/ 


\'' 


B5  4-R1 


.E9 


THE 


BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR: 


OR, 


ANECDOTES,  SIMILES,  EMBLEMS,  ILLUSTRATIONS,  EXPOSITORY, 

SCIENTIFIC,  GEOGRAPHICAL,  HISTORICAL,  AND  HOMILETIC, 

GATHERED  FROM  A  WIDE  RANGE  OF  HOME  AND 

FOREIGN  LITERATURE,  ON  THE  VERSES 

OF  THE  BIBLE. 


REV.  JOSEPH   S.   EXELL,  M.A, 


ISAIAH. 

VOL.  IL 


New  York  Chicago  Toronto 

Fleming   H.  Revell   Company 

London     and     Edinburgh 


THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR 


ISAIAH. 

CHAPTER  XXXL 

TsB.  1.  Woe  to  them  that  go  down  to  Egypt  for  help. — The  abundance 
of  borsea  in  Egypt  is  attested,  not  only  in  other  parts  of  Scripture,  but 
by  profane  writers.  Homer  describes  Thebes  as  having  a  hundred  gates, 
out  of  each  of  which  two  hundred  warriors  went  forth  with  chariots  and  horses. . 
Diodorus  speaks  of  the  whole  coiintry  between  Thebes  and  Memphis  as  filled 
with  royal  stables.  The  horses  of  Solomon  are  expressly  said  to  have  been  brought 
out  of  Egypt.  This  kind  of  military  force  was  more  highly  valued,  in  comparison 
with  infantry,  by  the  ancients  than  the  modems,  and  especially  by  those  who, 
like  the  Hebrews,  were  almost  entirely  deprived  of  it  themselves.  Hence  their 
reliance  upon  foreign  aid  is  frequently  identified  with  confidence  in  horses  and 
contrasted  with  simple  trust  in  God  (Psa.  xx.  7).  {J.  A.  Alexander.)  Seeking 
Ood : — To  "  seek  Jehovah  "  is  not  merely  to  consult  Him,  but  to  seek  His  aid, 
resort  to  Him,  implying  the  strongest  confidence.  (Ibid.)  Looking : — I 
want  you  to  remember  how  much  often  depends  in  life  on  a  straight  and  steady 
"  look."  A  few  weeks  ago  there  was  a  great  rehearsal  of  Sunday-school  choirs. 
AU  the  children  were  assembled  in  a  vast  building,  and  away  in  front  of  them 
stood  a  man  holding  a  little  stick  in  his  hand.  And  he  said  a  few  words  to 
them.  "  To  succeed,"  said  he,  "  you  must  keep  your  eyes  on  me  and  watch  the 
movements  of  my  hand."  Every  now  and  then  part  of  the  choir  went  wrong 
in  the  time ;  they  had  taken  their  eyes  off  the  conductor ;  they  were  not 
steadily,  earnestly,  intelligently  looking  to  him.  (C.  Silvester  Home,  M.A.) 
Unholy  alliances  : — I.  The  trNHOLY  alliance  which  the  Jewish  people  formed 
with  Egypt.  God  had  promised  to  be  their  Protector ;  He  had  also  prohibited 
alliances  with  heathen  nations  (Exod.  xxiii.  32 ;  Deut.  vii.  2).  This  alliance 
with  Egypt  was  a  violation  of  this  command.  I.  This  imholy  alliance  is  an  old 
Bin.  They  could  see  and  feel  the  horses  and  chariots  of  Egypt.  They  allowed 
their  senses  to  be  their  sovereigns,  instead  of  making  them  their  servants.  Has 
not  this  been  the  ruin  of  the  race  ?  Fleshly  lusts  "  war  against  the  soul."  History 
is  crowded  with  examples.  Eve  in  Eden ;  Esau ;  the  Israelites  in  the  wilder- 
ness;  David.  2.  This  unholy  alliance  is  marked  by  peculiar  features.  (1)  It 
was  a  wretched  choice.  "  Egypt."  What  good  thing  had  Egypt  ever  done 
for  them  ?  Not  one.  Yet  they  chose  Egypt  in  preference  to  God.  (2)  They 
were  influenced  by  sensuous  motives.  They  were  carried  away  by  the  strength 
of  the  horses  and  the  beauty  of  the  chariots  of  Egypt.  (3)  It  led  them  to  reject 
God.  3.  This  unholy  alliance  incurred  severe  pimishment.  "  Woe,"  &c.  Sin 
leads  to  punishment.  The  safety  of  a  nation  does  not  consist  in  the  strength 
of  her  army,  nor  in  the  extent  of  her  commerce,  but  in  her  loyalty  to  God  (Pro v. 
xiv.  34 ;  Isa.  Ix.  12).  II.  This  unholy  alliance  is  common  is  the  present  day. 
This  unholy  alliance  is  formed — 1.  When  relief  is  looked  for  from  wrong  sources 
in  the  day  of  trouble.  God  is  a  refuge  and  helper  to  all  true  souls  in  trouble 
who  trust  in  Him.  Yet  how  common  it  is  for  many  in  the  day  of  trouble  to 
enter  into  a  league  with  sin  and  make  a  covenant  with  death  !  A  woe  follows 
Buch,  and  sooner  or  later  will  overtake  them.  2.  When  happiness  is  sought  in 
wrong  paths.     True  happiness  is  obtained  when  our  will  is  brought  into  harmony 

VOL,  II. — I 


2  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTBATOB.  [ohap.  xxxl 

with  God's  wilL  Many  look  for  it  in  other  directions.  E.g.,  the  miser,  the 
sensuous,  the  ambitious,  the  worldling.  3.  When  salvation  is  expected  in  any 
other  way  than  through  Christ.  4.  When  unworthy  means  are  employed  to 
spread  the  Gospel.  Conclusion : — True  loyalty  to  God  will  bring  safety,  happi- 
ness, heaven.  Horses  may  be  strong,  numerous,  and  swift;  but  they  shall  die 
and  be  forgotten.  Chariots  shall  become  lighter  than  dust;  but  they  who  do 
the  will  of  God  abide  for  ever.     "  Some  trust  in  chariots,"  &o.    (J.  WUeman.) 

Vet.  2.  Yet  He  also  is  wise.  —  Ood  tvorks  in  history : — You  have  been 
clever  and  successful,  but  have  you  forgotten  that  "  God  also  is  wise,"  that 
He  too  has  His  policy,  and  acts  reasonably  and  consistently  ?  You  think  you 
have  been  making  history ;  but  God  also  works  in  history,  and  surely,  to  put 
it  on  the  lowest  ground,  with  as  much  cleverness  and  persistence  as  you  do. 
{Prof.  0.  A.  Smith,  D.D.)  Forgetfulness  of  God  : — The  forgetfulness,  against 
which  Isaiah  directs  this  shaft  of  satire,  is  the  besetting  sin  of  very  religious 
people,  of  very  successful  people,  and  of  very  clever  people.  {Ibid.)  The 
religion,  that  ignores  God : — It  is  the  temptation  of  an  ordinary  Christian,  church- 
going  people,  like  ourselves,  with  a  religion  so  fuU  of  marvellous  mercies,  and 
so  blessed  with  regular  opportunities  of  worship,  to  think  of  God  only  in  con- 
nection with  these,  and  practically  to  ignore  that  along  the  far  greater  stretches 
of  life  He  has  any  interest  or  purpose  regarding  us.  {Ibid.)  Man  no  match 
for  God  : — After  Moscow,  Napoleon  is  reported  to  have  exclaimed,  "  The  Almighty 
is  too  strong  for  me."    {Ibid.) 

Yet.  3.  Men,  and  not  God  .  .  .  flesh,  and  not  spirit. — Spiritual  existences  the 
ehief  forces  of  the  world : — It  is  here  evidently  implied  that  a  spu-it  is  mightier 
than  a  horse.  The  ancients  attached  the  idea  of  immense  force  to  a  well-trained 
war-horse.  I.  Spirit  is  the  original  powbb.  We  see  power  everywhere  aroimd 
us.  We  see  it  in  the  inanimate  world,  as  the  effect  which  one  element  produces 
upon  another,  and  in  the  motion  which  one  body,  in  a  certain  relation,  produces 
upon  another.  We  see  it,  also,  in  the  world  of  life :  in  the  plant  that  turns  to 
its  use,  and  transmutes  into  its  own  essence,  the  elements  that  play  about 
it ;  in  the  beast  that  drags  along  the  farmer's  harvest-wain,  and  in  the  bird  that 
rises  on  the  wing,  and  chants  its  victories  over  that  force  that  binds  the  earth 
and  links  it  to  the  sun.  AH  these  powers  are  manifestly  effects,  not  ultimate 
causes — are  derived,  not  primal.  All  true  science  suggests  this,  and  the  Bible 
declares  it.  Spirit  is  the  fontal  force.  It  was  spirit  that  gave  to  the  elements 
the  procUvity  to  act  and  re-act  on  each  other ;  and  that  so  poised  the  masses 
of  the  universe  that  one  should  gently  press  its  fellow  into  lines  and  ratios  of 
motion,  and  thus  conduce  to  the  harmony  and  well-being  of  all.  And  the  forces 
of  life  too,  whether  in  the  fibres  of  plants  or  the  muscles  of  flesh,  are  but  the 
breathings  of  that  Spirit  which  "  reneweth  the  face  of  the  earth."  "  He  stretcheth 
out  the  north  over  the  empty  place,  and  hangeth  the  earth  upon  nothing."  "  By 
His  Spirit  He  hath  garnished  the  heavens ;  His  hand  hath  formed  the  crooked 
serpent."  11.  Spirit  is  the  subordinating  power.  The  horses  of  the  Egyptians 
were  "  flesh  and  not  spirit."  Implying,  probably,  the  fact,  that  the  Eg5rptian 
cavalry  lacked  that  intelligence  and  skill  necessary  to  render  the  noble  animal 
of  service  in  the  field  of  battle.  The  value  of  the  steed  in  the  strife  is  ever  in 
proportion  to  the  skill  of  the  rider.  "  Wisdom  is  better  than  weapons  of  war." 
Reason  is  mightier  than  brute  force.  What  force  is  there  on  earth  that  man 
cannot  subordinate  to  his  will  ?  Man  can  press  every  element  into  his  service 
as  well  as  every  living  creature.  Let  us  rise  to  a  sense  of  the  greatness  of  the 
natmre  with  which  God  has  endowed  us.  We  are  spirit;  emanations  of  the 
Infinite  Mind,  and  members  of  that  spiritual  system  for  which  matter,  in  all 
its  functions  and  forms,  was  made.  Let  us  assert  our  supremacy  over  the 
material — "  use  the  world  as  not  abusing  it."  In  one  sense  we  can  never  think 
too  highly  of  ourselves.  "  What  shall  it  profit  a  man  ?  "  &c.  (D.  Thomas,  D.D.) 
Spirituality  of  the  Divine  nature  : — In  these  words  we  are  reminded  of  an  important 
and  infinite  disparity  between  God  and  man,  arising  from  a  great  peculiarity 
in  the  character  of  the  former,  which  rendered  the  Egyptian  monarch  and  his 
cavalry  infinitely  inferior  to  Him  in  power,  and  all  those  other  qualities  which 
entitle  the  possessor  of  them  to  confidence  and  trust.  L  The  spirituality  of 
the  Divine  nature  is  intimately^  connected  with  the  possession  of  AuaaHTY 
POWER.     The  vulgar  notion  which  would  restrict  the  exercise  of  power  to  what 


CHAP.  XXXI.]  ISAIAH.  3 

is  corporeal,  and  deny  it  to  that  which  is  spiritual  and  immaterial,  is  a  mere  pre- 
judice, founded  on  gross  inattention  or  ignorance.  If  we  inquire  after  the  original 
seat  of  power,  we  shall  invariably  find  it  in  mind,  not  in  body ;  in  spirit,  not 
in  flesh.  The  changes  we  are  able  to  effect  in  the  state  of  the  objecte  around 
us  are  produced  through  the  instrumentality  of  the  body,  which  is  always  pre- 
viously put  in  motion  by  the  mind.  As  we  can  move  certain  parts  of  our  bodies 
at  pleasure,  and  nothing  intervenes  betwixt  the  volition  and  the  corresponding 
movements,  so  the  great  original  Spirit  impresses  on  the  machine  of  the  imiverse 
what  movements  He  pleases,  and  without  the  intervention  of  any  other  cause. 
"  He  speaks,  and  it  is  done ;  He  commands,  and  it  stands  fast."  II.  His  spirit- 
uality is  closely  connected  with  His  invtsibiuty.  "  The  King  eternal,  immortal, 
invisible,"  "  whom  no  man  hath  seen,  nor  can  see."  Whatever  is  the  object  of 
sight  must  be  perceived  under  some  determinate  shape  or  figure;  it  must  be, 
consequently,  bounded  by  an  outline,  and  occupy  a  determinate  portion  of  space, 
and  no  more ;  attributes  utterly  incompatible  with  the  conceptions  of  an  infinite 
being.  He  was  pleased  formerly,  indeed,  to  signalise  His  presence  with  His 
worshippers  by  visible  symbols,  by  an  admixture  of  clouds  and  fire,  of  darkness 
and  splendour;  but  that  these  were  never  intended  to  exhibit  His  power,  but 
merely  to  afford  a  sensible  attestation  of  His  special  presence,  is  evident,  from 
the  care  He  took  to  prevent  His  worshippers  from  entertaining  degrading  con- 
ceptions of  His  character,  by  the  solemn  prohibition  of  attempting  to  represent 
Him  by  an  image  or  picture.  III.  That  God  is  spirit,  and  not  flesh,  is  a  view 
of  His  character  closely  connected  with  His  omnipresence.  Matter  is  sub- 
jected to  a  local  circumscription ;  God,  as  a  Spirit,  is  capable  of  co-existing  with 
every  other  order  of  being.  IV.  Because  God  is  spirit  and  not  flesh,  He  is 
possessed  of  rsFiNiTB  wisdom  and  intelugencb.  Thought  and  perception 
are  the  attributes  of  mind,  not  of  matter ;  of  spirit,  not  of  flesh ;  and,  for  this 
reason,  the  original  and  great  Spirit  possesses  them  in  an  infinite  degree.  V.  The 
spirituality  of  the  Divine  nature  lays  a  foundation  fob  the  most  rsrnMATE 

RELATION  between  THE  INTELUGENT  PART  OF  THE  CREATION  AND  HiMSELF. 

He  is  emphatically  "  the  Father  of  spirits."  VI.  The  spirituality  of  the  Divine 
nature  fits  Him  fob  bboominq  oite  etbbnal  portion  and  supbemb  good. 
(Robert  HaU,  M.A.) 

Yet.  4.  Like  as  the  lion  and  the  young  lion  roaring  on  bis  prey. — A 
Homeric  passage : — There  is  no  passage  in  Isaiah  which  is  so  Homeric  in  ring  as 
this;  cf.  Iliad,  xviii.  161  f.,  xii.  299  ff.  {F.  Delitzsch.)  The  lion  and  the 
shepherds : — Is  it  an  imworthy  figure  of  the  Divine  Claimant  for  this  city,  who 
kept  unceasing  hold  upon  her  after  His  own  manner,  mysterious  and  lionlike  to 
men,  undisturbed  by  the  screams,  formulas,  and  prayers  of  her  mob  of  politicians 
and  treaty-mongers  ?  For  these  are  the  "  shepherds  "  Isaiah  means — sham 
shepherds,  the  shrieking  crew  of  politicians,  with  their  treaties  and  military 
display.  God  will  save  and  carry  Jerusalem  His  own  way,  paying  no  heed  to 
such.  (Prof.  O.  A.  Smith,  D.D.)  The  lionlike  mercies  of  God: — If  it  is  God 
who  is  the  lion,  then  it  is  for  the  best.  For  "  though  He  slay  me,  yet  will  I  trust 
Him  "  ;  and,  after  all,  it  is  safer  to  rely  on  the  mercies  of  God,  lionlike  though 
they  be,  than  on  the  weak  benevolences  and  officious  pities  of  the  best  of  human 
advisers.    {Ibid.) 

Ver.  5.  As  birds  tLyiag. — Three  pictures  of  one  reality: — L  The  vbby 
striking  and  BEAUTiFuii  PICTURES.  There  are  three  of  them.  1.  "  As  birds 
flying,"  &c.  The  original  shows  that  it  is  the  mother-bird  that  is  thought  about. 
And  the  picture  rises  at  once  of  her  fluttering  over  the  nest,  where  the  callow 
chickens  are  unable  to  fly  and  to  help  themselves.  It  is  a  kind  of  echo  of  the 
grand  old  metaphor  in  the  song  that  is  attributed  to  Moses,  which  speaks  of  the 
eagle  fluttering  over  her  nest,  and  taking  care  of  her  young.  Jerusalem  was 
as  a  nest  on  which,  for  long  centuries,  that  infinite  Divine  love  had  brooded.  It 
was  but  a  poor  brood  that  had  been  hatched  out,  but  yet  "  as  birds  flying  " 
He  had  watehed  over  the  city.  Can  you  not  almost  see  the  mother-bird,  made 
bold  by  maternal  love,  swooping  down  upon  the  intruder  that  sought  to  rob  the 
nest,  and  spreading  her  broad  pinion  over  the  callow  fledglings  that  lie  below  ? 
That  is  what  God  does  with  us.  It  is  a  poor  brood  that  is  hatched  out.  That 
does  not  matter ;  still  the  Love  bends  down  and  helps.  Nobody  but  a  prophet  could 
have  ventured  on  such  a  metaphor  as  that,  and  nobody  but  Jesus  Christ  would 


4  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xxxi. 

have  ventured  to  mend  it  and  say,  "  As  a  hen  gathereth  her  chickens  under  her 
wings,"  when  there  are  hawks  in  the  sky.  So  He,  in  all  the  past  ages,  was  the 
One  that  "  as  birds  flying  .  .  .  defended  "  His  people,  and  would  have  gathered 
them  under  His  wings,  only  they  would  not.  Now,  beautiful  as  this  metaphor 
is,  as  it  stands,  it  seems  to  me,  like  some  brilliant  piece  of  colouring,  to  derive 
additional  beauty  from  its  coimection  with  the  background  upon  which  it  stands 
out.  For  just  a  verse  before  the  prophet  has  given  another  emblem  of  what  God 
is  and  does.  "  Like  as  a  lion,"  &c.  Look  at  these  two  pictures  side  by  side  ; 
on  the  one  hand  the  lion,  with  his  paw  on  his  prey,  and  the  angry  growl  that 
answers  when  the  shepherds  vainly  try  to  drag  it  away  from  him.  That  is  God. 
Ay  !  but  that  is  only  one  aspect  of  God.  "  As  birds  flying,  so  the  Lord  will  defend 
Jerusalem."  We  have  to  take  that  into  account,  too.  This  generation  is  very 
fond  of  talking  about  God's  love ;  does  it  be  ieve  in  God's  wrath  ?  Has  it 
pondered  that  tremendous  phrase,  "  the  wrath  of  the  Lamb  "  ?  The  lion  that 
growls,  and  the  mother-bird  that  hovers — God  is  like  them  both.  2.  The  second 
picture  is  not  so  obvious  to  English  readers,  but  it  is  equally  striking.  The  word 
that  is  translated  in  our  text  twice  "  defend  "  and  "  defending,"  means  literally 
"  shielding."  Thus  we  have  the  same  general  idea  as  that  in  the  previous  meta- 
phor of  the  mother-bird  hovering  above  the  nest.  God  is  like  a  shield  held  over 
us,  and  so  flinging  off  from  the  broad  and  biurnished  surface  of  the  almighty 
buckler,  all  the  darts  that  any  foe  can  launch  against  us.  3."  "Passing  over,  He 
will  deliver."  The  word  that  is  there  rendered  "passing  over"  is  almost  a 
technical  word  in  the  Old  Testament,  because  it  is  that  employed  in  reference 
to  the  Passover.  And  so  you  see  the  swiftness  of  genius  with  which  the  prophet 
changes  his  whole  scene.  We  are  swept  back  to  that  night  when  the  Destroying 
Angel  stalked  through  the  land,  and  "  passed  over  "  the  doors  on  which  the  blood 
had  been  sprinkled.  II.  The  reality  meant  by  these  pictures.  They  mean 
the  absolute  promise  from  God  of  protection  for  His  people  from  every  evil. 
III.  The  way  by  which  we  can  make  the  reality  of  these  pictttres  ours. 
All  the  promises  and  prophecies  of  the  Old  Testament  are  conditional,  and  there 
are  many  of  them  that  were  never  fulfilled,  and  were  spoken  in  order  that  they 
might  not  be  fulfilled,  because  the  people  took  warning.  1.  Put  thou  thy  trust 
in  God,  and  God  is  to  thee  the  hovering  bird,  the  broad  shield,  the  angel  that 
"  passes  over."  2.  But  having  thus  fled  thither,  we  must  continue  there,  if  we 
would  continue  under  His  protection.  Such  continuance  of  safety  because  of 
continuous  faith  is  possible  only  by  continued  communion.  3.  Another  condition 
of  Divine  protection  is  obedience.  {A.  Madaren,  D.D.)  A  twofold  repre- 
sentation of  God  : — Like  a  lion  descending  from  the  mountains  (Psa.  Ixxvi.  4)  to 
seize  its  prey,  whom  the  shepherds  are  impotent  to  dismay,  so  Jehovah  at  the 
head  of  the  Assjrrian  battalions,  will  advance  against  Jerusalem;  the  city  is 
already  within  His  grasp — when  suddenly  the  image  changes,  and  the  impetuous 
lion  is  transformed  into  a  bird  protecting  and  shielding  its  threatened  nest. 
{Prof.  S.  R.  Driver,  D.D.)  God's  care  for  His  people  : — Egyptian  horses  cannot 
fly,  but  "  as  birds  flying,  so  will  the  Lord  of  hosts  defend  Jerusalem."  The  image 
is  clear  and  impressive.  There  lies  the  fair  city,  more  a  thought  than  a  thing, 
a  poem  in  architecture,  God's  poetry  set  forth  in  types  and  letters  of  stone,  and 
the  Lord  Himself  is  as  a  thousand  birds,  curling,  circling,  watching,  protecting  His 
loved  Zion.  No  figure  is  to  be  driven  to  its  furthest  issues ;  we  are  to  take  out  of  it 
that  which  is  substantial  in  reason  and  in  truth :  and  from  this  figure  we  extract 
the  doctrine  that  God  hovers  about  His  people,  cares  for  them,  watches  them, 
sometimes  sends  a  raven,  it  may  be,  to  help  them  when  they  come  out  of  their 
dream-sleep,  wondering  in  daze  and  bewilderment  what  the  universe  was  made 
for,  and  what  they  themselves  can  do.  Any  image  that  brings  God  nearer  to  us 
is  an  image  that  the  memory  should  treasure.  The  Lord  knows  what  the  issue 
of  trusting  in  Egyptian  horses  will  be,  and  what  the  end  of  all  idolatry  will  be. 
{J.  Parker,  D.D.) 

Ver.  9.  The  Lord,  whose  fire  Is  in  Zion. — The  Lord's  furnace : — This  very 
remarkable  designation  of  God  stands  ere  as  a  kind  of  seal  set  upon  the 
.preceding  prophecy.  It  is  the  reas  n  why  that  shall  certainly  be  fulfilled.  And 
what  precedes  is  mainly  a  promise  of  a  deliverance  for  Israel,  which  was  to  be  a 
destruction  for  Israel's  enemies.  We  shall  not  understan  these  great  words  if 
we  regard  them  as  only  a  revelation  of  destructive  and  terrible  power.  It  is  the 
very  beauty  and  completeness  of  this  emblem  that  it  has  a  double  aspect  and  is 


CHAP.  XXXI.]  ISAIAH.  5 

ro  less  rich  in  joy  and  blessing  than  pregnant  with  warning  and  terror.  I.  In 
THE  Chtjkch  God  is  present  as  a  great  reservoir  of  fervid  love.  Every 
language  has  taken  fire  as  the  symbol  of  love  and  emotion.  He  dwells  in  His 
Church,  a  storehouse  of  blazing  love,  heated  seventy  times  seven  hotter  than  any 
creatural  love,  and  pouring  out  its  ardours  for  the  quickening  and  gladdening 
of  all  who  walk  in  the  light  of  that  fire  and  thaw  their  coldness  at  its  blaze.  Then, 
how  comes  it  that  so  many  Christian  Churches  are  ice-houses  instead  of  furnaces  ? 
If  God's  blazing  furnace  is  in  Jerusalem,  it  should  send  the  thermometer  up  in 
all  the  houses  of  the  city.  But  what  a  strange  contradiction  it  is  for  men  to  be 
in  God's  Church,  the  very  focus  and  centre  of  His  burning  love,  and  themselves 
to  be  almost  down  below  zero  in  their  temperature  !  A  fiery  furnace  with  its 
doors  himg  with  icicles  is  no  greater  a  contradiction  and  anomaly  than  a  Christian 
Church  or  a  single  soul  which  professes  to  have  been  touched  by  the  infinite 
lovingkindness  of  God,  and  yet  lives  as  cold  and  unmoved  as  we  do.  There  is 
no  religion  worth  calling  so  which  has  not  warmth  in  it.  We  hear  a  great  deal 
about  the  danger  of  an  "  emotional  Christianity."  Agreed,  if  by  that  they  mean 
a  Christianity  which  has  no  foundation  for  its  emotion  in  principle  and  intelli- 
gence ;  but  not  agreed,  if  they  mean  to  recommend  a  Christianity  which  professes 
to  accept  truths  that  might  kindle  a  soul  beneath  the  ribs  of  death  and  make  the 
dumb  sing,  and  yet  is  never  moved  one  hair's-breadth  from  its  quiet  phlegmaticism. 
If  there  is  no  fire,  what  is  tbere  ?  Cold  is  death.  We  want  no  flimsy,  transitory, 
noisy,  ignorant,  hysterical  agitation.  Smoke  is  not  fire.  If  the  temperature 
were  higher,  and  the  fire  more  wisely  fed,  there  would  not  be  any.  But  we  do 
want  a  more  obvious  and  powerful  effect  of  our  solemn,  glorious,  and  heart- 
melting  beliefs  on  the  affections  and  emotions  of  professing  Christians,  and  that 
they  may  be  more  mightily  moved  by  love  to  heroisms  of  service  and  enthusiasms 
of  consecration  which  shall  in  some  measure  answer  to  the  glowing  heat  of  that 
fire  of  God  which  flames  in  Zion.  11.  God's  eevelation  of  Himself,  ajnd 
presence  in  His  Church,  arb  an  instrument  of  cleansing.  Fu-e  purifies. 
In  our  great  cities  now  there  are  "  disinfecting  ovens,"  where  infected  articles 
are  taken,  and  exposed  to  a  high  temperature  which  kills  the  germs  of  disease, 
60  that  tainted  things  come  out  sweet  and  clean.  That  is  what  God's  furnace 
in  Zion  is  meant  to  do  for  us.  The  true  way  of  pm-ifying  is  by  fire.  To  pmify 
by  water,  as  John  the  Baptist  saw  and  said,  is  but  a  poor  cold  way  of  g  tting 
outward  cleanliness.  Water  cleanses  the  surface,  and  becomes  dirty  in  the 
process.  Fire  cleanses  within  and  throughout,  and  is  not  tainted  thereby.  The 
Hebrew  captives  were  flung  into  the  fiery  furnace ;  what  did  it  burn  if  Only 
their  bonds.  They  themselves  lived,  and  rejoiced,  in  the  intense  heat.  So,  if 
we  have  any  real  possession  of  that  Divine  flame,  it  will  bum  off  our  wrists  the 
bands  and  chains  of  oiu:  old  vices,  and  we  shall  stand  pure  and  clear,  emancipated 
by  the  fire  which  will  bvum  up  only  our  sins,  and  be  for  our  true  selves  as  our 
native  home,  where  we  walk  at  liberty  and  expatiate  in  the  genial  warmth. 
in.  God,  in  His  great  revelation  of  Himself  by  which  He  dwells  in  EEis 
Church,  is  a  power  of  transformation.  Fire  turns  all  which  it  seizes  into 
fire.  And  so  God,  coming  to  us  in  His  "  Spirit  of  burning,"  turns  us  into  His 
own  likeness,  and  makes  us  possessors  of  some  spark  of  Himself.  IV.  This 
figure  teaches  that  the  same  Divine  ftrb  may  become  destructive.  The 
emblem  of  fire  suggests  a  double  operation,  and  the  very  felicity  of  it  as  an  emblem 
is  that  it  has  these  two  sides,  and  with  equal  naturalness  may  stand  for  a  power 
which  quickens  and  for  one  which  destroys.  The  difference  in  the  effects  springs 
not  from  differences  in  the  cause,  but  in  the  objects  on  which  the  fire  plays.  We 
may  make  the  fimiace  of  God  our  blessedness  and  the  reservoir  of  a  far  more 
joyful  and  noble  life  than  ever  we  could  have  lived  in  our  coldness  ;  or  we  may 
make  it  terror  and  destruction.  {A.  Madaren,  D.D.)  The  fiery  ordeal  of 
the  Church  : — I.  Let  us  endeavour  to  understand  the  names  by  which  God's 
Church  is  designated,  particularly  under  the  Old  Testament — "  Zion  "  and 
"  Jerusalem."  They  are  very  significant.  Some  tell  us  that  the  word  "  Zion  " 
simply  signifies  a  monument  or  heap  of  stones  in  memorial.  Nothing  could  be 
more  significant  with  reference  to  the  Church  of  God — a  chosen  monument  of 
grace,  constituted  of  a  heap  of  stones.  "  Jerusalem."  It  is  very  evident  from 
the  termination  of  it — Salem — that  it  signifies  "  peace  "  ;  and  it  is  conjectured 
by  some  to  have  been  the  capital  of  Melchizedec  ;  but  one  thing  is  certain,  it 
was  the  organised  city  of  the  great  King,  the  King  of  peace,  and  so  is  the  Church 
of  the  living  God.    No  city  on  the  face  of  the  earth  was  ever  so  warred  against 


«  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xxxn. 

as  Jerusalem.  And,  in  this  respect,  Jerusalem  was  exactly  the  picture  of  the 
Church  of  Grod.  What  was  her  paramount  glory  7  Not  her  extent ;  she  never 
was  a  large  city.  Not  the  tractableness  and  teachableness  of  her  sons,  for  they 
were  very  rebellious  against  even  the  Lord  their  God.  What  then  was  the  glory 
of  her  city  ?  The  name  and  presence  of  her  God  there.  This  is  our  stay,  this 
is  our  coridence,  this  is  our  joy,  this  is  our  constant  expectation.  His  presence 
must  be  sensibly  enjoyed,  in  order  to  know  that  He  is  here.  II.  The  oedeal 
THROUGH  WHICH  THE  Chtjrch  OF  GoD  MUST  PASS.  "  His  fire  in  Zion,  and  His 
furnace  in  Jerusalem."  The  saints  of  the  living  God  may  expect,  and  whether 
they  expect  or  no,  they  are  sure  to  meet  a  succession  of  trials,  both  in  a  temporal 
and  a  spiritual  sense.  I  would  take  another  view  of  the  subject :  if  there  were 
no  "  fire  in  Zion,"  and  no  "  furnace  in  Jerusalem,"  there  would  be  no  sacrifice, 
no  burnt-offering,  no  clouds  of  incense ;  and  therefore  God  says,  it  shall  ever 
be  burning.  In  this  sense,  it  is  the  emblem  of  life  Divine,  the  Holy  Spirit's  work. 
I  would  name  three  things  which  God  is  doing  with  the  "furnace."  (1)  He  is 
melting;  (2)  He  is  manifesting;  (3)  He  is  making  useful.  These  are  the  main 
purposes  for  which  a  fiurnace  is  used.  III.  The  tendency  and  the  tebmination 
OF  THIS  PROCESS.  The  tendency  is  the  exercising  of  all  the  graces  in  personal 
religion  ;  the  termination  is  to  demonstrate  Divine  love  and  faithfulness  in  the 
deliverance  and  ultimate  glorification  of  His  saints.     (J.  Irons.) 


CHAPTER    XXXIL 


Vers.  1-8.  Behold,  a  "King  shall  reign  in  righteonsness.  —  Assyria  and 
Judah: — Such  (ch.  xxxi.  8,  9)  will  be  the  ignominious  end  of  the  proud  bat- 
talions of  Assyria.  For  Judah  a  happier  future  immediately  begins.  There 
should  be  no  break  between  the  two  chapters.  The  representation  which  follows 
(vers.  1-8)  is  the  positive  complement  to  chap.  xxxi.  6  f.,  and  is  parallel  to  chap. 
XXX.  23-26,  completing  under  its  ethical  and  spiritual  aspects  the  picture  of 
which  the  external  material  features  were  there  delineated.  Society,  when 
the  crisis  is  past,  will  be  regenerated.  Kings  and  nobles  will  be  the  devoted 
guardians  of  justice,  and  great  men  will  be  what  their  position  demands  that 
they  should  be — the  willing  and  powerful  protectors  of  the  poor.  All  classes, 
in  other  words,  will  be  pervaded  by  an  increased  sense  of  public  duty.  The 
spiritual  and  intellectual  blindness  (chap.  xxix.  10)  will  have  passed  away  (ver. 
3);  superficial  and  precipitate  judgments  will  be  replaced  by  discrimination 
(ver.  4a);  hesitancy  and  vacillation  will  give  way  before  the  prompt  and  clear 
assertion  of  principle  (ver.  46).  The  present  confusion  of  moral  distinctions 
will  cease;  men  and  actions  will  be  called  by  their  right  names.  (Prof.  S.  R. 
Driver,  D.D.)  A  new  era : — For  Judah — sifted,  rescued,  cleansed — a  new 
era  opens.  I.  JtrsT  government  in  blessing  to  the  people  is  the  first  good 
fruit  (vers.  I,  2).  II.  The  second  is  an  open  understanding  after  the 
CURSE  OF  HARDNESS  (vcrs.  3,  4).  III.  A  third  good  fruit  is  calling  and  treat- 
ing everyone  according  to  HIS  TRUE  CHARACTER  (vers.  5-8).  Nobility  of 
birth  and  riches  will  give  place  to  nobility  of  disposition,  so  that  the  former  will 
not  be  found,  nor  find  recognition  without  the  latter.  (F.  Delitzsch.)  A  flour- 
ishing kingdom : — It  may  be  taken  as  a  directory  both  to  magistrates  and  sub- 
jects, what  both  ought  to  do.  It  is  here  promised  and  ytrescribed — I.  That 
MAGISTRATES  SHOULD  DO  THEIR  DUTY  IN  THEIR  PLACES,  and  the  powcrs  answer 
the  great  ends  for  which  they  were  ordained  of  God  (vers.  1,  2).  1.  There  shall 
be  a  king  and  princes  that  shall  reign  and  rule;  for  it  cannot  go  well  when  there 
is  no  king  in  Israel.  2.  They  shall  use  their  power  according  to  law,  and  not 
against  it.  3.  Thus  they  shall  be  great  blessings  to  the  people  (ver.  2).  "  A 
man  " — that  man,  that  king  that  reigns  in  righteousness — '  shall  be  as  a  hiding- 
place."  II.  That  subjects  shall  do  their  duty  in  their  places.  1.  They 
shall  be  willing  to  be  taught,  and  to  understand  things  aright  (ver.  3).  When 
this  blessed  work  of  reformation  is  set  on  foot,  and  men  do  their  part  towards 
it,  God  will  not  be  wanting  to  do  His.  Then  "  the  eyes  of  them  that  see  " — 
of  the  prophets,  the  seers —  shall  not  be  dim,"  &c.  2.  There  shall  be  a  wonderful 
change  wrought  in  them  by  that  which  is  taught  them  (ver.  4).      (1)  They  shall 


CHAP,  xxxn.]  ISAIAH.  T 

have  a  clear  head,  and  be  able  to  discern  things  that  differ,  and  distinguish  con- 
cerning them.  (2)  They  shall  have  a  ready  utterance.  3.  The  differences 
between  good  and  evil,  virtue  and  vice,  shall  be  kept  up  and  no  more  confounded 
by  those  who  put  darkness  for  light,  and  light  for  darkness  (ver.  5).  {Matthew 
Henry.)  Reformed  society: — Though  Isaiah's  words  are  only  perfectly  ful- 
filled in  Jesus  Christ,  it  was  not  concerning  Christ  that  they  were  spoken.  The 
prophet  is  speaking  of  the  religious  future  and  social  progress  of  his  people.  He 
is  presenting  a  picture  of  regenerated  Judah.  He  points  to  the  essential 
elements  of  all  national  stability  and  greatness.  He  speaks  first  of  the 
righteousness  that  shall  be  exalted,  and  exemplified  in  the  government  of 
king  and  rulers;  and  then  he  goes  on  to  speak  of  the  moral  conditions  of  real 
blessedness  and  progress,  as  they  shall  appear  among  the  people.  Great  char- 
acters are  the  outstanding  feature  in  the  reformed  society  that  he  anticipates. 
Through  them  the  progress  of  the  nation  is  secured;  in  them  the  greatness  of 
the  nation  will  consist.  But  great  characters  can  only  exercise  their  full  and 
proper  influence  when  they  move  among  those  who  are  able  to  discern  their 
greatness.  Hence  Isaiah  declares  that  in  that  glorious  time  for  which  he 
confidently  looks  the  moral  blindness  of  the  people,  over  which  he  had  so  often 
and  so  deeply  mourned,  the  moral  insensibility  and  dulness,  with  all  the  con- 
fusion and  false  judgment  it  occasioned,  shall  have  ceased  (ver.  3).  Men  shall 
know  true  manhood  when  they  see  it,  and  honour  the  manhood  that  they  see. 
They  shall  no  longer  debase  the  moral  currency,  and  make  false  use  of  terms 
denoting  moral  qualities.  The  great  men  shall  be  seen  in  all  their  greatness, 
and  shall  raise  others  to  a  moral  elevation  like  their  own.  They  shall  protect 
the  weak,  and  encourage  the  faint-hearted;  they  shall  foster  the  growth  of  all 
goodness,  and  be  an  unfailing  source  of  noblest  inspiration.  As  they  stand 
there  in  all  their  moral  grandeur,  rooted  and  grounded  in  the  eternal  righteous- 
ness, they  are  indeed — and  they  are  known  to  be — "  as  a  hiding-place  from  the 
wind,  and  a  covert  from  the  tempest;  as  rivers  of  water  in  a  dry  place,  as  the 
shadow  of  a  great  rock  in  a  weary  land."  (E.  A.  Lawrence.)  Isaiah's  Utopia  :— 
The  first  eight  verses  of  this  chapter  are  like  the  sudden  opening  of  a  window. 
The  hall  behind  you  resounds  with  the  clamour  of  fierce  contentions;  the  window 
before  you  frames  in  the  prospect  of  a  fair  country,  all  bathed  in  rosy  light,  a 
land  of  corn  and  wine  and  oil,  a  land  of  plenty  and  peace.  Isaiah  is  not  the 
only  politician  who  has  found  relief  from  the  anxieties  of  a  stormy  time  in  a 
Utopia  of  his  own  imagining.  The  air  was  full  of  the  noise  of  change,  the  Re- 
formation was  in  full  career  on  the  Continent,  and  the  ground- swell  of  the  great 
movement  already  trembling  on  the  shores  of  England,  when  Sir  Thomas  More 
wrote  his  description  of  the  ideal  state.  When,  as  they  think,  everything  is 
going  wrong,  men  often  have  brightest  visions  of  what  the  world  would  be  if 
everything  were  going  right.  Isaiah's  Utopia  has  three  grand  characteristics: 
1.  The  triumph  of  righteousness  in  government.  His  programme  for  the  ruling 
power  is  this:  "  A  king  shall  reign  in  righteousness,  and  princes  shall  rule  in 
judgment."  2.  The  new  state  shall  be  broad-based,  not  upon  the  people's 
will,  but  upon  the  people's  character.  Men  shall  not  be,  as  they  have  been, 
weak  and  unstable,  and  ungenerous;  but,  rock-like  and  river-like,  they  shall 
be  strong  and  bountiful.  3.  The  ideal  Israel,  themselves  judged  justly,  shall 
be  just  judges  of  others.  They  shall  be  able  to  discriminate  character,  and 
to  recognise  and  honour  the  truly  good.  "  The  quack  and  the  dupe,"  says 
Carlyle,  "  are  upper  and  under  side  of  the  same  substance."  So,  in  the  kingdom 
of  the  future,  "  the  vile  person  shall  be  no  more  called  Uberal,  nor  the  churl  said 
to  be  bountiful."  There  will  be  no  quacks,  because  there  will  be  no  dupes. 
Those  who  are  liberal  themselves  are  not  likely  to  err  in  what  constitutes  liber- 
ality in  others.     {W.  B.  Dalby.) 

Ver.  2.  A  man  shall  l>e  as  an  hiding'-place  firom  the  wind. — A  hiding- 
place  from  the  wind: — In  the  East,  the  following  phenomenon  is  often  observed. 
Where  the  desert  touches  a  river,  valley,  or  oasis,  the  sand  is  in  a  continual  state 
of  drift  from  the  wind,  and  it  is  this  drift  which  is  the  real  cause  of  the  barren- 
ness of  such  portions  of  the  desert,  at  least,  as  abut  upon  the  fertile  land.  For 
under  the  rain,  or  by  the  infiltration  of  the  river,  plants  often  spring  up  through 
the  sand,  and  there  is  sometimes  promise  of  considerable  fertiUty.  It  never 
lasts.  Down  comes  the  periodic  drift,  and  life  is  stunted  or  choked  out.  But 
set  down  a  rock  on  the  sand,  and  see  the  difference  its  presence  makes.      After 


8  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  xxxii. 

a  few  showers,  to  the  leeward  side  of  this  some  blades  will  spring  up;  if  you 
have  patience,  you  will  see  in  time  a  garden.  How  has  the  boulder  produced 
this?  Simply  by  arresting  the  drift.  Now  that  is  exactly  how  great  men 
benefit  human  life.  {Prof.  G.  A.  Smith,  D.D.)  The  trite  shelter  for  tJ^  world : — 
A  Saviour  who  does  not  seek  first  to  improve  man's  condition,  but  to  improve 
man.  {W.  C.  E.  Newbolt.)  A  man: — The  prophet  here  has  no  individual 
specially  in  his  view,  but  is  rather  laying  down  a  general  description  of  the 
influence  of  individual  character,  of  which  Christ  Jesus  was  the  highest  instance. 
Taken  in  this  sense,  his  famous  words  present  us — I.  With  a  philosophy  of 
HISTORY.  Great  men  are  not  the  whole  of  life,  but  they  are  the  condition  of 
all  the  rest;  if  it  were  not  for  the  big  men,  the  little  ones  could  scarcely 
live.     The  first  requisites  of  religion  and  civilisation  are  outstanding  characters. 

II.  But  in  this  philosophy  of  history  there  is  a  Gospel.  Isaiah's  words  are  not 
only  man's  ideal:  they  are  God's  promise,  and  that  promise  has  been  fulfilled 
in  Jesus  Christ.  Jesus  Christ  is  the  most  conspicuous  example — none  others 
are  near  Him — of  this  personal  influence  in  which  Isaiah  places  all  the  shelter 
and  revival  of  society.  This  figure  of  a  rock,  a  rock  resisting  drift,  gives  us 
some  idea,  not  only  of  the  commanding  influence  of  Christ's  person,  but  of  that 
special  ofiice  from  which  all  the  glory  of  His  person  and  of  His  name  arises  :  that 
'  He  saves  His  people  from  their  sins."  For  what  is  sin?  Sin  is  simply  the 
longest,  heaviest  drift  in  human  history.  "  The  oldest  custom  of  the  race," 
it  is  the  most  powerful  habit  of  the  individual.  Men  have  reared  against  it 
government,  education,  philosophy,  system  after  system  of  religion.  But  sin 
overwhelmed  them  all.      Only  Christ  resisted,  and  His  resistance  saves  the  world. 

III.  In  this  promise  of  a  man  there  is  a  great  duty  and  ideal  for  every  one. 
If  this  prophecy  distinctly  reaches  forward  to  Jesus  Christ  as  its  only  perfect 
fulfilment,  the  vagueness  of  its  expression  permits  of  its  application  to  all,  and 
through  Him  its  fulfilment  by  all  becomes  a  possibility.  1-  We  can  be  like  Christ 
the  Rock  in  shutting  out  from  our  neighbours  the  knowledge  and  infection  of 
sin,  in  keeping  our  conversation  so  unsiiggestive  and  unprovocative  of  evil,  that, 
though  sin  drift  upon  us,  it  shall  never  drift  through  us.  2.  We  may  be  like 
Christ  the  Rock  in  shutting  out  blame  from  other  men;  in  sheltering  them  from 
the  east  wind  of  pitiless  prejudice,  quarrel,  or  controversy;  in  stopping  the  imiclean 
and  bitter  drifts  of  scandal  and  gossip.  How  many  lives  have  lost  their  fertility 
for  the  want  of  a  little  silence  and  a  little  shadow!  3.  As  there  are  a  number 
of  men  and  women  who  fall  in  struggling  for  virtue  simply  because  they  never 
see  it  successful  in  others,  and  the  spectacle  of  one  pure,  heroic  character  would 
be  their  salvation,  here  is  a  way  in  which  each  servant  of  God  may  be  a  rock. 
{Prof.  O.  A.  Smith,  D.D.)  Humanity  greater  than  all  distinctions  of  class. '^ 
In  the  first  and  second  verses  of  this  chapter  we  have  suggested  to  us  the  three 
great  forms  of  government  or  social  power,  in  accordance  with  which  society 
has  been  constructed,  and  umder  which  men  have  lived;  namely,  the  monarchy, 
the  aristocracy,  and  the  democracy.  A  king  shall  reign,  princes  shall  rule, 
and  a  man  shall  be  as  a  hiding-place.  First,  there  is  a  throne,  then  a  palace, 
and  then  the  common  earth.  It  seems  to  be  a  descent  from  a  king  to 
princes,  and  from  princes  to  a  man;  but  it  is  also  an  ascent,  for  the  man  is  the 
climax  rather  than  the  king.  The  king  and  the  princes  disappear  in  the  man. 
Humanity  or  the  common  nature  is  greater  than  all  distinctions  of  class.  A  king 
exists  for  men,  rather  than  men  for  a  king;  and  the  salvation  of  society  consists 
in  the  elevation  of  the  common  substratum  of  the  race.  In  this  elevation  all 
the  three  powers  may  play  a  part — the  power  of  the  throne,  the  power  of  the 
nobles,  and  the  power  of  the  people  themselves.  All  these  three  forms  of  govern- 
ment may  exist  in  the  same  constitution.  In  the  heavenly,  or  eternal  govern- 
ment, there  is  a  King  with  different  orders  of  subjects.  But  since,  in  this  heavenly 
kingdom.  He  who  is  King  of  kings  and  Lord  of  lords  became  a  man,  and  a  poor 
man,  that  He  might  serve  all,  and  lift  up  all  to  citizenship  in  His  kingdom,  and 
to  sit  even  on  His  throne,  the  great  moral  and  spiritual  law  has  been  laid  down, 
that  every  one,  from  the  ruler  on  the  throne  to  the  humblest  subject,  rises  in 
moral  character  and  dignity  just  as  he  stoops  to  the  help  of  others.  If  it  is 
by  the  gentleness  of  God  that  we  are  made  great;  if  He  who  is  over  all  became 
servant  to  all,  we  cannot  hope  to  become  great  on  a  different  principle;  that  is, 
by  seeking  to  be  ministered  unto  rather  than  to  minister.  {F.  Ferguson. )  Christ 
the  shield  of  the  believer: — It  is  probable  that  the  prophecy  had  some  reference 
to  Hezekiah,  who,  as  the  successor  of  the  iniquitous  Ahaz,  restored  the  worship 


CHAP,  xxxn.]  ISAIAH.  9 

of  God,  and  re-established  the  kingdom  of  Judah.  The  very  striking  deliverance 
vouchsafed  by  God  to  His  people,  in  the  reign  of  this  monarch,  when  the  swarming 
hosts  of  the  Assyrians  fell  in  one  night  before  the  destroying  angel,  may  justly 
be  considered  as  having  been  alluded  to  by  the  prophet  in  strains  which  breathe 
high  of  the  triumphs  of  redemption.  And  when  '  a  king  "  is  spoken  of  as  "  reign- 
ing in  righteousness,"  and  there  is  associated  with  his  dominion  all  the  imagery 
of  prosperity  and  peace,  we  may,  undoubtedly,  find,  in  the  holy  and  beneficent 
rule  of  Hezekiah,  much  that  answers  to  the  glowing  predictions.  But  the 
destruction  of  the  army  of  the  Assyrians  may  itself  be  regarded  as  a  figurative 
occurrence;  and  Hezekiah,  like  his  forefather  David,  as  but  a  type  of  the  Lord 
our  Redeemer.  There  are  to  be  great  and  fearful  judgments  ere  Christ  shall 
finally  set  up  His  kingdom  on  earth.  We  shall  consider  the  text  as  containing 
a  description — metaphorical,  undoubtedly,  but  not  the  less  comforting  and 
instructive — of  what  the  Redeemer  is  to  the  Church.  I.  The  first  thing  which 
may  justly  strike  you  as  remarkable  in  this  description  of  Christ,  is  the 
EMPHASIS  WHICH  SEEMS  LAID  ON  THE  woED  "  MAN."  A  man  "  shall  be  this  or 
that;  and  Bishop  Lowth  renders  it  "  the  man,"  as  if  he  were  man  by  distinction 
from  every  other — which  is  undoubtedly  St.  Paul's  statement  when  he  writes 
to  the  Corinthians:  "  The  first  man  is  of  the  earth,  earthy;  the  second  man  is 
the  Lord  from  heaven."  It  is  the  human  natiure  of  Christ  to  which  our  text 
gives  the  prominence;  it  is  this  human  nattire  to  which  seems  ascribed  the  suit- 
ableness of  Christ's  office  prophetically  assigned.  What  our  blessed  Saviour 
undertook  was  the  reconciliation  of  our  offending  nature  to  God;  and  of  this 
it  is  perhaps  hardly  too  much  to  say  that  it  could  not  have  been  effected  by  any 
nature  but  itself.      IT.  Let  us  now  proceed  to  consider  with  what  jtjsticb 

OB  PROPRIETY  THE   SEVERAL    ASSERTIONS    HERE    MADE    MAY   BE   APPLIED   TO   OTTB 

Saviour.  There  are  four  assertions  in  the  text,  four  similes  used  to  represent 
to  us  the  office  of  our  Redeemer,  or  the  benefits  secured  to  us  through  BUs  gracious 
mediation.  These  assertions  or  similes  are  not,  indeed,  all  different;  on  the 
contrary,  there  is  great  similarity,  or  even  something  like  repetition.  Thus, 
"  a  hidmg-place  from  the  wind  "  does  not  materially  differ  from  "  a  covert  from 
the  tempest."  The  idea  is  the  same;  there  is  only  that  variety  in  the  mode 
of  expression  which  accords  with  poetic  composition.  Neither  is  "  the  shadow 
of  a  great  rock  in  a  weary  desert  "  altogether  a  different  image;  the  idea  is  still 
that  which  shields — shelter  from  the  heat,  if  not  from  the  tempest.  It  may, 
perhaps,  be  more  correct  to  say  that  there  are  two  great  ideas  embodied  in  the 
text,  and  there  are  two  figures  for  the  illustration  of  each.  The  first  idea  is 
that  of  a  refuge  in  circumstances  of  danger ;  and  this  is  illustrated  by  "  a  hiding- 
place  from  the  wind,  and  a  covert  from  the  tempest."  The  second  idea  is  that 
of  refreshment  under  circumstances  of  fatigue;  and  this  is  illustrated  by  "  rivers 
of  water  in  a  dry  place,  and  the  shadow  of  a  great  rock  in  a  weary  land."  There 
is  one  thing,  according  to  the  three  illustrations,  which  should  be  separately 
•nd  carefully  considered.  The  "  hiding-place,"  the  "  covert,"  and  the  '  rock," 
give  shelter  and  relief,  through  receiving  on  themselves  that  against  which  they 
defend  us.  It  were  a  dull  imagination,  nay,  it  were  a  cold  heart,  which  does 
not  instantly  recognise  the  appropriateness  of  the  figure,  as  taken  in  illustration 
of  the  Lord  our  Redeemer.  These  Scriptural  figures  while  under  one  point 
of  view  they  represent  Christ,  under  another  they  represent  ourselves.  And 
it  is  simply  because  there  is  so  little  feeling  of  our  own  actual  condition  that  there 
is  so  little  appreciation  of  the  character  under  which  Christ  is  described.  {H. 
Melvill,  B.D.)  Jesus,  the  hiding-place: — There  is  not  a  want,  not  a  need,  but 
we  find  Jesus  enough  for  it.  I.  Man's  need  of  a  hiding-place.  1.  What  a 
tempest  will  sharp  afflictions  sometimes  raise,  particularly  if  one  follows  another 
in  quick  succession.  2.  There  are  other  storms — national  judgments.  3.  What 
a  storm  can  the  Eternal  Spirit  raise  in  a  man's  own  conscience  when  the  poor 
Christless  sinner  catches  has  first  glimpse  of  God!  4.  What  a  burning  wind 
has  oft  withered  the  mere  professor  when  the  Eternal  Spirit  has  in  a  dying  hour 
forced  him  to  the  fearful  review  of  the  past.  II.  The  glorious  hiding-place 
WHICH  THE  Gospel  points  out.  As  God-man,  who  can  describe  the  hiding- 
place?  What  a  hiding-place  is  BKs  Person!  What  a  hiding-place  is  ffis  inter- 
cession! What  a  hidmg-place  is  His  deep  sympathy!  What  a  hiding-place 
is  EUs  fulness  of  grace!  What  a  hiding-place,  that  has  all  the  power,  strength, 
and  merit  of  Deity  in  it,  and  all  the  tenderness,  love,  and  sympathy  of  humanity 
in  it!      The  great  question  is.  Have  we  really  entered  in?     {J.  H.  Evans,  M.A.) 


10  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xxxn. 

A  covert  from  the  tempest: — We  cannot  easily  imagine  the  fury  of  whirlwinds  in 
the  East.  Granite  and  iron  columns  are  snapped  in  two;  the  largest  trees  are 
torn  up  by  the  roots;  houses  are  tossed  about  like  straws,  and  at  sea  whole  fleets 
are  cast  away.  But  Eastern  storms  are  most  terrible  in  the  desert.  There 
mountains  of  sand  are  lifted  up  and  dashed  down,  sometimes  burying  whole 
caravans,  and  even  whole  armies.  Picture  a  traveller  in  such  a  case.  After 
a  strange  stillness,  he  sees  a  cloud  of  sand  arising  in  front  of  him.  At  once  the 
sky  is  darkened,  and  earth  and  heaven  seem  confounded.  The  angel  of  des- 
truction rides  on  every  blast,  and  claims  the  whole  desert  as  his  own.  The  poor 
man  stands  appalled,  as  if  the  day  of  doom  had  come.  Oh,  for  a  shelter:  it 
is  his  one  chance  for  life!  Lo!  a  gigantic  rock  rears  its  head;  he  runs  under  it. 
The  storm  spends  its  fury  upon  the  sheltering  rock,  not  upon  the  sheltered  pilgrim. 
(J.  Wells,  M.A.)  Our  hiding-place: — I.  In  thb  Savioub  thbbb  is  shklteb 
FOR  OTTB  SOULS.  What  are  the  storms  from  which  the  Saviour  shields  usT  The 
Bible  speaks  most  about  two:  the  storm  of  God's  wrath  against  sin,  and  the 
storm  of  life's  trials.  H.  In  the  Saviottb  wb  havb  safety.  Shelter  and  safety 
are  different  things,  though  we  may  not  see  the  difference  at  once.  About 
eighteen  hundred  years  ago  there  was  a  town  in  the  south  of  Italy,  called  Pompeii, 
which  owes  its  fame  to  its  destruction.  It  was  biu'ied  under  streams  of  boiling 
mud  from  Vesuvius,  and  showers  of  dust  and  ashes.  Most  of  the  people  escaped 
by  flight.  The  priests,  having  no  faith  in  their  idols,  seized  their  treasures  and 
fled.  But  some  poor  folks  ran  to  the  temples,  hoping  that  their  gods  would 
save  them.  They  found  shelter,  and — a  grave.  Since  many  are  more  anxious 
about  shelter  than  real  safety,  Christ  is  at  great  pains  to  warn  us  against  a  mistake 
as  common  as  it  is  dangerous.  You  remember  Christ's  story  about  the  two 
builders;  the  one  building  upon  the  sand,  and  the  other  upon  the  rock.  Very 
likely  the  two  houses  were  equally  fair  to  look  upon,  and  both  the  wise  man  and 
the  fool  found  shelter  enough  in  sunny  weather.  But  the  rain  descended,  and 
the  floods  came,  and  the  winds  blew  and  beat  upon  the  fool's  house,  and  it  fell, 
and  great  was  the  fall  thereof.  The  poor  man  found  shelter  and  death.  Many 
"  refuges  of  lies  " — man-made  refuges  all — would  lure  us  away  from  our  true 
safety.  III.  In  the  Savioub  there  is  sympathy.  Shelter  and  safety  are 
often  found  without  sympathy.  The  fortress  that  gave  the  besieged  safety 
from  their  foes  has  often  been  a  hateful  prison,  in  which  famine  and  pestilence 
slew  more  than  the  sword.  The  dens  and  caves  which  were  the  hiding-places 
of  our  martyrs  were  equally  wretched  and  safe.  The  Alpine  traveller,  overtaken 
by  snowstorms,  hurries  to  the  nearest  shelter,  and  finds  only  four  bare  walls. 
No  cheerful  fire,  no  kind  host  welcomes  and  revives  him;  and  often  he  faints 
on  the  threshold,  and  dies  within.  But  the  soul's  hiding-place  is  the  soul's 
banqueting- house.  You  must  lay  the  stress  on  the  word  "  man."  To  the 
Jews  before  Christ  it  was  no  news  to  be  told  that  God  was  a  hiding-place.  But 
that  a  man  should  be  their  hiding-place  and  covert,  their  overshadowing  rock 
and  water  of  life — that  was  a  very  surprising  and  glorious  prophecy.  And  what 
a  man!  The  Man  of  men,  the  alone  perfect  Man,  of  all  men  the  most  gracious 
and  tender-hearted — the  God-man.  And  He  is  a  man  by  His  own  choice.  More, 
He  is  a  man  from  love  to  us.  Had  He  been  only  God,  we  sinful,  trembling  crea- 
tures might  not  have  dared  to  draw  near ;  had  He  been  only  man,  we  should  have 
doubted  His  power;  but  being  both  God  and  man,  we  can  approach  Him  with 
equal  confidence  and  affection.  Your  safety  is  not  a  hard,  cold,  empty  thing. 
No,  it  is  like  the  safety  of  the  young  eagle,  covered  with  the  feathers,  and  drawn 
close  to  the  warm,  beating  side  of  the  parent  bird.  IV.  In  the  Saviour  thebi 
is  satisfaction.  'Tis  thorough  satisfaction,  as  when  the  desert-traveller,  perish- 
ing with  thirst,  finds  "  rivers  of  water  in  a  dry  place."  Among  men,  beasts, 
and  birds,  how  boundless  is  the  delight  the  thirsty  find  in  fresh  water!  Every 
one  has  a  craving  for  happiness,  that  never  can  be  conquered,  but  lives  while 
the  soul  lives.  The  Bible  is  ever  declaring  these  two  truths  —  1.  Your  soul 
cannot  get  true  satisfaction  away  from  Christ.  2.  You  may  find  it  in  Him. 
(Ibid.)        The  hiding-place: — I.  The  Holy  Ghost  declares  it  is  "  a  man  that 

SHALL    BE    the    HIDINO-PLACE    FROM    THB    WIND."        II.    IN    WHAT    RESPECT    OUB 

BLESSED  Lord  is  that  "  hiding-place."   HI.  The  many  encouragements 

THAT   ABE   GIVEN   IN    God'S    SACRED    WORD   TO   THE   POOR   AND    WEARY    TEMPEST- 

BBATEN  TBAVELLKB  TO  ENTEB  INTO  THAT  "  HiDiNO-PLAOE."  1.  The  Command- 
ment of  God,  on  the  one  side.  2.  The  freeness  of  invitation,  on  the  other.  3.  The 
open  door.    4.  The  testimony  of  all  those  who  are  in  heaven,  and  all  those  who 


CHAP,  xxxn.]  ISAIAH.  U 

are  on  earth,  under  the  teaching  of  the  Eternal  Spirit,  that  never  did  any  go 
thither  and  have  a  negative,  but  that  as  many  as  went  were  freely  welcomed 
by  the  Lord  of  life  and  glory.  (J.  H.  Evans,  M.A.)  The  value  of  true  man- 
Jiood: — Change  the  emphasis  of  your  poUcy.  You  have  been  busy  making  alli- 
ances; now  make  a  man.  That  was  the  teaching  of  this  statesman- prophet. 
(J.  H.  Jowett,  31. A.)  The  variety  and  urgency  of  human  need: — What  a  revela- 
tion is  here  of  the  wants  of  men!  The  very  supply  indicates  the  depths  and 
urgency  of  the  need  which  craves  for  satisfaction.  "  Hiding-place!  "  "  Covert!  " 
"Fountains  of  water  !"  "The  shadow  of  a  great  rock!"  Each  of  these 
beautiful  images  serves  to  accentuate  the  impression  of  urgent  and  pitifid  need. 
Lighthouses  and  harbours  are  always  terribly  suggestive.  {F.  B.  Meyer,  B.A.) 
Human  need  met  in  Christ: — I.  Wind.  How  apt  a  symbol  of  our  lives  is  here ! 
Often  when  all  seems  fair,  suddenly  a  wild  storm  envelops  us  in  a  furious  melee. 
A  calumnious  story  is  circulated,  which  is  absolutely  without  foundation  ;  a  , 
well-meant  act  is  misconstrued;  a  love  suddenly  cools;  a  dam  which  had  warded 
off  the  wild  North  Sea  breaks;  a  life  which  had  been  dearer  than  our  own  fails; 
oxa  whole  natiu^e  is  plunged  into  a  bath  of  agonising  pain;  the  mind  is  cast  into- 
a  tumult  of  perplexity;  the  heart  is  rent.  Then  we  know  bitterly  the  spiritual 
side  of  the  words,  "  No  small  tempest  lay  upon  us."  II.  Storm.  We  are  exposed 
not  only  to  great  and  crushing  sorrows,  which  threaten  to  suddenly  enguK  us, 
as  it  is  said  the  old  seats  of  human  life  were  engulfed  in  the  midst  of  the  Indian 
Ocean;  but  we  have  to  suffer  from  the  accumulations  of  little  stinging  irritations, 
which  are  like  the  grit  or  sand  grains  of  the  desert.  The  rasping  temper  of  somo 
one  with  whom  we  have  to  live ;  the  annoyances  and  slights  which  are  daily  heaped 
on  us;  petty  iimuendoes  and  insinuations  that  sting;  trifles  which  we  could 
not  put  into  words,  but  which  hurt  us  like  acid  dropped  into  a  sore.  III.  A 
DRY  PLACE.  Our  lot  is  sometimcs  cast,  as  David's  was,  in  a  dry  and  thirsty 
land,  where  no  water  is.  There  are  few  helps  in  our  religious  life;  we  are  cast 
into  a  worldly  family;  we  are  obliged  to  attend  an  uncongenial  ministry;  wo 
are  too  driven  with  occupation  to  have  quiet  times  for  fellowship  with  God, 
and  communion  with  His  saints;  or  we  are  so  lonely  that  we  long  unutterably 
for  some  kindred  soul,  some  one  to  love,  or  to  be  loved.  The  eye  ranges  daj' 
after  day  over  the  same  monotonous  landscape.  IV.  A  weary  land.  Weary 
people — there  are  plenty  of  them !  Weary  of  life,  with  its  poverty  from  which 
there  is  never  a  moment's  respite  ;  with  the  love  of  the  life  unrequited  ;  with 
the  light  of  life  hidden  beneath  a  bushel  ;  with  common-place  duties  and  mono- 
tonous routine!  The  demands  are  so  incessant,  the  pressure  so  constant,  the 
heartache  so  wearing,  the  pain  so  cruel!  The  eyes  weary  of  looking  for  one 
who  never  comes;  the  ears  weary  of  listening  for  a  step  that  never  greets  them; 
the  hearts  weary  of  waiting  for  a  love  that  never  comes  forth  from  the  grave, 
though  they  call  never  so  loudly.  But  all  these  many-sided  needs  may  be  met  and 
satisfied  in  "  The  Man  Christ  Jesus."  No  one  man  could  perfectly  meet  even  one 
of  them;  but  Jesus  perfectly  meets  them  all.  (Ibid.)  Christ  the  perfect  Man: — 
Have  you  not  often  wished  to  take  the  characteristic  qualities  from  the  men  in 
whom  they  are  strongest,  and  put  them  all  together  into  one  nature,  making  one 
complete  man  out  of  the  many  broken  bits,  one  chord  of  the  many  single  notes, 
one  ray  of  the  many  colours  ?  But  this  that  you  would  wish  to  do  is  done  in  Him — • 
in  whom  the  faith  of  Abraham,  the  meekness  of  Moses,  the  patience  of  Job,  the 
strength  of  Daniel,  the  love  of  the  apostle  John,  blend  in  one  complete  symme- 
trical whole.  (Ibid.)  Christ  our  hiding-place: — I.  The  storms.  1.  The 
storm  of  adversity.  2.  Of  conviction.  3.  Of  temptation.  4.  There  is  an  eternal 
storm.  II.  The  hiding-place.  "A  man,"  &c.  1.  What  man?  The  Man 
Christ  Jesus.  2.  A  suitable  refuge.  While  He  feels  for  you  as  a  man.  He  helps 
you  as  a  God.  A  refuge  from — (1)  A  broken  law.  (2)  A  raging  devil.  (3)  A 
persecuting  world.  III.  Delightful  refreshment.  "  As  rivers  of  water," 
&c.  1.  Refreshing.  2.  Purifying.  3.  Free.  4.  Free  to  all.  IV.  Needful 
shelter.  "  As  the  shadow,"  &c.  {W.Jackson.)  Offices  of  Christ: — I.  Christ 
came  to  be  a  hiding-place  from  the  wind.  This  part  of  our  text  maj^  bo 
regarded  as  referring  to  the  lesser  evils  of  human  life;  to  those  which  chiefly 
affect  our  temporal  condition.  Who  does  not  feel,  in  his  measure,  the  winds 
of  adversity,  which  never  fail  to  blow  upon  this  lower  world  ?  The  widow  mourns 
over  her  bereavement,  and  sits  alone,  as  a  sparrow  upon  the  housetop.  The 
orphans  look  in  vain  for  a  parent's  sympathy  and  protection.  The  poor  man 
stands  aghast  at  the  prospect  of  penury.     The  sick  languish  under  the  appoint- 


12  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [ohap.  xxxh. 

ment  of  painful  days  and  wearisome  nights.  The  mourners  go  about  the  streets, 
telling  the  sad  tale  of  their  desolation,  and  refusing  to  be  comforted,  under  the 
loss  of  some  endeared  object.  But  let  us  not  imagine  that  even  our  most  trivial 
Bufferings  are  beneath  the  notice  of  Jehovah.  He  became  a  man  that  He  might 
make  Himself  acquainted  with  the  afflictions  of  humanity,  and  thus  be  able 
to  afford  His  sympathy.  1.  There  is  the  shelter  of  His  gracious  declarations. 
2.  Of  the  promises.  3.  Of  Christ's  example.  See  Him  weeping  with  those 
that  wept.  See  Him  providing  for  the  hungry  multitude.  See  Him  ever  ready 
to  alleviate  human  misery,  and,  during  the  whole  period  of  His  life,  going  about 
doing  good.  Is  it  possible  to  study  the  life  of  Jesus,  and  not  derive  succour 
from  the  view  of  His  sympathy  and  compassion?  11.  The  second  clause  of 
our  text  leads  us  to  the  consideration  of  those  greater  evils,  from  which  Christ 
protects  His  followers.  He  is  spoken  of  as  a  covert  from  the  tempest.  1.  There 
is  the  tempest  of  God's  wrath,  roused  by  man's  transgression.  2.  Of  Satan's 
buffetings.  3.  Of  indwelling  sin.  But,  amidst  all  these  tempests,  Christ  is  a 
covert  for  His  people.  Consider  how  it  is  that  He  shelters  them.  It  is  by  bearing 
Himself  the  stormy  wind  and  tempest.  III.  Christ  is  spoken  of  as  rivers  of 
WATER  IN  A  DRY  PLACE.  To  the  renewed  mind,  what  is  the  whole  world  but 
a  dry  place?  IV.  Christ  is  spoken  of  as  the  shadow  of  a  great  rock  in  a 
WBAET  LAND.  What  are  we  but  pilgrims  toiling  over  the  sandy  desert  of  this 
weary  world?  We  have  various  burdens  to  carry,  and  labours  allotted  to  us; 
and  how  are  we  straitened  in  our  work!  With  one  hand  we  have  to  fight  con- 
tinually against  our  enemies,  as  we  hasten  onward  to  our  home:  with  the  other, 
we  have  to  labour  diligently,  both  for  ourselves  and  others.  We  have  to  bear 
the  burden  and  heat  of  the  day.  But  shall  we  faint  because  of  the  way?  No, 
we  have  a  grand  support.  We  have  the  shadow  of  a  great  rock  in  this  weary 
land.  {Cams  Wilson.)  Christ,  a  rejuge: — I.  We  are  reminded  here  of  our 
DANGERS.  These  are  set  forth  by  images  which  we  in  our  climate  can  only  half 
understand.  Except  at  sea,  we  have  little  to  fear  from  winds  and  tempests. 
At  the  worst,  they  are  inconveniences  to  us,  seldom  dangers.  But  in  other  coun- 
tries they  are  at  times  the  causes  of  great  havoc.  Besides  these,  there  are  gentler 
winds  sometimes  blowing  in  them,  that  are  almost  as  fearful.  Hot  and  debili- 
tating, they  cannot  be  breathed  without  much  suffering,  and  instances,  it  is  said, 
have  been  known  in  which  they  have  been  so  noxious  as  to  occasion  death.  Is 
not  this  a  true  picture  of  our  situation?  There  are  storms  of  outward  affliction 
for  us  in  the  world.  And  there  are  inward  storms  also — storms  of  conscience, 
storms  of  temptation;  and  still  worse  storms  than  any  of  these — the  ragings  of 
our  own  corrupt  affections.  And  yet  what  are  all  these?  They  are  all  nothing 
compared  with  one  storm  yet  to  come.  There  is  the  wrath  of  God  awaiting 
us.  n.  The  text  tells  us  of  A  Protector  from  our  dangers.  And  who  is  He? 
If  we  understand  what  our  dangers  are,  we  shall  all  say  He  must  be  the  great 
God.  But  the  text  does  not  saj'  this.  It  tells  us  that  He  is  a  man.  But  how, 
we  may  ask,  can  this  be?  We  have  tried  often  enough  to  get  help  from  men. 
This  man  is  such  as  never  before  was  seen  or  heard  of,  the  everlasting  Jehovah 
manifest  in  our  mortal  flesh,  God  and  man  united  in  one  Christ.  But  why  is 
the  Lord  Jesus  called  so  emphatically  a  man  in  this  passage?  Perhaps  for  three 
reasons.  1.  To  lead  the  ancient  Church  to  expect  His  incarnation.  2.  To 
encourage  us  to  approach  Him.  We  naturally  are  afraid  of  God.  But  here, 
says  this  text,  is  God  appearing  before  you  in  a  new  character  and  form.  His 
mere  appearance  in  our  world  as  a  man,  proclaims  Him  at  once  man's  Friend 
and  Saviour.  3.  To  show  us  the  importance  of  His  human  nature  to  our  safety. 
in.  The  excellence  of  that  protection  which  the  Lord  Jesus  affords 
us.  Imagine  yourselves  in  such  a  desert  as  the  prophet  has  here  in  his  mind. 
Suppose  yourselves  asked,  what  kind  of  shelter  you  wished  for.  1.  You  would 
naturally  say,  in  the  first  place,  it  must  be  a  secure  one.  And  Christ  is  a  secure 
hiding-place.  2.  Then  you  would  say,  the  refuge  I  want  must  be  a  near  one. 
And  who  so  near  at  hand  as  the  Lord  Jesus?  3.  But,  you  may  ask.  Can  I  gain 
admittance  into  this  refuge  if  I  flee  to  it?  The  answer  is.  You  can.  It  is  an 
open  refuge,  a  refuge  ever  open,  and  open  to  all  who  choose  to  enter  it.  4.  He 
is  a  well-furnished  hiding-place.  There  is  provision  and  plentiful  provision 
in  this  stronghold  for  all  who  enter  it.  Conclusion — 1.  What  think  ye  of  this 
hiding-place?  What  use  have  you  made  of  it?  Have  you  fled  to  it?  2.  But 
there  are  those  who  are  out  of  this  hiding-place.  Oh,  brethren,  have  mercy  on 
yourBelvesl    (C  Bradley,  M.A.)        The  angering  voorld  and  the  relieving  Man: — 


CHAP,  xxxu.]  ISAIAH.  13 

1.  Thb  suffering  world.  The  world's  trials  are  here  represented  by  the  imagery 
of — 1.  A  "  tempest."  Tempests  in  natxire  are  often  most  terrible  and  devastating. 
Spiritually,  the  world  is  in  a  tempest.  It  is  beaten  by  the  storm  of — (1)  conflicting 
thoughts,  (2)  sinful  passions,  (3)  guilty  memories,  and  (4)  terrible  foreboding. 

2.  A  drought.  "  A  dry  place."  The  Oriental  traveller  under  a  vertical  sun, 
and  on  scorching  sands  without  water,  is  the  picture  here.  He  has  a  burning 
thirst  and  is  in  earnest  quest  for  the  cooling  stream.  Is  this  not  a  true  picture 
of  man  spiritually  as  a  traveller  to  eternity  ?  He  thirsts  for  a  good  which  he 
fails  to  get.  3.  Exhaustion.  "  In  a  weary  land."  The  Oriental  traveller  has 
exhausted  his  strength,  and  hes  down  in  prostrate  hopelessness.  Man,  spiritually, 
is  "  weary  and  heavy  laden,"  "  without  strength."  Without  strength  to  dis- 
charge his  moral  obligations,  to  please  his  Maker,  to  serve  his  race,  and  reach 
his  destiny.  II.  The  RELiEvrsrG  Man.  "  A  man  shall  be,"  &c.  Hezekiah 
did  much  to  reheve  Israel  in  its  pohtical  troubles,  but  Christ  does  infinitely  more. 
He  relieves  the  moral  troubles  of  humanity.  1.  He  is  a  shelter  from  moral  storms. 
What  a  secure,  accessible,  capacious  refuge  is  Christ.  2.  He  is  the  river  in  moral 
droughts.  Christ  refreshes  and  satisfies  souls  by  opening  rivers  of  holy  thoughts, 
&c.  (Homilist.)  The  humanity  of  the  way  of  salvation: — I.  A  pictxtrb  of 
THE  STATE  OF  THE  WORLD.  We  may  view  this  picture  of  the  world  under  four 
aspects — 1.  A  picture  of  the  natural  world.  The  four  elements  of  nature  are 
brought  into  view — earth,  air,  water,  and  fire;  and  each  in  its  turn  may  become 
a  blessing  or  a  curse  to  man.  Man  has  lost  the  dominion  of  nature,  and  is  no 
longer  at  home  in  it.  He  fights  an  unequal  battle,  and  is  obliged  to  succumb. 
2.  A  picture  of  the  moral  world.  Although  war,  famine,  and  pestilence  are 
physical  evils,  their  causes  are  moral.  They  fall  more  directly  on  man  than 
other  natural  evils.  They  are  the  storms  of  human  society.  3.  A  picture 
of  the  spiritual  world.  This  earth  is  the  platform,  not  merely  of  a  natural  and 
political  or  moral  strife;  it  is  the  arena,  as  well,  of  a  spiritual  strife.  To  realise 
this,  and  to  know  it  as  the  most  certain  of  all  facts,  the  soul  must  be  awakened 
by  the  Spirit  of  God  to  the  true  meaning  of  life.  We  must  feel  the  battle  within 
ourselves  in  order  to  see  it  around  us.  4.  Something  that  reminds  us  of  a  condi- 
tion of  existence  in  the  eternal  world.  All  the  storms  of  which  we  have  spoken 
are  but  the  foreshadowings  of  the  wrath  of  God.  II.  A  prophecy  of  the  Saviotjr 
OF  THE  WORLD.  This  is  represented  under  the  figure  of  a  hiding-place,  a  covert, 
rivers  of  water,  and  the  shadow  of  a  great  rock.  1.  The  blessedness  of  the  pro- 
phecy. In  proportion  as  we  have  realised  the  world  to  be  what  the  word  here 
describes  it  as  being,  will  the  aimouncement  of  the  text  appear  most  acceptable 
and  blessed.  2.  The  wonderfulness  and  apparent  contradictoriness  of  the 
prophecy.  It  says  that  a  "  man  "  shall  be  a  hiding-place.  Man  is  the  creature 
who  is  in  want  oi  salvation.  3.  The  prophecy  itself,  more  directly  and  particu- 
larly. We  accept  the  statement  as  at  once  referring  primarily  to  Christ  Jesus, 
the  Saviour  of  the  world.  Only  in  Him  is  the  prophecy  fuUy  realised,  and  dehvered 
from  its  apparently  contradictory  character.  Believers  look  upon  Him  as  the 
only  one  who  can  save  from  physical,  moral,  spiritual,  and  eternal  evil.  4.  How 
the  man  Christ  Jesus  is  such  a  hiding-place.  {F.  Ferguson.)  The  hiding- 
place: — L  There  underlies  this  prophecy  a  very  sad,  a  very  true  conception 
OF  HUMAN  life.  1.  We  live  a  life  defenceless  and  exposed  to  many  a  storm 
and  tempest.  2.  "  Rivera  of  water  in  a  dry  i^lace!  '"  And  what  is  the  prose 
fact  of  that?  That  you  and  I  live  in  the  midst  of  a  world  wliich  has  no  corre- 
spondence with  nor  capacity  of  satisfying  our  truest  and  deepest  selves — that 
we  bear  about  with  us  a  whole  set  of  longings  and  needs  and  weaknesses  and 
strengths  and  capacities,  all  of  which,  like  the  climbing  tendrils  of  some  creeping 
plant,  go  feeling  and  putting  out  their  green  fingers  to  lay  hold  of  some  prop  and 
stay — that  man  is  so  made  that  for  his  rest  and  blessedness  he  needs  an  external 
object  round  which  his  spirit  may  cling,  on  which  his  desires  may  fall  and  rest, 
by  which  his  heart  may  be  clasped,  which  shall  be  authority  for  his  will,  peace 
for  his  fears,  sprinkling  and  cleansing  for  his  conscience,  light  for  his  understandincr, 
shall  be  in  complete  correspondence  with  his  inward  nature — the  water  for  his 
thirst,  and  the  bread  for  his  hunger.  3.  And  then  there  is  the  other  idea  under- 
lying these  words  also,  yet  another  phase  of  this  sad  life  of  ours — not  only  danger 
and  drought,  but  also  weariness  and  languor.  II.  But  another  thought  suggested 
by  these  words  is,  the  mysterious  hope  which  shines  through  them 
— that  one  of  ourselves  shall  dehver  us  from  all  this  evil  in  life.  "  A  man," 
&c.     III.  The  solution  of  the  mystery  in  the  Person  op  Jesus  Christ. 


14  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xxxn. 

(A.  Madaren,  D.D.)  Christ  a  refuge: — I.  In  the  day  of  earthly  disappoint- 
ment. II.  In  times  of  affliction.  III.  In  the  day  of  tbial.  God  tries  our 
faith,  our  hope,  our  patience,  our  principles.  IV.  In  the  day  of  feab.  V.  From 
the  torments  of  an  accusing  conscience.  VI.  In  the  day  of  final  wbath. 
{J.  M.  Sherwood.)  The  covert  of  Divine  love: — There  are  two  very  distinct 
methods  and  aims  in  the  Bible.  A  very  large  portion  of  the  Scriptures  are  in 
the  form  of  appeals  to  duty,  to  service.  But  there  is  another  part  of  the  Bible 
that  appeals  to  exactly  the  opposite  sentiment,  and  is  a  caU  to  rest,  to  quiet, 
to  ease,  to  everything  but  action — to  contemplation,  to  silence.  And  there  are 
times  in  our  experience  when  we  need  the  call  to  rest  as  absolutely  as  at  others 
we  need  the  call  to  duty.  I  desire,  then,  to  call  your  thought  to  the  rest  side 
of  religion.  I.  Peayer,  as  revealed  to  us  in  Scripture,  is  beautifully  illustrated 
by  the  shadow  of  a  great  rock  in  a  weary  land.  II.  The  words  that  are  given 
us  IN  the  Scriptttbb  are  offered  to  us  like  the  shadow  of  a  great  rock  in  a  weary 
land — the  Scripture  is  full  of  these  delightful  surprises.  "  Come  unto  Me," 
&0.  "  Let  not  your  heart  be  troubled,"  &c.  "  Lo!  I  am  with  you  alway," 
&c.  Such  doctrines  as  Divine  Providence;  the  idea  of  God  giving  you  work 
to  do;  the  idea  that  trouble  comes  to  us  as  a  dispensation  from  our  Father's 
hand,  &c.  III.  Christian  hope  is  also  like  the  shadow  of  a  great  rock  in  a  weary 
land.  Rest,  in  the  Word  of  God,  is  like  rest  in  nature.  The  night  is  very 
blessed  for  the  weary  one,  but  the  morning  follows  the  night,  and  rest  is  given 
that  we  may  be  strong  to  labour.     {A.  D.    Vail,  D.D.)  The  wayworn  pil- 

grim's hiding-place  (-with  ver.  3): — I.  Who  the  travellers  are,  on  their  home- 
ward march,  and  the  dangers  and  difificulties  which  beset  their  path.  The 
way  to  heaven  is  often  spoken  of  in  Scripture  as  a  journey,  and  this  by  no  flowery 
meadow  or  pmrling  brook,  through  no  over-arching  bowers  or  verdant  shade, 
but  through  a  wilderness.  1.  The  first  peril  mentioned  is  the  wind.  By  "  the 
wind  "  here,  I  tinderstand  the  pestilential  wind,  sometimes  called  the  simoom, 
or  samiel,  which  at  certain  seasons  passes  over  the  desert,  blasting  and  wither- 
ing aU  it  touches,  and  carrying  death  in  its  train.  But  what  is  there  in  the 
spiritual  desert  corresponding  to  this  pestilential  wind?  Sin.  2.  The  second 
peril  in  the  wilderness  is  "the  tempest."  This  we  may  characterise  as  the 
thunderstorm,  which  differs  from  the  pestilential  wind  in  being  from  above, 
not  from  beneath;  violent,  not  subtle;  destroying  by  lightning,  not  by  poison. 
And  what  so  aptly  corresponds  to  this  as  the  manifested  anger  of  God  against 
sin?  3.  But  there  is  a  third  peril  in  the  wilderness — one  in  a  measure  peculiar 
to  it,  and  rarely  absent  from  it,  "  the  want  of  water,"  for  the  wondrous  man 
here  spoken  of  is  promised  to  be  "  as  rivers  of  water  in  a  dry  place."  The  wilder- 
ness is  especially  dry.  What  an  expressive  emblem,  then,  is  thirst  of  the  desire 
of  the  soul  after  Christ !  4.  The  last  peril  of  the  wilderness  here  mentioned  is 
the  wearisomeness  of  the  way.  What  poetry  and  beauty  there  are  in  the  ex- 
pression, "  a  weary  land  "  !  As  if  the  land  itself  were  weary,  weary  of  its  own 
wearisomeness,  weary  of  being  such  an  imcultivated  waste,  and  of  wearing  out 
the  lives  of  so  many  travellers.  One  main,  perhaps  the  chief,  element  of  the 
weariness  of  the  desert  is  the  unclouded  sun,  ever  darting  his  beams  down  upon 
it.  What  does  the  sun  here,  then,  represent?  Temptation.  U.  The  hidino- 
PLACE  AND  COVERT — the  refreshment  and  shade  which  the  Lord  has  provided 
for  these  travellers  in  the  Son  of  His  love.  1.  "  A  hiding-place  from  the  wind." 
This  wind  we  have  explained  as  the  pestilential  breath  of  sin.  A  hiding-place 
is  wanted,  lest  it  should  destroy  body  and  soul  in  hell.  Where  shall  we  find  it? 
In  the  Law?  That  is  going  out  of  the  wind  into  the  storm.  In  self?  That  is 
<  the  very  thing  we  most  want  shelter  from.  Jesus  is  the  hiding-place,  the  only 
hiding-place  from  sin  and  self.  But  three  things  we  must  know  and  experi- 
ence before  we  can  enter  into  the  beauty  and  blessedness  of  Jesus  as  a  hiding- 
place  from  the  wind.  (1)  We  must  feel  our  need  of  such  a  shelter.  (2)  We 
must  be  brought  to  see  the  hiding-place  which  God  has  provided  in  the  Son  of 
His  love.  (3)  Then  follows  the  third  step — the  entering  into  the  hiding-place. 
2.  But  the  same  wondrous  man  is  also  "  a  covert  from  the  storm."  This  we 
explained  as  referring  to  the  law.  How  a  shelter  is  needed  from  its  condemna- 
tion and  curse !  Where  is  this  refuge  to  be  found  ?  In  Jesus.  He  has  redeemed 
us  from  its  curse.  3.  From  this  springs  the  third  character  which  Jesus  sustains 
to  the  pilgrim  in  the  wilderness.  "  As  rivers  of  water  in  a  dry  place."  How 
graciously  does  the  blessed  Spirit,  by  this  figure,  set  forth  the  suitability  of  the 
Lord  Jesus  Christ  to  travellers  in  the  wilderness.     The  Lord  Jesus  is  spoken  of 


CHAP,  xxxn.]  ISAIAH.  16 

as  "  rivers  of  water."  The  very  thing  in  the  desert  which  we  need.  In  the  wilder- 
ness we  do  not  want  strong  drink  ;  that  would  only  inflame  the  thirst,  make 
the  blood  boil  in  the  veins,  and  smite  the  frame  with  fever.  As  it  toils  through 
the  desolate  wastes  of  sand  it  is  water  that  the  fainting  spirit  wants.  It  is  water 
— the  well  of  water  springing  up  into  everlasting  life — that  is  provided.  The 
fulness  of  the  Lord  Jesus  is  not  a  rill,  but  a  river;  not  only  a  river,  but  "  rivers." 
4.  But  the  Lord  Jesus  is  spoken  of  also  as  "  the  shadow  of  a  great  rock  in  a 
weary  land."  He  has  been  tempted  in  all  points  Uke  as  we  are;  but  as  the  rock 
bears  uninjured  the  beams  of  the  hottest  sun,  and  yet,  by  bearing  them,  shields 
in  its  recesses  the  wayworn  pilgrim,  so  did  Jesus,  as  man,  bear  the  whole  fury 
of  Satanic  tempt^ions,  and  yet  was  as  uninjured  by  them  as  the  rock  in  the 
desert.  And  having  borne  them.  He  shields  from  their  destructive  power  the 
tempted  child  of  God  who  lies  at  His  feet  under  the  shadow  of  His  embrace. 
m.  Thb  opening  of  the  eyes  to  see  and  the  unstopping  op  the  ears  to 
HEARKEN  to  the  blessings  thus  promised.  1.  "  The  eyes  of  them  that  see  shall 
not  be  dim."  Our  text  speaks  rather  of  dimness  than  blindness.  There  is 
a  diflference  between  the  two.  The  dead  in  sin  are  blind;  the  newly-quickened 
into  life  are  dim.  How  true  is  this  of  the  wilderness  pilgrim!  The  breath  of 
the  pestilential  wind,  the  thick  clouds  of  the  tempest,  the  hot  and  burning  sand, 
and  the  glare  of  the  mid- day  sun,  aU  blear  and  dim  the  eye.  But  the  hiding- 
place  from  the  wind,  the  covert  from  the  tempest,  the  rivers  of  water,  and  the 
shady  rock  heal  the  dimness.  2.  "  And  the  ears  of  them  that  hear  shall  hearken," 
The  persons  spoken  of  in  the  text  are  not  totally  deaf,  for  they  "  hear."  Yet 
there  is  a  difference  between  hearing  and  hearkening — a  difference  almost  analo- 
gous to  that  between  the  eyes  being  dim  and  seeing.  To  hearken  implies  faith 
and  obedience.  When  the  pilgrim  in  the  wilderness  reaches  the  hiding-place 
from  the  wind,  and  the  covert  from  the  tempest;  when  he  drinks  of  the  rivers 
of  water,  and  lies  under  the  shadow  of  the  great  rock,  he  not  only  hears  but 
hearkens — believes,  loves,  and  obeys.  (J.  C.  Philpot.)  31  en  as  hiding-places 
from  the  wind: — The  sandstorms  of  the  desert  margin  have  their  counterparts 
in  human  history  and  society.  Here  also  the  victories  of  faith  and  effort  are 
won  painfully,  and  often,  after  a  little  time  of  security,  are  overswept  by  some 
blighting  evil  influence.  Isaiah  himself,  St.  Paul,  Luther,  Wesley,  are  examples 
of  the  rock-like  men  of  history,  who  have  withstood  the  storm,  anfl  made  the 
good  things  of  life — faith,  hope,  and  charity — possible  to  others.  Isaiah's  bold 
stand  against  a  disposition  and  a  policy  which  would  have  made  Israel  the  plaything 
of  the  greater  nations  around,  preserved  the  national  existence  and  made  possible 
the  great  revival  of  religion  which  took  place  in  the  reign  of  Josiah.  St.  Paul's 
protest  against  the  Judaisers  saved  the  infant  Church  of  Christ  to  be  a  world- 
wide faith  instead  of  a  feeble  sect.  Luther's  great  work  of  reformation  broke 
one  of  the  strongest  currents  of  history — the  dead  set  of  things  towards  super- 
stition and  lifeless  formalism.  And  when  in  England  religious  indifference 
and  a  cold,  heartless  scepticism  lay  on  the  land  like  a  nightmare,  it  was  the  work 
of  Wesley  and  his  helpers  which  gave  a  new  opportunity  to  Christian  enterprise 
and  fervour.  The  great  value  of  these  lives  is  not  only  in  their  own  intrinsic 
nobleness  and  beauty;  they  make  space  for  others.  Thousands  of  hearts  pining 
in  secret  for  the  opportunities  of  service,  for  the  inspirations  of  faith  and  courage, 
gather  to  them,  take  shelter  in  their  greatness,  and  are  vitalised  and  transformed 
by  their  personal  power.  {W.  B.  Dalby.)  The  rock-like  man: — Who  is  the 
rock-like  man?  1.  He  is  always  a  man  of  great  strength  of  wiU.  A  purely 
natural   quality?     Yes  ;    but  one  which  is  nourished  on   prayer  and  striving. 

2.  Another  virtue  of  the  rock-man  is  moral  courage.  He  dares  to  do  right  when 
right-doing  is  dangerous,  when  it  carries  with  it  probabilities  of  loss  and  suffering. 

3.  But  that  which  adds  the  crowning  value  to  the  true  moral  hero  is  that  he 
is  always  a  man  of  faith,  i.e.  the  unseen  is  real  to  him.  He  has  many  ways 
of  realising  the  unseen,  differing  according  to  the  age  in  which  he  lives,  the 
influences  which  have  moulded  him,  the  manner  and  form  in  which  the  Divine 
revelation  has  come  to  him;  but  this  one  thing  is  of  the  essence  of  his  life,  whether 
he  be  a  Socrates,  a  Marcus  Aurelius,  a  St.  Bernard,  a  Dante,  or  a  Martin  Luther — 
that  he  shall  have  felt  and  known  that  "  man's  life  consisteth  not  in  the  abund- 
ance of  the  things  which  he  possesseth,"  that  "  man  doth  not  live  by  bread  alone, 
but  by  every  word  that  proceedeth  out  of  the  mouth  of  God."  {Ibid.)  Rock- 
men: — It  was  said  of  one  who  even  as  a  boy  showed  the  promise  of  his  later  years, 
*'  it  was  easy  to  be  good  when  he  came  to  the  school."     A  man  ifiay  be  a  rock 


16  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xxxn. 

to  his  fellows  at  school,  in  the  office,  in  the  home  life,  in  the  world,  wherever 
his  influence  falls,  a  fertilising  shelter,  a  healing  shade,  an  opposing  barrier — 
the  shadow  of  a  great  rock  in  a  weary  land.     {W.  C.  E.  Newbolt.)         Christ** 
human  sympathy: — Once  when  addressing  children  upon  this  text,  I  asked  what 
word  in  it  proved  the  sympathy  of  the  Saviour.      A  boy,  in  his  eagerness  for- 
getting where  he  was,  started  to  his  feet,  and,  waving  his  right  hand,  made  the 
whole  church  ring  with,  "  A  man,  a  man."     (J.    Wells,  M.A.)        Brotherhood 
in  adversity: — I  was  one  of  five  or  six  who,  the  other  day,  under  a  tree  sought 
shelter  from  a  passing  shower.      I  noticed  that,  though  strangers  to  one  another, 
we  seemed  then  more  friendly  than  friends  usually  are.      The  storm  gave  us 
a  sense  of  fellowship  as  well  as  of  danger.     The  common  deliverance  from  the 
common  peril,  trifling  though  it  was,  had  power  somehow,  I  thought,  to  awaken 
friendly  feeling.      The  least  easily  suggests  the  greatest.     There  is  a  sad  want 
of  love  in  the  world,  but   brotherly   love   would   reign   everywhere,  if   we  only 
remembered  that  we  are  all  fellow-travellers  through  the  desert,  that  the  same 
storms  may  any  moment  sweep  down  upon  us,  and  that  we  have  the  same  hiding- 
place  in  the  man  Christ  Jesus.     (Ibid.)        As  rivers  of  water  in  a  dry  place. 
— Religion  a  river: — This  chapter  is  a  prophetic  photogram  of  a  bright  age  that 
awaits  this  world.     The  dry  places  are  unregenerated  souls — souls  scorched  with 
the  drought  of  sin,  dusty  and  leafless,  without  any  vestige  of  spiritual  life  or 
verdiure.     Without  figure — a  soul  unrenewed  by  heavenly  influence,   is,   in  a 
moral  sense,  "  a  dry  place,"  barren  and  unfruitful.     What  is  the  river  that  is 
to  run  through  it,  irrigate  its  barren  districts,  clothe  it  with  living  beauty,  and 
enrich  it  with  fruit?     It  is  Christ's  religion.     Let  the  river  then  stand,  not  for 
objective  Christianity,  but  for  Christianity  in  the  soul,  for  experimental  godliness; 
and  we  have  four  ideas  suggested  concerning  it.     I.  Vitality.     So  necessarily 
do  we  associate  life  with  a  river,  that  the  ancients  traced  the  universe  to  water 
as  the  first  principle  of  all  things.     Life,  in  all  its  forms,  follows  in  profusion  the 
meandering  course  of  rivers.     Even  all  the  races  of  men  crowd  to  their  banks 
and  settle  on  their  shores.     The  Euphrates  made  Babylon;    the  Tiber  made 
Rome;    and  the  Thames  makes  London.     Water  is  life.     "  Everything  shall 
live  whither  the  river  cometh."     Religion,  which,  in  one  word,  is  supreme  love 
to  God  in  the  soul,  is  life;   it  quickens,  develops,  and  brings  to  fruition  all  the 
powers  of  *our  spiritual  natiu-e.     II.  Motion.     The  river  is  not  like  the  torpid 
pool  or  the  stagnant  lake,  resting  in  the  quiet  of  death.     It  is  active,  essentially 
and  perpetually  active.      So  with  real  godliness  in  the  soul.     It  is  in  perpetual 
flow;    it  keeps  all  the  powers  of  the  soul  in  action.     Thought  is  ever  at  work, 
gathering  elements  to  feed  th«  fire  of  devotion,  and  brighten  the  lamp  of  duty. 
The  spirit  is  always  abounding  in  the  work  of  the  Lord.     III.  Emanancy.     A 
river  is  an  outflow — it  has  a  fountain-head  somewhere.     It  has  no  independent 
existence;    there  is  a  force  that  started  it  at  first  and  feeds  it  every  hour.      A 
river  is  an  emanation;    so  is  true  godliness  in  the  soul.     1.  There  is  a  Divine 
fountain  from  which  it  emanates.     What  is  its  primal  font?     The  love  of  God. 
This  fountain  lies  far  back  in  the  awful  depths  of  eternity.     2.  There  is  a  Divine 
channel   through  which  it   flows  —  Christ.      3.  There  ia  a   Divine  agent   to  let 
it  into  the  heart.      The   Spirit   of   God   does   this   in  connection  with   means. 
IV.  Peogress.     In  a  river  there  is  twofold  progress.     1.  Progress  in  its  volume. 
As  the  river  meanders  on  its  way,  it  grows  in  bulk  by  the  contributory  streams 
that  flow  into  it.      At  length  it  gets  force  enough  to  sweep  everything  before 
it  and  to  give  a  character  to  the  district.     So  with  godliness  in  the  soul.     Holy 
currents  of  thought,  sympathy,  and  purpose,  deepen  their  charmels  and  rise  in 
the  strength  and  majesty  of  their  flow,  as  years  and  ages  pass  on.     2.  Progress 
towards  its   destination.     So   with  the  godly  soul.     Godward  it  ever   moves. 
(Homilist.)         Christ  the  source  of   refreshment: — 1.  Christ  relieves  His   people 
from  their  feelings  of  dissatisfaction,  inspired  by  the  vanity  of  earthly  things. 
2.  Christ  may  be  described  as  the  source  of  refreshment  to  His  people,  in  conse- 
quence of  the  comforts  He  vouchsafes  to  them  amidst  the  toils  and  sorrows  of 
their   Christian  pilgrimage.     (J.   B.   Patterson,   M.A.)        Rivers  of  water  in  a 
dry  place: — I.  As  setting  forth  the  benedictions  which  come  to  us  through  the 
incarnate  God,  let  tjs  study  the  metaphor  of  rivers  of  water  in  a  dry  place. 
This  means — 1.  Great  excellence  of  blessing.     A  river  is  the  fit  emblem  of  very 
great  benefits,  for  it  is  of  the  utmost  value  to  the  land  through  which  it  flows. 
2.  Abundance.     Jesus  is  full  of  grace  and  truth.     3.  Freshness.     A  pool  is  the 
same  thing  over  again,  and  gradually  it  becomes  a  stagnant  pond,  breeding 


CHAP,  xxxn.]  ISAIAH.  17 

corrupt  life  and  pestilential  gases.  A  river  is  always  the  same,  yet  never  the 
same;  it  is  ever  in  its  place,  yet  always  moving  on.  We  call  our  own  beautiful 
river,  "  Father  Thames,"  yet  he  wears  no  furrows  on  his  brows,  but  leaps  in 
all  the  freshness  of  youth.  4.  Freeness.  We  cannot  say  this  of  all  the  rivers 
on  earth,  for  men  generally  manage  to  claim  the  banks  and  shores,  and  the  fisheries 
and  water- powers.  Yet  rivers  can  scarcely  be  parcelled  out,  they  refuse  to 
become  private  property.  See  how  freely  the  creatures  approach  the  banks. 
5.  Constancy.     Pools  and  cisterns  drj'  up,  but  the  river's  song  is — 

Men  may  come  and  men  may  go. 
But  I  go  on  for  ever. 

So  is  it  with  Jesus.  The  grace  to  pardon  and  the  power  to  heal  are  not  a  spas- 
modic force  in  Him;  they  abide  in  Him  evermore.  6.  The  text  speaks  of 
"  rivers,"  which  implies  both  variety  and  unity.  7.  Force.  Nothing  is  stronger 
than  a  river;  it  cuts  its  own  way,  and  will  not  be  hindered  in  its  course.  II.  A 
SPECIAL  EXCELLENCE  wlucli  the  text  mentions.  "  Rivers  of  water  in  a  dry  place." 
In  this  country  we  do  not  value  rivers  so  much  because  we  have  springs  and 
wells  in  all  our  villages  and  hamlets;  but  in  the  country  where  Isaiah  lived  the 
land  is  parched  and  burnt  up  without  rivers.  When  the  man  Christ  Jesus  came 
hither  with  blessings  from  God,  He  brought  rivers  into  the  dry  place  of  our 
humanity.  What  a  dry  place  your  heart  was  by  nature!  Do  not  many  of  you 
find  your  outward  circumstances  very  dry  places?  III.  The  practical  lesson 
from  it  all.  1.  See  the  goings  out  of  God's  heart  to  man,  and  man's  way  of  com- 
muning with  God.  Other  rivers  rise  in  small  springs,  and  many  tributaries 
combine  to  swell  them,  but  the  river  I  have  been  preaching  about  rises  in  full 
force  from  the  throne  of  God.  It  is  as  great  a  river  at  its  source  as  in  its  after- 
course.  Whenever  you  stoop  down  to  drink  of  the  mercy  which  comes  to  you 
by  Jesus  Christ  you  are  having  fellowship  with  God,  for  what  you  drink  coines 
direct  from  God  Himself.  2.  See  what  a  misery  it  is  that  men  should  be  perish- 
ing and  dying  of  soul-thirst  when  there  is  this  river  so  near.  Millions  of  men 
know  all  about  this  river,  and  yet  do  not  drink.  3.  Let  us  learn,  if  we  have  any 
straitness,  where  it  must  lie.  Our  cup  is  small,  but  the  river  is  not.  4.  Is  Christ 
a  river  ?  Then  drink  of  Him,  all  of  you.  To  be  carried  along  on  the  surface  of 
Christianity,  like  a  man  in  a  boat,  is  not  enough,  you  must  drink  or  die.  6.  And 
if  you  have  diunk  of  this  stream,  live  near  it.  We  read  of  Isaac,  that  he  dwelt 
by  the  well.  It  is  good  to  live  hard  by  an  inexhaustible  spring.  Commune 
with  Christ,  and  get  nearer  to  Him  each  day.  6.  If  Christ  be  like  a  river,  let 
us,  like  the  fishes,  live  in  it.  (C  H.  Spurgeon.)  Infinite  fulness  in  Christ : — 
I  always  feel  very  fidgety  when  theologians  begin  making  calculations  about 
the  Lord  Jesus.  There  used  to  be  a  very  strong  contention  about  particular 
redemption  and  general  redemption,  and  though  I  confess  myself  to  be  to  the 
very  backbone  a  believer  in  Calvinistic  doctrine,  I  never  felt  at  home  in  such 
discussions.  I  can  have  nothing  to  do  with  calculating  the  value  of  the  atone- 
ment of  Christ.  Appraisers  and  valuers  are  out  of  place  here.  Sirs,  I  would 
like  to  see  you  with  your  slates  and  pencils  calculating  the  cubical  contents  of 
the  Amazon:  I  would  be  pleased  to  see  you  sitting  down  and  estimating  the 
quantity  of  fluid  in  the  Ganges,  the  Indus,  and  the  Orinoco;  but  when  you  have 
done  so,  and  summed  up  all  the  rivers  of  this  earth,  I  will  tell  you  that  your  task 
was  only  fit  for  schoolboys,  and  that  you  are  not  at  the  beginning  of  that  arith- 
metic which  can  sum  up  the  fulness  of  Christ,  for  in  Him  dwelleth  all  the  fulness 
of  the  Godhead  bodily.  His  merit.  His  power,  His  love.  His  grace,  surpass  all 
knowledge,  and  consequently  all  estimate.  {Ibid.)  Freeness  of  grace  in 
Christ: — I  took  pleasure  the  other  day  in  seeing  the  cattle  come  to  the  river  to 
drink.  The  cows  sought  out  a  sloping  place,  and  then  stood  knee  deep  in  the 
stream  and  drank  and  drank  again!  I  thought  of  Behemoth,  who  trusted  he 
could  snufiF  up  Jordan  at  a  draught,  they  drank  so  heartily,  and  no  one  said  them 
nay,  or  measured  out  the  draught.  The  dog,  as  he  ran  along,  lapped  eagerl}%  and 
no  tax  was  demanded  of  him.  The  swan  was  free  to  plunge  her  long  neck  into 
the  flood,  and  the  swallow  to  touch  the  surface  with  its  wing.  To  ox,  and  fly, 
and  bird,  and  fish,  and  man,  the  river  was  alike  free.  So  thou  ox  of  a  sinner, 
with  thy  great  thirst,  come  and  drink;  and  thou  dog  of  a  sinner,  who  thinkest 
thyself  unworthy  even  of  a  drop  of  grace,  yet  come  and  drink.  I  read  near  one 
of  our  public  ponds  a  notice,  "  Nobody  is  allowed  to  wash  dogs  here."  That 
is  right  enough  for  a  pond,  but  it  would  be  quite  needless  for  a  river.  In  a  river 
VOL.  II. — 2 


18  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  xxxn 

the  foulest  may  bathe  to  his  heart's  content.    The  fact  of  its  fulness  creates  » 
freeness  which  none  may  restrict.     {Ihid.)        Rivera  of  water  in  a  dry  place:— 
Isaiah's  moral  ideal  is  not  exhausted  in  a  single  picture.     The  scene  is  changed. 
The  desert  is  indeed  a  "  dry  place  ";   but  so  also  is  every  place  in  Palestine  when 
the  hot  season  is  reaching  its  close.     The  whole  land  is  thirsting  for  the  coming 
rain.     The  harsh,  dry  air  shimmers  over  the  rocks  and  dusty  roads.     The  heavens 
are  as  brass.     Every  evening  when  the  red  sun  sinks  below  the  western  horizon 
one  can  imagine  him  suUen  and  weary.     The  grass  is  no  longer  green,  but  of 
a  dull  dead  brown.     In  the  vineyard  the  vine  leaves  hang  sapless  and  limp,  or 
drift  wearily  to  the  ground.     The  figs,  the  oranges,  and  the  pomegranates  have 
all  been  gathered;    the  last  flower  has  withered  upon  its  stem.     The  reservoirs 
are  rapimy  becoming  exhausted  ;    the  diminished   Jordan  wanders  sluggishly 
along  its  southward  course;   its  tributary  streams  have  long  since  ceased  to  run. 
The  land  is  a  "  dry  and  thirsty  land,  where  no  water  is."     But  by-and-by  the 
watchers  on  Carmel  see  the  light  clouds  rising  out  of  the  Great  Sea.     Soon  the 
heavens  are  overspread,  and  the  first  heavy  drops  begin  to  fall.     The  rain  comes 
at  length  in  sheets,  in  torrents.     The  water-courses  fill  as  by  magic.     Kedron, 
Cherith,  Kishon,  and  Jabbok  are  now  no  longer  mere  names,  but  "  rivers  of 
water  in  a  dry  place."     The  change  wrought  in  a  few  days  is  wonderful.     The 
hot  earth  drinks  in  the  living  stream,  and  gives  it  out  a^ain  in  life,  abundant, 
exuberant.     Everywhere  the  grass  grows  green,   the  fields  are  carpeted  with 
flowers.     Soon  the  orange  trees  mingle  the  silver  of  their  blossoms  with  the  golden 
glow  of  their  fruitage,  and  the  dark  leaves  of  the  oleanders  are  relieved  by  the 
rich  red  or  snowy  white  of  their  flowers.     The  air  is  clear  and  the  horizon  lumin- 
ous.    It  is  a  land  of  rejoicing  now;    the  song  of  the  birds  is  heard  around,  on 
high,  fitting  accompaniment  to  the  sounds  of  happy  labour — labour  which  will 
soon  result  in  the  abundance  of  vintage  and  harvest,  when  Palestine  shall  literally 
be  "a  land  flowing  with  milk  and  honey."     {W.  B.  Dolby.)         The  fertilising 
power  of  a  gracious  character: — Where  is  the  life  that  answers  to  the  comparison, 
"  as  rivers  of  water  in  a  dry  place  "  ?     Any  life  which  is  rich  in  the  softer  virtues — 
unselflshness,    gentleness,    purity,    patience,    charity.     There  _  are    some    people 
whose  natures  overflow  in  blessing.     To  have  known  them  is  an  education  in 
morals   and  religion.     They  are   strong  :     they   have   will,  courage — especially 
the  courage  which  endures;  they  have  a  lofty  faith.     But  these  are  not  the  things 
which  most  impress  you  in  them.      Their  sphere,  it  may  be,  is  a  narrow  one; 
their  gifts  of  the  quiet,  homely  order.      It  is  not  so  much  what  they  say  or  do, 
it  is  what  they  are,  that  so  penetrates  you  with  a  sense  of  sweetness,  graciousness, 
and  charm.     They  are  women  with  no  particular  idea  that  they  have  a  "  mission." 
Or  they  are  men  of  quiet,  self-contained  nature,  very  high-principled,  though 
they  never  tell  you  so;    of  sensitive  honour,  though  they  never  call  attention 
to  the  fact.     When  trouble  comes,  they  meet  it  calmly;   loss  and  sorrow  are  to 
them  merely  experiences  which  proflt  to  the  increase  of  their  hopefulness.     If 
you  make  demands  upon  their  patience,  upon  their  self-sacrifice,  they  are  ready 
to  endure  hardness,  to  go  all  lengths  to  succour  any  brother  human  being  broken 
by  the  world.     Their  lives  are  lovely  and  pleasant  in  themselves,  fruitful  in 
blessing  to  others.     It  is  said  of  the  late  Clerk  Maxwell,  the  great  natmal  philo- 
sopher, that  "  he  made  faith  in  goodness  easy  to  other  men."     You  never  heard 
of  him  as  a  public  advocate  of  religion  or  philanthropy.     His  life  was  absorbed 
in  what  are  called  "  secular  studies,"  yet  the  character  rang  the  true  note  of 
Christian  purity  and  graciousness.     "  Rivers  of  water  in  a  dry  place  "  :    that  is 
a  very  affluent  description  of  these  quiet  lives;    but  not  any  too  much  so,  for 
without  them  the  work  of  the  great  moral  reformer  would  be  in  vain.     Each 
type  has  its  place  and  power;   each  is  needed  for  the  work  of  God  in  the  world. 
{Ibid.)         Shelter  and  refreshment  in  Christ:— During  the  Crimean  War  a  bomb- 
shell was  fired  from  the  fortifications  of  Sebastopol  by  the  Russians,  which  buried 
itself  in  the  earth,  and  burst  on  the  side  of  the  hill  on  which  the  British  troops 
were  encamped.     Strange  to  say,  immediately  from  the  ragged  hole  which  it 
made  in  the  ground  came  out  a  copious  stream  of  clear,  cold  water.      The  shell 
had  tapped  a  hidden  fountain  in  the  dry  and  thirsty  land,  and  broken  the  rocky 
cover  which  hid  it.     And  thus,  in  a  most  extraordinary  fashion,  the  British 
Boldiers,  who  were  complaining  of  thirst,  and  had  great  difficulty  in  getting  water, 
had  their  want  supplied;   and  the  enemy's  shot  that  was  meant  for  their  destruc- 
tion, proved  their  salvation.     And  so  the  wounds  inflicted  by  your  sins  upon 
the  Rock  of  Ages,  not  only  produced  a  place  of  safety  for  you,  but  also  opened 


CHAP,  xxxn.]  ISAIAH.  19 

up  a  fountain  of  refreshment  in  it.  And  a  Man,  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  is  your 
hiding-place  from  the  wind,  and  yoxir  covert  from  the  tempest — the  shadow  of 
a  great  rock  in  a  weary  land,  and  rivers  of  water  in  a  dry  place.  {H.  MacmiUan, 
D.D.)  As  the  shadow  of  a  great  rock  in  a  weary  land. — Comfort  in  Christ:^' 
This  is  the  agreeable  truth  to  be  illustrated:  that  saints  may  always  find  comfort 
in  Christ  in  this  wearisome  world.  I.  This  world  is  wearisome  to  saints. 
Their  treasture  is  in  heaven,  and  they  are  only  passing  through  the  world  to  take 
possession  of  it.  1.  This  is  a  laborious  world.  "  AU  things  are  full  of  labour." 
Employment  was  originally  enjoined  upon  man.  But  since  the  apostasy  servile 
labour  has  become  a  burden.  2.  This  is  a  troublesome  world.  Trouble  attends 
every  stage  and  condition  of  life.  3.  This  is  a  dark  world.  What  is  past,  what 
Is  present,  as  well  as  what  is  to  come,  lies  involved  in  darkness.  Good  men  are 
often  weary  of  conjectures,  and  despond  under  the  darkness  of  Divine  dispensa- 
tions. 4.  This  is  a  sinful  world.  II.  When  saints  are  weary  of  the  world 
THEY  siay  find  COMFORT  IN  Christ.  They  are  then  prepared  to  receive  comfort; 
and  Christ  is  always  ready  to  bestow  comfort  upon  those  who  are  prepared  for 
it.  In  particular — 1.  They  may  always  find  compassion  in  Christ,  which  is  a 
source  of  comfort.  Christ  has  gone  through  the  heat  and  cold,  the  storms  and 
tempests,  the  labours  and  troubles  of  this  world.  He  knows  what  it  is  to  be 
faint  and  weary.  He  knows  the  heart  of  a  pilgrim  and  stranger.  And  He  has 
the  tenderest  compassion  for  His  friends  in  distress  or  want.  2.  Weary  saints 
may  find  comfort  in  the  intercession  of  Christ.  3.  When  saints  are  weary  of 
the  world,  they  may  always  find  comfort  in  the  strength  of  Christ.  4.  They 
may  find  comfort  in  the  government  of  Christ.  Since  Christ  has  the  govern- 
ment of  all  things  in  His  hands,  ffis  people  may  safely  confide  in  His  wisdom, 
power,  and  compassion  to  defend  His  own  cause  and  repel  every  weapon  formed 
against  it.  6.  They  may  find  comfort  in  the  promises  of  Christ.  Improvement — 
1.  May  the  friends  of  Christ  always  find  comfort  in  Him  when  they  are  weary 
of  the  world?  Hence  we  may  see  the  reason  why  He  forbids  them  to  be  con- 
formed to  it,  or  seek  to  derive  their  supreme  happiness  from  it.  2.  If  those 
who  are  weary  of  the  world  may  fimd  comfort  in  Christ,  then  the  more  they  become 
weary  of  the  world,  the  better  they  are  prepared  to  enjoy  His  promised  peace 
and  comfort.  3.  If  Christians  who  are  weary  of  the  world  'nay  always  find  rest 
and  comfort  in  Christ,  then  they  may  enjoy  more  happiness  than  sinners  do, 
even  in  this  life.  4.  If  saints,  when  weary  of  the  world,  find  comfort  in  Christ, 
then  we  may  readily  believe  that  those  who  have  lived  in  the  darkest  times,  met 
with  the  greatest  troubles,  and  experienced  the  severest  trials,  have  often  arrived 
at  the  greatest  degrees  of  holiness  and  happiness  in  the  present  life.  5.  Since 
all  real  saints  who  are  weary  of  the  world  may  always  find  rest  in  Christ,  they 
have  no  reason  to  murmur  and  complain  under  any  of  the  troubles  and  afflic- 
tions in  which  they  are  involved.  6.  Since  all  true  believers  may  always  find 
rest  in  Christ,  when  they  are  weary  of  the  world,  they  have  no  more  reason  to 
be  anxious  about  future,  than  to  be  impatient  under  present,  troubles  and  trials, 
7.  Since  saints  may  find  rest  in  Christ  when  they  are  weary  of  the  world,  we 
may  easily  account  for  their  being  sometimes  stronger  and  sometimes  weaker 
than  other  men  in  adversity.  8.  Since  weak  and  weary  saints  may  always  find 
rest  in  Christ,  they  have  a  much  brighter  prospect  before  them  than  sinners. 
{N.  Emmons,  D.D.)  Beneficent  interposition: — A  traveller,  recently  returned 
from  Africa,  relates  that  one  day,  overcome  by  intense  heat,  he  feU  asleep  on 
the  baked  earth,  but  on  awaking  had  the  sensation  of  freshness,  and  found  it 
was  caused  by  the  thoughtfulness  of  his  attendants,  who  were  standing  around 
him,  receiving  upon  themselves  the  fierce  glare,  and  sheltering  his  recumbent 
body  from  the  ardent  rays  of  a  vertical  sun.  In  truth,  the  whole  world  rests 
in  the  shadow  of  Him  who  stands  between  us  and  the  consuming  fire  of  outraged 
law,  and  in  virtue  of  His  interposition  a  thousand  blessings  are  ours.  "  A  man 
shall  be  as  a  hiding-place  from  the  wind,"  &c.  (W.  L.  Watkinaon.)  Jesus 
the  Rock: — Of  Jesus,  the  believer  can  truly  say  that  life  on  this  side  of  Him 
is  very  different  from  life  on  that.  {Prof.  O.  A.  Smith,  D.D.)  An  emblem 
of  our  gracious  God: — The  rock  and  its  shadow.  Look  at  it!  It  is  the 
mingling  of  all  that  is  most  massive  and  immovable  with  all  that  is  gentlest  and 
tenderest.  The  rock  going  down  to  the  very  depths  of  the  solid  world,  rooted 
and  grounded,  it  is  the  very  figure  of  all  that  is  enduring  and  abiding.  Yet  its 
shadow  is  a  thing  almost  spiritual;  noiseless  in  its  fall,  it  creeps  as  if  it  feared 
to  disturb  those  whom  it  has  lulled  to  rest,  like  a  mother  who  fears  to  stir  lest 


20  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xxxn. 

she  awaken  the  little  one  that  she  has  hushed  to  sleep.  The  shadow — is  it  not 
the  perfection  of  gentleness?  The  breeze  whispers  of  its  coming  and  grows 
boisterously  playful  sometimes;  but  the  shadow  will  not  add  a  burden  to  the 
flower  bell.  The  rock  and  its  shadow — it  is  power  and  pity.  It  is  the  fit  emblem 
of  our  God  and  Father.  The  great  Creator  of  heaven  and  earth,  from  everlast- 
ing to  everlasting  He  is  God — yet  how  gracious  and  pitiful  is  He,  how  gentle! 
{M.  O.  Pearse.)  Weariness  in  life: — O !  the  weariness  felt  by  us  all,  of  plod,  plod, 
plodding  across  the  sand!  That  fatal  monotony  into  which  every  man's  life 
stiffens,  as  far  as  outward  circumstances,  outward  joys  and  pleasures  go!  the 
depressing  influence  of  custom  which  takes  the  edge  off  all  gladness  and  adds 
a  burden  to  every  duty!  the  weariness  of  all  that  tugging  up  the  hill,  of  all 
that  collar-work  which  we  have  to  do!  {A.  Madaren,  D.D.)  A  many-sided 
Christ: — Applying  the  language  of  the  whole  verse  to  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ, 
the  King  in  Zion,  we  are  struck  with  the  number  of  the  metaphors.  He  is  not 
merely  a  hiding-place,  and  a  covert,  and  a  river,  but  He  is  a  shadow  of  a  great 
rock.  Yes,  if  we  attempt  to  set  forth  our  Lord's  glories  by  earthly  analogies, 
we  shall  need  a  host  of  them,  for  no  one  can  set  Him  forth  to  perfection,  each 
one  has  some  deficiency,  and  even  altogether  they  are  insufficient  to  display 
all  His  loveliness.  It  is  very  pleasant  to  see  that  our  Beloved  is  such  a  many- 
sided  Christ,  that  from  all  points  of  view  He  is  so  admirable,  and  that  He  is 
supremely  precious  in  so  many  different  ways,  for  we  have  so  many  and  so  varied 
needs,  and  our  circumstances  are  so  continually  changing,  and  the  incessant 
cravings  of  our  spirit  are  so  constantly  taking  fresh  turns.     (C.  H.  Spurgeon.) 

Vers.  3,  4.  The  eyes  of  them  that  see  shall  not  be  dim. — Four  tests  of 
character: — The  whole  of  this  chapter  refers  to  the  state  of  the  world  during 
the  time  of  the  millennium.  The  happiness  which  shall  be  the  lot  of  God's 
children  in  that  period  will  be  only  an  increase  of  our  present  state  of 
happiness  and  holiness.  Therefore  this  passage  may  be  fairly  taken  as  furnish- 
ing tests  of  our  conversion  at  the  present  time.  I.  There  are  to  be  hereafter 
CLEAR  VIEWS.  If  we  are  converted,  we  have  clearer  views  than  we  once 
had.  n.  The  second  test  is,  the  HEARrNO  ear.  There  is  a  great  difference 
in  the  manner  in  which  persons  listen  to  the  Word  of  God.  III.  There  will 
be  INCREASED  KNOWLEDGE.  It  forms  part  of  the  promise  of  God  that  His 
people  shall  be  taught  of  Him.  And  what  is  it  they  are  taught?  They  are 
taught  to  see  the  excellence  of  the  person  of  Christ  Jesus  their  Saviour. 
IV.  There  shall  be  bold  confession  of  Jesus,  for  "  the  tongue  of  the 
stammerers,"  &c.  Can  you  say  your  character  will  bear  these  tests  T 
{M.  ViUiers,  M.A.) 

Ver.  6.  The  vile  person  shall  be  no  more  called  liberal — Vile  person 
(Heb.,  ndbal): — Compare  1  Sam.  xxv.  {A.  B.  Davidson,  LL.D.)  The  con- 
ventional abuse  of  moral  terms: — "  Liberal  "  and  "  bountiful  "  were  conventional 
names.  The  Hebrew  word  for  "  liberal  "  originally  meant  exactly  that — open- 
hearted,  generous,  magnanimous.  In  the  East  it  is  the  character  which,  above 
all,  they  call  princely.  So,  like  our  words  "  noble  "  and  "  nobility,"  it  became 
a  term  of  rank — "  lord  "  or  "  prince  " — and  was  often  applied  to  men  who  were 
not  at  all  great-hearted,  but  the  verv  opposite:  even  to  the  "  vile  person."  "  Vile 
person  "  is  literally  the  "  faded,'  or  the  "  exhausted,"  whether  mentally  or 
morally — the  last  kind  of  character  that  would  be  princely.  The  other  con- 
ventional term  used  by  Isaiah  refers  to  wealth,  rather  than  rank.  The  Hebrew 
for  "  bountiful  "  literally  means  "  abundant " — a  man  blessed  with  plenty — • 
and  is  used  in  the  Old  Testament  both  for  the  rich  and  the  fortunate.  Its 
nearest  English  equivalent  is,  perhaps,  "  the  successful  man."  To  this,  Isaiah 
fitly  opi)oses  a  name,  wrongly  rendered  in  our  version  "  churl,"  but  corrected 
in  the  margin  to  "  crafty  " — the  fraudulent,  the  knave.  When  moral  discrimina- 
tion comes,  says  Isaiah,  men  will  not  apply  the  term  "  princely  "  to  "  worn-out" 
characters,  nor  grant  them  the  social  respect  implied  by  the  term.  They  will 
not  call  the  "  fraudulent  "  the  "  fortunate,"  nor  canonise  him  as  successful  who 
has  gotten  his  wealth  by  underhand  means.  "  The  worthless  character  shall 
no  more  be  called  princely,  nor  the  knave  hailed  as  the  successful."  But  men's 
characters  shall  stand  out  true  in  their  actions,  and  by  their  fruits  ye  shall  know 
them.  In  those  magic  days  the  heart  shall  come  to  the  lips,  and  its  effects  be 
unmistakable.     {Pro/.  G.  A.  Smith,  D.D.) 


CHAP,  xxxn.]  ISAIAH.  21 

Vers.  6,  7.  For  the  vile  person  will  speak  villany. — TJie  outer  life  accord- 
ing to  the  inner: — A  vile  person  and  a  churl  will  do  mischief;  and  the  more 
if  he  be  preferred,  and  have  p<^fcr  in  his  hand.  His  honours  will  make  him 
worse,  and  not  better.  See  the  character  of  these  base,  ill-conditioned  men. 
1.  They  are  always  plotting  some  unjust  thing  or  other;  designing  ill  either  to 
particular  persons  or  to  the  public,  and  contriving  how  to  bring  it  about;  and 
BO  many  silly  piques  they  have  to  gratify,  and  mean  revenges,  that  there  appears 
not  in  them  the  least  spark  of  generosity.  Observe,  there  is  the  work  oi  the 
heart,  as  well  as  the  work  of  the  hands.  As  thoughts  are  words  to  God,  so  designs 
are  works  in  His  account.  See  what  pains  sinners  take  in  sin;  they  labour  it, 
their  hearts  are  intent  upon  it,  and  with  a  great  deal  of  art  and  application  they 
work  iniquity.  They  devise  wicked  devices  with  all  the  subtlety  of  the  old 
Berpent.  2.  They  carry  on  their  plots  by  trick  and  dissimulation.  When  they 
are  meditating  iniquity,  they  practise  hypocrisy,  feign  themselves  just  men. 
The  most  abominable  mischiefs  shall  be  disguised  with  the  most  plausible  pre- 
tences of  devotion  to  God,  regard  to  man,  and  concern  for  some  common  good. 
Those  are  the  vilest  of  men  that  intend  the  worst  mischief  when  they  speak  fair. 
3.  They  speak  villany.  When  they  are  in  a  passion,  you  will  see  what  they 
are  by  the  base,  ill  language  they  give  to  those  about  them,  which  no  way  becomes 
men  of  rank  and  honour.  Or,  in  giving  verdict  or  judgment,  they  villainously 
put  false  colours  upon  things  to  pervert  justice.  4.  They  affront  God,  who  is 
a  righteous  God  and  loveth  righteousness.  They  utter  error  against  the  Lord, 
and  therein  they  practise  profaneness.  They  give  an  unjust  sentence,  and  then 
profanely  make  use  of  the  name  of  God  for  the  ratification  of  it.  Nothing  can 
be  more  impudently  done  against  God  than  to  patronise  wickedness  with  His 
name.  5.  They  abuse  mankind,  those  particularly  whom  they  are  bound  to 
protect  and  relieve.  6.  These  churls  and  vile  persons  have  always  ill  instruments 
about  them,  that  are  ready  to  serve  their  villainous  purposes — "  the  instruments 
of  the  churl  are  evil."     {M.  Henry.) 

Ver.  8.  The  liberal  deviseth  liberal  things. — Liberality,  natural  and  gracious : 
— The  liberal  man  is  one  who  is  generous  and  benevolent  in  his  feelings  —  a 
man  of  large  views  and  public  spirit  —  one  far  above  covetousness  and  self- 
seeking — ever  desirous  to  promote  the  welfare  of  his  country,  and  the  best  interests 
of  his  fellowmen.  1.  There  is  a  certain  kind  of  liberality  which  may  be  con- 
sidered natural  and  constitutional.  Some  there  are  who,  from  their  earliest 
days,  evince  a  benevolent  and  generous  disposition.  The  liberality  which  is 
natural  wiU  be  found  to  operate  chiefly,  if  not  exclusively,  in  promoting  the 
temporal  welfare  of  mankind.  And  in  this  department  of  philanthropy  the 
labours  of  such  are  often  entitled  to  highest  commendation.  But  such  rarely 
evince  any  interest  about  the  precious  undying  soul,  and  the  eternity  towards 
which  we  are  all  so  rapidly  hastening.  2.  The  person  described  in  the  text, 
we  may  well  suppose,  is  indebted  to  a  higher  source  than  himself  for  a  mind 
so  enlightened  and  a  heart  so  enlarged.  As  water  cannot  rise  higher  than  the 
fountain,  so  man  cannot  in  himself  develop  a  character  higher  than  he  has  inherited. 
There  are  some  feelings  of  natural  amiability  which  have  survived  the  ruin  of 
the  fall.  These  may,  along  with  certain  external  causes,  form  a  character  in 
which  there  is  much  to  admire  and  love.  But  just  as,  to  borrow  the  words  of 
&  great  writer,  "  all  the  complexional  varieties  of  the  human  countenance,  from 
exquisite  beauty  to  revolting  deformity,  have  the  one  universal  attribute  of  decay, 
so,  amid  all  the  varieties  of  human  character,  from  the  most  lovely  to  the  most 
hideous,  there  is  a  heart  that  is  deceitful  above  all  things  and  desperately  wicked." 
There  is  a  constant  tendency  in  the  world  to  overlook  the  agency  of  God's  Spirit, 
and  to  put  to  the  credit  of  something  human — such  as  good  education,  or  good 
example,  or  sound  philosophy — what,  in  reality,  is  the  fruit  of  the  Spirit.  {W. 
Runciman.)  The  liberal  man: — I.  The  character  of  the  liberal  man.  "  He 
deviseth  liberal  things."  It  is  not  said  he  doeth  Liberal  things.  This  is  implied. 
If  he  has  the  means,  he  has  the  heart  and  the  will  to  practise  large  and  wide 
liberality.  There  is  a  far  greater  expenditure  both  of  mind  and  labom-  in  devising, 
than  in  doing  liberal  things.  It  is  an  easy  thing  for  one  who  has  abundant  wealth 
to  give  largely  in  aid  of  any  scheme  of  philanthropy.  But  to  originate  and  carry 
forward  any  plan  for  the  improvement  of  mankind,  requires  much  wisdom,  and 
energy,  and  patience,  and  benevolence.  The  one  is  liberal ;  the  other  directs 
and  stimulates  the  liberality  of  others.     The  one  is  as  the  hand,  the  other  the 


22  TEE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  xxxa 

mainspring  of  the  watch.     Of  the  multitude  who  cheerfully  give,  how  few  have 
the  capacity  to  devise!     And  one  intelligent  head,  conjoined  with  a  benevolent 
heart,  can  open  the  purses  of  a  whole  community.     II.  The  seciteity  of  thh 
UBEEAL  MAN.     "  By  liberal  things  shall  he  stand  " ;  or,  as  rendered  in  the  margin, 
"  shall  he  be  established."     This  statement  does  not  mean  that  there  is  anything 
about  the  most  enlightened  and  generous  liberaHty  which  has  anything  merit- 
orious, and  which  in  any  way  is  the  procuring  cause  of  God's  favour.     1.  The 
possession  of  this  beauteous  character  is  a  clear  indication  of  possessing  God's 
favour,  and  an  important  means  of  preserving  that  privilege.     2.  A  liberal  man 
is,  by  liberal  things,  established  in  the  estimation  of  the  wise  and  good.     3.  Devo- 
tion to  the  good  of  others  establishes  and  secures  much  happiness  to  the  liberal 
man.     The  greater  the  outgoing  of  benevolence,  the  greater  the  influx  of  peace. 
{Ibid.)        Liberality: — The  picture  drawn  has  a  twofold  aspect.     I.  The  influ- 
ence OF  LIBERALITY.      1.  The  liberal   man  is  he  whose  mind  has   been  freed 
and  enlarged  by  the  truth  of  the  Gospel.     You  cannot  make  a  man  liberal  so 
long  as  a  violent'  craving  for  more  sways  his  heart;  neither  wiU  a  man  be  liberal, 
though  he  may  count  himself  rich,  if  he  disintegrate  himself  from  the  great  com- 
munity of  which  he  is  a  member.     We  are  made  free  indeed  by  the  Son  when 
we  see  that  all  things  are  ours,  and  that  it  is  ours  also  to  fulfil  our  mission  as 
part  of  that  all  of  which  God  is  the  sum  and  substance.     2.  The  liberal  man 
is  he  whose  mind  premeditates  acts  of  liberality — "  he  deviseth  liberal  things." 
There  are  instincts  of  pity  and  charity  in  human  nature  which  may  be  brought 
into  accidental  action.      There  are  moments  of  weakness  which  make  the  miser 
even  to  relax  his  hold  of  his  hoardings.     Many  are  terrified  by  the  approach  of 
death  to  make  large  bequests.     There  are  others  who  are  naturally  tender-hearted, 
and  they  give  alms  most  feelingly,  but  not  from  thought.     There  are  some  seasons 
of  the  year,  such  as  Christmas-tide  and  harvest,  when  many  make  a  small  display 
of  their  charity.     These  are  the  once-a-year  liberal  folk.     The  text  refers  to  a 
much  higher  class  of  liberality  than  such  can  possibly  be — the  liberality  of  thought. 
The  goodness  of  God  is  not  fitful  or  forced,  but  the  outcome  of  His  Fatherly  care 
and  providence.     Liberality  in  thought  emanates  from  the  Spirit  of  Christ  in 
us.     3.  The  liberal  man  is  he  whose  acts  are  liberal.     The  subject  is  far  wider 
than   almsgiving.      Our   Sunday-school   teachers   and   the   leaders  of   religious 
and  temperance  movements  ;   our  tract  distributors,  and  those  who  visit  the 
poor,  the  afflicted,  the  dying,  and  the  sinful — are  greater  benefactors  than  those 
who  can  spare  silver  and  gold.     Alexander  gave,  not  according  to  the  merit 
of  the  man,  but  according  to  the  honour  and  resources  of  a  king.      Jesus  gave. 
How  much  ?     Time,  and  energy,  and  wisdom,  and  sympathy,  and  power  ?     Much 
more.      He   gave   Himself.      Let   all    yours   be   love-gifts.      II.  The     reflex 
INFLTTENCE  OF  LiBERAiJTY.     "  And  by  liberal  things  shall  he  be  estabhshed." 
There  is  a  power  in  liberality  which  strengthens  our  faith  and  character.     What- 
ever Christian  work  we  engage  in,  the  influence  on  ourselves  is  as  great  as  on 
others.     1.  The  liberal  man,  by  his  liberality,  cultivates  the  Spirit  of  Christ  in 
himself.     2.  The  liberal  man,  by  his  liberality,  increases  the  store  of  his  wealth 
(Prov.  xi.  24).     Many  Christians  are  poor  because  they  are  not  liberal.     3.  The 
liberal  man,  by  his  liberality,   obtains  the  approval  of  God.     That  approval 
we  now  receive  in  our  consciences,  but  hereafter  the  judgment  will  demonstrate 
it,  when  the  Judge  will  say,  "  Well  done,  good  and  faithful  servant."     4.  The 
liberal  man,  by  his  liberality,  will  conquer  the  hardness  of  the  human  heart. 
If  we  look  forth  to  the  mission  field,  liberaUty  has  been  the  vanguard  of  civilisa- 
tion and  religion.     Or  if  we  look  nearer  home,  at  the  liberal  changes  which  have 
been  made  in  the  punishment  of  criminals,  we  have  ample  proofs  that  crime 
has  decreased  in  proportion  as  we  have  humanised  jurisprudence.     The  highest 
note  of  liberality  is  this,  "  For  God  so  loved  the  world,"  &c,     {T.  Davies,  M.A.) 
Liberality  and   its  reflex  advantages: — I.    The   sttbject,   or   person   spoken  of. 
II.  The  property  ascribed  to  him.     "  He  deviseth  liberal  things."     I.  The  act. 
"  He  deviseth  " — the  bent  and  inclination  of  his  mind  is  set  this  way.     The 
word    may  denote  two  things.      Either — (1)  Serious   deliberation  about  it;   or 
(2)  readiness  of  mind  to  it.     Such  an  one  doth  not  stay  tUl  he  be  provoked  or 
necessitated  by  others  to  such  kinds  of  work.     2.  The  object.     "  Liberal  things," 
f,uch  as  become  a  person  of  a  large  and  bountiful  heart,  redounding  to  the  good 
of  mankind.     III.  The  benefit  or  advantage  of  it.     "  By  liberal  things  shall 
he  stand."     Such  persons  shall  not  only  be  not  ruined  by  their  bounty,  but  shall 
hereby  be  confirmed  and  advanced  in  all  kinds  of  prosperity.     {Bp.  J.  Wilkins.) 


CHAP,  xxxn.]  ISAIAH.  23 

The  virtue  of  liberality: — I.  The  nature  op  this  virtxte  :  what  it  is  and  wherein 
it  consists.  1.  The  several  names  whereby  it  is  described — generosity,  &c.  The 
periphiastical  descriptions  of  it  are  such  as  these, — Opening  our  hands  wide 
(Deut.  XV.  8);  drawing  out  our  souls  (Isa.  Iviii.  10);  dispersing  abroad  (2  Cor. 
ix.  9);  being  enriched  in  everything  to  tM  bountifulness  (2  Cor.  ix.  11);  to  be 
rich  in  good  works,  ready  to  distribute,  willing  to  communicate  (1  Tim.  vi.  18). 
2.  The  nature  of  it.  Extended  to  persons  in  a  state  of  suffering  and  misery,  it 
is  styled  mercy  or  pity.  To  persons  in  a  condition  of  want  it  is  styled  alms  or 
charity.  3.  The  qualifications  or  conditions  required  to  the  due  exercise  of 
it.  (1)  It  must  be  done  willingly,  with  spontaneity,  with  forwardness  of  mind 
(2  Cor.  ix.  2).  Not  grudgingly,  but  cheerfully  (ver.  7).  "  Thine  heart  shall 
not  be  grieved  when  thou  givest  to  thy  brother  "  (Deut.  xv.  10).  (2)  It  must 
be  done  freely,  without  expecting  reward.  "  Do  good — expecting  nothing  again; 
freely  you  have  received,  freely  give."  He  that  is  liberal  upon  design  may  be 
styled  mercenary.  Such  kind  of  gifts  are  not  benevolence,  but  a  bargain;  not 
a  dole,  but  a  bait.  That  is  a  remarkable  place  (Prov.  xxii.  16),  "  He  that  oppresseth 
the  poor  to  increase  his  riches,  and  he  that  giveth  to  the  rich,  shall  surely  come 
to  want."  (3)  It  must  be  done  readily,  without  delay  (Prov.  iii.  28).  (4)  Besides 
these  several  qualifications  for  the  manner,  it  must  likewise  be  done  freely  and 
liberally  for  the  measure — according  to  our  several  abilities.  'Tis  for  a  brother 
of  low  degree  to  give  sparingly:  they  that  are  rich  in  this  world  must  be  rich 
in  good  works  also.  Goats'  hair  and  badgers'  skins  may  be  a  suitable  gift  for 
the  people,  and  a  mite  for  a  poor  widow;  but  the  rich  are  to  give  purple,  and 
gold,  and  jewels.  And  in  this  sense  is  that  Scripture  to  be  fuIOlled,  that  "  to 
whom  much  is  given,  of  them  much  shall  be  required."  4.  The  opposites  to 
it,  which  (as  of  aU  other  moral  virtues)  are  of  two  kinds — redundant,  and  defi- 
cient. (1)  The  exceeding  extreme  is  styled  prodigality,  profuseness,  riotousness, 
which  observes  neither  the  due  maimer  nor  measure  in  keeping  or  giving.  (2)  The 
deficient  extreme  is  churlishness,  tenacity,  shutting  up  the  bowels  of  compassion, 
being  greedy  of  filthy  lucre.  It  hath  these  particular  characters  given  to  it  in 
Scripture;  it  is  a  kind  of  idolatry,  inconsistent  with  religion.  "  No  man  can 
serve  God  and  mammon."  He  that  "  loveth  the  world,  the  love  of  the  Father 
is  not  in  him."  It  is  the  root  of  all  evil,  leading  men  into  temptations  and  snares. 
It  is  hateful  to  men,  amongst  whom  it  will  render  a  person  vile  and  contemptible; 
and  it  is  abominable  to  God  (Psa.  x.  3).  II.  The  necessity  op  it,  or  the  grounds 
of  our  obligation  to  it  from  Scripture  and  reason.  1.  Scripture  proofs.  (1)  The 
precepts  for  it  (Deut.  xv.  7,  8,  10,  11;  Eccles.  xi.  1;  Matt.  v.  42;  Luke  vi.  33; 
1  Tim.  vi.  18;  Titus  iii.  8).  (2)  The  commendations  of  it.  That  which  we 
translate  "  a  liberal  soul  "  (Prov.  xi.  25)  in  the  Hebrew  is  "  the  soul  of  blessing." 
As  the  virtue  of  charity  is  frequently  celebrated  for  one  of  the  most  excellent 
amongst  aU  the  rest,  and  set  forth  by  many  peculiar  commendations  as  being 
better  than  sacrifice ;  the  fulfilling  of  the  law  ;  the  bond  of  perfectness  ;  the 
great  commandment;  the  royal  law:  so  is  bounty  one  of  the  top  branches  of 
charity.  "  It  is  more  blessed  to  give  than  to  receive."  It  is  both  the  evidence 
and  the  ornament  of  our  religion.  It  is  the  chief  fruit  whereby  we  are  to  judge 
of  our  sincerity.  Men  do  vainly  pretend  to  faith  and  religion,  without  the  proof 
of  such  good  works.  Obadiah  doth  urge  this  to  the  prophet  as  an  evidence  of 
his  fearing  God,  that  he  had  been  careful  to  relieve  others  in  distress.  And 
the  centurion  was  for  this  reason  styled  a  man  of  worth.  "  Pure  religion  and 
undefiled,"  is  to  abound  in  works  of  this  natm-e,  "  to  visit  the  fatherless  and 
the  widow  "  (James  i.  27).  (3)  The  promises  made  to  it.  (4)  The  threats 
and  judgments  denounced  upon  the  neglect  of  it.     2.  The  arguments  from  reason. 

( 1 )  From  equity,  (a)  In  respect  of  God,  who  bestows  upon  us  aU  that  we  have, 
and  therefore  may  well  expect  that  we  should  be  ready  to  lay  out  some  of  it 
for  His  use,  according  to  His  appointment,  (b)  In  respect  of  the  poor,  who  by 
reason  of  their  relation  to  us,  and  their  need  of  us,  may  reasonably  expect  assist- 
ance from  us.  (c)  In  respect  of  ourselves.  We  can  hope  for  nothing  from  God 
but  upon  the  account  of  bounty.  Now,  the  rules  of  congruity  require  that  we 
should  be  as  ready   to  show  mercy  to  others  as  to  expect  it  for   ourselves. 

(2)  Justice.  In  God's  law,  the  not  doing  a  kindness  when  we  have  a  fitting  occa- 
sion is  counted  injustice,  and  He  will  arraign  us  for  the  omission  of  such  occasions. 
The  apostle,  having  said  (Rom.  xiii.  7),  "  Render  to  all  their  dues,"  subjoins  in 
the  next  verses,  "  Owe  no  man  anything,  but  to  love  one  another,"  implying 
that,  in  the  Scripture  sense,  charity  is  a  debt,  and  the  not  paying  of  it  an 


24  TEE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xxxn. 

injustice.  It  is  such  a  debt  as  we  can  never  fully  discharge,  but  though  we  are 
always  paying  it,  yet  we  must  still  be  in  arrear  whilst  there  shall  remain  any 
ability  and  occasion  for  our  exercising  it.  (3)  Advantage.  "  By  liberal  things 
shall  he  stand."  III.  Application.  By  way  of — 1.  Doctrinal  inference. 
2.  Practical  inference.  (Ibid.)  The  advantages  of  liberality: — I.  For  this  life. 
It  is  the  most  effectual  way  both  to  improve  and  preserve  our  estates,  and  to 
render  us  honourable  and  amiable  in  the  esteem  of  others.  1.  For  the  increasing 
of  our  estates,  the  apostle  compares  it  to  sowing,  which  refers  to  a  harvest.  2.  For 
the  preserving  them  safe.  The  Jews  call  alms  by  the  name  of  salt,  for  its  pre- 
serving power.  It  is  laying  up  treasures  in  heaven,  where  rust  cannot  corrupt, 
nor  thieves  break  through  and  steal.  Saith  the  epigrammatist,  "  A  man  can 
be  sure  only  of  that  wealth  which  he  hath  given  away."  II.  For  the  future 
LIFE.  Works  of  beneficence  are  called  by  St.  Paul,  Be/neXiov — the  foundation 
of  that  reward  we  shall  receive  in  the  world  to  come  (1  Tim.  vi.  19).  {Ibid.) 
Liberality: — I.  The  liberality.  II.  The  devising.  III.  The  standing.  (J. 
Donne.)  True  liberality: — I.  State  the  true  notion  of  liberality.  True 
liberality  by  no  means  intends  profuseness,  or  a  wasteful,  thoughtless  scattering 
of  our  substance,  without  judgment  or  economy.  Neither  is  it  consistent  with 
the  account  the  Scriptures  give  us  of  liberality,  nor  indeed  with  the  laws  of  nature 
and  reason,  that  a  man  should  abound  in  acts  of  generosity  to  more  remote  objects, 
while  he  neglects  those  under  his  special  care  (Matt.  xv.  3-6  ;  1  Tim.  v.  4,  8  ; 
Gal.  vi.  10).  But  it  is  most  of  all  inconsistent  with  the  liberality  recommended 
in  the  Word  of  God,  that  we  should  give  that  to  others  which  is  not  our  own; 
or  distribute  among  the  poor  that  which  should  pay  our  just  debts.  1.  By  a 
liberal  man,  we  are  to  understand  a  man  of  a  kind,  compassionate,  benevolent 
disposition  ;  one  who  observes,  with  admiration  and  delight,  that  profusion  of 
bounty  with  which  the  great  Creator  of  the  world  blesses  the  works  of  His  hands  ; 
is  truly  thankful  for  the  share  he  enjoys  of  it;  and  as  he  sees  his  "  heavenly 
Father  makes  His  sun  to  rise  on  the  evil  and  on  the  good,  and  sendeth  rain  on 
the  just  and  on  the  unjust,"  so  he  is  charmed  with  the  Divine  pattern,  and  labours, 
according  to  his  measure,  to  imitate  it.  2.  But  his  benevolence  must,  according 
to  his  ability,  be  put  in  practice.  3.  His  charity  is  very  diffusive  ;  indeed,  it 
can  bear  no  limits  but  such  as  are  prescribed  by  Scripture  and  sound  reason. 
The  stranger  must  partake  of  it  as  well  as  those  of  his  own  country  and  kindred. 
4.  To  finish  the  character  of  the  truly  liberal  man,  it  is  necessary  that  his  dispo- 
sition and  practice  should  be  founded  in  religious  principles,  and  be  the  blessed 
fruit  of  the  saving  work  of  the  Spirit  upon  his  heart.     II.  Consider  that  part 

OF  THE  LIBERAL  MAN'S  CHARACTER  WHICH  IS,  IN  A  SPECIAL  MANNER,  RECOM- 
MENDED IN  THE  TEXT.  He  "  deviscth  liberal  things."  It  is  commendable  to 
have  a  readiness  of  soul  to  such  works  as  these,  when  they  are  proposed  and  marked 
out  to  us  by  others.  It  is  well  to  have  a  mind  easily  impressed  with  the  condi- 
tion of  the  indigent,  and  willing  to  submit  to  the  dictates  of  conscience,  the 
importunity  of  the  necessitous,  and  the  advice  of  good  men.  But  the  charitable 
character  rises  much  higher  when  we  devise  liberal  things  ourselves.  It  supposes 
a  heart  greatly  set  on  doing  good.  1.  The  liberal  man  wisely  manages  his  own 
affairs  to  this  good  end.  2.  He  employs  all  his  wisdom  and  prudence  in  order 
to  dispose  of  his  bounty  in  the  best  manner  and  to  the  most  advantageous 
purposes.  He  is  so  far  from  hiding  his  face  from  his  brother  who  is  in  want, 
that  he  searches  diligently  to  find  him  out.  He  will  lay  himself  out  in  the  service 
of  every  community  to  which  he  stands  related,  and  will  labour  what  in  him 
lies  to  promote  the  true  peace  and  welfare  of  the  whole  world.  3.  He  will  also 
call  in  all  proper  assistance  in  this  good  work.  He  will  consult  about  these 
things  with  such  of  his  pious  friends  as  have  generous  souls  and  good  judgments. 
4.  The  liberal  man  contrives  how  he  shall  diffuse  and  promote  the  spirit  of  liber- 
ality.    6.  He  persists  in  this  course.     III.  Some  account  of  that  suitable 

AND  gracious   reward   WHICH  SHALL  ATTEND  THE  LIBERAL  MAN.      "  By  liberal 

things  shall  he  stand."  1.  In  some  good  degree  in  this  life.  (1)  In  the  opinion 
and  regard  of  mankind.  (2)  This  temper  and  conduct  are  the  most  likely  way 
both  to  secure  and  enlarge  our  estates,  as  well  as  give  us  the  truest  enjoyment 
of  them.  (3)  This  conduct  will  certainly  afford  him  a  pleasure  in  his  own  mind 
that  cannot  easily  be  described.  (4)  What  is  still  more  valuable,  he  shall  be 
supported,  maintained,  and  established  by  the  liberal  things  of  Divine  grace. 
2.  What  will  crown  all,  is  the  blessedness  which  shall  follow  in  the  life  to  come. 
(Joseph  Stennett.)        Liberality: — I.  Thb  true  source  of  liberality.     II.  The 


CHAP.  XXXII.]  ISAIAH.  25 

PRACTICE     OP    THE     UBEEAX.      III.    ThE     BLESSEDNESS     OF    LIBERAL    MEN.      {A. 

Brandram,  M.A.)  The  Christian  liberal: — The  name  liberal  comes  from  the 
Latin  word  Itberalis,  meaning  free,  open-handed,  generous-hearted,  and  well- 
bred;  it  implies  also  a  nature  which  acts  according  to  its  own  desire,  and  yet 
is  neither  selfish  nor  narrow,  being  of  pure  mind  and  noble  soul.  1.  The  genuine, 
Christ-inspired  liberal  loves  freedom  in  the  highest  sense  of  the  word.  2.  He 
embraces  other  interests  than  his  own.  3.  He  should  be  unselfish,  broad,  and 
catholic  in  his  character.  4.  To  be  liberal-natured  after  the  standard  of  Christ 
is  not  so  easy  as  it  seems  ;  it  is  the  work  of  a  life-time.  (W.  Birch.)  Saving 
and  giving: — He  that  locks  up  may  be  a  good  jailer,  but  he  that  gives  out  is 
His  steward.  The  saver  may  be  God's  chest,  the  giver  is  God's  right  hand.  (J. 
Donne.)  Devising  liberal  things: — One  of  the  most  liberal  and  lavish  givers 
to  charitable  objects  said  to  a  friend  who  spoke  of  his  generosity,  "  You  mistake: 
I  am  not  generous.  I  am  by  nature  extremely  avaricious  :  but  when  I  was  a 
young  man  I  had  sense  enough  to  see  how  mean  and  belittling  such  a  passion 
was,  and  I  forced  mj'self  to  give.  At  first,  I  declare  to  you,  it  was  hard  for  me 
to  part  with  a  penny;  but  I  persisted  until  the  habit  of  liberality  was  formed. 
There  is  no  yoke  like  that  of  habit.  Now  I  like  to  give."  {W.  Baxendale.)  A 
liberal  heart  desired: — Sir  Thomas  Sutton,  the  founder  of  the  Charter  House, 
was  one  of  the  wealthiest  merchants  of  his  day.  Fuller  teUs  how  he  was  over- 
heard one  day  praying  in  his  garden  :  "  Lord,  Thou  hast  given  me  a  large  and 
liberal  estate  ;   give  me  also  a  heart  to  make  use  of  it."     (Tinling^s  Illustrations.) 

Ver.  9.  Rise  up,  ye  women,  that  are  at  ease. — Female  complacency  re- 
proved:— Isaiah  turns  aside  abruptly  from  his  main  theme.  His  eye,  we  may 
suppose,  was  arrested  by  the  spectacle  of  some  women,  sitting  down  perhaps 
at  a  little  distance  from  where  he  stood,  and  testifying  their  indifference  to  his 
words.  In  chap.  iii.  it  was  their  vanity  and  love  of  display  which  called  forth 
the  prophet's  censure  :  here  it  is  their  complacency  and  unconcern.  {Prof. 
S.  H.  Driver,  D.D.) 

Ver.  11.  Be  troubled,  ye  careless  ones. — Besetting  tins  may  be  the  defects 
of-  virtues: — The  besetting  sins  of  either  sex  are  its  virtues  prostituted.  A  man's 
greatest  temptations  proceed  from  his  strength;  but  the  glory  of  the  feminine 
nature  is  repose,  and  trust  is  the  strength  of  the  feminine  character,  in  which 
very  things,  however,  lies  all  the  possibility  of  woman's  degradation.  {Prof. 
0.  A.  Smith,  D.D.)         The  careless  sinner  reproved: — I.  I  am  to  expostulate 

WITH  THOSE  WHO  ARE  CARELESS  IN  THE  CONCERNS  OF  RELIGION  AND  THEIR  SOULS. 

The  following  things  are  submitted  to  your  consideration: — 1.  The  importance  of 
religion,  which  is  neglected  by  you.  2.  The  beneficial  proofs  of  the  Divine  agency 
which  surround  you.  3.  Your  personal  obligations  to  God  are  neither  few  nor 
small.  4.  The  grand  display  of  the  love  of  God  in  giving  His  only-begotten  Son, 
that  whosoever  believeth  in  Him,  &c.  5.  The  certainty  of  judgment  and  a 
future  state.  11.  We  are  now  to  address  these  expostulations  to  the  con- 
sideration OF  youth,  manhood,  and  age.  {A.  Shanks.)  An  alarm  to  the 
careless: — To  be  careless  in  temporal  things  is  generally  regarded  as  a  very  serious 
defect  or  offence.  How  much  more  so  when  one  is  careless  in  spiritual  things! 
Yet  this  is  characteristic  of  great  numbers  who  hear  the  Gospel.  Is  there  no 
cause  for  alarm?  A  careless  attitude  and  habit  towards  God  and  Christ  and 
salvation  are — 1.  Unreasonable.  2.  Hazardous.  3.  God- provoking.  (J.  M. 
Sherwood.) 

Vers.  13-19.  Upon  the  land  of  my  people  shall  come  up  thorns  and 
briers. — The  outpouring  of  the  Spirit : — As  the  communication  of  the  Spirit 
is  necessary  to  produce  a  reformation,  so  a  large  communication  or  outpouring 
of  the  Spirit  is  necessary  to  produce  a  public  general  reformation;  such  as  may 
save  a  country  on  the  brink  of  ruin,  or  recover  one  already  laid  desolate.  With- 
out this  remedy,  all  other  applications  will  be  ineffectual;  and  the  distempered 
body  politic  will  languish  more  and  more,  till  it  is  at  length  dissolved.  Until  this 
outpouring  of  the  Spirit,  says  the  prophet,  "  briers  and  thorns  shall  come  up 
upon  the  land;  and  the  houses  of  joy,  the  palaces,  and  towers,  shall  be  heaps  of 
ruins,  dens  for  wild  beasts,  and  pastures  for  flocks."  Until  that  blessed  time 
come,  no  means  can  effectually  repair  a  broken  state,  or  repeople  a  desolate 
country.     But  when  that  blessed  time  comes,  then  what  a  glorious  revelation — ■ 


26  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xixn. 

what  a  happy  alteration  follows!  (vers.  15-19).  (5.  Davies,  M.A.)  The 
Holy  Spirit  tn  prophecy: — I.  The  blight  of  sin.  It  is  contrasted  here  with 
the  beauty  of  holiness;  and  this  contrast  makes  the  deep  gloom  more  apparent 
than  if  it  were  viewed  by  itself.  II.  The  dabk  otttlook  which  Isaiah  beheld. 
There  is  gloom  first,  and  then  gladness — confusion  first,  then  comfort — darkness 
first,  then  light.  Sin  brings  suffering  and  sorrow,  either  in  this  world  or  in  the 
world  to  come.  III.  The  blessing  promised.  In  proportion  as  the  Church 
prays  for,  and  expects,  and  receives  the  more  abundant  outpouring  of  the  Spirit, 
the  work  of  the  world's  conversion  will  proceed  apace.  We  speak  of  a  Pente- 
costal effusion;  but  the  Church  prays  and  waits  for  a  yet  more  abundant  out- 
fouring :  and,  when  it  comes,  the  glory  of  the  latter  day  will  be  fuUy  realised. 
V.  The  bright  future.  As  the  result  of  the  pouring  out  of  the  Spirit,  "  the 
wilderness  shall  become  a  fruitful  field."  It  has  been  said  that  this  part  of  the 
prophecy  is  "  luminous,  rather  than  lucid;  full  of  suffused,  rather  than  distinct 
meanings."  This  much,  however,  is  clear,  that  the  good  fruits  of  the  Spirit's 
outpouring  will  be  both  material  and  moral.     (P.  M earns.) 

Vers.  15-17.  Until  the  Spirit  be  poured  upon  na  ftom  on  high.  —  Spiritual 
influences: — I.  There  is  provided  en  connection  with  the  Christian  economy, 
THE  bestowment  OF  SPIRITUAL  INFLUENCES  ON  MANKIND.  1.  In  what  manner 
is  the  Spirit  poured  from  on  high?  It  cannot  but  be  expected  that  there  must 
be  not  a  little  of  mystery  on  such  a  subject.  Yet  the  information  we  possess 
is  distinct  and  important.  There  was  a  distinct  communication  of  this  influence 
made  to  the  apostles,  which  was  accompanied  by  immediate  and  visible  signs. 
But  it  was  intended  that  this  Spirit  should  influence  the  hearts  of  men  in  general : 
an  arrangement  was  made,  in  the  Divine  goodness,  by  which  the  Gospel  should 
be  rendered  powerful  and  effectual  to  produce  great  moral  results  in  the  hearts 
and  on  the  lives  of  men.  We  speak  of  this  influence  as  common  and  permanent. 
We  pretend  not  to  state  how  this  Spirit  comes  down  to  influence  the  minds  of 
men  :  "  the  wind  bloweth  where  it  listeth,  and  thou  hearest  the  sound  thereof, 
but  canst  not  tell  whence  it  cometh,  and  whither  it  goeth;  so  is  everyone  that 
is  born  of  the  Spirit."  But  we  do  regard  it  as  an  essential  principle,  that  the 
Spirit  of  God  is  poured  out  upon  mankind  ;  and  we  declare  that  to  reject  this 
doctrine  is  most  perilous  to  the  immortal  soul!  2.  For  what  purposes  is  the 
Spirit  poured  from  on  high?  One  effect  of  this  influence  on  the  minds  of  the 
apostles  at  first  was  a  great  and  a  public  one  ;  it  was  intended  to  endow  them 
with  those  miraculous  gifts  and  graces  which  were  commensurate  with  the  divinity 
of  their  claims — the  truth  of  their  mission — the  importance  of  their  object.  But 
the  more  ordinary  influences  of  the  Spirit  are  stiU  poured  out,  and  are  most 
important  to  effect  the  salvation  of  the  soul.  He  is  the  Spirit  of  repentance — 
of  faith — of  power — of  knowledge — of  "  wisdom  and  revelation  in  the  know- 
ledge of  Christ  " — of  holiness — of  comfort — of  love — of  anticipation.  3.  To 
what  extent  is  the  Spirit  poured  from  on  high?  It  is  evidently  the  design  of 
God  that  there  should  be  a  very  wide  extension  of  this  influence.  4.  Under 
what  necessity  is  the  Spirit  poured  from  on  high?  Excepting  it  were  the  case 
that  such  an  arrangement  had  been  made,  in  the  mercy  of  God,  for  changing 
the  state  of  mankind,  there  could  have  been  no  prospect  of  happiness  on  earth, 
or  of  everlasting  glory  hereafter.     11.  The  facts  regarding  the  bestowment 

OF    spiritual    INFLUENCE    UPON    MANKIND    OUGHT    TO    PRODUCE    ON    OUR    MINDS 

THE  MOST  POWERFUL  EFFECTS.  1.  We  Ought  carefully  to  ascertain  whether 
we  have  the  communication  of  this  influence  of  the  Spirit.  2.  Pray  that  there 
may  be  an  outpouring  of  this  communication.  Pray  for  this  gift  for  yourselves — 
for  your  families— for  the  Chiu-ch  of  God — for  the  world.  {James  Parsoris.) 
The  pouring-out  of  the  Spirit: — Whoever  has  paid  any  serious  attention  to  religion 
must  be  convinced  of  his  natural  weakness  and  inability  to  fulfil  even  his  own 
wishes  and  resolutions.  It  is  to  meet  this  undoubted  fact  of  man's  natural  mability 
to  do  the  will  of  God  that  the  Divine  influence  of  the  Holy  Spirit  was  arranged 
and  promised.  I.  The  influence  of  the  Spirit  in  the  progress  of  thb 
Gospel.  The  Bible  shows  us  our  dependence  on  God  as  Creator,  Preserver, 
and  Lord.  1.  On  the  first  page  we  find  the  creation,  with  all  its  wonders, 
recorded.  "  The  earth  was  without  form,  and  void."  But  the  Spirit  of  God 
moved  on  the  face  of  the  waters,  and  forthwith  light  and  order  proceeded,  life 
appeared,  the  heavens  and  the  earth,  and  all  was  very  good.  2.  Sin  cam© 
and  devastated  the  social  world.     The  evil  spirit  of  temptation  was  at  worlb 


CHAP,  xxxn.]  ISAIAH.  27 

3.  Diiring  the  times  of  the  prophets  the  limited  range  of  the  Spirit  was  felt  and 
more  favoured  days  proclaimed.  4.  These  promises  were  revived  in  the  words 
of  Christ,  who  more  particularly  entered  into  the  offices  and  working  of  the  Holy 
Ghost  and  its  influence  on  the  future  Church  as  well  as  on  the  individual  lives 
of  Christians.  On  Him  also  the  Spirit  descended  in  a  bodily  form.  He  gives 
definite  promises  of  the  particular  gift — promises  which  the  disciples  did  not 
rightly  apprehend.  5.  In  subsequent  history  all  was  made  plain  and  clear. 
On  the  day  of  Pentecost  was  the  great  promise  fully  realised.  6.  The  apostles, 
in  all  their  writings,  enter  fully  into  its  power  and  influence.  Do  the  converts 
need  wisdom?  The  Father  will  give  the  Spirit  of  wisdom.  Or,  deliverance 
from  corruption?  The  Spiritworks  in  them  to  '  will  and  to  do  "  the  good  pleasure. 
The  distinguishing  marks  of  a  Christian  are  that  he  "  walks  after  the  Spirit"; 
is  "  spiritually  minded  "  ;  that  the  Spirit  dwells  in  a  man  as  a  Spirit  of  adoption, 
confidence,  and  love;  while  the  apostle  glories  in  tribulation  '  because  of  the 
Holy  Ghost,"  and  prays  that  the  disciples  may  be  "  filled  with  hope  "  by  the 
power  of  the  Holy  Ghost.  Thus  we  see  the  nature  and  office  of  the  Spirit.  II.  Its 
PRACTICAL  APPLICATION  TO  OURSELVES.  All  persons  are  divided  into  two  classes. 
1.  Those  who  have  no  adequate  apprehension  of  the  nature  or  value  of  divine 
things.  "  The  natural  man  receiveth  not  the  things  of  God,  for  they  are  foolish- 
ness unto  him."  They  are  therefore  ignorant  for  want  of  spiritual  illumination. 
"  But,"  continues  the  apostle,  "  God  hath  shined  in  our  hearts  to  give  the  light 
of  the  knowledge  of  the  glory  of  God  in  the  face  of  Jesus  Christ."  This  reveals 
to  us  the  knowledge  of  ourselves  as  ruined  and  lost.  2.  But  as  there  may  be 
light  without  heat,  so  there  may  be  knowledge  without  practice.  The  Word 
of  God  may  be  received  with  joy,  but  it  may  not  take  root  in  the  soul.  It  is 
the  glory  of  the  Gospel  that  it  not  only  inculcates  what  is  right,  but  gives  strength 
to  perform  it :  it  teaches  what  is  evil,  and  helps  to  subdue  that  evil.  All  this 
is  wrought  by  the  Holy  Ghost.  [Homilist.)  A  national  Pentecost: — I.  The 
NATIONAL  IMPORT  OP  THESE  WORDS.  That  the  thought  of  Isaiah  was  national, 
and  not  individual,  may  easily  be  gathered  from  his  opening  words,  and  from 
the  whole  burden  of  his  message.  It  is  of  a  king  he  speaks,  and  of  the  effects 
of  a  righteous  rule.  The  words  of  our  text  are  especially  addressed  to  women, 
and  reveal  the  sad  state  of  society  as  it  was  when  Isaiah  addressed  it.  There 
is  no  hope  for  the  nation  when  its  women  are  "  careless  daughters,"  and  con- 
temptible of  holy  things.  Woman  is  the  last  bulwark  of  godliness,  if  women  are 
lost  to  God,  all  is  lost.  Yet  though  the  prophet's  heart  groans  under  the  lament- 
able state  of  the  women  of  his  day,  he  sees  a  glad  day  coming,  when  the  Spirit 
shall  be  so  outpoured,  that  society  will  be  purified.  Upon  the  outpouring  of 
the  Spirit,  three  things  are  to  take  place.  1.  There  is  to  be  a  godly  revolution. 
It  may  be  silent  and  natural,  but  is  to  be  very  real.  The  very  wilderness  is  to 
become  a  fruitful  field.  The  desert  is  to  blossom  as  the  rose.  If  we  study  the 
prophecy  of  Joel,  we  see  the  signs  are  revolutionary.  And  no  language  employed 
by  Carlyle  in  his  French  Bevohition  is  more  potent,  more  expressive.  "  I  will 
show  wonders  in  the  heaven  and  in  the  earth,  blood,  and  fire,  and  pillars  of  smoke ; 
the  sun  shall  be  turned  into  darkness  and  the  moon  into  blood."  It  is  the  re- 
creation of  the  nation  that  the  prophet  has  in  his  mind.  Ezekiel's  valley  of  dry 
bones  is  to  be  re-animated.  The  national  identity  as  well  as  the  national  life 
is  to  be  restored.  2.  There  is  to  be  an  outburst  of  new  life.  The  wilderness 
is  to  blossom,  the  fruitful  field  is  to  become  a  forest.  Mazzini  must  foster  a 
"  Young  Italy  "  to-day  if  he  is  to  create  a  new  Italy  to-morrow.  The  Spirit 
generates  new  life.  The  visions  of  possibilities  in  the  young,  the  fresh  dreams 
of  the  old,  all  make  for  a  new  existence.  3.  There  is  also  to  be  a  newly  organised 
government.  A  king  rules  in  righteousness.  And  even  the  wilderness,  type 
of  lawless  oppression,  is  to  be  under  a  just  government.  Judgment  shall  rule 
in  the  wilderness.  Righteousness  is  the  basis  of  peace.  Pascal  say«,  "  Philo- 
sophy says,  know  thyself.  Christianity  says,  know  thy  Cod."  That  is  all  the 
difference  between  the  maxims  of  the  world  and  the  new  force  that  Pentecost 
created  in  the  world.  When  men  fall  into  right  relationship  with  God,  they 
will  soon  fall  into  right  relations  \vith  one  another.  II.  The  effect  of  the 
OTTTPOXTRiNG  OP  THE  HoLY  Ghost.  Pentecost  was  only  a  promise,  a  first-fruit, 
a  miniature  fulfilment  of  the  prophet's  great  words.  1.  There  is  in  our  prophecy 
a  restoration  of  blessing.  Acquainted  as  Isaiah  was  with  vast  reaches  of  arid 
desert,  he  sees  il  a  fruitful  field.  Out  of  death  life  comes,  and  into  barrenness, 
fruitfulness.     2.  There  is  to  be  a  multiplication  of  blessing.     That  vast,  dreary 


28  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xxxn. 

stretch  of  desert  in  the  East  is  to  be  as  the  Vale  of  Carmel,  luxuriant  and  beautiful, 
and  Carmel's  valley  is  to  be  as  precious  as  Lebanon's  forest.  And  righteousness 
is  to  sway  its  sceptre  over  all.  The  effect  of  righteousness  is  to  be  quietness 
and  assurance  for  ever.  The  Church  of  apostolic  days  was  a  beautiful  miniature 
of  still  larger  things,  of  richer  spiritual  results.  3.  There  is  to  be  a  social  better- 
ment for  all.  Wherever  Christianity  goes  it  uplifts  the  races.  Unbelief  may 
sneer  at  Christianity,  but  it  still  remains  the  greatest  civilising  force  in  the  world. 
III.  Things  essential  to  the  new  order.  The  Holy  Spirit  is  to  effect  regenera- 
tion, by  convicting  men  of  sin,  of  righteousness  and  of  judgment.  By  breathing 
into  them  a  new  life,  and  by  Divine  illumination.  Three  things  are  essential 
to  a  new  kingdom.  Power  to  create  it,  authority  to  govern  it,  a  cause  for  its 
existence.  Garibaldi  found  his  cause  in  the  degraded  condition  of  his  people. 
Jesus  finds  His  cause  not  only  in  the  lost  condition  of  the  human  race,  but  also 
in  the  Father's  eternal  love  and  purpose.  Christ  is  said  to  be  seated  at  the  right 
hand  of  power.  That  word  power  is  the  same  as  that  from  which  we  get  dynamics. 
The  very  strength  of  power,  a  mighty  force.  Christ  is  at  the  right  hand  of  Almighty 
power.  There  are  certain  powers  in  the  world  which  we  call  forces ;  such  as 
gravity,  steam,  hydraulics,  liquid  air,  electricity.  These  forces  operate  along 
definite  lines,  just  as  surely  as  a  train  of  railway  carriages  runs  along  the  track 
of  its  lines  of  steel.  It  is  said,  "  Whenever  you  obey  the  law  of  power,  the  law 
of  power  obeys  you."  Now,  in  fact,  this  is  just  what  Peter  says.  The  Holy 
Ghost  is  given  "  to  them  that  obey  Him."  If  the  Holy  Spirit  is  to  use  a  man, 
work  through  and  by  a  man,  he  must  obey  the  laws  of  the  Spirit.  He  must  be 
conformed  to  God's  will.  Let  me  now  quote  to  you  some  cases  where  men  have 
been  obedient  to  the  Holy  Spirit,  and  as  a  result  have  been  filled  with  power 
from  on  high.  In  each  case  they  have  obeyed  Christ's  word — "  Tarry  ye  .  .  . 
until  ye  be  endued  with  power  from  on  high."  Jonathan  Edwards,  a  quiet, 
strong  intellect,  strongly  Calvinistic,  whose  influence  in  the  world  has  been 
most  mighty,  says,  "  I  found  from  time  to  time  an  inward  sweetness  that 
would  carry  me  away  in  my  contemplations.  This  I  know  not  how  to 
express  otherwise  than  as  a  calm,  sweet  abstraction  of  the  soul  from  all  the 
concerns  of  the  world,  and  sometimes  a  kind  of  vision  of  being  alone  on  the  moun- 
tains, far  from  all  mankind,  sweetly  conversing  with  Christ,  and  wrapped  and 
swallowed  up  in  God."  Then  there  is  John  Flavel,  who  one  day  journeying 
alone,  had  such  concentration  of  mind,  such  ravishing  tastes  of  heavenly  joys, 
that  he  utterly  lost  sight  and  sense  of  this  world,  and  for  some  hours  knew  no 
more  where  he  was  than  if  a  deep  sleep  had  fallen  upon  him  in  the  night.  Thus 
we  see  that  these  men  wholly  consecrated  to  God,  obeying  His  will,  placing  them- 
selves in  direct  communication  with  the  Spirit  of  God,  leaving  their  whole  being 
open  to  the  Spirit's  operations,  were  filled  with  a  Divine  power  that  is  inexpressible. 
And  may  we  not  thus  lie  open  to  His  gracious  incoming,  and  wait  daily  upon 
God  "  until  the  Spirit  be  poured  out  upon  us  from  on  high  "  ?  IV.  The  nature 
OF  the  Spirit's  manifestations.  The  Holy  Spirit's  presence  is  seen  in  His 
conviction  of  the  sinner.  When  He  is  among  us,  men  realise  their  sinfulness, 
and  cry  unto  God.  {F.  James.)  Judgment  and  mercy: — Some  time  ago, 
amid  a  very  heavy  thunderstorm,  I  heard,  between  two  of  the  heaviest  peals, 
the  carolling  of  a  lark!  It  was  a  strange  and  welcome  contrast.  All  around  us 
the  thunder  was  growling  and  roaring,  but  in  one  of  the  brief  interludes  there 
came  this  burst  of  bird-song.  And  Eul  about  this  chapter  one  hears  the  growl 
of  the  threatening  thunder.  There  is  a  gathering  storm  of  judgment.  The 
future  is  full  of  menace.  And  yet,  in  the  midst  of  all  the  approaching  terror, 
there  sounds  out  this  sweet  little  paean  about  fruitful  fields,  and  righteous  relation- 
ships, and  peaceful  homes,  and  happy,  restful  days.  It  was  ever  the  way  of  thi? 
great  prophet.  The  hard  note  of  judgment  was  alternated  with  the  softer  note 
of  mercy.  The  lark's  song  is  frequently  heard  amid  the  thunder.  {J.  H.  Jowett, 
M.A.)  The  Spirit  poured  out: — I.  Here  is  a  great  prophet  foreseeing 
the  outpouring  of  the  Spirit  of  God.  That  in  itself  would  be  interesting, 
but  it  is  rendered  doubly  so  by  the  fact  that — II.  He  proceeds  to  name  thb 
results  which  would  follow  the  0UTP9URIN0  (vers.  15-17).  (Ibid.)  Re- 
sults of  the  outpouring  of  the  Spirit: — Here  is  the  problem:  If  the  Spirit  of  God 
were  to  be  poured  out  upon  a  nation,  what  would  happen?  1.  The  unfolding 
of  creation  in  accordance  with  the  fullest  design  of  God.  "  The  wilderness  a 
fruitful  field,"  &c.  Is  that  to  be  taken  literally  or  only  figuratively?  Shall 
we  interpret  it  as  only  meaning  that  the  wilderness  of  meanness  and  niggardlinesj 


CHAP,  xxxn.]  ISAIAH.  29 

and  greed  shall  break  into  the  fruitful  field  of  benevolence  and  philanthropy. 
or  shall  we  interpret  it  according  to  its  literal  meaning  that  nature  itself  shall 
pass  into  larger  bounteousness  and  perfection  ?  I  think  the  literal  interpretation 
is  the  right  one.  I  think  Isaiah  means  just  what  he  says,  that  the  beautifying 
of  humanity  will  elicit  higher  beauty  in  the  world  about  us.  Throughout  the 
whole  book  you  will  find  this  doctrine  taught,  that  the  perfection  of  nature  is 
involved  in  the  redemption  of  men.  Nature  cannot  put  on  all  the  fulness  of 
her  beautiful  garments  until  man  puts  on  the  beauty  of^holiness.  The  imfolding 
of  one  awaits  the  evolution  of  the  other.  Scripture  affirms  that  nature  is  held 
in  bondage.  She  is  fettered,  and  unable  to  reahse  the  full  glory  of  her  design, 
and  this  because  of  the  moral  and  spiritual  bondage  of  man.  This  is  not  the 
teaching  only  of  the  prophet  Isaiah.  It  is  apostolic  teaching.  Have  you  ever 
paused  at  that  profound  word  of  the  Apostle  Paul,  where  he  says  that,  "  the 
earnest  expectation  of  creation  waiteth  for  the  reveaHng  of  the  sons  of  God  "  ? 
Enghsh  translation  does  not  in  any  degree  express  the  extraordinary  force  of 
the  figure  which  the  apostle  employs.  What  is  the  figure?  It  is  this.  Paul 
represents  nature  standing  bound,  "  with  uphfted  head,  scanning  with  longing 
eyes  the  horizon  from  which  she  looks  for  help,  her  hands  stretched  out  to  grasp 
and  welcome  the  redemption  into  freedom  and  perfection  which  she  yearns  for 
and  confidently  expects.  That  is  the  figure:  creation,  bound  and  imperfect, 
yearning  and  waiting  for  her  redemption  and  perfection,  which  is  to  come  through 
redeemed  man.  2.  Judgment  and  righteousness  shall  dwell  among  them  as 
abiding  guests.  Righteousness  shall "  dwell "  there !  It  shall  not  be  an  occasional 
visitor,  a  spasmodic  impulse,  an  inconstant  and  irregular  desire.  It  shall  dwell 
there  as  a  permanent  disposition.  It  shall  not  be  a  weak  emotion.  It  shall  be 
a  mighty  passion.  When  the  Spirit  of  God  is  poured  out  upon  a  people,  that 
people  shall  hunger  for  righteousness.  You  know  how  it  is  with  mountain  air. 
Down  in  the  sultry  valley  we  are  sluggish  and  languid.  We  are  indifferent  about 
our  food.  We  come  to  it  as  a  custom ;  we  take  it  as  a  task.  But  if  we  get  up 
into  the  pure,  strong  air  of  the  higher  moorlands,  our  languor  drops  from  us, 
and  our  appetite  awakes,  and  we  turn  to  our  food  with  hunger,  and  take  it  with 
rehsh.  3.  The  creation  of  social  peace.  Put  things  right,  and  peace  will  come. 
Maladjustments  always  produce  unrest  in  the  physical  and  moral  Ufe.     (Ibid.) 

Ver.  17.  And  the  work  of  righteousness  shall  be  peace. — The  true  work  of  life  : — 
I.  The  kattjre  of  true  life  work — the  work  of  righteousness.  What  is  righteous 
wor'ET  1.  Working  by  right  law.  God  has  established  a  law  to  regulate  all  action 
and  motion  throughout  His  empire.  What  is  the  law  by  which  mind  is  to  be 
regulated?  The  will  of  God,  not  expediency.  Of  expediency,  we  are  no  safe,  no 
correct  judges.  (1)  This  will  is  revealed  in  nature.  But  the  revelation  is  difficult 
to  interpret.  (2)  It  is  revealed  in  Christ.  There  it  can  be  clearly  read  and  easily 
appreciated.  He  embodied  the  great  moral  code.  ^^Workingbyari^t  lawfroma 
right  motive.  A  mere  conformity  to  the  letter  of  the  lawTTf  it  could  be  obtained, 
is  not  righteousness.  We  must  keep  the  law  not  from  the  fear  of  hell,  or  the  hope 
of  heaven,  but  from  a  predominant  affection  for  the  Lawgiver.  It  is  noteworthy 
that  the  work  of  righteousness  is  not  a  work  to  be  limited  to  any  department  of 
action.  Kighteousness  must  run  through  all  personal  and  social  relationships. 
n.  The  blessedness  of  true  life  w.qrk.  "  Peace."  This  is  true — 1.  Of  indi- 
viduals.  2.  Of  tamiues.  a.  ul  churches.  4.  Of  nations.  Conclusion — Learn"* 
the  transcendent  worth  of  the  Gospel.  The  great  object  of  Christ's  mission  was 
to  promote  righteousness.  His  life  was  a  revelation  of  righteousness,  His  death 
a  demonstration  of  righteousness,  His  whole  history  one  great  motive  to  righteous- 
ness. This  is  the  supreme  want  of  humanity.  Legislation,  philosophy,  poets, 
priesthoods,  civilisations,  have  tried  to  supply  it  and  have  failed.  Christ  alone  can 
establish  righteousness.  {Homilist.)  Righteousness  and  'peace  : — Peace  is  not 
a  root,  but  a  fruit.  It  is  not  the  beginning  of  a  process,  but  its  end.  It  is  not  the 
summary  creation  of  an  imperial  fiat;  it  is  the  matured  product  of  the  spiritual 
order.  We  cannot  command  peace;  we  can  only  grow  it.  If  we  would  have  the 
reapings  we  must  attend  to  certain  sowings.  To  obtain  peace  we  must  plant 
righteousness.  (J.  H.  Jowett,  M.A.)  The  smritual  order  : — The  first  bugle- 
peal  proclaims  not  the  advent  of  peace  but  tne  enthronement  of  right !  The 
herald  withholds  the  word  "  peace "  until  "  righteousness "  is  established. 
*'  Behold,  a  king  shall  reign  in  righteousness!  "  That  is  the  voice  of  the  first 
trumpet,  and  it  is  only  when  certain  great  redemptions  have  been  wrought,  certain 


30  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xxxn. 

perversities  corrected,  certain  degraded  monarchies  restored,  certain  pure  and 
muscular  dispositions  recovered,  that  we  hear  the  sound  of  the  second  trumpet, 
"  And  the  work  of  righteousness  shall  be  peace,"  &c.  That  is  the  expression  of 
the  spiritual  order  as  contained  in  the  teaching  of  the  Divine  Word.  (Ibid.) 
Peace  is  the  general  glow  of  health  resulting  from  the  inter-related  life  of  many 
members,  each  of  whom  occupies  his  appointed  place  in  the  spiritual  order,  and  18 
possessed  by  the  spirit  of  equity  and  truth.  Peace  is  the  spirit  of  communion, 
the  genius  of  co-operation,  the  cohesion  of  many  me^niDers  into  one  pure  and 
indissoluble  whole.  Now  there  can  be  no  cohesion  among  the  unclean.  Dirt 
isalwayS-dhiaiKe.  {Ibid.)  Righteousness  and  peace  : — Before  iniquity  intnI3ed 
King  Arthur's  court  was  whole,  and  the  angel  ot  peace  abode  in  the  temple.  But 
when  the  iniquitous  stole  into  the  court,  the  rare  communion  was  broken,  and  the, 
angel  of  peace  flew  away  into  distant  exile.  {Ibid.)  Maladjustments  always 
produce  unrest  whether  it  be  in  the  physical  or  the  moral  life.  You  say,  I 
cannot  rest  at  night."  How  is  that?  "  T  have  a  great  deal  of  pain."  Where? 
"  In  this  hand."  How  are  you  treating  it?  "  Oh,  I  bathe  it  very  frequently, 
and  I  use  a  little  ointment."  But  your  finger  is  out  of  joint!  There  is  a  mal- 
adjustment. Your  finger  is  not  where  God  intended  it  to  be.  Your  finger  will 
have  to  be  set  right.  Physical  righteousness,  physical  rightness  must  be  the  first 
step  to  physical  rest.  The  truth  is  analogous  in  the  moral  sphere.  There  are  mal- 
adjustments there,  disjointings  there.  {Ibid.)  Goodness  and  joy : — "  Why 
are  you  singing?  "  a  lady  asked  a  little  girl.  "  Oh,  I  don't  know,  unless  it  is 
because  I  have  tried  to  be  good  to-day,"  was  the  answer. 

Vers.  18,  19.  My  people  shall  dwell  in  a  peaceable  habitation. — The  safety  of 
believers  in  time  of  judgment : — I.  Contemplate  the  comtng  judgments  of  thb 
Lord.  II.  Consider  the  blessed  promises  made  to  His  seeking  people. 
III.  The  period  when  these  promises  shall  have  their  fulfilment.  Read 
the  first  verse  of  this  chapter,  and  what  is  there  stated  is  enough  to  answer  all 
inquiries  upon  this  head.  "  Behold,  a  king,  &c."  I  expect  this  when  the  King 
of  righteousness,  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  reigns.  The  personal  improvement  of 
this  subject  consists — 1.  In  directing  you  to  the  safety  of  believers.  2.  In  con- 
sidering tlift  conduct  becoming  those  who  have  so  high  a  destiny.  Watch  and 
pray.  I'  EJ  for  yourselves,  pray  for  your  country.  Be  valiant  for  the  truth, 
continue  ill  persevering  faith.  (J.  Wilcox,  M. A.)  The  peaceable  habitation : — 
1. 1  believe  I  shall  not  be  doing  justice  to  the  prospective  design  of  all  Old  Testament 
truth,  if  I  do  not  represent  to  you  all  peace — aU  true  moral  peace — as  founded 
in  and  on,  not  only  the  atonement  made  by  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  but  on  the 
nature  of  that  atonement.  "  The  peaceable  habitation,"  in  which  only  we  have 
"  a  sure  dwelling,"  and  "  a  quiet  resting-place,"  is  made  of  the  wood  of  the  Cross. 
n.  Having  said  this,  I  must  say,  that  no  doubt  "  the  peaceable  liabitation  "  is 
found  in  moral  dispositions  created  within  by  Divine  grace.  There  is,  first, 
the  chamber  of  holiness.  Oh,  the  sweet  tranquillity  of  a  holy  life !  This  is  the 
deep  centre  of  peace.  There  is  a  hallowed  chamber  in  the  same  palace  of  holy 
dispositions — a  "  quiet  habitation  " — resignation  to  the  Divine  will.  From  these 
chambers  we  climb  the  stairs  and  rise  higher.  Trust  in  God's  providence — 
this  is  the  observatory;  and  like  all  observatories,  it  is  high  and  clear.  Other 
observatories  boast  that  from  them  you  may  see  the  stars  in  the  day-time;  but 
from  this,  you  may  see  the  sun  in  the  night-time!  A  quiet  habitation  indeed! 
Scripture  speaks  of  a  "  peace  which  passeth  all  understanding."  The  grave  is  a 
hallowed  cavern,  a  blessed  hiding-place.  {Paxton  Hood.)  A  guiet  life  : — George 
Herbert,  thinking  of  his  former  ambitions  in  the  court  of  James  I.,  in  contrast  with 
his  quiet  life  of  prayer  and  song,  could  write:  "  I  now  look  back  upon  my  aspiring 
thoughts  and  think  myself  more  happy  than  if  I  had  attained  what  I  then  so 
ambitiously  thirsted  for."  Quiet  resting-places. — The  Christian  in  temporary 
retirement  from  business  : — To  speak  of  cessation  from  business,  to  urge  retirement, 
will  sound  very  strange  and,  perhaps,  very  ridiculous  to  some.  "  What,"  they 
exclaim,  "  sacrifice  opportunities  of  getting  money?  To  get  what  we  can,  and  keep 
what  we  get,  is  our  motto."  But,  has  it  ever  occurred  to  you  that  you  may  so 
pursue  business  as  to  destroy  the  power  of  doing  it?  Besides,  if  thou  be  getting 
the  chief  good,  is  getting  all?  Is  there  to  be  no  enjoyment  of  it?  And  no  use  of 
it?  But,  the  gain  on  which  thou  hast  set  thine  heart,  and  which  thou  thinkest 
it  a  great  mistake  and  weakness  to  forego  in  any  measure,  will  not  last  long.  Does 
it  accord  with  reason  to  let  thy  nature  be  neglected  for  the  sake  of  temporary 


CHAP.  XXXII.]  ISAIAH.  31 

possessions?  I.  Let  us  consider  those  retirements  which  are  incttmbent 
ON  thb-Christian  in  the  midst  of  secular  life.  1.  I  shall  omit  the  compulsory, 
and  confine  myself  to  the  voluntary;  and  shall  treat  of  these  in  relation  rather  to 
their  ends  than  to  their  seasons.  (1)  The  first  end  is  health.  This  I  put  on  the 
ground  of  duty.  If  a  man  kill  himself,  or  if  he  deprive  himself  of  some  bodily  organ, 
we  pronounce  him  a  grave  offender.  Why  ?  Because  he  has  no  right  to  do  it.  He 
is  not  his  own  proprietor.  A  man  may  kill  himself  by  excessive  toil  and  care,  just 
as  well  as  by  poison  or  the  knife.  And  if  he  who  maims  his  body  is  a  sinner,  is 
not  he  who  destroys  the  vigour  and  elasticity  of  his  powers,  physical  or  mental? 
There  is  no  law  more  clear  and  indubitable  than  that  rest  is  necessary  to  health. 
And  if  this  ordinance  be  violated,  it  will  tell  somewhere.  (2)  Enjoyment  is 
another  end.  We  were  made  for  happiness,  for  various  kinds  of  pleasurable 
sensations  and  emotion.  Benevolence  must  contemplate  that  end.  Now,  he  who 
gives  himself  to  unremitting  toil  catmot  enjoy  the  gifts  of  providence,  as  it  is 
meant  he  should.  He  may  have  much  pleasure  in  the  very  exercise  of  his  faculties ; 
but  there  is  a  pleasure  in  the  calm  contemplation  of  the  Divine  bounty,  in  the 
unbending  and  relaxation  of  the  soul,  and  in  the  gratification  of  its  varied  tastes 
by  the  means  afforded  by  success,  which  is  impossible  to  him.  He  feasts  at  God's 
table,  but  it  is  a  hurried  and  an  unquiet  meal;  he  rests  on  God's  pillow,  but  it  is  a 
dreamy  and  disturbed  slumber.  He  lives  wholly  without,  and  not  within.  He  is 
like  one  who  labours  only  in  the  sun,  and  never  seeks  the  calm  cool  shade.  The 
bow  is  kept  bent  till  its  spring  is  lost.  He  obtains  a  portion,  but  does  not  "  rejoice 
in  it."  He  holds  property,  but  does  not  possess  it.  He  builds  a  house,  but  does 
not  inhabit  it.  He  has  gorgeous  apparel,  but  does  not  wear  it.  His  connection 
with  his  lot  is  that  of  title  and  outward  law,  not  of  fresh  and  joyous  interest. 
(3)  The  general  cultivation  of  faculty  is  an  end.  Business  requires  and  sharpens 
some  faculties;  and,  in  connection  with  other  things,  it  may  exercise  a  sanitary 
and  invigorating  influence  upon  many  faculties.  But  when  it  is  pursued,  as  it  must 
be  by  him  who  does  nothing  else,  it  has  but  a  limited  influence  for  good,  and  a 
powerful  influence  for  evil.  It  is  well  known,  that  the  powers  necessary  to  the 
greatest  secular  success  are  none  of  the  highest,  and  that  they  may  have  but  a  small 
range.  His  only  reading  may  be  the  "  city  article  ";  his  only  meditation,  the  state 
of  the  market;  his  only  estimate,  profit;  his  only  aspiration,  gain.  He  may  have, 
in  high  perfection,  the  activity,  the  cunning,  the  quickness,  the  perseverance, 
which  belong  to  many  portions  of  the  animal  world,  and  be  almost  entirely  destitute 
of  the  distinguishing  endowments  of  a  rational  and  moral  being.  Now,  retirement 
from  business  should  be  sought  in  order  that  the  mind  be  furnished  and  expanded 
with  knowledge;  that  it  be  refined  and  elevated  by  literature;  that  noble  affections 
be  nourished  by  the  study  and  contemplation  of  noble  natiu-es;  that  social  sym- 
pathies be  developed  by  intercourse;  and  that  principles  more  lofty  and  dis- 
interested than  those  which  rule  the  world  of  commerce  may  be  fed  and  fostered 
by  thought  and  service.  (4)  Religion  is  an  end  of  retirement.  Devotional  engage- 
ments have  the  same  relation  to  active  life  that  food  has  to  exercise.  The  world 
is  the  place  in  which  to  exercise  and  apply  spiritual  principles,  rather  than  the 
place  in  which  to  get  or  increase  them.  If  exercise  does  strengthen,  it  cannot  do 
so  without  truth  and  grace,  to  be  obtained  elsewhere.  It  is  by  the  study  of  the  book 
of  hfe,  by  deep  meditation  on  spiritual  things,  by  intercourse  with  Christ,  by  earnest 
prayer,  by  severe  self-examination,  that  we  must  minister  to  the  principles  and 
habits  of  hohness,  that  we  must  "exercise  ourselves  unto  godhness."  (5)  Bene- 
volent activity  is  an  end  of  retirement.  We  may  not  stop  at  personal  rehgion. 
Can  it  be  doubted  that  the  salvation  of  men  would  be  largely  promoted,  if  those 
Christians  who  give  themselves  wholly  to  secular  hfe  were  to  devote  a  portion  of 
their  time  to  good  works,  to  intercourse  with  the  sinful,  to  earnest  endeavours  to 
teach  and  warn  them  ?  Need  I  specify  the  family?  By  incessant  work  how  is  that 
defrauded  !  Need  I  mention  the  school;  the  neighbourhood;  the  Church,  whose 
wants  and  spheres  are  neglected  by  the  over-busy  saint?  2. 1  must  say  a  few  words 
on  the  relations  of  retirement  from  business  to  business.  ( 1)  In  retiring  from  busi- 
ness, do  not  take  business  with  you  (2)  Do  not  bring  the  spirit  of  business  into 
your  retirements.  (3)  Look  at  business  from  those  points  of  view  which  are 
accessible  only  in  retirement.  We  cannot  properly  estimate  our  pursuits,  when 
actively  engaged  in  them.  It  is  often  necessary  to  withdraw  from  an  object  in  order 
to  get  a  proper  view  of  it;  and  we  must  come  out  of  the  world  to  see  it  clearly 
and  fuUy.  (4)  Use  your  retirement,  at  least  in  part,  with  a  view  to  your  return 
to  it.     I  do  not  mean  that  you  should  make  your  retirement  a  mere  means  of  more 


32  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xxxn. 

effectually  prosecuting  worldly  pursuits.  I  mean  that  you  should  seek  for  a 
counteracting  influence  to  business.  It  may  be  that  j'ou  have  failed  in  the  exercise 
of  some  moral  virtue,  that  you  have  wronged  some  brother,  that  some  particular 
sensibility  is  in  danger  of  being  injured,  that  some  care  is  becoming  engrossing 
and  benumbing;  then,  let  your  retirement  be,  in  part,  directed  to  this  matter. 
II.  I  did  intend  to  speak  on  another  point,  that  ketirement  from  business  which 

CONSISTS  IN  A  FINAL  ABAKDONMENT  OF  IT,  EN  A   COMPLETE  KESIGNATION  OF  ITS 

CONCEKNS ;  not  that  which  takes  place  at  death,  but  that  which  takes  place,  though 
a  voluntary  act,  in  consequence  of  the  obtainment  of  competency,  on  the  growth 
of  infirmities,  or  the  influence  of  other  circumstances.  1.  This  retirement  may  be  a 
duty.  It  may  be  a  duty  in  order  that  you  niay  give  place  to  others.  It  is  a 
selfish  thing  for  a  man  to  go  on  getting  as  much  as  he  can,  simply  because  he  can. 
But  the  duty  becomes  still  plainer  when  considered  in  relation  to  a  man's  own 
well-being.  If  God  has  prospered  secular  diUgence  so  that  there  is  enough  and  to 
spare,  it  is  a  loud  call  to  modes  of  activity  and  service  that  are  impossible,  to  any 
great  extent,  in  the  heat  and  absorption  of  worldly  pursuits.  2.  When  a  Christian 
has  retired  from  business,  he  should  form  some  settled  plan  of  hfe.  {A.  J.  Morris.) 
"  Nothing  to  do  !  " — I  know  that  many  find  retirement  a  burden  and  a  snare,  and 
that  many  have  returned  to  business  after  having  left  it,  because  they  were 
oppressed  by  having  nothing  to  do.  But  what  a  condemnation  is  this  of  their  past 
life;  what  a  rebuke  of  their  treatment  of  the  immortal  mind!  Nothing  to  do; 
and  yet  living  in  a  world  of  mysteries!  Nothing  to  do;  and  yet  surrounded  with 
the  images  and  works  of  God !  Nothing  to  do ;  and  yet  belonging  to  a  race  which 
has  seen  six  thousand  years,  and  to  a  system  of  redemption  which  has  been  a  Divine 
gift  and  power  for  nearly  two!  Nothing  to  do;  and  yet  the  works  of  countless 
mighty  dead  extant,  and  full  of  glorious  things  and  thoughts!  Nothing  to  do; 
and  yet  possessing  a  nature  which  is  the  reflection  of  Deity,  and  the  heir  of  immor- 
tality !  Nothing  to  do ;  and  yet  the  world  in  its  sin  and  suffering  calling  for  the 
utmost  tenderness  of  human  compassion,  and  the  utmost  activity  of  human  energy. 
He  who  pleads  that  he  has  nothing  to  do  after  business  is  abandoned,  what  has  he 
been  doing  in  the  long  years  devoted  to  its  pursuits?  {Ibid.)  Quiet  resting- 
places  : — It  is  impossible  to  doubt  that  the  prophet,  now  and  again,  in  describing 
those  nearer  scenes  obtains  and  reveals  glimpses  of  a  higher  glory,  and  refreshes 
his  readers  and  himself  with  anticipations  of  Messiah's  times.  The  closing  verses 
of  the  chapter  are  full  of  the  Gospel,  penetrated  with  the  very  spirit  of  evangelical 
peace.  "  My  people  "  seems  to  make  the  promise  general,  and  to  hold  it  out  to  us 
sealed  with  the  '  yea  and  amen  "  which  is  attached  to  every  promise  of  God. 
"  Shall  dwell  "  seems  to  import  some  settled  order  of  Divine  procedure.  If 
Solomon  said  in  his  day,  "  all  things  are  full  of  labour,"  what  would  he  say  in  ours? 
How  fierce  and  keen  are  the  conflicts  of  life !  Where  shall  rest  be  found  ?  Only  in 
some  of  those  quiet  resting-places  which  God  makes  and  keeps  for  His  pilgrim 
people.  They  have  soul- quietness  for  city  strife.  I.  The  evenino.  A  sacred 
time  even  in  Eden  was  "  the  cool  of  the  day."  Isaac  went  out  into  the  field  to 
meditate  "  at  eventide."  Jesus  often  left  His  disciples  about  sundown,  and 
wandered  up  among  the  Syrian  hills  to  find  some  sequestered  spot  where  He  might 
feel  himself  alone  in  the  full  presence  of  God.  The  breeze  that  fanned  the  leaves  of 
Paradise  will  touch  our  cheek,  and  make  coolness  at  the  close  of  our  day,  if  we  will 
but  cease  from  care  and  sin.  We  read  in  the  Scriptures  that  day  and  night  are  the 
"  ordinances  "  of  God.  Can  anyone  suppose  that  He  has  established  them  for 
only  material  ends  ?  Surely  a  higher  end  is  found  in  the  trial,  nurture,  and  purifica- 
tion of  souls.  To  a  devout  soul  the  evening  is  like  "  the  secret  place  of  the  Most 
High."  It  is  "  the  shadow  of  the  Almighty."  It  is  a  closet  of  which  God  builds  the 
walls  and  shuts  to  the  door.  Think,  then,  as  the  evening  comes  round — for 
thought  is  the  soul's  rest — of  the  day  that  is  gone  with  gratitude,  for  every  hour 
of  it  has  been  overflowing  with  the  goodness  of  God;  with  penitence,  for  you  will 
easily  discover  that  it  has  been  a  day  of  shortcomings  and  sins;  with  wisdom, 
aiming  to  understand  it  better  than  when  you  lived  it;  with  tenderness  and  holy 
fear,  as  feeling  how  good  and  how  grand  a  thing  it  is  to  be  permitted  to  live  on,  and 
to  hope  to  live  better.  Think  of  to-morrow  which  will  come  so  soon,  with  its 
unknown  and  yet  probable  events — of  the  task  that  will  await  you  then;  of  the 
persons  who  will  be  around  you,  of  their  words,  their  looks,  their  influence;  of  the 
peril  you  will  have  to  brave;  of  the  weakness  you  will  feel;  of  the  strength  you  will 
need;  of  the  failure  you  fear,  that  by  your  thought  and  prayer  it  may  be  the  less 
likely  to  come;  and  of  the  goodness  which  will  certainly  enrich  and  crown  to-morrow 


CHAP,  xxxn.]  ISAIAH.  33 

as  it  has  filled  and  now  closes  to-day.  Think  of  the  evening  of  life  itself.  Think 
any  such  thoughts  with  prayer  and  faith,  and  your  soul  must  be  lifted  at  least 
somewhat  above  the  dust  and  drudgery  of  this  vexing  and  down-dragging  world. 
II.  The  Sabbath.  In  the  beginning  God  rested  from  His  work,  and  blessed  and 
hallowed  the  day  for  all  time,  and  never  has  there  been  a  Sabbath  on  earth  in 
which  men  have  not  been  entering  into  the  very  rest  of  God.  III.  The  provi- 
dential CHANQB  may  be  of  such  a  character  as  to  lead  us  at  once  into  a  "  quiet 
resting-place."  It  may  be  a  change  of  locality,  or  of  occupation,  or  of  condition. 
Any  considerable  providential  change  has  something  of  the  same  character.  An 
infant  is  born,  and  in  his  first  sleep  sheds  through  the  house  something  of  the 
solemnity  of  being.  A  child  is  "  recovered  of  his  sickness,"  in  which  the  little 
pilgrim  seemed  to  be  wandering  away  from  all  your  care  and  love.  A  son  has  gone 
out  to  a  foreign  land.  A  daughter  has  been  married.  Anything  that  breaks  the 
continuity,  that  alters  the  relationships,  that  makes  a  pause  in  life — an  open  space 
in  the  forest  of  its  toils  and  cares — anything  of  that  kind  is  God's  voice,  saying, 
"  Here  is  relief  for  you.  Enter  this  quiet  resting-place  which  My  hand  has  made." 
Or,  let  the  change  be  from  health  to  sickness,  then  the  "  quiet  resting-place  " 
is  made  in  the  retirement  of  the  chamber,  or  the  "  stillness  "  of  the  bed.  IV.  The 
GBAVE.  '*  There  the  prisoners  rest  together ;  they  hear  not  the  voice  of  the 
oppressor.  The  small  and  great  are  there,  and  the  servant  is  free  from  his  master. 
There  the  wicked  cease  from  troubling,  and  there  the  weary  be  at  rest."  It  is  not 
our  mere  human  fancy  that  invests  the  burial-place  of  the  Christian  dead  with 
Buch  a  sacred  charm,  that  wraps  it  as  in  the  peace  and  silence  of  God.  It  is  Christ 
who  thus  hallows  the  grave.  He  has  been  a  sleeper  there;  He  has  taken  the  harsh- 
ness, the  disquietude,  the  terror  away.  V.  Heaven  is  the  quietest  resting-place 
of  all.  {A.  Raleigh,  D.D.)  God's  thoughtfvl  loving -kindness : — In  eastern 
countries,  where  the  habit  of  hospitality  is  stronger  than  with  us,  the  traveller  is 
sometimes  surprised  and  regaled  by  much-needed  but  unexpected  wayside  com- 
forts. Yonder  husbandman  who  is  now  a-field  at  his  work  was  here  in  the  early 
morning  to  leave  by  the  wayside  that  pitcher  of  water  that  the  passing  traveller 
might  drink.  This  clump  of  trees  which  makes  a  thick  and  welcome  "  shadow 
from  the  heat,"  was  planted  by  one  who  expected  neither  fame  nor  money  for 
his  toil,  and  who  now  lies  in  a  nameless  grave.  Hands  now  mouldering  in  dust 
scooped  out  this  cool  seat  in  the  rock.  Some  "  Father  Jacob  gave  us  this  well 
after  drinking  thereof  himself,  and  his  children,  and  his  cattle."  Travellers  from 
the  west  are  much  affected  by  such  instances  of  pure  humanity  and  unselfish 
kindness.  And  yet  these  are  but  feeble  types,  mere  dim  shadows  of  Divine  thought- 
fulness  and  care.  The  heavenly  benefactor  comes  down  in  preventing  loving- 
kindness  upon  the  earthly  pathway  of  His  people.  {Ibid.)  True  rest  in  persons; 
specially  in  God: — We  need  one  great  complemental  truth — we  do  not  find  om: 
true  rest  in  places  at  all,  but  only  in  persons.  The  living  soul  must  have  a  living 
portion.  What  were  the  fairest  prospect  if  a  man  were  condemned  to  behold  it 
for  ever  alone  ?  What  even  the  higher  things  of  this  human  life,  the  duties,  and 
the  interests,  and  the  struggles,  if  there  were  not  intermingled  with  them  all  a 
sense  of  the  nearness  of  other  human  beings,  and  if  there  were  not  the  continual 
reciprocal  action  of  those  affections  and  sympathies  which  make  life  so  sacred 
and  dear  ?  But  no  human  being,  no  assemblage  of  human  beings,  can  meet  the 
wants  and  fulfil  the  longings  of  even  one  human  soul.  Your  heart  is  waiting, 
and  aching  while  it  waits,  for  an  infinite  sympathy,  for  an  everlasting  strength, 
for  a  grace  that  wiU  cancel  sin  and  restore  purity,  in  one  word,  for  the  love  of  God; 
for  the  love  of  God  in  Christ.     (Ibid.) 

Ver.  20.  Blessed  axe  ye  that  sow  beside  aJl  waters. — Times  of  peace  should 
be  improved  : — The  war  is  now  over;  Asher  has  been  crushed  fike  a  serpent, 
and  this  sweet  voice  is  heard  when  the  enemy  has  been  driven  out  of  the  land. 
Undeiatand  that  times  of  peace  are  to  be  times  of  cultivation.  We  are  not  to 
be  great  only  in  war.  {Jos.  Parker,  D.D.)  Moral  cultivation  : — The  allusion 
in  this  verse  is  supposed  by  some  to  be  to  pasturage,  by  others  to  tillage.  Lowth 
follows  Chardin  in  applying  the  words  to  the  practice  of  treading  the  ground 
by  the  feet  of  cattle  before  planting  rice;  Henderson  to  the  act  of  setting  them 
at  Uberty  from  the  rope  with  which  they  were  tied  by  the  foot.  Kjiobel  under- 
stands the  verse  as  contrasting  the  condition  of  those  who  Uved  at  liberty,  on 
the  seaside  or  by  rivers,  with  theirs  who  were  pent  up  and  besieged  in  cities. 
Hitzig  supposes  a  particular  allusion  to  the  case  of  those  who  had  escaped  with 
VOL.  II. — 3 


34  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xxxn. 

their  possessions  from  Jerusalem.  Hendewerk  applies  the  verse  to  the  happy 
external  condition  of  the  people  in  the  days  of  the  Messiah.  Henderson  says 
it  beautifully  exhibits  the  free  and  unrestrained  exertions  of  the  apostles  and 
other  missionaries  in  sowing  the  seed  of  the  kingdom  in  every  part  of  the  world. 
Ewald  explains  it  exclusively  of  moral  cultivation,  as  impl3dng  that  none  can 
expect  to  reap  good  without  dihgently  sowing  it.  Of  aU  these  explanations 
the  last  may  be  considered  as  approaching  nearest  to  the  truth,  because  it  requires 
least  to  be  supplied  by  the  imagination.  Taking  the  whole  connection  into 
view,  the  meaning  of  this  last  verse  seems  to  be,  that  as  great  revolutions  are 
to  be  expected,  arising  wholly  or  in  part  from  moral  causes,  they  alone  are  safe, 
for  the  present  and  the  future,  who  with  patient  assiduity  perform  what  is 
required;  and  provide,  by  the  discharge  of  actual  duty,  for  contingencies  which 
can  neither  be  escaped,  nor  provided  for  in  any  other  manner.  (J.  A.  Alexander.) 
Missionary  operations  in  the  Christian  dispensation: — It  has  been  granted  to 
Isaiah  to  look  into  the  future,  and  he  foresaw  the  call  of  the  Gentiles  and  the 
Christian  dispensation.  There  he  beheld  the  messengers  of  the  Lord  receiving 
their  commission,  "Go  ye  and  teach  aU  nations";  and  he  pronounced  them 
to  be  blessed  as  compared  with  himself,  sent  to  a  single  people,  rebelhous  and 
gainsaying.  This  he  expresses  in  metaphorical  language,  and  by  reference  to 
a  process  of  husbandry,  or  to  the  manner  of  sowing  grain,  particularly  rice,  which 
stiU  prevails  in  Eastern  countries,  and  with  which  the  IsraeUtes  were  famiUar. 
The  mode  of  proceeding  is  thus  described: — The  sowers  cast  their  seed  upon 
the  waters,  when,  by  the  swelUng  of  the  river,  the  waters  cover  the  land.  Beasts 
of  burden  are  employed  to  tread  down  the  mud  or  shme,  to  render  it  capable 
of  receiving  the  seed  as  it  sinks.  ( W.  F.  Hook,  D.D. )  Sowing  beside  all  waters  : 
— There  is  spiritual  seed  to  be  sown.  It  is  to  be  sown  by  the  side  of  all  waters. 
It  is,  however,  sown  in  vain,  imless  the  moral  soil  be  cultivated  in  which  it  is 
designed  to  take  root.  I.  The  nature  of  the  seed  we  have  to  sow.  Our 
Lord  and  Master,  when  explaining  the  parable  of  the  Sower  and  the  seed  to  His 
disciples,  saith,  "  the  seed  is  the  Word  of  God."  1.  The  ministers  of  Christ  are 
the  sowers  of  the  seed.  2.  But  they  are  not  so  exclusively.  To  sow  the  seed 
is  in  some  measure  the  duty  of  all  who  name  the  name  of  Christ;  of  the  parent 
especially  to  his  child,  and  of  every  Christian  in  his  daily  conversation  and  walk. 
II.  The  imtortakce  of  watching  the  times,  and  of  availing  otjkselves 

OF  THE    OPPORTinsriTIES   PROVIDENTIALLY   OPENED   TO   US,   FOR  SOWING   THE   SEED. 

In  every  nation,  and  in  every  chme,  it  is  indeed  as  much  the  farmer's  duty  to 
watch  the  seasons  as  it  is  to  sow  the  seed.  And  in  spiritual  husbandry,  this 
it  is  that  distinguishes  the  sober-minded  Christian  from  the  mere  fanatic.  But 
this  is  not  the  only  lesson  that  we  are  to  deduce  from  our  text.  We  are  to  sow 
beside  all  waters.  III.  The  conditions  tjnder  which  the  sowing  of  it  results 
IN  A  MORAL,  spiritual,  AND  HEAVENLY  HARVEST.  God  requires  the  spiritual 
seed  to  be  sown;  He  requires  the  spiritual  seed  to  take  root  in  the  heart,  before 
the  harvest  of  grace  can  be  realised,  or  the  fruit  be  produced.  It  is  by  medita- 
tion that  we  tread  down  the  seed  into  the  heart  and  soul.  {Ibid.)  The  blessed- 
ness of  communicating  the  privileges  of  the  Gospel  to  others  : — I.  Blessed  are  they 
in  this  work;  for  in  acting  thus  they  are  instruments  of  God's  mercy  to 
MEN.  II.  Blessed  are  they,  IN  reference  to  the  state  of  religion  within 
THEMSELVES.  III.  May  we  not  add,  as  another  ground  of  blessedness,  the 
prayers  of  those  who  are  brought  to  the  knowledge  of  the  Saviour 
BY  missionary  EFFORTS?  {H.  Raikes,  31. A.)  The  work  of  the  evangel  : — 
I.  It  is  a  SOWING  WORK.  Of  all  mere  human  works,  this  is — 1.  The  most  Divine. 
The  seed,  the  soil,  are  all  of  God.  2.  The  most  righteous.  Statesmen,  merchants, 
warriors,  may  question  the  rectitude  of  their  work,  but  the  agriculturist  has 
no  reason  to  doubt.  3.  The  most  useful.  The  farmer  feeds  the  world.  4.  The 
most  believing.  The  man  who  commits  the  precious  grain  to  the  earth  has  strong 
faith  in  the  laws  of  nature.  II.  It  is  a  blessed  work.  "  Blessed  is  he."  1.  He 
is  blessed  by  the  gratitude  of  society.  All  are  indebted  to  his  services.  2.  He 
is  blessed  with  the  approval  of  his  own  conscience.  He  feels  that  in  sowing  he 
is  doing  his  duty.  3.  He  is  blessed  by  the  smiles  of  his  God.  III.  It  is  an  unre- 
stricted work.  "  All  waters."  The  meaning  is,  all  well-watered  places. 
The  word  "  beside  "  would  be  better  translated  "upon."  Scatter  seed  upon 
all  suitable  spots.  The  evangel  has  unUmited  scope  for  his  operations.  His 
field  of  labour  is  the  world,  and  he  is  commanded  to  be  instant  in  season  and 
out   of   season.     (Homilist.)         The   blessedness   of   sowing   beside   all   waters: — 


CHAP,  xxxn.]  ISAIAH.  85 

I.  They  who  wish  to  be  useful  should  never  forget  the  many  favourable  oppor- 
tunities for  sowing  good  seed  on  the  clear  and  unruffled  waters  of  child- 
hood. II.  Another  opportunity  for  scattering  precious  seed  is  on  the  troubled 
WATERS  of  strife.  III.  Another  opportunity  is  upon  the  stagnant  and 
MUDDY  waters  OF  DOUBT  AND  UNBELIEF.  IV.  If  we  are  reaUy  anxious  to  do 
good  in  our  day  and  generation,  there  will  be  times  when  words  op  comfort 

MAY  BE  SPOKEN  TO  BEWILDERED  SOULS  ABOUT  TO  EMBARK  UPON  "  THE  NARROW 
SEA  "   which   divides   THIS  WORLD   FROM  THE  NEXT.       (J.   N.   NortOTl.)  Sowing 

beside  all  waters  : — 1.  Here  is  an  assertion  of  that  tiniversal  law  that  operates 
in  the  whole  domain  of  human  Ufe — the  law  of  consequent  following  precedent, 
of  effect  being  the  child  of  cause,  of  our  sowing  determining  our  reaping,  of  our 
character  and  conduct  evolving  our  destiny.  2.  "  Blessed  are  ye  that  sow  beside 
all  waters."  Why?  Not  because  the  sowing  is  itself  an  absolute  benediction. 
Oftentimes  it  is  attended  with  a  great  deal  of  pain,  and  labour,  and  anxiety, 
and  sacrifice.  It  is  the  casting  away  of  that  which  is  in  itself  of  great  value. 
The  sowing  is  blessed  because  it  is  a  prophecy  of  the  increase  of  that  which  we 
sow,  the  promise  of  the  reward  of  our  labour  and  our  sacrifice.  3.  We  are  very 
apt  to  say,  "  I  shaU  attain  this  and  that,  acquire  this  and  that  by  the  goodness 
of  God."  We  do  well  to  say  this.  But  we  must  not  forget  that  the  mercy  and 
goodness  of  God  alone  will  do  nothing  for  us.  It  is  God's  mercy  and  goodness, 
flus  our  own  wiU,  energy,  and  conduct,  that  wiU  determine  our  destiny,  and 
evolve  our  circumstances,  and  ripen  our  harvests.  4.  The  skiU  of  the  farmer 
lies  in  his  knowledge  of  the  relation  of  his  seed  to  the  soil,  to  the  season,  and  the 
atmosphere,  and  the  conditions  of  the  growth  and  development  of  the  seed. 
The  highest  wisdom  of  Hfe  is  the  knowledge  of  the  relation  of  conduct  to  character, 
and  of  character  to  destiny:  the  perception  of  the  conditions  under  which  Ufe's 
highest  elements  are  perfected  and  its  fruit-bearing  qualities  ripened.  That 
is  the  mystic  meaning  of  the  benediction  of  my  text:  there  is  the  secret  of  the 
blessedness  of  every  sower.  5.  Do  we  know  what  God's  purpose  in  our  Hfe  is? 
Along  what  Unes  would  He  have  us  develop?  What  does  He  wish  human  life 
to  be?  I  would  answer  these  questions  first,  and  then  show  how  the  working 
of  the  human  with  the  Divine  fulfils  the  purposes  and  plans  of  God.  I  do  not 
think  that  He  wants  us  to  go  hungry  or  poorly  clad  in  the  biting  cold;  I  do  not 
think  that  we  are  fulfilling  His  purpose  when  we  sigh  over  accidents  that  are 
traceable  to  human  causes.  It  is  anything  but  piety  to  sit  down  in  poverty, 
rags,  and  dirt,  and  say,  "  The  will  of  the  Lord  be  done."  His  will  is  our  weU- 
being — body,  soul,  and  spirit.  I  want  to  point  out  what  Unes  of  conduct  will 
contribute  to  the  forming  of  such  a  character  and  the  developing  of  such  cir- 
cumstances as  God  approves.  I.  I  would  speak  of  activity  as  fruit-bearing 
seed  that  ripens  into  a  harvest  of  blessedness.  I  do  not  mean  busjj^ness  in  any 
realm  of  life  that  may  present  itself.  What  I  mean  is  activity  in  righteous  pur- 
suits, in  holy  ambitions,  in  legitimate  calhngs;  activity  in  things  that  pertain 
to  human  improvement,  human  comfort  and  well-being;  things  that  belong 
to  the  many  phases  of  Hfe's  wondrous  economy;  things  that  tend  to  the  uplifting 
of  human  fives,  to  the  amehoration  of  human  woes,  to  the  Hghtening  of  human 
burdens,  to  the  redeeming  of  human  souls  from  tyranny,  falsehood,  and  wrong. 

II.  The  next  fruit-bearing  quahty  of  which  I  would  speak  is  learning.  There 
is  a  trite  old  saying,  "  Never  too  late  to  learn,"  which  in  most  lives  has  little 
or  no  practical  application.  Do  not  let  learning  end  at  the  schoolroom.  Set 
yourself  some  task  to  learn  that  shall  explain  some  of  the  mysteries  of  fife  to 
you.  Go  apart  from  the  "  madding  crowd's  ignoble  strife,"  and  there  open 
the  windows  of  your  mind,  till  that  "  light  which  never  was  on  sea  or  land  " 
shall  flood  it  and  make  it  luminous  as  with  the  sunshine  of  God.  Every  task 
you  set  yourself  to  learn,  and  learn  it;  every  mystery  that  j'ou  make  plain  to 
yourself  by  processes  of  reasoning  and  study;  every  new  fact  that  you  gain  by 
search  and  research  in  the  domain  of  knowledge  will  not  only  make  you  wiser, 
but  better;  and,  perhaps,  after  much  pain  and  labour,  you  shall  find  the  task 
ripening  into  a  harvest  that  shaU  make  the  autumn  of  life  golden.  III.  I  would 
mention  also  the  preservation  of  health  as  that  which  will  bear  abundant 
fruitage  in  our  happiness  and  well-being.  "  A  sound  mind  in  a  sound  body  " 
is  doubtless  God's  wiU  concerning  us.  And  towards  attaining  that  we  can  do 
more  for  ourselves  than  all  the  physicians  in  the  world  can  do  for  us.  Blessed 
is  every  man  that  sows  his  life's  seeds  in  fertile  places;  he  is  promoting  the  Divine 
economy,  he  is  carrying  out  the  purposes  of  God  on  earth.     (W.  J.  Hocking.) 


36  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xxxn. 

Sowing  beside  all  waters  : — I.  The  chakactebs  heeb  described.  Sowers.  A 
sower  implies  seed.  There  is  only  one  granary  in  which  the  living  seed  of  the 
kingdom  is  treasured,  namely,  the  Bible.  1.  The  true  spiritual  sower,  having 
first  of  all  received  himself  the  seed,  will  manifest  a  real  love  for  the  work.  He 
will  go  forth  willingly,  conscientiously,  and  lovingly,  to  scatter  broadcast  the 
precious  treasure,  not  merely  on  well-cultivated  patches  of  human  soil,  but 
"  beside  all  waters,"  finding  very  often  his  chiefest  joy  in  sowing  the  unlikeUest 
patches.  2.  The  true,  spiritual  sower  will  also  have  faith  in  his  work.  3.  He 
wiU  not  only  have  faith  in  the  seed,  but  also  in  the  soiL  The  farmer  who  does 
not  believe  the  soil  capable  of  producing  fruit  will  certainly  not  waste  time  in 
its  cultivation.  If  we  did  not  beheve  that  between  every  human  heart  and  the 
Gospel  seed  there  was  such  affinity  that  it  could  not  help  taking  root  therein, 
we  should  most  certainly  give  up  our  toiL  4.  The  true,  spiritual  sower  will  often 
encounter  difficulties  in  his  work.  5.  The  spiritual  sower  is  earth's  truest  philan- 
thropist. II.  OiTB  sphere  of  operation.  "  Beside  aU  waters."  Wherever 
there  is  a  solitary  spot  capable  of  receiving  the  good  and  Uving  seed — whether 
at  home  or  abroad,  in  dens  of  squalor  or  palaces  of  luxury  and  ease,  in  the  crowded 
city  or  the  rural  village — we  are  commanded  to  go  and  plant  it  there.  III.  The 
BENEDICTION  HEBE  PRONOUNCED.  "  Blcssed  are  they  that  sow  beside  all  waters." 
1.  The  work  itself  is  its  own  reward.  2.  The  spiritual  sower  enjoys  the  bene- 
diction of  others.  3.  He  has  the  smile  and  benediction  of  Him  in  whose  service 
he  is  engaged.  {J.  W.  Atkinson. )  Sowing  beside  all  waters  : — Isaiah  ever 
had  an  eye  to  the  golden  age.  In  view  of  the  successful  issue  of  the  coming 
struggle,  he  intimates  the  wisdom  of  going  on  with  seed  sowing.  They  are  blessed 
who  are  not  hindered  by  fear.  May  we  not  learn  the  wisdom  of  hopefulness? 
The  man  who  believes  in  Divine  faithfulness  has  every  reason  to  be  an  optimist. 
This  subject  is  capable  of  appHcation  in  various  ways.  The  optimism  of  Isaiah, 
Christ,  Paul,  and  John  needs  cultivation.  1.  Those  who  give  any  thought  to 
the  social  problems  of  the  age  are  met  by  many  difficulties  and  discouragementa 
So  much  want  to  be  relieved,  so  many  wrongs  to  be  righted.  Pessimism  says, 
"  Society  is  going  to  the  dogs;  let  it  go."  Optimism  says,  "  I'll  save  it  if  I  can." 
Present  social  inequalities  and  woes  should  not  make  us  hopeless.  Jehovah 
was  more  mighty  than  Sennacherib.  He  is  more  mighty  than  all  the  forces 
arrayed  against  true  liberty.  Having  faith  in  God  we  may  sow  the  seeds  of 
social  reform.  2.  In  evangelistic  and  missionary  work  a  spirit  of  optimism  is 
essential.  With  Divine  promises  of  power  and  blessing  we  may  hopefully  sow. 
Concerning  foreign  missions,  Pessimism  says,  "  It  is  a  waste  of  hfe,  money, 
energy";  but  the  man  whose  faith  in  God  is  strong,  points  to  the  golden  age 
when  all  shall  know  the  Lord.  3.  Considering  our  own  life  and  experience  this 
same  hopefulness  is  essential.  Is  hfe  worth  hving?  Yes,  if  for  no  other  reason 
because  in  it  we  may  sow  for  a  golden  harvest.  {T.  S.  Williams,  M.A.)  Selfish- 
ness in  service  : — Some  one  tells  of  a  physician,  who,  at  the  beginning  of  his  career, 
made  a  resolution  that  he  would  undertake  no  cases  but  those  with  which  he 
was  certain  he  could  succeed.  While  this  would  mean  the  loss  of  a  good  deal 
of  money,  he  shrewdly  calculated  on  getting  it  back  a  hundredfold  in  the  reputa- 
tion of  skill  which  such  a  course  would  bring  him.  The  idea  is  wholly  selfish. 
He  preferred  to  let  men,  whom  he  might  possibly  have  saved,  die,  rather  than 
run  the  risk  of  having  the  brightness  of  his  reputation  dimmed.  {Christian 
Endeavour. )  Usefulness  I — Is  there  a  word  in  our  language  which  expresses 
more  than  that?  What  images  of  the  good,  the  devoted,  and  the  self-sacrificing 
does  it  not  bring  up  vividly  before  us  !  We  see  Thomas  Cranfield,  the  tailor, 
labouring  among  the  bricklayers  in  the  cause  of  Sunday  schools;  John  Pounds, 
the  cobbler,  who  founded  ragged  schools;  Sarah  Martin,  the  dressmaker  of 
Yarmouth,  the  devoted  visitor  to  the  workhouse  and  the  jail;  and  Thomas  Dakin, 
the  Greenwich  pensioner  and  distributor  of  tracts.  Among  these,  in  the  higher 
walks  of  life,  we  recognise  Howard,  the  philanthropist,  over  whose  grave,  in 
Russia,  was  engraved  the  motto  which  kings  might  envy,  "  He  lived  for  others  "; 
Clarkson,  Wilberforce,  and  a  host  of  honoured  statesmen;  the  Thorntons,  and 
a  multitude  of  other  merchant  princes;  Washington  and  Wellington,  and  Havelock 
and  Scott,  who,  while  they  were  leaders  in  the  armies  of  this  world,  were  ^  proud 
to  be  humble  privates  in  the  armies  of  the  Lord  of  hosts.  (J.  N.  Norton.) 
Where  shall  we  sow  ? — "  Beside  all  waters."  Some  waters  are  clear  and  sparkling, 
and  the  murmur  of  their  ripple  gladdens  the  ear,  sow  there,  of  course.  But 
there  are  turbid,  angry  waters,  fouled  and  polluted,  sow  beside  them  also.     Into 


CHAP,  xxxin.]  ISAIAH.  37 

the  bright,  sunny,  prattling  lives  of  the  little  ones  cast  the  precious  seed,  but 
also,  aU  the  more  lovingly  and  skilfuUy,  when  the  swollen  torrents  of  sin  rush 
past.  God  is  able  to  make  it  grow  and  take  root  there;  and  also  beside  the 
stagnant  pools  of  stolid  atheism.  "  Thou  canst  not  tell  whether  shall  prosper, 
either  this  or  that."  {G.  Soltau.)  The  catechism  : — Many  striking  incidents 
are  related  of  good  "  Father  Nash,"  one  of  the  early  heralds  of  the  Cross  in  the 
more  destitute  and  neglected  regions  of  the  "  Diocese  of  New  York,"  who  has 
been  made  to  figure  with  such  effect  in  Fenimore  Cooper's  famous  romance. 
The  Pioneers.  On  a  certain  occasion,  when  a  number  of  clergymen  were  assembled 
for  some  purpose,  and  conversation  began  to  flag,  one  of  them,  who  was  almost 
too  diligent  a  farmer  for  the  good  of  the  Church,  entertained  the  company  with 
an  account  of  his  agricultural  operations,  and,  among  other  things,  of  his  suc- 
cessful management  of  sheep.  Father  Nash,  whose  whole  heart  was  devoted 
to  his  Heavenly  Master's  work,  felt  little  interest  in  aU  this,  and  when  the  enthusi- 
astic farmer-pastor  turned  to  him  and  asked,  "  What  do  you  feed  your  lambs 
with?  "  the  worthy  missionary  could  not  resist  the  temptation  of  administering 
ft  nuld  rebuke,  and  answered — "With  Catechism!"  (J.  N.  Norton.)  Tact 
in  seed-sowing  : — A  young  friend  was  invited  to  spend  the  evening  with  Dr.  and 
Mrs.  Horace  Bushnell.  She  was  a  girl  of  fine  intelligence  and  character,  but 
not  at  that  time  religious.  When,  therefore,  she  was  invited  to  tea  by  Mrs. 
Bushnell,  she  accepted  with  considerable  misgiving,  lest  the  evening  should 
be  made  the  occasion  of  such  exhortations  as  were  then  too  commonly  the  only 
subject  of  ministerial  intercourse  with  the  unconverted.  To  her  great  relief, 
however,  the  time  was  spent  in  the  pleasantest  social  intercourse,  free  from  all 
remarks  of  a  personal  nature.  Dr.  B.,  of  course,  saw  her  safely  home  when 
the  evening  was  over,  and  as  the  night  was  one  of  brilliant  starlight,  the  talk 
on  the  way  was  naturally  of  astronomy,  and  of  the  law-abiding  order  of  the  uni- 
verse. He  spoke  eloquently  of  the  great  harmony  of  the  spheres,  and  of  the 
perfect  manner  in  which  each  little  star  fulfilled  its  destiny,  and  swung  in  the 
Divine  order  of  its  orbit.  "  Sarah,"  he  said,  turning  to  her  with  a  winning  smile, 
"  I  want  to  see  you  in  your  place."  No  other  word  turned  the  suggestion  into 
a  homily,  and  her  quick  intelligence  was  thrilled  and  won  by  a  thought  which 
seemed  in  that  quiet  hour  to  have  dropped  upon  her  from  the  skies.  He  had 
simply  let  the  occasion  speak  its  own  thought.     {Dr.  BushnelVs  Life.) 


CHAPTER  xxxnr. 


Vbe.  1.  Woe  to  thee  that  spoilest. — Isaiah  xxxiii.  : — The  most  beautiful 
of  Isaiah's  discourse  [in  which]  the  long  confiict  of  Israel's  sin  with  Jehovah's 
righteousness  is  left  behind,  and  the  dark  colours  of  present  and  past  distress 
serve  only  as  a  foil  to  the  assured  feUcity  that  is  ready  to  dawn  on  Jehovah's  land. 
( W.  Robertson  Smith,  D.D.)  Treacherous  Assyria  : — The  course  of  Assyria  was 
that  of  a  treacherous  dealer — no  confidence  whatever  could  be  reposed  in  this 
people.  They  were  bom  to  spoil,  and  the  moment  they  ceased  spoiling  they 
would  be  spoiled  in  turn.  (B.  Blahe,  B.D.)  Aggravated  sin: — The  less  pro- 
vocation we  have  from  men  to  do  an  ill  thing,  the  more  provocation  we  give  to 
God  by  it.     (If.  Henry.) 

Ver.  2.  0  Lord,  be  gracious  unto  us. — An  appropriate  prayer  : — They  pray — 
1.  For  those  that  were  employed  in  military  services  for  them.  "  Be  Thou  their 
arm  every  morning."  In  our  spiritual  warfare  our  own  hands  are  not  sufficient 
for  us,  nor  can  we  bring  anything  to  pass  unless  God  not  only  strengthen  our 
arms  (Gen.  xHx.  24),  but  be  Himself  our  arm.  If  God  leave  us  to  ourselves  any 
morning  we  are  imdone ;  we  must,  therefore,  every  morning  commit  ourselves  to 
Him,  and  go  forth  in  Bis  strength  to  do  the  work  of  the  day  in  its  day.  2.  For 
the  body  of  the  people.  "  Be  Thou  our  salvation,"  &c., — ours  that  sit  still,  and 
do  not  venture  into  the  high  places  of  the  field.     {M.  Henry.) 

Ver.  6.  Wisdom  and  knowledge  shall  be  the  stability  of  thy  times. — The 
advantages  of  Sunday  Schools  : — I.  The  valuable  insteuction  in  the  aet  of 


38  THE  BIBLICAL  ILL  USTBATOB.  [chap.  xxxm. 

READING  WHICH  THEY  HAVE  IMPABTED  TO  MANY  WHO  COTILD  NOT  OTHERWISE  HAVB 
ATTAINED  IT.  II.  ThEY  HAVE  BEEN  EMINENTLY  USEFUL  IN  PROMOTING  THE 
CIVILISATION  OF  THE  INFERIOR  ORDERS,  AND  IN  PROVIDING  A  POWERFUL  AND 
EFFECTUAL  ANTIDOTE  TO  PAUPERISM  AND  MENDICITY.  III.  ThEY  HAVE  BEEN 
EXCEEDINGLY  BENEFICIAL  IN  PRESERVING  THE  YOUNG  FROM  MANY  CRIMES  ^VHICH 
ARE     DESTRUCTIVE    OF    THE    PEACE     AND     ORDER    OF    SOCIETY.       IV.     The     higher 

and    more    important    effects    which    have    resulted    from    these    schools,    in 

PROMOTING   A    SPIRIT    OF    PIETY    AND     VIRTUE    AMONG    THEIR    YOUTHFUL   PUPILS. 

(J.  Brown,  D.D.)  Christianity  promotive  of  knowledge  and  of  social  well- 
being  : — The  general  principle  is,  that  wisdom  or  practical  religion 
and  knowledge  are  the  best  elements  of  the  stability  of  any  people, — the 
best  defence  of  any  nation, — and  that  irrespective  of  the  difference  between 
a  nation  under  the  ordinary  providence  of  God,  and  one  enjoying  a  theocracy. 
I.  Christianity  promotes  wisdom  and  knowledge.  That  Christianity 
promotes  wisdom  and  knowledge  we  might  conclude  from  facts  which  lie 
on  the  face  of  it,  even  before  ascertaining  the  connection  between  the  cause 
and  the  effect.  We  may  assume  Jesus  Christ  to  be  the  living  type  of  His  own 
system,  and  He  is  the  very  impersonation  of  wisdom  and  knowledge.  Then, 
wisdom  and  knowledge  may  be  regarded  as  synonymous  with  practical  Christianity. 
They  are  at  least  essential  to  its  existence.  We  shall  take  them  separately,  and 
ascertain — 1.  How  the  Gospel  of  Christ  promotes  wisdom,  or  that  practical  reUgion 
of  which  the  fear  and  love  of  God  are  the  principles.  The  God  whom  the  Bible 
reveals  is  the  fit  object  of  reverence  and  love.  The  mere  manifestation  of  the 
Divine  character,  however,  invested  with  every  possible  perfection,  is  not  enough 
to  rekindle  the  flame  of  piety  in  a  fallen  world.  It  is  otherwise  mth  holy  beings. 
But  in  our  case  the  revelation  is  made  to  a  race  of  apostates,  partially  acquainted 
with  God,  but  estranged  from  Him  in  heart  and  will.  Christianity  provides, 
in  the  great  facts  through  which  it  conveys  the  knowledge  of  God,  the  means 
of  reducing  men  to  contrition  and  restoring  them  to  love.  The  dSospel  is  adapted 
to  convert  the  soul.  Any  scheme  whereby  you  would  regenerate  must  contain 
a  provision  of  mercy.  And  thus  far  the  Gospel  is  adapted  to  produce  practical 
piety.  But  this  is  not  enough.  The  Gospel  reveals  a  most  glorious  expedient 
for  the  vindication  of  the  law,  for  the  manifestation  of  the  Divine  righteousness, 
and  of  the  demerit  of  sin,  while  it  offers  a  free  and  eternal  pardon.  It  opens  the 
door  of  hope  to  the  guiltiest  criminal,  but  by  the  mode  of  doing  it,  it  impresses 
his  mind  with  a  sense  of  his  sinfulness,  it  moves  him  to  repentance,  and  inspires 
him  with  all  the  zeal  to  obey  that  can  arise  from  his  conscious  obligation  to  Divine 
grace.  2.  Christianity  promotes  knowledge.  Christianity  contains  the  only 
true  system  of  Divine  knowledge.  But  further,  Christianity  promotes  general 
knowledge.  It  is  itself  a  system  of  truth  and  not  of  error,  a  system  of  knowledge 
and  not  of  ignorance,  a  system  of  intelligence  and  not  a  mere  bodily  ceremonial 
or  a  dark  superstition.  The  very  commission  it  has  received  from  heaven  is, 
"  Go  and  teach  all  nations."  Reveahng  God,  it  makes  known  the  highest  truths; 
and  promotes  and  faciUtates  inquiry  into  every  other.  From  this  conviction 
we  deduce  principles  which  seem  to  possess  all  the  simpUcity  of  axioms.  There 
cannot  be  any  real  contrariety  between  the  doctrines  of  Christianity  and  the 
truths  of  reason  or  the  facts  of  science.  II.  By  promoting  wisdom  and  know- 
ledge, Christianity  establishes  a  people.  In  support  of  the  proposition 
before  us,- we  might  reason  a  fortiori  Christianity,  by  promoting  wisdom  and 
knowledge,  purifies  and  elevates  society, — how  much  more  will  it  establish  or 
give  the  elements  of  perpetuity  to  society.  Take  society  in  any  of  its  lowest 
states,  and  you  will  find  Christianity  an  adequate  power  to  raise  it.  For  example, 
it  is  an  acknowledged  fact,  that  the  Gospel  makes  men  unfit  for  a  state  of  slavery. 
If  Christianity  thus  elevates,  how  much  more  will  it  establish !  But  what  are 
the  means  of  the  stability  of  a  nation — what  the  elements  of  perpetuity  ?  Religion, 
virtue,  freedom,  and  good  order.  {J.  Kennedy.)  National  security  and  peace  : — 
I.   True  practical  religion    prohibits  what  would    endanger  national 

SECURITY  AND  PEACE.  II.  WhILE  RELIGION  DISCOUNTENANCES  WHAT  WOULD 
BE  PERNICIOUS  IN  PUBLIC  LIFE,  IT  PROVIDES  ALSO  WHAT,  IN  OTJIER  RESPECTS,  IS 
NECESSARY  AND  SALUTARY.       III.  It  iS  d^a^Vn  from  observation  and  EXPERIENCE. 

No  argument  is  more  valid  or  conclusive  in  confirmation  of  a  fact.  A  single 
well-conducted  experiment  in  philosophy  may  demonstrate  the  truth  of  a  general 
principle;  and,  similarly,  in  morals  and  religion,  the  experience  of  a  single  nation, 
or  the  uniform  experience  of  the  ages,  may  attest  the  inutility  or  value  of  any 


CHAP,  xxxm.]  ISAIAH.  39 

particular  theory  or  scheme.  {T.  S.  CartwrigTit.)  Christian  knowledge  the 
source  of  other  excellent  knowledge  : — As  Christianity  introduced  religious  light, 
60  did  that  light  become  the  parent  of  every  other  kind  of  useful  and  excellent 
knowledge.  \Vhen  once  the  powers  of  the  human  mind  are  brought  into  acquaint- 
ance with  evangelical  truth,  they  acquire  vigour,  a  strength  and  expansion  in 
their  exercise  before  unknown.  And  hence  it  is  that  the  knowledge  which  the 
revealed  truth  of  God  communicates  will  be  found  in  all  ages  to  produce  that 
discipline  of  mind  which  ministers  so  much  to  its  strength,  and  places  it  in  the 
most  favourable  circumstances  for  the  discovery  and  acquisition  of  truth  generalljr. 
So  little  opposition,  in  fact,  is  there  between  Christianity  and  true  science,  that 
all  the  most  important  discoveries  of  a  scientific  nature,  all  the  knowledge  whence 
nations  derive  power  and  refinement,  have  occurred  in  Christian  nations,  and 
Christian  nations  only.  {R.  Watson.)  The  importance  of  religious  knowledge  : — 
There  appears  no  real  connection  between  mere  scientific  knowledge  and  moral 
influence;  the  opinion  that  such  a  connection  exists  is  false  in  its  foundations 
and  injurious  in  practice.  No  moral  influence  is  exerted,  except  by  the  truths 
revealed  to  us  in  the  Scriptures.  I.  I  am  to  makb  an  appeal  to  the  attthority 
OF  ScBiPTURE,  in  support  of  the  proposition  that  we  have  no  right  to  expect 
any  moral  improvement  from  the  influence  of  any  kind  of  knowledge  except  that 
of  Divine  truth.  It  ought  to  be  stated,  that  this  sacred  Book  is  altogether  in 
favour  of  the  cultivation  of  all  useful  knowledge,  and  its  general  circulation  through 
society.  1.  We  tiu-n  to  the  Old  Testament.  We  are  there  expressly  required 
to  view  religion  as  wisdom.  "  Wisdom,"  we  are  told,  "  is  the  principal  thing"; 
and  it  is  urged  upon  us  that  we  "  get  wisdom,"  yea,  that  "  with  all  our  getting, 
we  get  understanding."  When  the  attainment  of  wisdom  is  thus  inculcated 
and  enjoined,  we  may  well  inquire,  "  What  kind  of  wisdom  is  it  to  which  so  many 
moral  effects  are  ascribed?  "  It  is  not  to  scientific  wisdom,  but  to  moral  wisdom: 
to  the  knowledge  of  God  and  His  wUl;  to  the  knowledge  of  our  own  obligations 
and  duties;  to  the  knowledge  which  applies  to  man  as  an  accountable  creature, 
destined  to  a  future  judgment;  to  the  knowledge  of  the  way  in  which  man,  as 
a  sinner,  may  find  pardon,  and  peace,  and  holiness  from  God,  whom  he  has 
offended.  All  this  is  included  in  the  scriptural  idea  of  wisdom;  and  it  is  to  this 
only  that  moral  results  are  ascribed.  2.  We  find  the  same  sentiment  in  the  New 
Testament.  Jesus  Christ  never  drops  a  word  from  which  it  might  be  gathered 
that  mere  knowledge,  knowledge  of  any  and  every  kind,  is  sufficient  to  exert  a 
moral  influence  on  the  mind  and  character.  On  the  contrary,  there  are  passages 
in  which  He  represents  it  as  operating  to  the  hindrance  of  salvation.  So  that 
solemn  declaration  in  Matthew:  "  I  thank  Thee,  O  Father,  Lord  of  heaven  and 
earth,  because  Thou  hast  hid  these  things  from  the  wise  and  prudent,  and  hast 
revealed  them  unto  babes."  So  in  the  writings  of  the  Apostles.  The  Gospel, 
which  gives  moral  knowledge,  they  declare  to  be  "  the  power  of  God  unto  salvation 
to  every  one  that  believeth";  while  of  the  wisdom  of  the  world,  so  long  tried 
among  the  heathen,  they  only  declare,  that  "  the  world  by  wisdom  knew  not 
God."  When  St.  Paul  points  to  the  injurious  effects  of  "  philosophy  and  vain 
deceit,"  he  tells  us  that  he  means  that  which  is  "  after  the  tradition  of  men,  after 
the  rudiments  of  this  world,  and  not  after  Christ."  Such  philosophy  could  not 
be  depended  upon  to  conquer  a  single  vice,  or  implant  a  single  principle  of  virtue, 
and  therefore  he  pronounces  it  to  be  but  vain  deceit,  empty  and  powerless.  II.  Let 
us  now  consider  the  manner  by  which  religious  knowledge  operates  to 
PRODUCE  these  MORAL  RESULTS.     That  such  results  are  produced  wiU  appear — 

1.  From  the  truths  which  it  presents  to  the  mind;  God,  &c.  2.  The  law  of  God 
presents  a  standard  of  duty,  binding  on  the  conscience;  for  there  can  be  no 
authoritative  standard  of  right  and  wrong  except  by  revelation  from  God  Himself, 
the  supreme  Lawgiver.  3.  We  have  appealed  to  the  Scriptures.  Now,  these 
assure  us  that,  along  with  the  truth  of  God,  there  goes  an  accompanying  influence; 
the  words  that  are  spoken  to  you  are  "  spirit  and  life."  This  is  because  the  illu- 
minations of  the  Holy  Ghost  go  along  with  them.     III.  By  no  other  species 

OF  KNOWLEDGE  THAN  THAT  WHICH  WE   HAVE  BEEN  CONSIDERING  CAN  THIS  MORAL 

INFLUENCE  BE  EXERTED.  1.  Though  many  seem  to  take  for  granted  that,  if  we 
circulate  knowledge,  we  improve  society,  it  is  nevertheless  true  that  there  are 
many  kinds  of  knowledge  wfiich  do  not  contribute  to  the  improvement  of  morals. 

2.  AU  experience  is  against  the  supposition  I  am  combating.  3.  But  let  us  even 
suppose  that  morals  are  taught.  What  then  ?  I  am  aware  that  there  are  often  some 
moral  instructions  added  to  systems  of  education;  some  moral  precepts  in  which 


40  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xxxm. 

all  will  agree  are,  perhaps,  even  selected  from  the  Book  of  God;  still,  if  this  Book 
be  true,  even  such  teaching  must  fail.     This  Book  has  its  doctrines  and  promises, 
as  well  as  its  moral  precepts;  and  its  morals  are  connected  most  intimately  both 
with  its  doctrines  and  promises.     Man  must  be  taught  no^  only  what  is  right, 
but  why  it  is  right;  and  he  must  be  shown  that  he  is  bouna  to  do  it.     The  term 
"  duty  "  refers  not  merely  to  the  action  which  is  to  be  done,  but  to  the  obUgation 
to  do  it.     Take,  then,  the  morahty  of  the  Bible  away  from  that  with  which  God 
has  connected  it,  and  you  make  it  powerless.     (Ibid.)         The  education  of  the 
poor  : — We  seem  to  have  here  something  Hke  a  prophetic  sanction  for  the  pro- 
pagation of  knowledge      Isaiah,  in  speaking  of  the  future  prosperity  of  the  Jewish 
empire,  rests  the  stabihty  of  its  fortunes,  not  upon  wealth,  nor  extensive  dominion, 
but  directly  upon  knowledge.     1.  The  most  common  objection  to  the  education 
of  the  lower  orders  of  the  community  is,  that  the  poor,  proud  of  the  distinction 
of  learning,  will  not  submit  to  the  performance  of  those  lower  offices  of  Ufe  which 
are  necessary  to  the  well-being  of  a  State.     Our  poorer  brethren  do  not  toil  because 
they  are  ignorant;  neither  would  they  cease  to  toil  because  they  were  instructed; 
the  fabric  of  human  happiness  God  has  placed  upon  much  stronger  foundations ; 
they  labour,  because  they  cannot  hve  without  labour;  this  has  ever  been  suffi- 
cient to  stimulate,  and  to  continue  the  energy  of  man,  and  will,  and  must  ever 
stimulate  it,  and  secure  its  continuance,  while  heaven  and  earth  remain.     2.  The 
next  objection  urged  against  the  education  of  the  poor  is,  that  the  most  ignorant 
poor,  in  country  villages,  are  the  best;  and  that  the  poor  of  large  towns,  as  they 
gain  in  inteUigence,  lose  in  character,  and  become  corrupt  as  they  become  know- 
ing; but  the  country  poor,  it  should  be  remembered,  are  the  fewest  in  number; 
they  are  not  exposed  to  all  those  innumerable  temptations  which  corrupt  the 
populace  of  large  towns;  this,  and  not  their  ignorance,  is  the  cause  of  their  superior 
decency  in  morals  and  reUgion.     3.  In  considering  the  effects  of  educating  the 
poor,  we  must  not  merely  dwell  upon  the  power,  but  upon  the  tendency  which 
we  have  created  to  use  that  power  aright;  not  merely  ask  if  it  is  a  good  thing 
for  the  poor  to  read,  but  to  read  such  books  as  are  full  of  wise  and  useful  advice. 
A  mere  instrument  for  acquiring  knowledge  may  be  used  with  equal  success, 
either  for  a  good  or  a  bad  purpose;  but  education  never  gives  the  instrument 
without  teaching  the  proper  method  of  using  it,  and  without  inspiring  a  strong 
desire-  to  use  it  in  that  manner.     4.  Education  may  easily  be  made  to  supply, 
hereafter,  the  most  innocent  source  of  amusement,  and  to  lessen  those  vices  which 
proceed  from  want  of  interesting  occupation;  it  subdues  ferocity,  by  raising  up 
an  admiration  for  something  besides  brutal  strength,  and  brutal  courage.     5.  We 
must  remember,  in  this  question,  that  aU  experience  is  in  our  favour.     6.  There 
are  many  methods  in  which  a  community  is  considerably  benefited  by  the  education 
of  its  poor;  a  human  being  who  is  educated  is,  for  many  purposes  of  commerce, 
a  much  more  useful  and  convenient  instrument;  and  the  advantage  to  be  derived 
from  the  universal  diffusion  of  this  power  is  not  to  be  overlooked  in  a  discussion 
of  this  nature.     7.  I  would  ask  those  who  place  such  confidence  in  the  benefits 
of  ignorance,  how  far  they  would  choose  to  carry  these  benefits  ?  for,  if  the  safety 
of  a  State  depends  upon  its  ignorance,  then,  the  more  ignorance  the  more  safety. 
{8.  Smith,  M.A.)        Education  is  the  chief  defence  of  nations.     {Edmund  Burke.) 
Education  .-—The  schoolmaster  is  abroad !     I  trust  more  to  him,  armed  with  his 
primer,  than  I  do  to  the  soldier  in  full  miUtary  array,  for  the  upholding  and  extend- 
ing the   Uberties   of   his   country.     {Lord   Brougham.)        Education  contributes 
to  the  welfare  of  the  State  .-—The  ravages  of  the  Danes  had  totally  extinguished 
any  small  sparks  of  learning,  by  the  dispersion  of  the  monks,  and  the  burning 
their  monasteries  and  hbraries.     To  repair  these  misfortunes,  Alfred  (the  Great), 
like  Charlemagne,  invited  learned  men  from  all  quarters  of  Europe  to  reside 
in  his  dominions.     He  estabfished  schools,  and  enjoined  every  freeholder  possessed 
of  two  ploughs  to  send  his  children  there  for  instruction.     He  is  said  to  have 
founded,  or,  at  least,  to  have  Uberally  endowed  the  illustrious  seminary  afterward 
known  as  the  University  of  Oxford.     {Tytler'a  History.)        The  fear  of  the  Lord 
is  his  treasure.— TAe  fear  of  the  Lord : — There  is  a  servile  fear  of  God  which  wicked 
men  possess,  but  that  which  distinguishes  the  beUever  is  fihal  and  reverential 
He  fears,  not  because  he  has  sinned,  but  that  he  may  not  sin;  and  dreads  not  so 
much  the  punishment  of  sin  as  the  commission  of  it.     He  fears  God  as  a  friend, 
and  not  as  an  enemy;  as  a  father,  and  not  as  a  judge.     The  Scripture  speaks 
of  a  natural  and  constitutional  fear,  arising  from  pusillanimity  and  want  of  courage, 
whereby  persons  are  alarmed  at  the  least  appearance  of  danger,  and  sink  imder 


CHAP,  xxxin.]  ISAIAH.  41 

the  sKghtest  affliction.  They  fear  where  no  fear  is,  and  flee  when  no  one  pnisueth. 
There  is  also  a  superstitious  fear,  which  is  forbidden  as  inconsistent  with  the  fe«ur 
of  God.  There  is  likewise  a  fear  which  tends  to  desperation,  and  sometimes 
ends  in  it;  a  fear  which  hath  torment,  and  is  attended  with  a  spirit  of  bondage. 
In  distinction  from  this,  there  is  a  fear  arising  from  distrust,  the  fruit  of  unbelief, 
which  good  men  too  frequently  betray  in  this  imperfect  state,  but  which  the 
Scripture  justly  condemns.  The  fear  of  the  Lord  is  a  gracious  principle  wrought 
in  the  soul  by  the  Holy  Spirit,  and  consists  in  a  reverential  regard  for  the  Divine 
authority  and  glory.  I.  Enquire  wherein  the  feab  of  the  Loed  consists. 
God  is  the  immediate  object  of  it;  and  it  consists  in  a  mixture  of  admiration 
and  love,  arising  from  an  apprehension  of  His  incomparable  excellences  and 
infinite  superiority,  joined  with  a  humble  hope  of  interest  in  His  favour  and  regard. 
1.  The  greatness  and  majesty  of  God  may  well  excite  our  fear,  and  fill  us  with  the 
deepest  reverence  and  awe.  2.  His  omnipresence  and  allseeing  eye  are  a  sufficient 
ground  of  fear  to  sinful  and  erring  creatures.  3.  The  justice  and  holiness  of  God 
are  adapted  to  excite  our  fear.  4.  There  is  something  awful  even  in  the  Divine 
goodness  (Psa.  cxxx.  4).  II.  The  advantages  arising  from  this  holy  prin- 
ciple. "  The  fear  of  the  Lord  is  his  treasure."  1.  It  is  in  its  own  nature  exceed- 
ingly precious,  and  all  the  things  of  this  world  are  base  and  mean  in  comparison 
of  it.  2.  It  answers  the  most  valuable  purposes.  3.  Its  advantages  are  permanent. 
4.  It  is  called  a  treasure  in  order  to  teach  us  the  following  things — (1)  The  necessity 
of  seeking  after  it  that  we  may  fully  possess  it.  (2)  That  we  may  be  taught  highly 
to  value  and  esteem  it.  (3)  That  we  may  be  careful  to  cultivate  and  preserve 
it.  (4)  We  are  hereby  taught  to  impart  this  inestimable  treasure  to  others,  and 
to  enrich  the  world  with  it,  by  endeavouring  to  inspire  them  also  with  the  fear 
of  God.  {B.  Beddome,  M.A.)  The  great  value  of  the  fear  of  the  Lord : — It 
keeps  the  conscience  tender,  and  the  mind  spiritual,  and  is  the  enemy  of  arrogance 
and  pride.  Hence  the  apostle  joins  these  two  together:  Be  not  high-minded, 
but  fear  (Rom.  xi.  20).  If  we  fear  the  Lord,  we  shall  dread  all  formahtyand 
hypocrisy,  and  shall  serve  Him  in  sincerity  and  truth  (Josh.  xxiv.  14).  It  will 
also  inspire  us  with  courage  and  fortitude,  and  enable  us  to  say  as  Nehemiah 
did  in  the  face  of  the  greatest  danger,  Should  such  a  man  as  I  flee?  AU  lesser 
fears  are  swallowed  up  of  this  great  fear,  the  fear  of  God.  A  heart  fully  impressed 
with  it  can  neither  sink  into  stupidity,  or  indulge  in  any  unbecoming  levity; 
will  neither  be  too  much  elated  with  prosperity,  or  depressed  by  adversity.  The 
fear  of  the  Lord  will  also  guard  us  against  evil  compliances,  and  criminal  indul- 
gences. It  stands  as  a  sentinel  over  the  soul,  warns  it  of  approaching  dangers, 
and  suppresses  the  flrst  risings  of  corruption,  before  they  break  forth  into  actual 
sins.  I  wiU  do  you  no  hurt,  says  Joseph  to  his  brethren,  for  I  fear  God.  Though 
at  the  utmost  distance  from  presumption,  it  produces  a  holy  confidence  in  God 
(Psa.  cxlvii.  11).  The  same  Divine  excellences  which  are  incitements  to  fear 
are  also  attractives  to  love;  so  that  these  kindred  graces  are  not  only  planted 
but  flourish  together,  and  the  same  promises  are  made  to  both.  The  Lord  will 
fulfil  the  desire  of  them  that  fear  Him;  He  also  preserve th  all  them  that  love  Him. 
(Psa.  cxlv.  19,  20).  A  servile  fear  contracts  the  mind;  but  an  ingenuous  fear 
of  God  enlarges  the  heart  in  His  service.  The  one  diverts  us  from  the  path  of 
duty,  the  other  disposes  us  to  walk  in  it;  the  one  is  slothful  and  indolent,  the 
other  active  and  persevering.  Blessed  is  the  man  that  feareth  the  Lord,  that 
delighteth  greatly  in  His  commandments  (Psa.  cxii.  1).  And  when  David  himself 
prayed  to  be  taught  God's  ways,  so  as  to  walk  in  the  truth,  he  added.  Unite  my 
heart  to  fear  Thy  name  (Psa.  Ixxxvi.  11).  The  fear  of  the  Lord  is  indeed  a  universal 
good;  it  affords  peace  of  conscience,  support  under  affliction,  and  comfort  in  the 
view  of  death.  The  fear  of  the  Lord  tendeth  to  Hfe,  a  long  life,  a  comfortable 
life,  and  life  everlasting.  As  the  heaven  is  high  above  the  earth,  so  great  is  His 
mercy  towards  them  that  fear  Him;  like  as  a  father  pitieth  his  children,  so  the 
Lord  pitieth  them  that  fear  Him.  Oh  how  great  is  BQs  goodness,  which  He  has 
laid  up  for  them  that  fear  Him;  which  He  has  wrought  for  them  that  trust  in 
Him,  before  the  sons  of  men  (Psa.  xxxi.  19,  ciii.  11-13).     {Ibid.) 

Ver.  7.  The  ambassadors  of  peace  shall  weep  bitterly.  —  The  weeping 
arnbassadors: — Tell  me  not  of  the  removal  of  statesmen,  the  falling  of  generals 
or  admirals  in  warfare,  the  removal  of  princes  or  monarchs  from  palaces  and 
thrones — all  these  may  take  place  and  leave,  comparatively,  no  chasm  in  society, 
when  contrasted  with  the  removal  of  an  ambassador  for  Jesus.     I.  What  abb 


42  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xxxm. 

WE  TO  UNDERSTAND  BY  AMBASSADORS  OF  PEACE  ?  An  ambassador  of  peace  must 
come  under  a  threefold  description  of  character.  1.  He  is  a  minister  sent  of 
God.  2.  He  is  instructed  in  the  terms  of  peace.  3.  He  has  to  negotiate  with 
siimers  who  are  at  war  with  God.  II.  The  lamentation  predicted  concebninq 
THESE  ambassadors.  They  "  shall  weep  bitterly."  Not  the  departed  one, 
but  the  surviving  ones.  1.  Because  of  the  impression  which  they  have  of  the 
loss  of  their  brother.  2.  For  sympathy  with  the  Church.  III.  The  LianTATioN 
OF  THEIR  sorrow.  We  are  not  to  sorrow  as  those  who  are  %vithout  hope.  1.  The 
election  of  grace  is  sure.  2.  The  redemption  of  the  Church  by  Christ  Jesus  is 
complete.  3.  The  succession  of  the  ambassadors  of  peace  remains  unbroken. 
(J.  Irons.)  Ministers  weeping  over  non-success: — The  ambassadors  of  Hezekiah 
wept  bitterly  because  their  embassy  was  rejected,  and  because  they  were  sent 
back  by  the  haughty  and  imposing  invader  «dthout  accomplishing  their  object 
of  peace.  And  very  few  form  any  ideas  of  the  deep  anxieties,  the  soul-travail, 
the  spiritual  concern,  of  God's  ambassadors  when  they  see  not,  as  the  result 
of  their  embassy,  the  message  they  have  delivered  received  by  precious  souls. 
(Hid.) 

Vers.  14,  15.  The  sinners  in  Zion  axe  afraid. — "  The  sinners  in  Zion  "  ; — 
What  a  contradiction  in  terms!  what  a  shock  to  the  fancy!  Zion!  fair  Zion, 
a  dewdrop,  a  glittering  star,  a  garden  of  beauty,  a  sweet  flower,  porcelain  without 
a  flaw,  honey  without  wax — Zion!  Then,  "sinners  in  Zion" — sinners  out 
of  place;  they  spoil  the  situation;  they  are  an  evil  blot  in  the  fair  landscape. 
Sinners  in  the  wilderness,  siimers  in  polluted  cities,  sinners  in  hell — there  you 
have  a  kind  of  music  that  has  an  accord  and  consonance  of  its  own;  but  sinners 
in  Zion!  {J.  Parker,  D.D.)  The  devouring  fire: — I.  The  characters  referred 
TO.  "  Sinners  in  Zion,"  and  "  the  hypocrites."  Those  who  are  in  Zion  by  a 
mere  profession  of  religion.  The  self-righteous.  Proud  formalists.  II.  Their 
present  state.  "  Afraid,"  &c.  If  temporal  judgments,  like  those  which  God 
wrought  upon  the  Assyrian  army,  had  such  an  effect  upon  the  sinners  in  Zion, 
what  will  be  the  terror  of  transgressors  in  prospect  of  the  everlasting  judgments 
of  God?  III.  The  important  questions.  "  Who  among  us  shall  dweU  with 
the  devouring  fire?  "  &c.  (J.  E.  Starey.)  Security  in  testing  times: — It  is 
certain  that  no  man  shall  find  his  profession  to  be  of  use  to  him  in  testing  times 
but  he  that  is  true  in  it,  he  that  is  thorough  in  it,  he  that  is  neither  a  sinner  nor 
a  hypocrite  in  the  sense  in  which  those  words  are  here  used.  Safety  in  Zion 
belongs  to  those  born  in  her  by  regeneration,  reared  in  her  by  sanctification, 
enfranchised  in  her  by  faith  in  the  Son  of  God,  settled  in  her  by  fixed  principles, 
confirmed  in  her  by  obedience  to  her  laws,  and  bound  to  her  by  intense  love 
of  her  King  and  her  citizens.  Such  "  shall  dwell  on  high  "  secure  from  danger, 
and  only  such :  the  aliens  and  foreigners  within  her  gates  shall  ere  long  be  driven 
forth  with  shame.  (C.  H.  Spurgeon.)  The  hypocrite: — The  man  that  stole 
the  livery  of  heaven  to  serve  the  devil  in.  (Robert  Pollok.)  Hypocrisy  detected: — 
A  large  price  was  demanded  for  a  picture  as  being  the  work  of  an  old  master. 
It  was  on  a  panel,  and  some  one  looking  behind  it  saw  that  the  panel  was  mahogany. 
The  picture  was  at  once  seen  to  be  a  fraud,  for  mahogany  was  not  known  in 
Europe  until  long  after  the  death  of  the  artist  who  was  said  to  have  painted  it. 
A  man  by  craft  and  hypocrisy  may  make  himself  look  beautiful  to  his  fellow- 
men,  and  be  honoured  for  saintliness  of  character,  but  God  looks  behind  the 
goodly  show  and  detects  the  imposture  at  a  glance.  Only  what  is  real  will  bear 
His  inspection.  (Gates  of  Imagery.)  Who  among  us  shall  dwell  with  the 
devouring  fire  ? — How  to  dwell  in  the  fire  of  God  (with  1  John  iv.  16:  "  He  that 
dwelleth  in  love  dwelleth  in  God"): — These  two  passages,  striking  as  is  the 
contrast,  refer  to  the  same  subject,  and  substantially  preach  the  same  truth. 
A  hasty  reader,  who  is  more  influenced  by  sound  than  by  sense,  is  apt  to  suppose 
that  the  solemn  expressions  in  my  first  text — "  the  devouring  fire  "  and  the  '  ever- 
lasting burnings  " — mean  hell.  They  mean  God,  as  is  quite  obvious  from  the 
context.  The  man  who  is  to  "  dwell  in  the  devouring  fire  "  is  the  good  man; 
he  that  is  able  to  abide  the  "  everlasting  burnings  "  is  "  the  man  that  walks  right- 
eously and  speaks  uprightly,"  that  "  despises  the  gain  of  oppression,  that  shaketh 
his  hands  from  holding  of  bribes,  that  stoppeth  his  cars  from  hearing  of  blood, 
and  shutteth  his  eyes  from  seeing  evil."  So  that,  plainly,  here  the  fire  is  the 
destructive  side  of  that  Divine  nature  which,  in  its  flashing  brightness  of  holiness, 
cannot  but  burn  up  and  consume  evil.     And  the  question  of  my  text  is  in  effect 


CHAP.   TTTTTT.]  ISAIAH.  43 

equivalent  to  this  question:  "  Who  among  us  can  abide  peacefully,  joyfully, 
fed  and  brightened,  not  consumed  and  annihilated,  by  that  flashing  brightness 
and  purity?  "  The  prophet's  answer  is  the  answer  of  common  sense.  Like 
draws  to  like.  If  the  fire  of  God  be  the  holiness  of  God  in  its  lustrous  brilliance, 
then  a  holy  God  must  have  holy  companions.  But  that  is  not  aU.  The  fire 
of  God  is  the  fire  of  love  as  well  as  the  fire  of  purity;  a  fire  that  blesses  and 
quickens,  as  well  as  a  fire  that  destroys  and  consumes.  So  the  Apostle  John 
comes  with  his  answer,  not  contradicting  the  other  one,  but  deepening  it,  expanding 
it,  letting  us  see  the  foundations  of  it,  and  proclaiming  that  as  a  holy  God  must 
be  surrounded  by  holy  hearts,  which  will  open  themselves  to  the  flame  as  flowers 
to  the  sunshine,  so  a  loving  God  must  be  clustered  about  by  loving  hearts,  who 
alone  can  enter  into  deep  and  true  fellowship  with  Him.  The  two  answers, 
then,  are  one  at  bottom ;  and  when  Isaiah  asks,  "  Who  shall  dwell  with  the  ever- 
lasting fire?  " — the  perpetual  fire,  burning  and  unconsumed,  of  that  Divine 
righteousness — the  deepest  answer,  which  is  no  stern  requirement  but  a  merciful 
promise,  is  John's  answer,  "  He  that  dwelleth  in  love  dwelleth  in  God."  {A. 
Madaren,  D.D.)  The  fire  of  God: — I.  The  wobld's  qttestiok.  Frequently 
in  the  Old  Testament  the  emblem  of  fire  is  employed  to  express  the  Divine  natiu:e. 
In  many  places,  though  by  no  means  in  all,  the  prominent  idea  in  the  emblem 
is  that  of  the  purity  of  the  Divine  nature,  which  flashes  and  flames  as  against 
all  which  is  evil  and  sinful.  So  we  read  in  one  grand  passage  in  this  very  oook, 
"  the  Light  of  Israel  shall  become  a  fire."  And  we  read,  too,  in  the  description 
of  the  symbolical  manifestation  of  the  Divine  nature  which  accompanied  the 
giving  of  the  law  on  Sinai,  that  "  the  glory  of  the  Lord  was  like  devouring  fire 
on  the  top  of  the  mountain,"  and  yet  into  that  blaze  and  brightness  the  Law- 
giver went  and  moved  in  it.  There  is  in  the  Divine  nature  a  side  of  antagonism 
and  opposition  to  evil,  which  fights  against  it,  and  flames  against  it,  and  labours 
to  consume  it.  But  then,  on  the  other  side,  the  fire  is  also  the  fire  of  perfect 
love  that  quickens  and  blesses.  And  these  two  are  one.  God's  wrath  is  a  form 
of  God's  love;  God  hates  because  He  loves.  Well,  that  being  so,  the  question 
rises  to  every  mind  of  ordinary  thoughtfulness:  "  Who  among  us  shall  dwell 
with  the  devouring  fire?  who  among  us  shall  dwell  with  everlasting  burnings?  " 
A  God  fighting  against  evil;  can  you  and  I  hope  to  hold  familiar  fellowship  with 
Him?  To  "dwell  with  everlasting  burnings"  means  two  things — first,  to  hold 
familiar  intercourse  and  communion  with  God.  What  sort  of  a  man  will  do 
that?  Can  you?  Is  it  likely  that  you  should?  The  second  of  the  things  that 
it  means  is  to  face  and  bear  the  action  of  the  fire,  the  judicial  action,  the  judgment 
of  the  present  and  of  the  future.  II.  The  prophet's  answer.  He  says  if  a 
man  is  to  hold  fellowship  with,  or  to  face  the  judgment  of  the  pure  and  righteous 
God,  the  plainest  dictate  of  reason  and  common  sense  is  that  he  himself  must 
be  pure  and  righteous  to  match.  And  the  details  into  which  his  answer  to  the 
question  runs  out  are  all  very  homely,  prosaic,  pedestrian  kind  of  virtues,  nothing 
at  all  out  of  the  way,  nothing  that  people  would  call  splendid  or  heroic.  If  you 
will  turn  to  the  Psalms  xv.  and  xxiv.  you  will  find  there  two  other  variations 
of  the  same  questions,  and  the  same  answer,  both  of  which  were  obviously  in 
our  prophet's  mind  when  he  spoke.  The  requirements  of  the  most  moderate 
conscience  are  such  as  none  of  us  is  able  to  comply  with.  And  what  then  ?  Am 
I  to  be  shut  up  to  despair  ?  am  I  to  say,  then,  nobody  can  dwell  with  that  bright 
flame?  III.  The  apostle's  answer.  "  God  is  love,  and  he  that  dwelleth  in 
love  dwelleth  in  God."  Now,  to  begin  with,  let  us  distinctly  understand  that 
the  New  Testament  answer,  represented  by  John's  great  words,  entirely  endorses 
Isaiah's;  and  the  difference  between  the  two  is  not  that  the  Old  Testament, 
as  represented  by  Psalmist  and  Prophet,  said:  *'  You  must  be  righteous  in  order 
to  dwell  with  God,"  and  that  the  New  Testament  says:  "  You  need  not  be!  " 
Not  at  aU !  John  is  just  as  vehement  in  saying  that  nothing  but  purity  can  bind 
a  man  in  thoroughly  friendly  and  familiar  conjunction  with  God  as  David  or 
Isaiah  was.  What,  then,  is  the  difference  between  them?  It  is  this,  for  one 
thing.  Isaiah  tells  us  we  must  be  righteous;  John  tells  us  how  we  may  be.  And 
now  you  have  got  to  the  very  bottom  of  the  matter.  That  is  the  first  step  of 
the  ladder — faith:  the  second  step  is  love,  and  the  third  is  righteousness.  {Ibid.) 
God's  anger: — If  you  will  only  remove  from  that  word  "  anger  "  the  mere  human 
associations  which  cleave  to  it,  of  passion  on  the  one  hand,  and  of  a  wish  to  hurt 
its  object  on  the  other,  then  you  cannot,  I  think,  deny  to  the  Divine  nature  the 
possession  of  that  passionless  and  unmahgnant  wrath  without  striking  a  fatal 


44  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  xxxin. 

blow  at  the  perfect  purity  of  God.  A  God  that  does  not  hate  evil,  that  does 
not  flame  out  against  it,  using  all  the  energies  of  His  being  to  destroy  it,  is  a  God 
to  whose  character  there  cleaves  the  fatal  suspicion  of  indifference  to  good,  of 
moral  apathy.  If  I  have  not  a  God  to  trust  in  that  hates  evil  because  He  loveth 
righteousness,  then  "  the  pillared  firmament  itself  were  rottenness,  and  earth's 
base  built  on  stubble  "  ;  nor  were  there  any  hope  that  this  damnable  thing 
that  is  killing  and  sucking  the  life-blood  out  of  our  spirits  should  ever  be  destroyed 
and  cast  aside.  It  is  short-sighted  wisdom,  and  it  is  cruel  kindness,  to  tamper 
with  the  thought  of  the  wrath  of  God,  the  "  everlasting  burnings  "  of  that  eternally 
pure  nature  wherewith  it  wages  war  against  all  sin!  (Ibid.)  God's  justice 
in  human  life: — To  Isaiah,  life  was  so  penetrated  by  the  active  justice  of  God, 
that  he  described  it  as  bathed  in  fire,  as  blown  through  with  fire.  (Prof.  Q.  A. 
Smith,  D.D.) 

Vers.  15,  16.  He  that  walketh  righteously. — The  citizens  of  God's  king- 
dom:— I.  The  chaeactee  of  the  true  citizens  of  God's  kingdom  is  expressed 
in  general  terms.  "  Walketh  righteously";  "  speaketh  uprightly."  II.  The 
DETAILS  are  given  in  which  the  character  is  revealed.  "  Despiseth  the  gain," 
&c.  (Prof.  J.  Skinner,  D.D.)  The  good  man: — I.  The  good  man's  chae- 
actee, which  he  preserves  even  in  times  of  common  iniquity.  II.  The  good 
man's  comfoet,  which  he  may  preserve  even  in  times  of  common  calamity  (ver. 
16).  (M.  Henry.)  The  rocky  fortress  and  its  inhabitant: — We  are  going  to 
look  at  the  favoured  people.  I.  Let  us  note  theie  chaeactee.  They  are 
described  in  part  in  the  words  of  our  text,  but  I  am  obUged  to  go  a  Httle  farther 
afield  for  one  essential  part  of  their  character.  1.  The  true  people  of  God  who 
in  the  time  of  danger  wiU  be  preserved  are  a  people  who  display  a  humble,  patient, 
present  faith  in  God.     They  reveal  their  character  in  verse  2,  when  they  pray, 

0  Lord,  be  gracious  unto  us  ;  we  have  waited  for  Thee,"  &c.  They  are  a 
praying  people,  who  make  their  appeal  to  God  under  a  sense  of  need  :  they  are 
not  fatalists,  neither  are  they  self-sufficient.  They  beseech  the  Lord  to  bless 
them  not  according  to  their  own  merit,  but  according  to  His  grace.  They  are 
not  a  people  who  think  that  God  will  be  gracious  necessarily,  for  they  are  found 
crying  to  Him  in  earnest  prayer.  They  are  a  trustful  people.  Furthermore, 
they  are  a  waiting  people:  "  We  have  waited  for  Thee."  If  the  Lord  does  not 
seem  to  hear  their  prayer  at  once,  they  nevertheless  expect  that  He  will  do  so. 
They  are  a  people  who  have  a  present  faith,  which  they  exercise  every  day, 
saying,  "  Be  Thou  their  arm  every  morning!  "  Every  step  they  are  depending, 
every  morning  they  are  looking  up  to  the  hills  whence  coiueth  their  help.  The 
description  in  our  actual  text  is  the  portrait  of  their  outer  Ufa ;  but  a  hving  faith 
is  the  secret  basis  and  foundation  oi  it  all.  2.  This  being  understood,  oiu:  text 
gives  a  description  of  these  people,  setting  out  their  varioua  features.  (1)  It 
first  describes  their  feet,  or  how  they  walk :  "  He  that  walketh  righteously." 
When  a  man  beUeves,  his  faith  affects  every  part  of  him;  it  operates  upon  his 
actions,  thoughts,  wishes,  and  designs;  and  it  affects  both  his  private  and  pubUc 
hfe.  One  of  the  first  evidences  of  a  true  behef  in  God  is  that  a  man  walks  right- 
eously. He  tries  to  act  rightly  towards  his  God  and  towards  his  fellow-men. 
The  rule  of  right  is  the  rule  for  him;  not  pohcy,  nor  the  hope  of  gain,  nor  the 
desire  to  please,  much  less  the  lust  of  the  flesh  and  the  pride  of  hfe.  (2)  The 
next  feature  that  is  described  is  his  tongue — "  he  speaketh  uprightly."  A  man 
whose  words  are  arrogant  and  boastful,  cruel  and  slanderous,  unrehable  and  decep- 
tive, unchaste  and  impure,  is  no  child  of  God.  The  grace  of  God  very  speedily 
sweetens  a  man's  tongue.  The  doctor  says,  "  Put  out  your  tongue,"  and  he 
judges  the  symptoms  of  health  or  disease  thereby;  assuredly  there  is  no  better 
test  of  the  inward  character  than  the  condition  of  the  tongue.  "  Out  of  thine 
own  mouth  will  I  judge  thee  "  is  a  fair  decision.  (3)  The  next  feature  is  the 
heart — "  he  that  despiseth  the  gain  of  oppressions."  Not  only  does  he  not  oppress 
any  man,  nor  wish  to  gain  anything  by  extortion  ;  but  he  thinks  such  gain  as 
might  be  made  in  that  fashion  to  be  utterly  contemptible — he  despises  it.  It 
httle  matters  what  our  outward  hfe  may  be,  or  even  what  our  speech  may  be, 
if  our  heart  is  not  affected  by  our  rehgion.  If  grace  only  Ues  skin  deep  in 
thee,  it  has  only  saved  thy  skin,  but  not  thy  soul.  Until  grace  touches  the  main- 
spring, it  has  done  nothing  to  purpose  :  the  heart  must  despise  evil,  as  well  as 
the  hps  denounce  it.  Until  the  well-head  is  sweetened,  the  streams  are  foul. 
Kot  only  must  I  do  right,  but  love  right;  not  only  must  I  avoid  wrong,  but  hate 


CHAP,  xxxm.]  ISAIAH.  45 

wrong.  (4)  The  portrait  does  not  omit  the  hands — those  prominent  actors 
both  for  good  and  evil.  In  Isaiah's  day  bribery  was  connected  with  every 
government  office  high  and  low;  but  the  good  man  "  shaketh  his  hands  from 
holding  of  bribes."  If  money  was  slipped  into  his  hand  before  he  was  aware 
of  it,  he  shook  it  o£E  with  indignation.  (5)  Now  comes  the  ear — "  that  stoppeth 
his  ears  from  hearing  of  blood."  Men  who  delighted  in  war  in  olden  time  were 
apt  to  regale  one  another  with  their  cruel  deeds — whom  they  slew,  and  how 
they  slew  them.  In  Hezekiah's  times,  I  warrant,  tales  were  told  blood-red  with 
horror  that  would  have  made  our  ears  to  tingle,  and  these  were  greedily  Ustened 
to  by  those  of  a  coarse  spirit;  but  the  good  man  in  Jerusalem  would  not  hear 
them.  Now  it  is  not  the  hearing  of  blood  alone  that  you  and  I  must  avoid,  but 
the  hearing  of  anything  that  is  tainted,  prurient,  sceptical,  depraving.  The 
Christian  wisely  shuts  the  gate,  lets  down  the  portcullis,  and  pulls  up  the  draw- 
bridge, so  that  no  filthy  communication  may  come  in  by  Ear-gate.  The  same 
sacred  prudence  prevents  our  reading  books  which  are  corrupt,  or  false.  The 
righteous  man  knows  that  an  iU  tale  cannot  injure  him  if  he  never  hears  it,  and 
therefore  he  denies  his  curiosity  that  he  may  preserve  his  memory  undefiled.  He 
is  deaf  to  news  about  which  a  good  man  would  be  dumb.  He  has  the  blood  upon 
his  ear,  to  signify  that  his  Lord  has  bought  him  with  a  price  in  that  member, 
as  well  as  in  every  other;  yea,  his  ear  is  bored  to  the  doorpost  of  truth,  that  he 
may  hear  it,  and  it  only,  with  full  intent  of  heart.  (6)  The  picture  is  complete 
when  the  eyes  are  mentioned — "  he  shutteth  his  eyes  from  seeing  evil."  He 
cannot  help  seeing  it  as  he  goes  along  his  pilgrimage  through  Hfe;  but  he  seeks 
not  such  a  sight,  and  as  much  as  he  can  he  avoids  it.  Shortly,  the  text  means 
just  this,  that  a  true  beUever  is  a  man  who  has  himself  well  in  hand,  having  mastery 
over  his  whole  manhood.  He  has  a  bit  in  the  mouth  of  all  the  steeds  which  draw 
the  chariot  of  life,  and  he  holds  them  under  due  control.  The  true  Christian 
is  a  man  who  keeps  himself  clear  of  the  common  sins  of  the  age,  the  popular 
vices  which  flourish  uncondemned.  The  sins  mentioned  in  the  text  were  those 
current  in  Jerusalem.  The  child  of  God  was  out  of  the  fashion.  II.  We  obseevid 
THELB  SECXIRITY.  1.  As  it  is  pictorially  described.  The  times  are  those  of 
war  :  the  battle  rages  in  the  plain,  but  "  he  shall  dwell  on  high  "  ;  aloft  upon 
the  craggy  rocks  shall  be  his  citadel.  In  times  of  invasion  men  resorted  to  the 
highest  mountains  and  rocks,  that  there  they  might  be  sheltered  among  the 
lofty  fastnesses.  While  others  flee,  this  man  shall  dwell  at  ease,  in  permanent 
peace;  and  that  dwelling  shall  be  on  the  heights,  far  beyond  the  reach  of  the 
invader.  Is  not  this  glorious?  The  bands  of  robbers  ravage  all  around,  but 
they  cannot  plunder  mm;  he  looks  down  upon  them,  and  defies  their  power. 
A  believer  dwells  on  the  heights,  his  Hfe  is  hid  with  Christ  in  God,  he  cannot  be 
reached  by  the  darts  of  the  adversary.  "  Yet,"  saith  one,  "  though  he  dwell  on 
high,  the  enemy  may  reach  him  by  scaling  ladders,  or  by  some  other  means  of 
assault."  By  no  means  shall  they  smite  Mm,  for  he  shall  have  a  "  place  of  de- 
fence." "  Yet,"  crieth  one,  "  these  walls  may  be  dashed  down,  or  may  fall 
into  decay."  Not  so,  for  "his  place  of  defence  shall  be  the  munitions  of  rocks." 
Immutable  strength  shaU  gird  him  around  both  by  day  and  by  night  for  ever 
and  ever.  "  Yet,"  saith  one,  "  the  enemy  may  starve  a  man  out  of  his  citadel: 
rock  cities  have  been  captured  at  last  because  the  inhabitants  have  been  pinched 
with  hunger."  But  this  also  is  provided  for — "  His  bread  shall  be  given  him." 
As  the  Lord's  chosen  cannot  be  driven  out,  so  they  shaU  not  be  starved  out.  "  Ah, 
well,"  saith  one,  "  but  even  if  bread  could  be  conveyed  into  the  fortress,  yet 
these  elevated  positions  cannot  be  readily  supplied  with  water,  and  by  thirst 
they  may  be  forced  to  yield."  The  promise  has  thought  of  that  also,  for  it  is 
written,  "  his  waters  shall  be  sure."  It  is  a  poetical  description,  but  it  is  true 
in  every  jot  and  tittle,  and  so  I  ask  you  to  accompany  me  while — 2,  We  consider 
this  thing  as  it  may  be  actually  experienced.  The  man  who  beheves  in  the  Lord 
Jesus  Christ,  and  lives  as  a  Christian  should  hve,  dwells  on  the  heights.  His 
mind  is  lifted  up  above  the  common  cares,  and  worries,  and  vexations  of  Ufe. 
You  have  also  found  that  you  have  had  a  place  of  defence  in  time  of  trouble. 
Though  often  assailed  you  have  never  been  really  injured.  The  poetic  utterance, 
"  Thy  bread  shall  be  given  thee,"  is  also  literally  true.  You  may  frequently 
reach  the  end  of  yo\ir  provision,  but  you  can  never  exhaust  your  Provider.  The 
meal  may  come  by  handfuls,  and  the  oil  may  only  drip  out  drop  by  drop,  but 
what  matters?  "  His  bread  shall  be  given  him,"  refers  also  to  heavenly  bread. 
As  for  the  waters,  the  living  waters  of  grace  and  of  the  Holy  Spirit,  these  shaU 


46  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xxxm. 

always  flow:  in  summer  and  winter  shall  the  still  waters  be  found  at  your  side; 
yea,  they  shall  be  within  you,  "  a  well  of  water  springing  up  unto  everlasting 
life."  III.  Seek  theib  felicity.  1.  Shall  I  need  to  say,  '  Do  not  try  to  obtain 
it  by  hypocrisy  "?  Since  they  are  so  happy  whom  God  favours,  do  not  think 
that  by  getting  your  name  into  their  church- book  you  will  necessarily  be  favoured 
too.  2.  Do  not  hope  to  win  the  bliss  of  the  righteous  by  self-righteousnesa. 
{C.  H.  Spurgeon.)  Shutteth  his  eyes  from  seeing  evil. — Shutting  the  eye» 
to  evil: — "And  shutteth  his  eyes  from  seeing  evil" — a  wonderful  expression 
in  the  original  :  so  shutting  his  eyes  as  not  even  to  wink,  that  is,  not  to  open 
the  Uds  for  one  transient  moment  that  he  may  see  where  evil  is,  or  know  what 
evil  is  hke,  or  what  evil  is  doing,  but  shuts  his  eyes  fast,  and  will  not  look  at  the 
devil's  image:  he  shall  be  calm  in  the  storm.  (J.  Parker,  D.D.)  Bad  litera- 
ture:— 1.  It  is  not  essential  that  a  man  should  know  aU  things;  some  knowledge 
is  hurtful.  2.  Thought  moulds  character:  As  a  man  thinketh,  so  is  he.  3.  The 
press  should  enlarge  upon  helpful  knowledge,  and  give  the  least  space  to  reports 
of  depravity.  4.  Hope,  faith,  visions  of  beauty  and  of  virtue,  are  powerfiil 
educators.     (Homiletic  Review.) 

Vers.  16,  17.  He  shall  dwell  on  high. — The  life  of  surrender  and  trust: — I.  A  lipb 
OF  EXALTATION.  "  Shall  dwell  on  high."  Those  who  are  kept  safe,  are  kept  rejoic- 
ing, and  that  constantly;  it  is  not  an  intermittent  experience.  "  He  shall  dwelL" 
The  same  thought  is  given  in  Psa.  xci.  1,  and  in  John  xv.  11.  It  is  always  constant 
because  it  does  not  depend  on  circumstances,  but  on  God.  The  surrendered 
man  has  learned  to  hve  in  God,  and  in  His  presence  is  fulness  of  joy.  II.  A 
LIFE  OF  SAFETY.  "  His  place  shall  be  the  munition  of  rocks."  Because  of  the 
safety  there  is  perfect  peace.  III.  A  life  op  contintjal  satisfaction.  "  Hia 
bread  shall  be  given  him."  There  is  no  leanness  in  the  surrendered  Hfe;  it  i» 
fed  with  the  very  Bread  of  Life.  One  of  the  greatest  blessings  of  this  Hfe  is  the 
deeper  communion,  the  greater  reality  of  spiritual  things,  as  the  soul  learns  to 
feed  on  Christ.  "  His  waters  shall  be  sure."  IV.  A  life  of  beauty  and  of 
refreshment.  Jeremiah  speaks  of  the  same  life  under  the  figure  of  a  tree  planted 
by  the  river,  whose  leaf  is  aways  green.  Continual  freshness  and  perennial 
beauty.  The  "  beauty  of  the  Lord  our  God  upon  us,"  and  the  "  fruit  of  the 
Spirit "  manifest.  V.  A  life  of  vision.  The  unmistakable  sign  of  the  fulness 
of  the  Holy  Ghost  is  the  power  to  look  into  the  glorified  face  of  Jesus  Christ  (John 
xvii.  24).  VI.  A  life  of  unlimited  outlook.  "  Shall  behold  the  land  of  far 
distances."  As  we  stand  and  look  down  the  vistas  of  eternity  we  learn  a  little 
of  what  this  Ufe  means.  {0.  H.  C.  Macgregor,  M.A.)  Dwelling  on  high: — 
In  the  ascent  of  a  mountain,  the  objects  which  we  leave  beneath  us  become 
insignificant  as  we  ascend,  until  the  things  we  at  first  passed  become  as  mere 
specks  in  the  distance,  and  we  get  into  pure,  clear  air,  and  see  the  extent  of  land 
around  us,  of  which  we  had  never  dreamed.  So  in  the  spiritual  life,  as  we  "  dwell 
on  high  "with  the  holy  God,  the  things  of  earth  are  of  less  importance  to  us, 
even  earthly  friendships  becoming  insignificant  as  we  "  behold  the  King  in  His 
beauty,"  and  all  around  us  is  the  "  far-stretching  land  "  of  His  full,  unUmited 
salvation.  (J.  6.  Govan.)  Rest  in  Qod: — A  man  in  some  high  hill-fortress 
looks  down  upon  the  open  where  the  enemy's  ranks  are  crawling  like  insects 
across  the  grass,  and  he  scarcely  hears  the  noise  of  the  tumult,  and  no  arrow 
can  reach  his  lofty  hold.  So  up  in  God  we  may  dwell  at  rest,  whate'er  betide. 
Strange  that  we  should  prefer  to  hve  down  amongst  the  unwalled  villages,  which 
every  spoiler  can  harry  and  burn,  when  we  might  climb,  and  by  the  might  and 
the  magic  of  trust  in  the  Lord,  bring  round  about  ourselves  a  wall  of  fire  which 
shall  consume  the  poison  out  of  the  evil,  even  whilst  it  permits  the  sorrow  to 
do  its  beneficent  work  upon  us.  {A,  Maclaren,  D.D.)  Safe  in  the  rock: — 
Two  birds  went  out  to  build  their  nests.  One  foimd  a  tree  by  the  river's  edge, 
and  made  her  nest  among  its  branches.  The  river  murmured  below,  and  the 
sunshine  played  among  the  leaves.  But  one  night  there  was  a  storm,  and  the 
tree  was  torn  out,  and  carried  away  in  the  floods — nest  and  nestUngs  and  all. 
The  other  bird  found  a  crag  in  a  mountain,  and  built  its  home  in  a  cleft  of  the 
rock.  The  storm  swept  over  it,  and  the  floods  rushed  through  the  valley,  but 
the  nest  with  its  nestlings  was  safe  in  the  rock.  ( Westminster  Teacher.)  Hidden 
in  the  rock: — In  the  Pitti  Palace  at  Florence  hangs  a  picture  which  represents 
a  stormy  sea,  with  wild  waves  and  black  clouds  and  fierce  lightnings  flashing 
across  the  sky.     Wrecks  float  on  the  angry  waters,  and  here  and  there  a  human 


CHAP,  xxxm.]  ISAIAH.  47 

face  is  seen.  Out  of  the  midst  of  the  waves  a  rock  rises,  against  which  the  waters 
dash  in  vain.  It  towers  high  above  the  crest  of  the  waves.  In  a  cleft  of  the 
rock  are  some  tufts  of  grass  and  green  herbage,  with  sweet  flowers  blooming, 
and  amid  these  a  dove  is  seen,  sitting  on  her  nest,  quiet  and  undisturbed  by  the 
wild  fury  of  the  storm,  or  the  mad  dashing  of  the  waves  below  her.  The  picture 
fitly  represents  the  peace  of  the  Christian  amid  the  storms  and  trials  of  the  world. 
He  is  hidden  in  the  cleft  of  the  Rock  of  Ages,  and  nestles  securely  in  the  bosom 
of  God's  unchanging  love.  (J.  R.  Miller,  D.D.)  The  Christian  should  he 
joyfvl: — I  have  been  so  long  away  from  England  that  I  do  not  know  where  our 
Queen  is  residing  just  now;  but  if  I  had  the  wings  of  a  dove,  and  could  mount 
into  the  upper  air,  I  would  soon  find  out.  I  should  look  for  the  Royal  Standard. 
I  should  see  it  floating  over  Windsor  or  Osborne,  and  by  this  token  I  should 
espy  the  royal  abode.  Fling  out  the  banner  to  the  breeze  when  the  King  is  within. 
Is  the  King  at  home  with  you,  dear  brother  ?  Do  not  forget  to  display  the  standard 
of  holy  joy.  Hoist  it,  and  keep  it  flying.  The  Prince  of  Peace  is  enthroned  in 
our  hearts !  The  Lord  is  exalted,  for  He  dwelleth  on  high  (ver.  6),  and  we  dwell 
on  high  with  Blm.     (C.  H.  Spurgeon.) 

Ver.  1 7.  Thine  eyes  shall  see  the  King  in  His  beauty. — The  King  in  His  beatify  : — 
Jerusalem  was  surrounded  by  the  army  of  Sennacherib.  The  relief  gained  when 
Hezekiah  paid  over  the  three  hundred  talents  of  silver  and  the  thirty  talents 
of  gold,  emptying  thereby  the  royal  treasury  and  stripping  the  gold  from  the 
doors  and  pillars  of  the  Temple,  had  not  lasted  long.  Rabshakeh,  the  chief 
envoy  of  Assyria,  had  been  sent  with  another  army  to  demand  the  unconditional 
surrender  of  the  city.  A  great  change,  however,  had  taken  place  in  the  spirit 
and  faith  of  the  people.  No  further  mention  was  made  of  an  alliance  with  Egypt. 
The  prophet  Isaiah,  instead  of  being  ridiculed  and  despised,  was  at  once  appealed 
to  by  the  king,  and  his  counsel  followed.  Hope  and  confidence  in  Jehovah  had 
been  restored,  and  this  second  attack  of  the  treacherous  Assjrrian,  instead  of 
plunging  the  nation  into  despair,  seemed  rather  to  rouse  them  to  defiance.  It 
was  God's  forgiveness  which  had  wrought  the  change.  The  departure  of  the 
Assyrian,  at  a  time  when  Jerusalem  was  absolutely  in  his  power,  was  a  manifest 
proof  of  God's  forgiving  mercy  and  a  striking  confirmation  of  Isaiah's  words. 
So,  though  the  enemy  returned,  the  prophet's  encouraging  and  reassuring  messages 
did  not  faU  upon  deaf  ears.  The  chapter  opens  with  a  plain  forecast  of  the  speedy 
destruction  that  should  overtake  the  treacherous  spoiler  of  God's  people.  Then 
follows  a  graphic  picture  of  the  disappointment  of  the  ambassadors  of  peace, 
and  the  deserted  and  downtrodden  state  of  the  country  districts  that  had  resulted 
from  Sennacherib's  breach  of  the  covenant  of  peace.  But  from  verse  10  to  the 
end  the  sufficiency  of  the  championship  of  Jehovah  is  unfolded,  and  the  chapter 
closes  with  promises  of  victory  and  pardon,  "  the  lame  shall  take  the  prey,"  '  the 
people  shall  be  forgiven  their  iniquity."  Yes,  the  presence  and  leadership  of 
Jehovah  would  change  everything.  The  glorious  Lord  would  be  unto  them  a 
place  of  broad  rivers  and  streams.  But  as  we  read  these  Scriptures,  "  Thine 
eyes  shall  see  the  King  in  His  beauty  "  ;  "  thine  eyes  shall  see  Jerusalem  a  quiet 
habitation,"  we  feel  that  their  primary  application  by  no  means  exhausts  their 
full  meaning.  A  greater  than  Hezekiah  is  here.  The  King  in  His  beauty  is 
for  us  the  very  Prince  of  Peace  Himself.  Once  for  our  sakes  He  was  covered 
with  shame,  mocked  and  buffeted  and  handcuffed.  Now  by  faith  we  see  Him 
crowned  with  glory  and  honour,  and  one  day  our  eyes  shall  see  Him  as  He  is  in 
His  beauty.  As  yet  the  new  Jerusalem  is  hemmed  in  by  foes.  Enemies  far 
more  treacherous  and  destructive  than  the  Assyrians  are  seeking  to  enslave  and 
despoil  the  people  of  God.  But  our  eyes  shall  see  Jerusalem  a  quiet  habitation, 
a  tabernacle  so  peaceful  and  steadfast  that  not  one  of  the  stakes  thereof  shall  be 
removed  nor  any  of  its  cords  broken.  Yes,  the  story  of  the  siege  of  Jerusalem 
is  only  a  parable  of  the  life  of  God  in  the  soul  of  man.  "  God's  forgiveness  is 
much  more  than  a  clean  slate."  It  brings  His  people  into  the  joy  and  strength 
of  a  living  union  with  Himself.  It  gave  new  national  life  to  Judah.  It  gives 
new  spiritual  life  to  the  pardoned  sinner.  Once  the  Divine  forgiveness  is  realised 
the  whole  man  is  born  again.  But  this  does  not  make  us  free  from  temptation. 
The  Assyrians  will  surely  return  and  menace  the  city.  But  the  Lord  is  our  sure 
defence.  I.  The  beauty  of  the  King  passes  all  man's  tmderstanding.  There 
is  the  beauty  of  His  personal  character.  It  is  unfolded  to  us  in  the  Gospel  story. 
There  we  see  His  goodness  and  truth.     His  purity  is  so  strong  and  incandescent 


48  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  tttttt. 

with  the  fire  of  love  that  it  cannot  be  marred  by  the  defilements  of  earth.  Hia 
sympathy  and  compassion  are  so  tender  and  real  that  the  most  needy  and  outcast 
are  attracted  to  Him.  Christ  has  no  beauty  in  the  eyes  of  the  carnal  and  worldly. 
He  pours  contempt  on  the  wisdom  of  the  flesh,  the  wisdom  of  this  world.  Have 
ye  eyes  to  see  the  beauty  in  Jesus?  There  is  the  beauty,  too,  of  His  perfect  sacri- 
fice. This  was  set  forth  in  the  Old  Testament  Scriptures  in  the  passover  lamb, 
in  the  brazen  serpent,  and  in  all  the  sacrifices  connected  with  the  old  covenant. 
The  Lamb  without  spot  or  blemish  was  slain  that  His  atoning  blood  might  covot 
our  sins.  The  beauty  and  perfection  of  the  personal  character  secures  the  beauty 
and  perfection  of  the  precious  sacrifice.  Is  that  blood-stained  Cross  the  most 
beautiful  sight  in  the  world  to  you  ?  Have  you  seen  the  love  of  Grod  triumphing 
there  over  the  sin  of  man,  and  the  Son  of  God  reconciling  God  and  man  by  the 
sacrifice  of  BUmself,  and  laying  a  righteous  foundation  for  the  exercise  towards 
guilty  sinners  of  God's  sovereign  mercy  and  grace?  But,  again,  there  is  the 
beauty  of  His  perpetual  intercession  and  His  abiding  presence  in  oiu:  hearts. 
Christ  is  no  longer  on  the  Cross — He  is  on  the  Throne,  seated  at  the  right  hand 
of  God.  From  that  vantage  ground  of  infinite  power  and  resource  He  watchea 
all  that  transpires  here  below.  And  He  not  only  watches  from  a  distance,  He 
is  with  us  to  save  and  succour  and  defend.  Have  you  seen  the  King  in  His  beauty 
as  He  walks  with  us  along  life's  highway?  Or  are  your  eyes  still  holden?  2.  To 
see  the  Eling  in  His  beauty  is  the  essence  of  all  true  religion.  The  world  cannot 
understand  the  things  of  God.  It  cannot  receive  the  Comforter  because  it  seeth 
Him  not.  The  veil  of  sense  shuts  out  the  glories  of  the  unseen  world.  Have 
you  seen  the  Son  and  believed  on  Ham?  Or  is  there  still  some  veU  or  prejudice 
or  disobedience  upon  your  heart?  Is  personal  religion  still  a  mystery  to  you? 
Does  conversion  seem  to  you  a  strange  and  doubtful  experience?  Does  the 
earnestness  of  some  Christians  seem  altogether  extravagant  and  fanatical?  When 
you  have  truly  seen  the  King  you  will  find  it  impossible  to  exaggerate  His  beauty, 
and  you  will  find  it  equally  impossible  to  set  a  limit  to  your  obedience.  The 
King  must  have  all.  Loyalty  cannot  measure  out  its  service.  It  delights  in 
sacrifice.  As  the  veil  of  sense  is  penetrated  by  the  vision  of  faith  the  victory  of 
life  begins.  This  is  the  object  of  all  the  means  of  grace.  They  are  to  help  us 
to  see  the  King.  All  life  becomes  worth  living  when  the  humblest  duty 
performed  aright  may  be  rewarded  with  a  sight  of  Him  whom  you  love.  This 
gives  new  zest  to  worship.  For  this  we  pray  and  study  our  Bibles,  for  this  we 
come  to  church  and  join  in  the  Lord's  Supper,  that  we  may  see  the  King.  This 
helps  us  to  live  a  detached  and  separate  life.  {F.  S.  Webster,  M.A.)  The 
heavenly  King  and  the  •privileges  of  His  subjects  : — L  The  character  of  THa 
King.  L  The  situation  of  a  king  is  most  respectable;  he  is  the  head  of  his  people. 
God  is  Head  of  all  things;  King  of  kings,  and  Lord  of  lords.  2.  Kings  ought  to 
be  wise  men,  to  rule  in  wisdom.  God  is  all -wise,  omniscient.  3.  Kings  ought 
to  possess  power,  to  be  ready  to  oppose  any  foe  of  their  people.  God  is  Almighty. 
4.  Eangs  should  be  good  men,  kind  and  benevolent.  God  is  good  and  kind;  He 
feeds,  clothes,  &c..  He  is  the  Fountain  of  goodness.  6.  Kings  should  be  just  men, 
to  enforce  the  laws  and  punish  offenders.  God  is  just,  and  will  not  suffer  His 
laws  to  be  infringed,  but  will  punish  the  guilty.  11.  The  extent  of  His  DOsmaoN. 
1.  Heaven  is  His  throne;  here  He  manifests  His  glorious  presence;  angels,  &c., 
are  His  servants.  2.  Earth  is  His  foot-stool;  things  animate  and  inanimate  are 
subject  to  His  control.  3.  Hell  is  His  prison,  where  He  confines  His  foes,  and 
here  He  is  enthroned  in  vengeance.  4.  He  has  a  kingdom  among  men;  this  is 
His  universal  Church,  all  who  fear  God,  and  work  righteousness.  5.  He  ha^  a 
kingdom  in  men;  every  true  believer  is  a  little  kingdom  in  himself,  the  heart 
is  His  throne,  and  the  passions  and  affections  are  the  subjects.  6.  He  reigns 
that  He  may  conquer  all,  save  all.  HI.  The  persons  this  declaration  may 
BE  APPLIED  TO.  "  They."  1.  Those  who  have  an  experimental  knowledge 
of  the  King's  favour.  2.  Such  as  feel  a  profound  reverence  towards  Him.  3.  Who 
love  Him,  from  a  sense  of  His  love  to  them.  4.  And  obey  Him  from  this  principle 
of  love.  IV.  What  is  iuplisd  by  the  declaration,  "  They  shall  see  the  King." 
L  Not  with  their  bodily  eye.  God  is  a  Spirit.  2.  If  we  could  see  Him  as  a  Spirit 
with  our  bodily  eye,  yet  we  could  not  as  God.  He  is  immensity.  3.  They  shall 
see  Him  by  the  eye  of  faith — in  creation,  providence  and  grace.  {John  Overton.) 
The  blessedness  oj  heaven  : — These  words  may  more  immediately  refer  to  the 
restoration  of  Hezekiah  to  his  former  splendour  and  dignity,  by  the  destruction 
of  Sennacherib's  army,  which  would  establish  peace  in  the  land  of  Judea,  and 


CHAP,  xxxm.]  ISAIAH.  49 

enable  the  exiles  to  return  home,  without  fear  or  danger.  But  the  Holy  Spirit 
in  this  passage  seems  also  to  refer  to  the  initial  happiness  of  all  true  believers  in 
this  world,  and  their  complete  felicity  in  the  world  to  come.  I.  The  soubcbs  op 
HAPPrNBSS  PBOVIDED  FOB  TEXTB  BKUEVEKS.  These  in  general  are  two — 1.  The 
King  in  His  beauty.  All  that  is  to  be  seen  of  God  with  joy  and  satisfaction,  is 
visible  only  in  the  Mediator.  2.  The  land  that  is  very  far  off.  In  the  present 
life  our  chief  happiness  arises  from  hope;  hereafter  it  will  consist  in  vision,  and 
in  full  fruition.  The  heavenly  glory  is  here  compared  to  the  land  of  promise, 
which  abounded  in  population,  and  yet  was  so  fruitful  as  to  be  well  able  to  support 
all  its  inhabitants.  ( 1 )  It  is  a  land  that  is  very  far  off  from  the  earth,  and  farther 
still  from  hell.  (2)  The  views  which  good  people  have  of  the  Land  of  Promise 
are  at  present  very  distant  and  imperfect.     IL.  The  maitneb  in  which  the  saints 

SHALL   KNJOT   THE   BLISS   THAT   IS   PBEPABED   FOB   THEM.      "  They   shall   See   and 

behold  it."  1.  This  may  either  refer  to  the  partial  view  which  Christians  have 
of  future  glory  upon  earth,  or  to  the  beatific  vision  of  heaven.  We  see  some- 
thing of  God  in  the  works  of  creation  and  providence,  and  especially  in  the  great 
work  of  human  redemption.  We  have  also  seen  the  power  and  glory  of  God 
in  the  sanctuary,  in  the  Word  and  ordinances,  and  have  sometimes  been  filled 
with  joy  unspeakable  and  full  of  glory.  But  these  views,  however  refreshing, 
are  not  only  transient,  but  very  narrow  and  contracted,  in  comparison  of  what 
they  will  be  hereafter.  Then  the  powers  of  perception  will  be  raised  to  the  highest 
pitch,  otir  contracted  minds  will  be  enlarged  and  rendered  more  retentive,  and 
we  shall  be  able  to  "  gaze  in  thought  on  what  all  thought  transcends."  2.  The 
eight  which  believers  have  of  spiritual  objects  is  essentially  different  from  that 
of  the  unregenerate,  either  in  this  world  or  that  which  is  to  come.  3.  There  is 
an  intuitive  certainty  in  the  knowledge  which  Christians  have  of  invisible  realities, 
and  which  is  peculiar  to  themselves  only.  4.  A  sight  of  the  King  in  His  beauty 
will  be  attended  with  a  clearness  and  a  comprehension  far  surpassing  all  that 
we  have  experienced  in  the  present  life.  6.  The  celestial  vision  will  be  ardent 
and  intense.  6.  Views  of  heaven  will  take  place  immediately  after  death,  and 
more  fully  after  the  resurrection.  7.  There  will  also  be  a  possessive  intuition, 
or  such  a  sight  as  includes  converse  and  enjoyment.  8.  The  vision  will  be  perpetual 
and  without  end.  There  is  an  entrance  into  heaven,  but  no  exit  out  of  it.  {B. 
Beddome,  M.A.)  Christ's  life  a  poem  : — There  are  human  lives  which  are 
poems,  as  there  are  lives  which  are  prose.  They  give  pleasure,  as  poetry  gives 
it,  by  the  expression  of  the  beautiful.  Such  a  life,  at  its  very  highest  range,  was 
the  life  of  Christ.  We  seek  its  poetry  to-day,  and  we  weave  our  thoughts  of  it 
lound  that  profound  phrase  of  Milton's,  that  poetry  must  be  simple,  sensuous, 
and  passionate.  I.  That  which  is  simplicity  in  art  is  purity  in  a  perfect  character. 
The  beauty  of  Christ's  purity  was  in  this — 1.  That  those  who  saw  it  saw  in  it 
the  glory  of  moral  victory.  2.  Prom  this  purity,  so  tried  and  so  victorious,  arose 
two  other  elements  of  moral  beauty — perfect  justice  and  perfect  mercy.  II.  The 
word  "  SEXSTJOXJSNESS,"  in  Alilton's  sense  of  it,  was  entirely  noble  in  meaning. 
As  the  poet  produces  beautiful  work  out  of  the  multitudinous  world  of  images 
and  things  which  he  has  received,  so  the  exquisiteness  of  the  parables  and  of 
the  words  of  Christ,  both  in  form  and  expression,  was  the  direct  result  of  the 
knowledge  He  had  gained  from  the  quality  of  sensibility.  HI.  The  third  element 
of  great  poetry  is  passion.  We  may  transfer  it  directly  to  a  character  as  an 
element  of  beauty.  It  is  best  defined  as  the  power  of  intense  feeling  capable 
of  perfect  expression.  It  was  intense  feeling  of  the  weakness  and  sin  of  man, 
and  intense  joy  in  His  Father's  power  to  redeem,  which  produced  the  story  of 
the  "  Prodigal  Son,"  where  every  word  is  on  fire  with  tender  passion.  See  how 
it  comes  home,  even  now,  to  men;  see  how  its  profound  humanity  has  made  it 
universal!  "  Come  unto  Me,  all  ye  that  are  weary  and  heavy-laden,  and  I  will 
give  you  rest."  How  that  goes  home  to  the  deepest  want  of  the  race;  how  deep 
the  passion  which  generalised  that  want  into  a  single  sentence;  how  intense, 
yet  how  pathetic,  the  expression  of  it;  how  noble  the  temperance  whiyk  stayed 
at  the  single  sentence  and  felt  that  it  was  enough!  (Stopford  A.  Brooke,  D.D.) 
The  beatUiftU  God  : — The  blessed  God  who  infinitely  possesses  every  amiable 
excellency,  and  from  whom  proceeds  all  that  is  lovely  in  the  universe,  must  Himself 
be  adorned  with  the  most  exquisite  beauty.  In  Him  is  concentred  the  sweetest 
assemblage  of  every  Divine  perfection.  In  Him,  they  all  shine  forth  with  the 
brightest  lustre,  without  any  superfluity  or  deficiency.  He  is  consummately 
righteous,  yet  full  of  compassion;  He  is  perfectly  holy,  yet  rich  in  mercy;  He 
VOL.  11. — 4 


50  TEE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xxxm. 

is  snpreme  in  majesty,  yet  infinitely  gracious;  wisdom,  power,  and  faithfulness, 
with  every  glorious  attribute  that  can  excite  admiration  and  love,  are  united 
in  the  supreme  Lord  of  heaven  and  earth.  In  the  various  important  characters 
He  sustains.  He  acts  with  the  most  endearing  condescension  and  approved  fidelity, 
assiduously  performing  every  office  and  duty  that  love  can  dictate.  {R. 
Maccvlloch.)  la  beauty  ascribed  to  Jehovah  f — "  Thine  eyes  shall  see  the  King 
in  His  beauty."  Cheyne  asserts  that  this  king  cannot  be  Jehovah,  for  beauty 
is  never  ascribed  to  Him.  This  is  a  shallow  argument.  Can  an  epithet  never 
be  given  to  God  once,  but  must  every  epithet  be  repeated  in  order  to  be  true? 
But  if  on©  sees  Jehovah  in  Jesus  there  will  be  no  trouble  in  finding  beauty  ascribed 
to  the  Messiah,  and  so  to  Jehovah  Jesus  is  Jehovah,  and  we  find  in  the  Messiah 
every  form  of  beauty  ascribed  to  Him  in  the  Canticles,  which  the  Church  has 
always  cherished  as  the  song  of  Christ's  love  and  loveliness  to  BUs  redeemed  people. 
Again  in  the  forty-fifth  Psalm  we  find  the  King  Messiah  described  as  "  fairer  than 
the  children  of  men  " ;  and  there  is  no  great  difference  between  assigning  beauty 
to  holiness  (Psa.  xxix.  2  and  xcvi.  9)  and  assigning  beauty  to  the  holy  God.  More- 
over, in  Zech.  ix.  17  we  find  Jehovah  thus  referred  to  by  the  prophet,  "  How 
great  is  His  goodness,  and  how  great  is  His  beauty."  Here  the  identical  word 
is  used  {yephi)  that  is  found  in  our  Isaiah  text.  In  this  last  passage  to  refer  the 
singular  pronoun  to  God's  people  when  they  are  spoken  of  with  plural  pronouns 
and  verbs  in  the  whole  context  is  hardly  a  fair  way  to  prove  the  proposition  that 
beauty  is  never  ascribed  to  Jehovah.  But  even  if  beauty  is  never  ascribed  to 
Jehovah  anywhere  else,  is  that  a  substantial  reason  why  it  cannot  be  here  so 
ascribed?  {H.  Crosby,  D.D.)  The  beautifvl  Christ : — I  cannot  but  regard  it 
as  a  great  misfortune  that  in  all  ages  the  art,  the  literature,  and  the  worship  of 
the  Churches  should  not  only  have  fallen  so  far  short  of  the  true  ideal  of  our  blessed 
Lord  and  Master,  but  shoidd  even  have  gone  so  far  astray  in  their  conceptions 
of  Him.  They  have  represented  Him  as  a  partial  Christ,  whereas  He  is  the  universal 
Christ;  as  an  ecclesiastical  Christ,  whereas  He  is  a  spiritual  Christ;  as  a  Christ 
of  gloom  and  anguish,  whereas  He  is  a  Christ  of  love,  and  joy,  and  peace  in  believing; 
as  a  dead  Christ,  whereas  He  is  the  risen,  the  living,  the  ascended  Saviour;  as 
a  distant  Christ,  a  Christ  who  has  gone  far  away  into  the  dim  realms  of  space, 
whereas  He  is  a  present  Christ,  with  us  now,  with  us  always,  with  us  individually, 
with  us  as  a  perpetual  comforter,  a  very  present  help  in  trouble,  with  us  even 
to  the  end  of  the  world;  as  a  Christ  of  wrath,  and  vengeance,  and  dreadfulness, 
whereas  He  is  loving,  tender,  and  of  infinite  compassion.  {F.  W.  Farrar,  D.D.) 
The  King  in  His  beauty  : — The  "  liing  "  is  probaoly  the  Messiah.  "  They  shall 
behold  a  far-stretching  land  " — Messiah's  kingdom  is  from  sea  to  sea.  (Prof. 
A.  B.  Davidson,  LL.D.)  The  Jews'  deliverance  from  the  Assyrian  invasion: — 
When  the  Assyrians  had  invaded  Judea  with  an  immense  army,  and  were  about 
to  attack  Jerusalem,  Rabshakeh  was  sent  with  a  railing  message  to  the  king  and 
his  people.  When  Hezekiah  heard  of  the  blasphemies  of  the  proud  Assyrian, 
he  rent  his  clothes  and  put  on  sackcloth,  and  went  into  the  house  of  the  Lord, 
and  sent  the  elders  of  the  priests  covered  with  sackcloth  to  consult  with  Isaiah 
the  prophet.  The  people  of  Jerusalem,  therefore,  had  seen  their  king  in  most 
momnful  array,  wearing  the  garments  of  sorrow,  and  the  weeds  of  mourning; 
they  were,  however,  cheered  by  the  promise  that  there  should  be  so  complete 
a  defeat  to  Sennacherib,  that  the  king  should  again  adorn  himself  with  the  robes 
of  state,  and  appear  with  a  smiling  countenance  in  all  the  beauty  of  joy.  More- 
over, through  the  invasion  of  Sennacherib,  the  people  had  not  been  able  to  travel ; 
they  had  been  cooped  up  within  the  walls  of  Jerusalem  like  prisoners.  No  journeys 
had  been  made,  either  in  the  direction  of  Dan  or  Beersheba,  even  the  nearest 
villages  could  not  be  reached;  but  the  promise  is  given,  that  so  completely  should 
the  country  be  rid  of  the  enemy,  that  wayfarers  should  be  able  to  see  the  whole 
of  their  territory,  even  that  part  of  the  land  which  was  very  far  off;  it  should 
be  safe  for  them  to  make  the  longest  voyages;  they  should  no  longer  be  afraid 
of  the  oppressor,  but  should  find  the  highways,  which  once  lay  waste,  to  be  again 
open  and  safe  for  traffic.  (C.  H.  Spurgeon.)  Christ  victorious  :  His  people 
free  : — We  have  seen  our  well-beloved  Monarch,  in  the  days  of  His  flesh,  humiliated 
and  sore  vexed;  for  He  was  "  despised  and  rejected  of  men,  a  man  of  sorrows, 
and  acquainted  with  grief."  He  whose  brightness  is  as  the  morning,  wore  the 
sackcloth  of  sorrow  as  His  daily  dress;  shame  was  His  mantle,  and  reproach 
was  His  vesture.  None  more  afflicted  and  sorrowful  than  He.  Yet  now,  inas- 
much as  He  has  triumphed  over  all  the  powers  of  darkness  upon  the  bloody  tree. 


OHAF.  xxxm.]  ISAIAH.  61 

our  faith  beholds  our  King  in  His  beauty,  returning  with  dyed  garments  from 
Edom,  robed  in  the  splendour  of  victory.  We  also.  His  joyful  subjects  who 
were  once  shut  up  and  could  not  come  forth,  are  now  possessed  of  boundless 
Gospel  liberty.  Now  that  we  see  Jesus  crowned  with  glory  and  honour,  we  freely 
possess  to  its  utmost  bounds  the  covenant  blessings  which  He  has  given  to  us; 
and  we  rejoice  that  if  the  land  of  happiness  should  sometimes  seem  to  be  very 
far  off,  it  is  nevertheless  our  own,  and  we  shall  stand  in  our  lot  in  the  end  of  the 
days.  {Ibid.)  The  King  in  His  beauty  : — I.  Wb  hail  the  Lord  Jestts  Chsist 
AS  oxm  KiNQ.  1.  His  right  to  royalty  lies  in  His  exalted  nature  as  the  Son  of 
God.  2.  Jesus  has  a  right  to  reign  because  He  is  the  Creator.  3.  The  Preserver 
of  all  men.  4.  He  governs  by  virtue  of  His  Headship  of  the  mediatorial  kingdom. 
6.  He  has  the  rights  of  Divine  designation,  for  God  has  made  Him  Eling.  6.  Certain 
princes  have  delighted  to  call  themselves  kings  by  the  popular  will,  and  certainly 
our  Lord  Jesus  Christ  is  such  in  His  Church.  Now  it  oehoves  us,  since  we  thus 
verbally  acknowledge  Him  to  be  King,  distinctly  to  understand  what  this  involves. 
(1)  We  look  upon  the  Lord  Jesus  as  being  to  us  the  fountain  of  all  spiritual  legisla- 
tion. He  is  a  King  in  His  own  right — no  limited  monarch — but  an  autocrat 
in  the  midst  of  His  Church,  and  in  the  Church  all  laws  proceed  from  Christ  and 
Christ  only.  (2)  He  alone  gives  authority  to  that  legislation.  (3)  He  is  the 
Captain  in  all  oiur  warfare.     11.  Wb  delight  to  know  that  cub  Eono  possesses 

StnPBBLATIVB   BBAXTTY.      HI.    ThBRE   ARE   SEASONS    WHEN    WB   SBB   THE   KiSa   IS 

His  bbaxjty.  L  We  saw  Him  in  that  day  when  He  pardoned  all  our  sins.  2.  Jesus 
Christ  was  in  His  beauty  seen  by  us  more  fuUy,  when,  after  being  pardoned,  we 
found  how  much  He  had  done  for  us.  3.  There  are  times  when,  in  our  contempla- 
tions, we  see  His  beauty.  4.  It  is  very  probable  that  we  shall  have  such  a  sight 
of  our  glorious  King  as  we  never  had  before,  when  we  come  to  die.     IV.  Thb 

EXCEEDING  GLORY  OP  THIS  SIGHT.      V.  ThIS  SIGHT  OP  ChRIST  EMINENTLY  AFFORDS 

LIBERTY  TO  THE  SOUL.  {Ibid.)  Seeing  the  King  in  His  beauty  : — These  words 
plainly  promise  to  every  follower  of  Christ,  if  he  shall  persevere  unto  the  end, 
that  in  the  resurrection  he  shall  see  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ  in  His  beauty,  and  in 
the  glory  of  His  kingdom.  What,  then,  is  this  beauty  which  shall  be  revealed 
to  all  who  attain  that  world  and  the  resurrection  of  the  .holy  dead  ?  I.  It  would 
seem  to  be  the  beauty  op  His  heavenly  court.  About  Him  and  before  Him 
are  the  companies  of  heaven,  the  hosts  and  hierarchies  of  the  blessed,  and  the 
saintly  multitude  of  God's  new  creation.  Armies  of  martyrs,  companies  of 
prophets,  the  majesty  of  patriarchs,  the  glory  of  apostles,  each  one  in  the  full 
transfigured  beauty  of  his  own  perfect  spirit,  and  all  revealing  the  warfare  of 
faith,  the  triumph  of  the  Church,  the  power  of  the  Cross,  the  election  of  God, — 
these  are  the  degrees  and  ascents  leading  upward  to  the  throne  of  bliss.  II.  But 
if  such  be  the  beauty  of  the  Bang's  court,  what  is  the  beauty  op  the  King  Him- 
self? We  shall  not  be  dangerously  out  of  the  way  if  we  believe  that  He  who 
is  the  brightness  of  His  Father's  glory  and  the  express  image  of  His  person,  did 
take  unto  Himself  oiu:  manhood  as  His  revealed  presence  for  ever,  in  its  most 
perfect  image  and  likeness;  that  in  Him  two  natures  were  united,  and  both  were 
perfect,  both  were  beautiful.  There  is  a  beauty  we  know  Him  to  possess  in  fulness 
— the  beauty  of  perfect  love.  In  His  face  will  be  revealed  all  the  love  of  Has  holy 
incarnation,  of  His  life  of  sorrow,  of  His  agony  and  passion,  of  His  cross  and 
death.  The  wounds  of  His  hands  and  feet  and  of  His  pierced  side  are  eternal 
seals  and  countersigns  of  the  love  which  has  redeemed  us  for  Himself.  1.  The 
King  whose  beauty  is  the  bliss  of  heaven  is  ever  drawing  and  preparing  us  for 
His  presence  by  all  the  mysteries  of  His  Church.  2.  By  a  special  and  particiilar 
discipline,  varied  and  measured  for  the  necessities  of  every  faithful  soul.  He  is 
making  us  ready  for  the  vision  of  His  presence.  {H.  E.  Manning,  D.D.)  The 
beautiful  King  and  the  far-o§  land  : — I.  The  supreme  object  op  vision.  "  The 
King  in  His  beauty."  11.  The  ultimate  possession.  "  The  land  that  is  very 
far  off."  {F.  Ferguson,  D.D.)  The  King  in  His  beauty : — It  is  astonishing 
how  much  comfort  can  be  packed  up  in  a  few  words.  If  one  were  asked  to  put 
into  a  single  sentence  the  entire  body  of  Scriptural  prophecy,  of  Old  and  New 
Testament  prophecy  combined,  he  could  not  easily  find  a  more  complete  con- 
densation of  the  whole  than  in  the  text.  There  are  two  points  of  view  from 
which  we  may  look  at  the  text.  I.  The  objective  aspect,  or  the  vision  as  it 
is  set  before  us;  the  moral  and  spiritual  ideal  yet  to  be  realised.  I.  The  text 
is  a  prediction  as  to  a  glorious  Person  and  a  far-off  land,  both  of  them  entirely 
beyond  the  calculations  of  men.     "  The  King  in  His  beauty  "  is  Jesus  Christ* 


62  TEE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xixm. 

The  words  are  striking.  It  is  not  exactly  the  King  in  His  majesty,  or  grandeur, 
or  glory,  or  power,  but  "  the  King  in  EUs  beauty."  We  speak  of  the  good  and 
the  beautiful  and  the  true.  And  there  is  a  singular  accordance  between  those 
three  super-excellent  realities.  We  think  of  them  in  connection  with  the  Persons 
in  the  Godhead.  While  it  is  true  that  all  glory  and  power  of  the  one  aspect  of 
the  Divine  Being  belongs  to  the  other,  still  we  are  permitted  to  make  a  distinction 
in  our  thoughts,  and  we  think  of  the  Father  as  that  One  in  whom  we  see  pre-emin- 
ently the  good;  and  the  Son  as  that  One  in  whom  we  see  specifically  the  beautiful; 
and  the  Spirit  as  that  One  in  whom  we  see  pre-eminentlj'  the  true.  2.  When 
we  turn  our  thoughts  to  the  beautiful  alone,  we  are  met  by  this  conception — 
that  the  beautiful  is  but  another  word  for  the  becoming.  A  beautiful  action 
is  an  action  which  it  becomes  one  to  do.  A  beautiful  character  is  one,  all  the 
elements  of  which  are  in  sweet  accordance;  when  part  is  adapted  to  part,  as 
the  colours  of  the  rainbow  blend  together;  when  one  line  of  the  form  gracefully 
runs  into  another;  when  one  sound  is  the  harmonious  concomitant  and  perfect 
sequel  of  another — there  you  have  beauty,  the  beauty  as  a  spirit  breathing  through 
the  whole  and  informing  all  its  parts — such  a  whole  that  one  part  may  become 
the  other,  and  pass  and  repass  into  the  other.  The  beauty  is  translucent,  elastic, 
perfect.  Now  apply  this  conception  to  Jesus  Christ,  and  you  will  see  with  what 
amazing  propriety  the  beautiful  in  Him  is  the  same  as  the  becoming.  Consider 
the  harmony  of  the  Divine  Being  as  the  eternal  source  of  all  the  beauty  we  can 
ever  know.  Consider  the  essential  beauty  of  our  human  nature  as  made  in  the 
image  and  after  the  likeness  of  God;  consider,  further,  the  absolutely  harmonious 
combination  and  indissoluble  union  of  those  two  natures  in  Christ  with  the  amazing 
self-sacrifice  of  the  Son  of  God  for  our  redemption,  and  the  adaptation  of  His 
work  to  all  the  wants  of  our  case,  and  you  have  such  a  conception  of  the  becoming — 
of  all  that  it  becomes  both  God  and  man  to  do — as  explains  to  us  the  emphasis 
and  the  propriety  with  which  Christ  is  spoken  of  as  "  the  King  in  His  beauty." 
No  one  can  be  beautiful  apart  from  Him.  3.  Society  is  at  present  a  hideous 
discord,  at  least  to  a  very  large  extent.  We  cannot  say  that  it  is  beautiful.  But 
it  is  not  more  certain  that  Jesus  Christ  is  King;  it  is  not  more  certain  that  He 
is  the  centre  of  heaven's  harmony,  than  it  is  certain  that  the  far-ofE  land  will  yet 
be  brought  nigh  and  made  visible  upon  the  earth;  and  that  God's  will  shall  be 
done  upon  the  earth,  even  as  it  is  done  in  heaven.  II.  The  subjective  aspect, 
or  what  is  implied  in  seeing  the  vision,  in  realising  the  ideal.  The  time  is  cojning 
when  every  human  being  shall  actually  look  upon  Jesus  Christ.  But  to  look 
is  not  always  to  see  all  that  can  be  seen.     To  see  the  King  in  His  beauty  implies 

•  a  deeper  seeing  than  that  of  merely  looking  upon  Him.  It  implies  a  being  made 
like  Him.  In  order  to  see  the  kingdom  of  God,  or  to  enter  into  it,  we  must  actually 
be  born  again.  We  must  ourselves  (in  other  words)  be  a  part  of  that  which  we 
truly  see.  We  shall  see  Him  at  last  because  we  shall  have  been  made  like  Him. 
It  is  the  pure  in  heart  who  see  God.  This  seeing  of  God  is  our  heaven  in  its  highest 
and  moat  complete  form ;  and  it  is  by  faith  in  Christ  that  we  are  brought  to  this 
perception.  As  faith  grows  and  develops,  as  it  passes  into  the  life,  it  turns  the 
abstract  ideal  into  the  concrete  renlity.  On  the  other  hand,  the  result  is  certain 
from  the  Divine  side.  It  is  secured  by  the  fact  that  the  King  in  His  beauty  is 
there.  The  heavenly  Bridegroom  is  waiting  for  the  perfection  of  His  Bride. 
And  as  He  waits  He  works.  He  rules  over  all  things  for  the  accomplishment 
of  the  Divine  purpose.  Make,  then,  the  goal  of  your  life  quite  clear,  and  lay 
down  all  your  lines  of  thought  and  action  directly  for  that  goal.  Let  us  thank 
God  that  such  is  the  Christianity  of  Jesus  Christ.  {Tbid.)  Reverence,  a  belief 
in  God's  presence  : — 1.  Though  Moses  was  not  permitted  to  enter  the  land  of 

,  promise,  he  was  vouchsafed  a  sight  of  it  from  a  distance.     We  too,  though  as 

*  yet  we  are  not  admitted  to  heavenly  glory,  yet  are  given  to  see  much,  in  prepara- 
tion for  seeing  more.  Christ  dwells  among  us  in  His  Church  really  though  invisibly, 
and  through  its  Ordinances  fulfils  towards  us,  in  a  true  and  sufficient  sense,  the 
promise  of  the  text.  We  are  even  now  permitted  to  "  see  the  King  in  His  beauty," 
to  "  behold  the  land  that  is  very  far  oflf."  The  words  of  the  Prophet  relate  to 
our  present  state  as  well  as  to  the  state  of  saints  hereafter.  Of  the  future  glory 
it  is  said  by  St.  John,  "  They  shall  see  His  face,  and  His  name  shall  be  in  their 
foreheads."  And  of  the  present,  Isaiah  himself  speaks  in  passages  which  may 
be  taken  in  explanation  of  the  text:  "  The  glory  of  the  Lord  shall  be  revealed, 
and  all  flesh  shall  see  it  together  ";  and  again,  "  They  shall  see  the  glory  of  the 
Lord  and  the  excellency  of  our  God."     2.  Such  a  view  is  strange  to  most  men; 


CHAP,  xxxin.]  ISAIAH.  63 

they  do  not  realise  the  presence  of  Christ,  nor  admit  the  duty  of  reah'sing  it.  Even 
those  who  are  not  without  habits  of  seriousness,  have  almost  or  quite  forgotten 
the  duty.  This  is  plain  at  once:  for,  unless  they  had,  they  would  not  be  so  very 
deficient  in  reverence  as  they  are.  There  are  two  classes  of  men  who  are  deficient 
in  awe  and  fear,  and,  lamentable  to  say,  taken  together,  they  go  far  to  make 
up  the  religious  portion  of  the  community.  It  is  not  wonderful  that  sinners 
should  live  without  the  fear  of  God;  but  what  shall  we  say  of  an  age  or  country 
in  which  even  the  more  serious  classes  maintain,  or  at  least  act  as  if  thoy  main- 
tained, that  "  the  spirit  of  God's  holy  fear  "  is  no  part  of  religion?  (1)  Those 
who  think  that  they  never  were  greatly  under  God's  displeasure.  (2)  Those  who 
think  that,  though  they  once  were,  they  are  not  at  all  now,  for  all  sin  has  been 
forgiven  them; — those  on  the  one  hand  who  consider  that  sin  is  no  great  evil 
in  itself,  those  on  the  other  who  consider  that  it  is  no  great  evil  in  them,  because 
their  persons  are  accepted  in  Christ  for  their  faith's  sake.  {J.  H.  Newman,  B.D.) 
The  land  that  is  very  far  off. — "  The  land  that  is  very  far  o§  "  ; — "  A  far-stretching 
land,"  i.e.,  a  land  no  longer  "  diminished  "  (to  use  Sennacherib's  own  expression) 
by  spoliation  or  hemmed  in  by  foes.  [Proj.  8.  R.  Driver,  D.D.)  The  distant 
land  : — As  it  is  in  the  margin,  "  the  land  of  far  distances."  A  land  cleared  of 
enemies  as  far  as  the  eye  can  reach  and  the  foot  carry.     I.  This  will  apply  to 

THE  KNOWLEDGE  OF  GOD,  WHICH  THE  REDEEMED  SOUL  SHALL  POSSESS  IN   HEAVEN. 

Here  we  know  but  little  of  the  great  Father  of  our  spirits.  But  in  heaven  w© 
shall  know  God  more  fully.  Know  Him  not  in  His  essence,  but  in  the  glorified  human 
nature  of  Christ;  in  His  relation  to  ourselves  and  the  universe.     11.  This  will 

APPLY  TO  THE  VIEWS  WHICH  HEAVEN  WILL  GIVE  US  OP  THE  REDEEMING  WORK  OF 

Christ.  At  present  there  are  many  questions  which  the  devout  soul  proposes 
in  relation  to  this  mighty  work,  but  no  response  is  given.  What  disclosures 
will  heaven  make  on  these  points !    HI.  This  will  apply  to  the  explanations 

WHICH    HEAVEN    WILL   APFORD    OF   THE    SECRETS    OF   NATURE.      Nature,    like   the 

fabled  traveller,  has  given  the  casket  to  the  highwayman,  but  kept  the  jewels. 
She  has  given  us  names,  but  kept  the  power.  IV.  This  will  apply  to  the  solu- 
tion  WHICH   HEAVEN   WILL  GIVE   OF  THE  MYSTERIES   OF   PROVIDENCE.      V.    ThIS 

will  apply  to  our  EXPERIENCE  OF  DiviNE  GOODNESS.  Here  the  vessel  is  narrowed 
by  its  conditions.  It  cannot  receive  much,  it  cannot  bear  much.  Here  we  sip 
of  the  river  of  God,  there  we  shall  drink  of  its  fulness.  1.  Learn  the  limitations 
of  this  life.  We  know  in  part.  It  doth  not  yet  appear  what  we  shall  be.  2.  The 
boundless  wisdom  and  goodness  of  God.  The  best  things  are  yet  in  store.  3.  See 
here  the  encoirragements  to  a  life  of  faith  {J.  Hoyle. )  Glances  at  the  future : — 
Do  you  ask  what  are  the  waving  outlines  of  this  "  land  of  far  distances  "  that 
begins  directly  a  man  begins  to  live  a  Christly  hfe,  and  that  stretches  away  after 
death  into  the  Infinite?  I  answer — I.  Unending  existence.  II.  Undeoayino 
activity.  Oiu"  work  here  is  bounded  by  many  things.  1.  There  is  the  finishing 
of  the  enterprise.  2.  There  is  the  failure  of  our  powers.  3.  There  is  the  ceasing 
of  inclination.  Sometimes  fuel  has  not  been  added  to  fire  of  flickering  motive; 
■ometimes  fellow-workers  have  been  cold,  unwelcome,  or  harshly  discouraging; 
sometimes  repeated  failure  and  mocking  disappointments  have  driven  a  man  back 
from  seeking  his  own  higher  education  or  the  world's  welfare,  and  "  desire  ceases," 
and  there  is  an  end  of  work.  But  in  contrast  with  all  this  that  is  of  the  earth 
earthy,  the  true  worker  for  himself  and  for  others,  yearns  after  and  will  inherit 
"  a  land  of  far  distances."  There  the  work  will  never  be  completed,  for  a  universe 
is  the  sphere  of  labour,  eternity  is  the  period,  and  the  infinite  the  problem.  Labour 
— the  putting  forth  of  power:  sacrificial  laboiu- — the  putting  forth  of  power 
in  the  spirit  of  the  Lamb,  who  is  the  central  life  of  the  heavenly  world;  this  is 
the  far-reaching  hope  of  every  Christly  soul.  And  this  without  the  decay  of 
powers,  for  then  will  be  fulfilled  the  promise  of  perpetual  morning  dew,  immortal 
youth,  a  world  without  pain,  and  never  needing  a  night.  Nor  will  want  of  inclina- 
tion bring  these  occupations  to  an  end,  for  there  is  realised  the  full  power  of  the 
quenchless  inspiration  of  love  to  the  Lamb  who  was  slain.  So,  for  our  highest, 
noblest  labours,  there  is  a  limitless  hope.  III.  Unfettered  thought.  For 
the  inquirer  this  human  life  is  not  "  a  land  of  far  distances."  Thinkers  often 
weep  in  their  sense  of  mental  poverty.  But  we  are  to  believe  in  the  lifting  of 
veil  after  veil  as  we  go  on  through  the  ages,  till  the  fair  face  of  Truth  shall  be  seen 
in  Divinest  beauty,  IV.  Unbounded  affections.  {U.R.Thomas,  B.  A.)  The 
King  in  His  beauty : — I.  Our  first  concern  is  with  the  historical  setting  of 
this  verse.     11.  The  spiritual  parallel.     To  see  the  King, — Jesus,  I  mean, — 


64  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xxxm. 

is  one  of  the  best  blessings  of  His  people.  There  is  a  further  promise,  "  Thine 
eyes  shall  behold  the  land  that  is  very  far  off,"  i.e.,  "  a  far-stretching  tract  of 
country."  We  must  abide  by  the  metaphor;  this  stands.pl  think,  for  the  great 
multitude  of  exceeding  great  and  precious  privileges  which  God  has  given  us 
in  Jesus  Christ.  III.  The  final  fttlfilment  of  this  peomise.  All  the  things 
God's  people  know  on  earth  are  but  feeble  foretastes  of  the  joys  of  heaven.  {Thos. 
Spurgeon.)  Heaven  anticipated  : — It  is  recorded  of  the  celebrated  John  Howe, 
that  in  his  latter  days  he  greatly  desired  to  attain  such  a  knowledge  of  Christ, 
and  feel  such  a  sense  of  Hia  love,  as  might  be  a  foretaste  of  the  joys  of  heaven. 
After  his  death,  a  paper  was  found  in  his  Bible  recording  how  God  had  answered 
his  prayer.  One  morning  (and  he  noted  the  day)  he  awoke,  with  his  eyes  swim- 
ming with  tears,  overwhelmed  with  a  sense  of  God's  goodness  in  shedding  down 
His  grace  into  the  hearts  of  men.  He  never  could  forget  the  joy  of  these  moments: 
they  made  him  long  still  more  ardently  for  that  heaven  which,  from  his  youth, 
he  had  panted  to  behold.  {Light  in  the  Dwelling.)  Samuel  Rutherford^ s  dying 
utterances  : — Some  days  before  he  died,  he  said:  "  I  shall  shine,  I  shall  see  Him 
as  He  is,  I  shall  see  Him  reign,  and  all  His  fair  company  with  Him;  and  I  shall 
have  my  large  share,  my  eyes  shall  see  my  Redeemer,  these  very  eyes  of  mine, 
and  no  other  for  me;  this  may  seem  a  wide  word,  but  it  is  no  fancy  or  delusion; 
it  is  true,  it  is  true;  let  my  Lord's  name  be  exalted,  and  if  He  will,  let  my  name 
be  grinded  to  pieces,  that  He  may  be  all  in  all.  If  He  should  slay  me  ten  thousand 
times  ten  thousand  times,  I'll  trust."  One  of  his  friends,  5lr.  Robert  Blair, 
who  stood  by  his  bed,  said  to  him:  "  What  think  ye  now  of  Christ?  "  To  this 
he  replied:  '  I  shall  live  and  adore  Him;  glory,  glory,  to  my  Creator,  and  to 
my  Redeemer  for  ever;  glory  shines  in  Immanuel's  land."  In  the  afternoon 
of  the  same  day  he  said:  "  Oh,  that  all  my  brethren  in  the  public  may  know 
what  a  Master  I  have  served,  and  what  peace  I  have  this  day;  I  shall  sleep  in 
Christ,  and  when  I  awake  I  shall  be  satisfied  with  His  likeness.  This  night  shall 
close  the  door,  and  put  my  anchor  within  the  veil,  and  I  shall  go  away  in  a  sleep 
by  five  of  the  clock  in  the  morning."  Words  which  received  their  exact  fulfil- 
ment. His  soxil  was  filled  with  rapture  as  he  lay  dying,  and  he  cried,  "  Oh,  for 
arms  to  embrace  Him!  Oh,  for  a  well-tuned  harp!  "  So  he  passed  away, 
declaring  as  he  went  that  in  the  love  and  presence  of  his  Lord  he  had  found  heaven 
before  he  entered  within  the  gates.  (King^s  Highway.)  "Not  all  over": 
— When  a  medical  man  visited  a  young  woman  who  was  on  her  death-bed,  he 
uttered  the  common  thought  of  the  world  when  he  said  to  her  weeping  mother 
as  he  grasped  her  hand,  '  It  will  soon  be  all  over  with  your  daughter."  She 
who  was  about  to  depart  heard  the  armouncement,  and,  raising  herself  on  her 
arm,  drew  aside  the  curtain,  and  looking  into  the  face  of  the  doctor  with  that 
peculiar  look  that  characterises  those  who  are  being  loosened  from  the  hither 
side  of  existence  said,  "  All  over,  sir !  all  over — no,  mother,  believe  him  not. 
When  I  die,  it  will  not  be  all  over  with  your  daughter,  it  will  only  be  all  begin- 
ning. For  this  present  span  of  existence  is  not  worthy  of  being  compared  with 
the  life  which  shall  thrill  my  whole  being  in  the  presence  of  Him  who  sits  on  the 
throne,  and  the  Lamb."  (W.  Adamson,  D.D.)  Death  a  means  of  vision: — 
One  Sunday  morning  a  friend — a  deacon  of  my  church — came  to  me  and  said, 
epeaking  of  his  father,  a  dear  old  minister  and  a  blind  man,  "  My  father  can 
Bee  this  morning."  "  I  congratulate  you!  "  I  exclaimed;  "  I  am  glad  and  sur- 
prised to  hear  it."  "  Ah,"  he  replied,  "  you  misimderstand  me.  My  father 
18  dead."  {R.  J.  Campbell,  M.A.)  The  beautiful  Ood : — "  How  beautiful 
it  is  to  be  with  God!  "  Aliss  Willard  whispered  as  she  died.  Miss  HavergaTs 
experience  : — A  most  interesting  chapter  in  the  biography  describes  her  visit 
to  Switzerland.  On  her  return  home  she  had  typhoid  fever,  and  was  laid  aside 
for  a  long  time.  This  is  how  she  talked  of  her  experience  during  her  illness: 
F.  "  Sometimes  I  could  not  quite  see  His  face;  yet  there  was  His  promise,  '  I 
will  never  leave  thee.'  I  knew  He  said  it,  and  that  He  was  there."  M.  "  Had 
you  any  fear  at  all  to  die?  "  F.  "  Oh  no,  not  a  shadow.  It  was  on  the  first 
day  of  this  illness  I  dictated  to  Constance,  '  Just  as  Thou  wilt,  0  Master,  call!  '  " 
M.  "  Then  was  it  delightful  to  think  you  were  going  home,  dear  Fan?  "  F.  "  No, 
it  was  not  the  idea  ofgoing  home,  but  that  He  was  coming  for  me,  and  that  I 
should  see  my  King.  I  never  thought  of  death  as  going  through  the  dark  valley 
or  down  to  the  river;  it  often  seemed  to  me  a  going  up  to  the  golden  gates  and 
lying  there  in  the  brightness,  just  waiting  for  the  gate  to  open  for  me."  She 
was  brought  back,  in  answer  to  many  prayers,  from  the  gates  of  the  grave. 


CHAP,  zxzni.]  ISAIAH.  66 

{King^s  Highway.)  The  Delectable  Mountains  : — Then  they  went  on  till  they 
came  to  the  Delectable  Mountains,  which  belong  to  the  Lord  of  the  country 
towards  which  they  were  journeying.  So  they  went  up  the  mountains  to  behold 
the  gardens  and  orchards,  the  vineyards  and  fountains  of  water.  Now  there 
were  on  the  top  of  these  mountains  shepherds  feeding  their  flocks.  The  pilgrims, 
therefore,  went  to  them  and  asked:  Whose  Delectable  Mountains  are  these? 
and  whose  sheep  be  they  that  feed  on  them?  "  And  the  shepherds  answered 
"  These  mountains  are  Emmanuel's  Land:  and  they  are  within  sight  of  His  city, 
the  sheep  are  His.  '  He  laid  down  His  life  for  them.*  "  Then  said  the  shepherds 
one  to  another,  "  Let  us  show  the  pilgrims  the  gates  to  the  celestial  city,  if  they 
have  skill  to  look  through  our  perspective-glass."  Then  the  pilgrims  lovingly 
accepted  the  motion;  so  they  led  them  to  the  top  of  a  hill  called  Clear,  and  gave 
them  the  glass  to  look  through.  Then  they  tried  to  look;  but  the  remembrance 
of  the  last  things  that  the  shepherds  had  showed  them  made  their  hands  shake; 
by  means  of  which  impediment  they  could  not  look  steadily  through  the  glass: 
yet  they  thought  they  saw  something  like  the  gate,  and  also  some  of  the  glory 
of  the  place.     {Bunyan'a  Pilgrim's  Progress.) 

Vers.  20-24.  Look  upon  Zion,  the  city  of  our  solemnitleB. — IsaiaVs  imagery: — 
Among  the  images  wMch  crowd  the  concluding  verses  of  this  chapter,  we  may 
perhaps,  without  fancifulness,  distinguish  an  under-current  of  thoughts  sug- 
gested by  the  circumstances  of  the  times  at  which  this  prophecy  was  delivered; 
the  promised  "  quiet "  seems  to  point  to  the  existing  commotion;  the  "  tabernacle 
which  shall  not  be  taken  down,'  reminds  us  not  only  of  the  fast-foujided  Temple 
which  had  replaced  the  tabernacle,  and  become  the  fixed  centre  of  their  "  solem- 
nities," but  also  of  the  tents  of  Sennacherib's  hosts,  then,  as  now,  made  of  black 
camels'  or  goats'  hair,  now  blackening  the  valleys  roimd  Jerusalem,  but  soon  to  be 
swept  away  "  hke  the  thistle-down  before  the  whirlwind  ";  the  broad  "  rivers  and 
streams"  suggest  the  thought  that  though  Hezekiah's  precautions  would  have 
secured  the  absolutely  necessary  supply  of  water  for  the  beleaguered  city,  they  felt 
the  want  of  that  abundance  of  it  which  is  still  more  grateful  in  an  Eastern  chmate 
than  in  our  own ;  while  the  promise  that "  the  inhabitants  should  no  longer  say,  I  am 
sick,"  favours  the  conjecture  that  the  illness  of  Hezekiah  may  have  been  one 
instance  of  the  disease  which  usually  attends  on  the  confinement  and  discomforts 
of  a  city  shut-up  against  an  enemy  in  the  field.  {Sir  E.  Strachey,  Bart.)  The 
privileges  and  stability  of  the  Church : — Jerusalem,  after  this  period,  was  never  long 
preserved  from  hostile  invasions,  therefore  our  attention  is  turned  from  it  to  that 
glorious  city  against  which  the  gates  of  hell  shall  never  prevail.     Let  us — I.  Take 

THOSE  VIEWS  OF  THE  ChTJECH  OF  ChBIST  WHICH  OTJE  TEXT  RECOMMENDS.      1.  As  a 

solemn  city.  "  The  city  of  our  solemnities."  The  Church  of  the  Lord  on  earth  is 
called  "  the  holy  people  "  ;  "  the  redeemed  of  the  Lord  ";  "  sought  out,  a  city  not 
forsaken."  It  is  "  that  great  city,  the  holy  Jerusalem."  It  is  "  Mount  Zion,  the 
city  of  the  Uving  God."  It  is  "  the  holy  city,  which  is  the  mother  of  us  all."  The 
orders  and  laws  necessary  for  the  city  of  Zion  are  contained  in  these  Hvely  oracles, 
which  may  also  be  considered  as  the  charter  of  the  privileges  of  its  happy  and 
active  citizens.  Peace  is  within  its  walls,  and  prosperity  within  its  palaces;  and 
everything  is  conducted  well,  being  managed  by  Him  who  is  the  God  of  order,  and 
not  of  confusion.  Its  great  King  ever  dwells  in  the  midst  of  it,  and  its  walls  are 
continually  before  Him.  The  immunities,  for  which  its  inhabitants  are  distin- 
guished, are  numerous  and  inestimable;  including  deUverance  from  the  bondage 
of  corruption  and  sin,  together  with  a  full  enjoyment  of  a  right  to  the  tree  of  Ufe, 
and  to  all  the  blessings  they  can  need.  Its  "  walls  are  called  salvation,  and  its 
gates  praise";  its  streets  are  all  pleasant,  and  its  towers  may  well  strike  the  eye 
with  admiration.  It  is  well  called  "  the  city  of  our  solemnities."  This  name  may 
be  applied  to  Jerusalem  on  account  of  the  most  solemn  feasts  that  were  there  made ; 
the  solemn  assembUes  that  were  there  held ;  and  the  solemn  sacrifices  which  were 
there  offered.  Nor  is  the  term  at  all  inapplicable  to  the  Church  of  God,  which 
consists  of  serious  behevers,  who  enter  into  the  most  solemn  engagements  with 
Jehovah;  who  are  employed  in  the  most  solemn  exercises  of  mind  that  can  possibly 
be  imagined;  and  whose  minds  are  peculiarly  affected  with  the  solemnities  of  death 
and  judgment.  Ileal  reUgion  is  altogether  a  solemn  thing.  2.  As  a  quiet  habita- 
tion. It  is  "  builded  together  for  an  habitation  of  God  through  the  Spirit."  God 
Himself  is  the  householder,  for  He  hath  chosen  Zion,  and  desired  it  for  His  habita- 
tion; and  here,  too,  dwell  all  the  faithful.     There  is  something  very  consolatory 


66  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xxxm. 

in  the  idea,  that  all  the  worthies  now  in  glory,  that  ever  trusted  in  Christ,  were  all 
members  of  that  Church  which  is  one;  and  that  all  real  believers  are  considered  by 
Jehovah  as  forming  a  part  of  it.  This  dwelling-place  of  the  just  is  remarkable  for 
the  security  which  is  there  enjoyed,  and  the  peace  which  pervades  the  whole.  It  is 
"  a  quiet  habitation  " ;  here  the  Prince  of  Peace  takes  up  His  residence,  and  reigns: 
here  "  the  work  of  righteousness  is  peace,  and  the  effect  of  righteousness,  qxiietness 
and  assurance  for  ever";  and  God's  people  dwell  here  in  a  peaceable  habitation. 
3.  An  immovable  tabernacle.  "A  tabernacle  that  shaU  not  be  taken  down;  not 
one  of  the  stakes  thereof  shall  ever  be  removed,  neither  shall  any  of  the  cords 
thereof  be  broken."  The  Church  mihtant  is  but  a  tabernacle  when  contrasted  with 
the  inconceivable  excellencies  of  the  paradise  of  God.  Divine  glory  is  manifested 
to  us,  and  known  by  us  here,  but  in  part;  but  there  "  we  shall  know  even  as  we  are 
known."  The  Church  of  God  may  often  change  its  place.  This  is  shown  us  by 
the  state  of  those  cities  in  which  once  the  cause  of  our  Redeemer  prospered,  but 
where  now  His  name  is  never  heard.  The  Jerusalem  Church,  though  it  might 
verify  the  promise  in  the  text,  by  experiencing  a  long  space  of  peace,  and  season  of 
rest  from  war,  together  with  the  restoration  and  continuance  of  their  sacred 
privileges,  has  now  lost  all  its  excellence,  and  Ichabod  (the  glory  is  departed)  may 
evidently  be  seen  inscribed  upon  it.  The  true  Church  typified  by  it,  shall  never  be 
taken  down  whilst  the  world  itself  remains.  II.  Enfokce  that  attention  to  thb 
Chtjech  of  God  which  the  text  deiiajjos.  "  Look  upon  Zion."  1.  Look  upon 
it,  angels,  with  complacency  and  deUght !  2.  Look  upon  it,  sinners,  with  astonish- 
ment and  desire !  3.  Look  upon  it.  Christians,  with  wonder,  love,  and  praise ! 
(T.  Spencer.)  God's  promises  to  His  Church: — To  our  Zion,  to  the  Church  of 
Christ,  are  promised  explicitly  such  gifts  as  those  of  the  text — unity,  truth,  success. 
Of  which  of  them,  it  may  be  asked,  can  we  make  our  boast?  I.  The  unity  of 
THE  Church  was  to  be  one  chief  note  of  its  Divine  origin.  What  is  our  state? 
Visible  unity  seems  to  be  no  more  a  mark  of  the  Church  of  Christ.  Of  those  whose 
faces  are  all  turned  one  way,  to  the  place  where  Jesus  the  crucified  sits  on  the  right 
hand  of  God,  the  east  and  west  have  been  rent  asunder,  so  that  none  can  re-knit 
the  torn  garment  of  the  Lord.  And  west  and  east  are  again  divided,  each  within 
itself;  and  we,  that  are  but  a  section  of  the  Western  Church,  are  torn  and  torn 
again.  God's  promise  cannot  have  been  in  vain.  Man  must  have  hindered  it; 
God  hath  not  forgotten  it.  II.  But  if  unity  has  been  lost,  truth  has  been  pre- 
served TO  us.  And  this  is  our  consolation.  If  the  Church  be  not  the  great  ocean 
— vast,  bright,  fresh,  a  counterpart  of  the  blue  heaven  above  it — still  she  is  like  the 
hundred  lakes  that  nestle  among  the  sheltering  hills;  they  know  not  each  other, 
but  every  one  of  them  reflects,  and  truly,  the  firmament  above.  So  far  as  salvation 
by  Christ  is  brought  home  to  men  by  the  teaching  of  the  churches,  so  long  there 
is  an  imderlying  bond  of  agreement  which  outward  misunderstanding  cannot 
cancel.  III.  HumiUating  to  us  are  those  promises  of  great  success  which 
are  a  part  of  our  charter.  The  power  of  the  truth  we  teach,  the  presence  of  the 
Holy  Ghost,  to  turn  the  outward  word  into  an  inward  Ufe,  seem  to  assure  us  of 
great  success  in  gathering  in  souls  to  Christ.  There  is  much  love  amongst  us, 
even  with  our  strife ;  there  is  a  warm  and  growing  zeal  in  works  of  good.  Without 
the  presence  of  the  Spirit  these  things  could  not  be.  (Archbishop  Thomson.) 
Jerusalem  imperilled  yet  secure  (vers.  20-23) : — As  the  existence  of  Jerusalem 
was  imperilled,  the  first  promise  of  Isaiah  was  that  Jerusalem  should  still  exist — 
"Thine  eyes  shall  see  Jerusalem  a  quiet  habitation,"  and  so  on;  but,  further, 
inasmuch  as  during  the  siege  many  unbelieving  persons  had  found  fault  with  the 
position  of  Jerusalem,  because  it  was  not  surrounded  by  a  river,  the  promise  is 
given  that  she  shall  have  a  glorious  position — "  There  the  glorious  Lord  will  be 
unto  us  a  place  of  broad  rivers  and  streams  ";  nay,  more  than  this,  as  a  cUmax 
of  blessing,  she  is  promised  perpetual  triumph  over  all  her  enemies,  since  in  her 
streams  "  shall  go  no  galley  with  oars,  neither  shall  gallant  ship  pass  thereby  "; 
or,  if  they  come  they  shall  prove  a  wreck — "  Thy  tackhngs  are  loosed;  they  could 
not  well  strengthen  their  mast,  they  could  not  spread  the  sail."  (C.  H.  Spurgeon.) 
The  Church  of  Qod : — I.  The  first  promise  made  to  the  Church  of  God  in  our  text 
is  one  securing  to  her  an  everlasting  existence.  The  Church  is  not  a 
temporary  institution;  it  shall  never  be  removed.  1.  The  Jerusalem  of  God 
shall  exist  as  she  is.  What  was  she  in  those  days?  "  The  city  of  solemnities  "  ; 
the  place  where  prayer  and  praise  were  wont  to  be  made.  So  is  she  to  continue 
throughout  all  generations.  2.  As  a  quiet  habitation,  which  we  would  desire  it 
to  be.     (1)  The  Church  of  God  is  always  a  quiet  habitation,  even  when  her  enemies 


CHAP.  xxxin.J  ISAIAH.  57 

BiuTound  her.  Some  of  you  may  have  seen  in  the  Exhibition  a  Belgian  picture 
representing  the  reading  of  the  statute  of  the  Duke  of  Alva  in  the  Flemish  towns, 
estabhshing  the  Inquisition.  Godly  merchants  are  Usteningin  deep  solemnity 
of  sorrow;  the  young  maiden  weeps  upon  her  sister's  bosom;  the  aged  woman 
turns  her  streaming  eyes  to  heaven.  All  this  the  painter  could  depict,  but  he 
could  not  paint  the  deep  heaven-bom  peace  which  still  possessed  the  souls  of  the 
threatened  ones.  (2)  But  how  quiet  is  she  when  her  enemies  are  not  allowed  to 
prey  upon  her!  "  Then  had  the  churches  rest,"  says  the  Holy  Ghost  in  the  Acts 
of  the  Apostles.  (3)  We  know  what  quiet  means  in  our  commimion  with  one 
another.  3.  Our  text  seems  to  indicate  that  there  were  some  persons  who  doubted 
all  this,  and  said,  "  Well,  but  you  speak  of  this  city  as  though  it  could  stand  an 
attack.  It  cannot ;  it  is  such  a  feeble  place ;  it  is  like  a  tent ;  it  can  soon  be 
stormed;  a  gust  of  wind  can  blow  it  over."  The  Lord  anticipates  this  difficulty, 
and  shows  that  the  feebleness  of  Jerusalem  should  be  no  reason  why  she  should 
not  still  continue  to  exist.  She  is  a  tabernacle — a  mere  tent;  but  she  is  a  taber- 
nacle that  shall  not  be  taken  down.  The  Church's  feebleness,  because  it  drives 
her  to  God,  is  the  Church's  strength.  4.  To  complete  this  part  of  the  promise, 
the  city,  notwithstanding  all  her  feebleness,  is  to  be  for  ever  complete.  (1)  If 
I  vmderstand  the  last  two  sentences, — "  Not  one  of  the  stakes  thereof  shall  ever 
be  removed,  neither  shall  any  of  the  cords  thereof  be  broken,"  we  learn  here  that 
all  the  true  members  of  the  Church  are  safe.  Some  of  them  may  be  driven  into 
the  earth  as  the  stakes  are  driven,  with  a  heavy  mallet;  but  the  strokes  of  tribula- 
tion shall  only  give  them  a  better  hold,  and  minister  stabiUty  to  the  whole  structure. 
(2)  This  also  relates  to  the  doctrines  of  the  Gospel.  (3)  The  ordinances.  II.  The 
lEB-EiiiNENT  POSITION  (ver.  21).     HI.  Eteenal  SAFETY  (vers.  22,  23).     {Ibid.) 

Vers.  21,  22.  The  glorious  Lord  will  be  unto  us  a  place  of  broad  rivers  and 
streams. — The  glorious  Lord,  the  only  security  and  consolation,  to  His  people : — 
I.  The  Lokb  Himself  is  the  foundation  oe  cause  of  the  saints'  safety  and 
BLESSEDNESS.  "  For  there  the  glorious  Lord  will  be  unto  us  a  pl*ce  of  broad 
rivers  and  streams."  This  is  a  consideration  which  may  well  allay  our  fears, 
excite  our  hopes,  and  confirm  our  faith.  1.  The  Lord  is  here  caUed  "  glorious." 
He  is  glorious  in  His  personal  excellence,  glorious  in  His  essential  attributes, 
glorious  in  His  works  of  creation  and  providence.  Above  aU,  He  is  glorious  to 
the  believer's  view,  in  the  marvellous  work  of  redemption,  where  He  displays  the 

f;lorious  perfections  of  His  nature.  His  power,  faithfulness,  truth,  holiness,  mercy, 
ove,  and  grace.  His  glory  is  manifested  in  the  Church  where  His  glorious  Gospel 
is  preached,  where  He  grants  His  gi-acious  and  glorious  presence,  and  where  saints 
meet  together  to  see  and  speak  of  His  glory.  "  In  His  temple  doth  every  one," 
eaith  the  Psalmist,  "  speak  of  His  glory."  Yea,  "  In  the  Lord  shall  all  the  seed 
of  Israel  be  justified  and  shall  glory."  2.  This  glorious  Lord  will  be  imto  His 
Church  and  people  "  a  place  of  broad  rivers  and  streams."  God  promises  to 
be  that  to  His  Jerusalem,  which  wiU  be  instead  of,  and  vastly  superior  to  a  river, 
however  broad  its  streams.  This  is  expressive  of  the  abundance  of  His  grace, 
and  the  freeness  of  it  for  the  supply  of  His  Church,  and  for  the  purification,  con- 
solation, refreshment,  and  confirmation  in  the  faith  of  aU  its  members.  The 
streams  of  this  river  are  the  everlasting  love  of  God,  Father,  Son,  and  Spirit;  the 
covenant  of  grace,  its  blessings  and  promises;  the  provision  and  mission  of  Christ  as 
a  Saviour,  and  the  blessings  which  flow  from  these,  called  "  streams  "  because  they 
flow  from  the  fountain  of  divine  love,  and  because  of  the  rapidity,  force,  and 
power  of  the  grace  of  God  in  the  application  of  these  blessings  in  conversion, 
which  carries  all  before  it;  and  because  of  the  abundance,  continuance,  and  free- 
ness of  them,  and  the  gratefulness  and  acceptableness  of  them  to  thot;o  who  see 
the  worth  of  them,  and  feel  their  interest  in  them.     11.  This  eivee  of  God  also 

SERVES   FOE  THEIE  DEFENCE  AND  SECURITY  AGAINST  ALL    ENEMIES.        The  gloriOUS 

Lord  wiU  be  unto  us  a  place  of  broad  rivers  and  streams;  wherein  shall  go  no  galley 
with  oars,  &c.  It  was  the  case  with  literal  Jerusalem,  that  although  it  had  no 
river  for  its  pleasure,  profit,  and  protection,  yet  it  had  this  advantage  from  the 
circumstances,  that  no  enemy  could  approach  it  in  this  way.  And  the  Lord, 
though  He  be  indeed  instead  of  a  broad  river  to  His  people  for  their  supply  and 
safety,  yet  He  is  such  an  one  as  will  not  admit  any  enemy,  great  or  small,  signified 
by  the  galley  with  oars,"  and  the  "  gallant  ship,"  to  come  near  to  hurt  them. 
in.  The  text  adds,  as  a  further  confikmation  and  proof  of  the  security  and 
TRIUMPH  of  the  PEOPLE  OF  GoD,  that  "  the  Lord  is  our  Judge."     All  their  wrongs 


68  TEE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  xxxni. 

will  be  righted  and  their  injuries  avenged.  IV.  The  text  states,  as  a  tttbthsb 
ENCOTJRAGEMENT,  that  "  the  Lord  is  our  Lawgiver."  He  hath  not  only  enacted 
wholesome  laws  for  the  government  of  His  Church  and  people,  in  keeping  of  which 
there  is  great  reward;  but  He  writes  them  on  their  heart,  and  puts  Hia  Spirit 
within  them  to  enable  them  to  keep  His  commandments,  and  walk  in  Hia  ways. 
V.  The  Lord  is  also  oue  Kino.  He  is  King  of  Zion  and  King  of  saints.  "  The 
government  shall  be  upon  His  shoulder."  He  manages  and  directs  all  the  con- 
cerns of  His  people.  "  His  Kingdom  is  an  everlasting  Kingdom,  and  His  dominion 
endureth  throughout  all  ages."  VI.  The  text  concludes  with  an  epitome  of  thb 
WHOLE  in  a  few  words,  "  He  will  save  us."  Whom  will  He  save?  Those  who 
receive  Him  as  their  Lawgiver  and  King.  (J.  Shore,  M.A.)  The  water-supply 
of  Jerusalem : — One  great  peculiarity  of  Jerusalem  which  distinguishes  it  irova. 
almost  all  other  historical  cities,  is  that  it  has  no  river.  Babylon  was  on  the 
Euphrates,  Nineveh  on  the  Tigris,  Thebes  on  the  Nile,  Rome  on  the  Tiber;  but 
Jerusalem  had  nothing  but  a  fountain  or  two,  and  a  well  or  two,  and  a  Uttle  trickle 
of  an  intermittent  stream.  The  water-supply  to-day  is,  and  always  has  been,  a 
great  difficulty,  and  an  insuperable  barrier  to  the  city's  ever  having  a  great  popula- 
tion. That  deficiency  throws  a  great  deal  of  beautiful  light  on  more  than  one 
passage  in  the  Old  Testament.  Isaiah's  great  vision  is  not,  as  I  take  it,  of  a  future, 
but  of  what  the  Jerusalem  of  his  day  might  be  to  the  Israelite,  if  he  would  live 
by  faith.  The  mighty  Lord,  "  the  glorious  Lord,"  shall  BQmself  "  be  a  place  of 
broad  rivers  and  streams."  (A.  Maclaren,  D.D.)  The  rivers  of  God: — I.  This 
remarkable  promise  suggestshowDT  God  there  is  the  supply  of  all  deficiencies. 
The  city  was  perched  on  its  barren,  hot  rock,  with  scarcely  a  drop  of  water,  and 
its  inhabitants  must  often  have  been  tempted  to  wish  that  there  had  been  running 
down  the  sun-bleached  stones  of  the  Kedron  a  flashing  stream,  such  as  laved  the 
rock-cut  temples  and  tombs  of  Thebes.  Isaiah  says,  in  effect,  "  You  cannot  see 
it,  but  if  you  will  trust  yourselves  to  God,  there  will  be  such  a  river."  In  Uke 
manner  every  defect  in  our  circumstances,  everything  lacking  in  our  lives,  every- 
thing which  seems  to  hamper  us  in  some  aspects,  and  to  sadden  us  in  others, 
may  be  compensated  and  made  up,  if  we  will  hold  fast  by  God.  11.  Take  another 
side  of  the  same  thought.  Herb  is  a  revelation  of  God  and  His  sweet 
PRESENCE  AS  oiTR  TRUE  DEFENCE.  The  river  that  lay  between  some  strong  city 
and  the  advancing  enemy  was  its  strongest  fortification  when  the  bridge  of  boata 
was  taken  away.  One  of  the  ancient  cities  is  described  by  one  of  the  prophets 
as  being  held  as  within  the  coils  of  a  serpent,  by  which  he  means  the  various  bend- 
ings  and  twistings  of  the  Euphrates  which  encompassed  Babylon,  and  made  it  so 
hard  to  be  conquered.  The  primitive  city  of  Paris  owed  its  safety,  in  the  wild  old 
times  when  it  was  founded,  to  being  upon  an  island.  Venice  has  lived  through 
all  the  centuries  because  it  is  girded  about  by  its  lagoons.  England  is  what  it 
is  largely  because  of  the  streak  of  silver  sea.  So,  God's  city  has  a  broad  moat 
all  round  it.  If  we  will  only  knit  ourselves  with  God  by  simple  trust  and  con- 
tinual communion,  it  is  the  plainest  prose  fact  that  nothing  will  harm  us,  and  no 
foe  will  ever  get  near  enough  to  shoot  his  arrows  against  us.  That  is  a  truth  for 
faith,  and  not  for  sense.  Many  a  man,  truly  compassed  about  by  God,  has 
to  go  through  fiery  trials  of  sorrow  and  affliction.  But  no  real  evil  befalls  us, 
because,  according  to  the  old  superstition  that  money  bewitched  was  cleansed 
if  it  was  handed  across  running  water,  our  sorrows  only  reach  us  across  the  river 
that  defends.  HI.  Take,  again,  another  aspect  of  this  same  thought,  which 
suggests  to  us  God's  presence  as  our  true  refreshment  and  satisfaction. 
The  waterless  city  depended  on  cisterns,  and  they  were  often  broken,  and  they 
were  always  more  or  less  foul,  and  sometimes  the  water  fell  very  low  in  them. 
The  rivers  in  northern  Tartary  all  lose  themselves  in  the  sand.  Not  one  of 
them  has  volume  or  force  enough  to  get  to  the  sea.  And  the  rivers  from  which 
we  try  to  drink  are  sand- choked  long  before  our  thirst  is  slaked.  So  if  we  are 
wise,  we  shall  take  Isaiah's  hint,  and  go  where  the  water  flows  abundantly,  and 
flows  for  ever.  IV.  The  manifold  variety  in  the  results  of  God's  presenob. 
It  shapes  itself  into  many  forms,  according  to  oiur  different  needs.  "  The  glorious 
Lord  shall  be  a  place  of  broad  rivers."  Yes;  but  notice  the  next  words — "  and 
streams."  Now,  the  word  which  is  there  translated  "  streams  "  means  the  little 
channels,  for  irrigation  and  other  purposes,  by  which  the  water  of  some  great 
river  is  led  off  into  the  melon  patches,  and  gardens,  and  plantations,  and  houses 
of  the  inhabitants.  So  we  have  not  only  the  picture  of  the  broad  river  in  its  unity, 
bat  also  that  of  the  thousand  little  rivulets  in  their  multiplicity  and  in  their  direc- 


CHAP,  xxnn.]  ISAIAH.  69 

tion  to  each  man's  plot  of  ground.  It  is  of  no  profit  that  we  b*ve  on  the  river's 
bank  if  we  let  its  waters  go  rolling  and  flashing  past  our  door,  or  our  garden,  or 
our  lips.  Unless  you  have  a  sluice,  by  which  you  can  take  them  off  into  your 
own  territory,  and  keep  the  shining  blessing  to  be  the  source  of  fertility  in  your 
garden,  and  of  coolness  and  refreshment  to  your  thirst,  your  garden  will  be  parched, 
and  your  lips  will  crack.  We  may,  and  must,  make  God  our  very  own  property; 
it  is  useless  to  say  "  our  God,"  "  the  God  of  Israel,"  "  the  God  of  the  Church," 
the  great  Creator,  the  Universal  Father,  and  so  on,  unless  we  say  "  my  God  and 
my  Saviour  "  ;  "  my  refuge  and  my  strength."  {A.  Madaren  D.D.)  The 
glorioiis  Lord: — I.  The  salvation  of  the  Gospel.  Its  value  is  shown — 1.  In 
the  riches  of  the  blessings  that  it  confers.  "  There,"  i.e.,  in  the  church,  "  shall 
the  Lord  be  unto  us  a  place,"  &c.  (1)  The  first  idea  suggested  to  the  mind  of  a 
Jew  by  the  neighbourhood  of  a  great  river,  would  be  that  of  unfailing  plenty. 
By  this  the  salvation  of  the  Gospel  is  especially  distinguished.  (2)  The  next  idea 
suggested  by  "  a  place  of  broad  rivers  and  streams  "  is  that  of  beauty.  Running 
water  is  everywhere  a  great  addition  to  the  beauty  of  the  landscape.  The  richest 
herbage  clothes  the  banks  of  every  stream,  &c.  The  highest  qualities  of  man 
are  brought  out  only  by  Christianity;  and  all  that  is  good  thrives  best  under  its 
influence.  (3)  After  plenty  and  beauty,  the  chief  idea  is  perpetuity.  The  river 
rolls  on  with  the  same  calm  and  even  current  from  age  to  age,  and  yields  to  the 
successive  generations  of  mankind  the  same  unfailing  supply.  2.  The  salva- 
tion of  the  Gospel  is  remarkable  for  its  freedom  from  attendant  evils.  All  the 
blessings  of  the  present  life  have  some  considerable  drawback  to  their  full  enjoy- 
ment. The  possession  of  wealth  is  apt  to  lead  either  to  wastefulness  and  dissipa- 
tion, or  to  avarice;  power  tempts  to  arbitrary  and  despotic  conduct;  and  those 
who  are  gifted  with  genius  are  exposed  to  the  assaults  of  malice  and  envy; — 
most  worldly  good  things  lead  their  possessor  into  danger,  and  all  of  them  are 
attended  by  care.  But  it  is  not  so  with  the  salvation  of  the  Gospel:  "  The  blessing 
of  the  Lord  maketh  rich,  and  He  addeth  no  sorrow  with  it  ";  or,  as  it  is  expressed 
in  the  text,  it  resembles  "  a  place  of  broad  rivers  and  streams;  wherein  shall  go  no 
galley  with  oars,  neither  shall  gallant  ship  pass  thereby."  (1)  The  good  of  the 
Gospel  salvation  is  unmingled  with  evil,  because  it  requires  man  to  do  nothing 
injiu-ious  to  himself.  (2)  The  pleasures  of  the  Gospel  are  attended  and  followed 
by  no  sting,  while  it  extracts  their  bitterness  from  all  ordinary  griefs.  II.  The 
GLORY  OF  God  as  manifested  in  His  bestowing  salvation  on  its  people.  He 
is  "  glorious,"  because  He  is  unto  us  a  place  of  broad  rivers.  &c.  (W.  Dickson.) 
Broad  rivers  and  streams : — The  meaning  of  this  promise.  1.  Fertility.  2.  Abund- 
ance to  the  inhabitants.  Places  near  broad  rivers  produce  a  great  variety  of 
plants.  The  children  of  Israel  regretted  that  they  had  left  the  leeks,  and  garlic, 
and  onions,  and  cucumbers,  and  melons  of  Egypt — plants  that  grew  by  the  rivers. 
Besides,  where  there  are  rivers  there  is  an  abundance  of  fish  of  all  kinds,  and  in 
the  fat  pastures,  such  as  Goshen,  which  was  well  watered  by  the  Nile,  abundance 
of  cattle  are  reared,  while  the  abundant  harvests  which  are  there  produced  through 
the  admirable  irrigation  make  the  lands  blessed  with  broad  rivers  and  streams  the 
sunniest  of  climes.  Well ,  now,  our  God  is  all  this  to  His  Church.  3.  Broad  rivers  and 
streams  in  like  manner  point  to  commerce.  In  Holland  especially  the  broad  rivers 
and  streams  make  that  nation  what  it  is;  the  harbours  are  so  safe,  the  rivers  so 
broad,  and  the  canals  so  innumerable,  that  in  every  place  commerce  is  easy, 
and  the  ends  of  the  earth  are  linked  to  the  nation  by  its  broad  rivers  and 
streams.  In  that  country  we  find  curious  importations  hardly  known  to  any 
other  people,  because  they  have  gathered  up  the  treasures  of  the  far-off  lands. 
and  there  was  a  time  when  their  broad  rivers  and  streams  enabled  them  to  engross 
the  mercantile  power  of  the  whole  universe.  Well,  beloved,  our  glorious  Lord — ■ 
keep  the  adjective  as  well  as  the  noun — is  to  be  to  us  a  place  of  commerce. 
Through  God  we  have  commerce  with  the  past;  the  riches  of  Calvary,  the  riches 
of  the  covenant,  the  riches  of  eternity,  all  come  to  us  down  the  broad  stream  of  ova 
gracious  Lord.  We  have  commerce,  too,  with  the  future.  What  galleys,  laden 
to  the  water's  edge,  come  to  us  from  the  millennium !  What  visions  we  have  of 
the  days  of  heaven  upon  earth.  Through  our  glorious  Lord  we  have  commerce 
with  angels;  commerce  with  the  bright  spirits  washed  in  blood  that  sing  before  the 
throne;  nay,  better  still,  we  have  commerce  with  the  Infinite  One,  with  eternity, 
with  self- existence,  with  immutability,  with  omnipotence,  with  omniscience; 
for  our  glorious  Lord  is  to  us  a  place  of  broad  rivers  and  streams.  4.  Broad 
rivers  and  streams  are  specially  intended  to  set  forth  security.     (C.  H.  Spurgeon.) 


60  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xxxm. 

The  Church' a  enemies : — 1.  To  the  eye  of  faith  the  Church  has  no  enemies  at  all. 
"  Wherein  shall  go  no  galley  with  oars."  You  ramble  in  your  garden,  perhaps, 
in  the  summer-time,  and  a  spider  has  spun  its  stoutest  web  across  your  path; 
you  walk  along  and  you  never  think  that  there  is  anything  to  hinder  you,  and 
yet  there  are  those  spider's  strong  webs,  which  would  have  caught  a  thousand 
flies,  but  they  do  not  impede  you.  So  is  it  with  God's  glorious  Church:  there  are 
barriers  across  her  path,  but  they  are  only  spider's  webs;  on  she  walks;  she  has 
no  adversaries,  for  she  counts  her  adversaries  to  be  nothing.  2.  When  we  are 
compelled  to  see  that  the  Church  has  adversaries,  yet,  according  to  the  promise, 
those  adversaries  shall  be  put  to  confusion.  They  have  launched  the  bark;  the 
galley  with  oars  is  on  the  sea.  The  text  does  not  say  that  no  galley  with  oars 
shall  ever  be  there,  but  "  no  galley  with  oars  shall  go  there."  Now,  in  order  to 
make  it  "  go  "  they  must  fix  the  mast;  they  must  gird  the  tacklings,  or  how  shall 
they  spread  the  sail,  and  how  shall  they  proceed  on  their  way?  Ah!  but  they 
cannot  (ver.  21).  3.  And  then  faith  not  only  sees  the  confusion  of  her  adversaries, 
but  she  also  believes  they  are  so  utterly  destroyed  that  she  may  go  out  and  spoil 
them.  4.  What  is  to  be  the  end  of  it  all?  Glory  to  a  Triune  God  (ver.  22). 
(Ibid.) 

Ver.  22,  For  the  Lord  Is  our  Judge  .  .  .  lawgiver  .  .  .  king. — Salvation  in 
harmony  with  Divine  relations: — The  advent  of  sin  into  the  world  is  one  of 
the  greatest  mysteries  of  the  universe.  It  was  the  introduction  of  a  mighty 
force  for  evil  in  direct  antagonism  to  God,  and  to  everything  God  ever  made. 
Now  that  sin  had  found  a  footing  in  this  world,  it  became  a  problem,  perhaps 
the  most  perplexing  and  difficult  ever  known:  How  the  Divine  government 
should  deal  with  sin  to  prevent  its  spread,  to  restrain  its  action,  to  subdue  its 
})ower,  and,  if  possible,  to  expel  it  from  the  throne  it  had  usurped.  Known  to 
us  are  two  methods  in  which  the  Divine  government  has  dealt  with  sin.  The 
first  is  that  of  stern,  vigorous,  prompt  justice.  This  was  the  principle  adopted 
in  the  case  of  the  fallen  angels.  Sin  in  them  became  at  once  its  own  punish- 
ment. In  the  case  of  man  God  adopted  another  method  of  dealing  with  sin — a 
method  of  merciful  and  mediatorial  intervention.  By  redemption  He  proposes 
to  meet  evil  in  its  own  temple,  even  in  the  heart  of  man,  and  there  restrain,  subdue, 
destroy,  and  abolish  it.  How  can  this  be  done?  If  done  at  all,  it  must  be  done 
in  perfect  harmony  with  the  attributes  and  the  character  of  God.  He  can  do 
nothing  contrary  to  His  nature,  or  dishonouring  to  His  law.  If  He  saves,  pardons, 
and  acquits  the  guilty,  it  must  be  in  perfect  harmony  with  His  law  and  government. 
Jehovah  King,  Jehovah  Lawgiver,  Jehovah  Judge  is  our  Jehovah  Saviour.  All 
the  four  offices  blend  and  harmonise  in  one  glorious  Person,  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ. 
I.  Jehovah  is  cue  King,  and  although  we  are  rebels  against  His  kingly  authority, 
yet  He  can  save  us.  His  right  to  govern  us  is  based  on  His  creatorship.  He 
made  us  and  not  we  ourselves.  All  oxa  powers  of  body,  mind,  and  spirit  are 
gifts — His  gifts.  Not  one  of  them  is  of  our  own  production.  He  hath  made 
all  things  for  Himself,  for  His  service,  for  His  will.  Had  the  race  of  man  continued 
obedient  to  His  will,  we  should  have  continued  happy  and  safe  imder  His  benevo- 
lent and  holy  rule.  But  the  reverse  of  this  has  taken  place.  We  have  rebelled. 
Had  He  doomed  us  to  woes  unrelieved  and  unending,  every  attribute  of  His  nature, 
every  law  in  the  universe,  every  being  in  creation  would  have  given  the  acquiescing 
Amen,  just  and  true  are  all  Thy  ways.  Yet,  when  retribution  with  unrestrained 
force  was  about  to  fall,  when  truth  and  justice  demanded  the  execution  of  the 
dread  sentence,  the  curse  was  rolled  back,  wrath  suspended,  punishment  deferred, 
guilty  man  spared,  and  complete  eternal  dehverance  provided  and  freely  offered. 
How  came  this  to  pass?  Not  by  a  mere  act  of  arbitrary  sovereignty.  There 
are  things  which  God  cannot  do.  He  cannot  do  an  injustice.  He  cannot  deny 
His  Word;  He  cannot  deny  Himself.  He  cannot  come  into  the  midst  of  a  rebel 
world  armed  to  the  teeth  against  His  majesty,  and  say,  "  I  know  that  all  men 
are  traitors  to  My  rule,  rebels  against  My  authority;  all  deserve  to  die,  and  with- 
out exception  ought  to  die,  for  I  have  solemnly  declared  that  death  is  the  penaltv 
of  rebellion ;  but  as  sovereign  Lord,  I  select  some  from  amongst  them  who  shall 
not  die,  who  shall  escape  the  penalty,  who  shall  be  treated  as  if  they  had  never 
rebelled,  and  ultimately  be  crowned  with  glory  and  immortality,  like  all  loyal  beings 
in  My  dominions.  I  give  no  reason  for  thus  acting.  I  claim  the  right  to  do  it  by  an 
act  of  sovereign  wilL  We  must  all  feel  that  this  was  impossible  to  God.  This 
would  be  to  abolish  all  distinction  between  virtue  and  vice,  between  obedience 


CKA7.  xxxm.]  ISAIAH.  61 

and  rebellion;  this  would  be  to  overthrow  law  and  right,  to  enthrone  lawlessness, 
and  reward  crime:  God  could  never  do  this.  Notwithstanding  that  He  is  our 
Kling,  and  that  we  are  traitors  who  have  dared  to  lift  our  hand  to  smite  the 
Majesty  on  high,  yet  He  saves  us.  Jehovah  is  our  King,  and  He  will  save 
us.  But  how?  If  He  saves  us,  it  must  be  in  perfect  harmony  with  His  Kingship. 
And  so  He  does.  The  Son  of  God  equipped  with  human  nature  steps  into  the 
breach,  stands  between  the  rebels  and  the  Majesty  they  have  offended.  The 
naked  sword  in  the  hand  of  the  angered  King  is  about  to  fall  and  smite,  but 
Jehovah's  Fellow  bares  His  breast  to  receive  the  smiting.  The  strongest  con- 
demnation of  sin  which  even  God  Himself  could  give  was  given  when  He  sent  His 
own  Son  in  the  likeness  of  sinful  flesh  and  for  sin  condemned  sin  in  the  flesh. 
n.  Salvation  in  harmony  with  law.  Jehovah  is  our  Lawgiver,  and  He  will 
save  us.  This  clause  teaches  that  God  sustains  towards  us  the  relation  of  Law- 
giver, but  the  difficulty  in  the  way  of  saving  us  is  in  the  fact  that  we  sustain  towards 
Him  the  relation  of  lawbreakers.  There  can  be  no  question  as  to  our  guilt.  We 
have  all  sinned  and  come  short  of  the  glory  of  God.  If  then  we  have  all  sinned, 
the  law  cannot  justify,  nay,  the  law  condemns  us.  The  penalty  of  disobedience  is 
death.  The  Lawgiver  cannot  by  an  act  of  mere  sovereignty  remit  that  penalty. 
He  cannot  ignore  or  override  the  law  which  He  Himself  has  made.  If  this  were 
done,  the  Maker  of  the  law  would  become  the  breaker  of  the  law.  This  can  never 
be.  Salvation  in  order  to  be  satisfactory  to  the  sinner  himself  must  be  bestowed 
in  harmony  with  law,  and  must  have  the  consent  of  the  law.  To  secure  for 
me  abiding  peace  I  must  have  the  assurance  that  the  law  consents  to  my  pardon, 
to  blot  out  my  sins  from  her  book  of  remembrance,  and  to  cancel  the  sentence  of 
condemnation.  I  must  be  assured  that  the  law  will  never  lift  up  her  voice  to 
condemn  me,  nor  stretch  out  her  hand  to  smite  me,  nor  throw  open  the  sources 
of  wrath  to  overwhelm  me.  Redemption  throiigh  atonement  meets  this 
difficulty.  Jehovah  Lawgiver  becomes  Jehovah  Saviour.  But  howT  Within 
the  ark  were  the  tables  of  the  law ;  over  the  law  was  the  lid,  the  covering, 
called  the  propitiatory  or  mercy-seat;  over  that  again  the  cherubim  in  bending 
thoughtful  attitude;  between  the  cherubim  the  Glory,  the  uncreated  symbol 
of  the  Divine  Presence  seated  in  majesty  on  the  mercy-seat.  This  then  is  the 
teaching  of  this  profound  symbolism.  Mercy  has  built  her  throne  on  law;  so 
that  when  the  transgressor  approaches  God  to  plead  for  pardon,  and  when 
God  graciously  bestows  it,  the  law  is  present,  not  to  condemn,  but  to  approve, 
not  to  object  but  to  acquiesce  in  the  pardon:  that  pardon  proceeds  from  mercy 
and  that  mercy  is  founded  on  law.  Jesus  was  wounded  for  our  transgressions, 
bruised  for  our  iniquities.  Now  that  the  law  has  vindicated  her  own  majesty 
and  purity  by  smiting  our  Substitute,  the  law  can  not  only  acquiesce,  but  also 
triumph  in  your  pardon,  and  be  more  signally  magnified  by  joxa  salvation  than 
by  your  condemnation,  so  that  we  can  challenge  you  to  come  boldly  to  the  throne 
of  grace  to  obtain  mercy,  for  Jehovah  Lawgiver  is  also  Jehovah  the  Saviour.  "  If 
«ny  man  sin,  we  have  an  advocate  with  the  Father."  Here  Jesus  Christ  is  spoken 
of  as  an  advocate  or  pleader.  What  is  He  pleading  for  ?  Forgiveness.  The  sinner 
cannot  deny  or  disprove  the  accusation.  But  the  Divine  Advocate  is  there  and 
shows  Himself  as  newly  slain,  saying,  I  have  endured  the  curse  for  him,  I  have 
been  wounded  for  his  transgressions,  the  chastisement  of  his  peace  has  been  laid 
upon  Me,  and  I  claim  for  him  forgiveness.  The  plea  is  admitted,  the  Advocate 
prevails,  the  siimer  is  free;  in  the  presence  of  the  sacrifice  the  law  is  magnified  and 
announces  the  acquittal  of  the  penitent  believer:  "  Neither  do  I  condemn  thee,  go 
in  peace."  III.  Salvation  in  harmony  with  Judgeship.  Jehovah  Judge  is  also 
Jehovah  Saviour.  We  must  all  appear  before  the  judgment  seat  of  Christ.  But  is 
not  every  man  judged  at  the  hour  of  death  and  his  eternal  destiny  then  irrevocably 
fixed?  Yes.  What  need  then  of  a  general  judgment?  One  important,  if  not 
the  most  important  purpose  is  this — the  general  judgment  will  give  the  Judge 
of  all  the  opportunity  of  vindicating  Himself.  He  must  be  justified  when  He 
«peaks;  He  must  be  cleared  when  He  judges.  Assembled  worlds  on  that  day 
must  be  satisfied  that  every  decision  is  in  perfect  harmony  with  truth  and  righteous- 
ness. For  father  and  mother  to  enter  heaven  with  even  the  shadow  of  a  suspicion 
that  the  sentence  pronounced  upon  their  son  was  unjust  or  severe,  would  mar 
heaven  to  them  for  ever.  For  His  own  sake  and  for  the  sake  of  all  His  subjects 
throughout  His  vast  dominions,  God  must  silence  every  objection,  dissipate  every 
suspicion.  How  will  the  Judge  clear  Himself?  Not  by  pleading  sovereignty. 
We  cannot  conceive  of  Him  saying  to  assembled  worlds  on  that  great  day: 


62  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chak  rxxni. 

"  I  am  sovereign  disposer  of  all  events,  of  all  beings,  of  all  worlds.  I  do  as  I  will 
with  each  and  all  without  giving  any  reason.  I  have  endowed  you  with  reason 
but  I  intend  to  treat  you  as  though  you  had  none.  You  may  be  dissatisfied  with 
your  destiny,  or  with  the  destiny  of  some  in  whom  you  are  lovingly  concerned; 
you  may  suspect  Me  of  having  done  you  or  your  loved  ones  an  injustice,  but  that 
will  not  concern  Me.  You  may  carry  your  suspicion  with  you  to  your  doom,  it 
may  cleave  to  your  spirit  for  ever;  I  will  not  attempt  to  remove  it  or  to  convince 
you  that  I  am  right."  This  would  be  an  unreasoning  despotism,  and  one  shudders 
at  the  thought  of  the  righteous  Judge  dealing  thus  with  His  rational  creatures. 
He  will  justify  Himself  when  He  speaks,  and  clear  Himself  when  He  judges.  But 
how?  When  the  dividing  line  is  drawn  between  the  righteous  and  the  wicked, 
the  one  placed  on  the  right,  the  other  on  the  left  of  the  judgment  throne,  the 
Judge  will  be  able  to  say  :  "  Notwithstanding  that  all  men  have  sinned  and  come 
short  of  the  glory  of  God,  yet,  in  infinite  compassion  I  made  a  provision  for  the 
removal  of  sin,  for  the  deliverance  of  every  man  from  its  power,  guilt,  and  pollu- 
tion, and  for  his  complete  restoration  to  purity  and  bliss.  These  on  My  right 
availed  themselves  of  that  provision,  fulfilled  its  conditions,  sought  with  true 
repentance  and  faith  the  application  of  that  redemption  to  their  heart,  and  they 
stand  here  to-day  without  sin.  Who  will  lay  anything  to  their  charge?"  Turning 
then  to  the  other  side  the  Judge  will  be  able  to  say:  '  All  these  on  My  left  I  have 
loved  with  an  infinite  compassion,  I  have  died  to  redeem  them,  My  salvation 
was  as  free  to  them  as  to  the  others,  and  would  have  been  as  effectual  had  they 
received  it,  but  they  spurned  it.  I  shed  My  blood  for  them,  but  they  trampled 
it  under  foot.  I  can  do  no  more  for  them.  They  have  chosen  death  and  they 
must  have  it."  What  then  is  the  inference?  If  you  perish  it  will  be  your  own 
fault;  the  entire  responsibility  of  your  lost  condition  is  with  yourself,  and  will 
rest  on  you  alone,  and  for  ever.  "  God  so  loved  the  world,"  &c.,  so  that  if  you 
perish,  it  will  not  be  because  you  are  sinners,  but  rather  because  you  spurn  the 
remedy,  and  reject  the  only  Redeemer.  Sin  and  punishment  are  inseparable 
You  cannot  divorce  them.  Where  the  one  is,  the  other  must  be.  K  sin  remain, 
you  carmot  escape  punishment ;  for  sin  is  its  own  punishment.  The  only  method 
to  avoid  punishment  is  to  abolish  sin.  God's  system  of  redemption  provides 
for  this.  For  this  purpose  was  the  Son  of  God  manifested  that  He  might  destroy 
the  works  of  the  devil."  Nothing  that  God  ever  made  is  to  be  annihilated. 
Matter  may  change  its  form,  its  appearance,  its  relations,  but  science  teaches 
us  that  not  an  atom  will  ever  cease  to  be.  God  has,  however,  provided  for  the 
annihilation  of  sin  in  the  believer  through  atonement.  This  is  the  mystery 
of  redemption,  it  destroys  that  which  destroys  humanity.  It  saves  the  sinner 
by  destroying  his  sin.  [Richard  Roberts.)  The  restoration  of  jvdgment,  God's 
way  of  salvation  to  the  Church: — The  broken  and  divided  condition  of  the 
Christian  Church  is,  to  every  right  -  thinking  man,  a  subject  of  uneasy 
reflection.  1.  It  is  in  the  nature  of  things  impossible  for  a  multitude  of  men  to 
live  together,  or  subsist  as  a  community  without  the  occurrence  of  differences, 
disputes,  and  questions  of  a  greater  or  a  less  degree  of  importance.  2.  The  institu- 
tion by  which  God  meets  and  provides  against  this  unavoidable  circumstance 
in  human  life  is  that  of  the  judge,  the  fullest  general  idea  and  true  theological 
definition  of  which  office  is  contained  in  these  words,  "  If  there  arise  a  matter 
too  hard  for  thee  in  judgment,  between  blood  and  blood,"  &c.  (Deut.  xvii.  8-13). 
3.  The  provision  of  a  judge  with  absolute  and  conclusive  authority,  is  God's  way 
of  meeting  that  evil  to  which  human  society  is  exposed.  He  demands  from  men 
that  they  shall  bring  their  controversies  and  have  them  determined  by  the  person 
whom  He  appoints;  and  they  are  to  yield  to  the  award  of  the  judge,  through 
submission  to  God,  by  whose  voice  or  in  whose  providence  he  has  been  appointed, 
and  through  faith  that  God  is  with  the  judge,  and  is  at  hand  to  give  him  wisdom 
and  discernment  (Prov.  xxix.  4;  Judg.  ii.  18).  4.  The  taking  away  of  judges 
is  one  of  the  last  and  severest  punishments  that  God  inflicts  upon  a  people.  When 
God  gives  men  children  to  be  their  princes  and  babes  to  rule  over  them — so  that 
the  people  are  oppressed  everyone  by  another  and  everyone  by  his  neighbour, 
so  that  the  child  behaves  himself  proudly  against  the  ancient,  and  the  base  against 
the  honourable — it  is  in  His  anger  that  He  does  so  (Amos  ii.  3).  6.  Again,  when 
God  recovered  His  people,  or  spake  of  doing  so,  the  restoration  of  the  judge  is 
one  of  the  main  acts  or  promises  (Isa.  i.  26).  6.  To  set  judgment  in  the  earth 
is  declared  to  be  one  of  the  offices  of  Christ:  and  His  kingdom  is  characterised 
as  that  in  which  "  a  King  shall  reign  in  righteousness,  and  princes  shall  rule  in 


CHAP,  xxxm.]  ISAIAH.  63 

judgment " ;  when  the  people  shall  dwell  in  a  peaceable  habitation  and  in  sure 
dwellings  and  in  quiet  resting-places.  But  of  peace  and  quiet  security  and  well- 
being  without  the  office  of  the  judge,  there  is  no  mention  in  all  scripture,  either 
prophetical  or  historical.  7.  This  method  and  ordinance  of  God  for  the  preserva- 
tion of  peace  and  righteousness  among  men  is  continually  alluded  to  in  the 
language  of  the  New  Testament;  alluded  to  and  recognised,  and  therefore  shown 
to  be  perpetual.  Our  blessed  Lord  always  refers  to  the  judge  as  the  ordained 
ultimate  decider  in  all  human  quarrels  and  contentions ;  and  although  He  would 
have  His  disciples  to  be  reconciled  everyone  to  his  adversary  before  an  appeal 
to  the  judge  shall  have  become  unavoidable,  yet  He  clearly  points  out  the  absolute- 
ness and  peremptoriness  of  the  ordinance,  as  one  which  God  will  ordinarily  guide, 
and  one  which  He  wiU  not  suffer  any  man  with  impunity  to  despise.  8.  The  duty 
of  those  whose  matter  is  brought  before  the  judge  is  to  do  according  to  the  sentence 
of  the  judge,  not  declining  from  it  to  the  right  nor  to  the  left.  This,  of  course, 
is  on  the  supposition  that  the  judge  spoken  of  is  the  ultimate  one,  from  whom 
there  can  be  no  appeal.  So  the  general  peace  of  society,  and  the  comfort  and 
quietness  of  the  individual  himself  are  ensured.  9.  Moreover,  it  is  through  the 
judge  that  law  becomes  a  living  thing,  capable  of  continual  enlargement,  and 
of  application  to  the  varying  conditions  of  human  society;  which  is  itself  a  living 
thing,  its  character  always  in  progress,  with  new  interests  springing  up,  and  liable 
to  new  difficulties  and  complications.  10.  The  Church  of  Christ  is  the  widest 
and  most  comprehensive  society  of  men  that  can  exist.  How  much  more  than 
all  other  societies  of  men  must  the  Church  be  liable  to  causes  of  division  !  11.  And 
shall  God's  ordinance  for  peace  not  be  found  in  the  spiritual  corporation?  And 
if  there  be  in  the  Church  such  an  ordinance  of  ultimate  appeal,  and  peremptory 
decision,  shall  not  the  same  implicit  submission  be  required  which  God  com- 
manded that  men  should  render  under  the  law — a  submission  more  intelligent 
than  under  the  Jewish  dispensation,  and  therefore  more  voluntary,  yet  not  less 
absolute — and  shall  not  the  penalty  be  as  severe  as  it  then  was  for  the  despiser 
and  the  presumptuous?  12.  There  has  been  no  Catholic  judgment  in  the  Church 
since  the  removal  of  the  apostles;  and  we  are  conscious  of  the  condition  to  which 
we  have  been  reduced  by  the  want  of  judgment.  Questions,  doubts,  disputes, 
discontents,  hatreds,  divisions,  rebellions  have  accumulated.  13.  And  when 
God's  people  fall  into  such  depths  as  these,  how  does  He  act  towards  them?  "  He 
repenteth  Himself  for  His  servants,  when  He  seeth  that  their  power  is  gone" 
(Deut.  xxxii.  36).  Such  as  God  was  to  Israel  the  same  is  He  for  ever,  the  same  shall 
He  show  Himself  unto  His  Church.  And  unto  Israel  He  hath  said,  "  I  will  restore 
thy  judges  as  at  the  first,  and  thy  counsellers  as  at  the  beginning,  afterward  thou 
shalt  be  called  the  city  of  righteousness,  the  faithful  city "  (Isa.  i.  26).  Those 
judges  and  counsellors,  shall  not  they  be  peacemakers  for  the  long- vexed  Church 
— by  whom  the  winds  and  the  sea  shall  be  rebuked  and  there  shall  be  a  great 
calm?  {W.  Dow,  M.A.)  Our  best  safety : — I.  Acceptance  of  God's  decision 
xs  THS  APFAIRS  OB"  LIPB.  "  The  Lord  is  our  Judge."  These  words  do  not  refer 
to  the  final  judgment,  but  to  the  verdict  of  the  Judge  in  this  life.  1.  This  decision 
is  made  known  in  reference  to  nations,  as  in  this  chapter.  God  judged  between 
Israel  and  the  Assyrians  by  destroying  the  Assyrian  host.  He  showed  that  the 
Jews  were  His  people,  and  He  was  their  God.  2.  The  same  may  be  said  of  Churches, 
as  is  shown  by  the  history  of  the  seven  Churches  of  Asia.  3.  So  likewise  of 
individuals,  though  the  Divine  decision  in  this  case  is  not  always  so  manifest. 
II.  Acceptance  of  God's  will  as  the  btjle  op  life.  "  The  Lord  is  our  Law- 
giver." We  are  liable  to  take  our  own  passions,  inclinations,  and  desires  as  the 
rule  of  life.  Sometimes  the  maxims  of  society  and  the  examples  of  others.  But 
the  only  safe  rule  is  the  will  of  God.  1.  It  is  benevolent  in  its  intentions — it 
aims  at  our  happiness  here  and  hereafter.  2.  It  is  safe  in  its  action — always 
the  same.  Human  wisdom  changes.  3.  It  is  elevating  in  its  effects,  ennobles, 
enriches,  exalts.  4.  It  is  eternal.  We  must  ever  live  under  the  rule  of  this 
Lawgiver.  If  we  accept  it  as  the  rule  of  life  here,  it  will  be  the  delight  of  heaven 
to  live  under  the  same  hereafter.  III.  Acceptance  of  God's  sovereignty. 
"  The  Lord  is  our  Eang."  He  is  a  worthy  King.  1.  A  King  who  is  infinite  in 
power,  and  wisdom,  and  love.  2.  A  King  who  ever  thinks  of,  and  provides 
for,  the  welfare  of  His  subjects.  3.  A  King  whose  dominion  extends  to  all 
things;  to  every  element  and  every  creature;  to  aU  men  and  spirits,  good  and 
bad  ;  to  all  regions — earth,  heaven,  and  hell.  4.  A  King  whose  kingdom  shall 
have  no  end.     No  revolution  will  ever  disturb  the  security  of  His  throne,  and 


64  TEE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xxxm. 

that  because  the  sceptre  of  His  kingdom  is  a  right  sceptre.  Let  us  earnestly 
and  devoutly  say,  Thy  kingdom  come."  IV.  AssuEANOB  OF  satbty.  "Ho 
will  save  us."  A  result  arising  from  the  acceptance  of  the  Divine  under 
the  three  foregoing  aspects — as  Judge,  as  Lawgiver,  and  as  King.  (HomUist.) 
The  Lord  is  our  King. — Our  King:  —  Let  the  great  day  at  Hebron  when 
David  was  made  king  by  a  united  nation  be  to  as  a  type  of  that  greater 
day  when  a  united  world  with  a  perfect  heart  shall  crown  Jesus  King 
of  men.  L  Jesus  is  our  King  by  Divine  anointing.  2.  Jesus  received  regal 
honours  without  any  protest  on  His  part.  3.  When  Jesus  had  risen  from  the 
dead  and  ascended  into  heaven  there  was  another  crowning  there.  4.  Though 
Jesus  was  the  King  of  men.  He  refused  to  possess  universal  empire.  6.  Our  King 
has  two  great  things  to  do.  (1)  To  recover  men  from  sin.  He  had  to  bear  the 
penalty.  Jesus  recovers  us  also  by  delivering  us  from  our  inclination  to  sin. 
And  by  giving  penitence  to  the  human  heart.  (2)  To  make  us  kings  like  Himself. 
He  bids  every  man  hope  in  God.  6.  Our  King  is  powerful.  7.  He  is  an  active 
King.  8.  Wliat  shall  we  do  for  our  King?  (W.  Birch.)  Israel's  King: — 
Two  distinct  benefits  stand  out  as  soon  as  we  compare  the  condition  of  Israel 
under  the  judges  with  that  under  King  David  and  King  Solomon.  Under  the 
king  was  obtained — L  Unity.  One  nation  with  one  national  life,  instead 
of  isolated  tribes  living  under  their  own  judges,  and  having  little  cohesion  with 
the  other  tribes.  2.  Salvation  from  their  enemies,  and  prosperity  at  home. 
{HvbeH  Brooke,  M,A.) 

Ver.  23.  Thy  tacklings  are  loosed. — Thy  tacldinga  are  loosed : — The  tacklings 
may  denote  the  good  counsels  of  wise  senators;  a  strong,  well-disciplined  army; 
and  money,  which  is  necessary  to  supply  the  exigences  of  the  State.  These  tacklings 
are  loosed,  when  few  prudent  men  can  be  found  to  manage  public  affairs,  and 
to  form  the  manners  of  the  citizens;  when  the  soldiery  become  weak  and  timid, 
and  there  is  a  scarcity  of  finances  to  carry  into  execution  the  salutary  measures 
that  are  requisite  to  be  adopted.  {R.  MaccuUoch.)  They  covid  not  well 
lengthen  their  mast : — The  mast  of  the  ship  may  signify  the  most  eminent 
person  or  persons  in  the  kingdom  who  were  exalted  above  all  the  others.  The 
mast,  in  this  figurative  sense,  could  not  be  well  strengthened;  when  the  proper 
means  of  aiding  and  supporting  the  chief  magistrate  were  wanting  or  were  greatly 
deficient,  he  could  not  receive  the  succours  that  were  requisite  to  maintain 
the  dignity  and  prosperity  of  the  empire.  Persons  in  power  are  incapable  by 
themselves  to  advance  the  public  welfare,  unless  supported  by  the  wealth,  the 
interest,  the  advice,  and  courage  of  those  over  whom  they  preside.  {Ihid. )  They 
could  not  spread  the  sail : — The  sail  may  denote  the  means  that  were  necessary 
to  be  appUed  and  vigorously  extended  without  delay,  in  order  to  promote  the 
purposes  to  which  they  ought  to  be  subservient,  for  the  benefit  of  the  State. 
These  the  people  employed  in  managing  public  affairs  were  unable  immediately 
to  use,  so  as  to  give  effect  to  the  measures  whereby  the  common  interest  might 
have  been  forwarded.  (Ibid.)  The  prey  of  a  great  spoU : — The  power  whose 
situation  resembled  a  ship  in  distress  is  supposed  to  have  met  with  a  terrible 
storm,  whereby  she  had  been  dreadfully  shattered,  her  cables  and  ropes  loosed 
or  broken,  her  masts  disabled,  so  that  she  was  almost  a  wreck.  When  in  this 
forlorn  condition,  deserted  by  the  mariners,  who  had  lost  hopes  of  her  being  able 
to  stand  out  the  tempest,  the  valuable  cargo  wherewith  she  was  laden  becomes 
a  prey  to  the  fraudulent  and  rapacious.  {Ibid.)  The  ship  of  state: — The 
abrupt  transition  from  the  glorious  future  to  the  present  or  the  past,  is  somewhat 
surprising  at  this  point.  It  is  not  AssjTia  but  Zion  which  is  compared  to  an 
unsea worthy  ship.  (Prof.  J.  Skinner,  D.D.)  Seems  to  describe  the  fate  of  a 
hostile  ship.  {Prof.  A.  B.  Davidson,  LL.D.)  The  lame  take  the  prey. — The 
prey-taker : — Men  labour  under  seemingly  great  disadvantages,  and  amid  the 
most  unfavourable  circumstances,  yet  making  grand  achievements,  getting  great 
blessing  for  themselves,  great  blessing  for  the  world,  great  blessing  for  the  Church; 
and  so  "  the  lame  take  the  prey."  {T.  De  Witt  Talmage,  D.D.)  The  disabilities 
of  successful  men : — Do  you  know  that  the  three  great  poets  of  the  world  were 
totally  blind?  Homer,  Ossian,  John  Milton.  Do  you  know  that  Mr.  Prescott, 
who  wrote  that  enchanting  book  The  Conquest  of  Mexico,  never  saw  Mexico, 
could  not  even  see  the  paper  on  which  he  was  writing?  A  framework  across 
the  sheet,  between  which  up  and  down  went  his  pen  immortal.  Do  you  know 
that  Gambassio,  the  sculptor,  could  not  see  the  marble  before  him,  or  the  chisel 


CHAP.  XXXIII.]  ISAIAH.  66 

with  which  he  cut  it  into  shapes  bewitching?  Do  you  know  that  Alexander  Pope, 
whose  poems  will  last  as  long  as  the  English  language,  was  so  much  of  an  invalid 
that  he  had  to  be  sewed  up  every  morning  in  rough  canvas  in  order  to  stand  on 
his  feet  at  all?  Do  you  know  that  Stuart,  the  celebrated  painter,  did  much  of 
his  wonderful  work  under  the  shadow  of  the  dungeon  where  he  had  been  unjustly 
imprisoned  for  debt?  Do  you  know  that  Demosthenes  by  almost  superhuman 
exertion  first  had  to  conquer  the  lisp  of  his  own  speech  before  he  conquered 
assemblages  with  his  eloquence  ?  Do  you  know  that  Bacon  struggled  up  tlurough 
innumerable  sicknesses,  and  that  Lord  Byron  and  Sir  Walter  Scott  went  limping 
on  club-foot  through  all  their  life,  and  that  many  of  the  great  poets,  and  painters, 
and  orators,  and  historians,  and  heroes  of  the  world  had  something  to  keep  them 
back,  and  pull  them  down,  and  impede  their  way,  and  cripple  their  physical  or 
their  intellectual  movement,  and  yet  that  they  pushed  on  and  pushed  up  until 
they  reached  the  spoils  of  worldly  success,  and  amid  the  huzzas  of  nations  and 
centuries  "  the  lame  took  the  prey  "  7  You  know  that  a  vast  multitude  of  these 
men  started  under  the  disadvantage  of  obscure  parentage.  Columbus,  the  son 
of  the  weaver;  Ferguson,  the  astronomer,  the  son  of  the  shepherd.  America  the 
prey  of  the  one,  worlds  on  worlds  the  prey  of  the  other.  {Ibid.)  The  advantages 
of  invalidism : — What  is  true  in  secmar  directions,  is  more  true  in  spiritual  and 
religious  directiona.  There  are  in  all  communities  many  invalids.  They  never 
know  a  well  day.  They  adhere  to  their  occupations,  but  they  go  panting  along 
the  streets  with  exhaustions,  and  at  eventime  they  lie  down  on  the  lounge  with 
aching  beyond  all  medicament.  They  have  tried  all  prescriptions,  they  have  gone 
through  all  the  cures  which  were  proclaimed  infallible,  and  they  have  come  now 
to  surrender  to  perpetual  ailments.  They  consider  they  are  among  many  dis- 
advantages, and  when  they  see  those  who  are  buoyant  in  health  pass  by,  they 
almost  envy  their  robust  frames  and  easy  respirations.  But  I  have  noticed  among 
that  invalid  class  those  who  have  the  greatest  knowledge  of  the  Bible,  who  are  in 
the  nearest  intimacy  with  Jesus  Christ,  who  have  the  most  glowing  experiences 
of  the  truth,  who  have  had  the  most  remarkable  answers  to  prayer,  and  who  have 
most  exhilarant  anticipations  of  heaven.  The  temptations  which  weary  us  who 
are  in  robust  health,  they  have  conquered.  They  have  divided  among  them  the 
spoils  of  the  conquest.  Many  who  are  athletic  and  swarthy  loiter  in  the  road, 
while  these  are  the  lame  which  take  the  prey.  Robert  Hall  an  invalid,  Edward 
Payson  an  invalid,  Richard  Baxter  an  invalid,  Samuel  Rutherford  an  invalid. 
(Ibid.)  Physical  disability  attended  by  spiritual  advantage: — Through  raised 
letters  the  art  of  printing  has  been  brought  to  the  attention  of  the  blind.  You 
take  up  the  Bible  for  the  blind,  and  you  close  your  eyes,  and  you  run  your  fingers 
over  the  raised  letters,  and  you  say,  "  Why,  I  never  could  get  any  information  in 
this  way;  what  a  slow  way  of  reading.  God  help  the  blind."  And  yet  I  find 
among  that  class  of  persons — among  the  blind,  the  deaf,  and  the  dumb — the  most 
thorough  acquaintance  with  God's  Word.  Shut  out  from  all  other  sources  of 
information,  no  sooner  does  their  hand  touch  the  raised  letter  than  they  gather  a 
prayer.  Without  eyes,  they  look  off  upon  the  kingdoms  of  God's  love.'  Without 
hearing,  they  catch  the  minstrelsy  of  the  skies.  Dumb,  yet  with  pencil  or  with 
irradiated  countenance,  they  declare  the  glory  of  God.  A  large  audience  assembled 
in  New  York  at  the  anniversary  of  the  Deaf  and  Dumb  Asylum,  and  one  of  the 
visitors,  with  chalk  on  the  blackboard,  wrote  this  question  to  the  pupils,  "  Do  you 
not  find  it  very  hard  to  be  deaf  and  dumb?  "  And  one  of  the  pupils  took  the 
chalk  and  wrote  on  the  blackboard  this  sublime  sentence  in  answer:  "  When  the 
Bong  of  the  angels  shall  burst  upon  our  enraptured  ear  we  will  scarcely  regret  that 
our  ears  were  never  marred  with  earthly  sounds."  {Ibid.)  Spiritual  compensa- 
tion for  physical  blindness: — A  lad  who  had  been  bhnd  from  infancy  was  cured. 
The  oculist  operated  upon  the  lad,  and  then  put  a  very  heavy  bandage  over  the 
eyes,  and  after  a  few  weeks  had  gone  by  the  bandage  was  removed,  and  the  mother 
said  to  her  child,  "  Willie,  can  you  see?  "  He  said,  "  Oh,  mamma,  is  this  heaven?  " 
The  contrast  betwBen  the  darkness  before  and  the  brightness  afterwards  was  over- 
whelming. And  I  tell  you  the  glories  of  heaven  will  be  a  thousandfold  brighter 
for  those  who  never  saw  anything  on  earth.  {Ibid.)  Poor,  yet  rich : — There  are 
those  in  all  communities  who  toil  mightily  for  a  livelihood.  They  have  scant  wages. 
Perhaps  they  are  diseased,  or  have  physical  infirmities,  so  that  they  are  hindered 
from  doing  a  continuous  day's  work.  A  city  missionary  finds  them  up  the  dark 
alley,  with  no  fire,  with  thin  clothing,  with  very  coarse  bread.  They  never  ride  in 
the  street  car;  they  cannot  afford  the  five  cents.  They  never  see  any  pictures  save 
VOL.  II. — 5 


66  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xxxm. 

those  in  the  show  window  on  the  street,  from  which  they  are  often  jostled  and 
looked  at  by  someone  who  seems  to  say  in  the  look,  "  Move  on !  what  are  you  doing 
here  looking  at  pictures?  "  Yet  many  of  them  live  on  mountains  of  transfiguration. 
At  their  rough  table  He  who  fed  the  five  thousand  breaks  the  bread.  They  talk 
often  of  the  good  times  that  are  coming.  This  world  has  no  charm  for  them,  but 
heaven  entrances  their  spirit.  They  often  divide  their  scant  crust  with  some 
forlorn  wretch  who  knocks  at  their  door  at  night,  and  on  the  blast  of  the  night  wind, 
as  the  door  opens  to  let  them  in,  is  heard  the  voice  of  Him  who  said,  "  I  was  hungry 
and  ye  fed  Me."  No  cohort  of  heaven  will  be  too  bright  to  transport  them. 
By  God's  help  they  have  vanquished  the  Assyrian  host.  {Ibid.)  Ordinary 
Christians  may  accomplish  great  good  : — There  are  those  who  would  like  to  do  good. 
They  say,  "  Oh,  if  I  only  had  wealth,  or  if  I  had  eloquence,  or  if  I  had  high  social 
position,  how  much  I  would  accomplish  for  God  and  the  Church."  You  have 
great  opportunities  for  usefulness.  Who  built  the  Pyramids?  The  king  who 
ordered  them  built?  No;  the  plain  workmen  who  added  stone  after  stone,  stone 
after  stone.  Who  built  the  dykes  of  Holland?  The  government  that  ordered  the 
enterprise?  No;  the  plain  workmen  who  carried  the  stuff  and  rung  their  trowels 
on  the  wall.  Who  are  those  who  have  built  these  vast  cities?  The  capitalists? 
No;  the  carpenters,  the  masons,  the  plumbers,  the  plasterers,  the  tinners,  the 
roofers  dependent  on  a  day's  wages  for  a  livelihood.  And  so  in  the  great  work  of 
assuaging  human  suffering,  and  enlightening  human  ignorance,  and  halting  human 
iniquity.  In  that  great  work  the  chief  part  is  to  be  done  by  ordinary  men,  with 
ordinary  speech,  in  an  ordinary  manner,  and  by  ordinary  means.  (Ibid.)  The 
lame  take  the  prey : — A  long,  long  while  that  has  puzzled  one,  why  the  prophet 
should  say,  "  The  lame  take  the  prey."  Our  experience  of  human  life  goes  to  show 
that  lame  people  seldom  succeed  in  taking  the  great  prizes  of  Ufe.  If  a  man  is  lame 
in  his  power  of  calculation,  and  cannot  easily  count  up  columns  of  figures ;  if  he  is 
lame  in  his  caligraphy,  if  he  is  lame  in  his  memory,  and  cannot  easily  recall  names 
and  f^ices;  if  he  is  lame  in  the  power  of  touch,  and  cannot  detect  the  difference 
between  two  apparently  identical  fabrics;  if  a  man  is  lame  in  any  faculty,  he  is 
crushed  to  the  wall  in  the  busy  rush  of  human  life  and  arrives  at  the  end  of  the 
crowd  to  take  the  leavings  of  the  rest.  In  human  life  a  man  who  is  lame  anyhow 
misses  the  prey,  misses  the  spoil,  misses  the  prize.  But  in  God's  world,  in  God's 
Book,  in  God's  dealings  with  men,  "  The  race  is  not  to  the  swift,  or  the  battle  to 
the  strong."  Weakness  has  a  fascination  for  God;  and  those  who  have  lost  every- 
thing that  this  world  can  give  are  they  who  come  off  best  with  our  heavenly 
Father.  {F.  B.  Meyer,  B.A.)  Henry  Fawcett,  Postmaster-General : — One  great 
Postmaster  -  General  of  England  was  lame  in  his  sight.  Mr.  Fawcett  was 
blind,  but  he  took  the  prey  of  a  great  office  which  he  fulfilled  with  great  success. 
{Ibid.)  The  weak  favoured  : — I  got  an  illustration  of  this  when  I  happened  to 
be  staying  in  a  farm-house.  With  one  exception  the  family  consisted  of  robust, 
hearty  children,  but  there  was  one  little  lame  boy.  Whilst  I  was  staying,  there 
came  in  a  great  hamper  of  apples,  and  at  once  all  the  boys  and  girls  in  the  family, 
having  eyed  them  wistfully,  proceeded  to  appropriate,  and  to  appropriate  very 
lavishly,  the  apples.  The  little  lame  fellow,  with  his  puny,  wan  face,  looked  forward 
eagerly  as  those  apples  disappeared,  and  no  one  thought  of  him,  till  mother  came, 
a  bustling,  quick-tempered  woman.  She  said,  "  What  is  that  you  are  doing? 
Put  all  those  apples  back  again,  I  tell  you."  And  very  ruefully  they  replaced 
them.  "  Now,"  she  said,  "  Jimmy,  you  come  and  take  your  pick."  And  the 
little  lame  fellow  on  the  crutch  pushed  his  way  up  to  the  table,  took  the  ripest  and 
juiciest,  and  filled  his  pockets  as  full  as  they  would  hold,  and  then  went  back  with  a 
flush  upon  his  pale  cheeks.  Then  mother  said  to  the  other  children,  "  Now  do  what 
you  like  with  the  rest."  I  saw  how  in  mother's  love  the  lame  take  the  prey !  {Ibid. ) 
The  weak  specially  cared  for: — I  came  afterwards  into  the  house  of  a  workman,  a 
smith,  one  whose  closed  fist  could  fell  any  man.  He  had  an  ailing  child.  A  little, 
puny  thing  lay  and  cried  in  the  cradle.  There  was  no  chance  to  rear  it;  it  must  die. 
And  he  came  in  from  his  smithy — a  strong,  brawny  man,  with  black  hair.  And  I 
tell  you  that  child  dragged  that  man  down  to  the  level,  and  its  poor,  weak,  puny 
frame  was  able  to  do  for  that  strong  man  what  the  strongest  in  the  village  could  not 
— it  could  fell  him!  And  at  once  there  came  upon  me  the  conception,  in  dealing 
with  God,  at  any  rate,  it  is  not  the  strong  man  who  can  shoulder  his  way  and  fight 
the  brunt  and  take  what  he  will  in  this  world,  every  one  waiting  behind  him,  but 
it  is  the  weak  who  get  the  tenderest  blessings.  {Ibid.)  The  lowly  are  enriched : — 
When  I  began  to  preach  I  thought  all  God's  best  things  were  on  the  tall  shelf,  and 


CHAP,  xxxm.]  ISAIAH.  67 

when  I  got  very  good  I  should  be  able  to  reach  them  down.  Now  I 
find  all  the  best  gifts  are  on  the  low  shelf,  that  the  babes  can  get  at.  And 
it  is  only  when  we  become  as  little  babes,  only  when  we  become  simple, 
natural,  and  our  stiflE  backs  get  bent,  that  we  get  low  enough  to  take  God's 
benefits.     {Ibid.) 

Ver.  24.  And  the  inhabitant  shall  not  say,  I  am  sick. — The  hlisa  of  heaven : — 
Two  principal  circumstances  are  dwelt  upon,  as  constituting  the  bliss  of  heaven. 
I.  There  is  no  soreow  dt  heaven.  "  The  inhabitant  shall  not  say,  I  am  sick." 
It  is  otherwise  in  this  world,  ruined  as  it  has  been  by  sin.  Here  "  the  whole  head 
is  sick,  and  the  whole  heart  faint."  And  what  men  universally  feel,  they  with  one 
consent  complain  of.  In  one  way  or  other,  every  child  of  Adam  is  exclaiming,  "  I 
am  sick!  "  With  some^l.  The  body  is  sick.  But  in  heaven  there  is  nothing 
of  all  this.  2.  The  heart  is  sick — sick  of  "  hope  deferred,"  of  rash  and  ill-judged 
wishes,  of  continual  disappointments.  In  heaven,  no  heart  saith,  "  I  am  sick." 
No  disappointment,  there,  of  former  hopes.  Even  hope  finds  no  admission  there. 
"  We  hope  for  that  we  see  not."  But  in  heaven  aU  is  sight,  and  knowledge,  and 
solid  experience.  3.  The  soul  is  sick.  In  heaven  no  indwelling  sin  will  remain,  to 
suggest  evil,  when  we  "  would  do  good  ":  no  tempter,  to  recommend  to  us  for- 
bidden pleasures:  no  apostate,  rebellious  world,  to  revile,  ensnare,  or  persecute 
the  friends  of  God.  Still — as  there  can  be  no  doubt  that  memory  will  accompany 
the  soul  into  its  heavenly  habitation — it  may  be  imagined  by  some  that  the 
recollection  of  sins  committed  on  earth  must  interfere  with  its  entire  felicity.  But 
the  apprehension  is  groundless.  That  a  deep  sense  of  unworthiness  will  exist, 
there  is  no  doubt;  even  the  sinless  angels  feel  this.  But  the  paimful  sense  of  guilt 
will  be  for  ever  excluded.  II.  There  is  no  condemnation  in  heaven.  "  The 
people  that  dwell  therein  shall  be  forgiven  their  iniquity."  1.  The  forgiveness  of 
sin  wiU  be  more  certain.  Forgiveness  is  certain  to  the  real  believer;  but  who  is 
certain  of  himself?  2.  The  forgiveness  of  sin  will  then  be  more  complete, — not 
so  much  the  forgiveness  itself,  as  the  consequences  of  it.  (J.  Jowett,  M.A.) 
Healing  and  pardon : — This  whole  chapter  was  a  gracious  message  from  God  to  a 
people  who  were  in  extremis.  When  the  worst  had  come  to  the  worst.  He  laid  bare 
His  arm  and  brought  deliverance  for  His  people.  Is  not  this  a  general  rule  with 
God?  The  peril  of  Jerusalem  serves  as  a  dark  background  to  bring  out  the  bright- 
ness of  my  text.  I.  There  is  such  a  thing  as  present  forgiveness.  There 
must  be  a  present,  conscious,  enjoyable  pardon  of  sin — 1.  Else  there  would  be  no 
joy  in  the  world  for  thoughtful  minds.  2.  Else  the  main  motive  and  fountain  of 
love  would  be  dried  up.  Forgiveness  begets  gratitude,  gratitude  creates  love,  and 
love  brings  forth  holiness.  3.  Else  we  should  always  be  in  bondage  through  fear 
of  death.  4.  Else  the  whole  system  of  grace  would  be  a  dead  letter,  and  its  glorious 
privileges  would  be  mere  shells  without  a  kernel.  Let  us  bend  our  thoughts 
to  a  consideration  of  this  great  blessing  as  it  is  treated  of  in  this  chapter.  (1)  It  is 
plainly  promised  in  the  text.  (2)  If  we  wish  to  obtain  this  free  pardon  it  will  be 
granted  in  answer  to  prayer.  Read  the  second  verse:  "  0  Lord,  be  gracious  unto 
us."  (3)  Pardon  is  given  in  connection  with  the  exaltation  of  God.  Read  the  fifth 
verse:  "  The  Lord  is  exalted."  He  does  not  grant  this  forgiveness  until  we  begin 
to  recognise  that  He  is  a  great  God  and  a  Saviour.  We  must  see  that  He  is  great  in 
justice,  and  we  must  bow  in  penitence,  and  honour,  that  justice.  (4)  God  grants 
pardon  when  men  are  humbled.  See  the  seventh  verse:  "  Their  valiant  ones  shall 
cry  without:  the  ambassadors  of  peace  shall  weep  bitterly."  (5)  God  grants  this 
pardon  also  when  the  heart  is  searched.  Read  the  fourteenth  verse:  "  The  sinners 
in  Zion  are  afraid;  fearfulness  hath  surprised  the  hypocrites.  Who  among  us 
shall  dwell  with  the  devouring  fire?  "  When  we  begin  to  examine  ourselves,  to  fear 
because  of  sin,  and  to  turn  from  all  hypocrisy,  then  the  Lord  will  accept  us.  (6)  God 
will  also  pardon  us  when  He  is  acknowledged  to  be  our  Ruler  and  Lord.  Look  at 
the  twenty-second  verse:  "  The  Lord  is  our  judge,"  &c.  (7)  He  will  also  forgive 
us  when  we  put  our  trust  in  Him.  Read  the  last  clause  of  the  twenty-second  verse: 
"  He  will  save  us."  Faith  must  look  for  salvation  from  the  Lord  alone,  and  then 
salvation  wiU  come  to  it.  II.  When  sin  is  pardoned,  the  consequences  of  sin 
ARE  ALSO  removed.  Sin  had  made  these  people  sick,  as  Isaiah  saith  in  his  first 
chapter — "  The  whole  head  is  sick,  and  the  whole  heart  faint."  But  when  iniquity 
is  forgiven,  then  "  the  inhabitant  shall  not  say,  I  am  sick."  Special  chastisement 
is  usually  removed  when  any  peculiar  sin  is  forgiven.  In  the  case  of  believers  in  the 
Lord  Jesus  Christ,  if  some  of  the  temporal  results  of  sin  do  not  cease,  yet  it  is  only 


68  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  xixin. 

in  appearance  that  they  remain:  or  rather  they  remain  for  other  purposes,  benign 
and  useful,  and  not  as  wrathful  inflictions,  m.  This  maess  a  remabeabli  change 
IN  THB  LANOtTAGE  OF  THE  FAVOTTBED  PEOPLE.  "  The  inhabitant  shall  not  say,  I 
am  sick."  1.  They  have  no  need  to  say  it  when  the  Lord  comes  and  dwells  with 
them ;  for  the  Sun  of  Righteousness  hath  risen  upon  them  with  healing  in  His  wings. 
2.  They  shall  have  no  thought  of  saying,  "  I  am  sick."  He  that  feels  the  joy  of 
pardoned  sin  forgets  all  his  pains  and  griefs.  3.  These  people  did  not  say  they 
were  sick,  since  they  had  a  motive  for  not  saying  so.  The  tliee  lepers  who  went 
out  and  divided  the  spoil  did  not  say,  "  We  are  lepers  " :  that  was  forgotten,  and 
they  entered  the  tents  as  if  they  had  been  in  health.  They  went  into  one  pavilion 
and  ate  and  drank,  and  then  they  went  into  another.  Men  free  from  leprosy  could 
not  have  made  themselves  more  at  home.  They  took  away  gold  and  silver  and 
hid  it;  though  they  were  lepers.  So  when  the  Lord  pardons  our  sin  there  is  a  prey 
to  be  taken:  riches  of  grace  are  at  our  disposal.  4.  Pardoned  people  shall  not  say 
they  are  sick,  for  by  a  little  anticipation  they  shall  declare  the  very  contrary.  In 
a  little  time  we  shall  be  where  the  inhabitant  shall  never  be  sick  again.  (C.  H. 
Spurgeon. )  Sickness  arid  sin: — I.  Let  us  speak  of  those  "  ills  that  flesh  is  heir 
TO."  Whereverman  exists  in  this  world,  the  cry  is  heard,"  I  am  sick."  It  isso  because 
wherever  man  exists  there  is  sin.  Disease  has  been  sent  to  reprove  the  sins  of  men, 
and  to  correct  them  with  salutary  pain.  We  are  not  competent  to  decide  what 
specific  connection  there  is  between  disease  and  sin  in  the  case  of  our  fellow-men. 
Endurance  of  sickness  is  more  often  a  mark  of  God's  goodwill  than  of  His  severe 
displeasure.  1.  Pain  removes  us  out  of  the  way  of  temptation,  gives  us  time  for 
reflection,  when  we  were  hastily  running  into  danger.  2.  How  much  a  formidable 
sickness  has  helped  a  believer  in  drawing  out  his  thoughts  to  the  heavenly  country 
and  the  passage  into  glory  !  But  these  considerations  do  not  remove  this  original 
and  humbling  fact  that  sickness  is  a  disorder  in  God's  world  and  that  it  is  connected 
with  that  moral  disorder  which  we  call  sin.  11.  The  removal  of  both  these.  As 
sickness  and  sin  entered  together,  so  shall  they  depart  together.  (X).  Fraser,  D.D.) 
Pardon  does  not  involve  immediate  deliverance  from-  all  evil : — Upon  one  other  point 
connected  with  the  forgiveness  of  sins  we  get  instruction  from  the  experience  of 
Jerusalem.  Pardon  does  not  change  the  outside  of  life;  it  does  not  immediately 
modify  the  movements  of  history,  or  suspend  the  laws  of  nature.  Although  God 
has  forgiven  Jerusalem,  Assyria  comes  back  to  besiege  her.  Although  the  penitent 
be  truly  reconciled  to  God,  the  constitutional  results  of  his  fall  remain:  the 
frequency  of  temptation,  the  power  of  habit,  the  bias  and  facility  downwards,  the 
physical  and  social  consequences.  Pardon  changes  none  of  these  things.  It  does 
not  keep  off  the  Assyrians.  But,  if  pardon  means  the  return  of  God  to  the  soul, 
then  in  this  we  have  the  secret  of  the  return  of  the  foe.  Men  could  not  try  nor 
develop  a  sense  of  the  former  except  by  their  experience  of  the  latter.  Had  the 
Assyrians  not  returned,  the  Jews  would  have  had  no  experimental  proof  of  God's 
restored  presence,  and  the  great  miracle  would  never  have  happened  that  rang 
through  human  history  for  evermore — a  trumpet-call  to  faith  in  the  God  of  Israel. 
And  so,  still  "  the  Lord  ecourgeth  every  son  whom  He  receiveth,"  because  He 
would  put  our  penitence  to  the  test;  because  He  would  discipline  our  disorganised 
affections,  and  give  conscience  and  will  a  chance  of  wiping  out  defeat  by  victory; 
because  He  would  baptize  us  with  the  most  powerful  baptism  possible — the  sense 
of  being  trusted  once  more  to  face  the  enemy  upon  the  fields  of  our  disgrace.  {Prof. 
O.  A.  Smith,  D.D.)  "  Nobody  is  quite  well  : — A  friend  who  met  Lord  Beacons- 
field  soon  after  that  statesman  had  lost  his  helpful  wife  hoped  that  he  was  quite 
well.  In  a  hollow  voice  Beaconsfield  answered,  "  Nobody  is  quite  well."  This  ia 
true.  {Quiver.)  Forgiveness  and  healing: — A  brother  had  grievously  offended, 
and  had  been  put  out  from  Church  fellowship  for  his  sin;  and  he  so  behaved  that  his 
pastor  thought  of  him  with  pain,  and  was  glad  to  avoid  an  interview  with  him,  for 
it  only  produced  a  sad  attempt  at  self -justification.  At  length  the  Lord  brought 
him  to  a  better  mind.  He  sought  his  pastor,  and  said,  with  tears,  "  Will  you  shake 
hands  with  me?  "  The  pastor  replied,  "  Right  gladly.  I  rejoice  to  feel  that  the 
past  is  all  forgiven.     How  are  youT  "     The  repentant  one  made  this  reply,  "  I  am 

Suite  well  now  that  you  restore  me  to  your  esteem."  The  poor  man  was  extremely 
1,  but  the  joy  of  being  once  more  in  his  old  place  in  his  friend's  thoughts  made  him 
refuse  to  say ,"  I  am  sick."  (C.  H.  Spurgeon.)  Forgiveness : — "  Thy  sins  be  for- 
given thee.  It  is  a  beautiful  figure.  It  is  as  if  a  boat  was  moored  to  a  filthy 
mainland  and  could  not  get  away.  There  comes  a  man  who  cuts  the  cable,  and  the 
boat  floats  away  down  stream.     That  is  the  figure  given.     The  Lord  cornea  and 


CHAP.  xxxiT.]  ISAIAH.  69 

cuts  the  cable  that  binds  me  to  the  filthy  mainland  of  the  past,  and  my  boat  goes 
free.    {J.  H.  JoweU,  M.A.) 


CHAPTER  XXXIV. 


ViEBS.  1-17.  Come  near,  ye  nations,  to  hear. — The  subject  is,  as  in  chap.  adiL,  the 
Lord's  judgment  upon  all  the  nations;  and  as  chap  xiii.  singled  out  Babylon  for 
special  doom,  so  chap,  xxxiv.  singles  out  Edom.  (Prof.  O.  A.  Smith,  D.D.) 
Edom  represents  here  all  the  powers  hostile  to  the  Church  of  God  as  such,  and  is 
thus  an  idea  of  the  profoundest  and  widest  cosmical  significance.  {F.  Delitzsch.) 
Edom's  punishment : — The  eternal  punishment  falling  on  the  Edomites  is  depicted 
(vers.  8-10)  in  figures  and  colours  suggested  by  the  nearness  of  Edom  to  the  Dead 
Sea,  and  the  volcanic  character  of  this  mountain-land;  it  suffers  the  fate  of  Sodom 
and  Gomorrah  (Jer.  xlix.  18).  {Ibid.)  Isaiah  xxxiv.  and  xxxv.: —  These  are  two 
wonderful  chapters,  and  great  use  is  made  of  them  by  Jeremiah  and  by  Zephaniah. 
This  use  of  the  Bible  by  the  Bible  is  of  great  consequence;  not  only  is  it  interesting 
as  a  literary  incident,  but  it  is  full  of  suggestion  as  to  the  range  and  certainty  and 
usefulness  of  inspiration.     {J.  Parker,  D.D.) 

Yet.  5.  My  sword  shall  be  bathed  In  heaven. — The  eword  bathed  in  heaven: — 
The  text  draws  back  the  curtain  which  separates  the  visible  world  from  the  invisible. 
It  reveals  celestial  regions,  in  whch  there  are  also  great  struggles  going  on.  It  lifts 
up  our  eyes  to  the  grander  movements  of  the  world  of  spirits;  and  then  it  declares 
that  the  sword  which  is  to  be  used  in  fighting  what  seem  to  be  the  petty  wars  of  the 
Hebrews  and  the  Edomites,  is  the  same  sword  which  has  been  used  in  these  celestial 
conflicts;  that  the  means  and  instruments  of  righteousness  upon  the  earth  must  be 
the  same  with  the  means  and  instruments  of  righteousness  in  the  heavens.     I.  All 

GOOD  STETTGGLE  IN  THB  WOELD  IS  EBALLY  God's  BATTLE,  and  Ought  tO  rOCOgnise 

itself  as  such.  Every  special  victory  of  human  progress — the  victory  over  slavery, 
superstition,  social  wrong,  nay,  even  the  victory  over  tough  matter,  the  subduing 
of  the  hard  stuff  of  nature  to  spiritual  uses, — each  of  these  is  but  a  step  in  the  great 
onward  march  of  God  taking  possession  of  His  own.  Fight  your  battle  with  the 
Bword  bathed  in  heaven;  so  you  shall  make  it  victorious,  and  grow  strong  and  great 
yoiu"self  in  fighting  it.  11.  One  of  the  most  marvellous  things  about  Jesus  is  the 
TTNiON  OP  FIEB  AND  PATIENCE.  He  saw  His  Father's  house  turned  into  a  place  of 
merchandise,  and  instantly  the  whip  of  small  cords  was  in  ffis  hands,  and  He  was 
cleansing  the  sacred  place  with  His  impassioned  indignation.  And  yet  He  walked 
day  after  day  through  the  streets  of  Jerusalem,  and  saw  the  sin,  and  let  the  sinners 
sin  on  with  only  the  remonstrance  of  His  pure  presence  and  His  pitying  gaze.  Only 
in  God's  own  time  and  in  God's  own  way  can  the  battles  of  the  Lord  be  fought. 
There  is  no  self-will  in  Jesus.  He  is  one  with  His  Father,  and  lives  by  His  Father's 
will.  His  sword  was  always  bathed  in  heaven.  HI.  The  battle  which  gobs  on 
WITHIN  otTESBLVES  IS  God's  BATTLE,  and  is  of  Supreme  importance.  If  the  battle 
be  God's,  it  must  be  fought  only  with  God's  weapons.  You  want  to  get  rid  of  your 
selfishness.  You  must  not  kill  it  with  the  sword  of  another  selfishness,  which 
thenceforth  shall  rule  in  its  place.  Selfishness  can  only  be  cast  out  by  self-forget- 
fulness  and  consecration.  To  count  sin  God's  enemy,  and  to  fight  it  with  all  His 
purity  and  strength,  that  is  what  it  means  for  us  that  our  sword  should  be  bathed 
in  heaven.    {PhiUipa  Brooks,  D.D.) 

Ver.  16.  Seek  ye  out  of  the  Book  of  the  Lord. — Th^  Scriptures  the  Book  of  the 

Lord,  to  be  diligently  studied: — I.  The  Holy  ScEiPTirRE  is  the  Book  of  the  Lobd. 
II.  The  Sceiptttee  is  a  Book  to  be  eead  ;  carefully  and  diligently  searched,  con- 
sulted and  sought  unto.  (T.  Watson,  D.D.)  The  Holy  Scripture  is  the  Book  of 
the  Lord: — 1.  This  Book  discovers  what  no  mortal  could  ever  have  done,  and  nowise 
could  be  had  but  by  Divine  revelation.  2.  The  perfect  holiness  of  the  doctrine. 
3.  The  eAcacy  of  the  doctrine  in  its  searching  and  convincing  the  conscience  (Heb. 
iv.  12) ;  converting  souls  from  their  most  beloved  lusts,  even  when  nothing  can  be 
expected  from  the  world  for  such  a  change  (Psa.  xix.  7);  rejoicing  the  heart  under 
the  deepest  distresses  (ver.  8).  This  is  not  from  any  virtue  in  the  letters  or  sylla- 
bles, but  from  the  Spirit,  whose  instrument  it  is.     4.  The  miracles  wherewith  it 


7t)  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  xxxy 

bas  been  confirmed.  5.  There  is  an  inward  sensation  of  this  in  the  spirits  of  thos« 
that  have  their  senses  exercised.  {Ibid.)  Seeking  out  of  the  Book  of  the  Lord : — 
WTiat  is  presupposed  in  this  seeking  out  of  the  Book  of  the  Lord?  1.  That  man  has 
lost  his  way,  and  needs  direction  to  find  it.  2.  That  man  is  in  hazard  of  being  led 
further  and  further  wrong.  3.  That  men  are  slow  of  heart  to  understand  the 
mind  of  God  in  His  Word.  4.  That  the  Book  of  the  Lord  has  its  difficulties  which 
are  not  to  be  easily  solved.  5.  That  we  need  highly  to  understand  it ;  otherwise  we 
would  not  be  bidden  search  into  it.  6.  That  we  may  gain  from  it  by  diligent  inquiry. 
(Ibid.)  Reasons  for  searching  the  Book  of  the  Lord: — 1.  Because  the  way  of  salva- 
tion is  to  be  found  only  therein  (John  v.  39).  2.  It  is  the  only  rule  of  our  faith  and 
lives  (Isa.  viii.  20).  The  lawyer  studies  his  law  books,  the  physician  his  medical 
books ;  and  shall  not  a  Christian  study  the  Book  of  the  Lord ?  3.  The  Lord  Himself 
dictated  it  and  gave  it  us  for  that  very  end  (2  Tim.  iii.  16,  17;  Rom.  xv.  4). 
4.  We  must  be  judged  by  the  Scriptures  at  the  great  day  (John  xii.  48).  (Ibid.) 
The  systematic  investigation  of  Christianity : — I.  Unless  the  Gospel  be  made  the 

SUBJECT  OF  MUCH  EEFLECTION  AND  EARNEST  INVESTIGATION  IT  CANNOT  BE  KIGHTLY 

UNDERSTOOD.  Are  those  truths  which  have  a  reference  to  the  grandest  objects 
in  existence  so  very  easily  to  be  comprehended  as  to  require  less  attention  than  the 
ordinary  facts  and   principles  which  are  connected  with  business  or  literature? 

II.  Universally  human  nature  is  in  a  state  of  moral  disorder  and  rebellion  against 
God;  and  as  Christianity  has  been  sent  from  heaven  with  the  express  design 
OF  removing  that  disorder  and  effecting  a  reconciliation  between  God  and 

MAN,  IT  IS  indispensably  REQUISITE  THAT  ALL  SHOULD  KNOW  IN  WHAT  IT  CONSISTS. 

( W.  Keith).  Reading  the  Scriptures: — I.  The  Scriptures  should  be  read  with  a 
SERIOUS  MIND.  The  argument  by  which  Moses  urged  the  Jews  to  attend  to  the  laws 
of  God  may  be  applied  to  Scripture  at  large — "It  is  not  a  vain  thing:  it  is  your 
life."  When  we  read  our  Bible  we  stand  in  the  presence  of  God:  we  are  receiving 
His  communications.  II.  The  Scriptures  should  be  read  with  earnest  prayer. 
Divine  influence  is  needful  to  impress  them  upon  our  understandings  and  hearts. 

III.  Scripture  should  be  read  with  pure  intentions.  "  If  any  man  will  do  His  will," 
&c.     Nothing  resists  the  evidence  or  dislikes  the  principles  of  the  Bible  but  sin. 

IV.  The  Bible  should  be  read  with  expectations  and  desires.  We  cannot  place 
too  much  confidence  in  its  authority,  or  anticipate  too  much  comfort  from  its 
influence.  All  that  may  be  expected  from  God  may  be  expected  from  His  _Word. 
There  He  opens  His  resources  and  declares  His  will ;  there  we  read  what  He  is,  and 
what  He  can  do,  and  what  He  intends  to  do.  To  read  the  Bible  and  expect  nothing 
from  its  influence  is  to  reflect  dishonour  upon  it.  V.  The  Bible  should  be  read  with 
retentive  memories.  It  is  intended  not  so  much  for  present  entertainment,  as  for 
future  wisdom  and  holiness:  its  contents,  therefore,  should  be  stored  and  classed 
in  the  memory,  to  be  drawn  forth  and  applied  as  the  different  circumstances  of  life 
require.  This  study  of  the  Scriptures  produces  incalculable  advantages;  it  will 
afford — 1.  The  most  valuable  instruction.  2.  The  best  impressions.  There  is  an 
energy  in  the  Bible  which  no  man  of  feeling  can  withstand.  The  words  which  it 
contains  are  "  spirit  and  life."  Under  Divine  influence  it  has  counteracted  carnal 
affections  and  vicious  propensities;  it  has  raised  men's  minds  to  God:  it  has  filled 
them  with  love  to  mankind.  So  as  Scripture  makes  men  holy  it  makes  them  happy. 
In  the  midst  of  trouble  they  have  an  unfailing  refuge.     {Homilist.) 


CHAPTER  XXXV. 


The  recurrence  of  the  figures  of  Isa.  xxxv.: — Many  of  the  figures  in  this  beautiful 
prophecy  of  Israel's  restoration  recur  in  the  course  of  chaps,  xl.-lxvi., — ver.  10,  for 
instance,  is  repeated  verbatim  in  chap.  li.  11.  (Prof.  S.  R.  Driver,  D.D.)  The 
manifold  application  of  Isa.  xxxv. : — Without  any  change  of  its  essential  meaning 
it  may  be  applied  to  the  restoration  of  the  Jews  from  Babylon,  to  the  vocation  of 
the  Gentiles,  to  the  whole  Christian  dispensation,  to  the  course  of  every  individual 
believer,  and  to  the  whole  blessedness  of  heaven.  The  ground  of  this  manifold 
api)lication  is  not  that  the  language  of  the  passage  is  unmeaning  or  indefinite,  but 
that  there  is  a  real  and  designed  analogy  between  the  various  changes  mentioned 
which  brings  them  all  within  the  natural  scope  of  the  same  inspired  description. 


CHAP.  XXXV.]  ISAIAH.  71 

{J.  A.  Alexander.)  A  joyous  chapter: — This  chapter  contains  thirty-five  distinct 
promises,  among  them  twenty-two  "  shalls  " — nine  "  shalls"  of  blessing  and  com- 
fort ;  eight  "  shalls  "  of  deliverance;  five  "  shalls  "  of  joy.  It  begins  and  ends  with 
"joy."     (E.  J.  Banks.) 

Vers.  1-10.  The  wilderness  and  the  solitary  place  shall  he  glad  for  them. — The 
blessings  of  the  Gospel : — The  thirty-fourth  and  the  thirty-fifth  chapters  of  Isaiah 
are  by  the  best  scholars  supposed  to  constitute  one  entire  and  complete  prophecy, 
not  connected  specially,  or  at  least  organically,  with  what  goes  before  or  follows. 
It  is  a  masterpiece  of  poetry.  A  single  poem  divided  into  two  parts ;  in  the  first 
part,  the  prophet  sets  forth  in  lurid  colours  the  universal  judgments  of  God  upon  all 
the  nations  of  the  earth  which  have  arrayed  themselves  against  Him  and  oppressed 
His  people.  As  an  instance  of  what  shall  come  upon  all,  he  selects  a  single  nation, 
that  of  the  Edomites,  and  shows  forth  in  them  what  shall  come  upon  all.  This 
awful  storm  of  wrath  passes  away;  and  we  see  in  the  "  clear  shining  after  rain  " 
the  beautiful  prospect  which  is  opened  up  to  both  earth  and  man,  when  God's 
enemies  cease  from  troubling  and  His  people  are  gathered  unto  Himself.  The  almost 
universal  habit  of  spiritualising  this,  and  all  Hke  prophecies,  and  allegorising  them 
into  an  exclusive  application  to  present  Gospel  blessings,  has  served  to  hide  the 
chief  significance  of  the  passage  from  the  eyes  of  the  ordinary  reader.  The  promise 
of  this  glorious  chapter  is  without  doubt  primarily  and  chiefly  to  the  Jews,  referring 
to  their  final  restoration  to  their  own  land  in  the  last  days.  That  it  has  a  prelim- 
inary reference  to  the  return  from  the  Babylonian  captivity  is  possible,  but  it  looks 
far  beyond  that  time  to  the  return  from  the  dispersion  which  the  Jews  are  now 
suffering.  Even  the  joy  of  that  first  return  did  not  fulfil  the  glorious  promises  of 
this  vision.  God's  day  of  vengeance,  and  the  year  of  His  redeemed,  are  thus  set 
side  by  side.  (Compare  with  Ixi.  2;  and  Ixiii.  4,  with  Matt,  xxiv,  27-31 ;  Luke  xxi. 
25-28.)  I.  Thb  kejoictng  creation.  It  is  almost  impossible  not  to  associate 
the  magnificent  opening  words  of  this  chapter  with  the  hope  held  out  to  the  "  whole 
creation  which  groaneth  and  travaileth  in  pain  together  until  now,  waiting  for  the 
manifestation  of  the  sons  of  God,  when  it  shall  also  be  delivered  from  the  bondage 
of  corruption  into  the  glorious  liberty  of  the  children  of  God  "  (Rom.  viii.  19-23). 
"  The  wilderness  and  the  solitary  place  shall  be  glad  for  them."  This  is  a  beautiful 
picture  of  the  sympathy  of  the  earth  with  man.  Not  only  do  the  beautiful  parts  of 
the  earth  rejoice  with  the  home-coming  of  man  from  his  wanderings  from  God,  but 
the  very  wilderness  and  solitary  places  rejoice  and  are  glad  for  them,  because  also  in 
man's  redemption  the  creation  which  was  cursed  for  man's  sake  is  set  free  from  that 
curse.  The  gladness  which  is  here  ascribed  to  the  inanimate  creation  corresponds 
with  the  songs  and  everlasting  joy  which  crown  the  redeemed  of  the  Lord  on  their 
return.  The  glory  of  Lebanon  shall  be  given  unto  them  and  the  excellency  of 
Carmel  and  Sharon.  Two  other  things  are  ascribed  to  the  creation.  They  are 
represented  as  consciously  participating  in  the  great  goodness  of  God  to  man.  They 
rejoice  even  with  joy  and  singing;  and  they  see  the  glory  of  the  Lord  and  the  excel- 
lency of  our  God.  It  is  the  habit  of  our  prophet  thus  to  invest  nature  with  con- 
sciousness and  intelligence.  It  is  the  habit  of  all  scriptural  writers  to  put  man  and 
natiu-e  into  close  sympathy  with  each  other,  declaring  that  God  is  the  maker  of 
both.  There  is  a  great  spiritual  as  well  as  poetic  truth  in  this.  How  powerfully 
are  we  affected  by  plastic  nature !  How  responsive  the  soil,  the  fruits  of  earth,  and 
trees  of  the  forest  to  the  loving  touch  and  sympathy  of  man !  Who  does  not  know 
how  wonderfully  different  all  nature  seemed  to  us  when  we  were  first  converted  to 
God.  What  a  world  of  beauty  this  will  be  when  the  curse  is  removed  and  man  and 
nature,  so  manifestly  made  for  each  other,  shall  rejoice  and  be  glad  together! 
n.  The  blessings  of  salvation.  The  outline  of  blessing  which  the  prophet  sets 
before  us  is  not  complete,  but  simply  consists  of  a  few  bold  strokes,  serving  to  fill  us 
with  the  hope  of  perfect  and  complete  recovery  to  God.  1.  Men  shall  see  God. 
The  vision  of  God  has  already  been  ascribed  in  a  metaphorical  sense  to 
the  inanimate  creation.  It  is  certainly  true  that,  among  the  chiefest  blessings  of 
salvation,  is  the  vision  of  God.  When  Jesus  came  into  the  world,  we  are  told  that 
in  Him  we  beheld  the  glory  of  God,  full  of  grace  and  truth.  We  are  also  told  that 
the  first  effect  of  the  new  birth  is  the  ability  of  the  sinner  to  see  God.  The  purifica- 
tion of  the  heart  which  comes  with  the  new  life  of  God  in  the  soul,  carries  with  it  the 
promise  of  seeing  God  (John  i.  14,  iii.  3;  Matt.  v.  8  ;  2  Cor.  iii.  18).  But  there 
18  manifestly  something  more  than  this  meant.  "  They  shall  see  the  glory  of 
Jehovah  and  the  excellency  of  our  God."     This  can  refer  to  nothing  else  than  that 


72  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  ixxv. 

beatific  vision  of  God  spoken  of  by  Paiil  in  1  Cor.  xiii.  12;  by  John  in  the  Revelation 
xxii.  4.  Yet  again,  if  we  are  to  include  the  saints  of  the  Church  in  this  prophecy, 
then  we  shall  also  have  to  look  for  a  more  literal  fulfilment  still.  When  the  Lord 
Himself  shall  descend  from  heaven  in  power  and  great  glory  (Matt.  ixvi.  64;  Dan. 
vii.  13;  John  i.  51;  1  Thess.  iv.  16;  Rev.  i.  7),  then  the  scattered  Jews  shall  sea 
their  long-rejected  Lord,  as  Saul  of  Tarsus  saw  Him  on  the  way  to  Damascus  (Acts 
ix.  3),  and  be  instantly  converted,  and  start  on  their  homeward  way,  greeted  by  all  the 
smiling  and  rejoicing  flowers  and  trees  and  pools  and  newly  fertilised  wildernesse* 
and  waste  places  of  tne  earth.  During  all  these  dark  centuries  the  veil  has  been  over 
the  eyes  of  the  Jews,  but  in  this  time  the  veil  shall  be  taken  away  and  they  shall  see 
the  face,  the  glory,  the  excellency  of  Jehovah-God.  2.  They  shall  strengthen  and 
encourage  each  other.  This  is  most  probably  a  retrospective  exhortation.  In  view 
of  this  promise  and  the  certain  coming  of  Jehovah  and  their  restoration,  they  are 
exhorted  to  strengthen  and  encoiu-age  each  other.  There  are  those  whose  hands 
are  weak,  whose  knees  are  feeble.  They  cannot  fight  the  good  fight  of  faith  with 
courage,  they  cannot  run  with  patience  the  race  that  is  set  before  them.  The  long 
delays  and  afflictions  experienced  during  the  time  of  waiting  has  taken  not  only  the 
courage  out  of  many,  but  has  filled  them  with  despair.  Therefore  they  were  to  say 
to  those  of  a  fearful  heart  or  of  a  hasty  tendency  to  unbelief:  "  Be  strong,  fear  not; 
behold  your  God  wiU  come  with  vengeance;  even  God  with  a  recompense;  He  will 
come  and  save  you."  Thus  the  prophet  calls  upon  the  strong  to  impart  their 
strength  to  the  weak  and  their  faith  and  courage  to  the  faint-hearted.  The  new 
Testament  writers  transfer  the  spirit,  and  in  part,  the  very  words  of  this  exhortation 
to  the  saints  of  the  Church  of  God.  "  We  that  are  strong  ought  to  bear  the  infirm- 
ities of  the  weak  "  (Rom.  xv.  1).  3.  Infirmities  shall  be  removed.  Not  only  shall 
the  earth  be  restored  to  primitive  beauty,  clothed  with  redemption  glory,  and  filled 
with  an  almost  conscious  sympathy  and  joy,  but  all  the  infirmities  which  sin  haa 
entailed  on  our  poor  sinful  human  nature  shall  be  removed.  In  view  of  this  entire 
deliverance  from  all  the  consequences  of  sin,  along  with  the  people  of  Jehovah,  the 
sore  spots  of  earth  shall  be  healed  too.  Waters  in  the  wilderness,  streams  in  the 
desert,  pools  covering  the  parched  sand,  and  springs  bursting  out  of  thirsty  lands; 
no  longer  a  mirage  thrown  up  from  a  few  turfs  of  dried  herbage,  but  veritable  grass 
with  reeds  and  rushes  shall  greet  the  returning  and  healed  pilgrims.  The  beginning 
of  this  marvel  of  redemption  came  when  Jesus  was  first  here,  opening  blind  eyes, 
healing  lame  limbs,  unlocking  deaf  ears,  and  loosing  silent  tongues.  Surely,  if  we 
have  the  will  to  do  the  will  of  God,  we  shall  know  of  this  doctrine  whether  it  be  of 
God.  III.  The  way  home.  Now  follows  a  wondrous  picture  of  the  way  of  the 
return  for  the  long  absent  wanderer.  The  way  of  the  transgressor  is  hard,  and  the 
world  away  from  God  is  a  barren  and  thirsty  land;  but  so  soon  as  the  face  is  set 
toward  God  and  heaven,  heaven's  God  makes  the  way  of  return  easy  and  sure.  The 
dispersion  of  the  Jews  was  a  way  of  misery.  In  the  return  of  the  Jews  to  God  and 
their  own  land  we  behold  the  truth  of  the  spiritual  way  which  God  has  prepared  for 
every  sinner  to  return  to  Him,  and  by  Him  to  heaven.  1.  It  is  a  highway.  "  An 
highway  shall  be  there."  A  broad  and  open  way,  cast  up  and  distinguished  from  all 
other  roads  and  tracks.  It  has  both  breadth  and  narrowness.  Broad  enough  for 
all  the  world  to  travel  over, — and  He  will  have  all  men  to  be  saved, — and  yet  in  the 
highway  there  is  a  "  narrow  way,"  in  which  every  man  must  walk  for  himself,  alone 
and  yet  not  alone — alone  in  that  he  must  believe  for  himself;  not  alone,  in  that 
others  are  walking  with  him  on  the  same  terms  and  surrounded  by  the  same  condi- 
tions. 2.  It  is  a  way  of  holiness.  That  is,  it  is  a  way  clean  in  itself,  and  only  for 
the  clean  to  traverse.  "  The  unclean  shall  not  pass  over  it."  Drunkards,  Liars, 
adulterers,  fornicators,  covetous,  idolaters,  and  extortioners  may  not  walk  in  that 
way.  For  none  of  these  sins  shall  see  or  enter  into  the  kingdom  of  heaven.  When 
the  scoffer  points  to  such  characters  in  the  "  visible "  Church,  the  sufficient 
answer  is  that  the  Church  is  not  the  way,  but  Jesus  Himself  is  the  Way,  and  all  that 
are  in  Christ  Jesus  are  new  creatures,  old  things  having  passed  away  and  all  things 
having  become  new  (2  Cor.  v.  17).  3.  God  is  with  them  in  the  way.  For  such 
is  the  meaning  of  the  expression:  "  It  shall  be  for  those."  God's  children  have  in  a 
sense  to  walk  alone,  ana  entering  this  way,  they  have  to  break  with  many  who  in 
the  days  of  their  flesh  were  their  companions,  but  the  presence  and  companionship 
of  God  with  them  in  the  way  will  more  than  compensate.  No  man  who  knows  the 
fellowship  of  God  and  the  saints  ever  misses  the  company  of  the  world.  4.  It  is 
a  wav  of  perfect  plainness.  No  one  need  fear  getting  lost  in  this  way.  It  is  so 
■imple  and  straightforward,  so  guarded  and  marked,  that  the  simple  and  unlearned 


CHAP.  XXXV.]  ISAIAH.  73 

need  not  err  therein.  "  He  that  followeth  Me,"  said  Jesus, "  shall  not  walk  in  dark- 
ness, but  shall  have  the  light  of  life."  Besides,  God  has  promised  to  hold  us  by  our 
right  hand,  and  to  keep  us  from  falling  (Isa.  ili,  13;  Jude  24).  5.  It  is  a  safe  way. 
No  lion  or  any  ravenous  beast  shall  be  there,  nor  be  permitted  to  go  up  thereon. 
God  has  cleared  the  way  of  enemies,  so  far  as  their  ability  to  harm  us  is  concerned. 
It  was  only  when  "  Christian  "  turned  out  of  the  wav  that  he  met  the  devil  and  had 
to  fight  him,  and  even  when  the  lions  fiercely  growled  at  him,  he  discovered  that, 
by  keeping  in  the  middle  of  the  path,  they  could  not  approach  him,  being  chained. 
rV.  Safb  at  homb.  What  a  picture  is  here  presented  to  the  poor  outcasts  of  Israel ! 
There  had  been  a  dispersion  and  a  home-coming  from  Babpon.  There  was  to  be 
yet  another  far  wider  and  more  prolonged  dispersion,  and  then  at  last  a  final  home- 
coming. In  view  of  this  the  prophet  bursts  out  with  a  triumphant  exclamation  of 
victory,  in  which  he  sets  all  the  redeemed  singing  for  joy.  He  sees  the  wanderers 
and  outcasts  gathering  from  every  quarter  of  the  earth  (chap.  xi.  12,  li.  3).  They 
come  with  songs  of  everlasting  joy  on  their  lips,  bursting  from  their  glad  and  happy 
hearts.  It  has  been  a  long  night  to  them,  but  joy  has  at  last  come  with  this  thrice- 
blessed  morning.  Is  not  this  a  blessed  picture,  too,  of  the  triumphant  entrance 
into  the  presence  of  God  of  those  who  have  fought  a  good  fight,  kept  the  faith, 
and  finished  their  course?  ((?.  F.  Pentecost,  D.D.)  Transformation: — llie 
prophecy  before  us  is  one  of  those  in  which  the  so-called  secondary  meaning  is, 
in  touth,  the  primary.      The  spiritual  takes  precedence  of  the  natural.     I.  The 

BAD  CONDITION  OF  THI  LOCAUTIES  ON  WHICH  THE  GOSPEL  OF  ChEIST  IS  IN- 
TENDED TO  OPERATE.  Let  US  gather  into  one  cluster  all  that  is  said  of  them. 
"  A  wilderness,"  "  a  solitary  place,"  "  parched  ground,"  "  thirsty  land,"  "  a 
habitation  of  dragons."  With  the  exception  of  the  last-mentioned,  aJl  the 
desolation  seems  to  turn  upon  the  absence  of  one  element — water.  What  simile 
could  so  vividly  depict  the  moral  barrenness  and  desolation,  whether  of  the 
individual,  or  of  the  world  at  large,  apart  from  the  glorious  Gospel  of  the  blessed 
God?  What  a  wilderness  the  heart  is,  that  has  not  God  dwelling  in  it!  The 
idea  of  "solitariness"  may  seem  to  disappear  when  this  word  habitation" 
comes  into  view.  But  what  a  habitation  it  is  !  "A  habitation  of  dragons." 
That,  and  that  only,  was  wanting  to  complete  the  pictiu-e  —  the  foul 
serpent  brood,  with  their  huge  encircling  folds,  prepared  to  crush  the  life  out  of 
every  creature  that  may  cross  their  dreaded  path.  To  a  heart  which  has  within  it 
that  "  well  of  water  springing  up  into  everlasting  life,"  there  is  no  sadder  scene  than 
the  unutterable  desolateness  of  these  moral  wastes  presented  by  hearts  that  are 
unchanged.  What  is  true  of  the  individual  is  equally  true  of  the  aspect  presented 
by  the  world  at  large.  It  may,  perhaps,  be  imagined  that  the  one  element  which 
is  wanting  to  turn  all  this  desolation  into  smiling  fertility  is  Civilisation.  That  has 
been  already  weighed  in  the  balances  and  found  wanting.  What  the  wilderness, 
and  the  solitary  place,  and  the  desert,  and  the  parched  ground,  and  the  thirsty  land 
require  is — the  Water  of  Life,  gushing  from  the  smitten  rock,  Christ  Jesus.  11.  The 
EFFECTS  prodtjced  BY  THE  KINGDOM  OF  Jestjs.  Even  to  US,  in  a  country  where 
water  is  plentiful,  the  beauty  and  appropriateness  of  the  image  are  at  once  apparent. 
WTiat  a  charm  it  adds  to  the  landscape,  whether  in  the  form  of  the  great  ocean, 
bearing  on  its  bosom  the  treasures  of  the  world,  or  of  the  river  winding  through  the 

{jleasant  meadows,  which  drink  in  fertility  and  beauty  from  the  living  stream !  The 
ake  with  its  mirror-like  surface  basking  in  the  sun,  suggests,  too,  the  theme  of  the 
prophet's  song.  But  it  was  with  an  appreciation  more  intense  that  the  inhabitants 
of  these  Eastern  lands  regarded  this  emblem  of  the  life  that  is  in  Jesus  Christ. 
Water  spoke  to  them  of  deliverance  from  death.  Hence,  wherever  this  glad  Gospel 
is  spoken  of,  we  find  this  emblem  employed  to  bring  before  the  mind  the  joy-giving 
results  of  the  kingdom  of  Christ.  Note  the  results  as  these  are  brought  before  us  in 
our  text.  L  Gladness.  It  requires  no  great  effort  of  imagination  to  realise  the 
glad  aspect  of  nature  refreshed  by  copious  rains,  after  a  heat  that  has  scorched 
the  grass,  and  dwarfed  the  com.  Fitting  emblem,  this,  of  the  great  joy  which  the 
Gospel  of  Jesus  brings  with  it  to  human  hearts.  2.  Fertility.  "  It  shall  blossom 
abimdantly."  This  fertility  not  only  stands  connected  with  life,  it  is  the  outcome 
of  its  existence.  The  desert  is  always  barren.  But  the  mighty  power  of  the  Gospel 
of  Jesus  converts  this  moral  wilderness  into  a  fruit- bearing  garden  of  the  Lord. 
3.  Beauty.  "  It  shall  blossom  as  the  rose."  One  has  only  to  picture  to  himself  a  part 
of  this  earth's  surface,  parched,  desert,  and  barren,  and  to  think  of  the  marvellous 
change  which  would  be  produced  upon  it  were  he,  on  revisiting  the  scene,  to  find  it 
covered  with  the  fairest  flowers  that  our  gardens  know.     The  first  and  most  striking 


74  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xxxt. 

impression  made  upon  the  mind  would  be  that  of  surpassing  beauty.  Even  so  is  it 
with  the  marvellous  moral  transformation  which  the  prophecy  before  us  contem. 
plates.  The  glorious  annals  of  missionary  effort  render  it  unnecessary  to  draw  on 
the  imagination.  What  a  beauty  is  unfolded  in  a  Christ-like  life!  4.  Glory  and 
majesty.  "  The  glory  of  Lebanon  shall  be  given  unto  it,  the  excellency  of  Carmel." 
To  live  under  the  power  of  Jesus  is  the  true  secret  of  a  noble  life.  Whatever  the 
sphere  of  life  which  the  man  occupies,  he  is  in  closest  alliance  with  the  majesty  of 
heaven,  and  in  virtue  of  that  alliance  is  raised  to  regal  dignity.  5.  A  vision  that 
extends  into  the  Holy  of  holies.  "  They  shall  see  the  glory  of  Jehovah,  and  the 
excellency  of  our  God."  (J.  Kay.)  The  transformative  field  and  force  of  the 
Gospel: — I.  The  sphere  in  which  the  Gospel  operates.  1.  The  condition  of 
depraved  humanity  is  that  of  solitude.  It  is  in  a  state  of  awful  isolation.  It  is 
away  from  God  and  from  fellowship  with  all  holy  spirits.  Between  corrupt  souls 
there  is  no  true  fellowship,  and  there  cannot  be.  2.  The  condition  of  depraved 
humanity  is  that  of  wildness.  It  is  a  wilderness.  Depraved  souls  are  productive, 
but  it  is  the  productiveness  of  the  wilderness.  II.  The  transformation  which 
THE  Gospel  effects.  1.  The  Gospel  makes  the  sphere  joyous.  "  The  wilderness 
shall  be  glad,"  &c.  What  gladness  the  Gospel  brings  into  the  soul  when  received 
in  fuU  faith,  the  gladness  of  gratitude,  love,  hope,  communion  with  infinite  good- 
ness. 2.  The  Gospel  makes  this  sphere  beautiful.  "  It  shall  blossom  as  the 
rose."  The  Gospel  imparts  to  the  soul  beauty  of  the  highest  kind — moral  beauty» 
the  beauty  of  the  Lord.  3.  The  Gospel  makes  the  sphere  grand.  "  The  glory 
of  Lebanon  shall  be  given  unto  it."  As  Carmel  and  Lebanon  tower  above  the 
plains  of  Palestine,  so  the  soul  into  which  the  Gospel  enters  is  raised  above  its 
unconverted  contemporaries.  Christliness  makes  man  great  in  moral  strength, 
elevation,  and  majesty.  4.  The  Gospel  makes  the  sphere  glorious.  "  They  shall 
see  the  glory  of  the  Lord."  {Homilist.)  Christianity  finally  triumphant: — • 
I.  The  certainty  that  the  needed  diffusion  of  true  religion  will  be 
accomplished.  Man  is  always  animated  to  the  performance  of  duty  by  the  hope 
of  success;  and  in  the  onerous  duties  to  which  Christians  are  summoned,  we  must 
be  animated  by  the  assurance,  proceeding  from  the  highest  authority,  that  our 
efforts  shall  be  crowned  with  success.  Before  stating  the  grounds  upon  which 
the  certainty  as  to  the  diffusion  of  our  religion  is  founded,  we  shall  notice  some 
matters  which  have  appeared  to  render  it  equivocal,  but  which  do  not  really 
interfere  with  it.  1.  The  certainty  of  this  diffusion  is  not  interfered  with  by  the 
obstacles  against  which  religion  in  its  advancing  progress  has  to  contend.  The 
obstacles  are  numerous  and  formidable;  arising  from  the  long-indulged  defects 
of  its  own  disciples;  the  varieties  existing  amongst  men,  of  language,  of  national 
character,  and  of  social  habits;  the  public  jealousies  and  antipathies  which  so 
often  bar  intercourse,  and  which  have  sometimes  been  kindled  into  desolating  wars; 
the  inveterate  depravity  of  the  human  heart,  nursed  into  rancorous  maturity  by  the 
impostures,  whether  barbarous  or  refined,  which  have  so  long  prevailed,  and  by 
the  malignant  influence  of  the  god  of  this  world.  To  many  agencies  such  obstacles 
as  these  would  be  undoubtedly  fatal.  But  our  religion  possesses  resources  which 
elevate  it  far  above  and  beyond  them.  2.  The  certainty  of  which  we  speak  is 
not  interfered  with  by  the  differences  existing  in  the  professing  Church  as  to  the 
mode  in  which  the  anticipated  diffusion  shall  come.  Some  aver  that  the  diffusion 
is  to  take  place  in  consequence  of  the  personal  appearance  of  the  Saviour  upon 
the  earth;  others  hold  that  it  is  to  come  by  the  ordinary  instrumentalities  already 
existing  in  the  Christian  system,  rendered  effectual  by  the  abundant  outpouring 
of  the  Spirit.  How  can  the  ignorance  of  a  private  soldier  in  an  immense  army, 
as  to  the  plan  of  the  great  chieftain,  argue  against  the  fact  that  that  plan  when 
developed  and  carried  out  shall  secure  a  final  and  glorious  victory?  3.  The 
certainty  is  not  interfered  with  by  obscurity  as  to  the  time  at  which  the  anticipated 
diffusion  shall  be  effected.  Obscurity  resting  over  the  time  when  the  desires 
of  the  Church  shall  be  fulfilled  and  when  the  wants  of  the  world  shall  be 
supplied,  is  a  direct  appointment  of  God,  not  to  be  the  object  of  curiosity  on 
the  one  hand,  nor  the  source  of  scepticism   on  the  other.     II.  The  grounds 

OR  EVIDENCE  UPON  WHICH   WE  MUST   CONSIDER   THAT  CERTAINTY  AS  RESTING.      It 

is  to  be  deduced — 1.  From  general  principles  as  to  the  character  and  government 
of  God.  Let  it  be  admitted  that  God  exists,  that  He  is  the  moral  Governor  and 
Sovereign  of  the  universe,  that  He  is  supremely  concerned  for  the  maintenance 
of  His  own  honour,  and  that  while  powerful,  and  just,  and  holy.  He  is  also  kind 
and  benevolent,  desiring  and  resolved  upon  the  well-being  of  His  creatures,  and 


CHAP.  xxxv.J  ISAIAH.  76 

then  the  conclusion  which  we  now  advocate  appears  to  ns  reasonable  and  unavoid- 
able.    If  our  religion  be  the  instrument  by  which  He  will  act  upon  the  hearts 
of  men,  so  as  to  turn  them  "  from  darkness  to  light,  and  from  the  power  of  Satan 
unto  God,"  then,  that  religion  will  advance  and  proceed  until  every  purpose  of 
the  Divine  majesty  and  love  shall  have  been  conducted  to  delightful  accomplish- 
ment.    2.  From  the  constitution  and  progress  of  our  religion  itself.     The  religion 
of  the  Gospel  is  formed  with  capacities  for,  and  with  a  direct  view  to,  universal 
diffusion.     It  does  not  admit  of  any  ceremonial  restrictions;  it  takes  no  note 
of  national  preferences  or  peculiarities;  it  owns  no  distinction  of  rank,  clime,  or 
colour;  it  addresses  men  on  grand,  comprehensive  principles,  dealing  with  them 
in  the  common  wants  and  properties  of  their  nature;  it  is  founded  on  a  redeeming 
provision  of  boundless  sufficiency — a  propitiation  for  the  sins  of  the  world;  and 
its  commission  is  universal  as  mankind.     If,  from  the  constitution  of  our  religion 
you  pass  to  its  history,  you  find  that  history  always  bearing  us  onward  to  precisely 
the  same  conclusion.     There  is  no  class  of  obstacles  over  which  it  has  not  achieved 
triumphs,  no  order  of  beings  among  whom  it  has  not  acquired  converts.     3.  From 
the  expressed  testimony  of  the  Sacred  Volume.     HI.  The  eesxtlts  which  prom 
THE  NEEDED  DiFEUSiON  OP  OUR  RELIGION  WILL  ARISE.     1.  Happiness  in  the  world. 
"  The  wilderness  and  the  solitary  place  shall  be  glad  for  them,"  &c.    By  the  disciples 
of  scepticism  Christianity  has  often  been  slandered  as  the  cause  of  sorrow.     But 
the  true  spiritual  religion  of  the  Gospel  can  produce  nothing  but  what  is  accordant 
with  its  sublime  and  munificent  nature.     Christianity  never  spake  a  word  but 
to  utter  a  promise,  never  took  a  step  but  to  bring  a  boon,  never  struck  a  blow 
but  to  emancipate  a  captive,  never  exerted  an  agency  but  to  elevate  and  redeem 
a  soul.     As  Christianity  advances,  there  will  be  the  full  development  of  results, 
of  which  now  we  have  instances.     There  will  be  happiness  to  individuals,  to 
families,  and  to  communities  or  nations.     Yet,  what  is  this  to  the  happiness  of 
the  life  which  is  to  come?     2.  Supreme  honour  to  God.     "  They  shall  see  the  glory 
of  the  Lord,  and  the  excellency  of  oxir  God."     In  connection  with  the  diffusion 
of  our  religion  God  will  display  and  magnify  the  majestic  attributes  of  His  nature. 
In  connection  with  the  display  and  magnifying  of  the  Divine  perfections,  God 
will  receive  the  homage  and  the  highest  praise  of  all  created  beings.     The  happiness 
is  the  happiness  of  gratitude.     Earth,  with  ten  thousand  times  ten  thousand 
voices,  will  celebrate  His  praise;  the  angels  of  heaven  and  "  the  spirits  of  the 
just  made  perfect "  will  join  in  the  long  and  loud  acclaim,  and  redemption  will 
constitute  the  noble  theme  of  their  noblest  songs.     (J.  Parsons.)         Christmas 
blessings : — I.  The  world  without  the  Gospel  is  a  wilderness,  a  "  desert," 
a  "  solitary  place."     What  though  the  bright  promise  of  the  spring,  the  warm 
glow  of  summer,  the  rich  matiurity  of  autumn,  the  quiet  rest  of  winter,  are  full 
of  beauty !     What  though  Nature's  broad  plains  are  watered  by  noble  rivers, 
though  her  mountains  rise  with  majesty  and  grandeur,  though  her  valleys  "  stand 
so  thick  with  corn  that  they  laugh  and  sing,"  and  though  a  teeming  population 
give  animation  to  every  habitable  spot;  yet,  to  the  spiritual  eye  and  apart  from 
the  Gospel,  aU  is  but  a  desert  and  a  solitary  place  !     And  if  it  be  so  in  our  own  fair 
land,  which  is  the  glory  of  all  lands,  what  of  the  heathen  nations?     Men  have 
broken  loose  from  God.     Sin  has  overspread  the  world.     There  is  nothing  to 
sustain  the  Divine  life,  nothing  to  insure  spiritual  health,  nothing  to  promote 
the  soul's  eternal  welfare.     II.  What,  then,  is  the  change  which  the  Gospel 
produces?     It  is  the  same  in  one  and  all  when  it  comes  with  "  demonstration 
of  the  Spirit  and  of  power."     AU  things  become  new.     The  "  fruits  of  the  Spirit " 
spring  up,  the  solitary  place  is  made  glad,  the  desert  rejoices  and  blossoms  as  the 
rose.     Conclusion — 1.  Has  my  heart  been  made  glad  by  the  Gospel?     2.  What 
am  I  doing  to  make  the  hearts  of  others  glad?     These  are  questions  which  demand 
prompt  answers,  because — 3.  The  time  is  short.     {Josiah  Bateman,  M.A.)         The 
wilderness  made  glad: — I.  A  desert  may  be  considered  as  barren  and  un- 
civilised.    So,  in  general,  are  heathen  countries.     But,  instead  of  unfruitfulness 
and  barbarism,  Christianity  would  introduce  culture,  civilisation,  and  everything 
which,  in  connection  with  these,  tends  to  promote  the  substantial  comforts  of 
life.     The  Bible  and  the  plough  go  together.     11.  A  wilderness  may  be  con- 
sidered AS  A  PLACE  OF  DREARY  SOLITUDE.     But  the  Gospel  would  introduce 
the  endearments  of  society;  or,  at  all  events,  sweeten  solitude  itself.     Among 
even  the  more  numerous  tribes  of  savages,  social  enjoyment  is  but  small.     They 
have,  indeed,  their  feasts;  but  these  are  seasons  of  diabolical,  rather  than  of 
human  mirth.     Their  habitual  character,  undoubtedly,  is  retiredness,  melancholy. 


76  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  xxxt 


and  taciturnity.  On  the  other  hand,  true  religion  gives  birth  to  those  feelings 
which  prompt  man  with  confidence  to  seek  man;  while,  at  the  same  time,  it 
enlarges  the  mind,  and  furnishes  many  rational  and  enlivening  topics  on  which 
men  delight  to  speak  out  of  the  abundance  of  the  heart.     III.  A  wilderness 

MAY  BE  CONSIDERED   AS  A  PLACE   OP  INHtTMANITY  AND  CRUELTY.      And  SUCh  are 

heathen  countries  (Psa.  Ixxiv.  20).  IV.  When  we  hear  of  a  wilderness  we  think 
of  A  PLACE  OF  COMFORTLESS  SORROW.  The  heathen  world  contains  not  within 
itself  the  means  of  soothing  the  sad  distress  with  which  it  is  filled.  But  such 
a  wilderness  would  be  gladdened  by  the  Gospel,  which  would  bring  home  to  the 
afflicted  and  dying  "  the  peace  of  God  which  passeth  all  understanding."     V.  Like 

A   WILDERNESS,   THE   HEATHEN   WORLD   IS   A   PLACE   OF   AWFUL   DANGER.       "  I    waS 

in  perils,"  said  the  apostle  Paul,  "  in  the  wilderness  "  (2  Cor.  xi.  26).  "  Where 
there  is  no  vision  the  people  perish "  (Prov.  xxix.  18).  Improvement — 1.  Let 
us  improve  the  subject  as  fiu-nishing  ourselves  with  ground  of  gratitude  and 
admonition.  How  thankful  ought  we  to  be  when  we  contrast  our  own  happy 
situation  with  the  state  of  those  who  "  sit  in  darkness,  and  in  the  region  and 
shadow  of  death  " !  2.  It  becomes  us  to  consider  whether  we  have  personally 
embraced  the  Gospel.  3.  Let  us  improve  the  subject  in  reference  to  the  heathen. 
4.  According  to  God's  wise  determination  human  instruments  are  necessary 
(Rom.  X.  14,  15).  5.  The  means  of  support  must  be  furnished.  6.  Already,  He 
who  is  to  be  crowned  Lord  of  all  has  gained  some  of  His  most  signal  triumphs  in 
modem  times,  through  this  instrumentality.  (James  Foot  e,  31.  A.)  Nativity: — 
Here  are  three  things  to  be  considered.  I.  The  wilderness  itself.  The  world 
before  the  appearance  of  the  Gospel  was  dry  as  a  wilderness,  being  destitute  of 
God's  holy  Spirit,  which  is  the  water  of  life,  and  the  immediate  cause  of  all  righteous- 
ness. The  heathen  were  without  the  good  Spirit,  they  were  exposed  to  the  assaults 
of  evil  spirits,  whose  employment  it  is  to  go  "  to  and  fro  in  the  earth,"  as  wild 
beasts  in  a  wilderness,  seeking  whom  they  may  devour.  And  it  has  ever  been 
the  way  of  wicked  men,  agitated  by  those  furious  passions  implanted  in  their  nature, 
to  become  beasts  of  prey  to  one  another,  biting  and  devouring  one  another.  But 
the  beast  which  is  noxious  and  cursed  above  all  others  is  the  serpent,  in  which 
we  have  the  most  perfect  representation  of  the  devil  himself,  and  of  all  his  children, 
who  are  called  the  seed  of  the  serpent.  In  a  place  infested  with  such  inhabitants 
there  could  be  no  real  comfort;  but  on  the  contrary  vexation,  misery,  disappoint- 
ment, and  despair.  The  evil  that  prevails  among  men  who  live  without  God 
renders  this  world  a  miserable  place.  II.  The  change  that  was  to  be  wrought 
UPON  IT.  The  knowledge  of  Christ  engrafted  in  the  hearts  of  men,  soon  made 
them  green  and  fruitful  in  righteousness,  and  they  abounded  in  good  works,  even 
to  the  astonishment  of  their  enemies.  III.  The  cause  of  this  blessed  change. 
"  They  shall  see  the  glory  of  the  Lord,  and  the  excellency  of  our  God."  The  glory 
of  the  natural  world  is  the  sun,  whose  presence  it  is  that  makes  the  day  so  superior 
to  the  night.  But  above  all,  the  change  of  the  winter  into  the  spring,  shows  the 
power  and  excellency  of  this  marvellous  instrument.  Therefore  Christ,  who 
performs  the  same  things  in  the  kingdom  of  grace  as  the  sun  doth  in  nature,  is 
m  all  respects  the  Sun  of  Righteousness.  ( W.  Jones,  M.A.)  The  desert  blossom- 
ing : — The  desert  shall  blossom  when  Christ  is  in  it,  as  the  narcissus,  the  meadow- 
saffron,  the  rose.  1.  There  is  a  desert  of  separation  from  ordinary  means  of  grace. 
I  may  be  deprived,  in  God's  providence,  of  my  Clu-istian  surroundings.  I  may 
have  to  travel  far  from  the  homeland  and  the  sound  of  the  Sabbath  bells.  But 
Jesus  may  dwell  in  my  heart  by  faith.  And  then  the  wilderness  will  be  a  garden. 
2.  There  is  a  desert  of  trial.  Perhaps  I  lose  my  substance.  Perhaps  I  lose  my 
health.  Perhaps  I  lose  my  friend,  the  half  of  my  own  soul.  How  desolating 
the  affliction  is!  But  Jesus  can  bless  me  through  it.  He  makes  the  sweetening 
tree  grow  beside  Marah.  3.  There  is  a  desert  of  apparent  disaster  to  the  cause 
of  God.  The  Church  has  its  periods  of  adversity  when  all  things  seem  to  be  against 
it.  But  Jesus  teaches  it  to  be  more  serious  then,  more  patient,  more  devout, 
stronger  in  faith,  richer  in  feeling,  ]iurer  in  aim.  4.  There  is  a  desert  of  death. 
To  go  out  from  the  world  which  I  know  so  well  into  the  world  which  is 
mysterious  and  strange — how  my  heart  shrinks  from  it!  But  Jesus  shows  me, 
by  His  Word  and  His  Spirit  and  His  own  experience,  that  death  is  the  road  to 
glory  and  the  path  to  fruitfulness  and  the  gate  into  life.  The  solitary  place 
shall  be  glad.  {A.  Smellie,  M.A.)  The  rose: — According  to  the  old  versions 
and  many  commentators  "  the  narcissus  "  or  the  autumn  crocus  ia  the  plant 
intended.     (W.  Houghton,  M.A.)        The  rose: — The  name  points  to  a  bulbous 


CHAP.  XXXV.]  ISAIAH.  77 

plant.  {F.  Delitzsch,  D.D.)  Life  out  of  death: — The  valley  of  Chambra,  in 
India,  is  rich  in  its  fertility  and  beauty.  The  cause  of  all  this  fertility  is  a 
wonderful  spring  of  water  which  flows  from  a  hillside,  and  furnishes  water  for 
the  irrigation  of  the  whole  valley,  and  for  the  use  of  the  people  who  live 
there.  Once,  says  the  legend,  the  valley  was  without  water,  and  there  was 
desolation  everywhere.  The  plants  and  trees  were  all  withering,  and  the  people 
were  dying  of  thirst.  The  princess  of  the  place  took  the  sorrows  of  her  subjects 
much  to  heart.  She  consulted  the  oracle  to  learn  how  the  constant  curse  of 
drought  could  be  removed.  The  oracle  said  that  if  the  princess  of  the  land  would 
die  for  the  people,  abundant  water  would  be  given.  She  hastened  to  give  her 
Ufe.  Her  grave  was  made,  and  she  was  buried  alive.  Then  forth  from  her  tomb 
came  a  river  which  flowed  down  into  the  valley,  restoring  aU  languishing  life  in 
field  and  garden,  and  sending  water  to  every  door  for  the  fafQishing  people  to 
drink.  Ever  since,  the  streams  have  continued  to  flow  from  the  wonderful  spring, 
carrying  their  precious  benediction  to  every  home.  This  old  heathen  legend 
beautifully  illustrates  what  Christ  did.  The  world  was  perishing  for  want  of 
the  water  of  life;  Jesus  died  and  was  buried,  and  from  His  Cross  and  broken  grave 

fioured  out  the  river  of  the  water  of  life  for  the  quenching  of  the  world's  thirst, 
ts  streams  run  everywhere,  and  wherever  they  flow  the  wilderness  has  been 
made  to  blossom  Uke  a  garden  of  roses.  Beauty  blooms  wherever  they  run. 
(J.  R.  Miller,  D.D.) 

Ver.  3.  Strengthen  ye  the  weak  hands,  and  confirm  the  feeble  knees. — Weak 
hands  and  feeble  knees : — I.  I  shall  attempt  to  show  the  importance  of  hands 
AND  KNEES  IN  GOING  TO  HEAVEN.  The  hands  and  knees  are  those  parts  of  the 
body  in  which  the  effects  of  fear  are  the  most  easily  seen.  Of  course,  the  root  of 
despondency  and  fear  must  lie  in  the  heart;  it  is  that  which  is  first  moved  with 
terror.  But  afterwards  these  extremities,  these  limbs  of  action  begin  to  feel  the 
weakness  also.  Just  so  the  prophet  means  that  wherever  the  Christian  displays 
most  his  timidity  and  his  dismay  there  we  must  be  careful  to  apply  the  remedy 
of  comfort.  1.  The  hands  and  knees  are  of  the  first  importance  because  they 
represent  active  duty  and  supplication.  Hence,  if  the  knees  be  weak  and  the 
hands  be  weak,  it  is  little  that  we  can  do.  2.  We  may  readily  see  what  the  prophet 
means  by  hands  and  knees  if  we  observe  that  a  Christian,  although  his  hopes 
are  in  heaven,  stands  upon  the  earth.  It  is  with  the  hand  of  faith  that  the 
Christian  lays  hold  upon  that  which  is  not  seen,  and  endeavours  to  climb  upwards 
to  the  skies;  it  is  with  his  foot  that  he  spurns  the  earth  and  aU  that  it  calls  good 
or  great.  Let  the  Christian's  foot  be  weak,  and  he  cannot  then  despise  the  things 
that  are  seen:  but  he  will  be  fixing  his  affection  on  things  on  earth  and  not  on 
things  above.  Let  his  hand  of  faith  grow  weak,  and  he  cannot  lay  hold  of  the 
things  that  are  in  heaven.  3.  But  you  will  remember  also  that  there  are  certain 
parts  of  the  spiritual  pilgrimage  where  hands  and  knees  are  absolutely  requi:  ed. 
John  Bunyan  represents  Christian  as  coming  to  the  foot  of  the  hill  Difficulty, 
and  he  says,  "  I  looked  then  after  Christian,  to  see  him  go  up  the  hill,  where  I  per- 
ceived he  fell  from  running  to  going,  and  from  going  to  clambering  upon  his  hands 
and  knees,  because  of  the  steepness  of  the  place."  Every  Christian  who  knows 
much  about  Divine  experience  will  understand  what  this  means.  II.  The  ill 
EFFECT  OF  WEAK  HANDS  AND  KNEES.  1.  We  have  already  hinted  that  one  ill 
fruit  of  a  Christian  having  weak  hands  and  knees  is  this,  that  he  will  not  himself 
be  able  to  make  much  progress  in  the  Divine  life.  When  I  sit  down  and  read 
the  biographies  of  saints  who  have  gone  to  heaven,  I  am  astonished  at  myself, 
and  I  can  only  weep  to  think  how  far  I  am  behind  these  men,  and  then  how  ranch 
further  I  must  be  behind  my  Divine  Master.  Surely  the  examples  of  eminent 
saints  should  spur  us  onward.  But  wea^  hands  and  feeble  knees  are  the  reasons 
why  so  few  Christians  attain  to  any  eminence  in  the  ways  and  works  of  God. 
2.  Weak  hands  and  feeble  knees  have  another  ill  effect.  They  prevent  our  doing 
any  great  wonder  for  the  good  of  the  world.  3.  Again,  weak  hands  and  feeble 
knees  very  much  dishonour  Christ.  Suppose  you  have  a  friend,  and  you  say  to 
him,  "  My  friend,  I  have  such  confidence  in  you,  that  I  will  trust  you  with  the 
title-deeds  of  my  estate,  and  with  all  I  have.  Nay,  more;  I  will  trust  you  with  my 
health,  with  my  life.  Do  what  you  will  with  me;  I  have  such  faith  in  yovu-  good- 
ness and  your  wisdom  that  I  am  sure  you  will  not  be  imkind,  and  will  not  err. 
I  trust  you."  There  is  something  honourable  in  faith  to  the  object  in  whom  it 
is  reposed.     Now,  if  you  are  able,  with  the  strong  hand  of  faith,  to  bring  all  you 


78  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xxxr. 

have  and  give  it  entire  unto  God,  then  He  is  glorified ;  but  if  your  hand  is  weak, 
and  you  are  hiding  away  some  choice  thing  that  you  cannot  give  up  to  Him,  if 
you  do  not  stand  fully  to  the  surrender,  but  keep  back  something  from  Him, 
then  that  weak  hand  brings  dishonour  upon  God.  So  also  does  the  feeble  knee. 
When  the  believer  goes  to  his  closet  and  bows  there  with  his  feeble  knee,  and 
asks  God  to  bless  him,  and  does  not  half  believe  that  He  wiU,  he  dishonours 
God.  But,  when  a  man  falls  on  his  knees,  and  cries,  "  Lord,  Thou  knowest  all 
things:  Thou  knowest  that  such  a  thing  is  necessary  to  me;  there  is  Thy  promise; 
do  as  Thou  hast  said,  Lord;  I  know  Thou  wilt  give  it  me  :  "  and  when  he  rises 
from  his  kn»es,  goes  down  and  says  to  his  friends,  "  The  blessing  wiU  come;  I  have 
asked  for  it,  and  God  will  hear  me; "  why,  such  a  man  honours  God.  III.  Thh 
CAUSES  OF  WEAK  HANDS  AND  FEEBLE  KNEES.  1.  Some  Christians  have  weak  hands 
and  feeble  knees  because  they  are  only  infants.  God's  family  is  like  every  other 
family;  we  do  not  expect  the  new-born  convert  to  run  alone  at  first.  God 
will  not  overdrive  His  lambs.  He  does  not  expect  long  marches  from  feebW 
feet.  As  you  are  but  weak,  you  shall  have  lighter  duties.  2.  A  more  frequent 
cause  of  weak  hands  and  feeble  knees  is  starvation.  3.  But,  again,  fear  is  the 
great  weakness  of  men's  knees;  doubt  and  distrust  are  the  great  relaxers  of  the 
strength  of  men's  hands.  4.  Sloth  may  make  a  man  weak  in  his  hands  and  in 
his  feet.  Arms  become  strong  by  using  them.  The  blacksmith  gets  a  brawny 
hand  by  constantly  using  his  hammer.  He  who  climbs  the  mountain  or  wal£S 
many  a  mile  a  day,  becomes  strong  in  his  feet.  [C.  H.  Spurgeon.)  Weak 
knees : — Earthly  life  should  be  a  spiritual  race  or  pilgrimage  to  Mount  Zion.  We 
need  strong  knees  to  climb  with  ease  steep  and  rugged  Mils ;  and  as  our  spiritual 
journey  may  be  likened  to  climbing  hills,  we  need  spiritual  strength  to  enable  ua 
to  do  it  with  comfort  to  ourselves.  If  we  have  weak  knees,  our  journey  will  be  a 
series  of  groans,  and,  perhaps,  a  succession  of  grumbles;  but  when  our  weak 
knees  are  strengthened  and  our  lungs  expanded  by  the  delicious  atmosphere  of  the 
hills,  the  journey  can  be  done  comfortably  with  sacred  songs  and  continual  joy. 
I.  Weak  knees  are  often  caused  by  mental  depression.  In  these  mental  depres- 
sions, human  aid  is  not  of  much  account;  we  need  the  presence  and  comfort  of 
God.  Prayer  is  the  best  medicine;  and  if,  at  the  same  time,  we  can  get  away 
from  the  town  to  the  sweet,  pure  air  of  the  country,  and  climb  a  hill,  we  shall  return 
home  with  a  buoyant  heart  and  an  elastic  tread.  1.  God  may  allow  depression 
to  visit  us  to  subdue  our  pride.  It  acts  like  a  "  scotch  "  on  a  wheel,  or  a  "brake," 
which  prevents  the  horses  dragging  the  carriage  so  swiftly  downhill  as  to  over- 
balance themselves.  At  such  times,  we  are  taught  that,  after  all,  we  must  keep 
pace  with  our  weak  brethren.  2.  Such  times  of  spiritual  depression  give  us  a 
nature  to  sympathise  with  the  troubled.  As  the  proverb  says,  "  They  are  of 
a  tender  nature  who  have  been  skinned  themselves."  3.  Heaviness  of  spirit  is 
also  needed  to  give  us  time  for  meditation  and  review  of  mercies.  When  you 
are  climbing,  you  see  nothing  more  than  the  hill  before  you;  but  when  you  are 
weary  and  resting,  you  can  see  the  glorious  landscape  for  miles.  Ah,  when  weak 
knees  are  caused  by  toiling  upwards  to  get  nearer  to  God,  it  is  a  sacred  token, 
which  shall  result  in  everlasting  strength.  Wlien  compelled  to  slacken  speed,  we  see 
the  goodness  of  God  and  learn  to  trust  His  direction.  11.  Our  knees  are  some- 
times weakened  by  many  afflictions.  But  though  we  have  afflictions  which  make 
our  knees  bend  in  weakness,  yet  God  has  undertaken  to  give  us  strength  according 
to  our  day.  If  we  bear  our  afflictions  with  patience,  our  knees  shall  be  strengthened 
to  do  great  things  for  God.  III.  Weakness  of  spiritual  knees  may  be  caused  by 
the  weight  of  unbelief.  (IF.  Birch.)  Solicitude  for  the  sorrow jvl: — It  is 
the  duty  of  all  men  to  be  careful  of  the  sons  of  sorrow.  There  be  some  who  from 
their  very  birth  are  marked  by  melancholy  as  her  own.  The  silent  shades  of 
sorrow  are  their  congenial  haunts;  the  glades  of  the  forest  of  grief  are  the  only 
places  where  their  leaf  can  flourish.  Others  there  are  who  through  some  crushing 
misfortune  are  brought  so  low  that  they  never  hold  up  their  heads  again,  but 
go  from  that  time  forth  mourning  to  their  graves.  Some  there  be,  again,  who, 
disappointed  in  their  early  youth,  either  in  some  fond  object  of  their  affections, 
or  else  in  some  project  of  their  young  ambition,  never  can  dare  to  face  the  world, 
but  shrink  from  contact  with  their  fellows,  even  as  the  sensitive  plant  curls  up 
its  tendrils  at  the  touch.  In  all  flocks  there  must  be  lambs,  and  weak  and 
wounded  sheep;  and  among  the  flock  of  men,  it  seems  that  there  must  necessarily 
be  some  who  should  more  than  others  prove  the  truth  of  Job's  declaration,  "  man 
is  bom  to  trouble  even  as  the  sparks  ny  upwards."     (C  H.  Spurgeon.) 


CHAP.  XXXV.]  ISAIAH.  79 

Ver.  4.  Say  to  them  that  are  of  a  fearful  heart,  Be  strong,  fear  not. — Comfort 
for  the.  fearful : — Presumption  and  fear  are  the  Scylla  and  Charybdis  of  the  Chris- 
tian life,  and  it  requires  Divine  guidance,  together  with  all  our  own  watchfulness, 
to  steer  safely  between  them.  My  object  is,  to  suit  the  case  of  those  who  are 
well  entitled  to  hope  for  the  Divine  mercy  through  Christ  Jesus,  but  are  disquiet- 
ing themselves,  or  are  disquieted  by  the  enemy  with  needless  fears.  1.  "  I  cannot 
indulge  the  hope  that  I  am  a  Christian,"  one  wUl  say,  "  because  I  have  never  passed 
through  the  same  religious  exercises  and  experiences  that  others  profess  to  have 
felt  and  enjoyed;  have  known  no  such  deep  convictions;  have  no  such  clear 
assurance  of  my  acceptance  with  God."  God  has  brought  many  sons  to  glory,  but 
I  do  not  suppose  that  any  two  of  them  have  been  led  thither  in  precisely  the  same 
way,  or  have  been  exercised  with  precisely  the  same  feelings.  If  in  the  main, 
our  experiences  correspond  with  the  Word  of  Grod,  in  the  great  points  of  faith 
and  love,  it  need  not  disquiet  us  though  we  never  heard  of  another  case  exactly 
like  our  own.  2.  But  another  desponding  one  says,  "  If  I  were  truly  a  child  of 
God,  sin  would  not  prevail  against  me  as  I  find  it  does."  So  long  as  there  is 
determined  war  against  sin,  there  is  ground  for  hope.  3.  Still  one  may  be  ready 
to  reply,  "  I  find  that  sin  not  only  prevails  against  me,  but  I  seem  to  be  worse 
than  when  I  first  strove  against  it;  my  heart  appears  to  grow  more  wicked;  my 
corruptions  stronger,  and  my  strength  to  resist  to  be  less."  To  perceive  more 
of  our  sin  than  usual,  does  not  always  prove  that  we  are  more  sinful,  but  often  the 
reverse;  just  as  when  one  cleanses  a  room,  though  the  air  is  filled  with  dust  floating 
in  the  sunbeams,  there  is  no  more  of  it  actually  there  than  before,  and  there  will 
soon  be  less  of  it  as  the  operation  goes  on.  We  do  not  know  the  strength  of  our 
evil  passions  until  we  begin  to  oppose  them.  When  one  is  making  a  special  effort 
to  lead  a  Christian  life,  then  he  is  especially  tempted  and  hindered.  4.  Another 
class  of  disquieted  ones  affirm  that  they  cannot  hope  they  are  true  Christians, 
because  they  seem  to  love  everything  else  more  than  God.  If  this  were  really 
true,  we  should  have  no  encouragement  to  offer,  for  if  God  be  not  loved  supremely 
we  cannot  be  His  children.  But,  in  estimating  our  love  to  God,  compared  with 
our  love  to  earthly  things,  we  are  not  to  conclude  that  we  love  that  most  which 
most  excites  'our  affections.  It  has  well  been  remarked,  "  that  a  man  may  be 
more  moved  when  he  sees  a  friend  that  has  long  been  absent,  and  seem  to  regard 
him  more  for  the  moment  than  he  does  his  own  wife  and  children,  and  yet  none 
would  think  that  the  friend  was  loved  the  most";  so  neither  must  we  conclude, 
because  when  we  are  abroad  in  the  world  we  find  our  affections  vehemently  stirred 
towards  its  various  objects,  that  therefore  they  are  supreme  in  our  hearts.  We 
should  judge  of  our  comparative  affection  by  asking  ourselves  soberly,  which  of 
the  two  objects  we  should  prefer  to  part  with?  5.  Again,  it  is  urged  by  some 
that  there  is  great  danger  of  self-deception;  that  a  person  may,  in  appearance, 
be  like  a  Cliristian,  and  yet  be  really  destitute  of  any  true  piety,  and  they  fear 
lest  they  should  fall  into  the  same  error.  The  fear  is  usually  the  best  remedy 
against  the  thing  feared,  and  none  are  farther  from  the  danger  of  making  a  false 
profession  than  those  who  are  most  afraid  of  it.  6.  Some,  again,  have  fears  that 
they  are  not  true  Christians,  because  they  come  so  far  short  of  the  attainments 
of  some  eminent  Christians  of  their  acquaintance.  We  reply,  that  the  worst 
part  of  the  character  of  those  exalted  saints  may  not  be  known  to  us,  or  they  may 
not  have  our  hindrances,  or  they  may  have  been  long  in  growing  up  to  that  state, 
while  we  are  only  babes  in  Christ.  7.  Another  class  may  say,  that  they  cannot 
think  any  real  Christian  ever  was  so  tempted  and  distressed  with  evil  thoughts 
as  they  are.  We  reply.  Job  was  tempted  to  curse  God,  and  Christ  Himself  to 
worship  Satan.  We  may  have  very  wicked  thoughts  entering  our  minds,  but 
if  we  do  not  delight  in  them,  if  we  strive  against  them,  and  they  are  painful  to 
us,  they  are  no  evidence  against  us.  The  very  fact  that  they  grieve  us  and  we 
resist  them,  is  in  our  favour.  8.  Another  class  of  the  discouraged  and  fearful 
say,  that  they  have  doctrinal  difficulties,  that  certain  things  in  the  Bible  do  not 
appear  clear  to  them,  and  they  fear  to  make  any  public  confession  of  Christ  till  these 
are  made  plain.  The  best  way  to  solve  doctrinal  difficulties  is  to  engage  in  practical 
duties.  But  it  would  be  endless  to  recount  all  the  ways  in  which  doubts  and  fears 
assail  us.  Their  name  is  Legion,  and  our  prayer  should  be  that  Christ  would 
-command  them  to  come  out  of  the  man  who  is  troubled  with  them,  and  to  enter 
no  more  into  him.  Many  seem  to  think  that  they  show  a  commendable  spirit 
by  cherishing  such  fears.  But  there  is  no  humility  in  doubting  God's  promises. 
\W.  H.  Levna,  D.D.)        The  ministry  of  consolation: — Let  us  consider  the  teart — 


80  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLU8TRAT0B.  [chap.  xxxv. 

1.  As  A  DISSUASIVE  AGAINST  OT7B  SECRET  FBAKS.  "  Say  to  them  that  are  of  a 
fearful  heart,  Fear  not."  The  language  is  not  uncommon  as  addressed 
to  God's  children.  "  Fear  not,  Abram,  I  am  thy  shield  and  thine  exceeding 
great  reward."  "  Thus  saith  the  Lord  that  created  thee,  0  Jacob,  and  He  that 
formed  thee,  0  Israel,  fear  not."  "  Fear  not,  for  I  am  with  thee;  be  not  dis- 
mayed, for  I  am  thy  God."  The  language  seems  to  intimate  that  those  who  are 
truly  seeking  Christ  are  yet  liable  to  be  oppressed  by  many  fears.  But  the  Lord 
says,  you  are  not  to  be  thus  afraid.  I.  Fear  not  on  account  of  the  greatness  of 
your  sins.  Fathomless  as  are  the  depths  of  your  iniquity,  there  is  one  depth 
which  is  deeper  still.     "  Where  sin  abounded,  grace  did  much  more  abound." 

2.  Fear  not  on  account  of  remaining  infirmities  and  indwelling  tendencies  to  evil. 
How  many  are  deterred  from  taking  any  decisive  step  in  religion  because  they 
have  not  attained  to  a  certain  point  of  spiritual  advancement;  forgetting  that 
the  act  of  taking  the  step  is  to  be  one  of  the  means  for  attaining  to  this  point. 

3.  Be  not  of  a  fearful  heart  through  anything  adverse  or  disquieting  in  your 
spiritual  experience.  Many  form  rash  conclusions  on  this  subject  from  unsound 
and  unworthy  premises,  and  from  only  partial  views  of  Scripture.     II.  As  ak 

ENCOURAGEMENT  TO  LAY  HOLD  UPON  THE  STRENGTH  OF  GoD.       "  Be  StrOng."      The 

advice  is  of  frequent  occurrence  in  Scripture.  But  what  are  we  to  be  strong 
in?  Why,  strong  in  the  Lord,  strong  in  His  strength,  safe  through  His  holding 
up.  Again,  by  the  exhortation,  "  Be  strong,"  we  must  understand  an  injunction 
to  seek  and  pray  for  the  strengthening  aids  of  God  the  Holy  Spirit.  1.  There 
is  the  strength  of  preventing  grace  in  the  hour  of  temptation,  when  not  permitted 
to  come  upon  us;  when  some  power  we  know  not  of  keeps  us  out  of  harm's  way; 
when  the  dominion  of  our  besetting  sin  appears  for  the  time  to  be  got  under,  and 
without  a  struggle  or  a  blow  we  conquer  in  the  might  of  God.  2.  Then,  there  is 
the  strength  of  supporting  grace  when  the  struggle  does  come,  when  we  have  to 
do  battle  with  hard  thoughts  in  adversity,  or  rebelUous  thoughts  in  disappoint- 
ment, with  sinful  thoughts  in  solitude,  with  proud  and  envious  thoughts  in  the 
world,  with  unbelief  and  impatience,  and  a  little  willingness  for  prayer,  and  we 
cannot  shake  off  these  things.  3.  And  then  there  is  the  strength  of  enlightening 
and  sanctifying  grace.  We  grow  in  grace  and  in  the  knowledge  of' our  Lord  and 
Saviour  Jesus  Christ  at  the  same  time;  and  all  this  is  through  the  imparted 
strength  of  the  Comforter.  4.  But  I  must  not  omit  to  notice  the  chief  thing  we 
are  to  be  strong  in,  that  which  gave  the  prayer  of  Jacob  power  to  prevail  with 
God,  namely,  that  we  be  as  Jacob  was,  strong  in  faith,  giving  glory  to  God. 
Guard  against  all  confused  and  imperfect  notions  of  the  offering  of  the  Gospel 
plan,  or  of  the  power  and  willingness  of  Christ  to  save.  Remember  there  is  virtue 
enough  in  His  blood,  power  enough  in  His  arm,  and  grace  enough  at  His  disposal 
to  sanctify  and  save  a  whole  world  of  sinners.  Apply  to  Him  by  faith  and  prayer. 
Place  no  limits  where  God  has  placed  none.  "  The  blood  of  Jesus  Christ  cleanseth 
from  all  sin,"  and  if  from  all,  why  not  yours?  (D.  Moore,  M.A.)  An  old  malady 
and  an  old  remedy : — I.  A  common  trouble.  "  A  fearfid  heart."  Think  of  some 
of  the  causes.  1.  Life  itself  is  a  cause.  A  little  child  does  not  fear.  But  the 
little  child  has  not  yet  reached  into  the  consciousness  of  its  own  personality — has 
not  been  awed  by  the  mystery  of  its  own  existence.  Wrapped  in  such  conscious- 
ness there  is  always  a  certain  fear.  2.  Sin  is  another  source  of  a  fearful  heart. 
The  ideal  relation  between  God  and  the  soul  is  that  of  utmost  intimacy,  but  sin 
breaks  this  relation.  3.  The  sad  things  emerging  in  life  are  causes  of  a  fearful 
heart.  4.  The  difficulties  of  duty.  5.  The  monotony  of  duty.  Sometimes  when 
dreary  stretches  of  duty,  the  same  thing  day  in,  day  out,  fill  the  vision,  a  real  fear 
comes  lest  one  fail  in  duty  because  of  its  uninteresting  routine.  6.  The  revelation 
of  man's  own  nature  under  some  great  surprise  or  disappointment  is  a  cause  of  a 
fearful  heart.  The  strength  one  fancied  himself  to  have,  turns  out  under  some 
great  strain  to  be  but  weakness  after  all.  The  heart  in  Scriptiu-e  stands  for  the 
whole  man — intellect,  affection,  will.  The  thing  needed  is  that  a  man  see  clearly, 
love  wisely,  will  strongly;  but  when  fear  wraps  one  about  with  mists,  this  is  the 
outcome;  a  weak  heart — no  strength  for  doing;  feeble  knees — no  power  of 
purpose.  II.  The  old  and  yet  new  remedy  for  this  common  trouble.  1.  A  per- 
sonal God.  "  Behold  your  God."  2.  A  God  appropriated — your  God.  3.  A 
God  active.  "  He  will  come."  God  is  not  an  inert  passiveness,  having  no  hand 
in  things.  Our  Scripture  is  prophecy;  God  has  come  in  the  Incarnation.  4.  A 
God  for  your  help.  '  He  will  come  and  save  you."  5.  A  rewarding  God.  "  He 
will  come  with  recompense."     Think  more  of  God  than  of  the  causes  of  your 


CHAP,  xxxv.]  ISAIAH.  81 

fearfulness,  and  also  appropriate  God.  {Homiletic  Review.)  Fears: — 1.  These 
words  bring  before  us  very  delightful  thoughts  concerning  God's  nature  and 
purposes.  We  gather  from  them  His  compassion.  He  graciously  sends  the 
message  unsolicited.  His  mercy.  He  does  not  desire  His  people  to  suffer  needless 
trouble  or  anxiety.  His  power  and  care,  for  He  is  able  to  save  them  from  danger 
and  so  guarantee  the  needlessness  of  their  fear.  2.  But  they  remind  us  of  a  very 
painful  condition  of  man,  which  is  his  tendency  to  fear  amid  the  discouragements 
of  life.  These  consist  in  many  things.  I.  Feaes  with  relation  to  externai. 
ciRCTTMSTANCES.  1.  Men  dread  that  which  is  greater  or  more  powerful  than 
themselves.  Hence  they  fear  the  material  forces  of  nature,  the  mighty  convulsions 
of  creation,  the  strength  of  their  fellow- man,  and  the  power  of  God.  2.  Men 
dread  that  which  to  them  is  mysterious  and  unknown.  Thus  there  is  an  innate 
fear  of  darkness,  of  death,  of  the  future.  3.  Men  dread  that  which  is  more  evil 
than  themselves.  Evil  men,  evil  combinations  of  men,  evil  spirits,  and  the 
machinations  of  Satan.  4.  Men  dread  those  circumstances  which  can  adversely 
affect  their  interests.  That  which  can  bring  them  material  loss,  that  which  checks 
their  external  advancement,  that  which  spoils  their  amusement  or  gratification. 
n.  Fears  with  regard  to  internal  circumstances.  1.  There  is  our  relation- 
ship to  God.  As  an  all-seeing  observer,  as  a  just  Judge,  as  an  avenging  King, 
We  stand  before  Him  as  an  Almighty  Jehovah,  who  knows  our  thoughts,  sns, 
and  desires.  2.  There  is  our  future  state  of  existence.  Guilt  makes  cowards 
of  us  all.  3.  There  are  our  domestic  relationships.  The  broken  cord  of  affection, 
the  ruptured  friendship,  and  the  lost  treasures.  4.  There  is  the  mental,  moral, 
and  bodily  anguish  and  suffering.  Great  and  terrible  do  they  appear  as  they 
enshroud  our  existence  and  threaten  our  futiu:e.  Now,  as  these  things  brood 
over  the  soul,  and  darken  the  horizon  of  life,  there  is  heard  speaking  to  the  soul 
of  the  faithful,  earnest  believer  in  Christ  the  trumpet  word  of  our  text — "  Fear 
not."  There  are  many  reasons  why  we  should  not  fear.  1.  There  is  the  fact  of 
our  Father's  love.  He  does  not  willingly  afflict  the  children  of  men.  2.  There 
is  the  fact  of  our  Father's  power.  He  is  able  to  support  and  to  overrule  all  adverse 
circumstances.  3.  There  is  the  fact  of  our  Father's  presence.  He  is  always  near. 
The  true  antidote  to  fear  is  faith.  {Homiliat.)  He  will  come  and  save  you: — 
It  is  no  abstract  salvation  that  we  hope  and  wait  for,  but  a  Saviour — a  Saviour 
before  whom  no  enemy  can  stand.  His  coming  will  be  the  deliverance.  Danger, 
bondage,  weakness,  and  sorrow  shall  be  done  away,  and  in  the  consciousness  of 
the  grand  release,  "The  eyes  of  the  blind  shall  be  opened,"  &c.     {W.  Hubbard.) 

Vers.  5,  6.  Then  the  eyes  of  the  blind  shall  be  opened. — Good  hope  for  the 
afflicted : — I.  This  joyful  prediction  was  literally  fulfilled  in  the  MiRACtrLOtrs  cures 
which  our  Lord  performed  in  the  days  op  His  flesh.  II.  The  cheering 
prediction  is  spiritually  fulfilled,  in  the  experience  of  sinners,  in  the  day  of 
conversion.  III.  This  pleasing  prediction  is  also  accomplished,  in  a  spiritual 
sense,  in  the  experience  of  the  Christian,  in  the  day  of  gracious  revival, 
after  a  season  of  declension.  IV.  The  delightful  prediction  is  gloriously  ful- 
filled in  THE  day  of  the  Christian's  death,  and  at  the  resurrection  of  the 
just.     (X>.  Fraser,  D.D.) 

Ver.  6.  Then  shall  the  lame  man  leap  as  an  hart. — A  threefold  promise: — 
1.  Banished  crutch.  2.  Accentuation  of  speechless  tongue.  3.  Irrigated  Sahara. 
(T.  De  Wilt  Talmage,  D.D.)  And  the  tongue  of  the  dumb  sing. — Dumb  singers : — 
I.  Note  the  persons  whom  God  has  chosen  to  sing  His  songs  for  ever.  "  The 
tongue  of  the  dumb  shall  sing."  Their  singing  does  not  come  naturally  from  them- 
selves; they  were  not  born  songsters.  No,  they  were  dumb.  How  this  ought  to 
give  you  encoiu-agement  in  seeking  to  do  good  to  others !  If  you  have  neighbours 
who  are  profaners  of  the  Sabbath,  haters  of  God,  unwilling  to  come  to  the  house  of 
God,  despising  Christ;  if  you  find  them  as  far  gone  as  you  can  find  them,  recollect 
He  maketh  the  dumb  sing,  and  therefore  He  can  make  them  live.  II.  Now  I  am  to 
enter  into  some  rather  more  lucid  description  of  these  dumb  people.  Who  are 
they?  Sometimes  I  get  a  good  thought  out  of  Cruden's  Concordance.  As  I  opened 
it  at  this  passage,  I  found  Master  Cruden  describing  different  kinds  of  dumb  people. 
He  says  there  are  four  or  five  different  sorts,  but  I  shall  name  only  four  of  them. 
1.  Those  who  carmot  speak — that  is  the  usual  acceptation  of  the  word  dumb — the 
others  are,  of  course,  only  figurative  applications  of  the  term.  Now,  spiritually,  the 
man  who  is  still  in  his  trespasses  and  sins  is  dumb.     He  is  dead,  and  there  is  none 

VOL.  II. — 6 


82  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  rxxv. 

80  dumb  as  a  dead  man.  "  Shall  the  dead  arise  and  praise  Thee  ?  Shall  Thy  loving- 
kindness  be  declared  in  the  grave,  or  Thy  faithfulness  in  destruction?  "  As  "  no 
man  can  call  Jesus  Lord,  except  by  the  Holy  Ghost,"  these  people  cannot  do  so 
truly.  But,  all  hail  sovereign  grace !  They  are  dumb  by  nature,  but  He  will  not 
leave  them  so;  they  cannot  now  sing  His  praises,  but  they  shall  do  it;  they  will  not 
now  confess  their  sins,  but  He  will  bring  them  on  their  knees  yet,  and  make  them 
pour  out  their  hearts  before  Him.  2.  But  there  is  a  sort  of  dumb  people  that  will 
not  speak.  They  are  mentioned  by  Isaiah.  He  said  of  preachers  in  his  day,  they 
were  "  dumb  dogs  that  would  not  bark."  3.  I  will  now  introduce  you  to  a  third 
sort  of  dumb  people.  They  are  dumb  because  they  dare  not  speak ;  and  they  are 
good  people.  Here  is  one  of  them:  "  I  was  dumb  with  silence;  I  opened  not  my 
mouth,  because  Thou  didst  it."  And  it  is  so  blessed  to  be  dumb  in  that  fashion. 
The  Lord's  servant  will  often  have  to  be  dumb  under  trials  and  troubles.  You  are, 
it  may  be,  in  the  deepest  trouble  now,  and  obliged  to  be  silent;  well,  you  shall  sing 
yet  for  all  that.  If  you  cannot  cheer  the  darkness  with  "  songs  in  the  night,"  yet 
He  shall  "  compass  you  about  with  songs  of  deliverance."  We  are  not  always  to  be 
silent  with  affliction.  The  saints  have  known  joy,  unspeakably  great,  in  the  midst 
of  trial  intolerably  hot.  Their  murmuring  has  been  silenced,  and  their  thanks- 
giving has  become  vocal.  An  old  Puritan  said,  "  God's  people  are  like  birds;  they 
sing  best  in  cages."  4.  We  have  one  more  kind  of  dumb  people — those  who  have 
nothing  to  say.  I  will  give  you  an  instance ;  Solomon  says  in  the  Proverbs — "  Open 
thy  mouth  for  the  dumb  " ;  and  he  means  those  who  in  the  court  of  judgment  have 
nothing  to  plead  for  themselves,  and  have  to  stand  dumb  before  the  bar.  Like  that 
man  of  old,  who,  when  the  king  came  in  to  see  the  guests,  had  not  on  a  wedding 
garment;  and  when  the  king  said,  "  Friend,  how  earnest  thou  in  hither?  "  he  stood 
speechless ;  speechless,  not  because  he  could  not  speak,  but  because  he  had  nothing 
to  say.  Have  not  you  and  I  been  dumb,  and  are  we  not  now,  when  we  attempt  to 
stand  on  law  terms  with  God,  when  we  forget  that  Jesus  Christ  and  His  blood  and 
righteousness  are  our  full  acquittal?  We  can  now  sing  this  anthem:  "  Who  shall 
lay  anything  to  the  charge  of  God's  elect?  "  Not  God,  for  "  He  hath  justified." 
"  Who  is  he  that  condemneth?  "  Not  Christ,  "  He  hath  died,  yea  rather,  hath 
risen  again,  who  is  even  at  the  right  hand  of  God,  and  maketh  intercession  for  us." 
m.  The  occasions  when  the  tongtjb  of  these  dumb  people  sings  the  best.  I 
think  it  sings  always,  little  or  much.  If  it  is  once  set  at  liberty,  it  will  never  leave 
off  singing.  (C.  H.  Spurgeon.)  In  the  wilderness  shall  waters  break  out. — T?ie 
figure  of  the  wilderness: — The  lovely  poetry  of  this  passage  is  almost  thrown  away 
upon  us  who  have  had  no  actual  experience  of  the  wilderness.  Our  imagination 
has  been  largely  helped  by  the  vivid  and  pathetic  descriptions  from  travellers  who 
have  been  through  it;  but  the  most  powerful  imagination  cannot  enable  us  to  feel 
its  awful  reality.  The  interminable  expanse,  the  distressing  sameness,  the  horizon 
for  leagues  on  leagues  unbroken  by  a  solitary  tree  or  shrub.  The  burning  sand 
blinding  our  eyes  and  scorching  our  feet.  The  very  pathway,  confused  and  often 
obliterated  by  the  blast  of  the  burning  wind,  is  strewn  with  the  bleached  bones  of 
the  poor  creatures  who  have  fallen  victims  to  the  heat  and  drought.  Not  a  bird 
flying  over  our  heads,  nor  a  harmless  animal  to  be  seen  browsing  a  scanty  pasture. 
The  night  is  made  terrible  and  the  gloom  is  deepened  by  the  roarings  of  the  lion  and 
the  bowlings  of  the  jackal  and  the  hysena.  Not  a  scrap  of  food  of  fruit  or  root  to  be 
obtained,  and,  worst  of  all,  not  a  drop  of  water  to  quench  the  fiery  thirst.  Our 
parched  lips  can  scarcely  close.  And  this  dreadful  place  is  so  interminable  that  it 
takes  days  and  weeks  to  traverse;  only  here  and  there  at  long  intervals  does  the 
exhausted  and  almost  demented  traveller  come  upon  the  green  oasis  and  the  price- 
less well  of  water.  In  the  Old  Testament  the  horrors  of  the  desert  are  often  used 
to  figure  the  miserable  aspect  of  life,  and  the  privations  of  the  human  soul.  "  My 
soul  is  athirst  for  Thee,  in  a  barren  and  dry  land  where  no  water  is."  "  As  the  hart 
panteth  after  the  water  brooks,  so  longeth  my  soul  after  Thee,  0  God."  "  My  soul 
is  athirst  for  God,  yea  even  for  the  living  God;  when  shall  I  come  to  appear 
before  the  presence  of  God?  "  "  I  will  pour  water  upon  him  that  is  thirsty  and 
floods  upon  the  dry  ground."  And  here  Isaiah,  wishing  to  show  the  glory  and 
beauty  of  a  true  vision  of  God,  compares  the  change  out  of  the  darkness  and  misery 
of  soul  to  the  transformation  of  the  wilderness  into  a  garden.  {C.  Voysey,  M.A.) 
The  wilderness  of  existence: — The  heart  of  man  is  the  real  wilderness,  where  dearth 
and  drought  and  quenchless  thirst  torment  and  destroy  him  until  he  get  the  vision 
of  the  glory  of  God,  which  is  His  love.  When  man  sees  that,  the  waters  break  forth 
in  the  wilderness  of  his  soul,  and  streams  in  the  desert.     His  heart  shall  blossom  as 


CHAP,  rrxv.]  ISAIAH.  83 

the  rose  and  blossom  abundantly;  and  not  only  flowers  but  fruit  shall  he  bear  far  the 
healing  of  the  nations.  When  man  learns  how  God  loves  us  all,  then  shall  he  find 
joy  and  gladness;  and  sorrow  and  sighing  shall  flee  away.  That  is  the  essence  of 
the  poem.  But  it  teaches  yet  a  great  deal  more.  When  man's  heart  is  turned  from 
a  wilderness  into  a  garden  by  the  knowledge  of  God's  love,  he  is  not  only  happy  in 
himself,  but  he  is  a  fountain  and  stream  of  happiness  to  others.  "  Then  the  eyes  of 
the  bUnd  are  opened  and  the  ears  of  the  deaf  unstopped.  Then  doth  the  lame  man 
leap  as  an  hart  and  the  tongue  of  the  dumb  can  sing."  His  love  for  others  is 
kindled  and  set  aglow  by  the  sight  of  the  love  of  God.  So  we  get  three  distinct 
ideas  out  of  the  poetry  before  us.  The  knowledge  of  the  love  of  God  as  the  source 
of  all  blessedness — first,  to  bring  joy  and  gladness  into  individual  souls,  and  then  to 
make  them  fruitful  in  bringing  joy  and  gladness  into  the  hearts  of  their  fellow-men. 
{Tbid. )  Ood  alone  the  satisfaction  of  humanity : — If  we  would  only  believe  it,  we 
should  see  that  in  proportion  as  we  regard  our  surroundings  as  a  desert,  we  are 
giving  proof  that  we  belong  to  a  higher  order  of  existence  than  those  who  can  be 
satisfied  with  the  common  pleasures,  the  bread  and  water  of  merely  animal  life.  If 
we  belong  to  that  higher  order,  if  our  true  realm  is  not  of  this  world,  we  shall  not 
be  able  to  satisfy  ourselves  with  all  that  this  world  can  possibly  furnish.  Our 
thirst  will  only  be  inflamed  and  not  quenched  by  every  effort  to  allay  it  with  earthly 
gratification.  And  I  do  not  think  it  unreasonable  to  ask  you  to  take  the  next  step 
— which  is  more  like  a  leap  than  a  step — and  to  admit  that  God  never  intended  us 
to  be  perfectly  happy  here  on  earth,  in  and  through  only  the  satisfaction  of  our 
earthly  desires.  He  has  so  made  us  that  the  world  and  human  life,  lovely  and 
delicious  as  these  are,  shaU  yet  be  to  us  a  very  wUdemess  full  of  weariness  and  hunger 
and  thirst,  until  we  have  found  our  true  satisfaction  in  Him  and  His  love.  [Ibid.) 
The  joys  of  the  godly: — The  whole  secret  of  our  happiness  lies  in  this  knowledge  of 
the  love  of  God.  I.  It  adds  enormously  to  every  lawful  pleasure  and  indulgence. 
We  take  our  joys  in  company  with  God.  In  our  recreation,  in  our  games,  in  our 
mirth  and  laughter,  we  revel  all  the  more  freely  and  heartily  because  we  never 
forget  that  He  is  there,  never  forget  that  it  is  from  Him  that  have  come  our  varied 
powers  of  enjoyment  and  the  numberless  resources  which  minister  to  it.  We  set  God 
always  before  us,  and  therefore  in  aU  the  so-called  blessings  and  comforts  of  life  we 
are  free  from  sin  in  the  using.  We  wiU  not  enjoy  any  pleasure  for  which  we  cannot 
give  Him  thanks.  And  it  is  amazing  what  a  large  extpa  number  of  pleasures  we 
find  in  consequence.  2.  A  still  greater  wealth  is  poured  upon  us  by  the  sight  of  the 
love  of  God.  It  turns  all  our  pains  and  sorrows  into  joy.  It  gives  us  perfect  con- 
tentment with  our  lot.  We  know  it  could  not  have  come  against  His  will.  We 
know  it  has  come,  then,  to  do  us  good.  If  we  will  only  be  patient  and  bear  it  like  a 
man,  we  shall  soon  see  the  blessing  which  God  had  wrapped  up  in  it;  when  o\a  GJod 
comes  to  us  in  the  wilderness  of  our  woe,  the  water  breaks  forth  and  we  are  satisfied 
and  refreshed.  He  is  our  living  fountain  of  peace  and  hope  and  joy  unspeakable; 
His  love  touches  the  strong  rock  of  our  heart's  rebellion,  and  lo!  the  streams  of 
gladness  flow  forth  and  we  are  like  a  well-watered  garden.  Then  our  poor  blind 
eyes  are  opened  to  see  only  good,  where  we  thought  there  was  only  evil.  Then  our 
deaf  ears  are  unstopped,  and  we  listen  joyfully  and  thankfully  to  His  soothing  and 
cheering  whispor  of  peace.  Then  our  palsied  limbs  leap  up  at  His  call  and  we  do  the 
duty  that  lies  nearest  to  us ;  we  begin  to  make  the  best  of  our  altered  conditions  and 
tread  cheerfully  the  path  of  thorns  in  which  His  hand  is  leading  us.  And  the  tongue 
of  the  dumb  shall  sing.  Our  stubborn  lips  fast  closed  in  anger  and  resentment,  our 
tongue  cleaving  to  the  roof  of  our  mouth  in  distress  and  despair,  shall  now  move  in 
harmony  with  the  gladness  awakened  by  the  sight  of  His  love.  We  shall  glorify  Him 
in  the  fires  of  tribulation;  we  shall  sing  of  His  great  salvation.  {Ibid.)  The 
desire  to  bless  others : — And  yet  more  and  more  comes  out  of  that  inexhaustible 
fountain  of  goodness  and  joy.  The  sight  of  the  love  of  God  not  only  transflgures 
the  life  of  each  individual,  but  makes  us  do  our  best  to  convert  the  wilderness  around 
us  into  a  garden.  Atheists  have  confessed  to  me  how  barren  of  any  practical  good 
atheism  is,  how  absolutely  deficient  in  any  inspiring  motive  iot  kindly  endeavour 
to  help  others.  But  we  know,  by  oiu*  own  experience,  that  the  sight  of  God's  love 
which  has  turned  our  own  wilderness  into  a  garden,  has  likewise  stirred  us  up  into 
an  enthusiasm  of  brotherly  love  and  has  borne  fruit  in  practical  endeavours  to  bring 
streams  into  the  desert  of  lives. not  our  own.  {Ibid. )  Streams  in  the  desert: — The 
streams  are  spiritual,  and  refer  to  the  diffusion  of  the  Gospel  and  the  manifold 
blessings  of  salvation  over  the  world.  I.  A  few  of  the  blessinos  which  thbsh 
STBZAMS  IMFABT.     They  are  a  source  of — 1.  Spiritual  fertility.     No  other  streama 


84  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xxxv. 

are  possessed  of  the  same  fertilising  power.  Modem  writers  show  a  tendency  to 
ascribe  to  the  influence  of  civilisation  and  knowledge  all  our  social,  moral,  and 
religious  blessings.  But  how  do  they  reconcile  their  theories  with  the  comparatively 
barren  effects  of  Egyptian  science  and  civilisation,  Greek  philosophy  and  art,  and 
Roman  law  and  discipline?  Be  the  influence  of  these  latter  what  they  might,  they 
wrought  no  radical  change  on  man's  moral  and  spiritual  character.  2.  Spiritual 
beauty.  Wherever  streams  flow  in  such  lands  as  Judaea,  there  luxuriance  waves, 
but  in  an  endless  variety  of  appearance.  Not  less  diversified  is  the  influence  of 
Divine  grace  on  the  character.  Religion  does  not  obliterate  nature,  but  works  in 
harmony  with  it,  preserving  all  its  innocent  idiosyncrasies,  so  that  as  in  the  natural 
world  are  to  be  seen  the  cedar,  the  palm,  the  fir,  and  the  rose,  so  in  the  Church,  along 
the  streams  of  Divine  grace,  are  to  be  seen  a  John  and  a  Peter,  a  Martha  and  a  Mary. 

3.  Spiritual  joy.  Every  one  has  experienced  the  refreshing  influence  of  water. 
This  is  an  image  of  the  deep  satisfaction  and  joy  which  true  religion  is  fitted  to 
impart.     No  other  streams  convey  the  same  joy.     11.  Some  of  the  DiSTTNGUiSHrNG 

EXCELLENCES  BY  WHICH  THE  STREAMS  ARE  CHARACTERISED.      1.  They  are  full  and 

abundant.  2.  They  are  free  to  all.  Men  have  tried  to  fence  round  these  streams, 
and  to  reduce  them  to  the  limits  of  their  own  selfish  hearts  and  narrow  creed ;  but 
God's  thoughts  are  not  as  our  thoughts,  nor  His  ways  as  ours.  While  this  is  a 
cheering,  it  is  also  a  solemnising,  thought,  laying  the  responsibility  of  our  own  ruin 
on  ourselves.  3.  They  are  near  and  accessible.  If  a  visit  to  such  rivers  as  the 
Ganges  or  the  Nile  were  requisite  to  our  salvation,  how  many  would  be  unable  to 
comply  with  the  condition.     But  these  streams  flow  wherever  the  Gospel  comes. 

4.  They  are  ever  spreading  in  their  influence.  What  is  the  garden  of  the  Lord  com- 
pared with  the  desert  of  this  world?  It  is  seen  blooming  in  little  oases  here  and 
there.  But  these  streams  are  destined  to  spread  and  multiply,  and  to  cover  the 
whole  earth  with  spiritual  verdure  and  beauty.  Conclusion — 1.  These  streams  are 
at  present  accessible,  but  may  not  be  so  long.  Come  to  them  now.  2.  Remember 
that  Jesus  is  the  only  channel  through  which  they  can  reach  ua.     {W.  Johnston.) 

Ver.  7.  And  tlie  parched  ground  shall  become  a  pooL —  The  mirage  of  the 
desert: — We  must  understand  these  words  as  they  would  be  understood  in  the  East. 
The  parched  ground  is  rich  in  what  is  known  as  mirage — the  image  of  water,  a  sheen 
that  cheats  the  eye,  and  so  successfully  cheats  it  that  the  thirsty  traveller  says,  I 
see  rivers !  It  is  the  mirage — (from  mirari,  to  wonder  at) — a  beautiful  thing  : 
water  on  ©very  hand:  presently  we  shall  drink  and  be  glad.  The  traveller  moves, 
the  mirage  recedes;  the.traveller  would  seize  the  blessing,  but  the  blessing  was  only 
in  clouds:  an  optical  delusion;  the  eye  has  deceived  the  appetite.  In  the  reign  of 
Jesus  Christ  the  parched  ground  shall  become  a  pool  of  real  water,  and  the  thirsty 
land  springs,  fountains:  the  period  of  mirage  has  vanished,  the  period  of  reality  has 
set  in.  (J.  Parker,  D.D.)  The  mirage  and  the  'pool : — The  mirage — what  is  that? 
In  place  of  an  enticing  lake,  the  traveller  finds  only  ground  "  dry  as  a  bone,"  as  my 
Arab  guide  expressed  it.  So  the  mirage  stands  as  the  emblem  of  the  sham,  the 
pretence.  And  the  pool — what  is  that  ?  It  is  the  patch  of  real  water  found  in  the 
desert;  an  oasis,  around  which  may  be  found  palms,  shade,  and  refreshment.  The 
pool  is  the  real  thing;  it  offers  refreshment  and  contentment.  To  an  Oriental  the 
mirage  becoming  a  pool  meant  a  transformation  from  illusion  to  reality.  The 
entire  pictiore  is  a  permanent  mirror  of  human  life.  I.  Let  us  look  at  the  miraob. 
It  appeals  to  a  need  of  our  nature.  To  the  thirsty  traveller  the  mirage  offers  water 
and  fruit.  Oiur  nature  is  fiill  of  needs.  We  are  not  self-contained;  we  must  con- 
tinually receive  help  from  without.  Our  senses,  our  minds,  and  our  hearts  cry  out 
for  their  food,  and  their  cry  is  natural.  In  reply  to  their  cry,  both  the  real  food  of 
our  nature  and  the  mirage  present  themselves.  The  real  and  the  sham  are  before 
us,  and  we  have  to  choose  between  them.  Alas !  too  many  follow  the  mirage.  In 
vain  old  travellers  warn  the  younger  ones.  II.  Let  us  look  at  the  pool.  No  one 
would  go  after  the  mirage  if  they  knew  it  was  the  mirage.  Men  want  reality,  and 
they  think  they  seek  it  until  a  humiliation  reveals  the  fact  that  they  have  been 
chasing  an  illusion  aU  the  time.  Now,  the  message  of  the  Gospel  is  a  message  of 
reahty.  The  Gospel  offers  to  transform  our  illusions  into  reaUties,  by  offering 
to  transform  us.  Bring  God  into  life,  and  the  traveller  sees  reaUty  everywhere. 
The  reality  touches  every  part  of  his  nature.  1.  His  senses.  He  is  neither  ascetic 
nor  libertine,  but  remembers  ever  that  his  body  is  the  temple  of  the  Holy  Ghost. 
Because  God's  temple  he  will  seek,  by  proper  exercise,  to  preserve  its  beauty.  The 
lenses,  being  the  transitory  and  lower  part  of  our  nature,  will  never  be  allowed  to 


CHAP.  XXXV.]  ISAIAH.  85 

Occupy  the  dominant  place  in  life.  2.  His  mind.  He  to  whom  God  is  the  supreme 
reality  will  take  care  that  he  never  allows  a  partial  knowledge  of  any  subject  to 
interpose  itself  as  a  thick  veil  between  his  soul  and  God.  3.  His  heart.  When  a  man 
finds  God  he  finds  BUm  who  is  love,  and  when  he  rests  in  that  love  he  experiences  no 
shock  of  disappointment.  And  the  other  loves  that  are  permitted  to  us,  when 
exercised  within  the  circle  of  the  larger  love,  are  harmonious  with  it,  and  so  bring  us 
peace  and  joy  without  alloy.  (F.  C.  Spurr.)  The  mirage  a  reality: — The  real 
translation  of  these  words  is  not "  The  parched  ground  shall  become  a  pool,"  but 
"  The  mirage  shall  become  a  pool."  The  thing  that  you  believed  would  be  the  satis- 
faction of  your  life,  the  sight  of  which  had  brought  new  vigour  to  your  limbs  and 
strengthened  your  mind  for  the  onward  journey  of  the  pilgrimage,  that,  says  the 
prophet,  shall  become  true.  The  mirage,  the  illusion  of  your  life,  shall  become  a 
reaUty.  What  has  been  the  mirage  that  humanity  has  seen  in  its  journey?  The 
prophet  enters  into  certain  details  that  we  might  glance  at  for  our  profit.  The  first 
thing  that  such  men  would  want  would  be  the  slaking  of  their  thirst,  the  satisfaction 
of  some  desire.  Might  we  not  go  back  to  the  beginning  of  the  history  of  man,  and 
see  that  it  has  been  a  series  of  efforts  succeeded  by  failure  to  gain  satisfaction  ?  We 
have  all  of  us,  as  humanity  at  large,  been  struggling  from  the  beginning  to  be  satisfied. 
And  the  soul  has  said  to  itself.  If  I  can  once  lay  hold  upon  that  particular  thing, 
then  I  shall  be  satisfied.  It  may  be  wealth,  it  may  be  honour,  it  may  be  physical 
strength,  it  may  be  popularity.  And  we  have  reached  it,  but  we  were  not  satisfied. 
We  found  that  the  same  want  began  all  over  again ;  year  after  year,  men  have  seen 
a  mirage,  and  said  to  themselves,  If  I  could  reach  that,  my  soul  would  be  satisfied. 
Many  a  man,  grown  old  and  weary  with  repeated  failure,  has  said  to  his  soul,  in  the 
secret  communion  of  his  own  heart,  "  What  is  it  that  thou  dost  desire,  0  my  sotiI? 
I  have  made  a  home.  I  have  gathered  about  me  those  I  love.  I  have  increased 
knowledge.  I  have  widened  the  circle  of  my  friendships.  But  I  am  not  satisfied. 
Still  there  is  something  that  does  not  slake  the  thirst  of  my  soul."  And  while  these 
men  so  long  ago  thought  as  we  do  now,  one  man  stood  up  in  the  midst  of  them 
all,  and  shouted  aloud,  as  if  it  were  a  great  discovery,  '  My  soul  is  athirst  for 
God."  That  is  the  trouble  with  humanity.  It  is  athirst  for  God,  and  it  haa 
supposed  that  it  could  satisfy  its  longings  with  the  things  that  are  touched  and 
seen.  And  the  prophet,  knowing  the  long  struggle  and  the  repeated  failure,  looked 
in  the  faces  of  these  men,  and  said,  "  The  mirage  shall  become  a  pool,"  your  satis- 
faction shall  be  met.  But  such  a  prophecy  as  that  called  men's  minds  away  from 
themselves  to  the  thought  of  others.  Individual  salvation,  if  it  could  be  brought 
to  any  one  of  us  here  to-day,  would  not  be  enough.  The  woman  who  knows  that  she 
stands  in  the  light  of  the  love  of  God,  but  that  her  husband  is  in  the  outer  darkness, 
the  man  who  knows  that  he  has  led  an  upright  and  true  life,  but  that  his  son  is  turning 
away  to  wickedness,  cannot  be  satisfied.  We  are  bound  one  to  another.  Hear 
the  word  of  the  prophet:  "  And  a  highway  shall  be  there,  and  a  way,  and  the  way- 
faring man,  though  a  fool,  shall  not  err  therein."  There  shall  come,  says  the 
prophet,  a  day  when  in  the  desert  a  highway  shall  be  built,  and  men  shall  know  that 
they  are  not  wandering  in  this  trackless  waste,  with  no  knowledge  of  the  home  from 
which  they  have  come,  and  no  understanding  of  the  end  and  object  of  the  pilgrimage. 
But  their  feet  shall  stand  on  the  way  that  others  have  travelled  before  them,  and 
they  shall  hear  the  voice  of  the  past  saying  to  them.  This  is  the  way,  walk  ye  in  it. 
And  walking  in  that  path,  united  with  the  great  company  of  pilgrims  who  have  been 
through  the  same  experiences,  known  the  same  sorrows,  been  beckoned  on  by  the 
same  mirage,  they  shall  have  strength  and  hope  and  comfort  in  the  consciousness  of 
this  great  companionship  of  the  redeemed  who  walk  on  the  highway  of  their  God. 
Again,  we  look  back  over  the  long  history  of  the  race,  and  we  find  that  something 
else  is  needed.  If  we  could  see  to-day  the  camp  in  which  the  earliest  forms  of 
civilisation  were  gathered,  before  cities  were  built,  or  roads  were  laid,  or  empires 
dreamed  of,  we  should  find  that  the  camp  encircled  itself  at  night  with  fire,  while 
without  were  the  beasts  roaring  for  their  prey,  causing  the  little  children  to  nestle 
close  to  the  father  who  could  protect  them,  causing  the  women  to  shudder,  and  even 
strong  men  to  ask  themselves.  May  the  fiery  barrier  be  broken  down,  and  the  beasts 
that  are  outside  the  camp  invade  us  and  destroy  what  we  love  ?  Oh  the  illusion,  the 
mirage,  as  it  must  have  seemed  to  them,  of  stately  cities  and  strong  walls,  and 
beasts  for  ever  banished  from  the  land!  But  the  prophet  said,  "  Notion  shall  be 
there,  nor  any  ravenous  beast;  they  shall  not  be  found  there,  but  the  redeemed 
shall  walk  there."  The  day  will  come  when  the  people  shall  know  that  they  are 
protected,  when  fear  shall  be  taken  away  from  them.     The  fear  of  what?     Of 


86  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xxxv. 

beasts?  Not  that  alone,  for  when  the  beasts  were  banished  from  the  land,  there  wai 
man  to  be  afraid  of.  And  the  children  said.  Who  will  protect  us  from  the  enemy? 
And  the  father  said,  I  will.  And  then  the  father  came  to  die.  And  he  rolled 
despairing  eyes  and  cried.  Ay,  but  who  will  protect  me  now?  I  must  go  into 
the  unseen  land,  and  face  the  shadows  that  I  now  behold.  Who  will  protect  me 
now?  Who  will  protect  me, — not  from  the  beast,  not  from  men,  not  from  the 
spirits  that  may  haunt  me,  not  from  hell,  but  from  sin  ?  Who  will  keep  me  from  the 
corruption  of  sin, — worse  than  any  evil  that  the  world  has  ever  seen  or  dreamed  of? 
The  prophet  said,  The  mirage  shall  become  a  pool.  That  which  seems  impossible 
shall  surely  come  to  pass.  Once  more.  On  the  journey  much  was  lost,  much  waa 
suffered,  much  endured.  And  the  pilgrim  who  stepped  out  so  blithely  at  the  begin- 
ning of  the  march  was  found  at  the  end  to  be  an  old  man  with  the  hope  deferred  that 
maketh  the  heart  sick,  the  disappointment  and  weariness  and  sorrow,  the  hatred 
of  those  whom  he  had  tried  to  help  along  the  journey,  the  fear  in  his  own  heart  that 
it  was  all  an  illusion.  So  at  the  last  there  was  something  more  needed  for  these 
weary  men.  Was  all  that  had  been  dropped  on  the  journey  to  be  gathered  up 
again?  Was  all  that  had  been  suffered  to  have  its  reward?  The  prophet  said, 
The  mirage  shall  become  a  pool.  What  you  have  dreamed  of  joy  and  peace  and 
glory  shall  be  your  portion.  For  "  the  ransomed  of  the  Lord  shall  retiu-n,  and  come 
to  Zion  with  songs  and  everlasting  joy  upon  their  heads."  The  mirage,  the  illusion, 
shall  become  a  reality.  These  words  were  spoken  thousands  of  years  ago.  What 
I  would  like  to  ask  you  is,  How  shall  we  read  them  to-day  ?  Is  it  true  that  the 
thirsty  soul  has  been  satisfied  ?  Is  it  true  that  there  is  a  highway  in  the  desert,  and 
that  the  wayfaring  man  need  not  err  therein  ?  Is  it  true  that  no  lion  is  there,  nor 
any  ravenous  beast,  but  that  in  the  consciousness  of  safety  men  are  making  their 
journey?  Is  it  true  that  the  redeemed  do  return  and  come  to  Zion  with  everlasting 
joy  upon  their  heads,  and  that  sorrow  and  sighing  flee  away?  Are  these  thinga 
true  ?  Why,  look  into  your  own  experiences,  and  think  for  a  moment,  not  of  yout 
sorrows  nor  trials  nor  temptations,  not  of  the  weariness  and  disappointment  of  life, 
but  of  its  glory,  and  see  if  what  the  prophet  said  be  not  true.  See  if  it  is  not  true 
that  things  that  in  that  day  seemed  an  illusion  are  to-day  the  realities  of  life.  Why, 
multitudes  of  men  and  women  know  what  it  is  to  have  the  satisfaction  of  the  soul, 
God  with  us;  the  knowledge  that  our  sins  have  been  pardoned,  that  they  shall 
never  rise  up  in  judgment  to  meet  us;  the  assurance  of  God's  undying  love;  the 
knowledge  of  the  sympathy  of  Him  who  was  crucified  for  us;  the  consciousness 
that  God  is  about  us  and  by  us  and  in  us, — is  the  pool  at  which  our  thirsty  souls  do 
drink.  And  the  way.  Have  we  not  that  way?  There  are  men  and  women  who 
are  lost,  men  and  women  who  are  wandering  thjrough  this  world,  not  knowing  where 
they  came  from  nor  whither  they  are  going.  But  is  it  true  of  those  who  have  been 
drawn  to  the  company  of  Jesus  Christ?  Are  their  feet  not  upon  the  way  that  leada 
to  eternal  life?  Who  would  give  it  up?  Those  who  do  not  know  it  think  that  it  ia 
a  mirage.  You  know  that  your  feet  are  on  the  highway,  and  though  you  may  be  a 
fool  in  many  things,  yet  you  shaU  not  err  from  the  way  of  salvation.  It  is  the  way 
that  comes  from  God  and  leads  to  God,  the  way  of  Jesus  Christ  the  Saviour.  And 
protection.  It  is  hard  for  us  to  picture  to  ourselves  what  it  must  have  been  for 
the  camp  to  hear  the  roar  of  the  beasts.  We  are  not  afraid  of  death,  for  Jesus  died. 
We  are  not  afraid  of  hell,  for  He  descended  into  hell.  We  are  not  afraid  of  God  nor 
of  God's  judgment,  for  it  is  the  judgment  of  a  father.  We  are  not  afraid  of  anything 
but  sin,  and  says  the  apostle,  "  Sin  shall  not  have  dominion  over  you.  You  are  not 
under  the  law;  you  are  under  grace."  Christ  is  personally  helping  every  one  of  us. 
Nothing  shall  separate  us  from  His  love.  We  have  no  cause  for  fear.  "  No  lion  shall 
be  there,  nor  any  ravenous  beast,  but  the  redeemed  shall  walk  there."  The  promise 
and  prophecy  of  joy, — have  we  not  known  it?  It  is  not  true  that  sorrow  and  sighing 
have  left  the  world,  but  has  not  the  sorrow  and  has  not  the  sighing  fled  away  from 
you,  as  you  have  entered  into  the  communion  of  your  God?  Have  you  not  come 
to  Zion  with  everlasting  joy  upon  your  head,  as  you  have  remembered,  not  the 
special  things  for  which  you  ought  to  be  thankful,  but  as  it  has  been  borne  in 
upon  you  that  you  belong  to  God  and  God  to  you,  and  that  the  glory  and  beauty 
of  life  is  not  in  doing  God's  will  as  a  hard  law,  but  in  doing  God's  will  because  you 
have  come  to  love  God's  will?  The  prophecy  is  not  to  come  true;  the  prophecy 
has  come  true.  What  the  prophet  said  was  that  these  things  should  come, — the 
satisfaction  of  human  want,  the  consciousness  that  the  feet  were  on  the  everlasting 
way,  the  protection  from  all  evil,  and  the  everlasting  joy  of  Zion  in  the  days  of  the 
Messiah.    And  now  if  you  ask  me  whether  this  prophecy  rests  upon  any  principle. 


CHAP.  XXXV.]  ISAIAH.  87 

and  whether  its  fulfilment  has  got  anything  back  of  it  but  the  individual  hope  that 
may  be  true,  I  answer  you.  Yes,  it  has.  It  has  the  revelation  of  God  in  the  incarna- 
tion of  Jesus  Christ  that  man  and  God  are  one.  And  because  man  and  God  are  one, 
therefore  the  mirage  that  humanity  has  beheld  is  the  reflection  of  the  refracted  rays 
of  the  will  of  God  passing  through  the  medium  of  human  life.  And  every  man  who 
has  purified  himself  is,  in  his  own  day  and  according  to  his  capacity,  some  sort  of 
revelation,  not  of  his  own  will,  but  of  God's  will  revealed  tlurough  him.  "  The 
mirage  shall  become  a  pool."  The  satisfaction  of  your  soul  you  shaU  know,  because 
you  are  God's  and  God  is  yours.  Is  not  that  what  St.  John  meant,  when  he  wrote, 
in  that  wonderftd  fifth  chapter  of  his  First  Epistle,  "And  this  is  the  confidence  that 
we  have  in  Him,  that,  if  we  ask  anything  according  to  His  will,  He  heareth  us:  and 
if  we  know  that  He  hear  us,  whatsoever  we  ask,  we  know  that  we  have  the  petitions 
that  we  desired  of  Him  "  ?  Because  your  will,  your  prayer,  purified  from  selfishness, 
is  no  longer  your  will  or  your  prayer.  "  The  Spirit  helpeth  our  infirmities,"  and 
"  maketh  intercession  for  us  with  groanings  which  cannot  be  uttered."  The  pro- 
phecy has  come  true,  and  yet  it  is  as  nothing  compared  with  that  which  shall  be  in 
the  day  when  we  know  Him  more  than  we  know  Him  now.  What  should  be  our 
attitude  ?  One  of  unbounded  thankfulness  that  He  has  seen  fit  to  reveal  Himself  to 
us  as  our  Father,  and  ourselves  as  His  sons.  One  of  unflinching  courage,  one  of 
undying  hope;  for  every  glorious  vision  that  humanity  has  had  upon  its  pilgrimage 
of  personal  joy,  of  larger  truth,  of  nobler  civilisation,  of  human  glory,  shaU,  in  God's 
good  time,  be  fulfilled,  because  it  is  not  the  will  of  man,  it  is  the  will  of  God. 
{Leighton  Parks.) 

Vers.  8-10.  And  an  Jughway  shall  be  there. — Highways  are  among  the  character- 
istic features  of  civiHsation  in  a  country,  since  they  are  the  means  of  regtdar  and 
easy  commimication  between  the  opposite  parts,  and  especially  of  all  with  the 
capital;  but  in  times  of  foreign  invasion  they  fall  first  into  the  power  of  the  enemy, 
and  are  most  completely  deserted  by  the  inhabitants  ( Judg.  v.  6) ;  and  in  Judsea, 
or  any  other  country  where  wild  beasts  still  exist,  these  keep  aloof  from  the  roads  as 
long  as  they  are  kept  open  by  traffic,  but  reappear  in  them  if  unfrequented,  as  in 
the  story  of  the  old  prophet  who  met  the  lion  on  the  way  from  Bethel.  And  this 
highroad  shall  not  only  be  so  well  marked  and  made  that  the  most  ignorant  and 
inexperienced  shall  keep  his  way  there  without  difficulty,  but  neither  shall  it  be 
appropriated  by  the  unclean  heathens,  nor  stopped  by  any  roaring  lion, — any 
Sennacherib,  or  spiritual  archetype  of  Sennacherib.  It  shall  be  called,  for  it  shaU 
really  be,  "  the  holy  way,"  the  road  set  apart  for  the  use  of  Jehovah's  own  chosen 
and  consecrated  people,  whom  He  has  redeemed  and  brought  back  from  bondage; 
it  shall  be  entirely  for  those.  {Sir  E.  Strachey,  Bart.)  The  way  to  heaven: — In 
describing  the  happiness  of  the  Christian  pilgrim,  the  prophet  looks  to  the  natural 
inconveniences  of  a  wilderness,  which  are  chiefly  three — the  want  of  water,  the 
want  of  proper  roads,  and  exposure  to  danger,  particidarly  from  beasts  of  prey;  and 
he  meets  these  with  corresponding  promises  of  abimdance  of  water,  an  excellent 
highway,  and  complete  protection.  I.  The  nattjee  and  pbopebties  of  this  way 
PREPARED  FOR  THE  PEOPLE  OF  GoD,  in  theiT  joumey  heavenward.  1.  It  is  a  way 
of  Divine  appointment,  being  hke  the  king's  highway,  established  by  authority. 
2.  Like  a  highway,  this  path  is  designed  for  general  use.  3.  This  way  is  denominated, 
"  The  way  of  holiness,"  or,  the  separated  way.  "  Enter  ye  in  at  the  strait  gate,  for 
wide  is  the  gate,"  &c.  The  path  of  Christians  is  not  merely  a  new  path,  among  the 
many  with  which  the  broad  way  is  filled.  They  have  not  changed  one  mode  of 
sinning  for  another — they  have  chosen  the  way  of  holiness.  4.  The  prophet  says, 
further,  of  the  way  to  Zion,  "  the  vmclean  shall  not  pass  over  it."  When  the 
Israelites  left  Egypt,  a  mixed  multitude  went  with  them  (Exod.  xii.  38).  This 
mixed  multitude  proved  a  great  snare  to  Israel.  5.  This  is  a  way  remarkable  for 
its  plaiimess,  and  there  is  also  the  privilege  of  a  guide  (ver.  8,  marg.)     II.  Thb 

REFRESHMENT  AND  COMFORTS  PROVIDED  FOB  CHRISTIANS  BY  THE  WAY.      "  And  the 

parched  ground  shall  become  a  pool,  and  the  thirsty  land  springs  of  water,"  &c. 
Give  a  thirsty  man  what  you  may,  if  you  do  not  give  him  what  will  assuage  his 
thirst,  you  have  not  relieved  him.  There  must  be  a  suitableness  in  the  object  to 
his  state,  else  it  cannot  profit  him.  III.  The  complete  protection  afforded 
THEM.  Is  not  the  pilgrimage  of  Christians  a  joumey  of  danger?  But  though  the 
highway  to  Zion  is  through  the  habitation  of  the  most  ferocious  of  animaki,  yet 
those  beasts  of  prey,  though  on  the  right  hand  and  on  the  left,  shall  not  enter  on 
this  highway.     While  the  redeemed  keep  this  way,  they  are  safe:  it  is  only  when 


88  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [ohap.  mv. 

they  leave  it,  that  they  are  in  danger.  We  have  no  example  in  Scripture  of  the 
Lord  forsaking  His  people  while  they  kept  this  way.  The  history  of  the  people  of 
Israel  furnishes  an  illustration  of  this  subject.  Their  males  were  required  to  go  up 
to  Jerusalem  three  times  a  year,  to  observe  the  great  festivals  of  the  law.  Now,  on 
such  occasions,  they  had  to  leave  their  frontiers,  their  wives  and  children,  and  all 
their  property,  exposed  to  surrounding  enemies.  But  God  gave  them  a  promise, 
that  no  man  should  desire  their  land,  when  they  went  up  to  appear  before  Him 
thrice  in  the  year  (Exod.  xxxiv.  24).  Accordingly,  though  they  were  surrounded 
by  the  most  hostile  nations,  not  a  man  of  them  felt  the  least  inclination  to  touch  a 
thing  that  belonged  to  Israel,  so  long  as  the  law  of  God  was  observed.  But  when 
Israel  forsook  the  law  of  their  God,  and  had  recourse  to  the  help  of  idols  and  of  men 
for  their  security,  then  the  restraint  which  had  been  put  upon  their  enemies  was 
removed,  and  their  land  became  the  prey  of  invaders.  [David  Riissell. )  The  road 
to  the  city : — I.  This  road  of  the  text  is  the  King's  highway.  In  the  diligence  you 
dash  on  over  the  Bernard  Pass  of  the  Alps,  mile  after  mile,  and  there  is  not  so  much 
as  a  pebble  to  jar  the  wheels.  You  go  over  bridges  which  cross  chasms  that  make 
you  hold  your  breath;  under  projecting  rock;  along  by  dangerous  precipices; 
through  tunnels  adrip  with  the  meltings  of  the  glaciers,  and,  perhaps  for  the  first 
time,  learn  the  majesty  of  a  road  built  and  supported  by  governmental  authority. 
Well,  my  Lord  the  King  decided  to  build  a  highway  from  earth  to  heaven.  It 
should  span  all  the  chasms  of  human  wretchedness ;  it  should  tunnel  all  the  moun- 
tains of  earthly  difficulty;  it  should  be  wide  enough  and  strong  enough  to  hold  fifty 
thousand  millions  of  the  human  race,  if  so  many  of  them  should  ever  be  born.  It 
should  be  blasted  out  of  the  "  Rock  of  Ages,"  and  cemented  with  the  blood  of  the 
Cross,  and  be  lifted  amid  the  shouting  of  angels  and  the  execration  of  devils.  The 
King  sent  His  Son  to  build  that  road.  He  put  head  and  hand  and  heart  to  it,  and 
after  the  road  was  completed,  waved  Has  blistered  hand  over  the  way,  crying,  It  is 
finished.  II.  This  road  spoken  of  is  a  clean  koad.  Many  a  fine  road  has  become 
miry  and  foul  because  it  has  not  been  properly  cared  for;  but  the  unclean  shall  not 
walk  on  this  one.  III.  The  road  spoken  of  is  a  plain  road.  "  The  wayfaring  men, 
though  fools,  shall  not  err  therein."  That  is,  if  a  man  is  three-fourths  an  idiot,  "he 
can  find  this  road  just  as  well  as  if  he  were  a  philosopher.  The  pardon  is  plain. 
The  peace  is  plain.  Everything  is  plain.  IV.  The  road  to  heaven  is  a  safe  eoad. 
"  No  lion  shall  be  there."  V.  The  road  spoken  of  is  a  pleasant  eoad.  God  gives 
a  bond  of  indemnity  against  all  evil  to  every  man  that  treads  it.  "  All  things  work 
together  for  good  to  those  who  love  God."  No  weapon  formed  against  them  can 
prosper.  VI.  This  way  ends  in  gloky.  I  do  not  care  how  fine  a  road  you  may 
put  me  on,  I  want  to  know  where  it  comes  out.  "  The  ransomed  of  the  Lord  shall 
return  and  come  to  Zion,"  &c.    (T. De  Witt  Talmage,  D.D.)        The  way  to  heaven: 

I.  The  way  itself.   There  is  only  one  way  that  leads  to  heaven.   1.  Jesus  Christ  is 

the  way.  2.  It  is  by  faith  that  we  enter  into,  and  make  progress  in  this  way.  II.  Thr 
EXCELLENCY  OF  THIS  WAY.  Christ  is  divinely,  infinitely  excellent.  III.  The 
CHARACTER  OF  THOSE  WHO  ARE  WALKING  IN  THIS  WAY.  1.  They  are  all,  by  nature, 
in  the  same  circumstances  with  the  rest  of  mankind.  2.  From  this  situation  they 
are  redeemed  by  the  obedience  and  death  of  the  Son  of  God.  3.  They  are  all  holy 
persons.  4.  They  are  constant,  regular,  and  progressive  in  the  way  of  holiness — 
they  walk  there.  5.  They  are  all  happy  persons.  They  "  come  to  Zion  with  songs," 
&c.  {W.  S.  Smart.)  The  King's  highway: — I.  The  featxtees  of  the  way. 
L  An  open  way  though  narrow.  2.  A  holy  way  though  gladsome.  3.  A  safe  way 
though  simple.  II.  Its  travellers.  1.  The  Lord  of  the  way  Himself  (see 
margin).  2.  His  ransomed  ones.  Good  company,  sympathetic,  pilgrim  songs  and 
converse.  3.  Angel-escort.  Jacob.  "  He  shall  give  His  angels  charge  ...  to 
keep  thee  in  all  thy  ways."  III.  Its  terjunation.  Path  of  just  brighter  to  "  com- 
pletion of  day."  Heavenly  Jerusalem  Zion's  templed  hiU.  Farewell  to  pilgrim's 
staff  and  worn  sandals.  Welcome  endless  rest,  wide  open  gates,  greetings  of  the 
glorified,  the  bosom  of  God,  and  coronation  of  joy.  {Homiletic  Review.)  The 
way  to  Zion: — Viewed  as  a  description  of  the  way  of  salvation  through  Christ,  this 
prof)hecy  calls  upon  us  to  consider — I.  The  travellers  of  whom  it  speaks. 
1.  They  were  once  journeying  along  a  very  different  path.  They  are  called  "  the 
redeemed,"  and  the  term  implies  that  they  were  once  in  bondage.  This  is  the 
natural  condition  of  us  all.  2.  But  these  travellers  have  been  deUvered  from  this 
state  of  bondage.  3.  There  are  three  ways  of  redeeming  a  captive — by  exchange, 
by  a  forcible  rescue,  or  by  ransom.  It  is  by  the  last  of  these  that  the  people  of  God 
are  here  said  to  have  been  liberated.    II.  The  way  along  which  they  are  journeying 


CHAP.  XXXV.]  ISAIAH.  89 

m.  The  home  to  which  it  is  leading  them.  To  return  to  Zion  implies,  in  the  first 
instance,  to  be  admitted  into  the  visible  Church  of  God,  and  to  a  full  participation 
of  all  its  privileges.  But  it  implies  also  much  more.  It  directs  our  eyes  upward  to 
that  holy  hill  on  which  the  heavenly  Jerusalem  is  built,  "  the  city  of  the  Hving  God." 
Of  this  unseen  residence  of  the  just,  the  earthly  Zion  was  a  type;  and  we  may  find 
it  a  profitable  subject  of  meditation  to  trace — (1)  The  resemblance;  (2)  the  contrast 
between  them.  1.  The  hill  of  Zion  was  the  peculiar  residence  of  God.  There  His 
temple  was  erected,  and  there  the  mercy-seat,  the  visible  symbol  of  His  presence, 
stood.  In  heaven  also  Jehovah  has  a  temple,  and  "  the  way  of  holiness  "  leads  to  it. 
2.  The  Jews  were  taught  to  regard  their  sacred  mountain  as  the  source  of  all  their 
blessings.  When  salvation  was  promised  them,  it  was  to  come  "  out  of  Zion  " ; 
when  they  were  to  be  strengthened  and  blessed,  "  the  Lord  out  of  Zion  "  was  to 
strengthen  and  bless  them.  Hence  we  find  Daniel  turning  towards  Jerusalem  when 
he  prayed  in  Babylon,  and  Jonah  looked  towards  the  holy  temple  of  his  God  when 
he  cried  amidst  the  waves  for  dehverance.  And  what  real  happiness  is  there,  which 
comes  not  from  above  ?  3.  Zion  also  was  the  place  in  which  the  people  of  the  Lord 
assembled.  And  who  can  describe  the  blessedness  which  will  flow  from  the  fellow- 
ship of  heaven?  4.  The  earthly  Jerusalem  was  a  splendid  city;  "beautiful  for 
situation,  and  the  joy  of  the  whole  earth,  was  moimt  Zion  " ;  but  even  in  the  height 
of  her  greatness,  when  the  glory  of  the  Lord  rested  on  her  tabernacle,  she  afforded 
but  a  poor  emblem  of  the  heavenly  city.  At  the  time,  however,  to  which  the  words 
of  the  prophet  primarily  relate,  the  contrast  was  peculiarly  striking.  The  Zion  to 
which  the  liberated  Jews  so  joyfully  returned,  was  "  a  wilderness,  and  Jerusalem  a 
desolation."  And  where  is  Jerusalem  now?  Where  is  its  temple ?  The  heavenly 
Zion,  however,  knows  no  destruction  and  fears  no  change.  It  is  "  a  city  which  hath 
foundations"  ;  an  abiding  city.  (C.  Bradley,  M.A.)  The  King^s  highway: — 
I.  The  King's  highway  is  a  plainly  marked  road.  In  the  Bible  we  have  an  accur- 
ate map  of  the  country  and  aU  its  roads.  From  first  page  to  last,  one  name  is  con- 
spicuous— Jesus  Christ.  1.  There  is  the  great  Patriarchal  road ;  travelled  by  Adam; 
in  bad  repair  in  Noah's  time;  a  broad  way  of  promises  to  Abram,  who  travelled  along 
it  out  of  Ur;  broader  stiU  to  his  children.  2.  Then  there  is  the  great  Mosaic  road. 
Great  pains  taken  to  make  it  a  good  road;  scores  of  workmen,  called  laws,  upon  it; 
hedges  of  immense  height  to  keep  people  from  the  dangerous  jimgles  of  heathendom. 
Sign- posts  everywhere.  Jlost  people  murmm'ed  at  it  as  rough  or  steep.  But  some, 
like  Moses  and  Aaron,  and  Caleb  and  Joshua,  saw  "  Christ  "  written  up  all  along 
the  way;  upon  their  sacred  buildings  and  altars;  upon  their  religious  teachers; 
even  upon  the  garments  of  the  people.  3.  By  and  by  the  road  widened  into  the 
great  Prophetical  road.  David  and  Solomon,  Isaiah  and  Jeremiah,  and  others, 
repaired  the  road.  But  after  their  time  the  road  was  sadly  neglected.  Few  were 
foimd  upon  it.  The  fences  were  broken,  and  the  people  wandered  in  by-paths, 
until  things  became  so  bad  that  it  seemed  as  though  the  road  wovdd  be  shut  up 
altogether.  4.  But  "  suddenly  "  (Mai.  iii.  1)  the  King  sent  and  put  it  into  a  thorough 
state  of  repair,  so  that  it  was  like  a  new  road,  and  it  was  called  "  the  new  and  hving 
way  " ;  and  though  very  rugged  and  narrow  at  times,  it  has  always  been  kept  open 
until  this  day.  II.  This  highway  is  "  the  way  of  holiness."  It  leads  to  God. 
They  who  travel  along  it  bear  His  image.  Dwelt  in,  and  led  by  the  Holy  Ghost, 
they  exercise  themselves  to  have  always  a  conscience  void  of  offence,  so  that  men 
can  see  that  they  walk  hoUly,  justly,  and  unblameably.  III.  This  highway  is  a 
SAFE  WAY.  "  The  wayfaring  men,  though  fools,  shall  not  err  therein."  IV.  This 
HIGHWAY  IS  A  WAY  OF  JOY.  "  The  ransomed  of  the  Lord  shall  return,"  &c.  The 
captives  of  Babylon,  concerning  whom  this  was  priiuarily  written,  rejoiced  because 
they  had  passed  through  the  wilderness,  and  had  survived  the  dangers  of  that 
journey;  because  they  were  re-instated  in  their  former  home,  and  the  smile  of  God 
once  more  rested  upon  them.  And  we, — delivered  from  wrath,  cleansed  from  sin, 
returned  from  banishment,  restored  to  our  proper  home  in  the  heart  of  God, 
dwelling  in  peace  and  safety  as  members  of  His  household,  the  church, — have  not 
we  abundant  cause  for  rejoicing?     {W.  J.  Chapman,  M.A.)  Holiness,  under  the 

old  dispensation  and  under  the  new.- — We  can  hardly  make  a  greater  mistake  in  our 
theology  than  to  suppose  that  the  gospel  dispensation  has  been  designed  by  God  in 
order  to  bring  down  the  standard  of  the  divine  claims  to  the  level  of  human  infirmity. 
So  far  from  this  being  the  case  the  gospel  dispensation  has  been  inaugurated  and 
designed  specially  in  order  that  human  infirmity  may  be  raised  to  the  level  of  the 
divine  claims.  The  prophet  was  looking  forward,  as  it  would  seem,  to  the  glories 
of  the  Christian  dispensation,  and  this  was  the  characteristic  of  this  new  era  that  he 


90  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xxxv. 

contemplated  with  the  most  complete  satisfaction:  "  An  highway  shall  be  there, 
and  a  way,  and  it  shall  be  called  The  way  of  holiness."     But  it  may  occur  to  some 
to  ask,  "  Had  there  been  no  knowledge  of  the  '  way  of  holiness '  under  previous 
dispensations?     Does  holiness  of  hfe  belong  only  to  the  gospel  age?  "     I  reply. 
Undoubtedly  there  were  holy  and  humble  men  of  heart  before  the  Incarnation — 
men  who  hved  in  advance  of  their  age.     These  were  the  bold  pioneers  of  spirituiU 
progress,  who  made  their  way  through  the  pathless  forest  and  the  trackless  wastes 
ere  the  King's  great  highway  was  opened  for  our  feet.     It  was  with  them  as  with 
the  pioneers  of  civihsation  in  our  own  days.     Hardy  travellers  have  made  their  way 
T\<Axi  across  the  continent  of  Central  Africa,  exploring  in  almost  all  directions  the 
vast  and  unknown  region;  but  there  is  no  highway  across  the  continent  of  Africa: 
and  those,  therefore,  who  have  crossed  it,  or  attempted  to  do  so,  have  had  to  face 
great  and  untold  difficulties,  and  endure  a  vast  amount  of  hardship  and  privation. 
By  and  by,  if  the  world  lasts  long  enough,  and  civilisation  progresses,  there  may  be 
a  grand  trunk  road  right  across  that  continent,  and  by  and  by  perhaps  railways  may 
be  laid,  and  easy  communication  established,  with  that  remote  and  barbarous 
region.     It  is  even  so  with  regard  to  the  highway  of  holiness.     Before  the  Christian 
dispensation  earnest  and  devoted  men  attained  to  various  degrees  of  holiness,  but 
the  King's  highway  to  holiness  was  not  yet  open.     It  was  not  yet  revealed  to  the 
world  what  true  and  perfect  holiness  was,  nor  how  we  are  to  rise  to  it.     "  Righteous- 
ness "  rather  than  holiness  was  set  forth  in  the  law.     It  needed  the  Incarnation  of 
the  Son  of  God  to  reveal  it  to  man.     And  not  until  the  Word  of  the  Father  was 
clothed  in  human  form,  and  lived  among  His  feUow-men  in  fashion  as  a  man,  did 
human  eyes  contemplate  the  true  ideal  of  holiness,  the  standard  and  type  of  absolute 
perfection.     In  the  life  and  conduct  of  Christ  that  standard  was  embodied  and 
revealed;  by  the  death  and  resurrection  of  Christ  the  spiritual  power  was  secured 
to  us  by  which  it  becomes  possible  for  us  to  rise  to  the  level  of  conduct  so  indicated. 
The  highway  of  holiness  was  thus  opened;  and  it  now  becomes  possible  for  "  the 
wayfaring  men,  though  fools,"  to  walk  therein.     There  are  two  thoughts,  then, 
specially  suggested  to  our  minds  in  this  connection.     1.  In  order  to  open  the  high-  ^ 
way  of  holiness  it  was  necessary  that  a  perfect  example  should  be  given  to  mankind, 
so  that  men  could  understand  what  perfect  holiness  means;  and  that  has  been 
presented  to  us  in  the  human  life  of  Jesus.     2.  Christ  also  imparts  to  us  the  secret 
of  all  true  spiritual  power  by  bringing  us  into  close  and  blessed  connection  with  God. 
The  same  power  which  rendered  it  possible  for  Jesus  Christ  as  a  man  to  be  perfectly 
holy  is  thus  brought  within  our  reach  by  the  Incarnation,  and  death  and  resurrec- 
tion, of  Jesus  Christ.     Thus  we  may  say,  not  only  have  we  the  map  and  the  chart 
of  the  highway  of  holiness  placed  in  our  hands,  but  also  the  highway  itself  opened 
up  to  us  by  the  communication  of  a  spiritual  abiUty  to  tread  therein.     But  if  those 
advantages  are  real,  they  carry  with  them  enhanced  responsibilities.     {W.  Hay 
Ait  ken,  lil.A.)         The  highway  of  holiness: — Let  us  consider  some  of  the  char- 
acteristics of  the  life  of  holiness  to  which  the  prophet  here  calls  our  attention,  and 
the  conditions  which  are  attached  to  the  right  of  way.     I.  It  is  the  way  of  the 
PURIFIED.     "  The  imclean  shall  not  pass  over  it."     Until  we  are  cleansed  from  our 
"  old  sins  "  we  are  not  in  a  position  to  pass  over  the  King's  highway  of  holiness. 
Some  people  who  desire  to  live  holy  lives  are  no  better  than  legaUsts.     They  cannot 
love  much,  because  they  have  not  had  much  forgiven  them;  thus  they  lose  the 
true  motive  of  a  Christian  hfe,  while  they  are  crippled  in  their  efforts  to  attain  to  the 
proper  standard  of  holiness,  both  by  the  weight  of  unf orgiven  sin  and  by  absence  of 
that  spiritual  power  which  flows  to  us  through  reconcihation.     We  must  pass 
through  the  gate  before  we  can  pass  along  the  way,  and  that  gate  is  the  Cross,  where 
the  blood  of  Jesus  Christ  cleanses  from  all  sin.     Nor  is  it  difficult  to  find  a  reason 
for  this  necessity.     Indeed,  this  passage  gives  us  a  sufficient  reason  if  we  are  to 
accept  the  marginal  rendering —    For  He  shall  be  with  them."     It  is  quite  true 
that  Jesus  Christ  was  the  Friend  of  pubhcans  and  sinners;  but  He  was  their  Friend 
because  He  saved  them  from  their  sins.     And  it  is  so  now;  those  only  who  hate 
their  sins,  and  who  come  to  Christ  to  be  deUvered  from  their  sins,  can  walk  along 
the  highway  of  hohness,  because  He  is  Bojouming  with  those  who  sojourn  there, 
and  He  cannot  walk  with  the  unclean.     But  having  called  attention  to  this  state- 
ment as  a  reason  for  the  necessity  of  cleansing,  let  us  now  dwell  upon  it  as  a  charac- 
teristic of  the  way  of  holiness,  and  of  the  experience  of  those  who  pass  along  it. 
II.  The  highway  of  holiness  is  the  path  of  fellowship  with  the  divine.    When 
Christ  was  here  on  earth  He  ever  moved -along  this  way,  and  He  is  still  to  be  found 
there  by  those  who  pass  along  it.     Indeed,  so  closely  is  His  presence  and  our  fellow- 


CHAP.  XXXV.]  ISAIAH.  91 

ship  with  Him  connected  with  true  spiritual  holiness,  that  we  can  scarcely  say 
whether  the  hoUness  is  the  fruit  of  the  fellowship,  or  the  fellowship  the  effect  of  the 
hohness.  It  is  only  while  we  walk  in  the  Ught,  as  He  is  in  the  light,  that  W3 
have  fellowship  with  the  Father  and  the  Son  through  the  Holy  Spirit.  These  two 
elements  in  our  experience  act  and  react  upon  each  other.  III.  It  is  the  way  of 
RIGHT  DIRECTION.  "  Wayfaring  men,  though  fools,  shaU  not  err  therein."  Here 
is  a  promise  that  may  well  comfort  us  in  the  perplexities  of  life.  The  reason  why  we 
make  such  great  mistakes  as  we  sometimes  do  is  surely  that  we  get  off  the  King's 
highway  of  holiness.  We  begin  to  pursue  our  own  pleasure,  or  to  gratify  our 
ambition,  or,  we  seek  to  please  other  people,  and  to  avoid  the  cross.  But  when  the 
wayfaring  man  is  on  the  highway  of  hohness  this  promise  will  be  fulfilled.  He  may 
seem  to  make  mistakes,  but  God  will  overrule  what  appears  to  be  a  blunder  to  His 
own  glory.  There  is  yet  another  thought  suggested  by  this  clause  which  may  serve 
to  explain  some  of  owe  errors.  The  prophet  here  speaks  of  those  who  are  fools  as 
being  assured  of  right  doctrines.  May  not  one  cause  of  mistakes  sometimes  be  that 
we  are  not  content  to  take  the  place  of  fools?  We  feel  too  much  confidence  in  our 
own  sound  judgment  and  commonsense,  and  so  we  scarcely  regard  it  necessary  to 
inquire  of  the  Lord.  I  do  not  mean  to  say  that  we  ought  not  to  use  our  natiu-al 
faculties.  They  are  a  trust  from  God,  and  we  are  bound  to  use  them.  But  we  are 
warned  not  to  lean  to  our  own  understanding,  and  he  who  gives  us  this  advice  would 
have  been  a  much  happier  man  and  made  much  fewer  practical  mistakes  if  he  had 
only  taken  it  himself.  But  there  is  yet  another  reason  why  we  sometimes  err, 
suggested  to  us  by  this  clause.  And  this  other  reason  brings  before  our  minds  the 
fourth  characteristic  of  the  way  of  holiness.  IV.  It  is  only  the  way  of  right  direc- 
tion TO  THOSE  WHO  ARE  WAYFARING  MEN.  Do  we  not  sometimes  err  because  we 
have  so  little  of  the  wayfaring  man  about  us?  Living  as  we  do  in  a  luxurious  age, 
how  many  of  us  surround  ourselves  with  luxury,  and  lay  o\u:selves  out  for  aelf- 
indtdgence !  We  are  called  to  use  the  world  as  not  abusing  it;  surely  it  is  the  abuse 
of  the  world  when  we  allow  it  to  take  the  place  of  heaven.  There  is  a  quaint  old 
Latin  proverb  which  tells  us,  "The  penmless  travellers  shall  sing  before  the  robbers." 
No  wonder;  for  what  can  the  robbers  take  from  them?  And  many  a  Christian 
might  sing  defiance  of  all  enemies — even  of  the  great  robber  himself,  if  only  we  made 
over  our  all  to  its  proper  Owner,  and  regarded  it  as  a  sacred  trust  to  be  used  for  Him. 
V.  It  is  THE  WAY  OF  SAFETY.  "  No  lion  shall  be  there,"  &c.  Is  Satan,  then,  really 
to  lose  his  power  to  do  us  harm?  He  may  come  to  the  hedge  which  fences  in  the 
highway  from  the  rest  of  the  world;  he  may  growl  and  roar,  and  do  his  best  to 
terrify  you,  but  so  long  as  your  eye  is  single,  and  you  are  moving  on  the  King's 
great  highway  of  hohness,  the  hon  cannot  lay  a  paw  upon  you  or  inflict  a  single 

wound.       VI.  It  is  THE  WAY  OF  JOY  .       VII.  It  is  THE  WAY  THAT  LEADS  HOME.       {Ibid.) 

The  highway  of  the  King  of  kings: — I.  Isaiah  proclaims  that  this  way  shall  be  a 
HIGHWAY.  Not  a  way  confined,  as  the  Old  Testament  way  was,  to  one  particular 
people.  Not  a  way  confined  to  any  particular  class  of  persons,  rich  in  preference 
to  poorv  learned  in  preference  to  unlearned.  Not  a  way  confined  to  any  particular 
sect,  or  any  particular  communion  of  persons.  But  a  way  open  and  pubUc  to  all 
Then,  woe  to  the  man  who  presumes  to  set  up  a  turnpike  upon  this  highway.  And 
yet  this  is  what  is  done.  Some  would  even  have  us  beUeve  that  we  cannot  set  our 
feet  upon  this  way  except  through  the  help  and  invocation  of  saints  and  angels. 
Others  tell  us  that  we  must  have  a  priest  at  our  elbow.  Others  say  that  we  must 
belong  to  some  particular  sect  of  Christians.  And  others  say  that  we  must  belong 
to  some  particular  class  of  persons,  such  for  instance  as  the  learned.  Such  are  the 
turnpikes,  such  are  the  barriers,  which  men  presume  to  set  up  upon  the  highway  of 
the  King  of  kings.  II.  Though  it  is  clear  that  this  way  is  accessible  to  all  sects, 
•lasses,  and  conditions  of  men,  yet  there  is  one  exception,  and  that  one  excep- 
tion is  not  due  to  God,  but  to  man  himself.  "  It  shall  be  called  the  way  of  hohness: 
the  unclean  shall  not  pass  over  it ;  but  it  shall  be  for  those,"  viz.,  for  the  holy. 
III.  Here  is  a  special  invitation  to  the  wayfaring  men — men  who  have  not  the 
advantage  of  learning,  education,  and  accomphshments.  It  is  the  guidance  of 
God's  Holy  Spirit,  without  which  even  the  best  acquirements  are  nothing,  which 
makes  up  to  wayfaring  men  for  the  absence  of  all  the  advantages  of  learning,  educa- 
tion, station,  and  leisure,  which  are  the  privileges  of  those  who  occupy  the  higher 
grades  of  life.  IV.  On  this  Christmas  Day  we  celebrate  the  opening  of  that 
WAY  which  Isaiah  describes.  V.  At  the  \tsry  end  of  this  great  viaduct  is 
heaven.  (E.  Girdlestone,  M.A.)  Simplicity  of  the  religion  of  Jesus: — It  is 
impossible  to  transport  ourselves  back  to  a  time  when  the  New  Testament  was  notj 


92  TEE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xxxv. 

and  when  the  civiUsation  which  has  come  forth  from  the  New  Testament  had  not 
even  been  hinted  at.  1.  In  that  old  time  the  choicest  wisdom  of  the  world  did  httle 
else  than  puzzle  itself  over  problems  which  are  now  known  in  their  solution  to  the 
children  in  our  schools.  Whether  man  was  anything  more  than  an  animal ;  whether 
with  the  death  of  his  body  a  man  did  not  cease  to  be,  was  an  undecided  question. 
But  the  mystery  touching  hfe  was  almost  as  great  as  the  mystery  touching  death. 
The  best  impulses  of  men  to  do  that  which  was  wise  and  good  had  no  direction,  A 
hundred  teachers  taught  a  hundred  different  ways  of  Uvlng.  The  interrogation 
of  ages  was:  What  is  truth?  Men  sought  it  with  a  patience  that  would  appal  a 
modem  disciple;  sought  it  vmtil  they  died,  and  died  with  the  infinite  sadness  of 
knowing  that  all  their  seeking  had  been  in  vain — that  they  were  no  wiser  than  they 
were  when  they  started  their  career  of  investigation.  2.  The  duty  of  all  men  that 
teach  or  can  teach  is  to  make  things  plain,  simple,  easily  discerned  by  the  popular 
perception,  readily  felt  by  the  popular  conscience,  and  easily  appropriated  by  the 
popular  emotion.  It  was  largely  because  the  language  of  Jesus  was  easily  imder- 
stood,  and  hence  sympathetic,  that  the  common  people  heard  Him  so  gladly. 
3.  Well,  the  old  prophet,  looking  along  the  line  of  his  craving,  in  which  he  repre- 
sented the  craving  of  humanity,  the  craving  for  hght  as  to  what  death  meant  and 
of  instruction  in  human  duties,  saw  a  happy  day  ahead.  He  saw  a  day  when 
ignorance  should  give  place  to  understanding,  and  the  fear  bom  of  it,  and  the 
torment  bom  of  the  fear,  should  harass  men  no  more.  He  saw  a  day  when  the 
way  of  holiness  should  be  so  plain  that  the  wayfaring  man,  though  a  fool,  should 
not  err  therein ;  that  is,  when  not  only  the  wise  should  find  it  readily,  but  when 
those  whose  intellects  were  unassisted  by  education,  and  whose  abiUties  to  discern 
between  right  and  wrong  were  not  extraordinary,  should  easUy  distinguish 
between  good  and  eviL  When  Christ  was  bom,  the  sun  arose;  when  Christ 
came  up  from  the  grave  and  brought  life  and  immortaUty  to  Ught  in  His 
resurrection,  the  clock  of  ages  struck  the  hoiu:  of  mid-day,  and  the  Sun  of  Righteous- 
ness stood  full-orbed,  armed  on  all  sides  with  beams,  in  the  spiritual  zenith  of  the 
world.  4.  If  you  desire  to  see  the  fulfilment  of  the  old  prophet's  prediction,  look  at 
your  own  age,  and  you  behold  it.  In  the  fact  that  the  Bible  Ues  waiting  perusal  in 
your  own  homes,  see  and  recognise  that  the  day  has  come  in  which  all  that  any  man 
can  long  for  in  the  way  of  knowledge  as  to  his  duty  of  hfe,  in  the  way  of  the 
destiny  of  his  soul  after  death,  is  reahsed.  5.  The  way  to  judge  a  system  of  instruc- 
tion is  not  by  Ustening  to  what  men  say  about  it,  but  by  studying  what  the  author 
of  it  said  and  did.  If  you  wish  to  know  what  the  system  of  salvation  is,  as  included 
in  the  coming  of  the  Christ,  go  to  your  New  Testament  record  and  ascertain  from 
His  own  lips  what  it  is.  6.  Do  not  go  expecting  that  His  system  is  mysterious,  for 
we  often  fail  to  see  the  simplicity  of  a  thing,  by  having  a  previous  impression  that 
it  is  profoundly  complex.  This  is  the  old  blunder  which  both  Jew  and  Greek  made 
centuries  ago.  The  ritualists  of  our  day  match  the  Jew,  and  the  man  of 
supreme  culture  types  the  .esthetic  Greek.  If  you  will  go  to  the  Master  Himself, 
and  not  to  His  disciples,  past  or  present,  you  will  be  struck  as  much  by  what  is  not  in 
His  system,  as  by  what  is  in  it.  7.  One  of  the  proofs  of  the  fine  wisdom  of  the 
Saviour  is  seen  in  His  studiously  keeping  out  of  sight  whatever  would  lead  the  minds 
of  His  followers  in  speculative  directions.  All  questions  of  casuistry,  such  as  the 
scribes  and  lawyers  were  continually  tempting  Him  to  discuss,  He  brushed  aside 
as  incompatible  with  the  object  of  His  mission.  He  came  simply  to  estabhsh 
divine  connections  with  men,  to  teach  the  race  virtues,  and  implant  in  their  souls 
the  germ  of  simple  piety.  (W.  H.  H.  Murray.)  The  holy  road: — 1.  The  way  to 
the  heavenly  Zion,  the  dwelling-place  of  God.  Zion  of  old  was  the  place  of  the  one 
altar  of  sacrifice  and  the  one  mercy-seat,  where  the  Lord  in  manifest  glory  commxined 
with  His  covenant  people.  Pilgrimage  to  the  holy  place  was  an  important  part  of 
Israel's  religious  hfe.  During  the  invasions  of  the  land,  and  especially  during 
the  captivity,  the  solemn  festivals  were  neglected,  and  there  seemed  to  be  no  way 
up  to  the  house  of  God.  Then  godly  men  sighed  for  the  tabernacles  of  God.  How 
much  they  longed  for  a  highway  by  which  they  could  march  to  Zion !  We  speak  of 
another  Jerusalem  which  is  above.  1.  There  is  a  way  to  God  and  heaven.  It  is 
noteworthy  that  this  road  is  one,  a  highway  and  a  way.  Many  ronds  load  to  ruin, 
but  only  one  to  salvation.  Years  ago,  at  the  University  of  Utrecht,  several 
Christian  students  met  together  from  various  nations,  and  on  one  occasion  it  was 
agreed  that  four  persons,  representing  Europe,  Asia,  Africa,  and  America,  should 
describe  the  work  of  grace  upon  their  hearts.  The  earnest  brother  from  New 
Ihigland,  and  the  friend  from  the  Cape  of  Good  Hope,  and  the  missionary  student 


CHAP.  XXXV.]  ISAIAH.  93 

from  India,  all  found  that  their  stories  agreed  with  that  of  a  young  nobleman  of 
Holland.  Scenes  and  circumstances  widely  differed,  but  the  joys  and  sorrows,  the 
struggles  and  the  victories  of  each,  were  the  same,  and  one  hope  filled  every  heart. 
We  differ  in  the  pace  with  which  we  traverse  the  way,  but  the  way  itself  is  one. 
Jesus  saith,  "  I  am  the  way."  He  is  not  only  way,  but  end  to  all  who  put  their 
trust  in  Him.  This  way  is  made  through  the  wilderness  :  "a  highway  shall  be 
there  " — where  the  sand  is  always  shifting,  where  if  the  traveller  once  loses  his 
bearings  he  is  doomed  to  certain  death,  with  the  vulture's  maw  as  his  only  sepulchre. 
A  way  is  made  for  us  through  the  deserts  of  sin,  and  the  wildernesses  of  sonow,  over 
hills  of  doubt  and  mountains  of  fear.  That  way  runs  close  at  thy  feet,  poor 
wanderer  !  This  way  was  cast  up  at  great  expense  ;  for  road-making  over  a  long 
and  rugged  country  is  a  costly  business.  Who  could  make  a  way  over  the  moun- 
tains of  om*  iniquities  but  Almighty  God  ?  It  cost  the  great  God  the  Jewel  of 
heaven.  This  road  has  lasted  now  these  thousands  of  years  ;  it  is  still  in  good 
travelling  condition,  nor  wiU  it  ever  be  closed  tiU  all  the  chosen  wayfarers  shall 
have  reached  the  many  mansions  of  the  Father's  house.  This  way,  being  made  by 
Divine  power,  is  appointed  by  Divine  authority  to  be  the  King's  highway.  Whoso- 
ever travels  by  this  road  is  under  the  protection  of  the  King  of  kings.  This  highway 
has  conducted  many  already  to  God.  It  is  said  to  be  "  a  highway  and  a  way  "  :  it 
is  not  only  a  highway  by  appointment,  but  it  is  a  way  by  use  and  traffic.  2.  The 
name  of  this  way.  The  way  of  faith  is  not  contrary  to  holiness,  but  it  is  "  the  way  of 
holiness."  If  you  are  ever  in  a  doubt  about  which  is  the  right  path,  remember  those 
words  of  the  Saviour  :  "  Strait  is  the  gate,  and  narrow  is  the  way,  and  few  there  be 
that  find  it."  Prefer  strictness  to  laxity.  God's  way  is  the  way  of  hoUness,  for  He 
has  founded  it  upon  holy  truth.  He  is  not  unholy  in  the  saving  of  any  sinner. 
Those  who  f  oUow  that  road  do  so  by  a  holy  trust.  We  must  not  beSeve  that  Christ 
will  save  us  in  our  sins — that  would  be  unholy  faith  ;  but  we  must  look  to  Him  to 
save  us  from  our  sins ;  for  that  is  holy  faith.     It  is  also  the  way  of  holy  Hving. 

3.  This  way  is  a  select  way.  '*  The  unclean  shall  not  pass  over  it,  but  it  shall  be  for 
those."  Literally  this  may  mean,  "  The  uncircumcised  and  the  unclean."  These 
were  excluded  from  the  house  of  the  Lord,  and  here  they  are  excluded  from  the 
eacred  way  of  Israel :  of  this  the  spiritual  meaning  is  that  unless  we  are  washed  in 
the  blood  of  Christ,  and  renewed  in  the  spirit  of  our  minds  by  the  Holy  Spirit,  we 
are  not  in  the  way  of  God.  It  is  a  select  way,  for  it  is  reserved  for  a  select  people — • 
"  it  shaU  be  for  those."  Who  are  they  ?  Look  backward,  and  you  will  read  of 
some  who  make  the  wilderness  and  the  solitary  place  to  be  glad :  of  some  whose 
bUnd  eyes  were  opened,  whose  deaf  ears  were  imstopped.  You  read  of  the  lame 
men  who  were  made  to  leap  as  an  hart,  and  of  dumb  men  who  began  to  sing. 
This  highway  is  reserved  for  those  upon  whom  a  miracle  of  grace  has  been  per- 
formed. Tins  way  is  for  the  ransomed.  "  The  redeemed  of  the  Lord  shall  walk 
there."     Another  fact  makes  it  very  select.     "  He  shall  be  with  them  "  (marg.). 

4.  It  is  a  plain  way.  The  true  Gospel  is  as  plain  as  a  pikestaff.  5.  It  is  a  safe 
way.  "  No  Uon  shall  be  there."  There  is  one  hon  which  those  who  make  Jesus 
their  way  need  never  be  afraid  of :  that  is,  the  Uon  of  unpardoned  sin.  Another 
lion  also  roars  upon  us,  but  cannot  devour  us,  namely,  temptation :  you  shall  not 
be  tempted  above  what  you  are  able  to  bear.  As  for  that  grim  hon  of  death  of 
which  some  speak,  it  does  not  exist.  11.  Otlb  duty  in  connection  with  this  way 
OP  HOLINESS.  1.  The  first  thing  is  carefully  to  discriminate  between  road  and  road. 
When  you  see  a  road  which  looks  broad,  smooth,  pleasant,  and  well-bordered 
with  flowers,  say  to  yoiurself,  "  There  are  many  ways,  but  since  only  one  of  them 
leads  to  eternal  hfe,  I  must  be  careful.  I  will  pray,  '  Lord,  be  my  guide,  even 
unto  death.'  "  Do  not  beheve  that  sincerity  is  enough  ;  you  need  truth  as  well. 
2.  When  you  know  the  road,  you  should  scrupulously  keep  in  it,  for  many  ways 
branch  from  it.  3.  Are  we  in  the  way  ?  Then  let  us  be  very  earnest  in  telling 
other  people  of  it.  Travelling  the  other  day  by  a  country  road  the  traveller 
wished  to  know  the  way  to  a  certain  spot.  He  inquired  of  one  who  sat  by  the 
roadside,  but  aU  the  answer  he  got  from  him  was  a  vacant  stare,  and  a  shake  of 
the  head.  A  httle  time  after  he  found  that  the  poor  man  was  deaf  and  dumb. 
I  am  afraid  there  are  many  such  Christians  nowadays :  they  are  spiritually  deaf 
to  the  woes  of  others,  and  dumb  as  to  giving  them  either  instruction  or  encourage- 
ment. All  they  seem  to  do  is  to  shake  their  wise  heads,  as  if  they  knew  a  great 
deal  more  than  they  meant  to  tell.  I  asked  a  person,  the  other  day,  the  road 
to  a  certain  place,  and  in  the  pohtest  possible  manner  he  answered,  "  I  beg  your 
pardon,  but  I  am  quite  a  stranger  in  these  parts."     That  was  a  very  sufficient 


94  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xxxv. 

reason  for  not  directing  me.  He  could  not  tell  what  he  did  not  know.  Tf  any 
of  you  do  not  know  the  way,  and  are  strangers  in  these  parts,  do  not  tell  any- 
body; bnt  let  this  mournful  reflection  go  home  to  your  consciences:  "  I  cannot 
tell  another  the  way  to  heaven  because  I  am  a  stranger  in  these  parts."  God 
grant  that  we  may  never  stretch  the  arm  of  our  testimony  beyond  the  sleeve  of 
our  experience!  4.  If  you  are  not  in  the  road,  may  the  Lord  help  you  to  get  into 
it  this  morning.  (C.  H.  Spurgeon.)  The  Appian  Way  and  the  highway  to 
heaven: — You  have  heard  of  the  Appian  Way.  It  was  three  hundred  and  fifty 
miles  long.  It  was  twenty-four  feet  wide,  and  on  either  side  the  road  was  a  path 
for  foot  passengers.  It  was  made  out  of  rocks  cut  in  hexagonal  shape  and  fitted 
together.  What  a  road  it  must  have  been !  Made  of  smooth,  hard  rock,  three 
hundred  and  fifty  miles  long.  No  wonder  that  in  the  construction  of  it  the 
treasures  of  a  whole  empire  were  exhausted.  Because  of  invaders,  and  the  ele- 
ments, and  Time — the  old  conqueror  who  tears  up  a  road  as  he  goes  over  it- 
there  is  nothing  left  of  that  structure  excepting  a  ruin.  But  I  have  to  tell  you 
of  a  road  built  before  the  Appian  Way,  and  yet  it  is  as  good  as  when  first  constructed. 
Millions  of  souls  have  gone  over  it.  ilillions  more  will  come.  (T.  De  Witt 
Tnlmngp,  D.D.)  The  pilgrim  and  his  destination: — Dean  Alford's  grave  is 
shaded  by  an  old  yew  tree  in  St.  Martin's  churchyard,  and  these  words  are 
recorded  on  the  headstone:  "The  Inn  of  a  traveller  on  his  way  to  Jerusalem." 
(J.  N.  Norton. )  The  way  of  salvation  plain : — I  remember  the  story  of  a 
Swedish  king  in  years  gone  by  who,  when  he  was  ill,  was  greatly  concerned 
about  his  eternal  state.  There  chanced  to  come  to  the  palace  an  old  farmer, 
known  to  his  majesty  for  his  piety;  the  king  called  him  to  his  bedside,  and  said, 
"  Tell  me,  what  is  the  faith  that  saves  the  soul  ? "  The  peasant  explained  it 
out  of  his  heart  in  plain  language,  much  to  the  king's  comfort.  The  king 
remained  ill  for  months,  and  again  fell  into  doubt  and  fear.  Those  about  him 
urged  him  to  send  for  the  Archbishop  of  Upsala,  as  a  learned  prelate  who  could 
allay  his  fears.  The  bishop  came  to  the  royal  couch,  and  gave  his  majesty  a 
logical  and  theological  definition  of  faith  in  most  proper  terms.  When  he  was 
gone  the  king  said,  "  It  was  very  learned,  no  doubt,  and  very  ingenious,  but 
there  was  no  comfort  in  it  for  me;  the  peasant's  faith  is  the  faith  that  can  save 
my  soul."  (0.  H.  Spurgeon.)  Holiness  can  be  understood  by  the  unlettered: — 
A  minister  was  speaking  to  a  disciple  of  Jesus,  not  much  versed  in  the  termin- 
ology of  the  schools,  on  the  subject  of  entire  holiness.  At  last  she  turned  to 
him  and  said,  "  I  don't  know  what  you  mean  in  the  way  in  which  you  speak  of 
it,  but  if  you  mean  constant  readiness  for  heaven,  I've  got  that."  She  was  a 
Christian  woman,  who  habitually  rested  on  Jesus  for  full  salvation,  and  into 
whose  heart  there  was  poured  the  comfort  of  conscious  readiness  to  do  or  sufifer 
God's  will,  as  He  might  direct.  {W.  O.  Pascoe.)  The  highway  of  holiness  i.s 
along  the  commonest  road  of  life — along  your  very  way.  In  wind  and  rain,  no 
matter  how  it  beats — it  is  only  going  hand  in  hand  with  Him.     {M.  G.  Pearse.) 

Ver.  9.  No  lion  shall  be  there. — Human  animalness : — I.  Man  natukally 
POSSESSES  SOMETHING  OF  THE  ANIMAL  NATTJKE.  That  man  by  nature  has  animal 
desires  and  passions  is  no  fault  of  his  own,  nor  is  it  a  misfortune  to  the  possessor 
if  these  are  inherited  in  harmonious  proportion  with  the  mental  and  spiritual 
propensities.  They  are  all  from  the  Divine  Creator.  They  are  all  essential  to 
man's  enjoyment,  and  symmetrical  development.  The  Creator  wastes  no  material. 
As  the  watch  contains  no  unnecessary  spring,  wheel,  cog,  or  screw,  so  every  passion, 
emotion,  affection,  from  the  lowest  to  the  highest,  as  coming  from  God,  is  of 
account.  II.  When  the  animal  nature  is  fed  and  strengthened  to  the  neglect 
and  at  the  expense  of  the  other  and  higher  fatuities  and  tendencies  of  the  human 
make-up,  then  the  animal  appears  in  a  great  variety  of  forms.  III.  Man  is  re- 
sponsible FOR  HIS  TREATMENT  OF  HIS  ANIMAL  NATXTKB.      It  IS  UOt  tO  be  CrUCificd, 

or  wholly  exterminated,  but  kept  in  subordination,  subject  to  the  ruling  of  the 
mental  and  spiritual.  Some  by  nature  have  a  great  deal  more  to  contend  with 
on  this  hne  than  others.  The  first  nature,  the  animal,  can  be  transformed  into 
the  "  second  nature,"  the  man;  and  if  made  "  a  new  creature  in  Christ  Jesus,'* 
such  must  necessarily  be  the  result.     ( W.  0.  Thrall. ) 

Ver.  10.  And  the  ransomed  of  tlie  Lord  shall  return. — Marching  to  music  : — 
My  object  will  be  to  give  the  text  its  highest  practical  appropriation  as  setting 
forth  in  glowing  language  the  return  of  God's  spiritual  Israel,  His  ransomed  ones, 


CHAP.  XXXV.]  ISAIAH.  95 

from  every  land.  I.  Who  they  are.  1.  "  The  ransomed  of  the  Lord."  To 
ransom  signifies  to  redeem  or  free  from  captivity  or  punishment  by  paying  down 
an  equivalent,  to  rescue  from  danger  and  death,  to  dehver  from  the  possession 
of  an  enemy  either  by  exploits  of  warfare  or  purchase  by  gold.  The  Lord's  ran- 
somed people  are,  therefore,  those  who  have  been  spiritually  rescued,  emanci- 
pated, delivered.  They  are  the  purchased  property  of  God  by  the  precious  blood 
of  Christ.  2.  The  ransomed  of  the  Lord  are  the  regenerate  of  the  Holy  Ghost. 
They  have  been  quickened  into  new  life  as  well  as  redeemed.  3.  The  ransomed 
of  the  Lord  are  the  adopted  into  the  family  of  God.  What  a  unique  and  beautiful 
sequence  we  have  here.  Life  purchased,  hfe  begotten,  life  ennobled.  II.  Whither 
ARE  THEY  JOURNEYING?  "  To  Zion."  The  old-time  Zion  was  typical  of  the 
"  city  which  hath  foundations,  whose  maker  and  builder  is  God."  Let  us  glance 
at  the  parallehsm.  1.  Zion  of  old  was  the  seat  and  scene  of  worship.  The  ran- 
somed of  the  Lord  in  returning  are  going  to  Zion  above,  to  join  the  immortal 
worshippers  in  the  "  temple  not  made  with  hands."  We  shall  worship,  but  we 
shall  also  serve  in  multifold  ministries  of  good.  2.  Zion  of  old  was  the  seat  of 
royalty.  "  There  were  set,"  we  are  told,  "  thrones  of  judgment,  the  thrones  of 
the  house  of  David."  Jerusalem  was  the  metropoUs  of  the  nation — the  centre 
of  monarchy,  authority,  power,  and  splendom-.  Heaven  is  the  city  of  the  Great 
King.  On  its  sapphire  throne,  belted  as  with  a  rainbow  of  mercy  and  grace, 
sits  the  Mediator- King  of  the  New  Covenant,  crowned  with  many  crowns,  holding 
the  sceptre  of  righteousness.  To  His  ransomed  ones  He  says,  "  Verily,  I  say 
unto  you,  that  ye  which  foUow  Me  in  the  regeneration,  when  the  Son  of  Man 
shall  sit  on  the  throne  of  His  glory,  ye  shall  also  sit  upon  thrones."  "  To  him 
that  overcometh  wiU  I  grant  to  sit  with  Me  on  My  throne."  "  Be  thou  faithful 
unto  death,  and  I  will  give  thee  the  crown  of  life."  3.  Zion  of  old  was  the  seat 
of  rest.  It  was  the  terminus  of  the  pilgrim-worshippers'  jomney.  With  the 
ransomed  of  the  Lord  it  is  now  the  pilgrimage;  but  daily  they  pitch  their  moving 
tents  a  day's  march  nearer  home,  heaven,  rest.  What  a  magic  word  is  "  rest." 
What  volumes  of  meaning  it  holds!  Rest  from  conflict,  rest  from  sorrow,  rest 
from  suffering,  rest  from  self  and  sin,  rest  from  all  the  ills  of  the  time-life !  Rest 
in  the  Lord  in  holy  contemplation,  holy  worship,  holy  service,  holy  visions,  holy 
companionships,  holy  pleasures  for  evermore !  III.  What  is  the  spirit  in  which 
THEY  JOURNEY?  "  With  songs  and  everlasting  joy  upon  their  heads."  They 
march  to  music  made  in  the  sanctuary  of  the  soul.  Undoubtedly  the  allusion 
is  to  the  Songs  of  Degrees  or  of  the  Ascents,  which  the  rejoicing  tribes  sung  on 
their  way  to  the  great  festive  celebrations  at  Jerusalem,  or  to  the  paeans  of  deliver- 
ance the  emancipated  exiles  rang  out  as  onward  they  pressed  to  the  Irrd  of  their 
fathers  and  God.  Thus  the  homeward-bound  hosts  of  God  on  the  highway  of 
holiness  are  m-ging  their  way.  They  are  hke  soldiers  returning  from  the  scene 
and  sjJoils  of  a  great  victory,  with  heart  and  step  keeping  time  to  jubilant  melody. 
But  the  ransomed  not  only  sing  on  the  way  home,  they  also  "  Come  to  Zion  with 
songs."  It  is  a  jubilant  arrival.  IV.  What  do  the  ransomed  of  the  Lord 
realise  on  their  arrival  home?  "Joy  and  gladness" — i.e.  outward  and 
inward  joy.  The  joy  of  holy  retrospect;  the  gladness  of  present  possession  of 
glory;  the  joy  of  fulfilled  hope,  perfected  manhood,  satisfied  hfe,  prospective 
progression,  intellectually  and  morally,  for  ever  and  ever.  It  is  the  "  joy  and 
gladness " — 1.  Of  heavenly  reunions.  2.  Of  perfected  knowledge.  3.  Of  the 
beatific  vision.  This  "  joy  and  gladness  "  will  mean  the  exclusion  of  "  sorrow 
and  sighing."  As  light  expels  darkness,  and  day  excludes  the  night,  so  the  rapture 
of  joy  prevents  the  sighings  of  sorrow,  (J.  0.  Keen,  D.D.)  Deliverance  from 
the  burdens  of  life  : — L  What  are  the  real  sources  of  that  deep  power  of  sorrow  which 
broods  so  heavily  over  hfe?  There  is,  first,  over  our  bodily  life  and  the  world 
of  nature  which  subserves  it,  the  continual  bhght  of  pain  and  suffering.  In 
nature's  highest  beauty,  even  to  our  power  of  imagination,  there  is  always  some 
imjjerfection.  But  it  is  no  mere  pious  imagination  to  declare  that  its  bvirden 
is  absolutely  as  nothing  in  comparison  with  the  burden  of  the  spiritual  evil,  the 
bhndness,  the  weakness,  and  the  sin  of  man.  These  are  the  two  great  burdens 
which  are  so  heavy  upon  our  human  Ufe,  and  they  are  worst  in  this — that  they  seem 
to  separate  us  from  our  Father  in  heaven,  alike  by  the  mist  of  doubt  and  by  the 
gloom  of  fear.  2.  Need  I  remind  you  how  the  Gospel  meets  both  these  things 
and  scatters  them  to  the  winds?  That  law  of  suffering  and  of  death  it  hallows 
doubly  by  the  revelation  of  the  Cross,  because  it  overrules  it  to  our  own  good, 
because  it  makes  it  a  condition  of  our  saving  others.     The  Gospel  deals  still  mora 


96  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xxxr. 

decisively  with  the  burden  of  sin.  In  it  lies  the  very  essence  of  redemption. 
But  you  will  ask  me,  "  Is  that  promise  realised  after  all  ?  "  Remember,  that 
by  the  very  nature  of  the  case  the  kingdom  of  Christ  here  is  seen  only  in  the  first 
stages  of  its  conflict  against  the  power  of  evil.  What  it  can  offer  us  is  only  a 
true  but  an  imperfect  earnest  of  a  perfect  future.  Has  it  given  us,  and  does  it 
give  us  now,  that  which  it  thus  professes  to  give  ?  I  answer  unhesitatingly.  Yes. 
These  things  are  no  dream.  They  are  a  present  and  blessed  reahty,  and  we  feel 
sometimes  as  if  they  were  the  only  reahty  in  a  very  fleeting  and  unsubstantial 
world.  But  the  reality  is  yet  imperfect.  Joy  and  gladness  may  be  ours,  but 
sorrow  and  sighing  have  not  yet  fled  away.  There  is  a  heaven  hereafter  in  which 
alone  all  these  promises  shall  be  quite  fulfilled.  {A.  Barry,  D.D.)  "  Ever- 
lasting joy  upon  their  heads  "  ; — This  expression  may  allude  to  the  ancient  custom 
of  wearing  crowns  in  seasons  of  mirth  and  festivity,  which  were  considered  as 
marks  of  honour  and  dignity ;  or,  it  may  refer  to  the  practice  of  anointing  the 
head  on  joyous,  festive  occasions,  which  probably  gave  rise  to  the  phrase  used 
by  the  royal  poet  of  "  the  oil  of  gladness "  (Psa.  xlv.  7).  {R.  MaccvUoch.) 
Sorrow  and  sighing  shall  flee  away. — The  flight  of  sorrow : — I.  What  is  m- 
VOLVED  IN  THE  STATEMENT  that  sorrow  and  sighing  shall  flee  away  ?  The  sus- 
ceptibility of  sorrow  and  the  power  of  expressing  sorrow  will  not  be  destroyed  ; 
but  there  shall  be  no  appeal  to  the  susceptibiUty,  and  no  use  for  the  power  of 
sorrowful  expression.  1.  The  sorrow  of  bodily  disease  shall  pass  away  with  the 
pain,  the  languor,  the  weakness  which  disease  imposes,  the  nervous  excitement 
which  it  often  sets  up,  and  the  debility  which  it  so  frequently  creates.  Disease 
shall  pass  away,  with  all  its  interruptions  of  domestic  and  social  intercourse, 
with  all  its  power  to  mar  our  enjoyment,  and  to  interfere  with  our  work.  It 
will  flee  before  a  new  constitution,  before  the  health  and  vigour  and  young  rich 
Hfe  of  a  body,  raised  in  incorruption — raised  in  glory — raised  in  power — raised 
in  Christ-like  spirituaUty.  2.  The  sorrow  of  dying  will  pass  away.  The  fear 
of  death — the  pains  of  death — the  separations  of  death — the  material  conse- 
quences of  death — the  abasement  of  death.  3.  The  sorrow  of  bereavement  will 
pass  away.  And  with  it  widowhood,  orphanage,  the  loss  of  wife  and  children, 
and  every  painful  farewell  which  death  so  often  and  so  rigorously  exacts.  4.  The 
sorrow  of  poverty  will  flee  away,  with  its  hunger  and  thirst,  its  nakedness  and 
cold,  its  homelessness  and  wretchedness,  and  all  the  neglect  and  contempt,  the 
painful  dependence,  the  degradation  and  dishonour,  which  it  too  often  brings. 
5.  The  sorrows  caused  by  the  sins  of  others  will  flee  away.  The  wicked,  whatever 
now  may  be  their  power,  through  relationship  or  through  position,  shall  cease 
to  trouble.  Slavery,  oppression,  and  persecution  will  utterly  cease.  The  sorrows 
caused  by  the  hell-fired  tongue,  by  the  fist  of  wickedness,  by  the  feet  swift  in 
running  to  do  mischief,  shall  flee  away.  Nothing  shall  enter  the  sorrowless  world 
that  defileth,  that  worketh  abomination  or  maketh  a  He.  6.  The  sorrows  produced 
by  the  fear  of  evil,  by  dark  imaginations,  and  by  blighted  hopes,  shall  flee  away. 
TTie  fiat,  "  Peace,  be  still,"  shall  be  spoken  to  every  sou!.  7.  The  sorrows  of 
this  Ufe's  illusions  and  delusions  shall  pass  away.  Everything  shall,  by  and 
by,  far  exceed  your  hopes.  8.  The  sorrows  of  sin  will  pass  away.  The  smart 
of  the  conscience,  remorse,  dread,  discord  between  the  passions  and  the  sanctified 
will,  chastisement,  even  temporary  Divine  desertion.  9.  Every  "  heart  knoweth 
its  own  bitterness."  The  own  bitterness  of  the  heart  shall  flee  away.  Secret 
sorrow — sorrow  that  you  hardly  admit  to  yourselves — sorrow  upon  which  you 
have  never  put  the  raiment  of  speech — the  sorrow  that  you  have  never  groaned 
out  to  the  nearest  friend  you  have — nameless  sorrow,  "  my  sorrow  " — sorrow  in 
all  its  roots,  in  all  its  branches,  sorrow  in  all  its  blossomings  and  fruits,  in  all 
its  depths,  and  in  all  its  manifestations,  shall  flee  away.  And  this  fleeing  away 
of  sorrow  will  leave  the  channels  of  the  emotions  open  only  to  the  streams  of 
enjoyment.  What  a  mighty  effect  this  will  have  upon  the  character  and  the 
entire  Ufe  !  The  flight  of  sorrow  will  enlarge  the  love  of  the  heart :  for  suffering 
often  makes  us  self-enclosed  and  self-engrossed ;  it  will  help,  moreover,  to  secure 
uninterrupted  intercourse  and  unbroken  activity ;  it  will  be  the  departure  of 
correction  no  longer  needed — the  withdrawment  of  discipUne  not  further  required 
— it  will  be  Uke  the  fleeing  away  of  winter  when  the  time  of  the  singing  of  birds 
has  come.  II.  When  shall  this  be  ?  The  text  points  to  Hezekiah's  reign — to 
that  portion  of  his  reign  through  wliich  God  blessed  the  people  whom  he  governed 
with  remarkable  prosperity.  But  does  this  exhaust  the  text  T  We  think  not. 
IT^ou  think  it  does,  there  are  other  words  from  the  mouth  of  God  on  this  Bubj.   *: 


CHAP,  xxxvl]  ISAIAH.  97 

(Isa.  XXV.  8;  Rev.  vii.  17).  When  shaU  this  be?  It  shall  be  to  the  individual 
saint  when  his  earthly  career  terminates.  To  the  saints  as  a  body,  this  will  bo 
reahsed  at  the  times  of  restitution  of  all  things.  HL  By  what  signs  may  we 
BE  ASSURED  THAT  CUB  SORROWS  WILL  FLEE  AWAY?  There  8X6  five  Sure  signs. 
1.  Personal  faith — not  in  King  Hezekiah,  but  in  King  Jesus.  2.  Acknowledged 
and  avowed  citizenship  in  the  kingdom  of  the  Saviour.  We  lay  stress  upon 
avowaJ,  because  where  there  is  no  avowal  there  must  always  be  reason  for  doubting 
and  suspicion.  3.  The  fleeing  away  of  sin — the  being  cleansed  from  sin.  4.  The 
present  effect  of  sorrow.  If  sorrow  bends  the  will  and  subdues  the  affections, 
then  it  is  sanctified,  and  herein  is  a  sign  that  sorrow  will  flee  away.  5.  A  living 
hope — hope  born  of  faith — hope  the  child  of  God's  promises — the  hope  which 
is  the  anchor  of  the  souL  Write  on  your  hearts  this  one  sentence  concerning 
your  sorrows  and  sighs,  they  shall  flee  away.  The  love  of  God,  hke  the  sun  upon 
the  snow-drift,  which  melts  the  snow,  raises  it  in  vapour  and  then  disperses  it, 
shall  make  sorrow  flee  away.  The  power  of  God,  like  the  north  wind,  which 
drive th  away  the  rain,  shall  constrain  sorrow  to  flee  away.  (S.  Martin.)  Sorroiv 
and  sighing  shall  flee  away  : — There  is  consolation  in  this  very  form  of  expression 
— "  flee  away."  It  shows  an  instability  as  characterising  sorrow  in  the  case 
we  contemplate.  Sorrow  to  the  redeemed  man  is  not  the  sea  which  is  found 
in  its  appointed  bed  in  summer  and  in  winter;  but  it  is  the  crested  wave  which 
is  here  to-day  and  gone  to-morrow.  It  is  not  the  mountain  which  stands  in  its 
place  year  after  year,  and  century  after  century;  but  it  is  the  clouds  which  rise 
from  the  vaUey,  and  travel  up  the  sides  of  the  mountain,  and  sometimes 
cap  and  completely  hide  it,  but  which  from  their  very  nature  must  flee  away. 
The  sorrows  of  the  saints  are  sorrows  which  from  their  very  character  must 
pass  away.     (Ibid.) 


CHAPTER  XXXVL 


Vbb.  1.  Sennaclierib    King  of  Assyria  came  up. — Sennacherib  was  one  of  the 

most  magniflcent  of  the  Assyrian  kings.  He  seems  to  have  been  the  first  Who 
fixed  the  seat  of  government  permanently  at  Nineveh,  which  he  carefully  repaired 
and  adorned  with  splendid  buildings.  His  greatest  work  is  the  grand  palace  at 
KojTmjik,  which  covered  a  space  of  about  eight  acres,  and  was  adorned  throughout 
with  sculptures  of  finished  execution.  He  biiilt  also,  or  repaired,  a  second  palace 
at  Nineveh,  on  the  mound  of  Nebbi  Yunus,  confined  the  Tigris  to  its  channel  by 
an  embankment  of  brick,  restored  the  ancient  aqueducts  which  had  gone  to  decay, 
and  gave  to  Nineveh  that  splendour  which  she  thenceforth  retained  till  the  ruin 

of  the  empire.     (0.  Eawlinson.)       Sennacherib^ s  invasion  of  Judah — Lessons  : 

1.  That  a  people  may  be  in  the  way  of  their  duty,  and  yet  meet  with  trouble  and 
distress.  Hezekiah  was  reforming,  and  his  people  in  some  measure  reformed;  vet 
their  country  is  at  that  time  invaded,  and  a  great  part  of  it  laid  waste.  Perhaps 
they  began  to  grow  remiss  and  cool  in  the  work  of  reformation,  were  doing  it  by 
halves,  and  ready  to  sit  down  short  of  a  thorough  reformation;  and  then  God 
visited  them  with  this  judgment,  to  put  life  into  them  and  that  good  cause.  We 
must  not  wonder  if,  when  we  are  doing  well,  God  sends  afflictions  to  quicken  us 
to  do  better,  to  do  our  best,  and  to  press  towards  perfection.  2.  That  we  must 
never  be  secure  of  the  continuance  of  our  peace  in  this  world,  nor  think  our  mountain 
stands  so  strong  as  that  it  cannot  be  moved.  Hezekiah  was  not  only  a  pious 
king,  but  prudent,  both  in  his  administration  at  home  and  his  treaties  abroad. 
His  affairs  were  in  a  good  posture,  and  he  seemed  particularly  to  be  upon  good 
terms  with  the  King  of  Assyria;  for  he  had  lately  made  his  peace  with  him  by  a 
rich  present  (2  Kings  xviii.  14),  and  yet  that  perfidious  prince  pours  an  army  into 
his  country  all  of  a  sudden,  and  lays  it  waste.  It  is  good  for  us,  therefore,  always 
to  keep  up  an  expectation  of  trouble,  that  when  it  comes  it  may  be  no  surprise 
to  us,  and  then  it  will  be  the  less  a  terror.  3.  That  God  sometimes  permits  the 
enemies  of  His  people,  even  those  that  are  most  impious  and  treacherous,  to 
prevail  far  against  them.  The  King  of  Assyria  took  all,  or  most,  of  the  defenced 
cities  of  Judah,  and  then  the  country  would,  of  course,  be  an  easy  prey  to  him. 
Wickedness  may  prosper  a  while,  but  cannot  prosper  always.  {M.  Henry.) 
VOL.  II. — 7 


98  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  xxxvi. 

Ver.  2.  And  the  King  of  Assjrria  sent  Rabshakeh. — Invasion  of  Judah  by 
Assyria : — In  chaps,  xxxvi. -xxxix.  a  historical  part  follows,  which  retiring  from 
the  ideal  distances  of  chaps,  xxxiv.,  xxxv.  into  the  historical  realities  of  chap,  xxxiii., 
begins  with  the  statement  that  "  at  the  conduit  of  the  upper  pool  in  the  road  of 
the  fuller's  field,"  where  Ahaz  preferred  the  help  of  Assyria  to  that  of  Jehovah 
(vii.  3),  stands  an  embassy  of  the  King  of  Assjnria  with  a  section  of  his  army.  {F. 
Delitzsch,  D.D.)  Rabshakeh  or  Rab-Sak,  the  chief  cup-bearer,  or  general  staff- 
oflScer  in  the  Assyrian  service,  entrusted  with  diplomatic  business.  It  is  the  title 
of  an  office,  and  not  the  name  of  a  person.  The  "  Tartan  "  was  the  supreme 
military  officer,  or  commander-in-chief,  while  the  "  Rab  Saris  "  was  the  chief  of 
the  Eunuchs,  and  a  confidential  officer.  Rab  =  chief.  {B.  Blake,  B.D.)  The 
Rabshakeh,  Sennacherib's  Bismarck.     {Prof.  0.  A.  Smith,  D.D.) 

Vers.  4-20.  Rabshakeh  said  unto  them. — War  orators  : — We  have  a  class  of 
speakers  in  this  country  who  are  silent  on  all  great  social  and  cosmopolitan  topics, 
but  make  themselves  heard  and  felt  the  moment  any  matter  of  warlike  fascination 
comes  to  the  surface.  All  other  questions  float  down  the  stream  of  public  opinion 
without  causing  them  even  to  indicate  their  existence.  But  let  a  question  in- 
volving blood  appear,  and  with  marvellous  celerity  all  these  pugilistic  men  come 
from  the  obscurity  of  barracks  and  service  clubs,  and  from  no  one  knows  where, 
often  fuming  about  no  one  knows  what.  They  remind  one  of  those  animals  noted 
for  their  bloodthirstiness  in  the  warm  regions  of  Africa — the  caribitos  (Serrasalmo). 
Their  haunts  are  at  the  bottoms  of  rivers,  but  a  few  drops  of  blood  suffice  to  bring 
them  by  thousands  to  the  surface;  and  Humboldt  himself  mentions  that  in  some 
part  of  the  Apure,  where  the  water  was  perfectly  clear  and  no  fish  were  visible, 
he  could,  in  a  few  minutes,  bring  together  a  cloud  of  caribitos  by  casting  in  some 
bits  of  flesh.  With  equal  ease  we  can  collect  our  war  orators  if  we  only  give  them 
one  sanguinary  pretext.     {Scientific  Illustrations  and  Symbols.) 

Ver.  5.  Now  on  whom  dost  thou  trust? — Trust  in  others  sometimes  dishonoured  : — 
That  question  may  not  be  without  importance  in  matters  of  ordinary  life.  We 
have  all  to  trust  our  fellows,  more  or  less,  and  I  suppose  we  have  all  had  to  smart 
in  some  degree,  as  the  result  of  it.  We  may  trust  the  mass  of  men  in  trifles  without 
any  serious  consequences;  but  when  it  comes  to  large  sums,  when  the  whole  of 
a  man's  fortune,  for  instance,  is  staked  u^on  the  character  and  reputation  of 
someone  else,  then  it  is  not  altogether  an  unimportant  question,  "  On  whom  dost 
thou  trust?  "  Many  have  rested  on  some  choice  friend,  and  found  him  play  the 
Judas!  How  often  have  our  dearest  counsellors  turned  away  fromusasAhithophel 
did  from  David !  How  frequently  have  we  confidently  rested  upon  the  integrity, 
friendship,  and  fidelity  of  some  person  whom  we  thought  we  knew  and  could  trust, 
and  we  have  found  that  "  Cursed  is  he  that  trusteth  in  man,  and  maketh  flesh  his 
arm."  Use  discretion  in  all  j'our  transactions  in  life,  as  to  how  far  you  will  trust 
the  sons  of  men.  (C.  H.  Spurgeon.)  In  whom  art  thou  trusting? — I.  Let  us  put 
this  question,  and  collect  a  little  bundle  of  answers.  1.  I  think  I  hear  some 
answer,  "  I  do  not  know  that  I  have  thought  about  the  matter  at  all;  I  hope  it  is  a 
long  time  before  I  shall  die,  and  there  is  no  need  to  trouble  myself  before  it  is 
necessary,  and,  therefore,  I  put  the  matter  off."  Do  not  you  think  that  you  are 
very  foolish?  There  is  a  gate  to  death,  ay!  and  to  hell,  too,  from  the  place  whero 
you  are  now  sitting.  Suppose  you  were  sure  of  a  long  life,  would  you  wish  to 
delay  being  happy?  2.  I  hear  one  say,  "  I  thank  God  I  am  about  as  good  as  most 
people;  when  my  poor  neighbours  have  needed  charity,  they  have  never  found  a 
churl  in  me.  I  hope  I  can  say  it  will  go  well  with  me,  and  if  it  does  not,  sir,  it  will 
go  badly  with  a  good  many."  I  am  afraid  it  will  go  badly  with  a  great  many; 
but  I  do  not  see  what  consolation  you  ought  to  get  out  of  that,  for  company  in 
being  ruined  will  not  decrease,  but  rather  increase  the  catastrophe.  The  sum  and 
substance  of  your  confidence  is,  that  you  are  trusting  in  yourself.  Now,  do  you 
really  and  honestly  think  that  you  are  of  yourself  sufficient  to  bring  yourself  safe 
to  God's  right  hand?  .  I  think  your  conscience  can  remind  you  of  some  slips  and 
flaws.  3.  ''  I  trust  in  my  priest;  he  has  been  regularly  ordained;  he  belongs  to  an 
Apostolin  Church;  he  tells  me  that  he  will  forgive  my  sins  if  I  confess  them  to  him, 
and  that  when  I  come  to  die  he  will  give  me  my  viaticum."  Do  not  be  misled; 
your  priest  might  as  well  trust  in  you  as  you  trust  in  him.  4.  "  Well,  God  is 
merciful.  He  is  not  so  severe  as  to  be  unkind  towards  us,  and  we  dare  say,  though 
we  may  have  a  good  many  faults,  yet  as  He  is  a  very  good  and  gracious  God, 


CHAP.  XXXVI.]  ISAIAH.  99 

He  will  forgive  our  sins  and  accept  us."  If  you  go  to  God  out  of  Christ,  you  will 
find  Him  to  be  a  consuming  fire,  and  instead  of  mercy  you  shall  receive  justice. 
6.  "  Well,  sir,  I  do  not  say  that  I  can  trust  to  my  works,  but  I  am  a  good-hearted 
man ;  I  am  a  man  of  good  intentions,  and  though  I  have  a  great  many  faults, 
yet  I  am  good-hearted  at  bottom,  and  I  think  God  will  look  at  my  heart, 
and  will  put  me  right  at  the  end,  notwithstanding  my  slips  and  wanderings  by 
the  way."  It  will  turn  out,  I  am  afraid,  to  be  a  delusion  and  a  snare.  Your 
heart  is  deceitful  above  all  things,  and  desperately  wicked.  Do  not  talk  about  its 
goodness  any  more,  for  when  you  do,  you  give  God  the  lie,  and  how  can  you  expect 
to  go  to  the  heaven  where  God  is,  when  you  are  thus  insulting  Him  all  the  whUe  ? 

II.  The  Cheistian's  answer.  "  I  trust,"  says  the  Christian,  "  a  triune  God — 
Father,  Son,  and  Holy  Spirit."  To  some  this  does  not  look  like  a  real  trust. 
"  Why,  we  cannot  see  God,"  says  one.  "  How  do  we  know  all  about  this  Trinity? 
Is  this  a  real  trust?  "  Cannot  you  trust  in  a  thousand  things  you  have  never 
seen  or  heard?  Some  of  you  may  be  earning  your  living  by  electricity,  but  you 
never  saw  it.  Some  have  said,  "  But  does  God  interfere  to  help  His  people?  Is 
the  trust  you  impose  in  Him  so  really  recognised  by  Him  that  you  can  distinctly 
prove  that  He  helps  you?  "  Yes,  we  can.  We  can  say,  also,  by  way  of  com- 
mending our  God  to  others,  that  we  feel  we  can  rest  upon  Him  for  the  futvu-e. 

III.  Some  words  of  advice  to  those  who  are  so  trusting.  1.  Drive  out  all 
unbelief.  If  we  have  such  a  God  to  trust  to,  let  us  trust  with  aU  our  might.  2.  Let 
us  seek  the  Holy  Spirit's  help  in  this  matter.  The  Author  of  oiu:  faith  must  be  the 
Finisher  of  it  also.  3.  Let  us  try  to  bring  others  to  trust  where  we  have  trusted. 
4.  We  must  prove  our  faith  by  our  works.  (Ibid.)  Unregenerate  human  nature 
had  all  through  : — That  is  a  very  silly  thing  which  people  say  of  men  when  they  die, 
"  Oh,  he  was  rather  loose  in  his  morals,  but  he  was  a  good-hearted  man  at  bottom." 
It  reminds  me  of  Rowland  Hill's  saying,  "  Yes,  but  when  you  go  to  market  to  buy 
apples,  and  you  see  a  number  of  rotten  ones  at  the  top,  if  the  market-woman 
says,  'Oh,  never  mind,  it  is  only  the  rotten  apples  at  the  top,  they  are  very  good  at 
bottom,'  you  will  say  to  her,  'My  good  soul,  I  will  be  bound  to  say  the  best  are  on 
the  top,  and  they  will  not  improve  as  you  go  down,  for  generally  they  will  get  far 
worse.'  "  And  so  if  a  man  is  bad  on  the  surface,  I  cannot  tell  how  much  worse  he 
may  be  down  below.  It  is  said  there  was  a  man  who  used  to  swear  and  drink, 
who,  nevertheless,  applied  for  membership  with  Mr.  Hill,  and  gave  this  reason 
for  it,  that  though  he  did  drink  occasionally  and  frequently  swear,  yet  he  was  good 
at  bottom.  Mr.  Hill  said,  "  Then  you  think  I  am  going  grovelling  down  through 
the  dirty  foul  filth  of  your  life  to  get  the  little  good  that  is  somewhere  at  the  bottom 
of  you !  Why,  sir,  it  will  not  pay  for  the  risk  of  digging  out,  and  I  am  not  going 
to  do  it."     {Ibid.) 

Ver.  11.  Tlie  Syrian  language. — The  Syrian  language,  i.e.  Aramaic,  spoken 
between  Palestine  and  the  Euphrates,  the  language  of  international  intercourse 
and  commerce  in  those  days.     {A.  B.  Davidson,  D.D.) 

Vers.  13-21.  Hear  ye  the  words  of  the  great  king. — The  bland  insinuations  of 
the  enemies  of  God's  people  : — When  Satan  would  tempt  men  from  trusting  in  God 
and  cleaving  to  Him,  he  doth  it  by  insinuating  that  in  yielding  to  him  they  may 
better  their  condition;  but  it  is  a  false  suggestion,  and  grossly  absurd,  and  therefore 
to  be  rejected  with  the  utmost  abhorrence.  When  the  world  and  the  flesh  say  to 
us.  Make  an  agreement  with  us,  and  come  out  to  us,  submit  to  our  dominion  and 
come  into  our  interests,  and  you  shall  eat  every  one  of  his  own  vine,  they  do  but 
deceive  us,  promising  liberty  when  they  would  lead  us  into  the  basest  captivity 
and  slavery.  One  might  as  good  take  Rabshakeh's  word  as  theirs  for  kind  usage 
and  fair  quarter;  therefore,  when  they  speak  fair,  believe  them  not.  Let  them 
say  what  they  will,  there  is  no  land  like  the  land  of  promise,  the  holy  land. 
{31.  Henry.) 

Ver.  19.  Where  are  the  gods  ? — Hamath,  at  the  north  border  of  the  Holy  Land, 
a  large  town  on  the  Orontes,  depopulated  by  the  Assyrian  in  720.  Arpad= 
Aradus,  a  town  on  the  coast,  now  a  heap  of  ruins.  Sepharvaim,  or  Sipar,  a  town 
to  the  north  of  Babylon,  built  on  both  sides  of  the  Euphrates.  {B.  Blake,  B.D.) 
Inquiry  for  gods  : — These  inquiries  may,  by  a  sUght  accommodation,  be  used  as 
showing  some  characteristics  of  false  gods,  and  showing,  by  imphcation,  the  glory 
and  worship  which  are  due  to  the  one  living  Lord.     Men  have  a  distinct  right  to 


100  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  xxxvi. 

inquire  for  their  gods.  Almighty  God  Himself  does  not  shrink  from  this  test  of 
personahty  and  nearness.  He  will  be  inquired  of.  He  has  proclaimed  Himself 
accessible.  "  Come  now,  let  us  reason  together."  God  is  within  reach  of  the 
heart  of  man;  and  rehgion,  as  well  as  bringing  with  it  a  Divine  fear,  brings  with 
it  also  a  Divine  companionship.  Men  cannot  Uve  on  mere  sublimity.  Man 
cannot  get  hold  of  infinitude.  He  must  have  something  that  he  can  lay  the  hands 
of  his  heart  upon.  God  must  give  miniatures  of  Himself,  which  little  children 
even  can  put  away  in  the  hiding-places  of  their  love  as  their  chief  jewels, 
(J.  Parker,  D.D.)  What  is  a  mart's  god  ? — A  man's  god  is  whatever  is  the  supreme 
object  of  his  admiration  and  trust.  It  may  be  beauty,  it  may  be  strength,  it  may 
be  money,  it  may  be  fame,  it  may  be  self-righteousness,  it  may  be  self-confidence. 
Now  there  are  times  in  life  when  a  man  instinctively  or  by  force  inquires  for  his 
god;  and  he  who  cannot,  in  such  critical  hours,  find  his  god,  has  made  the  pro- 
foundest  and  saddest  spiritual  mistake  in  the  bestowment  of  his  affections  and 
the  gift  of  his  trust.  There  are  times  when  you  are  dissatisfied  with  yourself; 
when  you  feel  your  utter  nothingness.  Take  a  season  of  utter  prostration,  when 
the  strong  man  is  withered.  At  such  a  time  we  look  out  for  something  greater 
than  ourselves.  Is  there  no  one  who  can  meet  us  in  this  extremity  of  feebleness, — 
who  can  come  down  to  us,  not  in  the  thunder  of  His  great  power,  but  in  the  con- 
descension of  His  almightiness  ?  Look  at  a  time  of  commercial  panic,  business 
distress,  when  no  man  knows  whom  to  trust.  Man  cannot  be  satisfied  then  without 
the  supernatural;  he  may  even  drift  into  superstition.  Atheists  pray  when  they 
are  in  extreme  pain  or  peril  There  are  times  when  all  men  either  come  quietly, 
with  reverence  and  tenderness,  to  seek  God  who  has  withdrawn  for  a  moment, 
or  when  they  are  startled,  are  frightened  into  momentary  devotion.  {Ihid.) 
Man-made  gods  : — 1.  Some  people  have  made'  money  their  god,  and  there  is  not 
a  more  helpless  god  in  all  the  temples  of  idolatry.  He  will  never  come  to  you  in 
the  crisis  of  your  life.  He  will  make  httle  compromises  with  you,  help  you  over 
divers  stiles,  solve  certain  little  problems  for  you.  But  when  your  soul  is  in  agony, 
when  your  life  has  wrought  itself  down  to  the  one  last  spasm,  he  will  be  a  dumb  god. 
We  brought  nothing  into  this  world,  and  it  is  certain  we  can  carry  nothing  out. 
If  you  could  take  a  five-pound  note  with  you  across  the  grave  into  yonder  invisible 
mysterious  world,  nobody  would  know  what  it  was.  You  would  have  to  explain 
it,  and  nobody  would  believe  you.  You  might  hold  it  up,  and  show  the  water- 
mark, and  lecture  upon  it,  and  turn  it  round  and  round,  and  nobody  could  change 
it.  2.  There  is  another  god  that  some  men  are  making.  Its  name  is  Luck !  Some 
men  say,  "  Things  will  not  turn  out  so  badly  after  all.  I  have  always  been  able 
to  get  upon  the  sunny  side  of  the  road,  and  something  will  occur  to  get  me  upon 
that  side  again.  I  have  trusted  the  chapter  of  accidents.  My  chances  have 
always  turned  out  right,  and  they  will  turn  out  right  again."  There  never  was 
so  mocking  an  idol  as  luck.  The  young  man  who  throws  in  a  game  of  that  kind 
and  is  lucky,  will  have  another  game  to  play.  He  has  another  competitor  who 
will  force  him,  and  say,  "  Now  you  must  have  the  dice  out  again."  The  name  of  that 
last  competitor  is  Death,  and  he  will  play  you.  The  young  man  says,  "  I  do 
not  want  to  play."  Death  grasps  him  by  the  throat,  and  says,  "  You  shall  play!  " 
Now  he  gets  hold  of  his  dice-box,  and  Death  always  wins.  3.  Some  men's  god  is 
a  well-favoured  countenance.  They  trust  to  their  shape,  figure,  bearing,  expression. 
They  say,  "  My  face  is  an  introduction,  a  certificate,  a  guarantee:  wherever  I  go 
a  space  is  cleared  for  me."  A  very  superficial  god!  I  can  imagine  such  persons 
brought  into  circumstances  which  will  try  their  god  severely.  Yonder  is  a  man 
lofty  in  stature,  portly  in  bearing,  commanding  in  all  the  attributes  of  external 
person.  He  says  that  he  feels  a  pain  piercing  him.  He  is  taken  home,  and  betakes 
nimself  to  his  bed.  His  physician  comes  to  his  room  and  says,  "  This  is  a  case  of 
small-pox."  That  god  of  his  \vill  be  dug  in  the  face  till  the  man's  own  mother  will 
not  know  him,  and  the  sister  who  loved  him  best  will  pray  to  escape  from  his 
presence.  God  can  blotch  your  skin!  God  can  send  poison  into  your  blood! 
And  you,  who  sneered  at  ungainly  virtue,  at  unfavoured  honesty,  may  be  a  corrupt, 
worm-eaten,  pestilent  thing  in  the  dirt!  What,  then,  if  any  man  should  say  to  you, 
Where  is  thy  God  ?  {Ibid. )  The  revelation  of  the  true  God  in  times  of  human  need  : — 
This  part  of  the  subject  is  not  free  from  diflSculty.  Many  a  man  has  felt  the  most 
intense  pain  on  observing  what  he  supposed  was  God's  absence  from  the  scene  of 
human  affairs.  This  difficulty  must  be  grappled  with  if  we  would  be  honest  to 
all  sides  of  our  great  subject.  In  reply  to  this  difficulty  I  suggest  three  things. 
1.  As  a  mere  matter  of  fact,  attested  by  a  thousand  histories  known  in  otir  own 


CHAP,  xxxvn.]  ISAIAH.  101 

experience,  God  has  appeared  in  vindication  of  His  name  and  honour.  2.  As  a 
first  principle  in  sound  theology,  it  must  be  admitted  that  God  Himself  is  the  only 
true  judge  as  to  the  best  manner  and  time  of  interposition.  By  so  much  as  He  is 
God  this  point  at  least  must  be  conceded.  Let  us  be  fair  to  the  Almighty,  as  we 
would  be  fair  to  man.  Stephen  was  taken  by  the  mob,  dragged  out  and  stoned. 
"  Where  was  his  God  then  ?  "  was  once  the  mocking  inqiiiry  of  a  well-known  free- 
thinker. Go  to  Stephen  himself  for  an  answer;  and  when  he,  outraged  and  dis- 
honoured, said  with  his  dying  breath,  "  Lord,  lay  not  this  sin  to  their  charge," — to 
have  wrought  in  the  human  soul,  under  circumstances  so  tragic  and  terrible,  a 
desire  Uke  that,  was  to  do  more  for  Stephen  than  if  he  had  been  lifted  up  by  myriads 
of  angels  out  of  the  hands  of  his  murderers  and  set  in  the  sun!  Do  not  let  us 
forget  God's  spiritual  gifts  to  us.  Though  the  stones  were  falling  upon  him  and 
he  was  in  the  last  agonies,  he  said  in  a  whisper,  the  sound  of  which  shall  survive 
the  voices  of  all  thunders  and  floods,  "  I  see  heaven  opened,  and  Jesus  standing  at 
the  right  hand  of  God."  It  is  only  in  crises,  in  extremities  such  as  these,  that  the 
highest  reach  of  faith  is  realised,  and  that  faith  itseM  becomes  victory.  3.  Then 
the  very  absence  of  God,  being  dictated  by  wisdom  and  controlled  by  love,  must 
be  intended  to  have  a  happy  effect  upon  human  faith.  When  God  is  absent, 
what  if  His  absence  is  intended  to  excite  inquiry  in  our  hearts  ?  It  is  in  having 
to  grope  for  God  we  learn  lessons  of  our  own  blindness  and  weakness  and  spiritual 
incapacity.     {Ibid.) 


CHAPTER  xxxvn. 


Veb.  1.  Eezeldab  .  .  .  rent  his  clotlies  .  .  .  and  went  into  the  honse  of  the 
Lord. — The  distress  of  Hezekiah : — Hezekiah  was  probably  weak  in  body, 
and  therefore  had  lost  true  courage  of  sovl.  (J.  Parker,  D.D.)  Peril  should 
drive  the  soul  to  God  : — The  best  way  to  baffle  the  malicious  designs  of  our  enemies 
against  us  is  to  be  driven  by  them  to  God  and  to  om*  duty,  and  so  to  fetch  meat 
out  of  the  eater.  Rabshakeh  intended  to  frighten  Hezekiah  from  the  Lord,  but 
it  proves  that  he  frightens  him  to  the  Lord.  The  wind,  instead  of  forcing  the 
traveller's  coat  from  him,  makes  him  wrap  it  closer  about  him.     {M.  Henry.) 

Ver.  3.  This  day  is  a  day  of  trouble. — Hezekiah's  day  of  trouble : — Ahaz  the 
father  and  immediate  predecessor  of  Hezekiah  on  the  throne  of  Judah,  engaged 
himself,  and  virtually  his  successors,  to  pay  tribute  to  the  kings  of  Assyria.  Such 
a  state  of  vassalage  Hezekiah  no  doubt  rightly  though  hazardously  declined  to 
continue,  and  this  is  what  is  meant  when  it  is  said  of  him  that  "  he  rebelled  against 
the  king  of  Assyria  and  served  him  not  "  (2  Kings  xviii.  7).  Any  such  refusal  on 
the  part  of  Hezekiah  to  acknowledge  the  despotic  king  of  Assyria  as  his  lord- 
paramount  we  may  be  sure  would  not  be  allowed  to  pass  imchallenged,  and  hence 
Sennacherib's  invasion  of  the  kingdom  of  Judah  in  order  to  compel  submission  to 
what  the  king  of  Judah  objected  to  and  declined  to  do.  This  is  what  constituted 
Hezekiah's  day  of  trouble.  {W.  Alnwick.)  Days  of  trouble: — I.  Hezekiah 
but  represents  what  has  been  the  general  experience  of  man,  for  there  has  probably 
never  Uved  a  man  on  the  face  of  the  earth  whose  lot  it  has  not  been  to  have  some 
days  of  trouble  and  annoyance.  2.  H  we  cannot  entertain  a  reasonable  hope  of  any 
such  thing  as  immunity  from  trouble,  we  can,  however,  endeavour  to  hve  and  act 
BO  that  our  troubles  may  not  be  more  than  they  need  to  be.  It  cannot  be  doubted 
that  many  bring  much  trouble  on  themselves,  and  subject  themselves  to  many 
heart-aches  and  heart  bums,  which  they  ought  never  to  have  known,  and  probably 
would  not  have  experienced  had  a  different  course  of  conduct  been  pursued,  a 
course,  perhaps,  pointed  out  to  them  by  those  gifted  with  greater  wisdom,  prudence, 
and  foresight  than  they  themselves  were  possessed  of,  but  which  by  their  obstinacy 
of  will  and  unjustifiable  determination  to  take  their  own  way,  they  were  led  to 
reject.  3.  We  are  not,  of  course,  to  think  that  because  many  and  great  troubles 
fall  to  the  lot  of  a  man,  he  has  necessarily  acted  fooHshly,  acted  in  opposition  to 
any  law  of  God,  either  natural,  religious,  or  spiritual  This  was  just  the  grievous 
mistake  Job's  friends  fell  into.  4.  It  is  only  in  heaven  that  trouble  will  be  a  thing 
unknown,  and  where  all  tears  will  for  ever  be  wiped  away.  5.  We  cannot  but 
see  the  importance  of  being  well  prepared  for  days  of  trouble  before  we  are  made 


102  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  xxxvn. 

sensible  of  their  presence  with  us.  If  we  are  wise  enough  to  prepare  ourselves 
for  them  thoir  approach  will  be  no  surprise  to  us,  and  we  shall  be  the  better  able 
to  battle  with  them,  and  to  turn  that  which  is  an  evil  in  itself  into  a  blessing,  and 
so  much  help  to  us  in  our  journey  heavenward.  6.  There  can  be  no  doubt  that 
troTibles  are  often  sent  by  a  wise  and  gracious  providence  for  this  very  purpose. 
7.  It  now  only  remains  for  me  to  make  a  few  fxirther  remarks  on  how  to  deal  -with 
days  of  trouble  when  from  being  matters  of  prospect  or  future  contingents,  they 
have  become  translated  into  actual  and  stern  facts.  In  dealing  with  such  days 
we  shall  find  much  instruction  and  guidance  afforded  us  by  the  example  of  Hezekiah 
in  dealing  with  his  day  of  trouble.  As  soon  as  Hezekiah  became  acquainted  with 
the  invasion  of  Sennacherib,  he  went  into  the  house  of  the  Lord,  the  sure  resort  of 
God's  people  in  the  time  of  distress,  there  in  prayer  to  lay  both  his  trouble  and 
its  cause  before  God,  and  at  the  same  time  he  sent  Eliakim  and  Shebna  unto  the 
prophet  Isaiah  to  desire  that  man  of  God  to  Uft  up  his  prayer  in  behalf  of  the 
remnant  that  was  left.  We  are  informed  what  was  the  blessed  result  of  this  union 
of  prayer  on  the  part  of  the  king  and  the  prophet.  The  day  of  trouble  was  removed, 
and  the  sun,  which  one  day  was  shrouded  in  darkness,  the  next,  shone  forth  bright 
and  clear,  every  cloud  being  swept  from  the  sky.  The  course  taken  by  the  king  of 
Judah  in  his  day  of  trouble  and  distress  must  commend  itself  to  all  who  are  found 
in  similar  circumstances  by  its  marvellous  success.  It  is  a  fact,  in  spite  of  the 
sneering  scepticism  of  some  people,  that  prayer  is  a  really  great  power,  and  that  as 
a  means  for  the  attainment  of  ends  consistent  with  and  approved  by  infinite 
wisdom  and  goodness,  it  will  succeed  when  other  means,  such  as  men  in  their 
ignorance  sometimes  elect  to  employ  as  the  best  and  fittest,  utterly  fail  to  reach 
the  end  aimed  at.  {Ibid.)  Hours  when  prophets  have  influence  : — In  the  midst 
of  his  distress  Hezekiah  sent  "  unto  Isaiah  the  prophet  the  son  of  Amoz."  So  far 
Hezekiah  was  right.  He  might  have  gone  himself  directly  by  an  act  of  faith  to  the 
living  God,  but  he  had  regard  to  the  constitution  of  Israel,  and  he  availed  himself 
of  the  ordinances  and  institutes  appointed  of  Heaven.  Hezekiah  made  through 
Eliakim  a  pathetic  speech  to  Isaiah — "  This  day  is  a  day  of  trouble,  and  of  rebuke, 
and  of  blasphemy."  There  are  hoitrs  M'hen  prophets  come  to  the  enjoyment  of 
their  fiillest  influence.  Isaiah  had  been  despised  and  derided,  but  now  his  hour  has 
come,  and  he  stands  up  as  the  one  hope  of  Judah.  The  question  was,  What  can 
you,  Isaiah,  do  to  extract  Israel  from  all  the  peril  which  now  presses  upon  the 
people  of  God?  In  the  sixth  verse  we  see  how  nobly  the  attitude  of  Isaiah  con- 
trasts with  the  attitude  of  Hezekiah.  Instead  of  the  word  of  inspiration  pro- 
ceeding from  the  king  it  issued  from  the  prophet.  (J.  Parker,  D.D.)  A 
dangerous  crisis: — "The  children  are  come  to  the  birth,"  &c.  Obviously  a  pro- 
verbial expression  for  a  crisis  which  becomes  dangerous  through  lack  of  strength 
to  meet  it  (Ixvi.  9;  Hos.  xiii.  13).     {Prof.  J.  Skinner,  D.D.) 

Ver.  4.  Lift  up  thy  prayer  for  the  remnant  that  Is  left.— Efficacious  praijer  : — 
I.  The  pekson  who  was  to  engage  in  the  work  of  intercession  was  one  of  great 
eminence  in  the  Chiu'ch  and  commonwealth,  a  great  and  good  man,  a  prophet  of 
the  Lord,  and  one  who  was  indulged  with  peculiar  nearness  to  Him.  Persons  of 
eminent  piety  will  not  be  contented  with  ordinary  applications  to  the  throne  of 
grace;  they  will  seek  till  they  find,  and  wrestle  till  they  prevail.  This  was  a  day 
of  trouble,  as  Hezekiah  calls  it;  and,  therefore,  it  ought  to  be  a  day  of  prayer. 
Intercession  is  the  duty  of  all  saints.  But  herein  ministers  should  take  the  lead. 
They  are  the  Church's  watchmen,  and  God's  remembrancers.  Zedekiah,  who  at 
one  time  cast  Jeremiah  the  prophet  into  a  dungeon,  at  another  time  desired  an 
interest  in  his  supphcations,  and  sent  messengers  to  him,  saying,  "  Pray  now  unto 
the  Lord  our  God  for  us."  And  God  often  spai-es  the  wicked  for  the  sake  of  the 
righteous,  and  in  answer  to  their  requests,  even  as  the  intercession  of  Abraham 
was  accepted  for  the  inhabitants  of  Sodom.  II.  TnosE  for  whom  the  prophet 
WAS  REQUESTED  TO  PRAY  wcrc  "  the  Tcmnaut  that  was  left"  ;  a  certain  number 
kno^vn  unto  God,  and  who  remained  after  the  rest  were  scattered  or  destroyed. 
This  should  teach  us,  that  though  in  our  prayers  we  should  be  forgetful  of  none, 
yet  we  are  to  be  particularly  mindful  of  our  fellow-Christians,  especially  when  in  a 
state  of  adversity.  It  becomes  us  also  to  be  attentive  to  public  and  national 
calamities,  as  well  as  to  those  which  are  personal  and  private,  and  to  spread  them 
before  the  Lord  in  prayer  and  supphcation.     III.  There  is  something  observable 

as  to  THE  MANUEB  IN  WHICH  THE  PROPHET'S  INTERCESSION  IS  REQUESTED.       "  Lift 

up  thy  prayer."     This  expressive  form  of  speech  may  teach  us  to  remember — 


CHAP,  xxxvn.]  I       ISAIAH.  103 

1.  That  the  glorious  object  of  prayer  is  infinitely  exalted.  2.  The  low  and  mean 
condition  of  the  worshipper.  3.  The  secrecy  of  prayer,  according  to  our  Lord's 
direction,  "  When  thou  prayest,  enter  into  thy  closet,"  &c.  Lifting  up  a  prayer 
may  denote  the  same  thing  as  David  expresses  by  the  lifting  up  of  the  soul  to  God, 
in  mental  and  silent  ejaculation.  4.  The  importunity  and  ardour  of  prayer.  In 
lifting  up  our  prayer  to  God,  our  affections  should  rise  high,  though  our  voice  may 
be  low  and  feeble.  5.  The  spirituality  and  heavenly-mindedness  of  the  person 
engaged.  6.  Boldness  and  confidence,  accompanied  with  the  hope  of  being  heard 
and  answered.  7.  The  proper  end  of  prayer,  which  is  not  to  draw  the  Divine 
Being  near  to  us,  but  ourselves  to  Kim.     {B.  Beddome,  M.A.) 

Ver.  10.  let  not  thy  God,  in  whom  thou  trustest»  deceive  thee. — A  piece  of 
Satanic  advice : — I.  Let  us  weigh  this  piece  of  Satanic  advice.  It  is  a  very 
dangerous  temptation  for  three  reasons.  1.  Because  it  appeals  to  the  natural 
pride  of  the  heart.  There  is  a  universal  instinct  which  makes  a  man  abhor  the 
idea  of  being  deceived.  There  is  something  in  the  very  idea  which  rouses  all  the 
pride  that  lies  latent  in  every  heart.  2.  There  is  no  disguising  the  fact  that  if  God 
did  deceive  us  we  are  in  a  hopeless  plight,  and  therefore  there  is  force  in  the  tempta- 
tion. 3.  The  methods  of  God's  government  being  beyond  our  comprehension, 
sometimes  appear  to  incline  towards  the  tempter's  suggestion, — from  appearances 
one  might  say,  "  God  is  going  to  leave  us  in  the  lurch."  II.  Let  us  turn  round 
AND  TEAR  THE  ADVICE  UP.  1.  We  may  tear  it  up  because  it  comes  too  late.  If 
God  be  a  deceiver  we  are  already  so  thoroughly  deceived,  and  have  been  so  for 
years,  that  it  is  rather  late  in  the  day  to  come  and  advise  us  not  to  be.  2.  We  may 
tear  it  up,  because  if  God  deceive  us  we  may  be  quite  certain  that  there  is  nobody 
else  that  would  not.  From  all  we  know  of  our  God,  His  holiness,  His  righteousness, 
and  His  faithfulness,  if  He  can  deceive  us,  then  are  we  quite  certain  that  there  are 
none  to  be  trusted.  3.  There  is  not  one  atom  of  evidence  to  support  the  Ubel. 
Search  the  world  through,  and  see  if  you  can  find  a  man  who  will  deliberately 
say,  "  I  have  tried  God,  I  have  trusted  Him,  and  He  has  deceived  me." 
4.  There  is  overwhelming  evidence  to  refute  it.  Never  yet  did  man  trust  his  God 
and  be  pat  to  shame.  Heaven  and  earth  and  hell  declare  that  Jehovah  never 
hath  deceived  and  never  can  deceive.  (.4.  G.  Brown.)  Sennacherib  versus 
Jehovah  : — Never  before  in  his  experience  had  Sennacherib  heard  of  a  God  who 
could  resist  his  progress;  he  believed  in  the  almighty  power  of  Asshur. 
{B.  Blake,  B.D.) 

Vers.  14-38.  And  Hezeldah  received  the  letter  .  .  .  and  read  it.  .  .  and  spread 
it  before  the  Lord. — HezekiaKs  prayer  and  deliverance: — In  the  struggles,  defeats, 
and  final  triumph  of  the  ancient  people  of  God  in  their  conflicts  with  the  surrounding 
nations,  we  have  a  key  to  the  purposes  of  God  in  respect  to  the  kingdom  of  Christ 
and  the  kingdoms  of  this  world ;  a  key  to  the  interpretation  of  the  principles  and 
powers  underlying  the  conflict  between  the  people  of  God  and  the  unbelievers  of 
this  world.  God's  hand  is  in  this  earth's  history;  His  eye  is  upon  all  men  and  Hia 
ear  open  to  their  counsels;  at  the  proper  time  and  in  the  proper  place  He  will 
frustrate  aU  the  combinations  of  evil  and  bring  to  pass  all  His  purposes  of  righteous- 
ness. It  is  not  by  might  nor  by  power  that  believers  triumph  over  their  spiritual 
enemies  or  win  their  victories,  but  by  the  interposition  of  God's  almighty  arm. 
The  preceding  chapter  is  so  closely  connected  with  that  from  which  our  present 
study  is  taken,  that  the  two  must  be  read  together.  Jerusalem  was  under  siege, 
or  at  least  was  threatened  with  siege  and  capture  by  the  Assyrian  king.  In  spite 
of  all  Hezekiah's  efforts  to  buy  a  peace  for  himself  and  his  kingdom,  the  greedy, 
haughty,  and  most  powerful  king  was  determined  to  be  satisfied  with  nothing  short 
of  entire  and  full  possession  of  Jerusalem  itself.  (For  further  historical  setting 
let  the  reader  consult  2  Kings  xviii.  13 — xix. ;  2  Chron.  xxxii.  1-21.)  The  first 
peremptory  message,  with  the  proud  and  blasphemous  boasts  of  Sennacherib, 
threw  Hezekiah  into  great  distress  of  mind  and  profound  dismay.  He  appealed 
to  the  prophet  Isaiah,  who  encouraged  him  to  keep  silence  and  trust  in  God 
(vers.  1-7).  A  sudden  rumour  of  an  army  marching  in  his  rear  caused  a  diversion  of 
the  Assyrian's  piirpose,  but  meantime  he  sent  another  haughty  message  to  Hezekiah, 
warning  him  that  he  was  powerless  to  resist,  and  intimating  his  return  presently 
to  capture  the  city  This  was  a  written  message  (ver.  14),  and  it  again  disturbed 
Hezekiah,  but  apparently  his  faith  in  God  was  not  shaken,  and  so  he  resorted 
again  to  the  temple  and  spread  the  whole  matter  out  before  the  Lord  and  sought 


104  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  xxxvii. 

help  and  deliverance.  I.  The  prayeb  of  Hezekiah.  Hezekiah  was  a  righteous, 
though  not  a  perfect  man.  He  was  habituated  to  prayer.  1.  The  place  and 
attitude  of  prayer.  "  Hezekiah  went  up  unto  the  house  of  the  Lord."  This 
was  the  proper  standing-ground  on  which  to  make  petitions,  God  had  promised 
to  meet  His  people  there,  and  hear  and  answer  their  prayers  (2  Chron.  vii. 
14,  15).  We  have  not  now  any  particular  place  in  which  to  pray,  but  we  have 
a  Name  which  to  plead — the  name  of  Jesus,  and  "  whatsoever  we  ask  in  His 
name,"  other  conditions  being  also  fuliiUed,  "  shall  be  done  unto  us."  Jesus 
is  the  true  "  meeting-place  "  between  God  and  His  people;  He  is  the  true  ground 
on  which  prayer  is  to  be  made.  By  Him  we  have  access  to  God  (Eph.  ii.  14). 
Then  Hezekiah  did  another  thing.  He  took  the  haughty  and  insolent  letter  of 
Rabshakeh  and  "  spread  it  before  the  Lord."  So  should  we  take  God  into  our 
confidence,  and  "  in  everything  by  prayer  and  supplication  with  thanksgiving 
make  our  request  known  xmto  God  "  (Phil.  iv.  6).  We  too  often  plan  our  own 
dehverance  or  our  own  work  and  then  ask  God  to  ratify  it,  whereas  the  first  thing 
to  do  is  to  spread  the  matter  at  once  fully  before  God,  reverently  submitting  to 
His  plan  and  will,  seeking  in  His  wisdom  the  right  thing  to  do.  2.  The  address. 
Here  was  a  reverent  remembrance  of  His  majesty  and  a  silent  appeal  to  His  power, 
in  which  also  Hezekiah  renewed  his  own  confession  of  faith:  "  0  Lord  of  hosts, 
God  of  Israel."  Israel  was  in  trouble,  and  God  was  Israel's  God,  not  a  mere 
titular  deity,  but  the  great  God  of  hosts.  This  is  a  familiar  designation  of  God 
and  Jehovah,  and  refers  to  His  universal  sovereignty  and  power.  "  That  dwellest 
between  the  cherubim."  This  is  a  reference  to  the  fact  that  God  had  been  pleased 
to  make  His  dwelling-place  on  the  mercy-seat  between  those  mysterious  figures 
called  the  cherubim,  from  which  place  He  was  always  graciously  incHned  towards 
His  people.  If  the  cherubim  symbolise  the  incarnation  (of  which  I,  at  least,  have 
no  doubt),  then  the  reference  to  God's  position  between  them,  or,  as  we  woidd 
now  say,  "  God  in  Christ,"  is  very  significant.  David  made  a  similar  appeal  to 
God  on  behalf  of  Israel:  "  Give  ear,  0  Shepherd  of  Israel;  Thou  that  dweUest 
between  the  cherubim,  shine  forth.  Stir  up  Thy  strength  and  come  and  save  us  " 
(Psa.  Ixxx.  1,  2).  "  Thou  art  the  God,  Thou  alone,  of  all  the  kingdoms  of  the 
earth."  The  views  of  Sennacherib  were  that  each  nation  and  kingdom  had  their 
own  gods  (xxxvi.  18-20),  but  Hezekiah  ascribes  to  God  not  only  aloneness  in 
His  being,  but  oneness,  and  universal  sovereignty  over  all  the  kingdoms  of  the 
earth.  He  therefore  could  interfere  in  the  plans  of  the  Assyrian  king  for  the 
purpose  of  frustrating  them,  as  well  as  come  to  the  defence  of  His  own  peculiar 
people;  besides,  there  was  a  refutation  and  repudiation  of  the  boasted  idol  gods 
who  had  been  compared  to  Him.  "  Thou  hast  made  heaven  and  earth."  It  is  a 
favourite  thought  of  Isaiah  and  the  old  prophets,  and  indeed  aU  the  Jews  who 
were  instructed  in  the  knowledge  of  God,  to  couple  His  redemptive  with  His 
creative  power.  Thus  did  Hezekiah  throw  himself  on  aU  the  great  attributes 
of  God  before  he  began  his  petition.  3.  The  supi^Iication.  "  Incline  Thine  ear 
and  hear,  open  Thine  eyes  and  see."  Shall  all  the  doings  of  this  vain  and  proud 
braggart  go  past  without  Thine  observation?  Shall  all  his  scandalous  words  in 
which  he  has  openly  derogated  Thee  pass  by  Thine  hearing  ?  True  prayer  has  always 
reference  to  the  glory  of  God,  however  much  our  own  personal  desires  and  needs 
may  be  involved  in  the  things  asked  for.  "  Let  not  thy  God  in  whom  thou 
trustest  deceive  thee  "  (ver.  10).  "  Lord,  refute  and  roll  back  that  scandalous 
speech  and  reproach."  4.  Confession.  Hezekiah  was  not  unmindful  of  the 
diSiculties  that  opposed  themselves  to  him,  of  the  dangers  that  confronted  him, 
nor  of  the  truth  of  the  statements  of  the  letter  concerning  the  power  of  Sennacherib. 
"  Of  a  truth.  Lord,  the  kings  of  Assyria  have  laid  waste  all  the  nations  and  their 
oountries,  and  have  cast  their  gods  into  the  fire."  For  two  centiuries  they  had 
had  a  steady  career  of  conquest.  There  was  no  denying  this;  and  many  of  the 
countries  and  kingdoms  that  had  succumbed  to  their  power  were  much  stronger 
than  that  of  Hezekiah  at  this  time.  There  was  therefore  some  show  of  truth 
in  what  they  said  (2  Kings  xv.  19,  20,  29,  xvi.  9,  xvii.  5,  6;  Isa.  xx.  1). 
Faith  does  not  ignore  difficulties  nor  close  its  eyes  to  precedents  in  which  the 
enemy  has  triumphed,  but  then  it  is  bold  in  the  behef  that  God  is  able;  and  that 
what  may  seem  to  be  failure  is  due  to  other  causes  than  the  lack  of  power  or 
covenant  faithfulness  on  the  part  of  God.  5.  The  faith  in  which  the  prayer  was 
made.  Hezekiah  having  admitted  the  prowess  of  the  great  enemy,  proceeds 
to  say  to  the  Lord  that  the  triumph  of  Sennacherib  over  other  nations  and  their 
gods  proves  nothing  in  this  case,  from  the  fact  that  the  gods  of  the  nations  were 


CHAP,  xxxvn.]  ISAIAH.  106 

no  gods  at  all,  but  mere  idols  of  wood  and  stone,  the  work  of  men's  hands. 
Hezekiah  in  thus  declaring  his  faith  in  God  above  all  idols,  seems  also  to  call  on 
God  to  make  this  truth  apparent  to  the  Assyrians.  Here  his  jealousy  for  God 
momentarily  rises  above  his  anxiety  for  Jerusalem.  6.  The  petition.  "  Now 
therefore,  0  Lord  our  God,  save  us  from  his  hand."  This  is  the  simple,  brie^ 
and  comprehensive  petition.  Just  save  us.  We  do  not  dictate  the  means,  we 
do  not  dictate  the  nature  of  the  salvation.  Sometimes  the  most  effective  prayers 
are  the  shortest.  "  God  be  merciful  to  me,  a  sinner,"  was  a  very  brief  prayer. 
So  was  "  Lord  save  me,"  but  both  were  heard  and  answered;  so  was  Hezekiah's. 
7.  The  argument.  Hezekiah's  argument  is  all  gathered  up  into  this  consummation, 
"  that  the  kingdoms  of  the  earth  may  know  that  Thou  art  Jehovah,  even  Thou 
only."  True  behevers  long  always  that  others  may  know  their  God.  It  is  right 
for  us  to  desire  that  our  own  may  know  God,  and  even  our  friends,  but  it  is  the 
part  of  the  true  Christian  spirit  to  desire  that  even  our  enemies  might  know  God, 
to  long  to  see  even  all  the  nations  of  the  earth  brought  to  a  saving  knowledge 
of  the  truth.  This  was  a  true  m  ssionary  prayer  of  Hezekiah.  Sometimes  the 
knowledge  of  God  can  only  be  spread  by  the  overthrow  of  some  great  poUtical 
power,  or  the  removing  of  some  gigantic  enemy,  such  as  Assyria  and  Sennacherib. 
It  proved  to  be  so  in  this  case.  II.  The  deliverance.  After  his  prayer  (we  do 
not  know  how  long  after)  Isaiah,  who  seems  to  have  been  supernaturally  informed 
of  the  prayer,  and  in  like  manner  put  in  possession  of  Jehovah's  reply,  "  sent 
word  to  Hezekiah,"  that  inasmuch  as  he  had  submitted  the  matter  concerning 
Sennacherib  to  God  for  help  and  deliverance,  his  request  would  be  heard  and 
answered.  The  following  verses  give  an  account  of  the  answer.  L  The  promise. 
The  first  part  of  this  promise  is  to  the  effect  that  the  "  virgin  daughter  of  Zion 
hath  despised  thee  and  laughed  thee  to  scorn;  the  daughter  of  Jerusalem  hath 
shaken  her  head  at  thee  "  (vers.  22,  23).  This  seems  to  be  not  only  an  answer 
to  Rabshakeh  for  his  vain  and  blasphemous  boasting,  but  also  an  assurance  to 
Hezekiah.  The  daughter  of  Zion,  like  a  virgin  maid,  was  in  herself  weak  and 
helpless;  nevertheless  she  held  all  the  threatening  of  the  Assyrian  in  scorn  and 
contempt,  and  would  shake  her  head  in  derision  at  him,  either  in  defiance  of  his 
onset  or  following  him  with  mockery  in  his  retreat  from  the  city.  Then  follows 
a  message  to  the  Assyrian  direct,  in  which  God  rebukes  him  for  his  boastful 
blasphemies,  and  reminds  him  of  how  in  the  ages  past  God  has  overthrown  and 
destroyed  the  nations  which  had  presumed  to  oppose  themselves  to  Jehovah. 
Then  he  is  told  that  God's  eye  has  been  upon  him,  and  that  now  Jehovah  was 
about  to  "  put  a  hook  in  his  nose  "  and  lead  him  away  out  of  the  country  in  con- 
tempt, not  even  giving  him  the  glory  of  a  battle.  Then  follows  another  promise 
to  the  remnant  of  Judah  that  they  should  again  "  take  root  downward  and  bear 
fruit  upward"  (vers.  24-32).  Then  comes  again  God's  "Therefore,"  concern- 
ing the  Assyrian.  (1)  "  He  shall  not  come  into  the  city,"  not  even  near  enough 
to  shoot  the  first  preliminary  arrow  at  it,  much  less  near  enough  to  use  shields, 
or  even  raise  an  embankment  against  it  for  the  purpose  of  a  siege.  Sennacherib's 
army  was  not  then  under  the  walls,  but  only  gathering  in  the  distance,  when  the 
"  letter  "  came  to  Hezekiah.  God  now  assures  the  king  that  it  shall  not  approach 
the  city.  He  should  be  deKvered,  and  that  without  even  a  siege.  (2)  "  I  wUl 
defend  this  city  to  save  it  for  Mine  own  sake."  This  of  course  meant  that,  without 
even  the  secondary  help  of  man.  He  would  in  a  supernatural  way  defend  it,  and 
that  for  His  own  sake.  Rabshakeh  had  defied  God  and  put  contempt  upon  His 
name,  while  boasting  his  own  prowess,  or  that  of  his  king.  God  would  vindicate 
His  name  and  save  His  city  by  such  a  demonstration  of  supernatiu-al  power,  with- 
out the  immediate  agency  of  man,  as  would  leave  no  doubt  in  the  mind  of  the 
Assyrian  as  to  the  fact  that  the  Lord  was  God  indeed.  Now  and  again  God  has 
done  such  things  just  to  clear  up  the  testimony  and  leave  men  no  excuse  for  their 
opposition  on  the  ground  of  ignorance.  He  did  it  with  Pharaoh,  who  challenged 
His  power.  2.  The  fulfilment.  "  Then  the  angel  of  the  Lord  went  forth  and 
smote  in  the  camp  of  the  Assyrians,  an  hundred  and  foiu-  score  and  five  thousand ; 
and  when  they  arose  early  in  the  morning,  behold  they  were  all  dead  corpses." 
This  was  an  awful  visitation.  All  the  more  so  that  it  was  done  in  the  night  and 
with  perfect  silence  (2  Kings  xix.  35).  Who  can  withstand  His  judgments  ? 
Who  is  strong  enough  to  fight  against  God?  Let  the  wicked  wonder  before 
they  perish  at  the  rebuke  of  His  countenajice  and  the  breath  of  His  mouth. 
3.  Sennacherib's  humiliation.  It  must  have  been  an  awful  humiliation  for  this 
proud  king  to  take  his  march  over  the  same  route  by  which  he  had  approached 


106  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  xxxvii. 

Jerusalem,  not  laden  with  the  spoil  of  the  captured  city,  leading  thousands  of 

the  chief  men  and  princes,  and  King  Hezekiah  himself  in  his  triumphal  captive 

train,  but  with  his  shattered  army  to  be  the  gazing  stock  of  the  countries  he  had 

subdued,  and  a  by- word  among  his  own  people.     We  must  fancy  that  he  entered 

Nineveh  with  muffled  drums,  or  no  drums  at  all,  with  trailing  or  furled  banners. 

When  God  does  rise  up  to  humble  the  proud,  He  does  it  thoroughly.     A  further 

hum  liation  awaited  him.     He  went  after  up  into  the  house  of  his  idol  to  worship, 

not  immediately,  for  he  appears  to  have  lived  some  twenty  years  after  this  defeat. 

But,  at  any  rate,  instead  of  his  god  defending  him,  much  less  giving  him  assurance 

of  further  victories,  his  own  sons,  who  should  have  stood  by  and  comforted  their 

father,  conspired  together  and  slew  him.   So  ended  the  career  of  this  proud  boaster, 

and  so  began  the  decline  of  this  great  Assyrian  power.     {G.  F.  Pentecost,  D.D.) 

Hezekiah  s   prayer  and  deliverance : — It  is  said  of  Hezekiah  that  "  he  trusted 

in    the    Lord    God    of    Israel."     Let    us    with    reference    to    this   side    of    his 

character    notice    some    lessons    suggested    by    this    story    of    his    trouble    and 

his    deliverance.      I.    Faith    discovees    God.      The    king    of    Judah    needed 

such   discernment   to    be    sure    that    Gcd   was    on    his   side.     He   must   have 

been  surprised  when  the  Assyrian  commissioner  said  to  him,  "  Do  not  believe 

that  Jehovah  will  take  your  part ;  this  is  my  master's  message  to  you :  '  The 

Lord  said  to  me.  Go  up  against  this  land  to  destroy  it.'  "     That  was  not  the  first 

time  nor  the  last  when  bad  men  have  claimed  Divine  authority.     II.  Faith  asks 

God  for  deliverance.     The  army  of  Judah  \mderstood  very  well  that  they 

were  no  match  for  the  Assyrians:  they  were  far  weaker  in  numbers  and  were 

demoralised  by  a  long  experience  of  defeat  and  servitude.     Sennacherib  had 

taken  pains  to  increase  this  impression.     When  this  letter  reached  Hezekiah,  he 

"  went  up  unto  the  house  of  the  Lord,  and  spread  it  before  the  Lord."     That 

was  his  privilege — that  is  the  right  of  every  one  who  believes;  it  is  our  prerogative 

as  God's  children.     He  offers  us  help  in  every  extremity,  only  requiring  that 

we  feel  our  need.     III.  Faith  inspires  faith.     Hezekiah  "  trusted  in  the  Lord," 

but  not  always.     Like  most  men  he  found  it  easier  to  beHeve  when  he  could 

see  the  way.     When  the  Assyrian  army  was  moving  toward  Jerusalem,  in  the 

early  part  of  his  reign,  he  was  frightened :  he  forgot  his  God  and  so  forgot  himself, 

even  sending  to  the  invader  this  humiliating  message:  "  I  have  offended;  return 

from  me:  that  which  thou  puttest  on  me  will  I  bear  "  (2  Kings  xviii.  14).     And 

his  unbehef  spread.     The  people,  who  had  httle  enough  of  spirit  at  the  best,  now, 

following  their  leader,  gave  up  in  despair.     But  there  came  to  the  king  in  his 

distress  an  inspiration — a  friend  had  been  raised  up  for  his  deliverance.     It  was 

the  prophet  Isaiah;   a  man  who   knew  how  to  trust  in  the  Lord  at  all  times; 

when  the  sky  was  darkest  he  could  see  the  stars  beyond.     When,  after  Samaria 

fell,  leading  men  proposed  an  a'liance  with  the  Egyptian  king,  "  No,"  he  said, 

"  woe  to  them  that  go  down  to  Egypt  for  help."     "  As  birds  flying,  so  will  the 

Lord  of  hosts  defend  Jerusalem;  defending  also  He  will  deUver  it."     That  faith 

inspired  Hezekiah,  giving  him  a  reinforcement  of  courage  which  he  very  soon 

needed.     He  rallied  and  organised  his  forces  for  defence,  and  then  went  personally 

among  the  people,  with  the  cheering  exhortation,  "  Be  strong  and  courageous,  * 

&c.     His  faith   inspired   faith   in  them.     IV.  Faith   overcomes   (vers.  33-36). 

What  delivered  Hezekiah?     Not  his  generalship;   not  his  army;   it  was   "  the 

angel  of  the  Lord."     (T.  T.  Holmes.)        Sennacherib'' s  letter: — It  is  bad  to  talk 

proudly  and  profanely,  but  it  is  worse  to  write  so,  for  that  argues  more  deliberation 

and  design;  and  what  is  written  spreads  farther,  and  lasts  longer,  and  doth  the 

more  mischief.     Atheism  and   irreligion  written  will  certainly  be  reckoned  for 

another  day.     {M.  Henry.)        HezekiaKa  'prayer: — Professor  Cheyne  refers  to 

a  striking  parallel  in  Kie  Egyptian  version  of  Sennacherib's  overthrow.     "  On 

this  th    monarch  (Sethos)  greatly  distressed,  entered  into  the  iimer  sanctuary, 

and    before  the   image  of  the  god  (Ptah)  bewailed   the  fate  which  impended 

over  him.     As  he  wept  he   fell   asleep  and  dreamed   that  the  god   came  and 

stood  by  his  s  de,  bidding  him  be  of  good  cheer,  and  go  boldly  forth  to  meet 

the  Arabian  (Assyrian)  host,  which  would  do  him  no  hurt,  as  he  himself  would 

send  those  who  should  help  him."     {Herodotus.)        Prayer  a  way  of  escape: — 

I  know  an  ancient  castle  on  a  high  rock,  which  used  to  be  garrisoned  by  soldiers. 

From  inside  the  castle  a  long,  winding  passage,  cut  out  of  the  sohd  rock,  and 

called  Mortimer's  Hole,  leads  right  away  under  the  town,  and  opens  up  at  a  great 

distance.     It  was  the  way  of  escape  for  the  garrison  in   a  case  of  extremity. 

Prayer  is  such  a  door  of  deliverance,  and  no  man  can  shut  it.     (/.  E.  Page.) 


CHAP,  xxxvn.]  ISAIAH.  107 

Prayer  for  hdp  answered : — "  When,"  Sir  Josiah  Mason  once  said,  "  I  have  done 
everything  I  can  and  see  no  clear  way,  I  say  to  myself,  God  help  me.  I  have 
brought  out  all  my  judgment,  my  brain  can  do  no  more,  so  may  it  please  Thee 
to  give  me  a  push."  '  And,"  he  added,  "  I  get  the  push,  for  as  sure  as  I  ask 
for  help,  help  comes."     {Sunday  School  Chronide.) 

Ver.  23.  Whom  hast  thou  reproached  and  blasphemed? — Isaiah's  saving  idea 
of  Qod: — Isaiah  in  his  day  saved  Jerusalem  by  teaching  the  people  a  better 
idea  of  their  God.  For  forty  years  he  had  been  witnessing  to  a  truer  thought  of 
God,  and  at  last  the  crisis  and  the  triumph  of  his  religious  statesmanship  came. 
Jerusalem  would  have  surrendered  to  Assyria  had  not  Isaiah  at  last  brought 
king  and  people,  in  their  despair,  to  the  faith  in  God  to  which  for  forty  years  he 
had  borne  witness.  At  an  hour  when  the  Assyrian  was  making  his  rapid  march 
towards  the  city,  two  props  of  the  people's  confidence  had  entirely  given  way: 
their  rehance  upon  Egypt,  and  their  confidence  in  their  religion.  Isaiah  had 
told  them  over  and  over  again  that  these  supports  were  rotten,  and  would  give 
way  when  the  crash  came.  And  they  did  when  at  last  came  the  scourge  of  the 
nations  which  had  swept  other  cities  before  it  reached  Jerusalem.  For  a  moment 
the  luridness  of  the  popular  despair  was  lit  up  by  a  wild  light  of  passion  and  revelry: 
"  Let  us  eat  and  drink,"  they  said,  "  for  to-morrow  we  shall  die."  Then  the  hour 
for  the  triumph  of  the  prophet's  lifelong  truth  was  come.  He  led  a  sobered  people 
and  a  humbled  king  to  the  Holy  One  of  IsraeL  (Nevmian  Smyth,  D.D.)  The 
Divine  holiness  and  Fatherhood : — The  historic  truth  is  that  wherever  a  better  idea 
of  God  prevails  men  are  delivered.  The  deep,  permanent,  at  all  times  greatly 
needed  lesson  is,  that  the  prophet's  truer  teaching  of  God  is  for  the  salvation  of 
a  city.  The  subject  for  us  to  inquire  concerning  is,  whether  we  are  being  saved 
by  any  truer,  stronger  ideas  of  our  God?  Are  we  saving  our  society,  our  neighbour- 
hood, our  city,  our  land  by  nobler  knowledge  of  God?  1.  Do  you  hope  to  work 
out  the  redemption  of  men  by  education?  It  is  a  means,  a  sharp  instrument 
for  good  or  evil,  but  Rabshakeh  could  blaspheme  in  two  languages.  We  have  to 
face  the  question:  "  What  leaven  is  to  keep  the  school  itself  from  moral  corrup- 
tion?" 2.  But  much,  it  is  said,  may  be  accomplished  through  sanitary  and 
political  science.  Undoubtedly.  Even  Ahaz  did  a  good  thing  when  he  looked 
after  the  water  supply  of  Jerusalem  in  fear  of  a  siege,  although  he  would  not  hear 
a  word  that  Isaiah  was  saying  to  him  by  the  upper  pool  in  the  fuller's  field.  But 
if  Isaiah  had  not  been  the  heart  and  the  soul  of  the  city  in  its  critical  hour,  aU  the 
work  that  the  kings  had  done  in  repairing  the  walls  and  looking  after  the  water- 
courses, would  never  have  kept  the  Assyrian  out.  Sooner  or  later  we  shaU 
have  to  go  down  to  the  God  on  whom  we  depend,  if  we  are  to  build  anjrthing  of 
permanent  worth.  3.  What,  then,  is  oiu-  better  saving  thought  of  God?  (1)  We 
are  coming  to  know  better  the  Divine  Fatherhood  of  men.  (2)  Yet,  this 
first  truth  of  the  Divine  Fatherhood  of  men,  and  His  special  Fatherhood 
towards  the  son  of  His  trust  and  love,  does  not  exhaust  our  redeeming  knowledge 
of  God.  Our  text  exalts  the  Holy  One  of  Israel.  Isaiah's  vision  of  Him  whose 
glory  fills  the  whole  earth  was  the  vision  of  the  Holy  One.  In  the  holiness  of 
God  the  prophet  saw  the  falsehoods  of  the  coturt  and  the  people  burning  as  with 
everlasting  fire.  And  when  Jesus  Christ  in  that  sublime  moment  to  which  St. 
John  has  borne  witness  in  the  seventeenth  chapter  of  his  Gospel,  summed  up  His 
whole  lifelong  teaching  in  His  last  prayer  for  the  disciples,  He  lifted  up  His  eyes 
to  heaven,  and  said.  Father,  Holy  Father,  0  righteous  Father.  (3)  There  is  on© 
way  in  particular  by  which  we,  with  all  our  worldliness,  may  be  brought  more 
fully  into  the  saving  power  of  these  truths  of  God.  It  is  through  our  increasing 
sense  of  God's  omnipresence,  of  the  Divine  immanence,  of  Immanuel,  God  with 
us.  {Ibid.)  God  His  people's  defence: — A  magistrate  in  Hamburg  once  held 
up  his  finger  and  said  to  Mr.  Oncken,  the  Baptist  preacher:  "  Do  you  see  that 
finger,  sir?  As  long  as  I  can  hold  up  that  finger  I  shall  put  you  down."  "  I  can 
see,"  said  Mr.  Oncken,  "  what  you  cannot  see;  I  can  see  the  mighty  arm  of  God,, 
and  as  long  as  that  arm  is  held  up  for  my  defence,  you  will  never  be  able  to  put 
me  down."     {Christian  Age.) 

Vers.  31,  32.  The  remnant.  —  The  root  and  fruit  of  Christianity:  —  I.  The 
REMNANT  THAT  AEE  SAID  TO  HAVE  ESCAPED.  Truly  thjs  is  a  description  of  the 
Lord's  Church  in  every  age.  "  Strait  is  the  gate,"  &c.  "  Even  so  now  also 
there  is  a  remnant  according  to  the  election  of  grace."     This  remnan    that  is  left 


108  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  xxxvn. 

is  in  great  distress.  A  peculiar  characteristic  of  this  very  small  remnant  is  that 
they  nave  escaped.  They  are  apart  from  the  great  bulk  of  professors.  They 
have  escaped  from  the  reigning  power  of  sin;  fiom  the  sentence  of  the  law;  from 
self  and  self-confidence,  and  from  all  apprehension  of  the  second  death.     II.  Glance 

at   THEEB    BEING    THE    OFFSPRINO    OF   A    DISTINGUISHED    TRIBE.      Although   Joseph 

had  an  exuberance  of  blessings  pronoimced  upon  him  by  his  fond  father,  and  he 
probably  realised  them  all,  both  in  a  temporal  and  spiritual  point  of  view;  yet 
the  true  dignity  rested  upon  the  house  of  Judah.  Marlt  here  the  Gospel  sense  of 
this  declaration,  that  Judah,  the  little  chosen  few,  the  Lord's  own  living  Church, 
have  the  sceptre  among  them — the  sceptre  of  righteousness  of  their  glorious  Lord 
who  sprang  out  of  Judah,  and  is  ruling  and  reigning  among  them.  His  presence 
is  enjoyed.  His  love  tokens  are  felt,  the  joys  of  His  salvation  are  experienced 
amongst  those  that  are  a  minority,  the  little  flock  that  He  has  chosen  and  redeemed 
for  Himself.  III.  The  origin  op  their  life.  They  have  a  root.  What  is  a  root? 
It  is  a  concealed,  hidden  life.  If  you  have  no  more  religion  than  what  is  seen, 
it  is  not  worth  youi-  possessing.  The  real  Christian  has  a  hidden  Ufe.  It  is  an 
abiding  and  downward  growing  principle.  Even  in  wintry  seasons  and  trying 
times,  there  shoiild  be  at  least  the  fruits  of  humility  and  self-abasement  and 
meekness  and  gentleness,  the  fruits  of  the  mind  of  Christ.  And  this  is  taking  root 
downwards.  IV.  Their  tendency  upward  with  fruitfulness.  The  believer 
in  Jesus  has  a  Ufe  which  is  always  tending  upwards.  If  earth  content  you,  your 
religion  is  not  worth  a  straw.  The  fruits  which  this  tribe  bear  upwards  are  diverse 
and  profuse.  "  The  fruits  of  the  Spirit,"  are  said  to  be  "  love,  joy,  peace,  long- 
suffering,  goodness,  gentleness,  faith;  against  such  there  is  no  law."  They  are 
outlaws — there  is  no  law  for  them.  "  The  fruits  of  righteousness  are  by  Jesus 
Christ."  Mark  their  upward  tendency — "  to  the  praise  and  glory  of  God." 
(J.  Irons.)  The  remnant : — The  sacred  writers  are  fiequent  in  speaking  of  a 
"remnant"  as  alone  inheriting  the  promises.  The  word  "remnant,"  so  con- 
stantly used  in  Scripture,  is  the  token  of  the  identity  of  the  Church,  in  the  miad  of 
her  Divine  Creator,  before  and  after  the  coming  of  Christ.  (J.  H.  Newman,  D.D.) 
God's  remnant  : — We  may  learn — 1.  Not  to  entertain  mean  thoughts  of  our  Lord, 
because  there  are  but  few  sincere  Christians.  2.  To  value  the  true  religion  and  the 
professors  of  it.  3.  God's  zeal  for  His  children  in  working  such  marvellous  deliver- 
ances for  them,  though  they  are  so  few  in  number.  4.  Let  us  own  our  dependence 
upon  God,  and  regard  Him  as  our  only  defence  and  salvation  in  time  of  trouble, 
seeking  to  Him,  as  Hezekiah  did  here,  by  devout  prayers  and  supplications,  and 
craving  the  assistance  of  His  Church  and  ministry,  as  this  king  did  of  the  prophet 
Isaiah,  to  obtain  of  Him  an  £inswer  of  peace  and  love.  (iV.  Reading,  Al.A.) 
Rooting  and  fruiting  : — This  is  a  promise  for  the  encouragement  of  a  downcast 
people.  It  is  the  seer's  way  of  looking  through  the  clouds  and  finding  the  sunshine. 
Judah  had  stood  hke  a  splendid  tree,  with  roots  deep  and  branches  wide.  The 
hurricane  had  struck  it,  and  it  was  plucked  up  by  the  roots.  The  kings  of  Assyria 
had  swept  down  on  the  people  of  God  hke  a  very  besom  of  destruction.  Their 
cry  to  God  brought  back  the  assurance  that  His  hand  was  still  on  the  kings  of 
Assyria  and  that  He  had  a  large  hope  to  offer  Judah,  the  hope  that  the  remnant 
should  grow  again,  taking  root  downward  and  bearing  fruit  upward-  It  does  not 
take  a  large  start  to  come  to  large  growth.  Rooting  for  the  sake  of  fruiting — it 
is  a  famihar  scriptural  thought.  "  He  shall  be  hke  a  tree  planted  by  the  rivers 
of  water,  which  bringeth  forth  his  fruit  in  his  season."  In  the  parable,  the  seed 
that  grew  so  quickly  withered  away  because  it  had  no  root.  The  fig-tree  which 
bore  no  fruit  was  dried  up  from  the  very  root.  And  so  on,  probably  twenty  times 
in  Scripture,  where  rooting  and  fruiting  are  connected.  Of  course  you  observe 
the  simple  naturalness  of  it.  That  is  what  we  are  accustomed  to  everywhere 
else.  That  is  what  we  are  to  expect  in  the  spiritual  hfe.  Trees  and  plants  take 
root  downward  and  bear  fruit  upward.  So  do  souls  ;  each  in  its  appropriate  soil 
and  each  in  its  appropriate  fruit,  but  by  processes  that  are  as  natural  in  one  case 
as  in  the  other.  You  cannot  explain  the  process  in  either  case  without  God ; 
you  need  Him  at  the  start  of  it,  and  in  the  progress  of  it,  and  at  the  end  of  it.  And 
you  find  Him  working  through  the  laws  He  has  made.  The  spiritual  life  is  not 
an  exception  to  the  rest  of  the  round  of  Ufe  ;  it  is  the  same  natural  Ufe,  has  its 
laws  as  native  to  it  as  the  natural  laws  are  native  to  the  rest  of  life.  Then  you 
observe  how  the  rooting  is  unseen,  underground,  unthought  of,  and  the  fruiting 
is  aljove  ground,  in  evidence,  out  in  the  Ught.  Here  is  a  laying  bare  of  the  necessity 
of  the  inner  life  and  the  outer  life  as  weU.     Neither  is  indiderent  to  the  other. 


CHAP,  xxxvn.]  ISAIAH.  109 

You  do  not  want  roots  for  their  own  sake,  and  you  cannot  have  fruit  without 
them.  K  you  are  going  to  improve  the  quality  of  the  fruit,  you  must  often  start 
in  a  better  care  of  the  root.  Li  that  fact  lies  one  of  the  puzzles  of  history  and  of 
human  life.  It  is  not  difficult  to  find  when  the  fruit  began  to  appear,  but  the 
root  is  always  baflEling.  So  it  is  difficult  to  find  the  influence  of  the  fruit  already 
borne  on  the  fruit  that  is  riper  and  richer.  Take  the  sphere  of  education.  It  is 
not  difficult  to  find  when  the  first  school  that  might  fairly  be  called  a  public  school 
appeared  ;  but  it  is  quite  impossible  to  find  who  first  originated  the  idea  of  which 
it  is  the  fruit — the  idea  of  the  equality  of  the  mental  rights  of  men.  It  is  quite 
certain  that  there  was  a  time  when  that  idea  was  not  fruit- bearing,  if  it  existed. 
And  it  is  evident,  too,  that  the  fruit  borne  through  the  years  of  the  schools  has 
reacted  on  the  root  idea,  enlarging  it  and  making  it  better.  We  have  better 
schools  now  because  we  have  a  better  root  idea  out  of  which  to  grow  them.  And 
80  we  come  to  a  word  about  the  two  parts  of  our  personal  lives — this  unseen  root- 
life  we  are  Hving,  and  the  seen  fruit-Ufe  we  are  meant  to  live.  There  is  always 
peril  that  one  may  be  neglected  in  the  care  of  the  other.  On  the  one  hand  there 
are  many  who  are  seeking  to  develop  the  inner  life,  as  though  for  its  own  sake, 
seeking  to  gain  new  inner  beauty  and  grace  and  assurance,  without  letting  that 
inner  Gfe  assert  itself  in  outer  seen  life.  On  the  other,  there  are  some  who  are 
caring  well  for  the  outer  life,  doing  much  for  the  Master,  active  in  every  good 
work,  but  caring  little  for  the  inner  life,  the  root-life,  out  of  which  must  grow  the 
seen  fife  if  it  be  a  secure  life.  Both  are  to  be  commended  for  what  they  do  ;  each 
is  to  be  warned  for  what  he  does  not  do.  The  Ufe  that  is  hid  with  Christ  in  God 
is  meant  to  be  seen  of  men  for  the  glory  of  Christ.  There  is  to  be,  do  you  not  see, 
a  measure  of  concealment  and  a  measure  of  publicity,  a  certain  hiding  of  life  and 
a  certain  reveahng  of  life,  a  degree  of  secrecy  and  a  degree  of  openness  ?  The 
men  whom  you  most  admire,  I  suspect,  are  men  who  always  seem  to  have  a  measure 
of  reserve  power,  but  they  are  not  men  who  live  behind  barriers,  whom  you  never 
approach  with  any  sense  of  companionship.  They  have  an  inner  Ufe,  a  taking 
root  downward,  out  of  your  sight,  and  you  do  not  forget  it  in  your  dealing  with 
them  ;  but  they  have  also  an  outer,  assertive  life,  the  fruit  of  that  inner  life. 
Carry  it  just  a  Uttle  farther  in  the  personal  fife  into  the  fundamentals  of  rehgion. 
Every  man  of  us  carries  about  with  him  a  certain  bundle  of  convictions,  a  certain 
set  of  creed-articles,  which  are  his  personal  and  inviolable  property.  They  may 
be  like  or  unUke  anybody  else's  bundle.  There  are  some  of  us  whose  possessions 
in  this  way  are  very  small,  and  we  tend  to  think  that  creeds  and  doctrines  are 
not  important ;  we  go  in  for  action,  for  conduct.  We  say  that  the  world  does  not 
judge  you  by  what  you  beheve,  but  by  what  you  do.  And  there  is  a  measure  of 
truth  in  it,  of  course.  But  are  we  so  ignorant  as  not  to  know  the  power  of  a  mighty 
conviction  ?  Do  we  not  realise  the  tremendous  energy  of  a  fruit-yielding  root 
of  belief  ?  It  is  not  enough,  therefore,  that  we  say  we  do  this  or  that  that  is 
good.  That  is  bearing  fruit  upward  ;  but  the  power  to  bear  fruit  and  the  quahty 
of  the  fruit,  its  power  to  feed  and  refresh  the  world,  will  be  hmited,  be  sure  of  it, 
by  the  amount  of  strength  the  roots  of  the  fife  have  gathered.  They  must  go 
deep  and  far,  or  the  branches  vAW.  soon  be  stunted  and  starved.  This  same  principle 
of  root  and  fruit  appUes  to  the  church  of  Christ.  There  have  been  times  of  a 
mistaken  accent  on  either  of  the  two  phases  of  Ufe.  Sometimes  the  church  has 
seemed  to  exist  for  its  own  sake,  caring  for  itself,  counting  its  task  ended  when  it 
had  done  so,  and  careless  of  that  true  fruit-bearing  which  is  meant  to  be  its  glory. 
Then  there  have  been  times  when,  in  the  joy  of  fruit-bearing,  the  inner  strength 
of  the  church  has  been  neglected.  That  is  a  strong  accent  on  the  root  of  the  church, 
its  creed,  its  inner  Ufe.  On  the  other  hand,  who  has  not  observed  the  weakness 
of  the  mere  gathering  together  of  people  around  no  particular  standard  ?  That 
is  one  extreme.  There  are  not  a  few  churches  which  touch  the  other  extreme. 
The  preaching  is  faithfiil  and  truthful,  the  people  are  well  indoctrinated  in  the 
faith,  they  hold  the  great  truths  of  the  gospel  without  wavering,  but  they  make 
no  successful  onslaught  on  the  world.  And  the  same  need  and  the  same  danger 
are  not  only  in  the  pulpit,  but  also  in  the  pew.  I  suppose  there  are  few  chvu-ches 
whose  people  are  not  called  to  constant  care  in  maintaining  the  balance  between 
the  demands  of  their  own  church,  which  is  root-work,  and  the  demands  of  the 
kingdom  at  large,  which  is  fruit- work.  It  appears  markedly  in  the  matt€r  of 
benevolence.  There  are  always  a  few  to  whom  it  is  almost  positive  pain  to  see 
money  going  away  from  the  church.  Some  resent  aU  that  goes  to  foreign  missions  ; 
some  all  that  goes  out  anywhere.     They  rejoice  far  more  in  a  large  gift  for  local 


110  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  xxxvil 

expenses  than  they  do  in  a  large  gift  for  charity  or  missions.  On  the  other  hand, 
there  are  some  who  neglect  the  demands  of  the  home  church,  chafe  under  caJla 
for  it,  are  attracted  by  the  outlying  thing.  I  have  not  described  the  rank  and 
file  of  any  church  in  these  extremes,  but  I  have  stated  the  two  broad  lines  of  peril 
to  which  a  church  is  subject.  For  each  is  a  peril.  One  is  a  magnifying  of  the  root 
and  a  stunting  of  the  fruit ;  the  other  is  a  magnifying  of  the  fruit  and  a  neglect  of 
the  root.  But  you  cannot  express  the  essential  fact  of  rooting  and  fruit-bearine 
in  terms  of  money.  It  yields  to  no  terms  except  that  of  life.  Leaving  the  chtircE 
as  an  organisation,  let  your  mind  turn  again  to  yourself  as  a  living  Christian, 
meant  to  take  root  downward  and  bear  fruit  upward.  The  Word  makes  plain 
what  the  rooting  soil  of  the  Christian  must  be.  "  That  ye,  being  rooted  and 
grounded  in  love,  may  grow  up  into  Him  in  all  things."  Of  the  early  Christians 
it  was  said,  "  See  how  they  love  one  another."  The  strength  of  the  church  in 
history  has  been  the  intimate  fellowship  that  has  bound  its  people  together  and 
made  them  one  body.  Its  inner  power  has  been  in  large  part  in  its  being  rooted 
in  love.  But  not  in  that  alone.  The  Word  again  bids  us  be  rooted  and  built 
up  in  Christ  Himself.  Therein  lies  real  power,  the  sending  of  the  life  root  down 
deeper  and  deeper  into  Him,  until  the  nourishment  of  Ufe  comes  from  Him.  We 
have  seen  numberless  enterprises  start  in  the  name  of  religion,  flourish  as  did  the 
seed  of  the  parable  and  presently  wither  away,  their  root  not  rurming  down  into 
feeding  soil.  And  what  has  thus  appeared  in  a  large  way  appears  in  many  a  life 
in  the  small  way.  Men  individually  also  are  striving  to  bear  fruit  without  rooting 
in  Christ,  without  drawing  the  very  life  sap  of  their  beings  from  Him.  God  keep 
His  church  true  to  its  soil,  rooting  it  in  love,  rooting  it  in  Him  who  is  the  very  lire 
of  God  revealed  to  us  men  for  our  salvation.     (C  B.  McAfee,  D.D.) 

Ver.  33.  He  shall  not  come  into  this  city. — The  momentous  issues  involved  in 
Sennacherib's  defeat : — We  do  not,  perhaps,  realise  the  magnitude  of  the  crisis, 
not  alone  in  the  life  and  fortunes  of  Isaiah,  but  in  the  history  of  the  Jews,  and, 
in  !eed,  of  the  world  at  large.  It  is  not  too  much  to  say  that  if  Sennacherib  had 
taken  Jerusalem,  in  all  human  probability  the  Jews  would  have  ceased  to  exist 
as  a  nation,  and  the  world  would  not  have  been  prepared  for  the  coming  of  Christ. 
They  had  not  yet  reached  a  point  in  their  training  at  which  the  national  life  and 
religion  could  have  survived  such  a  calamity  as  that  which  a  century  later  overtook 
Jerusalem  in  the  time  of  Jeremiah ;  and  there  is  every  reason  to  believe  that  had  they 
been  carried  captives  now,  they  would  simply  have  been  absorbed  into  heathenism, 
as  the  ten  tribes  doubtless  were.  {Edward  Orubb,  31. A.)  Jerusalem  and 
Leyden : — The  siege  of  Jerusalem  reminds  us  of  the  siege  of  Leyden  in  later  days. 
WiUiam  the  Silent  (as  Hezekiah  had  done  before  him)  put  his  sole  trust  for  deliver- 
ance in  God.  On  the  last  night  of  the  siege,  and  when  help  from  man  seemed 
hopeless,  God  came  to  their  aid,  and  with  His  ocean  and  tempest  delivered  Leyden, 
and  struck  such  terror  into  their  enemies,  that  when  the  morning  dawnea,  the 
Spaniards  had  fled,  panic-struck,  during  the  darkness.  Leyden  was  relieved, 
and  every  person  within  its  walls  repaired  to  the  great  church  to  return  thanks  to 
Almighty  God.     {Sunday  School  Chronicle.)        Deliverance  : — The  history  of  God's 

Seople  is  one  oft-repeated  story  of  deliverance.  Years  ago,  the  Sultan  of  Turkey 
eclared  that  every  Christian  missionary  would  be  banished  on  a  certain  day.  The 
Christians  met  in  earnest  prayer,  and  one  said,  "  The  great  Sultan  of  the  universe 
can  change  all  this."  He  did.  The  Sultan  of  Turkey  died  on  the  very  day  he  had 
named  for  the  expulsion  of  the  missionaries,  and  they  were  allowed  to  remain. 
{J.  S.  Drummond.) 

Ver.  36.  Then  the  angel  of  the  Lord  went  forth. — The  destruction  of  Senna- 
cherib's army: — The  narrative  does  not  say  here  (but  see  xxx.  30,  31)  what 
secondary  means,  if  any,  were  used.  But  it  does  not  exclude  the  use  of  secondary 
means.  As  Dean  Plumptre  remarks,  a  modern  historian  would  dwell  on  the  de- 
tails of  the  pestilence.  To  Isaiah,  who  had  learnt  to  see  in  the  winds  the  messengers 
of  God  (Psa.  civ.  4),  it  was  nothing  else  than  the  "  angel  of  the  Lord."  {Expository 
Times.)  A  parallel  in  English  history  : — In  English  history  there  is  a  striking 
parallel  to  the  events  of  this  period  of  Jewish  history.  Edward  vi.,  under  the 
guardianship  of  Cranmer,  had  established  a  pure  form  of  religious  worship  in 
England.  On  his  death.  Queen  Mary  upset  everything,  and  drove  into  retire- 
ment those  who  escaped  the  fires  of  Smithneld  for  their  allegiance  to  the  Protestant 
faith.     With  Elizabeth  a  new  era  dawned,  and  the  religious  life  of  the  country 


OHAF.  xxxvni.]  ISAIAH.  Ill 

displayed  itself  in  great  enthusiasm,  resulting  in  the  overthrow  of  the  Armada. 
The  reign  of  Ahaz  was  like  unto  that  of  Mary;  with  the  accession  of  Hezekiah 
begins  a  reign  like  unto  that  of  Elizabeth,  having  in  its  course  the  magnificent 
defeat  of  Sennacherib's  hosts  by  the  arm  of  the  Lord.     {B.  Blake,  B.D.) 

Ver.  38.  His  sons  smote  Mm  with  the  sword. — Sennacherib's  ignominy  : — The 
sacred  history  would  seem  to  imply  that  this  disastrous  end  came  at  once;  but 
here  twenty  years  of  ignominy  count  for  nothing.  "  The  mills  of  God  grind  slowly, 
but  they  grind  to  powder."  Sennacherib  died  in  681  B.C.,  some  twelve  years  after 
Hezekiah.  (B.  Blake,  B.D. )  SennacheriVs  sons : — The  two  parricides  fled 
to  the  land  of  Ararat,  therefore  to  Central  Armenia;  Armenian  history  derives 
the  tribes  of  the  Sassimians  and  Arzrunians  from  them.  From  the  royal  house  o£ 
the  latter,  among  whom  the  proper  name  Sennacherib  was  common,  sprang  Leo 
the  Armenian,  whom  Genesius  describes  as  of  Assyrio-Armenian  blood.  K  this 
is  so,  no  fewer  than  ten  Byzantine  emperors  may  be  regarded  as  descendants  of 
Sennacherib.  {F.  Delitzsch,  D.D.)  Humiliation  of  Napoleon  I. : — Napoleon 
said  that  "  God  was  always  on  the  side  of  the  biggest  battalions,"  and  God  flung 
the  lie  back  into  his  teeth.  {S.  K.  Hocking.)  The  end  of  worldly  ambition: — 
Take  the  greatest  rulers  that  ever  sat  upon  a  throne.  Alexander,  who  wept 
because  there  were  no  more  nations  left  to  conquer,  at  last  set  fire  to  a  city  and 
died  in  debauch.  Hannibal  died  from  poison  administered  by  himself.  Csesar, 
having  conquered  three  hundred  cities,  was  stabbed  by  his  best  friends. 
{Q,  8.  Bowea.) 


CHAPTER    XXXVnL 


Vbbs.  1-8.  In  those  days  was  Hezekiah  sick  unto  (liQaXIx.^— Hezekiah^ s  sick- 
ness :  the  historical  framework  .-—It  cannot  surprise  us  now  to  be  carried  back 
to  the  time  when  Jerusalem  was  still  under  the  despotic  sceptre  of  Assyria,  since 
the  purpose  of  the  concluding  piece  (xxxvii.  36-38)  was  merely  in  anticipation 
to  complete  the  picture  of  the  last  Assyrian  troubles,  by  relating  their  termina- 
tion as  foretold  by  Isaiah  (xxxi.  8).  (F.  Delitzsch,  D.D.)  The  parallel  passage 
(2  Kings  XX.  1-11)  varies  more  from  that  before  us  than  in  the  preceding  chapter. 
So  far  as  they  are  parallel,  the  narrative  in  Kings  is  more  minute  and  circum- 
stantial, and  at  the  same  time  more  exactly  chronological  in  its  arrangement. 
On  the  other  hand,  the  Psalm  is  wholly  wanting  in  that  passage.  All  these  cir- 
cumstances favour  the  conclusion  that  the  text  before  us  is  the  first  draft, 
and  the  other  a  repetition  by  the  hand  of  the  same  writer.  (J.  A.  Alexander.) 
Hezekiah' s  sickness  and  recovery : — This  sickness  and  recovery  of  Hezekiah  from 
the  gates  of  death,  was  an  event  of  such  national  importance  as  made  it  properly 
find  a  place  here,  as  well  as  in  the  historical  books.  For  the  throne  of  David, 
M  far  as  we  know,  was  without  an  heir  at  this  moment;  and  Hezekiah's  death 
might  have  been  followed  by  some  such  interregnum,  anarchy,  and  seizure  of 
the  crown  by  a  soldier,  as  hastened  the  downfall  of  the  kingdom  of  Ephraim. 
Such  a  failure  in  the  succession,  in  times  of  national  depression  and  disorganisa- 
tion, would  be  pregnant  with  evil  even  in  England  now;  and  we  must  remember 
that  in  Judea  then,  as  in  all  Eastern  and  patriarchal  governments  still,  the  personal 
character  of  the  hereditary  sovereign  was  of  an  importance  to  the  people  which 
it  has  to  a  great  degree,  though  not  utterly,  lost  in  every  country  of  Europe  except 
Russia.  Let  us  contrast  the  character  and  acts  of  Hezekiah  with  those  of  his 
immediate  predecessor  and  successor,  and  we  shall  see  of  what  moment  it  was 
that  the  interval  by  which  his  reign  separated  theirs  should  be  prolonged  fifteen 
years;  and  especially  when  the  country  needed  a  hand  disciplined  by  experience 
and  guided  by  faith  to  recover  it  from  the  moral  and  material  disorganisation  into 
which  (as  we  know  from  Isaiah's  discourses)  it  had  fallen  during  the  Assyrian 
supremacy.  And  thus  this  crisis  in  the  personal  life  of  Hezekiah — the  fact  cannot 
be  denied,  though  here,  as  in  so  many  Uke  cases,  our  philosophy  cannot  trace 
out  the  connection  of  cause  and  effect — became  the  type  and  symbol  of  the  like 
crisis  in  the  life  of  the  nation:  it,  too,  was  sick  unto  death,  and  was  granted  a 
new  period  of  life  by  God  after  it  was  past  the  help  of  man.  {Sir  E.  Strachey, 
Bart.)        Hezekiah's  disease : — When  the  prophet  first  came  to  him  he  addressed 


112  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap  xxxvm. 

him  in  words  clearly  indicating  the  gravity  of  the  disease.  "  Thus  saith  the 
Lord,  Set  thine  house  in  order,"  &c.  We  cannot,  therefore,  think  that  it  was 
an  ordinary  simple  boil  with  which  the  king  was  affected.  Nor  have  we  any 
ground  for  supposing,  as  some  have  suggested,  that  the  disease  waa  bubo-plague, 
which  does  not  occur  as  an  isolated  case,  and  we  have  no  evidence  to  lead  us  to 
think  that  any  epidemic  of  such  a  disease  prevailed.  But  it  might  have  been, 
and  probably  was,  a  carbuncle,  which  is  often  a  most  severe  and  painful  thing, 
endangering  and  often  terminating  the  life  of  the  sufferer.  For  this  a  poultice  of 
figs  would  be  an  appropriate  local  remedy,  as  in  the  present  day  are  cataplasms 
of  various  kinds.  But  doubtless  the  recovery  of  the  king  was  through  Divine 
interposition,  by  which  the  danger  to  hfe  was  averted,  and  of  which  Isaiah's 
prescription  was  but  a  symbol  The  answer  to  his  prayer,  accompanied  by  the 
promise  that  on  the  third  day  he  should  go  up  to  the  house  of  the  Lord,  is  sufficient 
evidence  that  the  cure  of  a  disease  by  which  he  had  been  brought  to  death's  door, 
was  not  brought  about  by  natural  means.  {Sir  Risdon  Bennett,  M.D.,  LL.D.) 
What  was  HezeHah's  disease  ? — My  friend.  Dr.  Lauder  Brunton,  tells  me  that  he 
has  been  led  to  view  the  disease  as  '  tonsillitis,"  from  the  similarity  of  the  symptoms 
described  by  Isaiah  with  those  of  some  cases  of  quinsy  (tonsillitis).  "  In  many 
cases,"  says  Dr.  Brunton,  "  that  I  have  seen,  the  pains  in  the  bones  have  been 
so  severe  as  to  attract  the  attention  of  the  patient,  to  the  exclusion  of  all  mention 
of  sore  throat.  If  Hezekiah  suffered  from  tonsilhtis,  his  comparison  of  a  hon 
breaking  his  bones  is  a  very  apt  one,  and  the  swelling  of  the  tonsils  would  also 
explain  the  alteration  in  his  speech,  which  made  him  '  chatter  like  a  crane  or  a 
swallow.'  The  dried  figs  would  be  almost  the  only  poultice  that  could  be  applied 
to  the  boil  in  his  fauces,  and  the  rapid  maturation  of  the  inflamed  boQ  in  the 
throat  affected  by  the  poultice  would  explain  the  rapid  recovery."  {Ibid.)  Every 
disease  is  a  little  death: — I  have  heard  it  said  that  every  disease  is  a  Uttle  death; 
therefore  God  sends  us  many  httle  deaths  to  instruct  our  preparation  for  the 
great  death.  The  oftener  a  man  dies,  the  better  he  may  know  how  to  die  well 
{T,  Adams.)  A  sick  maiCs  glass : — I.  The  message  sent  to  Hezekiah  while 
he  was  sick.  1.  The  time.  2.  The  person  to  whom  it  was  sent.  3.  The  person 
by  whom  it  was  sent.  4.  The  message  itself.  "  Set  thine  house  in  order."  5.  The 
reason  why  the  king  is  advised  so  to  do.  "  Thou  shalt  die,  and  not  hve."  XL  Thb 
BEHAVIOUB  OF  Hezeeiah  when  he  had  heard  the  message.  1.  He  turned  his  face 
to  the  waU.  2.  He  prayed.  3.  He  wept  sore.  {R.  Hachet,  D.D.)  Hezekiah* a 
sickness : — 1.  These  words  present  to  our  view  a  person  (1)  of  the  highest  rank  (2)  in 
the  prime  of  life  (3)  and  the  full  tide  of  prosperity,  seized  with  a  mortal  disease: 
a  case  which  ought  strongly  to  remind  the  securest  of  us  all,  how  uncertain  our 
condition  is  here  on  earth.  2.  By  the  goodness  of  God,  a  prophet  was  sent  to 
him,  to  admonish  him  of  the  preparation  that  his  state  required:  and  the  same 
goodness  hath  provided  that  you  shall  all  be  frequently  admonished  of  the  same 
thing,  by  the  ministers  of  BUs  Word.  3.  The  admonition  given  him  was  the 
means  of" prolonging  his  days  in  peace  and  comfort:  and  those  given  you,  if  received 
in  a  right  manner,  may,  both  naturally  and  providentially,  contribute  to  procure 
you  longer  and  happier  hves  in  this  world  ;  and  will  certainly  lead  you  to  a  life 
of  eternal  happiness  in  the  next.  {T.  Seeker,  LL.D.)  The  duties  of  the  sick: — 
The  text  mentions  the  obligations  of  sick  persons — I.  RESPECTmo  their  fellow- 
CREATUEES.  "  Set  thine  house  in  order.'  This  direction  may  well  be  enlarged 
to  comprehend — 1.  Due  regulation  of  all  affairs  in  which  the  sick  are  interested. 

(1)  The  principal  point  at  which  men  should  aim  in  setthng  their  temporal  affairs 
is  justice;   and  one  of  the  most  evident   branches   of  justice  is  paying  debts. 

(2)  Besides  those  who  are  commonly  called  creditors,  there  is  another  sort — I 
mean  those  to  whom  we  have  done  injuries,  and  owe  restitution.  (3)  But  as 
we  have  all,  more  or  less,  need  to  ask  pardon,  another  of  om:  duties  evidently  is 
to  grant  it  in  ovu:  turn  :  when  others  have  used  us  ill,  not  to  "  recompense '  or 
wish  them  "evil  for  evil"  The  expedient  to  which,  it  is  said,  some  have  had 
recourse,  of  forgiving  if  they  die,  and  being  revenged  if  they  hve,  is  as  foohsh  a 
contrivance  to  deceive  themselves,  and  to  mock  God,  as  the  human  heart  can 
frame.  (4)  The  next  thing,  after  providing  for  the  payment  of  our  debts,  and 
which,  Uke  that,  should  be  done  in  health,  but  much  rather  in  sickness  than  not 
at  ail,  is  disposing  of  the  remainder  of  our  substance.  The  principal  rule  is,  that 
we  ought  not  to  be  governed  in  it  by  fanciful  fondnesses,  much  less  by  blamable 
resentments.  2.  Proper  advice  to  all  persons  with  whom  the  sick  are  connected. 
TT,  Respecting  more  immediately  God  and  their  own  souls.     "  Then  Heze- 


CHAP,  xxxvm.]  ISAIAH.  113 

kiah  prayed  unto  the  Lord."  His  prayer,  indeed,  if  the  whole  of  it  be  recorded 
in  Scripture,  was  only  that  he  might  recover;  a  request  which  for  the  public 
good  he  had  urgent  reasons  to  make  in  the  first  place.  And  that  being  instantly 
granted,  he  had  no  need  to  apply  further  to  God,  in  relation  to  his  sickness,  other- 
wise than  by  thanksgiving,  which  he  did.  But  they  who  have  more  extensive 
wants  at  that  time  are  both  authorised  and  bound  to  enlarge  in  proportion  the 
subject  of  their  addresses  to  the  throne  of  grace;  and  therefore  I  shall  endeavour 
to  comprehend  under  this  head  all  the  religious  duties  of  the  sick.  1.  The  first 
principle  of  all  regard  to  God  is  faith.  There  are  indeed  very  good  persons  who, 
in  illnesses,  are  tempted  to  partial,  or  even  total  unbelief.  And  if  any  seeming 
reasons  for  it  be  suggested  to  their  minds,  they  ought  to  inquire  after,  and  oppose 
to  them  reasonable  answers.  2.  SeK-examination.  3.  Such  repentance  as  our 
case  requires.  4.  The  sick  ought  to  be  very  constant  in  every  other  exercise  of 
private  piety.  For  as  they  axe  cut  off  from  active  life,  they  have  more  leisure 
for  religious  contemplation.  And  as  they  want  all  the  improvement  and  comfort 
which  they  can  have,  so  they  will  receive  the  most  of  both  by  frequent  lifting  up 
of  their  hearts  to  "  the  God  of  patience  and  consolation."  {Ibid.)  Hezekiah's 
sickness  and  recovery : — I.  This  sickness  was  very  qeievoxjs,  upon  several 
accounts.  1.  For  the  nature  of  the  disease,  which  is  supposed  to  have  been 
pestilential.  2.  The  pain  of  his  distemper  was  aggravated  with  the  sentence 
which  the  prophet  passed  upon  him  in  the  name  of  God.  The  hope  of  recovery, 
which  contributes  very  much  to  the  cure  of  any  distemper,  was  taken  away  from 
him.  3.  Hezekiah's  sickness  and  sentence  of  death  were  embittered  with  this 
consideration,  that  he  was  going  to  be  cut  off  in  the  strength  of  his  age.  This 
shortening  of  life  was  always  esteemed  as  one  of  the  calamities  of  our  mortal 
condition;  especially  in  so  high  and  happy  a  station  as  that  of  a  king.  David 
prayed  against  it,  saying,  "  0  my  God,  take  me  not  away  in  the  midst  of  my  age." 
4.  That  which  made  Hezekiah  more  loth  to  leave  the  world  at  this  time  was,  that 
he  had  no  child  to  succeed  him  in  his  throne.  IL  His  request  he  enforces  with 
the  following  arguments.  1.  He  begs  God  to  remember  how  he  had  walked 
before  Him  in  truth  and  with  a  perfect  heart.  2.  Whereas  other  kings  had 
been  too  apt  to  consiilt  their  ease  and  carnal  interests  in  the  practice  of  religion, 
Hezekiah  had  a  true  and  thorough  zeal  for  the  glory  of  God  in  all  that  he  did. 
m.  He  lu-ged  it  with  importunate  cries  and  tears,  which  prevailed  with  God 
TO  HEAR  HIM  AND  GRANT  HIS  REQUEST.  (W.  Reading,  M.A.)  Supreme  atten- 
tion to  spiritual  concerns  (with  Luke  x.  42) : — Let  us  reflect — I.  On  "  the  one 
THING  NEEDFUL,"  i.e.,  living  religion.  IL  On  the  consequent  duty  of 
"  SETTING  OUR  HOUSE  IN  ORDER,  knowing  that  we  shall  die,  and  not  live."  (IF. 
Graham.)  Hezekiah's  sincerity: — This  verse  (ver.  3)  is  not  an  angry  expostu- 
lation, nor  an  ostentatious  self-praise,  but  an  appeal  to  the  only  satisfactory 
evidence  of  his  sincerity.  (J.  A.  Alexander.)  Set  thine  house  in  order. — 
Human  mortality: — I.  We  have  here  set  before  us  the  fact  of  our  mortality. 
"  Thou  shalt  die,  and  not  live."  How  apt  we  are  to  think  of  other  people's 
death,  but  not  of  our  own.  We  are  ready  to  say.  "0!  it  was  no  wonder  that 
httle,  weak  infant  died — it  was  no  wonder  that  worn-out,  aged  man  or  woman 
died — it  was  no  wonder  that  sickly  person  died."  And  when  we  hear  of  sudden 
deaths,  by  some  strange  disease  or  accident,  we  have  a  secret  feeling  that  the  same 
thing  is  not  likely  to  happen  to  ourselves.  There  was  something  peculiar  in 
their  condition  or  circumstances,  which  made  them  more  open  than  ourselves 
to  that  awful  visitation.  Yet  why  all  this  foolish  hiding  of  the  truth?  Until 
we  are  able  boldly  and  peacefully  to  face  this  truth,  there  is  no  real  comfort  for 
us  in  this  world.  When  our  Almighty  Father  in  heaven  sends  to  us  such  a 
message  as  this,  "  Thou  shalt  die,  and  not  live,"  it  is  not  to  vex  and  to  distress 
us,  but  only  to  awaken  in  us  those  thoughts  which  are  needful  for  us  in  our  present 
state  of  bemg.  n.  How  we  are  to  "  set  our  house  in  order,"  so  as  to  be  able 
to  meet  with  calmness  both  the  actual  coming  of  death  and  the  thought  of  its 
coming.  With  the  best  of  men,  the  near  approach  of  that  last  dread  hour  is  a 
time  of  deep  solemnity.  1.  The  first  point  in  this  work  is  to  see  that  our  hope 
for  eternity  is  placed  upon  a  right  foundation;  and  none  other  can  be  found  but 
that  which  God  Himself  has  laid  for  us  to  build  on — namely,  His  own  free  mercies 
in  His  dear  Son,  Jesus  Christ.  2.  If  we  would  "  set  our  house  "  truly  "  in  order," 
we  must  remember  that  there  is  a  work  to  be  wrought  in  us,  as  well  as  for  us. 
"  Without  holiness  no  man  shall  see  the  Lord!  "  {J.  W.  Colenso,  D.D.)  Pre- 
paration  for  the  end  of  time: — I.  The  injunction  urged.  "  Set  thine  house  in 
VOL.  II. — 8 


114  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  xxxvm 

order."  We  refer — 1.  To  temporal  affairs.  This  is  evident  from  the  more 
literal  translation:  "  Give  charge  concerning  thine  house."  2.  To  spiritual 
matters.  II.  The  reasok.  "For  thou  shalt  die,  and  not  Uve."  1.  Death  is 
certain  for  aU.  2.  The  time  is  uncertain;  therefore,  it  is  every  one's  duty  to  be 
prepared.  3.  The  time  may  be  very  near.  4.  The  best  of  men  need  special 
preparation.  Hezekiah  was  not  a  bad  man,  but  he  had  a  special  message.  So 
God  often  sends  a  time  of  sickness  as  a  special  warning.  How  much  better  amd 
happier  will  every  man  be  if  he  has  set  his  house  in  order!  [Homilist.)  New 
Year's  thoughts : — The  first  Sunday  in  the  new  year  is  surely,  with  every  minister 
of  Christ  who  watcheth  with  the  eye  and  love  of  a  true  shepherd  over  his  flock, 
a  time   for —  1.  General  rebuke.      2.  Remonstrance.      3.  Godly  encoiiragement. 

1.  The  authoeity  of  the  commission.  It  came  directly  from  God  at  the  mouth 
of  His  prophet;  and  whatever  comes  from  God  must  be  characterised  by  God's 
attributes,  must  bear  the  impress  of  His  wisdom,  must  be  pregnant  with  the  piir- 
poses  of  His  love.  II.  The  suddenness  of  the  commission.  How  it  must 
have  startled  the  king  on  his  bed!  III.  The  substance  of  the  commission. 
"Set  thine  house  in  order" — this  is  the  direction;  "  for  thou  shalt  die,  and  not 
live  " — this  is  the  doom.  Thou  art  the  man  upon  whom  the  mark  is  set,  this 
carries  the  reflections  home.  When  shall  I  die?  How  shall  I  die?  Shall  I  die 
a  hard  or  a  peaceful  death?  Shall  I  die  as  an  impenitent  and  despairing  sinner, 
or  as  a  pardoned,  a  redeemed,  a  rejoicing  saint?  (T.  J.  Judkin.)  Preparation 
for  death: — Our  being  ready  for  death  will  make  it  come  never  the  sooner,  but 
much  the  easier;  and  those  that  are  fit  to  die  are  most  fit  to  live.  {31.  Henry.) 
Contemplating  the  time  of  death : — Perhaps  the  most  awful  moment  of  our  lives 
is  when  we  first  feel  in  danger  of  death.  All  our  past  life  then  seems  to  be  a  cloud 
of  words  and  shadows,  altogether  external  to  the  realities  of  the  soul.  Not  only 
childhood  and  youth,  happiness  and  sorrow,  eager  hopes  and  disturbing  fears, 
but  even  our  communion  with  God,  oiu-  faith  in  things  unseen,  our  self-knowledge, 
and  our  repentance,  seem  aUke  to  be  but  visions  of  the  memory.  All  has 
become  stem,  hard,  and  appalling.  It  is  as  if  it  were  the  beginning  of  a  new 
existence;  as  if  we  had  passed  under  a  colder  sky,  and  into  a  world  where 
every  object  has  a  sharpness  of  outhne  almost  too  severe  for  sight  to  bear.  Let 
us  see  what  we  ought  to  do  when  God  warns  us.  I.  We  must  ask  oubselves 
THIS  question.  Is  there  any  one  sin,  great  or  small,  of  the  flesh  or  of  the 
spirit,  that  we  willingly  and  knowingly  commit?  This  is,  in  fact,  the  crisis  of 
our  whole  spiritual  life.  By  consent  in  one  sin,  a  man  is  guilty  of  the 
whole  principle  of  rebellion.  A  holy  man  is  not  a  man  who  never  sins,  but 
who  never  sins  willingly.  A  sinner  is  not  a  man  who  never  does  anything  good, 
but  who  willingly  does  what  he  knows  to  be  evil.  The  whole  difference  lies 
within  the  sphere  and  compass  of  the  will.  II.  We  must  next  search  and  see 
whether  there  is  anything  in  which  our  heart  in  its  secret  affections 
is  at  variance  with  the  mind  of  God  ;  for  if  so,  then  so  far  our  whole  being 
is  at  variance  with  His.  m.  A  third  test  by  which  to  test  ourselves  is  the  posi- 
tive capacity  of  our  spmrruAL  being  for  the  bliss  of  heaven.  When  St. 
Paul  bids  us  to  follow  after  "  holiness,  without  which  no  man  shall  see  the  Lord," 
he  surely  meant  something  more  than  a  negative  quaUty.  Doubtless  he  meant 
by  "  hoUness  "  to  express  the  active  aspirations  of  a  spiritual  nature,  thirsting  for 
the  presence  of  God.  IV.  There  are  two  short  counsels  which  it  may  be  well 
to  add.  1.  That  we  strive  always  to  live  so  as  to  be  akin  to  the  state  of  just  men 
made  perfect.  2.  That  we  often  rehearse  in  life  the  last  preparation  we  should 
make  in  death.     {H.  E.  Manning,  D.D.)        Hezekiah  warned : — 1.  He  was  warned. 

2.  He  was  religiously  warned.  Isaiah  was  charged  with  the  intelligence.  3.  He 
was  considerately  warned.  He  was  not  to  die  on  the  morrow,  he  was  to  have 
time  to  set  his  house  in  order.  Sometimes  we  feel  as  if  we  would  rather  not  have 
that  time,  and  yet  there  is  a  merciful  dispensation  in  the  arrangement  which 
gives  a  man  an  opportunity  of  calmly  approaching  the  end.  (J.  Parker,  D.D.) 
"  Set  thine  house  in  order"  : — What  does  this  injunction  signify?  I.  That  we  are 
TO  give  account  of  our  stewardship.  II.  That  we  are  to  be  diligent 
IN  our  daily  work.  III.  We  must  leabn  to  leave  our  possessions,  and 
hold  ourselves  ready  to  depart.  (C.  Schwartz.)  The  habitual  thought 
of  death  not  painful : — The  time  will  of  necessity  come  when  to  every  man  that 
hves  these  words  will  be  spoken.  God  Himself  will  speak  them  in  the  manifest 
dealings  of  His  providence,  making  this  known  to  us  in  some  way  which  our 
own  hearts  will  instinctively  interpret.      Why  should  we  be  afraid  to  think  of 


CHAP.  XXXVIII.]  ISAIAH.  115 

death?  1.  Do  you  reply  that  there  is  in  man  a  natural  love  of  life?  No  doubt 
there  is.  But  what,  then,  is  that  true  life  which  hes  beyond,  and  to  which  the 
act  of  departure,  which  we  call  death,  is  but  the  entrance?  2.  Or,  do  you  say 
that  we  are  naturally  repelled  from  mortality,  and  that  we  shrink  from  thinking 
of  the  lifeless  and  decaying  flesh?  I  admit  it,  and  there  is  a  necessary  and  whole- 
some lesson  in  the  bitterness  of  it,  for  how  should  we  know  what  sin  was  without 
some  httle  conception  of  what  death  was?  But  I  plead  that  this  is  but  for  a  time, 
till  the  body  shall  rise  again  in  glory.  The  horror  is  to  those  who  live  and  watch 
the  dead.  3.  Or,  do  you  say  that  you  fear  death  because  it  will  stop  for  ever 
all  the  schemes  and  activities  of  life?  Do  you  think  that  the  state  into  which 
we  shall  enter  will  be  a  passive  calm  ?  Every  hint  and  word  in  Scripture  appears 
to  me  to  point  to  something  very  different.  4.  Or,  do  you  say  that  you  shrink 
from  the  idea  of  never  seeing  again  the  blue  skies  and  the  sweet  flowers,  and  losing 
all  the  sights  and  sounds  that  make  this  world  beautiful?  Again,  I  think  that 
you  are  wrong.  Certaialy  all  the  imagery  of  the  Bible  suggests  a  different  con- 
clusion. 5.  Or,  do  you  say  that  you  dread  death  because  you  cannot  bear  to 
think  of  parting  from  those  you  love,  and  losing  that  sweet  intercourse,  and  that 
happy  interchange  of  mutual  affection,  which  spring  from  love?  Well,  all 
sepjkration  is  painful;  but  in  itself,  and  of  necessity,  this  separation  need  only 
be  for  a  time — a  brief  parting,  with  an  eternal  reunion  beyond  it,  when,  free  from 
the  little  hindrances  that  mar  a  perfect  love  on  earth,  we  shall  renew  a  pure  affec- 
tion, consecrated  for  ever  by  the  seen  presence  of  God.  6.  Do  you  say  that  yon 
dread  to  think  of  death  because  you  are  not  certain  of  your  state  before  G<xi? 
Ah !  here  we  reach  the  deepest  secret  of  all,  the  true  source  of  the  uneasiness  with 
which  men  think  of  their  mortaUty.  "  The  sting  of  death  is  sin,"  &c.  The 
Eternal  Father  is  ready  to  forgive  ;  the  Eternal  Son  sufficient  to  atone  ;  the 
Eternal  Spirit  almighty  to  convert  and  sanctify;  all  ready;  nay,  all  pleading, 
inviting,  expostulating,  entreating.  7.  Do  you  say  that  you  dread  to  think 
of  death  because  the  thought  saddens  and  darkens  life  ?  Surely  this  is  no  longer 
true,  if,  accepted  in  Christ  Jesus,  we  have  peace  with  God.  {E.  Garbett,  M.A.) 
Preparing  for  the  end: — I.  Preparation  for  death  is  an  immediate  duty,  because 

YOU  CAKNOT  TELL  WHAT  A  DAY  MAY  BRING  FORTH.        II.   It  OUGHT  TO  BE  A  CALM, 

DELiBEEATE,  AND  INTELLIGENT  PREPARATION.  Not  with  panic,  or  haste.  Or  gloom. 
m.  There  is  a  God  to  meet,  whose  eyes  will  inspect  the  house.     IV.  Thebb 

ARE  important  MATTERS  TO  BE  ADJUSTED  ARISING  FROM  OUR  HUMAN  RELA- 
TIONS. {HomUetic  Review.)  Thou  shalt  die. — Death: — I.  Death.  1.  In  its 
causes.  The  primary  cause  of  death  was  sin.  But  the  immediate  and  acting 
cause  of  mortality  is  the  frailty  of  our  bodies.  2.  In  its  nature.  What  is  it  to 
die?  It  is  not  to  terminate  our  existence.  We  are  well  assured  that  nothing  in 
being  can  cease  to  be,  either  of  itself  or  by  the  influence  of  other  finite  beings, 
but  only  by  an  exercise  of  the  almighty  power  of  the  Creator.  To  die  is  to  undergo 
a  solution  of  our  present  mode  of  existence,  in  which  the  immaterial  soul  is  severed 
from  the  material  body,  and  exists  thenceforth  for  a  time  alone;  whilst  the  body, 
bereft  of  Ufe,  loses  the  qualities  necessary  to  preserve  its  substance,  and  becomes 
disorganised,  and  resolved  into  its  primitive  elements.  How  near  is  this  world 
to  the  next !  God's  wisdom  and  goodness  have  appointed  a  bed  of  sickness  to  be 
the  general  precursor  of  death.  By  this  He  repeats  solemnly,  and  enforces.  His 
thousand  other  warnings  to  us,  and,  in  our  seclusion  from  the  engagements  and 
pleasures  of  time,  gives  us  a  further  opportunity  of  becoming  familiar  with  the 
things  of  eternity,  and  making  our  peace  with  Him.  But  His  wisdom  discovers 
in  what  ways  our  deceitful  hearts  will  teach  us  to  abuse  His  mercy,  and  He  provides 
against  the  evil.  Had  we  always  the  warning  and  opportvmity  of  sickness,  we 
might  neglect  Grod  tiU  it  was  given  to  us  ;  and  God  has,  perhaps,  therefore, 
appointed  that  death  should  sometimes  come  utnwamed.  3.  In  its  consequences. 
I  will  not  view  them  as  they  affect  the  body :  let  us  leave  it,  lifeless  and  cold, 
in  the  narrow  coffin  and  the  quiet  grave,  awaiting  the  trumpet  of  the  archangel. 
The  effects  of  death  on  the  soul  include,  doubtless,  the  enlargement  of  its  capacities, 
as  well  as  its  entrance  on  eternal  joy  or  misery.  U.  Its  personality.  "  Thou." 
The  young.  Those  in  the  prime  of  life.  Those  of  mature  years,  &c.  m.  Its 
CERTAINTY.  "  Thou  shalt  die."  1.  What  has  become  of  all  our  race — Adam, 
Noah,  &c.  ?  2.  Where  are  the  multitudes  that  have  peopled  your  town  in  past 
days?  All  who  have  lived  before  us  have  died,  and  all  now  living  are  dying. 
(J.  Badcock,  LL.B.)  Death  sometimes  svdden  and  unexpected: — I  have  known 
the  bride  to  expire  on  her  bridal  day,  the  shopkeeper  when  serving  his  customers. 


116  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [ohap.  xxxvm. 

the  player  on  the  stage,  the  clergyraan  in  his  pulpit,  the  lowly  Christian  on  his 
knees  in  prayer,  the  swearer  uttering  his  curse,  the  thief  with  his  plunder  at  his 
side.  (Ibid.)  The  human  body,  beautiful  yet  frail: — The  beautiful  frame  of 
man  it  is  impossible  to  consider  unaffected  by  its  frailty.  A  distinguished  philo- 
sopher, on  rising  from  the  study  of  the  human  frame,  was  so  impressed  with  this, 
and  with  the  complicated  nature  of  its  machinery,  and  the  numberless  parts  that 
must  all  duly  discharge  their  functions  to  continue  existence,  from  moment  to 
moment,  that  he  trembled  and  feared  to  move,  lest,  by  disordering  some  one  of 
them,  he  should  fall  on  the  floor  a  corpse.  {Ibid.)  "  The  biography  of  death  " 
was  the  title  of  a  sermon  preached  by  a  famous  London  minister.  For  death 
has  had  a  parentage,  birth,  history,  a  career  of  conquest  and  victory,  a  coronation 
and  kingdom,  a  ghastly  dining-hall  and  retinue  of  hired  servants,  and,  finall)', 
a  record  of  disaster,  defeat,  and  death !  The  last  enemy  to  be  destroyed  is  Death, 
{Homiletic  Review.)  Hezekidh  warned: — Is  there  any  peculiar  significance  in 
the  announcement  ?  There  ought  not  to  be.  All  Ufe  is  a  warning  that  we  are 
going  to  die.  [J.  Parker,  D.D.)  Facing  death: — When  the  physician  told 
General  Grant  that  his  disease  was  fatal,  and  might  quickly  do  its  dire  work,  for 
a  httle  while  he  seemed  to  lose,  not  courage,  but  hope.  It  was  like  a  man  gazing 
into  his  open  grave.  He  was  in  no  way  dismayed,  but  the  sight  was  still  appalling. 
The  conqueror  looking  at  his  inevitable  conqueror  :  the  stem  soldier  to  whom 
armies  had  surrendered,  watching  the  approach  of  that  enemy  to  whom  even 
he  must  yield.  [H.  0.  Mackey.)  Looking  over  the  brink: — A  godly  minister 
who  was  fond  of  visiting  his  sick  and  dying  people  on  Saturday  afternoons,  was 
asked  by  a  brother  minister,  who  met  him  on  this  errand  one  day,  why  he  did 
this,  instead  of  staying  at  home  and  preparing  his  sermons.  He  replipd,  "  I  like 
to  take  a  look  over  the  brink."  Sometimes  it  is  a  blessing  to  a  man  to  be  brought 
suddenly  to  the  brink  in  his  own  Ufe,  to  look  over  it  seriously  and  prayerfully, 
and  then  to  take  back  into  life  the  lessons  he  has  learned  there.  (Sunday  School 
Chronicle.)  Death,  the  ringing  of  the  curfew  bell: — William  the  Conqueror  estab- 
lished the  ringing  of  curfew  bells.  The  meaning  of  that  curfew  bell,  sounded 
at  eventime,  was,  that  all  the  fires  should  be  put  out  or  covered  with  ashes,  all 
the  lights  should  be  extinguished,  and  the  people  should  go  to  bed.  Soon  for  us 
the  curfew  will  sound.  The  fires  of  our  life  will  be  banked  up  in  ashes,  and  we 
shall  go  into  the  sleep,  the  cool  sleep,  I  hope  the  blessed  sleep.  But  there  is  no 
gloom  in  that  if  we  are  ready.  The  safest  thing  that  a  Christian  can  do  is  to  die. 
{T.  De  Witt  Talmage,  D.D.)  A  true  life  the  best  preparation  for  death: — An  old 
slave,  when  told  by  his  doctor  that  he  was  near  death,  said:  "  Bless  you,  doctor, 
don't  let  that  bother  you;  that's  what  I've  been  living  for."  {Sunday  School 
Chronicle.) 

Vers.  2,  3.  Then  HezeMali  turned  Ms  face  toward  the  walL — Hezekiah'a 
face  turned  to  the  wall: — The  obvious  meaning  is  th  wall  of  the  r^om,  towards 
which  he  turned,  not  merely  to  collect  his  thoughts,  or  to  conceal  his  tiars,  but 
as  a  natural  expression  of  strong  feeling.  (J.  A.  Alexander.)  Self -retirement  : — 
The  sick  man  turns  his  face  to  the  wall  in  order  to  retire  into  himself  and  God. 
(F.  Delitzsch,  D.D.)  A  natural  shrinking  from  dea'h : — The  voice  sounded 
natura  ly  as  it  pleaded  with  the  Lord.  The  old  man  wants  to  die;  he  says,  I 
am  living  amongst  strangers:  who  is  he?  and  who  is  she?  what  are  those  peopl  >? 
what  is  their  occupation?  I  do  not  know  where  I  am:  I  will  Uve  in  the  sacred 
past.  But  the  young  man  in  m  dd  e  life  does  not  want  to  die.  The  child  does 
not  want  to  go  to  rest  at  nine  o'clock  in  the  morning.  We  feel  as  if  we  had  a 
call  to  work.  {J.  Parker,  D.D.)  Hezekiah'a  face  turned  to  the  wall : — The 
place  of  honour  in  an  Eastern  room  is  an  angle  of  the  apartment,  so  that  which- 
ever side  Hezekiah  turned  upon,  his  face  would  be  to  a  wall,  and  screened  from 
observation.  {E.  W.  Shalders,  B.A.)  A  good  man's  plea : — 1.  Holy  men 
did  sometimes  make  mention  of  their  good  deeds  before  the  Lord,  in  their  prayer 
to  Him  (Neh.  xiii.  14;  Jer.  xv.  15-17).  2.  When  they  did  make  mention  of  their 
good  deeds  before  the  Lord,  they  did  it,  for  the  most  part,  when  they  were  in 
trouble.  3.  They  did  not  mention  them  as  meritorious  causes  of  what  they  prayed 
for  (Neh.  xiii.  22).  4.  The  reason  why  they  mention  their  good  deeds  at  such 
time  is — (1)  That  they  might  the  more  inchne  the  Lord  to  mercy;  for  the  Lord 
is  more  ready  to  show  mercy  to  those  who  endeavour  to  live  according  to  His 
laws  than  to  those  who  neglect  them.  (2)  That  they  might  sustain  themselves 
against  the  faint-heartedness  which  might  assail   them,  being  prone  by  natura 


CHAP,  xxxvm.]  ISAIAH.  117 

thereto;  for  the  testimony  of  a  good  conscience  produceth  boldness  towards 
God  (2  Cor.  i.  12  ;  1  Pet.  iii.  21).  Besides,  Hezekiah  might  have  a  special  reason 
to  move  him  to  mention  his  good  deeds,  and  it  is  this,  because  the  Lord  had  made 
a  promise  to  David  (1  Kings  ii.  4).  At  this  time  Hezekiah  had  not  a  child  to 
succeed  him  in  the  throne.  [W.  Day,  M.A.)  And  HezeMali  wept  sore. — 
Hezekiah's  tears  : — In  these  tears  we  can  discover — I.  A  dkead  of  death  common 
TO  HUMAN  NATtTRE.  1.  This  dread  of  death  has  a  moral  cause.  What  is  the 
cause?  A  consciousness  of  sin,  and  an  apprehension  of  its  consequences.  On 
the  assumption  that  man  would  have  died,  had  he  not  sinned,  his  death,  we  pre- 
sume, in  that  case,  would  have  been  free  from  aU  that  is  terrible.  2.  This  dread 
of  death  has  a  moral  antidote.  "  0  death,  where  is  thy  sting?  "  &c.  Those 
who  apply  this  remedy  hail  rather  thsai  dread  mortality;  they  "  desire  to  depart," 
&c.  n.  The  iNABtLiTr  of  the  world  to  believe  h0MAN  nature.  Hezekiah 
was  a  monarch.  His  home  was  a  palace,  and  the  great  men  of  the  nation  were  his 
willing  attendants.  Whatever  wealth  could  procure,  he  could  get  at  his  bidding; 
and  yet  with  so  much  of  the  world,  what  could  it  do  for  him?  Could  it  raise  him 
from  his  suffering  couch?  Nay!  Could  it  hush  one  sigh,  or  wipe  one  tear  away? 
No!  In  truth,  the  probability  is  that  his  earthly  possessions  and  splendour 
added  to  the  awfulness  of  the  idea  of  death.  The  world  has  no  power  to  help 
the  soul  in  its  deepest  griefs  and  wants.  The  soul  weeps  in  palaces.  III.  The 
power  of  prayer  to  help  human  nature.  These  tears  were  the  tears  of  prayer 
as  well  as  of  fear,  and  his  fear  stimulated  his  prayer.  And  what  was  the  result 
of  this  prayer?  "  I  have  seen  thy  tears:  behold,  I  will  add  unto  thy  days  fifteen 
years."  This  is  a  remarkable  instance  of  the  power  of  prayer,  and  is  recorded 
here  to  encourage  our  suffering  nature  to  direct  its  cries  to  heaven.  {Homilist.) 
Hezekiah'' s  distress  and  prayer : — Hezekiah  had  tried  to  serve  God  faithfully, 
and  had  been  taught  to  expect  length  of  days  as  his  reward.  The  very  conscious- 
ness of  his  integrity,  and  of  his  desire  to  honour  the  Lord  in  the  presence  of  his 
people,  must  have  added  to  his  distress.  What  had  been  the  fatal  flaw  in  his 
service  that  had  brought  upon  him  this  unexpected  doom?  Life  and  immortality 
had  not  been  brought  to  light.  Death,  for  him,  seemed  banishment  from  the 
presence  of  the  Lord.  In  the  grave  he  could  not  praise  Him;  dead,  he  could 
not  celebrate  His  glory  (vers.  11,  18).  Twice  he  says,  "  Thou  wilt  make  an  end 
of  me."  We  seldom  realise  how  much  we  owe  to  that  resurrection  which  lifted 
the  veil  that  was  spread  over  all  nations.  But  Hezekiah  teaches  us  how  much 
strength,  consolation,  and  joy  may  be  found  in  communion  with  God  in  this  life. 
His  earthly  experience,  which  he  thought  was  to  come  to  an  end,  was,  after  all, 
part  of  the  life  eternal.  The  Hebrew's  vivid  sense  of  God's  presence  with  him 
in  this  life,  were  it  more  generally  ours,  would  make  our  fear  more  reverent,  our 
obedience  and  submission  more  complete,  and  wovild  put  an  end  to  much  of  that 
practical  atheism  which  prevails  in  the  world  of  to-day.  Let  us  not  miss  the 
consolation  of  the  message  Isaiah  brought  to  his  king,  "  I  have  heard  thy  prayer, 
I  have  seen  thy  tears."  Our  prayers  may  be  ignorant  and  shortsighted,  we 
may  not  know  what  to  pray  for  as  we  ought,  but  our  tears  are  not  overlooked. 
When  our  sadness  is  speechless,  the  scalding  tears  that  tell  oiu*  heart's  woe,  move 
the  Divine  pity,  and  plead  for  us  more  e  oquently  than  any  words  we  can  put 
into  frame.  "  In  all  our  afflictions.  He  is  afflicted  " — to  believe  this  is  to  be 
consoled.     {E.    W.  Shalders,  B.A.)        Hezekiah' s  prayer  in  affliction  : — I.   Thb 

CIRCUMSTANCES  THAT  LED  TO  THE  UTTERANCE  OF  THIS  PRAYER.       1.  Hezekiah  WAS 

sorely  afflicted.  The  exact  nature  of  his  disease  may  be  difficult  to  determine. 
There  is  no  ground  for  the  vague  supposition  that  he  was  afflicted  with  the  plague 
which  destroyed  the  Assyrians.  The  malady  was  probably  "  a  fever  boil  " 
(Ewald),  or  "  a  single  carbuncle  formed  under  the  back  of  the  head  "  (Thenius), 
or  "  fever  terminating  in  abscess  "  (Meade).  The  word  shechin,  translated  boil, 
means  strictly  inflammation.  The  crude  state  of  medical  science  then  would 
make  many  diseases  fatal  which  are  now  easily  removed.  The  body  is  subject 
to  multifarious  maladies.  Few  have  perfect  health.  Doubtless  better  health 
would  come  from  wiser  habits  and  simpler  faith.  But  many  causes  of  disease 
are  indefinable.  A  sick  body  often  ministers  to  the  growth  of  the  souL  It  casts 
the  shadow  of  eternity  over  the  life.  It  awakens  prayer  in  the  most  callous. 
It  brings  the  prayerful  nearer  God.  2.  Hezekiah  beUeved  that  his  affliction  would 
be  "  unto  death."  He  probably  encouraged  a  hope  of  recovery  until  Isaiah 
came ;  though,  as  Josephus  informs  us,  "  the  physicians  despaired  of  him,  and 
expected  no  good  issue  from  his  sickness ;  as  neither  did  his  friends,"     Hope  dies 


118  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  xxxvm 

hard  in  a  sick  man's  breast.  Isaiah,  perhaps,  did  what  none  of  Hezekiah's  physicians 
or  courtiers  were  prepared  to  do.  He  faithfully  delivered  the  Divine  message. 
It  was  a  painful  duty.  The  djdng  should  be  warned.  Not  to  do  so  is  an  unkind- 
ness  and  a  sin.  All  have  some  preparations  to  make  when  death  comes  unex- 
pectedly. The  house  of  the  soul  needs  to  be  set  in  order  as  well  as  the  estate. 
3.  Hezekiah  met  death  with  great  reluctance.  Men  generally  shrink  from  death 
at  its  first  approach.  Dr.  Johnson  held  that  no  man  met  death  willingly.  Many 
doubtless  have.  But  to  meet  death  without  reluctance  is  no  direct  proof  of 
raeetness  for  eternity.  Remember  Bunyan's  "  Weary  of  the  World."  The  good 
may  be  unwilling  to  die.  Hezekiah  was  not  spiritually  unprepared.  He  was 
reluctant  to  die — (1)  From  the  natural  disinchnation  which  men  feel  towards 
death.  He  was  in  the  prime  of  life.  His  hold  of  all  earthly  things  was 
firm.  Age  loosens  the  grasp.  He  saw  a  time  of  quiet  and  prosperity  dawning 
upon  his  kingdom,  and  he  desired  to  li^'e  to  enjoy  it.  (2)  He  had  no  heir. 
It  is  certain  that  Manasseh  who  succeeded  him  was  not  then  bom,  for  twenty 
years  later  he  was  but  twelve  years  old ;  and  the  land  had  not  yet  begun  to 
recover  from  the  late  ravages,  so  that  his  death  would  have  left  the  nation  in  a 
distracted  condition,  and  would  probably  have  exposed  it  to  many  new  calamities  " 
(Kitto).  (3)  He  bad  not  that  clear  revelation  of  immortaUty  which  we  as  Christians 
possess.  He  would  look  upon  death  as  being  "  cut  oil  from  the  land  of  the  living," 
as  going  down  into  silence.  Christ  had  not  opened  the  kingdom  of  immortahty 
to  the  eyes  of  men.  This  Ufe  was  all  to  him,  and  he  clung  to  it.  II.  Hezekiah's 
PRAYEB.  1.  He  does  not  utter  the  desire  that  was  uppermost  in  his  mind.  We 
may  not  have  recorded  all  that  he  prayed :  probably  his  prayer  was  broken  off 
abruptly  in  weeping.  He  knew  God  could  interpret  his  broken  words,  his  sighs, 
his  tears.  Many  prayers  are  too  elaborately  expressed.  They  prove  their  shallow- 
ness by  the  smooth  elegance  of  the  language  in  which  they  are  uttered.  Strong 
feeling  makes  the  tongue  faHer.  Much  in  prayer  may  be  left  to  Cod's  omniscience, 
justice,  wisdom,  tenderness,  and  love.  Like  a  father  He  interprets  the  heart  of 
His  child.  2.  Hezekiah  appeals  to  his  past  life  as  a  reason  why  his  Ufe  should  be 
prolonged.  Few  can  do  this.  Most  Uves  are  so  marred,  so  imperfect,  so  sinful, 
that  they  can  furnish  no  argument  before  God.  But,  it  has  been  asked,  waa 
there  not  in  this  prayer  a  spirit  of  self-commendation  contrary  to  the  spirit  of 
the  Gospel  ?  Not  a  conscious  self-clothing  of  deceit,  but  a  pernicious  self-ignor- 
ance ?  We  think  not.  Hezekiah  hved  under  a  dispensation  of  reUgious  thought 
that  led  him  to  beheve  that  a  man's  character  and  conduct  were  the  grounds  upon 
which  God's  favour  or  displeasure  was  bestowed.  And  this  is  true  under  a  dis- 
pensation of  grace ;  though  we,  under  that  dispensation,  reaUse  as  Hezekiah  could 
not  that  all  our  virtue  is  by  the  help  of  God's  Spirit,  and  can  merit  httle  in  His 
sight.  The  modem  habit  of  self-analysis  and  eagerness  to  find  some  evil  to  con- 
demn at  every  turn,  so  a^  to  describe  ourselves  as  the  vilest  of  the  vile,  was  unlaiown 
to  him.  Many  merely  attempt  to  descend  to  some  imaginary  standard  of  vileness 
which  they  suppose  is  the  proper  depth  of  self-humiliation  to  reach  to  secure 
God's  favour.  Much  of  this  confession  of  being  miserable  sinners  is  but  miserable 
cant.  Sick  bed  confessions  are  exposed  to  this  danger.  Such  lip-service  may 
be,  as  Lynch  says,  "most  suspicious  and  affrighting."  What  God  desires  is  an 
honest  expression  of  our  heart's  convictions.  This  Hezekiah  gave.  This  prayer 
was  uttered  with  true  humility.  Whatever  had  been  his  sins — and  he  recognised 
them  (ver.  17) — he  could  claim — 1.  Sincerity.  He  had  walked  before  God  in 
truth.  He  was  conscious  of  no  deceit,  no  inward  angularities,  no  warping  of  con- 
science, no  sophistical  coverings,  no  histj-ionic  attitudes.  He  lived  out  the  verities 
of  his  soul.  2.  Simphcity  of  purpose.  His  heart  was  perfect  in  its  consecration 
to  the  Divine  glory.  He  had  no  double  aims.  In  building  up  the  religious  Ufe 
of  the  nation  he  had  not  sought  his  own  honour  but  God's.  3.  That  his  acts  had 
been  regulated  as  in  God's  sight,  and  had  been  to  increase  goodness  in  the  earth. 
His  lif'j  was  indeed  his  prayer.  Life  will  have  to  be  reviewed.  A  fife  of  sin  makes 
a  death-bed  terrible.  III.  The  emotions  with  which  this  prayer  was  offered. 
1.  Hezekiah  was  filled  with  grief.  But  while  grief  prostrates  the  mental  and 
physical  energies  it  often  gives  great  potency  to  prayer.  The  gaze  of  Hezekiah's 
almost  speechless  soul  was  fixed  on  God  with  beseeching  earnestness,  and  the 
poignancy  of  his  grief  arrested  the  Divine  arm.  2.  There  was  in  Hezekiah's  mind 
a  feeling  of  bitter  disappointment.  He  expected  to  five,  and  his  expectation 
rested  upon  his  religious  belief.  In  his  day,  under  the  incompleted  revelation 
of  t  he  Divine  purposes,  centering  in  human  life  and  destiny,  which  was  then 


CHAP,  xxxvm.]  ISAIAH.  119 

possessed,  longevity  was  regarded  as  one  of  the  peculiar  rewards  of  piety  (Psa.  xc. 
16).  Hezekiah  had  fulfilled  the  conditions  and  he  now  looked  for  the  reward. 
He  was  disappointed  in  God.  To  be  disappointed  in  God  is  the  direst  disappoint- 
ment that  can  fill  a  man's  soul  with  bitterness.  If  God  fail  him,  what  is  there  in 
the  universe  that  is  firm  ?  God  sometimes  permits  men  to  think  that  He  has  not 
been  faithful  to  them.  This  is,  perhaps,  the  severest  test  that  the  human  heart 
can  bear.  Christ  descended  to  that  "  profundity  of  woe  "  when  He  uttered  His 
agonising  cry  upon  the  cross.  Many  fail  in  such  hours.  But  true  faith  can  enable 
us  to  triumph  even  then.  It  will  enable  us  to  lie  weeping  before  God,  waiting 
for  the  explanation  that  it  assures  us  God  can  and  will  give ;  clinging  to  His 
garments  even  when  His  face  seems  tiimed  away,  and  His  form,  once  so  near  and 
trusted,  has  changed,  and  seems  moving  steadily  away  from  us.  Thus  Hezekiah 
waited,  weeping  sore.  3.  There  was  also  within  him  the  feeUng  of  utter  helpless- 
ness. AU  earthly  resources  had  failed  him.  When  he  turned  his  face  to  the 
wall,  he  felt  that  no  power  on  earth  could  help  him.  His  physicians,  his  attendants, 
his  most  trusted  counsellors,  could  render  no  assistance.  He  had  only  God. 
Hezekiah,  even  in  such  circumstances,  found  God  nigh  to  help  and  to  save.  Isaiah 
was  speedily  sent  back  to  comfort  him  with  the  Divine  message :  "  I  have  heard 
thy  prayers,  I  have  seen  thy  tears ;  behold,  I  will  add  unto  thy  days  fifteen  years." 
Learn — 1.  That  true  piety  will  enable  us  to  seek  and  find  God  in  life's  most  painful 
extremities.  2.  That  in  our  hours  of  bitterest  grief  prayer  will  reach  God's 
ear  and  bring  us  reUef  and  deliverance.     {HomUetic  Magazine.) 

Vers.  4,  5.  I  have  heard  thy  prayer. — Was  EezekiaKs  recovery  an  unmiti- 
gated blessing? — Most  of  us  who  have  had  some  experience  of  life,  have  seen 
instances  in  which  a  man  who  has  set  his  heart  too  fondly  upon  one  object, 
has  gained  that  object,  and  with  it  (to  use  the  language  of  St.  Paul  to  his  ship- 
mates) "  much  harm  and  loss."  He  has  won  the  position  which  he  coveted;  but 
perhaps  he  finds  himself  saddled  with  the  burden  of  a  crushing  responsibility; 
or  perhaps  his  health — the  one  condition  of  enjoyment — breaks  up  just  as  he 
grasps  the  prize;  or  perhaps  he  is  snatched  away  by  death,  "  while  the  meat 
is  yet  in  his  mouth";  and  those  who  knew  him  are  impleasantly  reminded  of 
the  end  of  Israel's  lusting  in  the  wilderness,  "  He  gave  them  their  desire,  and 
sent  leanness  withal  into  their  soul."  And  thinking  men  say,  when  they  hear  of 
this  result,  "  Strong  wishes  for  earthly  blessings  are  to  be  avoided."  The  Book 
of  God,  as  being  the  book  of  Truth,  gives  an  exact  echo  of  human  experience 
in  this  matter.  God  acceded  to  Hezekiah's  request,  and  added  fifteen  years 
to  his  life.  But  now  comes  the  grave  question.  Did  the  fifteen  years  thus  added 
prove,  in  the  issue,  a  blessing  to  Hezekiah  personally,  or  to  the  nation  over  which 
he  so  worthily  presided?  The  sacred  narrative  gives  an  emphatic  negative  to 
both  branches  of  the  question.  1.  Hezekiah,  when  God  had  originally  proposed 
to  take  him  to  Himself,  and  had  sent  Isaiah  with  the  message,  "  Set  thine  house 
in  order:  for  thou  shalt  die,  and  not  live,"  was  at  the  zenith  of  his  spiritual  pro- 
sperity. And  now  Hezekiah  was  to  be  gathered  to  his  fathers,  full,  if  not  of 
years,  yet  of  honours,  spiritual  and  temporal.  But  by  his  prayers  and  his  tears 
he  succeeded  in  prolonging  his  span;  and  the  first  result  of  this,  which  the  history 
brings  before  us,  points  to  a  spiritual  decline  in  Hezekiah  (chap,  xxxix. ).  The  sweet 
ointment  of  Hezekiah's  graces  was  flawed  and  corrupted  by  the  dead  fly  of  vanity. 
Had  Hezekiah  died  when  God  proposed  to  take  him,  he  would  have  died  humble; 
as  it  is,  he  dies  after  being  humbled  by  God ;  and  all  those  who  read  the  narrative 
thoughtfully  will  surely  say,  "  Better  far  he  had  died  at  first."  2.  But  more 
than  personal  interests  are  at  stake  in  the  life  of  princes;  and  we  are  led  to  nquire 
what,  as  far  as  it  is  given  us  to  know  them,  may  have  been  the  effects  upon  the 
Jewish  nation  of  the  addition  of  fifteen  years  to  Hezekiah's  life  ?  The  answer 
is  conveyed  in  these  words:  "  Manasseh  (Hezekiah's  son,  who  succeeded  to  the 
throne)  was  twelve  years  old  when  he  began  to  reign;  "  so  that  if  Hezekiah  had 
died  when  God  intended  he  should,  Manasseh  would  never  have  existed.  Now 
who  was  Manasseh?  and  what  part  did  he  play  in  Jewish  history?  Manasseh, 
by  his  extraordinary  wickedness,  surpassing  that  of  aU  who  had  gone  before  him, 
involved  the  nation  which  he  governed  in  ruin.  Manasseh's  crimes  cried  to  heaven 
for  vengeance,  and  were  heard,  long  after  Manasseh's  body  had  mingled  with 
the  dust,  and  long  after  Manasseh's  soul  had  become,  through  Divine  grace, 
profoundly  penitent.  For  when  the  author  of  the  Books  of  Kings  traces  up  the 
captivity  to  its  originating  cause,  thus  he  writes:  "  Surely  at  the  oommandment 


reo  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [ohap.  xxxvni. 

of  the  Lord  came  this  upon  Judah,  to  remove  them  out  of  His  sight,  for  the  sina 
of  INIanasseh,  according  to  all  that  he  did;  and  also  for  the  innocent  blood  that 
he  shed  (for  he  filled  Jerusalem  with  innocent  blood),  which  the  Lord  would  not 
pardon."  Possibly,  then,  if  Manasseh  had  not  existed,  the  great  national  de- 
gradation of  the  Jews  by  the  captivity,  and  the  demolition  of  the  city  and  temple, 
would  never  have  taken  place.  (Dean  Goulburn.)  Ministers  should  have  access 
to  the  sick : — Besides  its  other  important  lessons,  this  history  teaches  the  pro- 
priety of  admitting  the  minister  of  God  into  the  chamber  of  sickness.  His 
soothing  words  and  the  prayer  of  faith,  always  secure  to  the  sufferer  some  blessing, 
which  he  could  little  afford  to  lose.  No  intelligent,  right-minded  medical  man 
will  bar  the  door  of  the  sickroom  against  the  physician  of  the  soul.  (J.  N.  Norton.) 
Hezekiah's  life  prolonged  : — He  had  an  interview  with  the  Giver  of  life.  (J.  Parker, 
D.D.) 

Vers.  7,  8.  And  this  shall  be  a  sign  unto  thee  from  the  Lord. — The  shadow 
on  the  sun-dial  of  Ahaz  : — We  are  not  to  imagine  that  in  this  miracle  any  effect 
was  wrought  upon  the  motion  of  the  earth  roimd  its  axis.  A  miraculous  refraction 
of  the  sun's  rays  was  effected  by  God  on  a  particular  sun-dial,  at  the  prayer 
of  King  Hezekiah.  It  was  a  miracle,  wrought  on  a  particular  dial,  in  a  particular 
place,  showing  that  it  concerned  a  particular  person;  and  it  was  not  wrought 
on  the  solar  orb,  but  on  the  solar  light.  {Bp.  Wordsworth.)  The  shadow  re- 
versed  on  the  sun-dial  of  Ahaz  : — This  astounding  miracle  could  only  have  been 
effected  by  a  light  "  brighter  than  the  sun,"  rising  on  the  other  side  of  the  sun-dial. 
We  all  know  how  electric  light  reverses  the  shadow  of  gas  light.  At  St.  Paul's 
conversion,  "  the  light  from  heaven,"  the  Shechinah  brightness  of  Immanuel, 
outshone  the  splendour  of  the  noonday  sun.  In  the  heavenly  city  there  is  no 
need  of  the  sun  to  shine  on  it,  nor  of  the  moon  to  lighten  it,  for  the  glory  of 
God  and  the  Lamb  is  the  light  thereof.  Unfortunately,  we  cannot  tell  on  which 
wide  of  the  temple  at  Jerusalem  the  sun-dial  of  Ahaz  was  situated.  It  was  prob- 
ably a  monolith  or  obelisk,  resembling  that  on  the  Thames  embankment,  ele- 
vated on  steps — translated  "  degrees  " — and  intended  to  regulate  the  hours 
of  public  worship.  The  setting  sun  had  thrown  the  shadow  across  the  steps; 
it  had  gone  down  ten  degrees,  when  suddenly  from  the  gate  or  window  from  the 
mercy-seat  behind  the  veil  of  the  naos,  or  temple  proper,  there  flashed  forth  the 
majestic  hght  of  Divine  glory  that  dwelt  between  the  cherubim,  reversing  the 
shadow  of  the  natural  sun,  and  converting  for  Hezekiah  the  shadow  of  deatk 
into  morning.  {R.  Balgarnie,  D.D.)  The  Light  of  the  Mosaic  past: — To  the 
ardent  eyes  of  the  old  prophet  the  hght  that  had  reversed  the  shadow  on  the  sun- 
dial was  the  old  "  Light  "  of  the  Mosaic  past.  It  had  illumined  the  land  of  Goshen 
in  the  days  of  supernatural  darkness  that  overspread  the  rest  of  Egypt.  It  had 
flashed  out  with  more  than  electric  brightness  upon  the  hosts  of  Israel  as  they 
struggled  on  through  the  night  and  the  sea  to  escape  the  pursuing  army  of  the 
Pharaoh.  It  had  "  glided  "  as  a  fiery  pillar  before  the  tribes  through  the  rocky 
desert,  warning  off  their  enemies,  and  guiding  the  pilgrim  army  homeward  to 
the  fatherland.  It  had  synchronised  their  movements  with  those  convulsions 
of  nature  that  arrested  the  Jordan  at  harvest  fiood,  and  shook  down  the  walla 
of  Jericho  at  the  moment  when  they  were  prepared  to  cross  and  capture  the 
devoted  city.  And  it  had  stood  over  Gibeon  as  a  sun  that  would  not  go  down, 
and  as  a  moon  that  would  not  withdraw,  while  Jehovah  fought  for  Israel,  and 
gave  them  their  "  crowning  victory "  over  the  idolatrous  Canaanites.  Isaiah 
knew  the  Light.  {Ibid.)  Christ  the  glory  of  His  people  Israel  : — Was  it  this, 
I  wonder,  that  evoked  from  Isaiah  that  unwonted  outburst  of  enthusiasm  in 
the  chapter  beginning,  "  Arise,  shine,  for  thy  Light  is  come,  and  the  glory  of 
Jehovah  is  risen  upon  thee"?  "Thy  sun  shall  no  more  go  down  ...  for 
Jehovah  shall  be  unto  thee  an  everlasting  Light,  and  thy  God  thy  glory"?  If 
so,  how  appropriate  the  words  to  the  occasion.  It  is  easy  to  identify  the  Light 
of  Israel  with  Christ,  the  Light  of  the  world.  {Ibid.)  Christ  dispels  and  re- 
verses life's  shadows  : — I  do  not  consider  that  I  am  putting  any  undue  strain 
upon  the  text  in  applying  it  to  Christ.  The  Shechinah  was  the  recognised  token 
to  Israel  of  the  presence  of  her  covenant  God.  It  led  the  Magi  to  Bethlehem. 
It  shone  around  the  shepherds  on  the  night  of  the  nativity.  It  overwhelmed 
Saul  of  Tarsus  on  the  way  to  Damascus.  Christ  is  the  Light  that  dispels  and 
reverses  our  shadows.  Christ  has  dispelled  and  reversed — I.  Thb  shadow  op 
SEN.    II.  Thk  shadow  of  oeief.    III.  The  shadow  of  death.     "  If  He  be 


CHAP,  xxxvin.]  ISAIAH.  121 

in  thee,"  wrote  John  Pulsford,  "  who  is  the  Light  of  Life,  very  Light  and  very 
Life,  then,  when  the  candlelight  of  thy  body's  life  goes  out,  the  sunlight  of  thy 
soul's  life  shall  be  bright  about  thee."  (Ibid.)  The  great  miracle  : — The  miracle 
is  how  God  Himself  began.  Why  will  men  always  attack  the  wrong  point,  as 
if  it  were  a  wonderful  thing  that  a  man  should  have  fifteen  years  added  to  his 
life;  and  yet  we  omit  the  stupendous  miracle  that  man  ever  began  to  hve.  Thus 
attack  what  mystery  we  may  we  only  go  backward  and  upward  until  we  come 
to  Deity  Himself.  That  is  the  great  mystery,  and  there  is  none  other.  (J.  Parker, 
D.D.) 

Vers.  9-20.  The  writing  of  HezeMah,  Mng  of  Jadah. — Hezehiah's  recovery  : — 
L  He  was  sick,  and  then  he  prayed.  2.  He  is  recovered,  and  now  he  gives  thanks. 
(R.  Harris,  D.D.)  HezekiaWs  song : — I.  The  inscription  acquaints  us — 
1.  With  the  author  of  the  song.  2.  With  the  nature  of  it — a  poem  written. 
3.  With  the  argument  of  it — a  song  of  thanksgiving  for  the  removal  of  sickness, 
and  restoring  of  health.     II.  The  descexption  presents  unto  us  the  parts  of  it. 

1.  An  aggravation  of  Hezekiah's  former  misery.  2.  An  amplification  of  the  present 
mercy.  [Ibid.)  Hezekiah's  experience : — In  the  first  part  of  this  psalm,  he 
describes  the  views  and  feelings  which  occupied  his  mind  when  he  saw  himself 
apparently  on  the  brink  of  the  grave.  1.  Though  he  had  been  one  of  the  best  kings 
with  which  God  ever  blessed  a  nation,  he  viewed  his  sins  as  great  and  numerous, 
and  felt  that  he  was,  on  account  of  them,  justly  exposed  to  the  Diviae  displeasm-e. 

2.  Hence  death  appeared  di-eadful  to  him,  and  his  dread  of  it  was  increased  by  the 
darkness  which,  at  that  time,  before  Christ  had  brought  life  and  immortality  to 
light,  hung  over  a  future  state.  3.  Hence,  too,  he  was  assailed  by  fearful  apprehen- 
sions of  God's  anger  (ver.  13).  4.  In  consequence  of  these  apprehensions  he  could 
neither  look  nor  ask  for  help  from  God  with  confidence,  as  he  had  been  accustomed 
to  do.  "  My  eyes,"  he  exclaims,  "  fail  upward;  "  that  is,  I  cannot  look  upward, 
cannot  look  to  heaven  for  relief  and  consolation,  as  I  formerly  could.  5.  And 
when  he  endeavoured  to  pray,  he  found  that  he  offered  nothing  which  deserved 
the  name  of  prayer;  for  unbelief  and  despondency  prevailed.  '*  Like  a  crane  or  a 
swallow,"  says  he,  "  so  did  I  chatter;  "  that  is,  my  prayers  were  little  better  than 
the  complaints  of  a  bird  entangled  in  the  snare  of  the  fowler.  6.  Finally,  he 
gave  up  aU  hope,  and  cried  in  bitterness  of  soul,  "  I  shall  not  see  the  Lord,  even  the 
Lord  in  the  land  of  the  living."  7.  But  to  the  righteous  there  ariseth  light  in  the 
darkness.  There  did  in  this  case.  And  as  soon  as  it  began  to  dawn,  faith  revived, 
and  he  cried,  though  still  with  a  feeble  voice,  "  0  Lord,  I  am  oppres.sed ;  undertake 
for  me;  "  that  is,  be  my  help  and  deliverer,  make  my  cause  Thine  own.  and  do  all 
that  for  me  which  Thou  seest  to  be  necessary.  {E.  Payson,  D.D. )  The  prayer 
of  Hezekiah  : — It  is  a  strain  most  natural  and  pathetic.  It  is  the  simple  expression 
of  one  who  has  found  this  Hfe  beautiful  and  desirable,  and  who  would  fain  be 
permitted  to  remain  till  the  limit  of  human  existence  has  been  reached.  Its  very 
simplicity,  the  very  honesty  with  which  it  depicts  the  clinging  to  life  and  the 
shrinking  from  death,  has  been  a  stumbling-block  to  many — has  been  at  complete 
variance  with  their  preconceived  notions  as  to  the  frame  of  miad  in  which  a  good 
man  would  meet  such  an  hour.  H?  appealed  to  the  life  which  he  had  led,  to  the 
work  which  he  had  done,  to  the  integrity  of  purpose  with  which  he  had  done  it. 
He  also  ventured  to  recall,  as  it  were,  to  the  Hearer  of  his  prayer,  that  in  his 
removal  there  would  be  one  worshipper  the  less.  "  The  grave  cannot  praise  Thee," 
&c.  There  would  be — such  is  the  daring  argument  which  he  employs — loss  to  God 
as  well  as  to  himself:  if  Hezekiah  lost  all  that  he  had  prized  and  hoped  for,  God 
would  likemse  be  deprived  of  praise  and  honour  which  would  have  been  His  in 
days  to  com?.  It  is  a  method  of  expostulation  which  we  who  have,  through  Christ, 
boldness  to  enter  into  the  holiest,  would  hardly  venture  to  employ.  Then,  on 
the  other  hand,  the  unfeigned  alarm  with  which  he  contemplates  the  approaching 
change — the  evident  sujieriority  which  he  assigns  to  the  present  life  compared 
with  what  lies  beyond  the  grave — is  not  in  accordance  with  the  language  which 
would  be  used  by  one  who  cherished  the  glorious  hope  which  Christ  has  enkindled. 
But,  with  aU  this  admitted— it  may  even  be  on  this  very  account — we  find  in  this 
poem  the  expression  of  a  human  heart  like  our  own,  brooding  over  the  great 
mystery  of  life  and  of  death,  uttering,  without  reserve,  its  sorrow  and  complaint ; 
shrinking,  yet  trusting;  resisting,  yet  submitting;  delighting  in  life,  but  finding  in 
God  its  only  portion.  The  poem  is  but  the  record  of  what  any  human  spirit 
would  feel  in  being  confronted  with  death,  and  in  seeing  death  again  withdraw. 


122  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  xxxvm. 

(P.  M.  Muir.)  The,  fear  of  death: — What  are  the  main  elements  of  this  fear 
in  the  writing  of  Hezekiah?  Why  is  his  spirit  oppressed  and  overwhelmed  as  the 
great  change  approaches?  Some  of  the  reasons  are  what  we  all  have  experienced; 
others  of  them  may  be  only  too  strange  to  us.  I.  One  reason  is  that  he  mttst  bid 
FAREWELL  TO  THE  JOYS  OF  LIFE.  He  was  deprived  of  the  residue  of  his  years. 
Life  had  been  to  him  full  of  interest  and  of  beauty.  In  this  respect  there  were  even 
elements  of  weakness  in  his  character.  His  love  of  ease  and  of  display  showed 
itself  in  various  ways.  II.  Another  and  a  nobler  reason  for  the  sadness  of  Hezekiah, 
is  to  be  foimd  in  the  fact  that  he  was  about  to  be  cctt  off  from  the  work  on 
WHICH  HIS  HEART  WAS  SET.  That  is  a  sorrow  which  is  apt  to  overcloud  a  lofty 
mind.  The  idolatry  which  he  had  sought  to  crush  might  again  lift  up  its  head. 
The  ritual  which  he  had  restored  might  again  be  suffered  to  decay.  The  bondage 
from  which  he  had  kept  his  country  might  lay  hold  upon  it.  Because,  after  ms 
day,  the  hand  of  the  spoiler  might  seize  the  wealth  which  he  had  amassed  for  the 
good  of  the  nation,  he  might  well  desire  that  his  day  should  be  prolonged.  IH.  He 
shrank  from  death  as  an  entrance  on  an  unknown  sphere.  It  is  an  exaggera- 
tion to  say  that  kings  and  righteous  men  of  the  Old  Testament  had  no  conception 
of  a  future  state.  There  are  sayings  which  infer  that  the  thought  of  Ufe  was  not 
bovmded  by  the  grave,  that  there  was  a  conviction  of  union  with  BUm  who  is 
eternal.  But  the  sayings  are  comparatively  few:  there  is  no  greater  difference 
between  the  Old  Testament  and  the  New  than  the  difference  of  the  way  in  which 
they  speak  of  the  life  hereafter.  So  dim,  so  fluctuating,  so  uncertain  are  the 
allusions  in  the  Old  Testament,  that  the  revelation  of  the  New  may  well  be  called  the 
bringing  of  life  and  immortaUty  to  light.  Even  with  that  revelation,  "  our  know- 
ledge of  that  Mfe  is  small,  the  eye  of  faith  is  dim  " ;  but,  without  it,  the  horror  of  a 
gr  at  darkness  may  naturally  oppress  the  soul.  IV.  The  reason  which,  most  of  all« 
produced  the  regret  of  Hezekiah  in  the  thought  of  quitting  the  visible  world  is  to 
us  the  strangest  of  all.  It  was  that  he  should  be  more  distant  from  God. 
"  I  said,  I  shall  not  see  the  Lord,  even  the  Lord,  in  the  land  of  the  living."  This 
is  to  us  a  strange  contradiction,  an  evidence  of  marvellous  ignoranc  .  It  was 
exactly  in  that  world,  to  the  confines  of  which  he  was  drawing  near,  that  he  would 
find  God.  This  is  true,  and  there  is  ground  for  our  astonishment.  But  might 
not  Hezekiah,  in  his  turn,  be  astonished  at  us?  Does  his  lamentation  convey 
to  us  no  lesson,  no  reproach?  He  was  mournful  at  the  prospect  of  seeing  God  no 
more  in  the  land  of  the  living,  of  seeing  Him  no  more  in  the  glories  of  the  world 
around,  of  seeing  Him  no  more  in  the  worship  of  His  temple.  Were  we  honest 
with  oiirselves  and  with  one  another,  might  we  not  confess  that  oir  talk  of  s  eing 
God  hereafter  is  all  the  more  voluble  because  we  have  not  seen  Him  here  ?  We  too 
much  forg  t  that  He  is  here  at  all.  And  one  element  of  terror  in  our  imagination 
of  the  hereafter  consists  too  often  in  the  reflection  that  He  is  there.  (Ibid.) 
Hezekiah' s  return  to  health: — If  we  may  learn  something  from  Hezekiah  e.<n  in 
his  imperfect,  hopeless  mode  o  looking  on  impending  death,  much  more  may  we 
learn  rom  him  in  his  joyous  mode  of  welcoming  retiirning  health.  That  he  should 
be  glad  is  no  cause  for  wonder.  L  There  is  perhaps  no  keener  sense  of  enjoyment 
than  that  which  attends  convalescence,  when  simple  pleasiu-es,  which  may  once 
have  palled,  are  felt  again  in  all  their  freshness,  when  strength  is  actually  felt  to  be 
reanimating  the  enfeebled  frame.  For  the  man  who  has  been  tossing  and  turning 
in  restlessness  and  pain,  the  restoration  of  peace  and  ease  brings  a  pleasure  before 
unknown.  2.  But  it  was  not  simply  this  deUght  in  outward  tmngs  which  ins;  ired 
Hezekiah.  It  was  that  the  vision  of  God  would  again  be  granted,  that  the  worship 
which  he  loved  could  again  be  offered,  that  the  work  which  had  been  interrupted  might 
again  be  taken  up,  that  his  recovery  was  a  pledge  of  Divine  favour,  of  sin  forgiven 
and  forgotten,  and  must  awake  the  gratitude  of  liis  hi  art,  the  service  of  his  whole 
life.  Whatever  has  been  oiu-  past,  whatever  is  to  be  our  future  the  present  is 
ours  to  use,  to  improve,  to  spend  in  the  service  of  God  and  of  man.  (Ibid.) 
Hezekiah'' a  sickness  and  recovery  : — I.  The  affliction  and  danger  of  Hezekiah. 
This  writing  records  his  aflSiction.  From  his  previous  character,  you  perhaps 
expect  to  find  that  he  will  welcome  the  message  which  announces  his  release  from 
suffe  ing,  or  at  least  receive  it  with  calmne.'iS  and  submission.  But  there  are  two 
principles  on  which  we  accoimt  for  this  emotion.  1.  From  that  love  of  life 
which  is  the   strongest  instinct  of  our  nature.     2.  Hezekiah  was  engaged  in  a 

feat  and  important  work.     IF.  The  deliverance  wrought  on  his  behalf. 
He  traces  his  recovery  to  God.     2.  He  desires  to  retain  the  salutary  impressions 
he  had  received  (ver.  16).     3.  He  acknowledges  the  beneficial  influence  of  afflio- 


CHAP,  xxxvni.]  ISAIAH.  "  123 

tion  (ver.  16).  4.  He  gratefully  commemorates  the  Divine  goodness  (ver.  17). 
(H.  J.  Qarrible.)  The  wisdom  of  keeping  a  record  of  one^s  life  : — It  is  well,  for  the 
purpose  of  frequent  review,  to  keep  a  record  of  the  principal  events  of  our  lives, 
and  of  the  thoughts  which  in  trying  circumstances  have  most  deeply  impressed 
us.  This  is  the  way  both  to  multiply  and  prolong  the  advantages  of  experience. 
Such  a  record  may  be  of  great  use  also  to  our  successors,  and  especially  to  our 
children.  Of  all  the  periods  of  life  pregnant  with  materials  for  such  an  instructive 
memorial,  that  of  sickness,  for  the  supports  attending  it,  the  thoughts  that  arise 
out  of  it,  and  the  influence  to  be  exercised  by  them  upon  the  subsequent  course 
of  our  hves,  seems  to  have  a  pre-eminent  claim  to  notice.  It  is  to  a  record  of 
this  kind,  penned  by  the  pious  monarch  of  Judah,  and  which  was  probably 
of  great  service  to  his  son  Manasseh,  that  our  text  refers;  and  the  consideration  of 
which  may  serve  to  remind  us  of  what  we  should  aspire  after,  and  what  we  should 
cautiously  avoid,  in  a  similar  situation.  {J.  Leif child,  D.D.)  Sickness  and 
recovery : — I.  The  general  causes  and  effects  of  bodily  sickness.  Man  is 
much  more  liable  to  attacks  of  this  nature  than  the  mere  animals.  The  pecuhar 
organisation  of  the  human  being,  and  the  wearing  effect  of  mental  excitement 
upon  the  corporeal  system,  may  in  part  accoimt  for  this.  But  moral  causes  must 
also  be  taken  into  consideration.  Sin  is  the  great  parent  of  our  bodily  maladies. 
Though  some  conditions  of  human  society  are  more  exposed  to  disease  than 
others,  yet  no  station  in  life  forms  any  certain  security  against  the  interruption 
of  health.     Even  piety  itself,  though  a  preservative  against  spiritual  ills,  and  a 

Sreventive  of  many  bodily  ailments,  is  far  from  being  a  shield  against  the  shafts  of 
isease.  We  have  a  vivid  pictiu-e,  in  Hezekiah's  complaints,  of  the  humiliating 
state  both  of  body  and  mind  to  which  sickness  reduces  us.  While  much  importance 
should  not  be  attached  to  what  persons  in  sickness  think  of  th  mselves,  yet  we 
may  learn  the  desirableness  of  avoiding  those  dispositions  and  practices,  while  in 
health,  which  would  furnish  just  and  solid  occasion  for  uneasiness  in  our  duller 
hours.  We  may  invite  God  to  our  sick  chamber  with  confidence,  when  we  have 
not  driven  Him  away  from  us  by  impiety  and  neglect  in  our  more  joyous  and 
prosperous  seasons.  11.  The  anxieties  of  a  pious  mind  undee  sickness,  and 
THE  good  effects  OF  PRAYER  AND  SUPPLICATION.  The  message  of  Isaiah  to 
Hezekiah  was  indeed  calculated  to  produce  alarm  and  despondency  as  to  his 
recovery.  In  this  situation,  his  desire  of  life  moved  him  to  make  the  most  earnest 
and  passionate  entreaties.  The  good  men  of  that  age  felt  a  strong  attachment 
to  Ufe,  which  was  far  more  excusable  in  their  case  than  in  ours.  III.  The  spiritual 
AND  Divine  manifestations  with  which  deliverance  from  sickness  may  be 
ACCOMPANIED  IN  THE  CASE  OF  THE  PEOPLE  OF  GoD.  The  removal  of  the  bodily 
ill  was  the  least  part  of  his  deliverance ;  it  was  accompanied  and  followed  with  a 
eweet  sense  of  the  removal  of  guilt  from  his  soul,  and  with  the  presence  of  the 
gladdening  beams  of  the  Divine  favour.  It  is  sometimes  one  end  of  God,  in  the 
case  of  the  affliction  of  His  people,  to  prepare  them  for  such  manifestations,  and  to 
prove  the  power  of  Divine  principles  in  conferring  a  subhme  superiority  to  all  the 
impressions  of  the  surrounding  scene.     IV.  The  influence  which  the  visitation 

OF  SICKNESS,  THE  SUPPORTS  UNDER  IT,  AND  DELIVERANCE  OUT  OF  IT,  TN  THE  CASE 

of  GOOD  MEN,  SHOULD  HAVE  UPON  THEIR  FUTURE  CONDUCT.  The  beneficial  effects 
of  such  visitation  are  too  often  confined  to  the  hours  of  its  endurance,  or  extended 
only  to  a  short  period  after  its  termination.  This  arises  from  the  influence  of 
outward  scenes  and  circumstances  upon  the  mind,  and  the  natural  tendency  of  a 
change  in  the  one  to  operate  a  similar  change  in  the  other.  It  is  only  to  be  pre- 
vented by  a  due  resistance  to  such  tendency,  and  a  careful  :^ort  to  preserve, 
by  frequent  meditation  and  review,  the  just  discoveries  made  by  us  m  our  affliction, 
and  the  proper  feelings  then  entertained,  in  reference  to  the  character  of  human 
life,  and  the  importance  of  religion.  Probably  the  great  cause  of  sinful  relapses 
18  to  be  found  in  a  forgetfulness  of  our  mercies.  AppHcation — 1.  The  subject  may 
be  useful  to  such  as  have  not  yet  been  afflicted.  We  see  in  the  sufferings  of  others 
how  precarious  is  the  continuance  of  our  comforts,  and  our  vigour  and  health  to 
enjoy  them.  2.  Such  as  have  been  afflicted  in  vain,  may  be  furnished  with  a 
salutary  remonstrance.  Affliction  is  often  amongst  the  last  resources  employed 
by  infinite  wisdom  and  mercy  for  our  benefit.     3.  Such  as  are  labouring  under  the 

Eressure  of  disease  may,  especially  if  Christians,  learn  how  to  turn  it,  while  it 
ksts,  to  good  account,  as  well  as  to  gain  a  benefit  from  it  for  the  future.  There 
are  many  consoling  and  reconcil  ng  considerations.  It  is  fraught  with  a  benevolent 
design  on  the  part  of  Him  who  permits  or  causes  it.     (Ibid.)        Face  to  face  tvU  : 


124  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  xxxvm. 

death : — 1.  However  death  is  feared  and  resisted,  it  is  most  by  those  who  are  in  the 
midst  of  their  days.  The  reasons  for  this  are  worth  looking  into.  2.  Man's  most 
solemn  words  are  uttered  when  he  stands  face  to  face  with  death ;  then,  if  ever,  he 
forms  a  right  estimate  of  life,  and  of  preparation  for  dying.  3.  Prayer  is  a  real  power. 
(W.  Wheeler.)  HezekiaK'a  poem: — The  poem,  or  psalm,  in  which  Hezekiah 
describes  his  experience,  may  be  divided  into  two  parts.  I.  How  death  looked 
(vers.  10-15).  There  is  a  point  in  the  sun's  daily  climb  of  the  heavens  when  it 
seems  to  stand  still,  a  pause  before  descending  the  western  slope.  Hezekiah  felt 
he  had  reached  just  such  a  meridian  of  his  life.  In  the  tranquillity,  or  noontide, 
of  his  days,  he  was  to  enter  the  gates  of  the  grave.  Loss  of  God's  presence,  loss 
of  human  companionships  and  interests — this  was  what  death  meant  for  him. 
His  age,  his  natural  terra  of  life,  was  to  be  carried  away  like  a  shepherd's  tent 
that  had  been  struck — his  life  rolled  up  like  a  piece  of  cloth  cut  from  the  thrums 
of  the  weaver's  loom.  The  dreary  night  of  his  pain,  when  his  very  bones  seemed 
broken,  and  he  could  only  moan  and  mourn  like  some  lonely,  crying  bird,  how  well 
he  remembered  it,  what  a  bitter  experience  it  was!  His  eyes  failed  with  looking 
upward,  but  he  did  look  upward;  weighed  down  with  pain  and  weakness,  his 
Boul  still  cried,  "  Be  Thou  my  surety."  He  knew  not  what  to  say,  because  God 
had  done  it  all.  Never,  through  all  the  respite  of  years  allotted  to  him,  could  he 
forget  his  bitterness  of  soul.  The  memory  of  it  would  always  chasten  him.  Some 
of  us  have  never  known  what  it  is  to  spend  hours  of  pain  and  weakness,  with  death 
apparently  near  at  hand,  and,  in  the  absence  of  this  experience,  the  sick  king's 
account  of  his  dreary  night  will  be  hard  to  understand.  But  anyone  who  has  been 
in  the  shadowed  valley  will  recognise  the  truthfulness  of  the  picture,  and  the  sincere 
piety  of  Hezekiah's  looking  upward  to  God.  II.  How  restoeed  life  looked 
(vers.  16-20).  First  of  all,  he  is  sensible  of  the  preciousness  of  his  chastisement. 
He  had  learned  in  those  dark  and  terrible  hours  lessons  never  learned  before.  It  was 
in  deep  experiences  of  need  and  of  God's  present  help  given  him  then,  that  he  had 
found  the  true  life  of  his  spirit.  He  had  discovered  God's  love  to  his  soul,  and 
obtained  an  assurance  of  forgiveness  which  was  a  joy  unspeakable.  Blessed 
is  he  who,  looking  up  to  God  in  the  face  of  Jesus  Christ,  can  say,  "  Thou  hast  cast 
all  my  sins  behind  Thy  back."  Whoever  went  back  of  God?  Life  for  him  is  an 
opportunity  to  praise  God,  to  make  known  His  truth,  to  testify  before  all  the  Lord's 
readiness  to  save.  This  story  is  a  chapter  out  of  an  ancient  biography,  a  story  of  a 
soul  in  close  personal  dealing  with  God.  It  reminds  us  that  He  is  a  very  present 
help  in  trouble,  and  that  none  who  turn  to  Him  in  trust  and  hope  will  ever  be 
refused,     (E.  W.  Shalders,  B.A.) 

Ver.  10.  I  shall  go  to  the  gates  of  the  grave. —  Views  of  the  grave: — 1.  It  waa 
doubtless  from  veneration  for  the  dead,  that  the  practice  first  arose  of  depositing 
their  ashes  aroimd  the  temple  where  the  hving  worship.  That  dust,  which  once  was 
tenanted  by  an  immortal  spirit, — that  dust,  through  which  once  the  intelligence 
and  the  feelings  of  an  immortal  spirit  shone, — becomes  in  itself  hallowed  to  the 
fancy.  Collecting  it  around  the  place  which  most  we  honour,  we  trust  that  we 
remove  it  beyond  the  reach  of  profane  intrusion.  2.  To  the  Christian  there  appears 
a  peculiar  propriety  in  this  simple  and  affecting  arrangement.  The  dust  of  the 
departed  is  doubly  valuable  in  the  Christian's  regard,  who  knows  that  "  this 
mortal  "  is  destined  to  "  put  on  immortality."  In  placing  it  near  the  temple  of 
our  God,  we  seem  to  express  our  humble  confidence  in  the  promise  which  He  hath 
given;  we  seem  to  leave  it  under  His  own  especial  protection.  3.  The  practice 
which  arose  from  reverence  for  the  dead,  is  powerfidly  enforced  by  its  usefiilness  to 
the  hving.  H  we  would  Usten  to  the  thought,  there  is  in  it  eloquence  irresistible,  that 
around  the  place  where  we  assemble  to  worship  our  God,  the  ashes  of  our  fathers 
and  of  om:  brethren  sleep.  We  act  the  part  of  fools  when  we  banish  from  our  minds 
any  theme,  uninviting  though  its  aspect  be,  by  which  our  spiritual  welfare  might 
be  so  essentially  advanced.  {A.  Brunton,  D.D.)  Appeals  of  the  grave : — 1.  Come 
hither,  ye  proud !  Look  around  you  on  this  scene  of  universal  stillness,  and  show  us 
the  trace  of  those  distinctions  in  which  you  glory.  Tell  us  which  is  noble  and 
which  is  vulgar  dust!  2.  Come  hither,  ye  who  value  yourselves  upon  the  graces  of 
your  outward  form.  Have  you  courage  to  meet  the  aspect  here  of  that  which  late 
was  lovely?  3.  Come  hither,  ye  votaries  of  wealth;  and  show  us  in  this  receptacle 
of  human  dust,  what  advantages  have  gone  down  to  the  grave  with  him  who  pre- 
ceded you  in  your  anxious  labours.  The  riches  of  this  world  descend  not  into  the 
grave.     But  there  are  treasures  of  which  the  value  outlives  the  tomb.     4.  Children 


CHAP,  xxxvm,]  ISAIAH.  125 

o£  intemperance  and  folly,  those  who  once  were  your  associates  in  riot,  are  laid  ia  the 
grave.  Silent  is  now  the  wit  that  was  to  charm  for  ever;  and  quenched  the  smile 
that  was  never  to  fade!  Are  you  prepared  for  a  change  hke  thisT  5.  Son  of 
wisdom,  and  holiness,  and  piety,  thine  associates  also  are  sleeping  here.  6.  Come 
hither,  and  stand  by  this  new-formed  grave.  It  is  the  grave  of  thine  enemy.  He 
cannot  harm  thee  now.  Thou  mournest  to  think  that  the  remembrance  of 
injuries  which  he  had  done  or  suffered  may  have  agonised  his  deathbed.  Thou 
shudderest  at  the  thought,  either  that  he  died  execrating  and  abhorring  thee,  or 
suing  for  reconciliation  and  peace  in  vain;  that  the  departing  spirit  may  have  gone 
hence,  unforgiving  or  unforgiven.  Is  there,  then,  one  to  whom,  at  this  moment, 
thou  bearest  enmity  ?  "  Go,"  while  yet  the  lesson  is  warm  upon  thy  heart,  "  leave  thy 
gift  before  the  altar,"  &c.  7.  Reverence  and  attachment  lead  thee  onward  to  the 
spot  where  the  instructor  of  thy  youth,  the  guide  of  thy  childhood,  lies.  All  the 
lessons  of  his  wisdom  rush  upon  thy  remembrance,  as  thou  standest  by  his  grave. 
Improve  the  moment, — it  is  rich  in  usefulness.  8.  The  scene  around  may  well 
rouse  thee  to  self-examination.  For,  see,  here  is  laid  thine  equal  in  age.  He  began 
with  thee  the  career  of  life,  gay  and  careless  as  thyself.  The  same  with  thine  own 
were  his  pursuits.  The  same  with  thine  own  were  his  hopes.  Seest  thou  that 
vacant  space  by  his  side  ?  God  only  knows  how  soon  thou  mayest  be  called  to  fill  it. 
In  this  land  of  shadows  one  thing  is  certain, — it  is  death;  "  one  thing  is  needful," 
— it  is  an  interest  in  Him  who  hath  vanquished  death  and  the  grave.  {Ibid.) 
The  gates  of  the  grave  : — The  region  of  the  grave  is  bounded.  God  keeps  the  gates. 
L  All  men's  dbbad.  Through — 1.  Sin.  2.  Natural  fear  of  the  imknown. 
3.  Want  of  faith,  II.  All  men's  destiny.  1.  Certain.  2.  Men  may  approach 
these  gates  and  return,  but  once  passed  they  are  passed  for  ever.  3.  They  are 
the  portals  of  endless  joy  or  woe.  (IF.  0.  Lilley.)  I  am  deprived  of  the 
residue  of  my  years. — The  shortening  of  human  life: — The  words  of  the  text 
naturally  suggest  this  general  observation :  that  God  deprives  many  of  the 
human  race  of  the  residue  of  their  years.     I.  Consider  when  God  does  this. 

1.  God  deprives  all  those  of  the  residue  of  their  years  whom  He  calls  out  of  the 
world  before  they  have  reached  the  limits  of  life  which  are  to  be  found  ia  Scripture. 

2.  Whom  He  calls  out  of  the  world  before  they  have  reached  the  bounds  of  life  fixed 
by  Providence.  Though  the  Scriptures  hmit  hfe  to  seventy  or  eighty  years,  yet 
Providence  oftens  extends  it  to  a  longer  period.  3.  Who  die  before  they  have 
reached  the  bounds  of  hfe  which  are  imposed  by  the  laws  of  nature.  Nature  sets 
bounds  to  every  kind  of  hfe  ia  this  world.  All,  therefore,  who  die  by  sickness,  or 
accident,  or  violence,  or  any  other  cause  than  the  course  of  nature,  are  really  de- 
prived of  the  residue  of  their  days.  II.  Inquire  why  God  thus  shortens  the  lives 
OF  men.  1.  To  teach  the  living  that  He  is  not  dependent  upon  them  in  the  least 
degree.  2.  To  teach  mankind  their  constant  and  absolute  dependence  upon  Him- 
self. 3.  To  teach  the  living  the  necessity  of  being  continually  prepared  for  another 
life.  4.  To  teach  the  hving  the  importance  of  faithfully  improviag  hfe  as  long  as 
they  enjoy  it.  6.  God  may  sometimes  cut  short  the  days  of  the  wicked  to  prevent 
their  doing  evil  in  time  to  come.  6.  God  may  sometimes  shorten  the  hves  of 
His  faithful  servants  to  prevent  their  seeing  and  suffering  pubUc  calamities. 
m.  Improvement.  1.  If  God  does  not  always  deprive  men  of  the  residue  of  their 
years,  but  allows  some  to  reach  the  bounds  of  nature,  then  there  is  propriety  in 
prayiag  for  the  lives  of  the  aged  as  well  as  of  the  young.  2.  If  God  so  often  deprives 
men  of  the  residue  of  their  years,  then  it  is  extremely  uiu-easonable  and  dangerous 
to  flatter  ourselves  with  the  hopes  of  liviag  a  great  while  in  the  world.  3.  We  ought 
to  beware  of  placing  too  much  dependence  upon  the  hves  of  others,  as  well  as  upon 
our  own.  4.  Long  life  is  a  great  as  well  as  distinguishing  favour.  5.  If  God 
always  has  wise  and  good  reasons  for  depriving  men  of  the  residue  of  their  years, 
then  it  is  as  reasonable  to  submit  to  His  providence  in  one  rastance  of  mortality  as 
another.  {N.  Emmow,  D.D.)  The  residue  of  years  : — Life  has  crises.  Men 
often  feel  as  if  life  were  re-given.  Wisdom  is  born  in  such  hours.  The  residue 
of  hfe  is  regarded  with  reverence.  The  residue  of  year. — I.  Are,  with  us, 
uncertain.  II.  Should  be  guided  by  the  experiences  of  past  years. 
m.  Should  be  most  serene  and  happy.    IV.  Should  be  most  pious  and 

FRUITFUL  IN   GOOD  TO   OTHERS.      {W.   0.   lAUey.) 

Ver.  11.  I  said,  I  shall  not  see  the  Lord. — Eezehidh* a  distress  : — L  Hizeeiah's 
DISTRESS  AT  THE  THOUGHT  OF  NOT  SEEING  GoD.  Thls  manifested — 1.  True 
affection  towards  God.     2.  Fervent  desires  for  the  revelation  of  God's  glory. 


126  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [ohap.  xxxviu. 

3.  Spiritual  power  to  apprehend  God.  11.  Hezekiah's  disappointment  at  thb 
THOUGHT  OF  NOT  SEEING  GoD  ON  E.uiTH.  He  would  See  Him — 1.  In  deliverances 
wrought  out  for  His  people.  2.  In  Divine  manifestations  in  the  temple.  3.  In 
Divine  benediction  upon  himself  and  nation.  Happy  they  who  desire  to  see 
God.  He  may  be  seen  in  this  land  of  death.  In  the  true  land  of  the  hving  men 
ever  behold  Him  face  to  face.  (IT.  0.  Lilley.)  I  shall  behold  man  no  more 
with  the  inhabitants  of  the  world. — One,  and  only  one  probation,  a  benevolent 
arrangement  (with  Luke  xvi.  26): — There  are  two  facts  that  give  death  pro- 
found solemnity.  1.  It  separates  a  man  for  ever  from  his  connections  in  this 
world.  K  v.ekiah  felt  this  now.  Job  felt  this.  "When  a  few  years  are  come," 
&c.  What  living  man  has  not  been  impressed  with  this  idea!  The  old  scene 
of  his  first  impressions,  anxious  labours,  tender  friendships,  and  dear  associations 
is  left  for  ever.  However  trying  this  world  may  be,  it  contains  very  much 
that  is  dear  to  us.  Here  we  felt  the  first  sensations  of  Ufe;  here  the  first  trains 
of  thought  arose ;  here  we  have  received  the  elements  of  our  character;  here  all 
our  joys  have  been  experienced,  our  trials  endured,  and  our  labours  prosecuted. 
Here  sleep  the  dust  of  our  parents  and  our  friends.  To  leave  all  this  for  ever  is  a  sad 
thought.  2.  It  separates  a  man  for  ever  from  all  probationary  means  of  improve- 
ment. Abraham  gave  this  idea  to  the  rich  man  in  the  world  of  perdition:  he 
assured  him  there  was  an  impassable  "  gulf  "  fixed  between  him  and  all  remedial 
means.  After  death  character  seems  stereotyped.  This  is  a  more  solemn  fact 
than  the  other,  though  perhaps  not  so  deeply  and  generally  felt.  To  be  cut  off  for 
ever,  if  we  are  wicked,  from  Bibles,  sanctuaries,  and  all  mediatorial  influences  and 
helps ;  to  have  an  impassable  gulf  between  all  that  is  bright  and  fair  in  the  universe 
and  one's  self; — how  solemn  this !  This  fact,  which  is  profoundly  solemn,  is  neither 
cruel  nor  imjust,  but  on  the  contrary  highly  benevolent.  I.  There  is  more  good- 
ness IN  THIS  ARRANGEMENT  TO  THE  INDIVIDXJAL  HIMSELF.  Three  factS  wlll  illus- 
trate this.  1.  In  case  a  man  had  a  second  probation,  and  it  failed,  his  guilt  and 
misery  would  be  considerably  enhanced  by  it.  (1)  Pxmishment  will  be  propor- 
tioned by  the  privileges  and  opportunities  abused.  "  He  that  knoweth  his  Master's 
will,  and  doeth  it  not,"  &c.  '  If  I  had  not  spoken  to  them,"  said  Christ,  "  they  had 
not  had  sin."  What  is  the  guilt  of  a  heathen  compared  with  a  man  living  in 
Christian  lands?  (2)  The  privileges  and  opporttmities  connected  with  his  first 
probation  are  such  as  to  impose  incalculable  responsibility.  "  He  that  despised 
Moses'  law  died  without  mercy,"  &c.  What,  then,  would  be  the  guilt  of  a  man  who 
had  not  only  lived  through  a  first  probation,  but  a  second  ?  2.  The  man  who  abased 
the  first  probation  would  be  most  likely  to  abuse  the  second.  If  a  man  pass  through 
all  the  remedial  influences  of  the  first  probation — nature,  sacred  literature, 
sanctuaries,  the  coimsels  and  admonitions  of  the  pious,  the  Gospel  ministry — and 
not  be  saved,  but  hardened,  by  all,  would  there  not  be  a  certainty  that,  if  he  entered 
upon  a  second  probation,  the  second  would  also  fail?  (1)  Because  he  would  enter 
upon  the  second  with  hardened  sensibilities.  He  did  not  so  the  first.  We  began 
our  existence  here  with  tender  consciences.  (2)  He  would  enter  on  the  second  with 
confirmed  habits.  If  it  be  asked.  May  not  some  new  influences  be  brought  to  bear 
upon  the  soul  in  the  second  probation  that  did  not  act  upon  him  in  the  first? — We 
ask.  What  new  influences  are  possible?  We  can  only  conceive  of  two  kinds — the 
penal  and  the  merciful.  Will  penal  sufferings  convert?  And  as  to  merciful 
influences — can  there  be  any  more  merciful  power  brought  to  bear  upon  the  soul 
than  now?  Can  God  give  a  more  moving  and  mighty  expression  of  His  love  than 
in  sending  His  only- begotten  Son?  3.  Man's  knowledge  of  a  second  probation 
would  tend  to  counteract  upon  his  mind  the  saving  influence  of  the  first.  ( 1 )  It 
would  strengthen  that  procrastinating  principle  in  his  nature  which  leads  him  now  to 
postpone  the  question  of  his  salvation.  (2)  It  would  strengthen  that  presuming 
tendency  of  his  nature  which  induces  him  to  run  the  risk  of  the  future.     (HomUist.) 

Ver.  12.  As  a  shepherd's  tent. — The  inconstancy  of  earthly  life : — He  saith  "  • 
shepherd's  tent,"  because  that  represents  the  inconstancy  and  imcertainty  of  our 
life,  more  than  any  other  tent.  The  soldier's  tent  may  stand  pitched  long  in  a 
place,  as  in  sieges  and  the  like ;  but  shepherds  change  the  place  of  their  tent  every 
day,  because  of  the  opportunity  of  fresh  pasture  for  their  cattle.  (W.  Day,  M.A.) 
As  a  shepherd's  tent : — I.  Man's  lot  has  no  permanence.     II.  It  is  easily 

REMOVED.  III.  It  may  BE  SPEEDILY  REMOVED.  IV.  It  IS  OFTEN  REMOVED 
SUDDENLY.      V.  It  IS   REMOVED   TO   ANOTHER  PLACE.      (IF.   0.   LUley.)  I  haT« 

oat  off  like  a  weaver  my  life. — The  art  of  weaving  seems  to  have  been  coeval 


CHAP,  xxxvin.]  ISAIAH.  127 

with  the  first  dawn  of  civilisation.  We  do  not  know  where  or  at  what  time  it  was 
invented;  but  we  find  that  at  an  early  age  in  the  world's  history  the  Egyptians 
manifested  great  skill  in  it.  The  vestures  of  fine  linen  such  as  Joseph  wore  were  the 
product  of  Egyptian  looms,  and  the  existing  specimens  of  the  mummy  cloth  of 
Egypt  are  said  to  compare  favourably  with  the  finest  cambric  of  modem  times. 
There  are  various  incidental  references  to  this  art  in  the  Scriptures.  We  are  .told 
that  the  staff  of  GoUath's  spear  was  Uke  a  weaver's  beam.  Job  says  that  his  days 
are  swifter  than  a  weaver's  shuttle.  And  among  the  experiments  which  Dehlah 
tried  in  ascertaining  the  secret  of  Samson's  strength,  we  find  one  that  consisted  in 
weaving  the  seven  locks  of  his  hair  with  the  web  of  her  loom.  "  She  fastened  it 
with  the  pin,  and  said  imto  him.  The  Philistines  be  upon  thee,  Samson ;  and  he 
awaked  out  of  his  sleep,  and  plucked  away  the  pin  of  the  beam,  and  the  web." 
Here  we  have  references  to  some  of  the  parts  of  the  loom  as  it  exists  in  the  present 
day,  the  beam,  the  shuttle,  the  pin  to  which  the  web  was  attached.  Indeed,  we 
learn  on  reliable  authority  that  though  the  introduction  of  machinery  has  made 
some  important  changes  in  the  loom  as  used  by  the  ancients,  yet  the  essential 
features  of  it  remain  unaltered.  (IF.  V.  Robinson,  B.A.)  Man  as  a  weaver  : — 
We  need,  therefore,  but  a  slight  acquaintance  with  the  art  of  weaving  in  its  present 
state  to  enable  us  to  understand  the  meaning  of  our  text.  Let  us  suppose  that  a 
man  is  standing  before  his  loom.  The  warp  has  been  supplied  to  him  by  his  master, 
and  fixed  to  the  weaver's  beam.  The  threads  pass  over  the  loom,  and  the  weft  is 
shot  through  by  means  of  the  shuttle.  The  web  is  then  complete,  and  is  rolled  on 
to  another  beam.  When  the  required  length  of  cloth  has  been  woven,  the 
threads  of  the  warp  are  cut,  and  if  the  master  has  no  more  work  for  the 
weaver,  he  is  dismissed  from  his  employ.  {Hid.)  The  web  of  life : — Life 
is  like  a  web  of  which  man  is  the  weaver,  and  the  threads  may 
at  any  moment  be  cut  by  the  master,  and  the  weaver  dismissed  from  the  loom. 

1.  Lite  is  like  a  web,  of  which  God  supplies  the  materials,  and  of  which 
MAN  IS  THE  WEAVER.  1.  God  Supplies  the  warp  of  Ufe.  (1)  This  consists  partly  of 
a  man's  capacities  and  partly  of  a  man's  circumstances.  It  is  different  in  almost 
every  case ;  but  in  each  case  it  forms  the  material  which  lies  at  the  basis  of  a  man's 
life.  No  two  men  are  exactly  alike.  One  man  enters  life  with  a  strong  physical 
constitution.  Another,  perhaps  his  brother,  enters  into  Ufe  a  cripple.  One  man 
inherits  a  strong  intellect,  which  in  his  boyhood  puts  him  at  the  toj)  of  his  school, 
and  in  his  later  years  makes  him  the  leader  of  his  fellows.  Another  is  born  with  a 
slow,  dull  comprehension.  One  man  is  born  with  tastes  and  tendencies  which  will 
make  him  an  artist  or  a  poet;  another  with  passions  which  ^vill  sink  him  into  the 
criminal  class  if  they  are  allowed  to  develop.  One  man  is  weak  in  character, 
veering  like  the  weather-cock  with  every  breath  of  pubHc  opinion.  Another 
has  a  strong  character.  He  is  firm  and  persistent,  and  allows  no  difficulty  to 
discourage  or  distress  him.  How  very  different  is  the  warp  of  Ufe  in  these  cases! 
(2)  The  warp  of  life  comprises,  moreover,  a  man's  early  surroundings,  his  parentage, 
his  social  position,  his  early  education,  his  reUgious  training.  One  man  is  born 
with  a  silver  spoon  in  his  mouth,  another  has  the  fiery  Uquid  poured  down  his 
throat  before  he  is  many  weeks  old.  One  is  surrounded  by  the  sunshine  of  love 
and  affluence;  another  enters  Ufe  in  the  cold  winds  of  adversity  and  cruel  oppres- 
sion. One  man  is  born  in  a  country  village,  and  his  early  Ufe  is  full  of  experiences 
of  the  external  world  in  all  its  purity  and  beauty;  another  is  bom  in  a  large 
town,  amid  the  roar  of  traffic  and  the  bustUng  excitement  of  city  life.  One  is 
bom  in  a  land  where  the  air  is  heavy  with  idolatry;  another  is  surrounded  with 
Christian  influences.  How  different  is  the  warp  of  Ufe  in  aU  such  cases!  Now 
God  suppUes  this;  and  it  is  not  for  any  one  of  us  to  mmrmur  at  His  arrangements. 
For  this,  at  least,  we  know,  that  God  requires  of  a  man  no  more  than  he  possesses. 

2.  The  weft  of  life,  as  we  conceive  of  it,  consists  of  the  desires  and  purposes  and 
resolutions  that  we  bring  to  bear  upon  omr  capacities  and  circumstances.  There 
are  some  who  weave  with  the  coarse  yarn  of  selfishness,  who  use  their  strong 
physical  natures  for  the  gratification  of  their  bodily  appetitfes,  who  allow  their 
strong  reasoning  powers  to  lift  them  up  in  rebellion  against  God,  who  oppress  and 
crush  their  weaker  brethren  with  their  firm  wills  and  imperious  natures.  When 
a  coarse  thread  is  woven  into  a  fine  warp,  the  cloth  is  not  good.  Neither  can  that 
life  be  good  which  has  a  selfish  purpose  woven  into  the  Divine  plan.  But  there 
are  others  who  weave  with  the  fine  yam  of  Christian  consecration,  and  the  web  of 
their  Uves  cannot  but  be  well  pleasing  in  the  sight  of  Grod.  It  is  true  that  the  weft 
of  Ufe  is  suppUed  to  us  as  well  as  the  warp,  and  yet  each  man  possesses  the  power 


128  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  xxxvul 

to  choose  the  thread  that  he  will  weave  into  his  life.  It  is  ours  to  choose  either 
the  selfish  purpose  or  the  Christ-like  purpose.  Any  weaver  may  lay  aside  the 
yam  that  his  master  has  supplied  to  him,  and  substitute  for  it  an  inferior  yam  and 
work  with  that.  And  that  is  exactly  what  many  are  actually  doing.  On  the  one 
side,  the  Divine  Spirit  is  prompting  him  to  all  that  is  noble  and  good;  and  on  the 
other  side  are  the  spirits  of  darkness,  who  cannot  compel  one  single  man  to  choose 
the  wrong,  but  who  can,  and  do  tempt  him  to  it;  and  if  a  man,  either  through 
indifference  or  presumption,  allows  himself  to  be  influenced  by  that  which  is  evil, 
for  the  life  that  is  thus  marred  he  is  accountable  to  God.  H.  God  knows  best 
OF  ALL  WHEN  THE  WEB  OF  LIFE  13  REALLY  FINISHED.  The*  Greeks  believed  that 
the  fates  were  spinning  the  web  of  human  life,  and  that  they  determined  when 
it  should  be  cut  off  from  the  loom.  Ours  is  a  truer  and  a  more  comforting  creed. 
It  is  no  cruel  fate  but  a  loving  Father  that  determines  for  us  the  length  of  life's 
fabric.     1.  We  sometimes  think  that  some  lives  are  ended  before  they  are  com- 

Eleted.  What  means  the  broken  column,  so  frequently  to  be  seen  in  our  cemeteries, 
ut  that  some  mourning  friend  thinks  that  one  life,  perhaps  dearer  than  any  other 
life,  has  been  cut  off  before  it  is  completed.  But  God  knows  best  when  a  life  is 
really  finished.  Every  life  is  finished  when  God's  purpose  in  that  life  has  been 
fulfilled.  The  life  of  Jesus  only  reached  over  thirty- three  short  years ;  but  no  one 
thinks  of  suggesting  that  it  would  have  been  better  if  He  had  lived  to  be  sixty. 
His  work  was  finished.  2.  Again,  are  there  not  many  who  seem  to  us  to  have  lived 
long  after  their  work  on  earth  was  over?  It  may  be  that  in  the  patient  waiting  of 
their  Uves,  in  the  dim  glory  of  their  eventide,  He  has  some  threads  for  them  to 
weave  into  the  warp  that  He  has  supplied.  3.  But  after  the  fabric  has  been  rolled 
up,  it  must  be  unrolled  again.  How  few  are  there  who  can,  without  emotion, 
take  a  retrospect  of  their  past  life !  To  some  it  is  a  punishment  greater  than  they 
can  bear!  Ajad  is  there  any  man,  however  good,  who  can  think  of  the  past  without 
regret?  The  memory  of  Grod's  goodness,  indeed,  may  fill  him  with  gratitude, 
and  joy,  and  wonder;  but  the  recollection  of  his  share  in  life's  fabric  must  fill  him 
with  grief  and  shame.  And  this  life  must  be  imrolled  before  the  searching  eye 
of  the  Great  Master,  in  the  fierce  light  that  beats  about  His  throne.  "  For  we 
must  aU  appear  before  the  judgment-seat  of  Christ."  How  can  we  bear  to  present 
such  imperfect  and  sin-stained  lives  to  God  ?  Let  us  take  courage.  For  are  there 
not  some  standing  before  the  throne  whose  lives  were  no  better  than  ours?  How 
can  they  stand  there  ?  "  They  have  washed  their  robes,  and  made  them  white 
in  the  blood  of  the  Lamb."  And  we,  too,  can  receive  forgiveness  and  cleansing 
where  they  received  it.  The  Great  Master  might  well  say  that  such  clumsy  and 
faithless  weavers  as  we  are  should  have  no  place  in  His  service  and  in  His  home. 
But  He  will  receive  us  for  the  sake  of  His  dear  Son.  {Ihid. )  Two  typical  cases  : 
Judas  Iscariot  and  Paul : — Judas  Iscariot  was  a  man  of  whose  capacities  we  know 
little.  We  may  infer,  however,  that  he  possessed  some  valuable  gifts,  or  his 
brethren  in  the  apostolate  would  never  have  assigned  to  him  the  important  office 
of  purse-bearer  and  almoner  to  the  little  band.  His  circumstances,  we  know,  were 
unusually  good.  He  was  drawn,  with  the  other  apostles,  to  the  feet  of  Jesus 
by  the  gracious  words  that  proceeded  out  of  His  mouth.  For  three  years  he 
accompanied  our  Lord  in  His  journeys.  He  heard  the  discoiu-ses  to  which  He  gave 
utterance,  and  he  lived  under  the  influence  of  His  character.  This  was  the  wjirp 
of  his  life.  But  what  does  he  weave  into  it?  Is  it  avarice,  or  is  it  vindictiveness, 
or  is  it  a  conceited  idea  that  he  can  force  the  triumph  of  his  Master,  or  is  it  bitter 
disappointment  at  the  spiritual  character  of  Christ's  kingdom,  that  forms  the  weft 
of  his  life?  Whatever  it  is,  it  is  a  dark,  coarse  thread.  Satan  enters  into  him. 
He  betrays  his  Master  even  with  the  kiss  of  loyalty  and  affection.  And  when  he 
comes  to  look  at  the  web  that  he  has  woven,  he  himself  is  so  overwhelmed  with 
grief  and  remorse,  that  he  cuts  himself  off  from  the  loom.  "  He  went,  and 
departed,  and  hanged  himself."  Saul  of  Tarsus  was  a  very  different  man;  a  man 
of  weak  physical  constitution,  but  of  strong  intellect ;  a  man  of  deep  conscientious- 
ness and  rousing  enthusiasm.  Brought  up  in  a  comfortable  home  and  trained 
in  the  Pharisaism  of  his  day,  he  weaves  into  his  early  life  a  simply  liurid  thread  of 
persecution  of  the  Christians.  Jesus  meets  him  on  the  way  to  Damascus,  a.nd  he 
gives  himself  up  completely  to  the  influences  that  are  brought  to  bear  upon  him. 
How  changed  his  life  is!  He  has  severe  physical  sufferings  to  endure;  he  has 
persecutions  innumerable  to  face;  but  inwoven  into  all  the  threads  of  the  Divine 
providence  is  the  grand  purpose  of  consecration  to  Christ's  service.  Henceforth 
the  motto  of  his  life  is.      To  me  to  live  is  Christ."     Christ  is  the  aim  of  all  his 


CHAP,  xxxvin.]  ISAIAH.  129 

labours,  of  all  his  sufferings,  of  all  his  successes.  And  now  that  that  life  is  un- 
rolled for  us  in  the  Scriptures  it  is  acknowledged  to  be  one  of  the  noblest  and  best 
ever  lived  upon  earth.  (Ibid.)  The  life  of  Jesus : — But  even  that  life  pales 
before  the  resplendent  glory  that  streams  forth  from  the  one  perfect  life  upon  earth, 
the  life  of  Him  who  was  at  once  the  Son  of  Mary  and  the  Son  of  God.  Born  in  the 
stable  of  the  inn  at  Bethlehem,  bred  in  the  humble  home  of  Nazareth,  pursuing 
the  calling  of  a  carpenter.  He  possessed  little  that  men  would  covet.  But  that  life 
was  glorious,  not  because  of  its  circumstances,  but  because  of  its  high  and  holy 
purpose.  "  My  Father's  business,"  that  was  the  aim  that  He  set  before  Himself 
from  the  beginning;  and  that  was  the  aim  that  He  pursued  to  the  close  of  His 
career.  When  at  last  the  supreme  moment  has  come.  He  can  shout  triumph- 
antly, "  It  is  finished."  He  has  glorified  God  on  the  earth.  He  has  finished  the 
work  that  was  given  Him  to  do.  like  His  own  seamless  robe,  Hjs  life  was  of  one 
piece  throughout.  And  He  lived  for  us.  He  died  for  us.  Trusting  in  Him,  follow- 
ing in  His  footsteps,  oiu-  lives  may,  in  some  measure,  be  like  His.  Humbler  they 
can  scarcely  be;  but  are  there  any  that  are  so  full  of  glory?  [Ibid.)  Human 
life  a  weaving  : — I.  It  is  worth  while  LOOEiNa  at  the  woek  itself.  Now  what 
is  this?  The  formation  of  personal  character.  There  are  two  great  elements 
which  might  well  correspond  with  the  weaver's  warp  and  woof.  The  first  may 
represent  the  principles  of  scriptiural  trust  in  God;  pardon,  providence,  hope,  &c. 
These,  like  the  weaver's  warp,  are  strong  and  firmly  fixed.  The  second  are  our  own 
daily  deeds.  Each  is  a  thread,  woven  into  the  character;  both  are  necessary  in 
cloth  making:  so  are  faith  and  works,  in  character  weaving.  Now  observe  about 
this  work  what  it  is.  1.  The  weaver's  own.  I  do  not  mean  that  the  materials, 
either  before  or  after  they  are  made  up,  belong  to  him,  but  the  work  itself.  A 
thousand  weavers  may  use  the  same  wool  in  common,  while  the  work  of  each  will 
be  the  product  of  each  individual  workman.  Now  this  is  a  solemn  fact  in  character 
weaving.  Every  man  is  making,  and  must  make,  his  own;  nobody  can  make  it 
for  him,  nor  can  God  give  it  him.  2.  It  is  a  work  of  increasing  progress.  We  have 
to  choose,  not  whether  the  work  shall  go  on,  but  only  whether  the  work  shall  be 
good  or  bad.  3.  It  is  a  work  of  growing  ease.  It  is  diflScult  at  first,  but  soon,  and 
in  proportion  to  the  weaver's  assiduity,  he  becomes  dexterous,  and  may  sing  all  day 
at  his  loom;  ay,  he  shall  have  plenty  to  sing  about  too!  So  it  is  with  character 
weaving.  4.  It  is  a  work  of  changeful  feeling.  We  may  be  full  of  joy  or  grief, 
gaiety  or  gloom,  only  let  the  work  go  on.  The  finest  cloth  is  often  woven  while 
we  weep  (Job  vii.  6).  Poor  Job!  You  little  thought  what  was  in  your  loom  then! 
Every  age  admires  that  work  of  yours !  Christian  weaver,  do  not  think  too  much 
of  your  frames  and  feehngs.  11.  It  is  worth  while  lookikg  at  the  materials. 
These  are  the  doctrines  of  truth,  all  the  agencies  of  the  Spirit,  and  particularly 
aU  the  events  of  life,  all  the  calls  to  self-denial,  duty,  trust  and  righteousness  which 
ova  lot  furnishes.  Observe  of  them — 1.  They  are  like  the  weaver's  wool,  all  supplied 
by  the  Master.     And  the  Master  gives  that  material  which  best  suits  the  workman. 

2.  They  are  only  materials  after  all.  They  are  valuable  for  the  cloth's  sake, 
rather  than  for  themselv^es.  The  man  that  works  the  worst  material  best,  shall 
have  the  best  pay  and  praise,  and  vice  versa.  Always  remember  that  the  part  you 
play  in  life's  drama  is  the  choice  of  God,  the  manner  of  playing  it  alone  is  yours. 
These  materials  are  abundant.  The  master  never  lacks  them  so  that  work  should 
be  short.  Every  workman  has  his  hands  full.  III.  It  is  worth  while  lookcno 
AT  THE  END.  "  I  have  cut  off,"  &c.  Observe — 1.  The  fabric  lasts  for  ever.^ 
Cloth  wears  out,  character  does  not.  2.  The  work  is  over  at  death.  The  loom 
must  then  stop  for  ever.  No  unpicking  bad  work,  finished  or  unfinished,  bad  or 
good.     The  shuttle  is  still,  and  the  shears  cut  off  the  cloth,  and  it  is  delivered  up. 

3.  The  Master  inspects  it.  Here,  reputation  will  be  nothing ;  character,  all.  It  will 
be  held  up  to  the  sun,  iCKiKplveia.  4.  The  Master  disposes  of  it  according  to  its  worth. 
In  reviewing  all  this,  think — (1)  What  a  mercy  it  is  we  are  spared  and  furnished  for 
this  work!  (2)  What  a  motive  to  begin  the  work  early!  (3)  How  soon  shall  we 
have  nothing  but  our  work  left  I  Wealth,  poverty,  health,  sickness,  &c.,  all  will 
be  left  behind !     ( W.  Wheeler.) 

Ver.  14.  I  did  mourn  as  a  dove. — "  /  did  mourn  as  a  dove"  : — The  possessions 
of  the  world  are  often  the  means  of  fightening  life's  sorrows,  and  of  increasing 
its  enjoyments.  What  experience  teaches  us  in  this  respect  the  Word  of  God 
allows.  Prosperity  is  recognised  by  it  as  a  subject  for  gratitude.  But  that 
riches  in  themselves  are  insufiScient  to  make  us  happy  is  undeniable.  At  all  seasons 
VOL.  II. — 9 


130  TEE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  xxxvin. 

the  limitation  of  their  power  is  obvious;  but  at  no  time  does  it  appear  more 
strikingly  than  when  the  king  of  terrors  gives  challenge  to  an  earthly  potentate, 
and  he  finds  that  "  there  is  no  discharge  in  that  war."  The  history  connected 
with  our  text  will  furnish  us  with  an  instance.  I.  The  causes  of  MOtTRNiNG. 
This  image  of  mourning  as  a  dove  is  not  confined  to  this  one  passage  (chap, 
lix.  11;  Ezek.  vii.  16;  Nah.  ii.  7).  Now  the  plaintive  mourning  notes  of 
the  dove  we  will  suppose  to  be  descriptive  of  various  classes  of  men  of  sorrow. 
1.  We  will  begin  with  those  mourning  from  the  same  cause  as  the  author  of 
our  text.  It  was  pining  sickness  which  wounded  the  monarch's  spirit,  and 
the  prospect  which  it  presented  to  him  of  certain  dissolution.  If,  while  as 
a  dove  you  mourn  plaintively,  your  mourning  be  dove-like  because  it  is  meek 
and  submissive,  still  your  mourning  will  be  real  2.  Another  source  of 
mourning  is  the  tmtowardness  of  worldly  circumstances.  3.  Other  sources 
of  sorrow  are  to  be  found  in  the  coldness  of  former  friends,  the  treachery  of 
those  whom  you  trusted,  or  persecution  from  those  who  should  encourage 
and  support.  4.  Another  common  cause  of  mourning  hke  a  dove  is  the 
departure  of  endeared  ones.  5.  A  further  source  of  mourning  is  remembrance 
of  iniquity.  II.  Their  remedies  or  reliefs.  1.  To  the  afflict«d  in  body  there 
la  an  obvious  consolation — the  possibility  of  their  cure.  The  case  before  us  is 
thus  encouraging.  Another  support  in  bodily  affiction  is  the  conformity  which 
it  gives  us  to  our  Lord.  Again,  Jesus  Christ  hath  "  brought  life  and  immortaUty 
to  light  through  the  Gospel"  2.  What,  next,  is  our  rehef  in  case  of  the  wreck 
of  worldly  circumstances?  The  possession  of  wealth  is  no  siire  criterion  of  God's 
approval  If  your  earthly  losses  have  brought  you  to  reflection,  and  led  you  to 
a  right  judgment  of  worldly  goods;  if  the  changes  and  chances  of  this  mortal 
life  have  induced  you  to  set  your  affection  on  thmgs  above;  if  they  have  broken 
your  proud  spirit,  brought  you  to  Christ,  and  ensured  you  an  interest  in  His  "  im- 
searchable  riches,"  then  mourn  not  as  a  dove,  but  sing  as  a  lark.  3.  We  touch 
next  on  the  grief  which  springs  from  dishonour  done  to  us  by  famiHar  friends. 
We  account  this  a  curse:  God  may  turn  it  into  a  blessing.  We  were  wont  to 
trust  in  man;  we  loved  the  creature  with  too  ardent  an  attachment.  Henceforth 
we  think  more  of  that  Friend  "  who  sticketh  closer  than  a  brother";  "  who  is 
the  same  yesterday,  to-day,  and  for  ever  ";  concerning  whom  it  is  our  privilege  to 
exclaim,  "  Whom  nave  I  in  heaven  but  Thee?  "  &c.  If  the  ill-treatment  of  which 
we  complain  consists  in  persecution  for  righteousness'  sake,  our  Lord's  words  in 
the  beatitude  supply  all  necessary  consolation:  "Blessed  are  ye  when  men  shall 
revile  you,"  &c.  As  the  sufferings  of  Christ  abound  in  us,  so  our  consolation 
also  aboundeth  by  Christ."  4.  Separation  from  those  we  love  was  the  foiurth 
cause  of  mourning  for  which  we  were  to  seek  for  a  reUef.  Though  in  lands 
remote,  they  tread  the  same  earth.  The  rough  ocean  is  kind  to  each  of  us:  he 
bears  on  his  bosom  the  swift  messengers  carrying  the  interchange  of  tokens  that 
many  waters  cannot  quench  our  love.  The  weeds  of  widowhood  may  be  twined 
with  flowers  of  cheerf uhiess ;  for  "  a  defender  of  the  widow  is  God  in  His  holy 
habitation."  The  orphan's  lamentation  may  be  hushed;  for  God  is  "  a  Father  of 
the  fatherless."  God  can  give  "  a  place  and  a  name  better  than  of  sons  and  of 
daughters."  And  is  it  a  small  thing  that  "  the  righteous  arc  taken  away  from  the 
evil  to  come  " ;  that  "  they  rest  from  their  labours  "  ;  that  they  are  "  present  with 
the  Lord  "  ?  5.  The  last  source  of  mourning  which  we  noticed  was  the  remembrance 
of  iniquity.  Is  the  wound  incurable?  "  Is  there  no  balm  in  Gilead ;  is  there  no 
physician  there?"  (T.  W.  Thompson,  M.A.)  Affliction  the  occasion  of  mur- 
muring : — "  like  a  crane,"  &c,  I.  Afflictions  often  lead  to  rash  and 
FOOLISH  MURMURINGS.  They  often— 1.  Obscure  God's  goodness.  2.  Lead  us 
to  forget  past  mercies.     3.  Darken  our  future.     II.  Afflictions  leading  to 

RASH    AND    foolish    MXJRMTTRLNGS    EXPOSE    US    TO    GREAT    MORAL    DANGERS.       We 

may,  then — 1.  Wrongly  interpret  God's  providence.  2.  Lose  the  benefit  which 
God  intended.  3.  Dishonour  Him.  4.  Brmg  discredit  upon  our  religious  pro- 
fession. III.  Afflictions  having  led  to  rash  and  foolish  murmurengs, 
SUCH  murmurings  should  be  acknowledged.  This  will— 1.  Show  our  sense 
of  the  evil  of  our  conduct.  2.  Tend  to  repair  the  injury  we  may  have  done. 
3.  Obtain  pardon  from  God.  (IF.  0.  LiUey.)  0  Lord,  I  am  oppressed; 
undertake  for  me. — The  oppressed  soul  scclciwj  Divine  interposition: — If  language 
was  ever  uttered  by  man,  which  all  men  ought  to  adopt;  if  a  petition  was  ever 

£  resented  by  man,  which  all  men  ought  to  present  before  the  mercy-seat,  it  is  this. 
,  You  ALL  NEED  SOME  ONE  TO  UNDERTAKE  FOR  YOU.     Some  One  to  make  your 


CHAP,  xxxvm.]  ISAIAH.  131 

cause  his  own,  and  to  assist  you  in  performing  that  work  on  the  performance  of 
which  your  everlasting  happiness  depends.  You  need  some  one  to  undertake — 
1.  To  support  and  comfort  you  under  the  trials  of  life,  and  carry  you  safely  through 
them.  2.  To  be  yoiir  guide  through  Ufe.  You  need  a  guide,  a  counsellor,  who 
knows  not  only  what  is  in  man,  but  what  every  man  will  prove  to  be  in  futm^e  life. 
But,  if  you  need  such  a  guide  as  it  respects  this  world,  how  much  more  as  it  respects 
the  world  to  come  !  3.  Still  more  do  you  need  some  one  who  will  undertake  to  afford 
you  effectual  assistance  in  subduing  your  spiritual  enemies,  the  enemies  which 
oppose  your  salvation.  4.  Most  of  aU  do  you  need  some  one  who  can  and  will  under- 
take to  plead  your  cause  in  heaven,  and  effect  a  reconciliation  between  you  and 
your  justly  offended  God.    IL  There  is  NO  ONE  ON  eaeth  or  in  heaven  who  is 

BOTH  ABLE  AND  WILIiING  TO  UNDERTAKE  FOB  YOTJ,  EXCEPT  THE  LORD  JeSTJS  ChRIST. 

(E.  Payson,  D.D.)  The  Christian's  grand  resource: — There  is  scarcely  any  feel- 
ing more  painful  than  that  of  desolation.  The  Scriptures  frequently  refer  to  it. 
(Mcah  vii.  1,  2.)  When  this  feeUng  first  comes  upon  us,  there  is  as  it  were  a  total 
prostration  of  strength.  Consider — I.  Thb  Chbistian  under  trial.  The  text  is 
applicable — 1.  To  the  yoimg  Christian  just  entering  upon  the  duties  of  life.  2.  To  the 
young  man  entering  upon  his  religious  course.  3.  To  the  Christian  perplexed  in 
the  path  of  duty.  4.  To  the  Christian  under  conviction  of  sin.  5.  To  the  Christian 
in  a  state  of  grief  for  the  loss  of  one  near  and  dear  to  him.  6.  To  the  Christian  on 
his  dying  bed.  7.  To  the  Ch.'nstian  as  he  stands  before  the  Lord  at  His  second 
advent.  II.  The  Christian's  resource.  The  world  has  many  resources.  The 
Christian  has  but  one.  But  that  one  is  of  infinitely  greater  worth  than  aU  those 
possessed  by  an  unconverted  and  ungodly  world.  (M.  VUliers,  M.A.)  The 
burdened  soid's  relief: — I.  What  is  the  cause  of  your  oppression?  1.  Is  it  some 
biurden  of  sadness  that  has  fallen  upon  you — some  loss,  or  cross,  or  disappoint- 
ment, that  has  shown  you  the  fleeting  uncertainty  of  aU  earthly  treasures?  2.  Is  it 
some  persecution  of  the  ungodly?  3.  Or  do  you  stand  perplexed  by  the  foiling  of 
some  well-laid  plan;  or  the  unsuccessful  issue  of  your  efforts  to  remove  the  pre- 
judices and  enlighten  the  ignorance  and  improve  the  hearts  of  men?  4.  Or  do 
temptations  beset  you,  almost  too  strong  for  flesh  and  blood  to  bear?  5.  Is  it  not 
merely  at  the  deceitfulness  of  your  heart,  but  at  its  "  desperate  wickedness  "  that 
your  heart  sinks  within  you?  II.  Will  you  not  go  on  to  say,  "  0  Lord,  under- 
take FOR  me  "  ?  1.  How  doth  God  undertake  for  us?  Is  it  by  removing  from  the 
sinner  all  temptation  to  sin?  Is  it  by  taking  from  the  aiflicted  and  mourner  the 
immediate  cause  of  his  affliction,  and  restoring  aU  things  according  to  his  short- 
sighted wish?  No,  it  is  by  a  far  different  process.  He  will  suggest  to  his  heart 
good  resolutions,  and  holy  impulses;  and  if  he  cherish  these,  the  spirit  of  Jesus  will 
afford  him  measures  of  special  grace.  And  as  to  him  that  is  bowed  down  with 
sorrow — it  is  not  God's  way  to  reverse  His  sentence,  and  at  once  remove  the  cause. 
But  He  gives  us  such  faith  in  Him,  that  we  beheve  that  "  the  thoughts  which  He 
thinketh  towards  ua,  are  thoughts  of  peace,  and  not  of  evil"  And  in  proportion 
as  faith  makes  herself  heard,  the  voice  of  fretting  dies  away.  2.  What  groimd  of 
confidence  we  have  that  God  will  undertake  for  us.  (1)  Have  we  not  His  own  most 
sure  promise  ?  (2)  Have  we  not  the  experience  of  all  the  servants  of  the  most  High  ? 
(3)  But  besides  and  beyond  the  Word  of  God  and  the  experience  of  the  saints — both 
of  which  the  Israehtes  shared  of  old — we  have  the  knowledge  of  the  Incarnation  of 
our  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  and  of  all  the  fruits  and  consequences  which  grow  out  of  that 
blessed  doctrine.  (D.  A.  Beaufort,  M.A.)  The  yearning  for  sympathy  met  in 
Christ: — There  is  such  a  vast  disproportion  between  a  man  and  some  of  his  own 
feelings — between  the  inner  and  the  outer  life  of  a  man — that  the  wonder  is.  not 
that  we  should  sometimes  feel  the  burden  of  existence,  but  that  there  should  be  any 
man  who  should  not  be  always  saying,  "  I  am  oppressed."  I.  There  are  few 
minds  WHO  DO  NOT  LOOK  OUT  FOR  SYMPATHY.  It  is  an  instinct  of  our  nature,  that 
we  must  lean  somewhere.  Almost  all  error,  all  superstition,  all  worldliness,  resolves 
at  last  into  the  feeling  that  a  man  must  lean;  but  he  is  leaning  on  a  wrong  base. 
It  is  upon  this  great  principle  in  the  man's  breast  that  the  Gospel  lays  hold  and 
points  it  to  Christ.  It  sets  Him  forth  as  the  one  great  Undertaker  for  all  His 
people's  wants.  II.  What  are  Christ's  undertakings  for  us  ?  1.  He  has 
undertaken  to  pay  all  oiu-  debts:  they  are  very  great.  2.  He  has  imdertaken 
that  we  shall  never  be  alone.  "  I  will  never  leave  thee  nor  forsake  thee."  3.  He 
has  imdertaken  that  you  shall  never  be  really  overcome.  "  My  strength  is  made 
perfect  in  weakness."  4.  He  has  undertaken  to  place  you  on  the  smmy  side  of 
everything  all  life  through;  for  "  He  that  folio weth  Me  shall  not  walk  in  darkness. 


132  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  xxxvm. 

but  shall  have  the  light  of  life."  6.  He  has  undertaken  that  you  shall  always 
have  a  place  of  refuge.  "  Come  unto  Me,  all  ye  that  labour,"  &c.  6.  He  has 
undertaken  that  death  shall  be  to  you  only  a  name,  not  a  reality.  "  He  that 
believeth  on  Me  shall  never  die."  {J.  Vaughan,  M.A.)  "  Undertake  for  me  "  : — 
Plezekiah  here  represents  his  disease  as  a  bailiff  that  had  arrested  him  and  was 
carrying  him  to  the  prison  of  the  grave,  and  therefore  prays  that  the  Lord  wotxld 
bail  him  or  rescue  him  out  of  his  hands.  (J.  GiU,  D.D.)  God  needed  in  the 
dying  hour  : — Ten  days  before  the  late  Dean  Burgon  died  he  said,  "  Nothing  but 
the  Everlasting  Arms  can  support  me  now."  (F.  Harper,  M.A.)  The  cry 
of  an  oppressed  spirit : — Our  individuality  is  strong  in  suffering.  The  ego  rises 
to  throw  off  the  chains  that  bind  it.  L  A  cey  op  an  oppeessbd  spimt.  The 
human  spirit  is  oppressed  with — 1.  Sin.  2.  Circumstance.  3.  Trouble.  4.  Mys- 
teries of  life.  n.  A  CBY  ADDBBSSED  TO  THB  TBUB  HELPER.  1.  God  alone  Can 
undertake  the  cause  of  the  souL  2.  He  alone  can  bring  true  dehverance.  3.  He 
will  deliver  those  who  seek  Him.     4.  His  deliverances  are  eternal     ( W.  0.  Lilley. ) 

Ver.  15.  WMt  shall  I  say  ? — A  bewildered  aovl : — Such  an  exclamation 
escaped  from  the  Hps  of  Joshua,  and  it  was  the  language  of  bitter  disappointment, 
for  Israel  fled  before  their  enemies  (Josh.  vii.  8).  The  same  words  were  uttered 
by  our  adorable  Lord  when  His  soul  was  overwhelmed  with  grief  in  the  prospect 
of  His  agonies  and  bloody  sweat.  His  cross  and  sacrificial  death  (John  xii.  27). 
Here  it  is  the  language  of  one  who  was  filled  with  perplexity  by  the  dispensations 
of  Divine  Providence.  Such  is  the  case  with  us  sometimes;  our  circumstances 
are  so  painful,  so  different  from  what  we  anticipated,  that  in  bewilderment  we 
exclaim,  "  What  shall  I  say  ?  "  We  must  say — 1.  That  God's  dealings  are  very 
mysterious.  2.  That  the  words  of  Jesus  are  still  true,  "  In  the  world  ye  shall 
have  tribulation."  3.  That  some  of  God's  promises  require  strong  faith  to  beUeve 
them.  4.  That  God  will  do  just  as  He  pleases  with  His  own  children.  5.  That  the 
trial  of  faith  is  often  very  severe,  exceedingly  painful  6.  That  patience  and 
perseverance  are  required  under  our  trials.  7.  That  when  Satan  hinders,  none 
but  God  can  effectually  help;  therefore  we  must  look  to  Him.  8.  That  however 
rough  the  road,  the  end  will  more  than  make  up  for  its  toUs  and  trials,  for  the  end 
shall  be  blessed.  {James  Smith.)  I  shall  go  softly  all  my  years. — Past 
troubles  remembered  : — The  Revised  Version  has  it:  "I  shall  go  softly  all  my  years, 
because  of  the  bitterness  of  my  soul"  The  marginal  reading  of  the  Revised 
Version  is:  "  I  shall  go  in  solemn  procession  all  my  years  because  of  the  bitterness 
of  my  soul."  That  '  because  of  means — since  I  hold  in  memory  the  bitterness 
of  my  soul  So  that  we  may  state  the  significance  of  our  Scripture  thus:  I  will 
walk  henceforth  in  solemn,  subdued,  reverent  way,  remembering  always  and 
thankfully  the  bitterness  out  of  which  my  soul  has  been  deUvered  ( W.  Hoyt,  D.D.) 
Escape  from  death  gives  a  new  meaning  to  life  : — Hereafter  he  should  walk  with  the 
step  and  the  mien  of  a  conqueror;  or  with  the  carefulness  of  a  worshipper  who  sees 
at  the  end  of  his  course  the  throne  of  the  Most  High  God,  and  makes  all  his  Ufe 
an  ascent  thither.  (Prof.  0.  A.  Smith,  D.D.)  Outlook  in  affliction : — L  A 
WISE  RESOLVE.  Recklcss  ambition  is  folly.  Our  stage  of  action  is  polluted, 
insecure,  and  vanishing.  We  are  weak  and  dying.  To  walk  in  humility,  self- 
distrust,  and  holy  fear  is  wisdom.  11.  Its  cattse.  Afflictions  change  our  views 
of  life.  They  change  us.  Wisdom  is  often  born  out  of  soul-bitterness.  A  severe 
affliction  should  be  an  epoch  in  a  man's  Ufe.  It  should  pluck  out  his  foUies, 
and  make  his  future  a  more  tender,  gentle,  lovable  thing.     (IF.  0.  LiUey.) 

Ver.  16.  0  Lord,  by  these  things  men  live. — Affliction  as  related  to  life : — 
The  conception  and  quaUty  of  life  as  affected  by  the  discipline  of  any  form  of 
trial — that  is  the  topic.  L  Take  the  conception  of  life  as  a  whole,  and  see  how 
that  is  modified  or  altered  by  experiences  hke  those  through  which  Hezekiah 
passed.  They  who  have  had  no  such  critical  experience  in  any  form  have  never 
fully  awakenea  to  the  difference  which  there  is  between  mere  existence  and  life.  In 
sleep  there  is  as  real  existence  as  when  we  are  awake;  but  what  a  paltry  thing 
life  would  be  if  it  were  to  be  a  constant  sleep!  Yet  there  are  those  among  us  in 
whom,  though  their  time  may  be  busily  occupied,  and  though  their  intellects  may 
be  keen  and  vigilant,  the  spirit  slumbers.  They  are  like  the  landowner  on  whose 
estate  there  is  an  undiscovered  silver  mine,  who  is  no  richer  for  his  hidden  weahh, 
and  who  cannot  be  said  even  to  possess  it.  Nothing  haa  come  to  reveal  them  to 
themselves,  or  to  give  them  any  vivid  sense  of  the  existence  of  Ckxl  and  theii 


CHAP,  xxxvm.]  ISAIAB.  133 

relationship  to  Him.  Nothing  has  opened  their  eyes  to  the  possibilities  of  life 
that  are  yet  undeveloped  in  them.  One  day  has  been  to  them  like  another;  and 
the  unbroken  monotony  of  their  experience  has  fostered  in  them  the  expecta- 
tion that  things  will  always  continue  with  them  as  they  have  always  been.  Thus 
they  verify  the  psalmist's  words,  "  Because  they  have  no  changes,  therefore  they 
fear  not  God."  But  when  something  like  that  which  came  to  Hezekiah  comes  to 
them,  then  there  is  a  thorough,  if  also  a  rude,  awakening,  and  they  discover  that 
they  have  yet  to  begin  to  hve.  One  may  easily  see  this  exemplified  in  the  votary 
of  pleasiue.  Or  take  the  case  of  him  whose  object  in  existence  has  been  the 
accumulation  of  wealth.  II.  Passing  to  the  quality  of  the  lite,  we  may  see  how 
that  also  is  affected  by  such  experiences  of  affliction.  Here  many  features  of 
character  are  evoked  or  developed  by  trial  1.  There  is  the  element  of  strength, 
whether  in  its  passive  exercise  as  patient  endurance,  or  in  its  active  manifestation 
as  persevering  energy.  The  poet  has  caught  the  truth  when  he  bids  his  readers 
"  learn  to  suffer  and  be  strong."  He  who  has  known  no  affliction  is  easily  worn  out. 
The  old  sailor,  who  has  been  all  but  shipwrecked,  is  not  dismayed  by  a  summer 
equalL  It  is  the  same  with  life  as  a  whole.  You  will  find  the  strongest  char- 
acters always  among  those  who  have  been  most  sorely  afflicted.  We  ought,  then, 
to  be  reconciled  to  the  afflictions  by  which  alone  it  can  be  developed.  2.  We  can 
see  that  experiences  like  this  of  Hezekiah  have  a  great  influence  in  producing 
unselfishness  in  a  man.  When  a  man  has  been  in  the  grip  of  the  last  enemy, 
and  has  recovered;  or  has  been  within  a  little  of  losing  all  he  had,  and  has  escaped, 
you  can  understand  how  such  an  experience  sends  him  out  of  himseU.  It  inten- 
sifies for  him  the  idea  of  life  as  a  stewardship  for  God,  and  he  sees  the  folly  of  making 
an  the  streams  of  his  effort  run  into  himself.  Howard's  hfe  of  benevolence  was 
the  outcome  of  a  critical  illness;  and  of  multitudes  more  than  of  him  it  can  be  said 
that  they  sloughed  off  their  selfishness  in  the  crucible  of  trial  3.  But  it  is  only  a 
broadening  out  of  this  remark  when  I  affirm  that  sympathy  is  bom  out  of  such 
experiences  as  those  of  Hezekiah.  He  who  would  be  a  helper  must  first  be  a 
sufferer.  He  who  would  be  a  saviour  must  somewhere  and  somehow  have  been 
upon  a  cross.  4.  Experiences  like  Hezekiah's  have  much  to  do  with  the  usefulness 
of  a  man's  life.  Useftdness  is  not  a  thing  which  one  can  command  at  will  It 
is,  in  most  cases,  the  result  of  a  discipline ;  and  is  possessed  by  those  who,  in  a  large 
degree,  are  unconscious  that  they  are  exercising  it.  It  depends  fully  more  on  what 
a  man  is  than  on  what  he  does,  or,  if  it  is  due  to  what  he  does  or  says,  that  again 
is  owing  very  much  to  what  he  is,  and  what  he  is  now  has  been  determined  by  the 
history  through  which  he  has  been  brought.  You  see  that  in  the  case  of  a 
physician.  His  experience  goes  far  more  to  the  making  of  him  than  his  college 
training  has  done.  It  is  so,  also,  in  spiritual  things.  The  helpfulness  of  another 
to  us  in  the  prosecution  of  the  Christian  life  is  determined  more  by  his  personal 
experience  than  by  his  intellectual  pre-eminence.  Here  is  the  secret  of  the  differ- 
ence between  one  man  and  another  in  the  matter  of  pulpit  power.  I  must  add  one 
word  of  caution.  It  is  not  every  affliction  that  works  out  such  results;  and  whether 
any  trial  will  do  so  or  not  depends  entirely  on  the  spirit  in  which  it  is  borne. 
{W.  M.  Taylor,  D.D.)  Luther's  life  enriched  by  trial : — Luther  waa  wont  to  say 
that  his  three  great  teachers  were  prayer,  study,  and  trial;  and  any  reader  of  his 
life  can  perceive  that  if  he  had  been  required  in  the  early  part  of  his  career  to  face 
some  of  the  dangers  which  menaced  him  at  a  later  date  he  would  have  faltered 
in  his  course.  But  through  the  minor  experience  he  gained  strength  for  the 
severer  ordeal;  and  so  it  came  about  that  what  would  have  appalled  him  at  the 
outset  made  almost  as  Uttle  impression  on  him  at  the  last  as  "  the  whistling  of  the 
idle  wind  that  he  regarded  not."  {Hid.)  Sympaihy  engendered  by  trouble  : — 
Those  of  us  who  have  lost  Httle  children  feel  a  prompting  within  us  to  speak  a  word 
of  comfort  to  every  parent  who  is  passing  through  a  similar  experience.  Indeed, 
it  was  in  connection  with  an  affliction  of  that  sort  that  my  attention  was  first 
drawn  to  this  text.  I  had  just  a  few  weeks  before  buried  a  beloved  daughter,  the 
light  of  the  household,  and  had  gone  to  attend  a  meeting  of  Synod  where  an 
honoured  minister,  who  had  been  through  the  same  trial  oftener  than  once  before, 
came  up  to  me  and  took  me  by  the  hand,  and  said  to  me,  with  a  reference  to  my 
sorrow,  "  By  these  things  men  hve."  That  was  all,  but  each  successive  year  since 
then  has  given  a  new  verification  of  his  words,  for  oh !  how  often  in  the  interval 
have  I  been  enabled  to  comfort  others  with  the  comfort  with  which  I  have  been 
comiorted  of  God,  and  the  efficacy  of  the  consolation  lay  largely  in  the  fact  that 
it  waa  offered  by  one  who  had  proved  its  value  for  himself.     (Ibid.)        The  life  of 


134  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  xxxvm. 

the  spirit : — Whosoever  is  really  alive,  that  is,  has  Hfe  in  his  spirit,  the  life  of  a 
ma-i  and  not  a  beast,  the  only  life  which  is  worthy  to  be  called  life,  then  that  life 
is  kept  up  in  him  in  the  same  way  that  it  was  kept  up  in  Hezekiah.     Let  us  see, 
then,  what  things  they  were  which  gave  Hezekiah's  spirit  life.     1.  Great  joy, 
great  honour,  great  success,  wealth,  health,  prosperity,  and  pleasure?     Not  so! 
2.  Trouble  upon  trouble  came  on  Hezekiah.     3.  Death  looked  to  hiui  an  ugly  and 
an  evil  thing — as  it  is;   the  Lord's  last  enemy.     He  conquered  death  by  rising 
from  the  dead:  but  nevertheless  we  die.     Hezekiah  lived  before  the  Lord  Jesus 
came  to  bring  life  and  immortahty  to  hght  by  rising  from  the  dead;  and,  there- 
fore, he  dreaded  it,  because  he  knew  not  what  would  come  after  death.     He  prayed 
hard  not  to  die.     4.  What  was  the  use  of  his  sickness  and  his  terror  if,  after  all,  his 
prayer  was  heard,  and  after  the  Lord  had  told  him,  "  Thou  shalt  die,  and  not  live  " 
— that  did  not  come  to  pass;  but  the  very  contrary  happened?     Of  this  use,  at 
least;    it  taught  him  that  the  Lord  God  would  hear  the  prayers  of  mortal  men. 
Is  not  that  worth  going  through  any  misery  to  learn?     Hezekiah  did  not  pray 
rightly.     He  thought  himself  a  better  man  than  he  was.     But  he  did  pray.     And 
then  he  found  that  the  Lord  was  ready  to  save  him;   that  what  the  Lord  wished 
was  not  to  kill  him,  but  to  make  him   live   more  really  and  fully  and  wisely  and 
manfully.     5.  What  Hezekiah  saw  but  dimly  we  ought  to  see  clearly.     For  the 
Gospel  tells  us  that  the  same  Lord  who  chastened  and  taught  and  then  saved 
Hezekiah,  was  made  flesh,  that  He  might  in  His  own  person  bear  all  our  sickness 
and  carry  our  infirmities;  that  He  might  understand  all  our  temptations  and  be 
touched  with  the  feehng  of  our  infirmities.     He  who  made.  He  who  hghtens  every 
man  who  comes  into  the  world.  He  who  gave  you  every  right  thought  and  whole- 
some feeling  that  you  ever  had  in  your  lives — He  counts  your  tears;    He  knows 
your  sorrows;    He  is  able  and  willing  to  save  you  to  the  uttermost.     Therefore 
do  not  be  afraid  of  your  own  affictions.     (C.  Kingsley,  M.A.)        Spoil  from  the 
fight   with  death : — Hope   and   joy   returned   with   restored   health,  and  we   see 
(vers.  16-20)  what  Hezekiah  brought  back  with  him  from  his  fight  with  death — 
1.  A  new  peace.     2.  Forgiveness.     3.  A  new  sense  of  the  dignity  of  life,  and  of  the 
encompassing  eternal  realities.     4.  A  joyful  sense  of  God's  personal  love  for  him. 
(E.  W.  Shalders,  B.A.)        Physical  benefit  may  accrue  from  sicl-ness : — Strange  as 
it  may  appear,  it  is  no  less  true  that  fife  is  often  lengthened  and  health  invigorated 
by  a  sharp  illness.     Like  a  ship  put  in  dock  for  repairs,  an  illness  or  an  accident 
lays  a  man  aside  for  a  time  out  of  the  reach  of  work  and  worry,  and  the  rest  of 
mind  and  body  restores  the  balance  of  his  exhausted  energies.     Typhus  fever 
successfully  treated  often  clarifies  the  whole  system,  just  as  a  chimney  is  cleansed 
by  setting  it  on  fire;   and  a  severe  illness  often  acts  as  a  solemn  warning,  leading 
men  to  consider  their  ways  and  their  work,  and  to  diminish  the  strain  which  is 
overtaxing  the  system,  or  to  give  up  some  vicious  habit  of  self-indulgence  which 
is  laying  the  axe  to  the  root  of  the  tree.     (IF.  Johnston,  D.D.)        The  uses  of 
affliction  : — The  allusion  of  our  text 'is  not  to  the  hfe  of  the  body,  but  to  that  which 
is  far  more  important,  the  life  of  the  souL     In  what  manner  does  severe  sickness 
or  affliction  of  any  kind  conduce,  by  the  blessing  of  God,  to  the  creation  and 
development  of  our  spiritual  life?    I.  Affliction  teaches  us  orrR  entire  depend- 
ence UPON  God.    n.  Affliction  disrobes  us  of  self-righteousness.     Hezeldah 
yielded  to  the  insidious  promptings  of  self-righteousness  and   self-glorification. 
Affliction  \ra»  the  disrobing  process  through  which  he  was  called  upon  to  pass, 
the  school  in  which  he   must  learn  his   unworthiness  as  well  as  his  weakness. 
And   in  this  disrobing  of  all  self-righteousness  there  was  the  hfe  of  his  spirit. 
in.  Affliction  brings  us  to  realise  and  enjoy  the  fui.ness  of  Christ. 
When  Hezekiah  was  awakened  to  a  sense  of  his  want  of  righteousness  before  God, 
he  expected  to  go  softly  in  the  bitterness  of  his  soul  all  the  years  of  his  hfe.     But 
the  Rolf -righteous  idea  of  innocence  and  excellence  is  no  longer  the  broken  spear  on 
which  to  lean  and  pierce  his  hand.     The  Sun  of  Righteousness  has  arisen  with 
healing  in  His  wings;  bitterness  and  disquietude  pass  away  together,  and  Hezekiah 
is  made  to  see  what  he  had  never  seen  so  clearly  before — that  in  love  to  his  soul, 
the  Lord,  his  God  in  covenant,  had  afflJcted  his  body,  had  thus  dehvered  his  soul 
from  the  pit  of  corruption,  and  had  cast  all  his  sins  bi^hind  His  back.    IV.  Sanctified 
affi>tctton  stimulates  us  in  Christian  work.     Hezekiah  learned  on  the  bed  of 
sickness  that  there  are  but  twelve  hours  in  the  day,  that  the  night  cometh  when 
no  man  can  work,  and  that  the  brief  period  of  hfe  must  be  dihgently  and  devoutly 
improved.     And  it  is  when  laid  upon  the  bed  of  severe  sickness,  with  time  in  the 
past  and  eternity  in  the  near  future,  that  we  shall  realise  in  all  its  solemnity  the 


CHAP,  xxxvul]  ISAIAH.  135 

importance  and  responsibility  of  life,  and  resolve,  if  spared  like  Hezelciah  yet  a 
little  longer  to  recover  strength  before  we  go  hence  to  be  no  more,  that  our  chief 
end  shall  be  to  glorify  God  and  enjoy  Him  for  ever.  {Ibid.)  The  life  of  the 
spirit : — Hezekiah  was  a  rich  and  prosperous  king.  Surrounded  by  the  dignities 
of  rank,  the  refinements  of  elegance,  and  the  gratifications  of  voluptuousness,  he, 
doubtless,  viewed  these  as  the  very  end  and  dehght  of  his  being,  and  wished  for 
nothing,  knew  of  nothing  better  or  beyond  them.  No  j  very  different  was  his  char- 
acter ;  very  different  were  the  things  of  which  he  spake.  These  words  were  not 
uttered  in  "  the  house  of  his  armoiu*,"  but  in  the  chamber  of  his  sickness;  not  at  the 
festive  table  of  his  royal  banquets,  but  upon  the  couch  of  lassitude  and  pain.  Let  us 
endeavour,  by  a  few  examples,  to  verify  his  pensive  contemplation  ;  and  this,  that 
we  may  learn  "  so  to  number  our  days,  that  we  may  apply  our  hearts  unto  wisdom." 
1.  Take  the  case  of  a  professed  scoffer  at  religion.  He  is  arrested,  we  will  suppose, 
by  the  arm  of  Omnipotence,  in  his  profligate  course;  he  ia  thrown  by  a  stronger 
hand  than  his  own  upon  the  couch  of  pain  and  dejection;  he  learns  for  the  first 
time  to  tremble;  we  will  suppose  him  humbled,  converted.  Sanctified  affliction 
was  the  first  step.  This  softened  the  stony  ground:  this  prepared  the  heart  for 
holy  impressiona  Will  not  such  a  one  be  ready  to  exclaim  with  Hezekiah,  "  By 
these  things  men  live,  and  by  these  is  the  life  of  the  spirit "  ?  2.  Imagine  a  man 
careless  and  indifferent  to  religion,  though  not  a  hardened  scoffer.  He  is  too  busy 
with  the  world  to  spend  a  thought  upon  his  eternal  safety.  But  God  brings  him 
low.  In  the  sUence  and  soUtude  of  affliction  he  is  forced  to  think.  What  cause 
will  such  a  one  have  for  ever  to  bless  Him  who  wounds  that  He  may  heal,  who  kills 
that  He  may  make  alive !  3.  Let  us  imagine  an  inconsistent  backsUding  Christian 
brought  into  deep  affliction.  He  retvu-ns  to  Him  whom  he  had  forsaken,  4.  Look 
at  the  Pharisee,  God  brings  him  within  sight  of  death  and  eternity.  He  is 
Tinmasked  to  himself,  and  begins  to  exclaim,  "  What  must  I  do  to  be  saved?  " 
What  a  blessing  has  affliction  been  to  such  a  character !  5.  The  dejected  Christian. 
How  often  has  such  a  one  had  reason  to  exclaim  of  afflictions,  that  "  by  these 
things  men  live  " !  The  season  of  weakness  and  distress  is  often  that  which  God 
selects  for  the  brightest  manifestations  of  His  love  and  tenderness.  {Family 
Sermons.)  The  restoration  of  belief  : — In  the  especial  case  of  Hezekiah,  belief 
was  restored  by  a  great  shock,  which  brought  him  into  contact  with  reahty,  God 
appeared  to  him — not  as  to  Adam,  in  the  cool  of  the  day,  but  as  He  came  to  Job, 
in  the  whirlwind  and  the  eclipse — and  Hezekiah  knew  that  he  had  been  living  in 
a  vain  show.  The  answer  of  his  soul  was  quick  and  sad:  "  By  these  things  men 
live,  0  Lord."  L  The  blow  which  sobered  Hezekiah  was  a  cojimon  one. 
It  did  nothing  more  than  bring  him  face  to  face  with  death.  The  process  whereby 
his  dependence  on  God  was  restored  was  imcomplicated.  But  there  are  far  worse 
shocks  than  this,  and  recovery  from  them  into  a  Godlike  life  is  long  and  dreadful 
There  are  things  which  at  first  seem  to  annihilate  belief,  and  change  an  indifferent 
or  a  happy  nature  into  earnest,  even  savage  bitterness.  One  of  these  is  the  advent 
of  irrecoverable  disease,  protracted  weakness,  or  protracted  pain.  God  forgives 
our  human  anger  then,  but  we  speak  roughly  to  Him  at  first.  It  is  a  dark  anger, 
and  may  grow  in  intensity  till  faith  and  love  are  lost  for  this  life;  but  it  will  not 
reach  that  point  if  we  have  some  greatness  of  soul,  if  we  are  open  to  the  touch  of 
human  love.  One  day  the  Gospel  story  ia  all  its  sweet  simphcity  attracts  and 
softens  the  sufferer's  heart.  He  reads  that  Christ's  suffering  in  self-sacrifice 
brought  redemption  nnto  man,  Siu-ely,  he  seems  to  dream  this  is  no  isolated 
fact,  I  too,  in  my  apparent  uselessness,  am  at  one  with  the  Great  Labourer: 
I  bear  with  Christ  my  cross  for  men.  This  is  not  only  the  restoration  of  beUef, 
it  is  the  victory  of  life.  11.  But  theeb  aee  more  dreadful  things  than  long 
DISEASE.  There  is  that  shipwreck  which  comes  of  dishonoured  love.  Many  things 
are  terrible,  but  none  is  worse  than  this.  In  some  there  is  no  remedy  but  death, 
and  far  beyond  the  immanent  tenderness  of  God.  But  there  are  many  who 
recover,  whom  God  leads  out  of  the  desert  iuto  the  still  garden  of  an  evening  Hfe 
of  peace  and  usefulness  and  even  joy.  Lapse  of  time  does  part  of  the  work.  In 
the  quietude  of  middle  life  we  look  back  upon  our  early  misery,  and  only  remember 
the  love  we  felt.  Faith  is  restored,  hope  is  renewed,  when,  like  Christ,  you  can 
timi  and  say,  Father,  forgive  him,  forgive  her,  for  they  knew  not  what  they  did. 
111.  There  have  been  and  are  many  of  us  who  are  conscious  that,  as  we  have  passed 
into  the  later  period  of  life  and  mingled  with  the  world,  our  barlt  faith  has 
ALSO  PASSED  AWAY,  We  have  lost  belief  because  our  past  religion  was  borrowed 
too  much  from  others.     If  we  wish  for  perfection,  and  are  not  content  to  die  and 


136  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  xxxvm. 

love  no  more,  the  restoration  of  belief  may  be  attained  by  the  personal  labour  of 
the  souL  It  is  worth  trying  what  one  personal  effort  to  bring  ourselves  into  the 
relation  of  a  child  to  a  father,  in  all  the  naturalness  and  simphcity  of  that  relation, 
will  do  towards  jfestoring  faith  and  renewing  life  with  tenderness.  {S.  A.  Brooke, 
D.D.) 

Vers.  17-19.  Behold,  for  peace  I  had  great  bitterness. — EezehiaVa  return 
of  'praise  for  his  recovery : — I.  A  sad,  heavy  affliction.  "  Behold,  for  peace," 
&o.  The  affliction  is  aggravated — 1.  By  a  description  of  it  in  its  own  nature. 
(1)  In  the  quality  of  it — "  bitterness."  (2)  In  the  quantity  of  it — "great  bitter- 
ness." 2.  By  opposition  of  the  blessing  which  is-removed — "  peace  "  ;  a  word 
that  comprehends  all  temporal  blessings,  and  more  particularly  is  taken,  in  Holy 
Writ,  for  health — a  blessing  without  which  all  other  blessings  have  no  relish 
in  them.  3.  By  the  surprise  of  it — "  Behold  !  "  as  a  strange  thing.  4.  And 
this  further  aggravated  it,  if  we  understand  it,  as  we  must  in  a  spiritual  sense — 
that,  his  sickiiess  calling  his  sins  to  remembrance,  and  causing  some  distrust 
of  God's  love,  instead  of  that  peace  of  conscience  he  had  had  heretofore,  his  spirit 
was  now  troubled  and  greatly  embittered.  And  "  a  wounded  spirit,  who  can 
bear  ?  "  II.  A  merciful  deliverance  out  of  this  affliction.  "  Thou  hast 
in  love,"  &c.  The  mercy  of  the  deliverance  wants  not  its  heightening  circum- 
stances; as — 1.  From  the  efficient  cause.  It  was  God  deUvered  him.  2.  From 
the  motive  or  impulsive  cause — "  love."  3.  From  the  danger  he  was  delivered 
out  of,  and  that  no  ordinary  one — "a  pit" — "the  pit  of  corruption,"  even  the 
grave.  HE.  A  blessed  improvement  of  this  mercy.  "  For  Thou  hast  cast," 
&c.  This  is  the  crown  of  mercies,  when  temporals  are  thus  accumiilated  with 
spirituals;  this  a  recovery  indeed,  of  the  whole  man,  when  health  is  improved 
unto  salvation,  and  strength  of  body  accompanied  with  pardon  of  sins.  This 
is  right  "saving  health."  IV.  A  thankful  acknowledgment  OF  this  IMPROVED 
MERCY.  That  is  set  forth — 1.  By  showing  the  impossibility  for  the  dead  to 
perform  this  duty.  2.  And  then  showing,  not  the  possibility  only,  but  the  pro- 
babiUty,  that  the  living  will,  i.e.,  such  as  Divine  mercy  continues  in  life,  and 
especially  such  as  are  by  that  mercy  preserved  from  imminent  danger  of  death. 
3.  Exemplified  in  himself.  "  As  I  do  this  day."  {A.  Littleton,  D.D.)  The 
•pains  and  -pleasures  attending  religion: — L  The  felicitous  condition  of 
THE  GOOD  Hezekiah  IN  THE  POSSESSION  OF  PEACE.  Shall  I  speak  of  him  as  a 
man  enjoying  health  in  his  body;  as  a  king  blessed  with  prosperity  and  tran- 
quillity through  all  his  dominions?  These  are  invaluable  privileges.  Rather 
let  us  consider  him  as  a  sinner  whose  conscience  has  been  sprinkled  with  the 
blood  of  Christ,  by  virtue  of  which  he  enjoys  that  peace  which  consists  in  a  sweet 
sense  of  the  Divine  friendship.      II.  Attend  Hezeioah  when  his  peace  is 

FOLLOWED  BY  TROUBLE.  HI.  REFLECT  ON  THE  LOVE  OF  GOD,  DISPLAYED  TO- 
WARDS Hezekiah  in  lengthening  out  his  life  and  pardoning  all  his  sins.  {John 
Rippon.)  The  assurance  of  faith: — I.  The  distress  Hezekiah  was  in  before 
our  Saviour  spoke  peace  to  him,  and  dehvered  him  from  his  sins.  11.  The  assur- 
ance he  had  of  being  pardoned  and  accepted  by  his  Heavenly  Father  and  saved; 
and  how  boldly  he  testifies  that  this  must  be  the  case  with  all  the  children  of 
God.  III.  The  cause  of  all,  which  he  says  was  the  love  of  Jehovah  to  him. 
{John  Cennick.)  The  purpose  of  God's  love  is  to  draw  us  away  from  all 
pits,  dejections,  humiliations,  prostrations,  and  to  give  us  life,  vigour,  triumph, 
sense  and  guarantee  of  immortaUty.  {J.  Parker,  D.D.)  Love's  medicines  and 
mirades : — I.  Healthful  bitterness.  You  have  it  in  the  first  sentence,  which 
runs  in  Hebrew  very  nearly  as  follows  :  "  Behold,  to  peace  (or  to  health)  my 
bitter  bitterness."  This  means — 1.  That  Hezekiah  underwent  a  great,  sad, 
and  unexpected  change.  Let  us  never  boast  ourselves  of  to-morrow,  for  we 
know  not  what  a  day  may  bring  forth.  2.  Hezekiah's  condition  was  one  of 
emphatic  sorrow,  for  he  says,  "  Behold,  to  peace,  Marah,  Marah — bitter,  bitter." 
Marah  was  a  notable  spot  in  the  journeys  of  the  children  of  Israel,  and  Hezekiah 
had  come  spiritually  to  a  double  Marah.  Have  you  ever  passed  that  way  and 
drank  of  double  bitterness — the  wormwood  and  the  gall?  Some  of  us  know  what 
it  means,  for  we  have  had  at  the  same  time  a  body  racked  with  pain,  and  a  soul 
full  of  heaviness.  Perhaps  the  double  Marah  has  come  in  another  form:  it  is  a 
time  of  severe  trouble,  and  just  then  the  friend  in  whom  you  trusted  has  forsaken 
you.  Or,  perad venture,  you  are  in  temporal  difficulties,  and  at  the  same  time 
in  gieat  spiritual  straits.      The  flying  fish  is  pursued  by  a  fierce  enemy  in  the  sea, 


CHAT,  xxxvm.]  ISAIAH.  187 

and  when  it  flies  into  the  air  birds  of  prey  are  eager  after  it;  in  like  manner,  both 
in  temporal  and  spiritual  things  we  are  assailed.  "  Deep  calleth  unto  deep." 
3.  The  meaning  of  our  verse  is  not  at  aU  exhausted  by  this  explanation;  we  mid 
in  it  a  better  meaning  by  far.  "  Behold,  to  peace  bitter  bitterness  " — that  is  to 
say,  the  king's  double  bitterness  wrought  his  peace  and  health.  Take  the  word 
in  the  sense  of  health  first.  Many  a  time  when  a  man  has  been  exceedingly  ill 
the  medicine  which  has  met  his  case  has  been  intensely  disagreeable  to  the  ta^te; 
but  it  has  operated  as  a  strengthening  tonic,  it  has  purged  away  the  cause  of  the 
malady,  and  the  man  has  recovered.  Hezekiah  bore  witness  that  God  had 
sanctified  his  bodily  sickness  and  his  mental  sorrow  to  his  spiritual  health.  While 
he  lay  with  his  face  to  the  wall,  he  read  a  great  deal  upon  that  wall  which  he  had 
seen  nowhere  else.  The  king's  bitterness  of  soul  led  him  to  repent  of  his  wrong- 
doing, as  he  saw  wherein  he  had  sinned.  4.  This  bitter  bitterness  made  Heze- 
kiah see  the  need  of  his  God  more  than  ever  he  had  seen  it  before.  11.  Loving 
DELIVERANCE.  The  Original  runs  thus:  "  And  Thou  hast  loved  my  soul  from 
the  pit  of  destruction."  Taken  in  its  first  sense,  the  king  ascribes  to  the  love 
of  God  his  deliverance  from  death  and  the  grave,  and  praises  God  for  his  restora- 
tion to  the  land  of  the  living.  But  the  words  of  inspired  men  frequently  have 
a  deeper  significance  than  appears  upon  the  surface,  and  indeed  they  often  conceal 
an  inner  sense  which  perhaps  they  themselves  did  not  perceive,  and  hence  the 
king's  words  are  as  dark  sayings  upon  a  harp  full  of  meaning  within  meaning. 
At  any  rate,  taking  the  language  out  of  the  mouth  of  Hezekiah,  we  will  use  it 
for  expressing  our  own  emotions,  and  give  to  it  a  wider  sense  if  such  be  not  the 
original  range  of  its  meaning.  Let  us  notice  three  things.  1.  The  deed  of 
grace:  "  Thou  hast  brought  my  soul  from  the  pit  of  corruption."  (1)  From  the 
pit  of  hell.  (2)  Of  sinfulness,  as  horrible  a  pit  as  hell  itself;  indeed,  under  some 
aspects  it  is  the  same  thing,  for  sinfulness  is  hell,  and  to  Hve  under  the  power  of 
sin  is  to  be  condemned.  (3)  From  the  awful  consciousness  of  wrath  under  which 
we  once  groaned.  2.  The  power  which  performed  it.  Love.  Divine  love  is 
a  catholicon,  a  universal  medicine.  No  spiritual  disease  can  resist  its  healins 
power.  3.  The  modus  operandi  of  this  love.  "  Thou  hast  embraced  my  som 
out  of  the  pit  of  corruption."  Yonder  is  the  child  in  the  pit,  and  the  father,  wish- 
ing to  save  it,  goes  down  into  the  pit  and  embraces  his  beloved  one,  and  so  brings 
him  up  to  liife  and  safety  again.  After  this  manner  did  Jesus  save  us.  He 
embraced  us  by  taking  oiu*  nature,  and  so  becoming  one  with  us.  All  our  lives 
He  communes  with  us,  and  embraces  us  with  arms  of  mighty  love,  and  so  uplifts 
ns  from  the  pit  of  corruption,  m.  Absolute  pardon.  "  For  Thou  hast  cast 
all  my  sins  behind  Thy  back."  This  King  Hezekiah  mentions  as  the  cause  of 
his  restored  peace  and  health.  Sin  was  the  foreign  element  in  his  spiritual  con- 
stitution, and  as  long  as  it  was  there  it  caused  fret  and  worry  and  spiritual  disease. 
Notice — 1.  The  burden.  Sins.  2.  The  owner  of  this  bm-den.  "  My  sins." 
3.  The  comprehensiveness  of  the  burden.  "  AU  my  sins."  The  Lord  comes  to 
deal  with  them.  He  casts  them  behind  His  back.  Where  can  that  be?  It 
means  annihilation,  non-existence.  (C.  E.  Spurgeon.)  Thou  hast  in  love 
to  my  soul  delivered  it. — Miracles  of  love : — "  Thou  hast  loved  my  soul  out 
of  the  pit  of  corruption  "  (margin).  I.  We  were  in  the  beginning  loved  into 
QBACE.  1.  The  love  of  Christ  to  sinners  was  the  topic  which  arrested  ovir  solemn 
attention  to  the  Gospel.  2.  We  sat  in  the  region  of  the  shadow  of  death,  and 
would  have  remained  there  had  we  not  been  loved  into  faith.  3.  At  the  time 
when  faith  came  into  our  hearts,  there  came  with  it  the  sister  grace,  namely, 
repentance.  11.  We  have  been  loved  into  growth  in  grace.  The  great 
motive  power  urging  us  onward  has  always  been  the  self-same  love  of  God.  The 
Lord  loves  us  out  of  love  to  sin.  He  loves  us  out  of  the  pit  of  idolatry.  There 
is  another  pit  of  corruption  into  which  children  of  God  sometimes  fall,  namely, 
that  of  sluggishness.  The  only  effectual  cure  for  a  slumbering  Christian  is  to  let 
him  have  the  love  of  Christ  shed  abroad  in  his  heart.  The  same  is  true  of  that 
abominable  pit  of  selfishness  and  self-esteem  and  pride  and  self-seeking,  into 
which  our  feet  so  easily  gUde.  The  love  of  Christ  is  equally  a  cure  for  despondency 
and  unbelief.  Many  a  child  of  God  can  bear  witness  that  the  Lord  has  loved 
him  out  of  his  impatience.  HI.  The  Lord  will  love  its  out  of  grace  into  glory. 
(Ihid.)  Deliverance  from  destruction: — I  have  heard  a  story  of  a  man,  who, 
travelling  late  and  being  in  drink,  rode  over  a  narrow  footbridge  where  there 
was  a  great,  deep  water  underneath,  that  the  least  trip  of  the  horse's  foot  would 
have  posted  the  rider  to  his  long  home.      Next  morning,  when  he  came  to  himself. 


138  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.         [chap,  xxxvm. 

being  asked  which  way  he  came,  and  brought  to  the  place,  the  apprehension  of 
his  last  night's  adventure  did  so  astonish  his  sober  thoughts,  that  he  fell  down 
dead  in  the  very  place  at  the  sight  of  it.  And  when  we  look  back  upon  the 
follies  and  vanities  of  our  past  lives,  how  can  we  but  be  justly  startled,  when 
almost  every  step  we  have  trod  has  been  upon  the  brink  of  destruction! 
{A.  Littleton,  D.D.)  Soul-pits  abound.  I.  The  pit.  1.  Horrible.  2.  Nigh 
to  every  man.  3.  Treacherous  at  its  edge.  4.  Bottomless.  IT.  One  conscious 
OF  DELivEKANCE  FROM  IT.  1.  He  attributes  his  dehverance  to  God.  2.  That 
it  was  God's  love,  and  not  his  merit,  that  originated  his  deliverance.  3.  That 
all  may  possess  this  consciousness  of  deliverance.  4.  That  unless  the  soul  is 
delivered  it  will  sink  into  this   pit  eternally.      (TF.   0.  Lillcy.)  Thou  hast 

cast  all  my  sins  behind  Thy  hack. — A  sense  of  pardoned  sin  : — I.  A  sense  op 
PARDON  AS  GIVEN  BY  GoD  TO  THE  SINNER.  1.  We  are  not  to  wait  for  this  sense 
of  pardon  before  we  come  to  Christ.  2.  This  consciousness  of  pardon  includes 
many  things,  although  it  is  not  aUke  comprehensive  in  all  souls.  3.  But, 
saith  one,  "  How  does  this  sense  of  pardon  come  ?  "  It  comes  in  different 
ways  and  forms.  Many  men  receive  their  consciousness  of  pardon  in  an 
instant.  With  others  it  is  of  slower  growth.  This  conviction  is  sometimes 
conveyed  to  us  in  the  most  extraordinary  manner.  I  have  known  it  brought 
home  to  the  soul  by  some  singular  saying  of  a  minister.  At  other  times,  some 
strange  providence  has  been  the  singular  means  of  giving  joy  and  relief.  4.  Per- 
mit me  to  dwell  upon  the  joy  which  this  sense  of  pardon  creates.  It  is  but 
taking  God  at  His  word,  when  the  soul  knows  that  as  a  necessary  consequence 
of  its  faith  it  is  saved.  But,  besides  that,  the  Spirit  beareth  witness  with  our 
spirit,  that  we  are  bom  of  God.  II.  A  sense  of  forgiveness  enjoyed  by 
MAN,  NOT  AS  A  SINNER,  BUT  A3  A  PARDONED  CHILD.  I  have  Sometimes  heard 
uninstructed  Christians  ask  how  it  is  that  when  a  man  is  once  pardoned  he  has 
nevertheless  to  ask  every  day  that  his  sins  may  be  forgiven.  The  difficulty  lies 
in  a  forgetfulness  of  the  relationship  which  Christians  sustain  to  God.  As  a 
sinner  I  come  to  Christ  and  trust  Him.  God  is  then  a  Judge;  He  takes  the  great 
book  of  the  court,  strikes  out  my  sins,  and  acquits  me.  At  the  same  moment, 
out  of  His  great  love.  He  adopts  me  into  His  family.  Now  I  stand  in  quite  a 
different  relationship  to  Him.  I  am  not  so  much  His  subject  as  His  child.  He 
is  no  longer  to  me  a  Judge,  but  has  become  a  Father.  And  now  I  have  new 
laws,  a  new  discipline,  new  treatment;  now  I  have  new  obedience.  I  go  and 
do  wrong.  What  then?  Does  the  Judge  come  and  at  once  summon  me  before 
His  throne?  No!  He  is  a  Father,  and  that  Father  brings  me  up  before  His 
face,  and  frowns  on  me — nay,  takes  the  rod  and  begins  to  scourge  me.  He  never 
scourged  me  when  He  was  a  Judge.  Then,  He  only  threatened  to  use  the  axe. 
If  I  do  that  which  is  wrong,  I  am  bound  to  go  to  Him  as  on  a  child's  knees,  and 
say,  "  Our  Father  which  art  in  heaven,  forgive  me  these  trespasses,  as  I  forgive 
them  that  trespass  against  me."  (C  H.  Spurgeon.)  Pardon  realised' — The 
strangest  story  I  ever  remember  to  have  read,  with  regard  to  peace  given  after 
a  long  season  of  despondency,  is  the  case  of  Mrs.  Honeywood.  Living  in  puri- 
tanic times,  she  had  been  accustomed  to  hear  the  most  thundering  of  its  preachers. 
She  became  so  thoroughly  broken  in  peace  with  the  consciousness  of  sin,  that 
for,  I  think,  some  ten  years,  if  not  twenty  years,  the  poor  woman  was  given 
up  to  despair.  It  seemed  that  in  this  case,  a  kind  of  miracle  must  be  wrought 
to  give  her  peace  of  mind.  One  day,  an  eminent  minister  of  Christ,  conversing 
with  her,  told  her  there  yet  was  hope.  Grasping  a  Venice  glass  that  stood  on  the 
table,  made  of  the  thinnest  material  that  can  be  conceived,  the  woman  dashed 
it  down  on  the  ground,  and  said — "  I  am  lost,  as  sure  as  that  glass  is  broken  into 
a  thousand  pieces."  To  her  infinite  surprise,  the  glass  suffered  no  damage  what- 
ever, but  remained  without  a  crack.  From  that  instant  she  believed  that  God 
had  spoken  to  her.  She  opened  her  ears  to  hear  the  words  of  the  minister,  and 
peace  poured  into  her  spirit.  {Ibid.)  Sins  behind  Ood'a  back : — The  back 
of  God  !  Where  is  that  TLA  man's  sms.  May  be — 1.  Many.  2.  Various. 
3.  Heinous.  (1)  They  are  his  curse.  (2)  He  cannot  cast  them  away.  (3)  He 
must  own  them  for  ever  unless  Divine  mercy  interpose.  II.  Their  Divtnb 
removal.  1.  God  alone  has  the  right  to  cast  them  away.  2.  God  alone  can. 
3.  He  removes  them  so  as  to  see  them  no  more  for  ever.  4.  He  casts  all  sin  away 
that  is  repented  of.     {W.  0.  LiUey.) 

Vers.   18,   19.  For   the    grave    cannot    praise   Thee.— TA«   praisefvl   life: — 


CHAP,  xxxvm.]  ISAIAH.  139 

Bacon  says,  "  Prosperity  is  the  blessing  of  the  Old  Testament,  adversity  is  the 
blessing  of  the  New."  He  would  have  been  nearer  the  truth  had  he  said,  that 
temporal  blessings  were  the  promise  of  the  Old  Testament,  spiritual  blessings 
the  promise  of  the  New.  The  remark,  however,  suggests  thoughts  introductory 
to  the  consideration  of  our  text  from  a  Christian  standpoint.  1,  The  Jews  were 
for  the  most  part  influenced  by  the  prospect  of  temporal  rewards  and  punish- 
ments. Hezekiah  in  this  place  seems  to  have  no  thought  of  a  future  life,  and 
to  be  moved  only  by  the  prospect  of  leaving  this.  There  is  a  development  in 
revelation,  in  this  as  in  other  matters.  2.  When  our  Lord  came,  the  germ  of 
the  doctrine  of  the  future  Hfe,  only  dimly  discernible  to  the  spiritual  mind,  was 
developed.  I.  The  dead  cannot  praise  God.  1.  This  is  true  of  natural  death. 
The  hands  once  strong  to  labour  are  now  nerveless  and  stUl,  there  is  no  "  dis- 
quisition "  in  the  eyes,  and  the  heart  is  unmoved  by  the  things  of  joy  and  grief 
that  thrilled  it  in  life.  2.  It  is  true  of  spiritual  death,  of  which  natural  is  in  the 
New  Testament  the  constant  type.  IL  The  uvtng  must  peaise  God.  1.  The 
natural  daty  of  praising  God  is  recognised  by  Hezekiah;  and  it  would  be  strange 
if  it  were  not  so,  for  we  have  a  loathmg  of  ingratitude  from  man  to  man.  (1)  The 
pagans  would  shame  us  if  we  did  not  praise  God;  for  they  gave  the  first  fruits 
of  their  corn  and  the  best  of  the  prey  taken  in  hunting  as  offerings  to  their  gods, 
and  before  a  feast  made  Ubations  to  them.  (2)  The  Psalmist  is  an  eminent  example 
of  a  praiseful  spirit.  2.  But  those  who  have  been  partakers  of  the  spiritual  resur- 
rection can  alone  truly  praise  God,  for  they  alone  can  fully  reaUse  aU  His  boimty. 
(1)  God  has  designed  all  things  to  His  praise,  and  looks  for  it  in  His  people.  (2)  We 
must  thank  Him  for  all  things,  for  the  blessings  of  this  life,  but  above  all  for 
His  inestimable  love  in  the  redemption  of  the  world,"  Nay,  for  miseries  as  well 
as  for  mercies.  (3)  A  stimulus  to  praise  will  be  found  in  the  remembrance  of 
God's  bounty.  In  the  Greek  mjrthology,  Mnemosyne  was  the  mother  of  the 
Muses;  memory  is  the  mother  of  praise.  3.  But  the  most  perfect  praise  will 
be  in  the  spiritual  body  after  the  resurrection-  (J.  O.  PUkington,  M.A.)  Heze- 
kiah in  prospect  of  death  : — Hezekiah  was,  in  the  full  sense  of  the  word,  a  good 
king.  His  piety  is  shown — (1)  In  his  conduct  with  reference  to  idolatry.  (2)  In 
his  conduct  in  the  matter  of  the  siege  of  Jerusalem  by  Sennacherib.  But  there 
are  two  passages  in  his  life  which  show  the  weak  side  of  his  character.  One  is 
his  parading  his  treasures  before  the  ambassadors  of  the  king  of  Babylon;  the 
other  is  his  conduct  in  the  matter  of  his  severe  iUness.  L  The  essence  of  the  history 
is  this,  that  in  the  prospect  of  death  Hezekiah's  strength  of  mind  qtute 
BROKE  DOWN.  He  looks  upon  death  as  a  thing  to  be  dreaded  and  shimned; 
he  speaks  of  it  in  a  way  in  which  no  Christian  who  has  learned  the  Lord's  prayer 
could  ever  venture  or  even  Msh  to  speak  of  it.  Hezekiah  knew  that  he  must 
serve  God  while  life  lasted;  he  had  manifestly  no  express  revelation  beyond, 
and  therefore  he  looked  upon  the  grave  with  dismay.  11.  We  have  greatee 
SPramjAL  help  than  Hezekiah,  and  brighter  light,  and  clearer  grounds  of  hope, 
and  it  is  incumbent  on  us  to  act,  not  like  those  who  groped  their  way  in  the  twi- 
light of  the  old  dispensation,  but  hke  those  upon  whom  the  brightness  of  the 
knowledge  of  the  glory  of  God  has  shined  in  the  face  of  Jesus  Christ.  {Bp.  Harvey 
Goodwin,  D.D.) 

Ver.  19.  The  living,  the  living,  lie  shall  praise  Thee. — The  right  life : — The 
right  life  is  a  praise-giving  life.     Such  a  life  is— I.  The  most  honourable.     II.  The 

MOST  beneficial  TO  THE  MAN  HIMSELF.       HI.   ThE  MOST  BENEFICIAL  TO   OTHERS. 

"  The  father  to  the  children  shall  make  knoii^Ti  Thy  truth."  IV.  The  considera- 
tion  OF  the   SHORTNESS   OF  LIFE   OUGHT  TO   INDUCE   US   TO   SPEND   OUR  TIMB  HT 

PRAISING  God.  Hezekiah  felt  that  the  years  given  him  to  hve  on  the  earth  would 
soon  come  to  an  end,  hence  the  emphasis  placed  on  "  the  hving,  the  living." 
{Homilist.)  The  praise  of  the  living: — I.  The  worshipper.  'The  living." 
II.  The  object  and  nature  of  the  praise  rendered.  The  prolongation  of 
life  is  a  legitimate  cause  for  Christian  thanksgiving.  It  is  only  in  our  state  as 
"  the  living  "  that  we  have  an  opportunity  of  uttering  that  winch  we  may  term 
practical  and  generative  praise — a  praise  which  induces  others  to  join  us  in  our 
work — a  praise  which  begets  praise,  and  tends  to  propagate  itself,  by  God's  bless- 
ing, throughout  the  length  and  breadth  of  an  ungrateful  world.  It  is  evident 
that  Hezekiah  referred  to  such  praise  as  this;  for  he  says,  "  The  father  to  the 
children  shall  make  known  Thy  truth."  {D.  F.  Jarman,  B.A.)  The  value 
and  use  of  life : — L  The  duty  of  seriously  meditating  on  our  being  merci- 


140  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  xixvm. 

rtJLLY  SPARED  among  the  living.  It  is  right  and  rational  to  rejoice  in  this  pro- 
longation of  your  life;  but  such  rejoicing  is  useless,  unless  it  be  founded  on  a 
serious  thought  of  the  blessing  received.  To  rejoice  in  being  ahve,  for  the  sole 
selfish  enjoyment  which  you  hope  to  derive  from  Ufe,  is  nothing  better  than  the 
natural  instinct  of  a  mere  animal.  II.  The  importance  of  such  a  blessing. 
There  is  nothing  in  creation  more  amazing  than  what  is  called  hfe;  a  miracle, 
indeed,  perpetuaUy  witnessed,  and  therefore  generally  overlooked;  but  curious  to 
be  contemplated,  and  most  difficult  to  be  comprehended  in  its  various  attendant 
circumstances.  1.  As  a  mere  object  of  curiosity,  a  mere  piece  of  machinery, 
the  lowest  Hving  creatxire  is  above  the  utmost  reach  of  human  intelligence.  2.  But 
how  much  more  important  is  hfe  when  considered  as  a  means  of  enjoyment. 
3.  How  much  higher  still  does  hfe  rise  in  its  interest  and  importance  when  con- 
sidered in  connection  with  an  understanding  mind.  4.  Yet  all  this  is  the  least 
of  the  matter;  and  if  the  life  of  man  were  nothing  more  than  what  we  see  of  it 
here,  wonderful  as  it  is,  it  would  be  only  as  an  empty  show,  or  as  a  fleeting  meteor, 
bursting  on  the  view  and  gazed  at  for  a  moment,  but  gone  for  ever,  even  before 
it  could  be  understood.  5.  But  this  very  fleeting  nature  of  hfe  imparts  an 
additional  value  to  its  possession,  when  viewed  in  its  true  hght,  namely,  as  con- 
nected with  an  eternal  state.  6.  How  much  more  exalted  still  does  our  idea  of 
life  become,  when  it  is  connected  with  salvation!     III.  The  way  in  ^^^IICH  you 

SHOITLD  EXPRESS  THIS  THANKFULNESS  AND  USE  THIS  BLESSING.       "  He  shall  praise 

Thee."  1.  Nothing  can  possibly  be  more  clearly  right  and  reasonable  than  this, 
that  we  are  bound  to  hve  to  the  praise  of  that  gracious  Being  by  whose  power 
and  providence  we  do  live.  2.  This,  indeed,  is  the  great,  the  express  end  for 
which  you  were  brought  into  the  number  of  **  the  Hving  ";  the  onlj'  occjpation 
also  in  which  you  will  find  any  solid  happiness  in  hfe,  namely,  to  praise  or  glorify 
God;  to  make  His  will  the  rule  of  yoxu:  hfe,  to  make  His  glory  the  aim  of  j-our 
life.  3.  But  these  words  do  evidently  express  something  more  than  merely  the 
duty  of  hving  to  the  praise  of  God,  and  of  praising  Him  the  more  fervently  the 
longer  that  He  spares  us  among  the  hving.  They  seem  particularly  to  proclaim 
the  importance  of  life  on  this  account  alone,  that  it  affords  us  an  opportunity 
of  showing  forth  the  praises  of  God.  So  the  devout  behever  feels  a  relish  in  life, 
altogether  distinct  from  his  natural  instincts  or  personal- enjoyments;  namely, 
in  the  power  which  it  puts  into  his  hands  of  praising  the  gracious  Author  of  bus 
spiritual  privileges  and  eternal  hopes.  Nor  is  it  enough  to  say,  that  he  might 
still  better  praise  God  in  the  heavenly  courts.  There  are  calls  for  this  praise 
more  urgent,  and  opportimities  of  this  praise  more  direct,  even  in  this  mortal 
■cene,  than  in  the  eternal  state;  occasions  for  bearing  your  testimony  to  God's 
perfections,  which  are  not  required  in  heaven  above;  occasions  for  exercising 
your  great  Christian  graces  of  faith  and  charity,  which  are  not  afforded,  and 
which  caimot  be  afforded  in  a  state  of  perfect  hohness  and  feUcity.  (J.  Brewster.) 
The  Jew  valued  the  present  life  : — The  Jew,  in  all  his  thought  and  rehgion,  showed 
a  keen  sense  of  the  value  of  the  present  hfe.  The  very  deficiencies  in  his  rehgious 
conceptions  seem  to  arise  from  this  cause.  The  presence  of  God  in  this  world 
seemed  to  obscmre  the  future  from  his  eyes,  just  as  in  later  ages  the  bright  vision 
of  the  future  has  thrown  the  present  into  the  shade.  But  as  the  Jewish  spirit 
became  saddened  by  experience  the  sense  of  the  presence  of  God  in  the  world 
became  weaker.  The  Jew  did  not  relax  his  hold  on  practical  righteousness, 
but  the  faith  of  childhood  began  to  lose  its  simplicity.  His  thoughts  took  a 
wider  range,  and  began  to  be  directed  to  the  futme.  The  revelation  of  Christ 
completed  tl3e  change  for  which  other  influences  had  helped  to  prepare  the  way; 
and  the  new  faith  stood  opposed  to  the  old,  as  the  spiritual  to  the  carnal  {W. 
W.  Jackson,  31. A.)  The  importance  of  the  present  life  : — But  has  the  central 
conception  of  early  Jewish  rehgion  disappeared,  or  has  it  only  been  matured 
and  purified  ?  Is  not  human  hfe,  as  we  have  experience  of  it  here,  in  the  present, 
with  all  its  cares,  and  joys,  and  sorrows,  still  the  great  concern  of  rehgion?  Does 
it  not  still  afford  us  the  best  means  of  drawing  near  to  God,  and  realising  His 
presence?  Does  not  Christ  Himself  teach  us  that  our  first  business  is  in  this  life, 
when  He  prays  to  the  Father  that  He  should  not  take  the  disciples  out  of  the 
world,  but  that  He  should  keep  them  from  the  evil?  (Ibid.)  The  Christian 
view  of  life  : — 1.  The  feehng  which  the  Jew  had  entertained  on  the  subject  of 
death  differs  as  widely  as  possible  from  that  entertained  by  St.  Paul.  The  change 
of  sentiment  had  been  consummated  by  Christ,  who  had  "  abohshed  death  and 
brought  hfe  and  immortahty  to  Ught  through  the  Gospel"   The  life  of  the  Christian 


CHAP,  xxxvm.]  ISAIAH.  141 

was  thenceforth  "  hid  with  Christ  in  God."  The  afiFections  were  thenceforth 
to  be  "  set  on  things  above."  The  opposition  between  the  tilings  of  the  world 
and  the  things  of  God  had  been  declared-  But  as  soon  as  the  Glixistian  asked 
himself  what  was  the  means  by  which  he  could  make  this  view  his  own,  there 
could  be  only  one  reply.  He  must  hve  after  it.  He  must  take  the  spirit  of  Christ 
into  the  world.  But  he  could  rise  to  the  height  of  his  duty  here,  only  by  keeping 
his  eye  fixed  on  the  pattern  in  the  heavens.  2.  This  conception  of  Christian 
life  suggests  reflections  of  two  different  kinds — (l)If  religion  brings  harmony  and 
law  into  human  Ufe,  then  the  life  which  aspires  after  the  ideal  of  religion  is  the 
most  complete.  (2)  On  the  other  hand,  do  we  always  fully  accept  the  human 
revelation  which  the  teaching  of  life  itself  offers  to  us?  Do  we  recognise  the 
di-vuiity  which  resides  in  the  pursuits  and  institutions  of  secular  hfe?  (Ibid.) 
The  peculiar  mercy  and  business  of  life  : — L  The  mercy  of  life.  "  The  living, 
the  living,  he  shall  praise  Thee,"  &c.  IL  Wherein  the  peculiar  mercy  of 
IT  CONSISTS.  1.  Ask  the  carnal  man  where  hes  the  mercy  of  life.  And — (1)  If 
he  is  in  prosperity,  he  reckons  the  mercy  of  life  hes  in  that  the  hving  man  may 
enjoy  the  pleasures  of  sense,  mirth,  and  joUity,  and  may  lay  up  wealth  for  him 
and  his;  all  which  stem  death  robs  a  man  ot  But  there  is  not  one  word  of  this 
here.  (2)  If  he  is  in  adversity,  poverty,  and  sore  sickness,  he  cannot  see  the 
mercy  of  life  at  all,  but  thinks  they  are  well  that  are  away,  that  are  out  of  poverty 
and  pain,  and  he  at  ease  in  the  dust.  So  crosses  make  him  wish  to  be  away. 
At  best,  he  reckons  it  the  mercy  of  life,  that  he  is  not  where  it  may  be  he 
would  be  worse,  namely,  in  helL  But  there  is  not  a  word  of  all  this  either  in 
the  text.  2.  Ask  the  renewed  man  in  an  ill  frame  of  spirit,  where  hes  the  mercy 
of  hfe.  If  he  is  in  outward  prosperity  he  will  be  ready  to  reckon  it  hes  in  the 
comforts  of  this  life.  If  he  is  in  adversity,  the  troubles  of  life  are  so  great,  that 
the  mercy  of  it  is  small  in  his  view;  only  heaven  bulks  in  his  eyes,  and  that  as 
a  place  of  rest  from  trouble.     But  there  is  nothing  of  this  either  in  the  text. 

3.  The  decision  is,  the  mercy  of  hfe  lies  in  the  business  of  life,  to  wit,  being  service- 
able for  God  in  the  world.  "  The  hving,  the  hving,  he  shall  praise  Thee,"  &c. 
Which  speaks  a  high  esteem  of  God  and  His  service,  as  men  count  it  a  favour 
to  serve  their  prince;  and  an  ardent  love  to  Him,  as  men  dehght  to  serve  the 
interests  of  those  they  dearly  love.  Now,  the  business  of  life  for  which  it  is  de- 
sirable, is  twofold-  (1)  To  praise  or  glorify  God  in  the  world.  (2)  To  propagate 
His  name  and  praise:  "  The  father  to  the  children  shall  make  known  Thy  truth." 
It  is  the  special  business  of  hfe  to  endeavour  that  the  name  of  God  may  hve 
and  be  glorified  in  the  world  when  we  are  dead.  Consider — (a)  What  he  has 
access  to  do  for  that  end;  namely,  to  praise  God  to  the  younger  sort,  that  are 
Ukely  to  hve  after  he  is  gone;  especially  to  his  own  children.  (6)  How  he  may 
do  it,  namely,  by  making  Him  known  to  them  as  an  object  worthy  of  their  faith. 
"  Shall  make  known  Thy  truth."  (T.  Boston.)  Praising  God  : — I.  What 
PBAisiNQ  God  is.  It  is  the  acknowledging  and  declaring  the  glorious  excellencies 
of  God,  as  He  has  manifested  Himself  in  His  word  and  works,  and  imports— 
1.  Behef  of  the  Being  of  God-  2.  The  knowledge  of  God-  (1)  Of  who  He  is— 
Father,  Son,  and  Holy  Ghost,  one  God.  (2)  Of  what  He  is.  (3)  Of  what  He 
has  done.  3.  The  love  of  God.  Love  is  the  mother  of  praise.  4.  The  admiration 
of  God,  which  is  love  and  esteem  raised  to  a  high  pitch-  5.  Expressing  that  love 
and  admiration  to  Him.  This  is  twofold — (I)  Vocal.  (2)  Keal,  by  actions, 
though  not  accompanied  with  words.  IL  What  are  the  peculiarities  op 
THE  praises  of  THE  LiviNQ.  1.  They  are  the  praises  of  the  whole  man,  in  soul 
and  body  too  (1  Cor.  vi.  20).  2.  They  are  praises  which  may  spread  among  the 
hving  (Col.  iii.  16).     3.  They  are  praises  raised  by  the  way  to  the  heavenly  kingdom. 

4.  They  are  praises  of  faith,  not  of  sight.  5.  They  are  praises  to  God  amidst 
much  dishonour  done  to  Him.  (Tbid.)  Motives  : — 1.  God  is  the  Author  of  thy 
life.  2.  The  Preserver  of  thy  life.  3.  The  Giver  of  all  thou  hast,  whereby  thou 
mayest  honoiu-  Him.  4.  God  puts  opportimities  in  thine  hand  for  honouring 
Him.  5.  There  are  some  who  are  deprived  of  those  abihties  or  occasions  ye  have 
to  honour  God.  The  pagan  world,  &c.  6.  Ye  have  forfeited  by  sin  aU  your 
abihties,  opportunities,  and  yom:  very  hfe.  His  patience  has  suffered  us  long,  &c. 
Should  not  this  engage  us  to  hve  to  His  honour?  7.  This  was  the  design  of  the 
redemption  purchased  by  Christ  (Tit.  u.  14).  8.  It  is  the  design  of  the  sancti- 
fication  of  the  Spirit  (1  Pet.  ii.  9).  9.  It  is  a  lost  hfe  that  is  not  hved  to  the  honour 
of  God-  (Ibid.)  Thanksgiving  and  thanksliving : — Thanksgiving  is  good, 
but  thanksHving  is  better.     (M.  Henry.)        Ingratitude  common  : — A  lady  who 


I 
142  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  xxxvm. 

had  heard  a  great  many  prayers  offered  for  sick  people,  in  a  large  city  church, 
said  to  her  husband,  "  Do  all  the  sick  people  who  are  prayed  for  in  our  church 
die?  "  "  Why,  no,"  he  answered,  "  of  course  not;  but  why  do  you  ask?  "  "  I 
supposed  that  they  all  died,"  she  said,  "  because  I  hardly  ever  heard  of  one  who 
had  got  well  enough  to  give  thanks!  "  (J.  N.  Norton.)  The  father  to  the 
children. — Propagating  religion  : — What  is  it  to  propagate  religion,  God's  name 
and  praise,  to  the  rising  generation?  It  implies — 1.  The  having  religion  ourselves. 
2.  The  profession  of  religion.  3.  A  desire  to  continue  and  spread  reUgion  in  the 
world-  4.  Contributing  our  endeavoiirs  to  bring  others,  and  particularly  the 
rising  generation,  to  the  knowledge  and  practice  of  rehgion.  {T.  Boston.) 
"  The  father  to  the  children  "  .• — 1.  Fathers  of  the  State,  to  their  pohtical  children 
(Isa.  xlix.  23).  2.  Fathers  in  the  Church,  ministers,  and  other  Church  officers, 
to  their  ecclesiastical  children.  3.  Fathers  of  famihes,  to  their  children,  servants, 
&c.  4.  Fathers  in  gifts  or  graces  to  those  who  are  children  in  these  respects  in 
comparison  of  them  (1  John  ii  12,  13).  5.  Fathers  in  years  to  those  who  are 
children  in  respect  of  age  to  them  (1  Tim.  v.  I,  2).  (Ihid.)  The  obligation 
to  propagate  religion  : — 1.  Divine  authority  (Deut.  iv.  10,  xL  19).  2.  Gratitude 
to  God.     3.  Justice  to  former  generations,  who  have  propagated  rehgion  to  ua. 

4.  Our  own  interest.  5.  Charity  to  the  rising  generation.  {Ibid.)  Claimt 
of  children  : — Socrates  once  said,  "  Could  I  chmb  to  the  highest  place  in  Athens, 
I  would  Uft  my  voice  and  proclaim,  Fellow-citizens,  why  do  ye  turn  and  scrape 
every  stone  to  gather  wealth,  and  take  so  little  care  of  your  children,  to  whom 
one  day  you  must  reUnquish  it  all  ?  "  (Family  Circle.)  Parental  relation- 
ship  a  medium  of  Divine  revelation  : — Revelations  of  God's  faithfulness  are 
precious.  They  are  the  ground  of  human  hope.  Every  life  has  some  pecuhar 
revelation  of  God's  truth  in  it.  The  parental  relationship,  with  its  tender  sohci- 
tudes  and  loves,  furnishes  a  means  of  transmission.  This  duty  should  be  con» 
scientiously  performed — I.  That  the  knowledge  of  God  may  increasb  from 

AGE   TO   AGE.      U.    ThAT   THE   GBATITUDE   OF  ONE   GENERATION   SHOULD   GLORIFY 

God  by  mtnistering  to  the  moral  lifb  of  the  next.    HI.  That  the  qeneba> 

TION  FOLLOWING  MAY  HAVE  A  SAVING  KNOWLBDQB  OF  GOD,  AND  TRUST  EN  HdI. 
(W.  0.  Lilley.) 

Ver.  21.  He  shall  recover. — Christ  in  the  sick  room: — I.  The  Holy  Ghost  shows 
us  a  king  and  ruler  of  men,  a  dweller  in  palaces,  a  possessor  of  all  that  money  can 
obtain,  a  good  man,  a  friend  of  God,  laid  low  by  disease  like  the  poorest  man  in  the 
kingdom.  1.  Tliis  is  the  old  story.  After  all  there  is  nothing  wonderful  in  this. 
The  tabernacle  in  which  our  soul  Uves  is  a  most  frail  and  complicated  machine.  I 
do  not  wonder  so  much  that  we  die  as  that  we  hve  so  long.  2.  But  whence  comes 
this  hability  to  sickness,  disease,  and  death?  There  is  only  one  book  that  supphes 
an  answer  to  this  question.  That  book  is  the  Bible.  The  fall  of  man  at  the 
beginning  has  brought  sin  into  the  world,  and  sin  has  brought  with  it  the  curse  of 
sickness,  suffering,  and  pain.  Here  Ues  one  among  many  proofs  that  the  Bible  is 
given  by  inspiration  of  God.  It  accounts  for  many  things  which  the  Deist  cannot 
explairu  II.  Learn  from  this  chapter  that  sickness  is  not  an  unmixed  eviL 
Hezekiah  received  spiritual  benefit  from  his  illness.  Sickness  ought  to  do  us  good. 
And  God  sends  it  in  order  to  do  us  good.  1.  Sickness  is  meant  to  make  us  think, 
to  remind  us  that  we  have  an  immortal  soul;  and  that  if  this  soul  is  not  saved  we 
had  better  never  have  been  born.  2.  Sickness  is  meant  to  teach  us  that  there  is  a 
world  beyond  the  grave,  and  that  the  world  we  now  Uve  in  is  only  a  training- place 
for  another  dwelling,  where  there  will  be  no  decay,  no  sorrow,  no  tears,  no  misery, 
and  no  sin.  3.  Sickness  is  meant  to  make  us  look  at  our  past  lives  honestly,  fairly, 
and  conscientiously.  4.  Sickness  is  meant  to  make  us  see  the  emptiness  of  the 
world,  and  its  utter  inability  to  satisfy  the  highest  and  deepest  wants  of  the  soul. 

5.  Sickness  is  meant  to  send  us  to  our  Bibles.  6.  Sickness  is  meant  to  make  us  pray. 
7.  Sickness  is  meant  to  make  us  repent  and  break  off  our  sins.  8.  Sickness  is  meant 
to  draw  us  to  Christ.  9.  Sickness  is  meant  to  make  us  sympathising  towards  others. 
(Anon.)  A  fig-plaster: — The  appUcation  of  figs  leaves  it  uncertain  whether  a  boil 
(bubon)  or  a  carbuncle  (charbon)  is  to  be  supposed.  Figs  were  a  popular  emollient 
or  maturans;  they  were  uP'cl  to  hasten  the  rising  of  the  swelhng,  and  therefore  the 
mattering- process.     (F.  bdilzscJi,  D.D.) 

Ver.  22.  What  is  the  si^n  that  I  shall  gro  np  to  the  house  of  the  Lord  7 — Sieking 
a  sign: — Real  religion  is  the  same  in  every  coimtry  and  every  age.     Hence  we  have 


CHAP,  xxxvm.]  ISAIAH.  143 

so  much  of  the  history  and  experience  of  the  people  of  God  recorded  in  the  Scriptures 
of  truth,  that  we  may  compare  our  experience  with  theirs.  Let  us  take  these  words 
and  consider  them  foiu-  ways — I.  As  the  language  of  a  man  desirous  of  life. 
There  are  persons  who  can  talk  lightly  of  death;  but  it  is  a  solemn  thing  to  die. 
What  was  the  fortitude  of  Hume  when  dying,  joking  of  Charon  and  his  boat,  but 
like  "  whistling  aloud  to  keep  his  courage  up  "  ?  But  we  have  to  observe  that  death 
is  not  always  inviting  even  to  a  good  man.  1.  We  live  under  a  blessed  dispensation ; 
but,  though  the  revelation  of  God's  will  is  complete,  there  are  those  who  are  not  yet 
led  into  all  its  truths.  2.  Sometimes  a  good  man's  connections  draw  him  back  and 
attach  him  still  to  life.  A  minister  may  wish  "  to  depart  and  be  with  Christ,"  but 
he  sees  a  congregation  which  hang  upon  his  Ups;  a  husband  and  father  may  be 
looking  for  that  blessed  hope,  and  rejoicing  in  it,  but  he  knows  that  his  death  will 
make  the  wife  a  widow  and  the  children  fatherless.  You  talk  of  self-denial !  Who 
is  it  that  denies  himself  like  that  man  who  is  assured  of  heaven,  and  yet  is  willing 
to  forego  the  blessedness  from  year  to  year,  who  is  willing  to  weep  on  and  war  on  for 
the  sake  of  usefulness  to  others?  3.  A  good  man's  evidences  of  glory  are  not  always 
clear;  this  will  affect  his  experience.  4.  There  may  be  an  event  to  which  the 
believer  may  attach  some  importance,  that  has  not  taken  place,  and  which  may 
produce  some  hesitation  in  his  mind.  There  was  something  of  this  kind,  surely,  in 
regard  to  David;  he  therefore  pleaded  for  sparing  mercy — "  0  spare  me,  that  I  may 
recover  strength,  before  I  go  hence,  and  be  no  more  seen."  Simeon,  too,  had  the 
assurance  that  he  should  not  see  death  tiU  he  had  seen  the  Lord's  Christ.  5.  There 
is  also  a  constitutional  timidity  in  some.  .  If  they  are  not  afraid  of  death  itself,  they 
are  afraid  of  dying.  The  very  apostles  wished  to  enter  heaven,  if  possible,  without 
being  unclothed,  and  therefore  said,  "  We  that  are  in  this  tabernacle  do  groan, 
being  burdened:  not  for  that  we  would  be  unclothed,  but  clothed  upon,  that 
mortahty  may  be  swallowed  up  of  life."  The  fear  of  death  is  not  sinfxil.  Nature 
must  abhor  its  own  destruction,  and  if  there  be  anything  that  can  reconcile  us  to 
it,  it  must  be  supernatural.  11.  As  the  language  of  a  man  attached  to  the 
HOUSE  OF  GoD:  for  he  does  not  inquire,  "  What  is  the  sign  that  I  shall  ascend  my 
throne?  "  or  "  that  I  shall  give  audience  to  ambassadors,  or  commands  to  generals? 
What  is  the  sign  that  I  shall  head  my  army,  or  that  I  shall  travel  through  my 
country?  "  No,  but  "  What  is  the  sign  that  I  shall  go  up  to  the  house  of  the 
Lord?  "  What  is  it  that  attaches  a  good  man  so  much  to  the  house  of  God? 
L  Perhaps  'tis  his  birthplace:  we  refer  to  his  second  birth;  and  if  you  are  not  bom 
twice  before  you  die  once,  it  would  have  been  weU  if  you  had  never  been  born  at  all. 
2.  It  is  a  place  of  intercourse.  3.  It  is  a  place  of  instruction.  4.  It  is  also  a  place  of 
devotion.  "  My  house  shall  be  called  the  house  of  prayer."  If  Hezekiah  loved 
the  house  of  God  before,  you  may  be  sure  he  did  not  love  it  less  now,  having  been 
detained  so  long  from  it  by  sickness.  We  commonly  know  best  the  worth  of  our 
mercies  by  the  want  of  them.  How  pleasing  is  the  morning  after  the  darkness  of 
the  night!  How  alliKing  is  the  spring  after  the  dreary  winter!  How  health  is 
sweetened  after  the  bitterness  of  pain!  and  how  is  liberty  endeared  by  the  suflfer- 
ings  of  bondage !  HI.  As  the  language  of  a  man  concerned  to  show  his  grati- 
tude FOE  mercies  received.  He  wished  this,  not  only  for  the  enjoyment  of  a 
privilege,  but  for  the  performance  of  a  duty.  Having  experienced  deUvering 
mercy,  he  knew  he  ought  to  praise  God,  by  acknowledging  His  goodness  pubUcly, 
and  dedicating  himself  afresh  to  His  glory.  So  did  David  (Psa.  Ixvi.  13,  &c.). 
This  is  not  always  the  case.  There  are  many  whose  only  concern  when  in  affliction 
is  to  escape  from  it:  whereas,  a  good  man  dreads  the  removal  of  it,  unless  it  be 
sanctified,  and  the  end  of  God  be  answered  in  bringing  him  nearer  to  Himself.  A 
propel  improvement  of  deUverance  from  sickness  does  not  Ue  simply  in  the  offering 
up  of  a  single  thanksgiving:  it  requires  a  great  deal  more  than  this,  which  will  be 
mere  formahty  and  mockery  in  the  sight  of  God,  unless  accompanied  with  real 
gratitude,  and  thanldul  views  and  feelings;  and  imless  the  actions  and  the  hfe 
correspond  therewith.  Hezekiah  had  a  sad  falling  off.  "  Hezekiah  rendered  not 
again  according  to  the  benefit  done  imto  him;  for  his  heart  was  lifted  up."     TV.  As 

THE  LANGUAGE  OF  A  MAN  WHOSE  FAITH  REQUIRES  CONFIRMATION.       "  What  is  the 

sign  that  I  shall  go  up  to  the  house  of  the  Lord?"  Why?  Had  he  not  been 
assured  of  this  by  good  Isaiah?  He  ought  to  have  been  satisfied.  He  did  not 
beUeve  it,  and  he  did  believe  it.  Ah,  Clu'istians !  you  know  how  to  explain  such 
an  experience  as  this.  {W.  Jay,  M.A.)  Fear  of  dying: — The  excellent  Dr. 
Conyers  often  said,  "  I  am  not  afraid  of  death,  but  I  am  afraid  of  dying;  I  am  not 
afraid  of  the  end,  but  of  the  passage."     He  therefore  often  said  in  prayer,  "  0  Lord, 


144  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  xzxiz. 

if  it  be  Thy  blessed  will,  let  me  die  in  Thy  blessed  service!  "     And  his  wish  was 
granted,  for  he  sank  down  in  the  church,  and  even  in  the  pulpit.     (/&id) 


CHAPTER  XXXIX. 


Vebb.  1-8.  Uerodach-baJadan,  the  son  of  Baladau,  King  of  Babylon,  sent 
letters  and  a  present  to  Hezekiali. — Merodach-baladan : — Marduk-apal-iddina, 
son  of  Yakin,  is  the  Chaldean  ruler  who  more  than  any  other  vassal  embit- 
tered the  life  of  the  Assyrian  suzerain,  because  as  a  rival  suzerain  he  was  always 
renouncing  obedience  to  one  whom  he  felt  to  be  a  disgrace  to  the  ancient  renown 
of  his  country.  Lenormant,  in  his  Anjangen  der  Cvltur,  has  devoted  a  beautiful 
essay  to  him  under  the  title,  "A  Babylonian  Patriot  of  the  Eighth  Century  B.C." 
The  chief  matter  told  about  him  by  the  monuments  is  this:  In  the  year  731  he  did 
homage  at  Sapiya  to  the  Assyrian  ruler  Tiglath-pileser  iv.  In  Sargon's  first  year 
(721)  he,  who  was  properly  king  of  South  Babylonia  only,  brought  also  North 
Chaldea  into  the  range  of  his  rule;  war  ensued,  but  although  beaten,  he  still  main- 
tained himself  on  the  throne,  and  from  that  time  coimt  the  twelve  years  given  to 
him  by  the  Ptolemaic  canon  as  king  of  Babylon.  In  Sargon's  twelfth  year  (710)  he 
shook  off  the  Assyrian  yoke;  only  a  year  afterwards  (709)  Sargon  succeeded  in 
capturing  and  burning  to  ashes  the  fort  Dur- Yakin,  into  which  he  had  thrown  him- 
Befi ;  he  himself,  being  required  to  surrender  unconditionally,  vanished,  {F. 
Dditzsch,  D.D.)  Marduk-apal-iddina: — The  name  means:  Marduk  (written  also 
Marvduk)  has  given  a  son.  (Ibid.)  The  embassy  to  Hezekiah  was  in  all  proba- 
bihty  one  of  those  undertaken  by  Merodach-Baladan  for  the  purpose  of  providing 
himself  with  allies.  Inasmuch  now  as  there  was  at  this  time  in  Judah  a  party 
straining  its  utmost  to  combine  all  elements  antagonistic  to  Assyria,  there  is  nothing 
unreasonable  in  supposing  that  some  understanding  was  arrived  at  between  the 
ambassadors  from  Babylon  and  Judah.  Upon  this  view  of  the  circumstances  of 
the  occasion,  Hezekiah' s  motive  in  displaying  his  treasures  will  have  been  to  satisfy 
the  embassy  that  he  had  resources  at  his  disposal;  and  Isaiah's  rebuke  gains  in 
significance  and  force.  (Prof.  S.  R.  Driver,  D.D.)  Hezekiah  arid  the  embassy 
from  Babylon:  —  L  Affliction  of  body  and  sobeow  of  mind  abb  pronb  to 

BE    FOEQOTTBN    AND     UNIMPROVED    BY    THOSE    WHO     HAVE     EXPERIENCED    THEM 

(2  Chron.  xxxii.  25).  The  historian  says  of  Hezekiah,  that  "  his  heart  was  lifted  up." 
The  very  deliverances  which  God  wrought  for  him  worked  upon  his  vanity — the 
special  mercies  he  had  received  elated  his  mind-  What  are  we  without  grace? 
n.  Hezekiah  at  this  time  was  assailed  by  peculiar  temptations  to  vanity  and 
AMBITION  (2  Chron.  xxxii.  31).  HI.  Hezekiah  presents  an  instanoh  of 
strange  forgetfulness  of  duty  to  others  by  not  imparting  to  THEM  reli- 
gious knowledge.  IV.  Hezekiah  was  convinced  of  his  sin  by  the  speciaij 
message  sent  to  him  by  God  through  the  prophet.  V.  Almighty  god,  in  the 
midst  of  all  human  affairs  and  despite  the  conduct  of  individuals,  is  carry- 
ing OUT  His  own  infinite  counsels  of  wisdom  .and  of  love.    (D.  K.  Shoebotham.) 

Ver.  2.  And  Hezekiah  was  glad  of  them. — HezekiaKs  great  mistake : — Look 
at  Hezekiah;  as  he  takes  the  men  round  he  says  in  effect.  What  an  ally  I  would 
make  if  Babylon  should  ever  be  in  trouble !  Or,  What  an  opponent  I  would  make 
if  ever  Babylon  should  be  insolent!  Or,  You  see  I  am  one  of  the  great  powers  of 
the  world.  We  want  large  quotation  marks  for  "  great  powers '  1  This  is  the 
danger  of  aU  uncontrolled  and  imsanctified  power,  or  position,  or  possibihty  of 
dominion:  much  would  be  more,  more  would  be  most,  and  most  would  explode 
because  of  its  own  dissatisfaction.  (J.  Parker,  D.D.)  Character  s^cperior  to 
material  good  .-—Was  this  all  Hezekiah  had  to  show?  There  is  nothing  in  it  then. 
All  these  things  can  be  stolen.  A  half-educated  thief  could  take  away  the  silver 
and  the  gold;  a  very  young  felon  could  take  away  the  spices  and  the  precious 
ointment;  a  man  with  very  poor  resources  could  carry  off  the  armour.  Hezekiah 
laid  up  his  riches  where  thieves  could  break  through  and  steal.  Ah  me,  how  like 
us  all  this  is!  What  should  he  have  shown  to  the  men  from  Babylon?  What  we 
ought  to  show  to  every  inquirer  into  our  method  of  life — individual,  domestic, 
municipal,  tmd  national:   he  should  have  shown  them  character,  high  citizenship. 


OHAP.  XXXIX.]  ISAIAH.  1-15 

large  education,  self-control  developed  to  its  highest  point  of  discipline. — these 
are  things  which  no  king  of  Babylon  can  take  away.  (Ibid.)  A  misimproved 
opportunity  : — What  a  missionary  Hezekiah  might  have  been !  How  he  would 
have  astounded  the  Babylonian  delegates  had  he  said  to  them :  I  receive  you  with 
respect,  courtesy,  and  thankfulness,  but  I  must  tell  you  of  this  miracle;  come 
within,  and  you  shall  hear  how  it  was,  how  it  began,  continued,  culminated ;  this 
will  be  something  for  you  to  tell  when  you  go  home  again.  In  this  way  every  man 
might  create  a  home  missionary  field  for  himself.  "  Come  and  hear,  all  ye  that 
fear  God,  and  I  will  declare  what  He  hath  done  for  my  souL"  {Ibid.)  What  a 
city  to  plunder  I — The  Babylonian  ambassadors  had  probably  somewhat  of  the 
feeling  which  led  Blucher  to  say,  as  he  walked  through  the  streets  of  London, 
"  Himmd  I  what  a  city  to  plunder  !  "    (E.  H.  Plumptre,  D.D.) 

Ver.  3.  Then  came  Isaiah  the  prophet  unto  King  HezeMah. — The  prophet 
higher  than  the  king  : — It  is  well  to  have  Isaiahs  in  society,  for  Hezekiahs  could 
never  keep  it  together.  This  is  the  tone  we  want.  The  prophet  should  be  higher 
than  the  king.  The  Christian  teficher  should  stand  upon  the  topmost  place. 
(J.  Parker,  D.D.) 

Ver.  4.  What  have  they  seen  In  thine  house  ? — The  disciple  at  home  : — 1.  The 
parties  of  whom  the  prophet  inquired,  "  What  have  they  seen?  "  were  Babylonians. 
Foreigners,  aliens  from  the  commonwealth  of  Israel,  ignorant  of  the  true  God, 
and,  therefore,  parties  before  whom  it  was  specially  important  to  exhibit  nothing 
which  was  calciilated  to  bring  dishonour  upon  God.  These  strangers  might  have 
been  greatly  edified  had  they  remarked  a  deeply  chastened  and  humble  spirit  in 
the  kmg.  There  is  nothing  so  greatly  hinders  the  propagation  of  the  Christianity 
of  England  among  foreigners  as  that  practical  irreligion  which  they  observe  among 
the  Enghsh.  2.  The  subject  may  suggest  to  us  some  general  reflections  upon  the 
kind  of  aspect  which  the  house  of  a  professing  Christian  should  present  to  any 
stranger  as  a  man  of  the  world.  What  would  such  a  man  natxirally  expect  to  see 
in  a  Christian's  house?  Clearly  that  which  he  looks  for  in  other  houses — namely, 
a  general  style  and  conformity  with  the  particular  profession  or  character  of  the 
inmates.  He  woiild  reckon  upon  finding  there,  what  St.  Paul  calls  "  the  Church 
that  is  in  thy  house  " — the  pervading  air  of  heavenly-mindedness,  and  the  symptoms 
of  devotional  exercises  in  all  its  sanctified  "  chambers  of  imagery  " — "  the  treasures  " 
of  parental  piety,  of  filial  obedience  and  decorum  ;  a  well  -  ordered  household 
extending  its  influence  and  sanction,  like  the  sacred  comprehensions  of  the  law  of 
the  Sabbath,  from  the  man  himself,  to  his  son  and  daughter,  manservant  and  maid- 
servant, and  even  cattle  and  stranger.  Night  and  morning,  it  would  seem  to  him 
to  be  the  natural  and  consistent  rule,  that  the  offering  of  prayer  and  reading  of 
the  Word  should  be  there  presented  to  "  the  God  of  all  the  families  of  the  earth." 
In  every  room  and  chamber  of  the  house,  the  ready  Bible  should  suggest  by  its 
silent  presence  the  privilege  of  secret  study  of  the  Holy  Scriptures;  some  good 
books,  to  the  use  of  edifying,  should  strew  the  tables,  like  little  trophies,  in  inci- 
dental evidence  of  the  triumph  of  religion  in  that  place;  the  peace,  and  cheer- 
fulness, and  mutual  harmony  of  Christian  influence  should  breathe  its  airs  from 
Heaven  on  every  happy,  thankful  heart ;  the  music  of  habitual  concord  should  sound, 
like  an  ^olian  psalm,  in  every  aisle  of  that  homely  church;  and  family  love,  the 
instinctive  antepast  of  the  universal  love  of  Heaven,  should  spread  the  sweet 
odour  of  its  charity,  Uke  Aaron's  oU,  from  the  head  of  the  house  down  to  the  very 
skirts  of  the  living  garment  with  which  his  blessed  heart  is  clothed.  This  is  what 
the  worldly  man  should  see  in  the  house  of  the  Christian;  but,  alas!  is  it  always  to 
be  seen  there?  1.  "  What  have  they  seen  in  thine  house?  "  Have  they  seen  there 
the  spirit  of  the  world,  in  the  shape  of  expensive  apparel,  or  costly  furniture,  or 
ornaments  beyond  your  means  or  your  station  in  society?  A  Christian  man  may 
adorn  his  house  or  apparel  his  person  in  moderation  with  the  accustomed  decencies 
of  life  and  even  the  beautiful  things  of  art,  for  Christianity  is  no  enemy  of  taste 
nor  patron  of  vulgarity.     But  when  a  man  of  the  world  observes  in  a  Christian 

Srofessor  that  inordinate  affectation  of  style  and  sumptuousness  in  furniture  and 
ress,  which  leaves  no  external  mark  of  difference  between  "  him  that  serveth 
God  and  him  that  serveth  Him  not,"  then  such  a  professing  Christian  may  well 
tremble  for  the  stability  of  his  principles.  The  ambassadors  of  the  spiritual 
Babylon  are  visiting  him,  and  they  wiU  have  to  report  to  their  dark  master  that 
there  is  something  to  seize  in  the  household  of  his  divided  heart.  The  remark 
VOL.  II. — lo 


146  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  xxxir. 

ia  equally  applicable  to  the  humbler  classes.  Sin  is  sin,  and  vanity  is  vanity, 
whether  it  assume  a  vulgar  or  a  refined  shape.  2.  "  What  have  they  seen  in  thiae 
house?  "  Have  they  seen  the  continual  eagerness  to  grasp  and  hoard  up  money, 
the  absorption  of  every  abused  faculty  of  the  mind  and  every  overstrained  energy 
of  the  body  to  extend  busiaess,  increase  capital,  and  multiply  speculations, 
though  at  the  expense  of  a  neglected  soul  and  a  forsaken  God  ?  And  is  this  done 
in  the  face  of  better  convictions  of  duty  and  responsibility?  Is  the  heart  becoming 
hardened  as  the  very  metal  it  grasps  so  eagerly?  There  is  much  in  the  proper 
and  becoming  habits  of  Christian  men  which  is  calculated  to  aid  their  success  in 
life,  but  this  success  should  not  be  permitted  to  become  a  snare  to  them.  3.  "  What 
have  they  seen  in  thine  house?  "  Have  they  marked  the  professing  disciple  of 
the  self-denying  religion  of  Jesus  yielding  to  a  habitual  fretfulness  and  irritabihty 
at  every  trifling  trial  of  temper,  keeping  wife,  children,  and  servants  in  a  perpetual 
ferment  tending  to  the  ultimate  exacerbation  of  every  temper  in  the  household? 
Have  they  seen  the  man  at  one  time  discoursing  in  quiet  tone  and  serious  terms 
on  the  meek  and  lowly  one,  "  who,  when  He  was  reviled,  reviled  not  again,"  at 
another  time  terrifying  all  around  him  with  unrighteous  ebullitions  of  anger? 
The  Babylonians,  the  strangers,  see  it,  and  shake  their  heads,  saying,  "  DeHver 
me  from  that  man's  religion,  if  it  cannot  even  ciu-b  his  temper  ";  and  thus  a 
stumbling-block  is  cast  in  the  way,  that  offends  some  poor,  "  weak  brother  for 
whom  Christ  died."  The  children  in  such  a  house  learn  to  despise  a  religion  with 
the  remembrance  of  their  early  terrors  and  discomforts;  and  the  servants,  or 
others  employed  about  it,  thank  God  that  they  have  escaped  their  poor  master's 
supposed  hypocrisy,  even  at  the  sacrifice  of  his  real  Christianity.  Whereas  if, 
on  the  other  hand,  the  irascible  spirit  were  to  be  seen  only  to  be  subdued  before 
them;  if  its  occasional  outbreak  is  timely  checked,  and  obviously  striven  against, 
and  candidly  mourned  over,  if  they  mark  the  man  struggling  against  the  buffetings 
of  his  infirmity,  and  honestly  and  earnestly  doing  painful  violence  to  his  besetment, 
there  is  a  natural  sympathy  kindled  in  their  hearts  which  God  may  vouchsafe 
to  deepen  into  the  conviction  that  the  religion  must  be  real  which  could  generate 
such  an  inward  contest,  and  must  be  influential,  too,  which  could  obtain  such  a 
victory.  4.  "  What  have  they  seen  in  thine  house?  "  Have  they  seen  the  im- 
moderate "  banqueting,  excess  of  wine,  re  veilings,  and  such  like  "  ?  5.  "  What  have 
they  seen  in  thine  house?  "  Perhaps  some  of  you  have  been  mercifully  restored 
from  a  serious  illness  :  what  did  those  about  you  see  as  the  effect  of  your  being 
spared  ?  Did  they  see  a  thankful  man,  a  subdued  man,  a  man  bearing  the  spiritujQ 
marks  of  the  stripes  of  the  rod  of  chastisement,  more  in  earnest  for  God,  less  inclined 
to  murmur  at  his  lot,  to  cavil  at  religious  obligations,  or  depreciate  spiritual 
privileges,  or  to  lower  the  personal  standard  of  Christian  life  and  conversation? 
If  the  world  saw  this  in  your  house,  you  have  got  good  yoiu-self  and  done  the 
world  good;  if  they  saw  it  not,  in  whatever  degree  it  was  not  the  visible  effect 
upon  you,  in  that  proportion  you  have  yourself  forfeited  the  grace  of  your  personal 
dispensation,  missed  and  abused  an  ordinance  of  the  Lord,  and  wronged  your 
brotherhood.  6.  And  you,  heads  of  families,  who  make  no  profession  of  reUgion, 
who  have  no  particular  anxieties  at  stake  either  way,  "  what  have  they  seen  in 
your  houses?  "  Have  they  marked  no  family  prayer,  no  godly  conversation,  no 
effort  with  the  means  of  moral  and  evangelical  influence?  Have  they  seen  children 
growing  up  in  carelessness  and  irreligion,  whose  parental  indulgence  provoked 
that  destructive  judgment  which  the  real  love  and  tenderness  of  a  timely  discipline 
might  have  averted?  If  so,  consider,  you  who  have  the  solemn  responsibiUty  of 
a  family  of  immortal  souls  laid  upon  you,  how  Hezekiah's  folly  was  visited  upon 
his  children,  and  tremble  at  the  prospect  of  the  heartrending  anguish  you  may 
be  laying  up  in  store  for  yourselves  in  the  spectacle  of  an  ungodly  and  abandoned 
household.  7.  "What  have  they  seen  in  thine  house?"  VVell,  no  matter  what 
they  have  seen;  be  resolved  by  the  grace  of  God  as  to  what  shall  be  seen  for  the 
time  to  come.     (J.  B.  Owen,  M.A.) 

Vers.  6-7.  Hear  the  word  of  the  Lord  of  hosts. — IsaitTia  prophecy  of  the 
Babylonian  captivity : — Jarchi  directs  attention  to  the  exact  correspondence  of 
the  punishment  with  the  offence.  As  the  Babylonians  had  seen  all,  they  should 
one  day  take  all;  as  nothing  had  been  withheld  from  them  now,  so  nothing 
should  be  withheld  from  them  hereafter.  (J.  A.  Alexander.)  A  costly 
gratification: — Benjamin  Franklin,  when  a  lad,  was  greatly  enamoured  of  a 
whistle  he  saw  for  sale.     Swept   away  by  the  desire  to  possess  the  toy,   he 


CHAP.  XL.]  ISAIAH.  147 

gathered  all  his  money  and  offered  it  to  the  vendor,  who  at  once  took  it  and 
handed  over  the  whistle  to  the  eager  boy.  For  a  time  the  sense  of  a  craving 
gratified  shut  out  all  other  consideration.  Then,  gradually,  the  lad  reaUsed  how 
he  had  been  fooled;  and  in  after-days  the  wise  man,  as  he  observed  men  and 
their  fooUsh  ways,  would  remember  his  own  early  experience,  and  say  of  this 
man  and  of  that,  "  He  has  paid  too  dear  for  his  whistle."     (IF.  O.  Bonner.) 

Yet.  8.  Good  is  the  word  of  the  Lord  which  thou  hast  spoken. — "  Good  "  .• — 
The  word  "  good  "  is  here  used,  neither  in  the  sense  of  "  gracious  "  nor  in  that  of 
"  just "  exclusively,  but  in  that  of  "  right "  as  comprehending  both.  (J.  A. 
Alexander.)  Hezekiah's  acceptance  of  his  •punishment:  —  Hezekiah's  reply 
expressed  neither  the  highest  magnanimity  nor  the  mere  selfish  egotism  which 
some  commentators  have  seen  in  it;  but  a  mixture  of  feelings  in  accordance  with 
all  that  we  know  of  his  character.  His  appreciation  of  his  position  and  duties 
as  a  king  is  shown  in  his  restoration  of  the  national  worship,  and  his  final  resistance 
to  Sennacherib,  as  well  as  in  his  general  and  successful  care  for  the  prosperity 
of  his  country.  But  though  a  religious  sense  of  duty,  or  the  pressure  of  necessity, 
could  occasionally  stir  him  to  master  circumstances  by  a  great  effort,  we  may  infer 
from  the  domination  of  Shebna,  and  from  his  own  demeanour  and  language  when 
supplicating  Sennacherib's  pardon,  after  the  receipt  of  Rab-shakeh's  message  and 
Sennacherib's  letter,  in  the  time  of  his  own  sickness,  and  on  the  present  occasion, 
that  his  natural  and  habitual  disposition  was  rather  to  submit  to  the  guidance 
of  circumstances,  with  a  gentle  and  pious  confession  that  this  weakness  of  his 
character  was  beyond  cure,  and  to  accept  the  consequences  with  pious  and  affec- 
tionate resignation  to  God's  will,  and  thankful  acknowledgment  of  any  mitigation 
of  them.  He  could  enter  into  the  meaning  of  the  Psalmist's  words,  "  Thou  wast 
a  God  that  forgavest  them,  though  Thou  tookest  vengeance  on  their  inventions." 
And  though  he  had  not,  like  Moses  or  Paul,  the  stem  courage  which  could  ask  that 
the  punishment  might  be  to  himself,  and  the  forgiveness  to  his  people;  but  on 
the  contrary  was  thankful  to  learn  that  there  should  "  be  peace  and  truth  in  his 
days  " ;  it  must  not  be  overlooked  that  it  was  peace  and  truth  to  his  country  as 
well  as  himself,  and  not  merely  selfish  security  that  he  was  thankful  for.  {Sir 
E.  Strachey,  Bart.)  A  contrast :  Hezekiah  and  St.  Paul : — There  is  certainly 
submission  here,  resignation  to  the  Supreme  will,  readiness  to  accept  the  sentence 
of  chastisement  by  this  will.  The  sentiment  thus  far  is  that  of  EU  when  he  heard 
the  doom  of  his  house  from  the  lips  of  the  child-prophet :  "  It  is  the  Lord :  let 
"FTim  do  what  seemeth  Him  good."  But  the  reason  given  by  Hezekiah  in  the 
text  itself  is  deeply  disappointing  in  two  ways — first,  the  selfishness,  and,  secondly, 
the  earthliness  of  the  consolation.  Enough  for  him  if  he  is  spared  the  personal 
experience  of  the  retribution;  enough  if  he  may  live  out  his  fifteen  added  years 
in  the  peace  of  an  outward  tranquillity,  and  ia  the  truth,  or,  as  it  is  otherwise 
given,  in  the  continuance  of  an  accustomed  and  unbroken  prosperity.  "  There 
ehall  be  peace  and  truth  in  my  days,"  would  have  had  no  meaning  for  St.  PauL 
All  days  were  his  days;  days  of  time  and  days  of  eternity — all  were  his.  {Dean 
VaugJhan.) 


CHAPTER  XI* 

Vbr.  1.  Comfort  ye,  comfort  ye  My  people.— TAc  great  prophecy  of  IsraeTa 
restoration  : — In  passing  from  chaps,  xxxvi.-xxxix.  to  chap,  xl.  we  find  ourselves 
introduced  into   a  new  world.     The  persons  whom  the   prophet  addresses,  the 
people  amongst  whom  he  Uves   and   moves,  whose  feelings  he  portrays,  whose 
doubts  he  dispels,  whose  faith  he  confirms,  are  not  the  inhabitants  of  Jerusalem 
under   Ahaz,  or   Hezekiah,  or  Manasseh,  but  the  Jewish   exiles  in  Babylonia.    ] 
Jerusalem  and  the  Temple  are  in  ruins  (Ixiv.  10),  and  have  been  so  for  long  (Iviii.    j 
12,  Ixi.  4 — the  "  old  waste  places  ")  :  the  proud  and  imposing  Babylonian  empire    | 
is  to  all  appearance  as  secure  as  ever  ;  the  exiles  are  in  despair  or  indifferent ;     \ 
they  think  that  God  has  forgotten  them,  and  have  ceased  to  expect,  or  desire,     \ 
their  release  (xL  27,  xUx.   14,  24).     To  arouse  the  indifferent,  to  reassure  the 
wavering,  to  expostulate  with  the  doubting,  to  announce  with  triumphant  con- 
fidence the  certainty  of  the  approaching  restoration,  is  the  aim  of  the  great  prophecy 


148  TEE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xl. 

which  now  occupies  the  last  twenty-seven  chapters  of  the  Book  of  Isaiah.  {Prof. 
S.  R.  Driver,  D.D.)  The  Gospel  of  Isaiah: — Here  beginneth  the  Gospel  of  the 
prophet  Isaiah,  and  holdeth  on  to  the  end  of  the  book.  (J.  Trapp.)  Does 
Isaiah  xl.  treat  of  the  return  from  Babylon  ? — The  specific  application  of  this  chapter 
to  the  return  from  Babylon  is  without  the  least  foundation  in  the  text  itself.  The 
promise  is  a  general  one  of  consolation,  protection,  and  change  for  the  better, 
to  be  wrought  by  the  power  and  wisdom  of  Jehovah,  which  are  contrasted,  first, 
with  those  of  men,  of  nations,  and  of  rulers,  then  with  the  utter  impotence  of 
idols.  That  the  ultimate  fulfilment  of  the  promise  was  still  distant,  is  implied 
in  the  exhortation  to  faith  and  patience.  The  reference  to  idolatry  proves  nothing 
with  respect  to  the  date  of  the  prediction,  although  more  appropriate  in  the  writings 
of  Isaiah  than  of  a  prophet  in  the  Babylonish  Exile.  It  is  evidently  meant, 
however,  to  condemn  idolatry  in  general,  and  more  particularly  all  the  idolatrous 
defections  of  the  Israelites  under  the  old  economy.  {J.  A.  Alexander,  D.D.) 
A  comforting  message :  —  There  is  evident  allusion  to  the  threatening  in 
chap,  xxxix.  7.  Having  there  predicted  the  captivity  in  Babylon,  as  one 
of  the  successive  strokes  by  which  the  fate  of  Israel  as  a  nation  and  the  total 
loss  of  its  peculiar  privileges  should  be  brought  about,  the  prophet  is  now  sent 
to  assure  the  spiritual  Israel,  the  true  people  of  Jehovah,  that  although  the  Jewish 
nation  should  not  cease  to  be  externally  identified  with  the  Church,  the  Church 
itself  should  not  only  continue  to  exist,  but  in  a  far  more  glorious  state 
than  ever.  {Ibid. )  God's  return  to  a  pardoned  people  : — The  beginning  of  the 
good  tidings  is  Israel's  pardon;  yet  it  seems  not  to  be  the  people's  return  to 
Palestine  which  is  announced  in  consequence  of  this,  so  much  as  their  God's  return 
to  them.  "  Prepare  ye  the  way  of  Jehovah,  make  straight  a  high^^'ay  for  our 
God."  "  Behold,  the  Lord  Jehovah  will  come."  (Prof.  G.  A.  Smith,  D.D.) 
"My"  people;  "your"  God: — All  the  prophecy  we  are  about  to  study  may  be 
said  to  hang  from  these  pronouns.  They  are  the  hinges  on  which  the  door  of 
this  new  temple  of  revelation  swings  open  before  the  long-expectant  people. 
(Ibid.)  A  storehouse  of  Divine  promise: — This  portion  (chaps.  xl.-lxvi.)  of 
the  great  prophet's  writings  may  well  be  regarded  as  the  Old  Testament  Store- 
house and  Repertory  of  '  exceeding  great  and  precious  promises,"  in  which 
Jehovah  would  seem  to  anticipate  His  own  special  Gospel  name  as  "  the  God  of 
all  comfort."  (J.  R.  Macduff,  D.D.)  Jehovah  and  His  Church: — 1.  A  glorious 
change  awaits  the  Church,  consisting  in  a  new  and  gracious  manifestation  of 
Jehovah's  presence,  for  which  His  people  are  exhorted  to  prepare  (vers.   1-5). 

2.  Though  one  generation  perish  after  another,  this  promise  shall  eventually  be 
fulfilled,  because  it  rest*  not  upon   human   but  Divine  authority  (vers.    6-8). 

3.  Zion  may  even  now  see  Him  approaching  as  the  conqueror  of  His  enemies,  and 
at  the  same  time  as  the  Shepherd  of  His  people  (vers.  9-11).  4.  The  fulfilment 
of  these  pledges  is  insured  by  His  infinite  wisdom.  His  almighty  power,  and  His 
independence  both  of  individuals  and  nations  (vers.  12-17).  5.  How  much  more 
is  He  superior  to  material  images,  by  which  men  represent  Him  or  supply  His 
place  (vers.  18-25).  6.  The  same  power  which  sustains  the  heavens  is  pledged 
for  the  support  of  Israel  (vers.  26-31).  (J.  A.  Alexander.)  "Comfort  ye, 
comfort  ye  "  .• — The  double  utterance  of  the  "  Comfort  ye,"  is  the  well-known 
Hebrew  expression  of  emphasis,  abundance,  intensity; — "  Great  comfort,  saith 
your  God."  (J.  R.  Macduff,  D.D.)  God's  great  comfort: — At  the  close  of  the 
prophecy,  the  prophet  tells  us  what  the  strength  and  abundance  of  that  comfort 
is.  Earth's  best  picture  of  strong  consolation  is  that  of  the  mother  bending  over 
the  couch  of  her  suffering  and  sorrowing  child  (chap.  Ixvi.  13).  (Ibid.)  A 
Divine  art : — When  the  soul  is  in  the  period  of  its  exile  and  bitter  pain,  it  should 
do  three  things.  I.  Look  out  for  comfort.  1.  It  will  come  certainly.  Wherever 
the  nettle  grows,  beside  it  grows  the  dock-leaf;  and  wherever  there  is  severe 
trial,  there  is,  somewhere  at  hand,  a  sufficient  store  of  comfort,  though  our  eyes, 
like  Hagar's,  are  often  holden  that  we  cannot  see  it.  It  is  as  sure  as  the  faithfulness 
of  God.  "  I  never  had,"  says  Bunyan,  writing  of  his  twelve  years'  imprisonment, 
"  in  all  my  hfe,  so  great  an  insight  into  the  Word  of  God  as  now;  insomuch  that 
I  have  often  said.  Were  it  lawful,  I  could  pray  for  greater  trouble,  for  the  greater 
comforts'  sake."  God  cannot  forget  His  child.  2.  It  will  come  proportionately. 
Thy  Father  holdi  a  pair  of  scales.  This  on  the  right  is  called  As,  and  is  for  thine 
afflictions;  this  on  tne  left  is  called  So,  and  is  for  thy  comforts.  And  the  beam 
is  always  kept  level  The  more  thy  trial,  the  more  thy  comfort.  As  the  sufferings 
of  Christ  abound  in  us,  so  our  consolation  also  aboundeth  through  Christ.     3,  It 


CHAP.  XL.]  ISAIAH.  149 

will  come  Divinely.     God  reserves  to  Himself  the  prerogative  of  comfort.     It  is  a 
Divine  art.     4.  It  will  come  mediately.     What  the  prophet  was  as  the  spokesman 
of  Jehovah,  uttering  to  the  people  in  human  tones  the  inspirations  that  came  to 
him  from  God,  so  to  us  is  the  great  prophet,  whose  shoe-latchet  the  noblest  of 
the  prophetic  band  was  not  worthy  to  vinloose;  and  our  comfort  is  the  sweeter 
because  it  reaches  us  through  Him.     5.  It  will  come  variously.     Sometimes  by 
the  coming  of  a  beloved  Titus;  a  bouquet;  a  bimch  of  grapes;  a  letter;  a  message; 
a  card.     There  are  many  strings  in  the  dulcimer  of  consolation.     In  sore  sorrow 
it  is  not  what  a  friend  says,  but  what  he  is,  that  helps  us.     He  comforts  best  who 
says  least,  but  simply  draws  near,  takes  the  sufferer's  hand,  and  sits  silent  in 
his  sympathy.     This  is  God's  method.     IL  Store  up  comfort.     This  was  the 
prophet's  mission.     He  had  to  receive  before  he  could  impart.     Thy  own  Ufe 
becomes  the  hospital  ward  where  thou  art  taught  the  Divine  art  of  comfort.     Thou 
art  wounded,  that  in  the  binding  np  of  thy  wounds  by  the  Great  Physician  thou 
mayest  learn  how  to  render  first-aid  to  the  wounded  everywhere.     Til.  Pass  on 
COMFORT.     {F.  B.  Meyer,  B.A.)        The  Divine  ministry  of  comfort: — There  are 
ministries  in  the  world.      1.  There  is  the  Divine  ministry  of  instruction.      In 
this  ministry  nature,  history,  and  the  Bible  are  constantly  employed-     2.  There 
is  the  Divine  ministry  of  Justice.     Nemesis  is  always  and  everywhere  at  work, 
treading  on  the  heels  of  wrong,  and  inflicting  penalties.     3.  In  the  text  we  have 
the  Divine  ministry  of  comfort.     The  words  suggest  three  thoughts  concerning 
this  ministry.     I.  It  imphes  the  existence  of  distress.     Bright  and  fair  as  the 
material  world  often  appears,  a  sea  of  sorrow  rolls  through  human  souls.     The 
distress    is    of  various  kinds.     I.   Physical  sufEering.     2.  Social  bereavement. 
3.    Secular    anxieties.      4.    Moral    compunction.     EL.  It  imphes  the  existence 
of  SPECIAL  MILANS.     All  this  distress  is  an  abnormal  state  of  things.     Misery  is 
not  an  institution  of  nature,  and  the  creation  of  God,  but  the  production  of  the 
creature.     To  meet  this  abnormal  state  something  more  than  natural  instru- 
mentaUty  is  required.     1.  There  must  be  special  provisions.     Those  provisions 
are  to  be  found  in  the  Gospel.     To  the  physically  afflicted  there  are  presented 
considerations  fitted  to  energise  the  soul,   endow  it  with  magnanimity,  fill  it 
with  sentiments  and  hopes  that  will  raise  it,  if  not  above  the  sense  of  physical 
suffering,  above  its  depressing  influence.     To  the  socially  bereaved  it  brings  the 
glorious  doctrine  of  a  future  Ufe.      To   the  secularly  distressed  it  unfolds  the 
doctrine  of  eternal  providence.     In  secular  disappointments  and  anxieties  it  says, 
"  Your  heavenly  Father  knoweth  that  ye  have  need  of  these  things."     2.  There  must 
be  special  agency.     A  physician   may  know  the  disease  of  his  patient,  but  if 
he  does  not  know  the  precise  mode  of  application  he  will  not  succeed.     So  it  is 
with  the  Gospel.    A  man  to  give  comfort  to  another  requires  a  special  qualification. 
The  comforting  elements  must  be  administered — (1)  Not  officially,  but  humanly. 
(2)  Not  verbosely,  but  sympathetically.     III.  It  implies  a  limited  sphere.     "  My 
people."     The  whole  human  famUy  is  in  distress,  but  there  is  only  a  certain  class 
qualified  to  receive  comfort,  those  who  are  here  called  God's  "  people,"  and  who 
are  they?     Those  who  have  surrendered  themselves  to  His  will,  yielded  to  His 
claims,  and  dedicated  themselves  to  His  service.     {D.  Thomas,  D.D.)         Comfort 
for  God's  people : — I.  The  speaker.     It  is  the  God  of  comfort,  the  God  of  all 
comfort  that  here  speaks  comfortably  to  His  people.     There  is  a  danger  of  our 
thinking  too  much  of  comfort,  and  one  may  only  value  the  word  preached  as  it 
administers  comfort;  this  is  a  great  error,  because  all  Scripture  is  profitable  for 
doctrine,  and  reproof,  as  well  as  for  comfort.     One  great  end  which  even  the 
Scriptures  have  in  view,  is  not  only  to  lead  us  to  patience  in  suffering,  but  to 
comfort  us  under  suffering.     It  is  one  thing  for  man  to  speak  comfort,  it  is  another 
thing  for  God  to  speak  comfort.     II.  The  persons  that  are  here  spoken  to. 
"  Comfort  ye,  comfort  ye  My  people."     1.  The  Lord  has  a  people  upon  earth — 
He  has  never  been  without  a  people.     2.  The  Lord  has  a  people;  and  if  He  has 
a  people  He  will  try  them,  and  they  shall  not  be  found  summer  flies  just  restiag 
on  the  smrface  of  things,  but  they  shall  be  found  to  be  those  that  know  the  truth 
in  the  power  of  it,  and  they  shall  be  made  to  feel  and  experience  the  worth  df  it. 
It  shall  not  be  enough  for  them  to  say,  I  am  a  sinner,  but  they  shall  feel  the  wretched- 
ness of  being  a  sinner,  they  shall  not  only  confess  that  Christ  is  precious,  but  they 
shall  be  placed  where  they  shall  know  Him  to  be  precious.     3.  The  Lord  has  a 
people;  and  it  is  a  most  blessed  consideration  to  reflect  that  while  He  has  a  people, 
He  is  their  God.     Talk  not  of  your  wretchedness  and  your  poverty  and  your 
disease,  of  yonr  weakness;  if  God  be  your  God,  not  only  heaven  is  your  home, 


150  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xl. 

but  you  have  that  without  which  heaven  would  not  be  worth  the  having.  4.  God 
has  a  people ;  no  wonder  then  He  comforts  them — His  eye  is  upon  them  from 
the  beginning  to  the  end  of  the  year.  They  are  the  salt  of  the  earth  to  Him,  and 
he  that  touches  them  touches  the  apple  of  His  eye.  III.  The  Lord's  messagh 
UNTO  His  ministers.  "  Comfort  ye,"  &c.  The  great  cause  of  comfort  to  a 
child  of  God  may  be  summed  up  in  a  little  sentence — through  eternity  he  never 
shall  come  to  the  close  of  it.  Let  me  point  out  some  few  of  those  great  mercies 
that  flow  to  a  child  of  God  in  consequence  of  his  having  Christ  as  his  portion. 
1.  He  has  that  which  made  David  glad  (Psa.  xxxii.  1,  2).  The  great  contest 
Satan  has  with  our  consciences  is  about  the  pardon  of  our  sins.  Well  might  the 
people  of  God  then  be  comforted  by  this  truth,  that  their  sins  have  aU  been  blotted 
out  as  a  cloud.  2.  Do  you  ask  for  another  ground  of  comfort?  See  it  in  a 
covenant,  ordered  in  all  things  (2  Sam.  xxiii.  5).  3.  But  the  Psalmist  found 
another  source  of  comfort.  "  It  is  good  for  me  to  draw  near  to  God  "  (Psa.  Ixxiii.). 
There  is  no  mercy  on  earth  greater  than  to  have  a  God  in  heaven,  to  have  an 
Intercessor  at  the  right  hand;  to  have  the  heart  of  God;  to  have  the  promise 
of  God;  to  have  Jehovah  Himself  as  my  portion.  4.  One  comfort  more  is  the 
bright  prospect  that  is  before  the  child  of  God.  (J.  H.  Evans,  M.A.)  Comfort 
for  Zion  : — It  was  once  said  by  Vinet,  that  the  three  great  objects  of  the  preacher 
were  the  illumination,  consolation,  and  regeneration  of  men.  The  work  of  com- 
forting is  surely  an  important  one,  but  it  is  God's  people  whom  we  are  to  comfort. 
We  are  not  to  say,  Peace,  peace!  where  there  is  no  peace.  Stoical  indifference 
is  not  real  comfort,  but  peace  alone  is  found  in  God.  I.  Notice  what  a  discovery 
is  made  in  the  text  of  God's  nature.  He  has  not  hidden  away  from  men;  He  is 
not  asleep  or  tied  down  by  law,  but  His  tender  mercies  are  over  aU  His  works. 
He  is  near  to  every  one  of  us,  seeking  our  love  and  confidence.  11.  Human  souls 
need  comeort.  Constitutional  characteristics  render  us  susceptible  to  con- 
solatory truths.  Even  those  hardened  in  sin  have  been  melted  by  a  woman's 
tears,  or  have  yielded  to  the  persuasiveness  of  a  child.  III.  Look  at  the  grounds 
ON  WHICH  THIS  COMFORT  IS  ADMINISTERED.  Not  those  of  pMlosophy.  When 
the  Greeks,  under  Xenophon,  caught  sight  of  the  Euxine,  they  jubilantly  cried, 
"  The  sea,  the  sea!  "  The  discoveries  of  Divine  grace — a  sea  without  a  bottom 
or  a  shore — elicit  profounder  joy.  (G.  Nor  cross,  D.D.)  "Comfort  ye,  comfort 
ye  My  people  "  .• — The  words  of  this  passage  (1-11)  look  on  to  the  captivity.  The 
people,  afflicted,  chastened,  broken  in  spirit,  are  called  upon  to  listen  to  the  strains 
of  consolation  which  God  had  breathed  for  them  in  His  word.  I  venture  to  think 
that  they  were  laden  with  a  richer  consolation  in  that  they  came  down  a  vista 
of  nearly  two  hundred  years.  Old  words  are  precious  to  mourners.  That  which 
is  spoken  at  the  moment  is  apt  to  be  coloured  by  the  thoughts  and  the  doubts 
of  the  moment;  an  old  word  spoken  out  of  the  region  of  these  present  sorrows 
has  double  force.  It  seems  to  bring  that  which  is  absolute  and  universal  to  bear 
on  that  which  is  present  and  passing.  This  is  why  the  Scriptiure  is  so  precious  to 
mourners.  It  belongs  to  all  time.  And  these  words  rule  all  its  declarations. 
It  is  comfort  throughout  and  to  the  end.  The  mercies  of  judgment  is  a  subject 
we  too  little  study.  Yet  mercy  is  the  deepest  element  in  every  judgment  with 
which  God  afflicts  mankind.  Stern,  hard,  unfaltering  to  the  eye,  but  full  of  rich 
mercy  to  the  heart.  It  was  in  tender  mercy  that  man,  the  sinner,  was  sent 
forth  to  labour.  In  society  we  see  on  a  large  scale  how  God's  judgments  are 
blessings  in  disguise.  Great  epidemics  are  healing  ordinances.  Thoy  purify 
the  vital  springs.  They  leave  a  pm-er,  stronger  health  when  their  dread  shadow 
has  passed  by.  Catastrophes  in  history  are  like  thunderstorms;  they  leave  a 
fresher,  brighter  atmosphere.  Reigns  of  terror  are  the  gates  through  which  man 
passes  out  into  a  wider  world.  May  we  pray,  then,  in  calamities  for  d  liverance, 
when  they  are  so  likely  to  be  blessings?  Yes,  for  prayer  is  the  blessea  refuge  of 
our  ignorance  and  dread.  But  Isaiah  had  the  profoundest  right  to  speak  of 
comfort,  because  he  could  speak  of  the  advent  of  the  Redeemer  to  the  world. 
He  not  only  preaches  comfort,  but  discloses  the  source  from  which  it  springs^ 
"Emmanuel,  God  with  us."  (J.  B.  Brown,  B.A.)  Divine  comfort: — I.  Living 
in  the  midst  of  sorrow,  and  himself  personally  its  victim,  the  Christian  has  need 
of  comfort.  Whatever  form  the  affliction  may  take,  it  is  hard  for  flesh  and  blood 
to  bear;  it  runs  contrary  to  all  the  tastes  and  desires  of  the  natural  man.  Often 
under  its  pressure,  especially  when  long  continued  and  severe,  is  he  tempted  to 
faint  and  despond;  it  may  be,  even  to  repine  and  murmur;  to  doubt  the  faith- 
fulness of  God;  to  ask,  in  bitterness  of  heart,  why  such  woe  is  appointed  to  man? 


CHAP.  XL.]  ISAIAH.  151 

2.  With  what  power,  then,  do  words  like  these  reach  him  in  the  midst  of  his  sorrow, 
coming  from  God  Himself,  "  Comfort  ye,  comfort  ye  My  people ! "  No  sooner 
are  they  heard  than  hope  revives,  and'  the  assurance  of  Divine  sympathy  at 
once  soothes  his  trouble,  and  allays  his  fears.  (1)  Here  is  the  first  light  from 
heaven  which  breaks  upon  human  sorrow,  and  which  removes  from  it,  for  the 
Christian,  its  keenest  sting.  God  knows  your  suffering  and  thinks  of  it,  and  seeks 
to  comfort  you  under  it.  You  are  not  the  sport  of  inexorable  fate,  or  blind  and 
reckless  chance;  still  less  are  your  afflictions  proof  that  God  has  aljandoned  you 
in  wrath.  (2)  How  sweet  is  the  solace  of  human  sympathy !  But  here  we  have 
Divine  sympathy;  sympathy  from  One  both  able  and  willing  to  deliver, — from 
the  God  of  all  comfort.  (3)  Not  afar  off,  does  the  voice  of  God  reach  us,  from 
an  inaccessible  heaven,  telling  us  we  are  His  people  and  that  He  cares  for  us. 
He  has  come  and  made  us  His  people,  by  taking  our  nature,  and  being  born  and 
living  as  a  man.     (J.  N.  Bennie,  LL.B.)         The  Lord's  people  comforted  : — I.  God 

HAS  A  PBOPLB  IN  THE  WORLD.      II.   I  prOCCCd  TO   COMPLY  WITH  THB  INJtTNOTION 

IN  THE  TEXT.  To  this  end,  I  wiU  endeavoxir  to  obviate  some  few  of  the  most 
common  causes  of  that  want  of  comfort  to  which  the  people  of  God  are  liable. 
1.  One  cause  is  their  misunderstanding  the  nature  and  extent  of  that  pardon  of 
sin,  which  the  Gospel  provides.  2.  Another  cause  arises  from  their  seeking  comfort 
where  it  is  not  to  be  found.  You  can  never  find  it  from  poring  into  your  own 
hearts.  Look  in  faith  to  Jesus  Christ — His  glorious  person  and  gracious  offices, 
&c.  3.  Another  cause  arises  from  their  mistaking  the  proofs  and  marks  of  a  really 
religious  state.  They  suppose  that  it  consists  in  warm  and  rapturous  feelings. 
Your  salvation  is  grounded  on  the  faithfulness  of  Him  who  cannot  lie.  {E.  Cooper.) 
The  trials  of  business  men : — These  words  came  to  the  prophet  in  the  olden  time, 
but  they  come  just  as  forcibly  to  any  man  who  stands  to-day  in  any  one  of  the 
pulpits  of  our  great  cities.  A  preacher  has  no  more  right  to  ignore  commercial 
sorrows  than  any  other  kind  of  sorrow.  I.  A  great  many  of  our  business  men 
feel  ruinous  trials  and  temptations  coming  to  them  from  small  and  limited 
CAPITAL  IN  BTJSiNESS.  This  temptation  of  limited  capital  has  ruined  men  in  two 
ways.  Despondency  has  blasted  them.  Others  have  said,  "  Here  I  have  been 
trudging  along.  I  have  been  trying  to  be  honest  all  these  years.  I  find  it  is  of 
no  use.  Now  it  is  make  or  break."  H.  A  great  many  of  our  business  men  are 
tempted  to  over- anxiety  and  care.  God  manages  all  the  affairs  of  your  life, 
and  He  manages  them  for  the  best.  HI.  Many  of  our  business  men  are  tempted 
to  neglect  their  home  duties.  How  often  it  is  that  the  store  and  the  home 
seem  to  clash,  but  there  ought  not  to  be  any  collision.  If  you  want  to  keep  your 
children  away  from  places  of  sin,  you  can  only  do  it  by  making  your  home  attrac- 
tive. We  need  more  happy,  consecrated,  cheerful  Christian  homes.  IV.  A  great 
many  of  oi'  business  men  are  tempted  to  put  the  attainment  of  money  abovk 
THE  VALUE  OP  THE  SOUL.  The  more  money  you  get,  the  better  if  it  come  honestly 
and  go  usefully.  But  money  cannot  satisfy  a  man's  soul;  it  cannot  glitter 
in  the  dark  valley;  it  cannot  pay  our  fare  across  the  Jordan  of  death;  it  cannot 
unlock  the  gate  of  heaven.  Treasures  in  heaven  are  the  only  uncorruptible 
treasures.  Have  you  ever  ciphered  out  in  the  rule  of  Loss  and  Gain  the  sum, 
"  What  shall  it  profit  a  man  if  he  gain  the  whole  world  and  lose  his  soul?  "  Seek 
after  God;  find  His  righteousness,  and  all  shall  be  well  here  and  hereafter.  {T. 
De  Witt  Talmage,  D.D.)  Religiov^  comfort: — I.  Show  what  the  comfort  is 
which  the  Gospel  of  our  Lord  conveys  to  mankind-  Whenever  we  speak  of  com- 
forting another,  the  very  expression  implies  that  he  is  in  tribulation  and  distress. 
Without  the  Gospel  of  Christ  the  condition  of  men  must  be  wretched.     II.  Describe 

THE  persons  WHO  ABE  AUTHORISED  TO  TAKE  THAT  COMFORT  TO  THEMSELVES. 

Evangelical  obedience  is  to  be  the  foundation  of  evangelical  comfort.  {T. 
Oisborne.)  Comfort  for  God's  people: — "  Comfort  ye  My  people" — I.  By  re- 
minding tiiem  that  I  am  their  God.  2.  By  reminding  them  that  their  captivity 
in  this  world  is  nearly  over,  and  that  they  will  soon  be  home.  3.  The  Saviour 
is  coming  to  this  world,  and  is  on  His  way  to  show  His  glory  here.  He  will  come 
and  fill  the  world  with  His  victories.  { C.  Stanford,  D.  D. )  Comfort  proclaimed : — 
What  a  sweet  title:  "  My  people  !  "  What  a  cheering  revelation:  "  Your  God  !" 
How  much  of  meaning  is  couched  in  those  two  words,  "  My  people  !  "  Here  is 
speciality.     The  whole  world  is  God's.     But  He  saith  of  a  certain  number,  "  My 

Seople."     While  nations  and  kindreds  are  passed  by  as  being  simply  nations, 
[e  says  of  them  *'  My  people."     In  this  word  there  is  the  idea  of  proprietorship. 
In  some  special  maimer  the  "  Lord's  portion  is  His  people;  Jacob  is  the  lot  of 


152  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xi. 

His  inheritance."  He  has  done  more  for  them  than  others;  He  has  brought 
them  nigh  to  Himself.  How  careful  God  is  of  His  people;  mark  how  anxious 
He  is  concerning  them,  not  only  for  their  life,  but  for  their  comfort.  He  would 
not  only  have  us  His  Uving  people.  His  preserved  people,  but  He  would  hav^e 
us  be  His  happy  people  too.  He  likes  His  people  to  be  fed,  but  what  is  more, 
He  likes  to  give  them  "  wines  on  the  lees  well  refined,"  to  make  glad  their  hearts. 
I.  To  WHOM  IS  THIS  COMJiAND  ADDRESSED?  The  Holy  Spirit  is  the  great  Com- 
forter, and  He  it  is  who  alone  can  solace  the  saints;  but  He  uses  instruments 
to  relieve  His  children  in  their  distress  and  to  lift  up  their  hearts  from  desperation. 
To  whom,  then,  is  this  command  addressed?  1.  To  angels,  first  of  all.  You  often 
talk  about  the  insinuations  of  the  devil.  Allow  me  to  remind  you  that  there  is 
another  side  of  that  question,  for  if  evil  spirits  assault  us,  doubtless  good  spirits 
guard  us.  It  is  my  firm  belief  that  angels  are  often  employed  by  God  to  throw 
into  the  hearts  of  His  people  comforting  thoughts.  2.  But  on  earth  this  is  more 
especially  addressed  to  the  Lord's  ministers.  The  minister  should  ask  of  God 
the  Spirit,  that  he  may  be  filled  with  His  influence  as  a  comforter.  3.  But  do 
not  support  your  ministers  as  an  excuse  for  the  discharge  of  your  own  duties; 
many  do  so.  When  God  said,  "  Comfort  ye,  comfort  ye  My  people,"  He  spake 
to  all  His  people  to  comfort  one  another.  II.  What  are  the  reasons  for  this 
COMMAND?  1.  Because  God  loves  to  see  His  people  look  happy.  The  Roman 
Catholic  supposes  that  God  is  pleased  with  a  man  if  he  whips  himself,  walks  bare- 
footed for  many  nules,  and  torments  his  body.  When  I  am  by  the  seaside,  and 
the  tide  is  coming  in,  I  see  what  appears  to  be  a  little  fringe,  looking  almost  like 
a  mist;  and  I  ask  a  fisherman  what  it  is.  He  tells  me  there  is  no  mist  there;  and 
that  what  I  see  are  all  little  shrimps  dancing  in  ecstasy,  throwing  themselves 
in  convulsions  and  contortions  of  delight.  I  think  within  myself,  "  Does  God 
make  those  creatures  happy,  and  did  He  make  me  to  be  miserable?  Can  it  ever 
be  a  religious  thing  to  be  unhappy?  "  No;  true  religion  is  in  harmony  with  the 
whole  world;  it  is  in  harmony  with  the  whole  sun  and  moon  and  stars,  and  the 
sun  shines  and  the  stars  twinkle;  the  world  has  flowers  in  it  and  leaping  hills 
and  carolling  birds;  it  has  joys  in  it;  and  I  hold  it  to  be  an  irreligious  thing  to  go 
moping  miserably  through  God's  creation.  2.  Because  uncomfortable  Christiana 
dishonour  religion.  3.  Because  a  Christian  in  an  uncomfortable  state  cannot 
work  for  God  much.  It  is  when  the  mind  is  happy  that  it  can  be  laborious. 
4.  Again,  "  Comfort  ye  "  God's  people,  because  ye  profess  to  love  them.  III.  God 
never  gives  His  children  a  duty  without  giving  them  the  means  to  do  it.  Let 
me  just  hint  at  those  things  in  the  everlasting  Gospel  which  have  a  tendency  to 
comfort  the  saints.  Whisper  in  the  mourner's  ear  electing  grace,  and  redeeming 
mercy,  and  dying  love.  Tell  him  that  God  watcheth  the  fmnace  as  the  goldsmith 
the  refining  pot.  If  that  does  not  suflBice,  tell  him  of  his  present  mercies;  tell 
him  that  he  has  much  left,  though  much  is  gone.  Tell  him  that  Jesus  is  above, 
wearing  the  breast-plate,  or  pleading  his  cause.  Tell  him  that  though  earth's 
pillars  shake,  God  is  a  refuge  for  us;  tell  the  mourner  that  the  everlasting  God 
failcth  not,  neither  is  weary.  Let  present  facts  sufiice  thee  to  cheer  him.  But 
if  this  is  not  enough,  tell  him  of  the  future ;  whisper  to  him  that  there  is  a  heaven 
with  pearly  gates  and  golden  streets.  {C.H.  Spurgeon. )  Comfort  for  England  : — 
I  will  make  one  Httle  change  in  the  translation,  taking  the  words  of  Dr.  George 
Adam  Smith,  "  Speak  ye  to  the  heart  of  Jerusalem."  "  Comfort  ye,  comfort  ye  My 
people,  saith  your  God !  Speak  ye  to  the  heart  of  England,  and  cry  unto  her  that  her 
warfare  is  accomplished."  Had  the  Hebrew  prophets  no  other  claim  upon  our 
regard  we  ought  to  hold  them  in  everlasting  respect  for  their  patriotism.  For 
Israel  the  prophet  thought  a  man  might  well  die.  Israel  was  also  God's  people. 
The  strength  of  Israel  in  every  time  of  trouble  was  the  Lord  of  hosts.  And  the 
prophet's  interest  was  not  confined  to  the  sacrifices  of  the  temple,  nor  to  the 
coteries  of  pious  people,  but  swept  into  its  heart  everything  that  concerned  the 
welfare  of  the  community.  1.  Why  should  not  our  faith  go  farther  afield  and 
have  a  more  generous  range  ?  We  also  carry  in  our  hearts,  not  only  as  citizens, 
but  also  as  Christians,  this  England  which  God  gave  to  our  fathers,  and  has  con- 
tinued in  its  glory  unto  their  children.  Why  should  we  not  take  our  courage 
in  both  our  hands  and,  looking  at  the  history  of  the  past  and  comparing  it  with 
the  history  of  the  present,  recognise  in  our  own  people  another  Israel  called  of 
God  in  a  special  manner,  set  apart  by  God  for  a  special  mission,  and  gather  into 
our  soul  all  the  promises  of  God,  and  also  make  our  boast  in  Him  as  the  prophets 
did?     What  did  they  depend  on,  the  Hebrew  prophets,  for  this  great  conception 


CHAP.  XL.]  ISAIAH.  153 

that  Grod  had  called  the  nation,  and  had  a  great  work  for  that  nation  to  do?  They 
depended  on  the  facts  of  history  behind  them  creating  in  their  soul  an  irresistible 
conviction.  And  I  ask  jow  whether  the  right  arm  of  the  Most  High  has  not  been 
as  conspicuous  in  EngUsh  history?  From  what  perils  in  past  centuries  has  He 
not  deUvered  this  country  when  the  whole  world  was  against  us  and  was  put  to 
confusion!  Have  not  we  been  surrounded  by  the  sea,  our  national  character 
formed,  for  ptirposes  that  we  can  recognise?  What  nation  has  ever  planted  so 
many  colonies,  explored  so  many  unknown  lands,  made  such  practical  contribu- 
tions to  civihsation,  set  such  an  illustrious  example  of  liberty?  Within  our  blood 
is  the  genius  for  government,  the  passion  for  justice,  the  love  of  adventure,  and 
the  intelligence  of  pure  faith.  Our  Lord  came  of  the  Jewish  stock,  and  therefore 
that  people  must  have  a  lonely  place,  but  when  it  comes  to  the  carr3dng  out  of 
those  great  blessings,  physical,  poUtical,  social,  and  religious,  which  have  been 
conferred  upon  the  world  by  the  Cross  and  the  pierced  hand  of  the  Lord,  I  challenge 
anyone  to  say  whether  any  nation  has  so  extended  them  within  her  own  borders, 
or  been  so  willing  to  give  them  to  the  ends  of  the  earth  as  God's  England.  2.  I 
do  not  forget  England's  sias,  for  we  have  sinned  in  our  own  generation  by  in- 
ordinate love  of  material  possessions,  by  discord  between  the  classes  of  the  common- 
wealth, by  a  certain  insolence  which  has  offended  foreign  peoples,  and  also  by 
hideous  sins  of  the  flesh.  Our  sins  have  been  great,  and  it  becomes  us  to  acknow- 
ledge them.  Does  our  sin  destroy  our  calling  ?  Does  our  sin  break  the  Covenant 
which  the  Eternal  made  with  om:  fathers?  No  people  ever  sinned  against  God 
like  Israel.  And  between  the  sin  of  Israel  and  the  sin  of  England,  God's  chosen 
people  of  ancient  and  modem  times,  there  has  been  the  sinularity  which  arises 
from  the  sin  of  people  in  the  same  position.  Both  boasted  themselves  over-much 
against  other  peoples.  Both  were  intoxicated  with  prosperity.  Both  depended 
upon  it  instead  of  utilising  and  conserving  the  favour  of  the  Most  High.  When 
we  desire  to  confess  our  sins  where  do  we  go?  We  go  to  the  confessions  of  the 
Hebrew  prophets.  And  when  we  ask  mercy  for  our  sins,  what  are  the  promises 
we  plead?  The  great  promise  of  mercy  declared  by  the  evangehcal  prophet 
and  now  sealed  by  the  life  and  death  and  resmrection  of  our  Lord !  Because  the 
Hebrew  prophet  believed  that  his  people  were  God's  people,  he  had  the  courage 
to  speak  plainly  to  them.  He  is  not  a  traitor  to  his  country  who  on  occasions 
points  out  his  country's  sins.  When  Israel  sinned  there  was  no  voice  so  loud  as  that 
of  Isaiah  or  Amos,  but  they  delighted  not  in  the  work,  any  more  than  their  God 
dehghted  in  judgment.  If  God  sent  them  with  a  rod  they  took  the  rod  and  gave 
the  stroke,  biit  the  stroke  fell  also  on  the  prophet's  own  heart,  and  he  suffered  most 
of  aU  the  people.  When  the  people  repented  and  turned  again  to  God,  when  they 
brought  forth  works  meet  for  repentance  and  showed  humiUty,  there  was  no  man  so 
glad  as  the  prophet.  3.  When  the  prophet  takes  up  the  work  of  consolation  he  has 
no  bounds,  he  makes  the  comfort  of  God  to  run  down  the  streets  like  a  river.  It  is 
not  enough  to  say  it  once,  but  twice  must  he  sound  it,  tiU  the  comfort  of  God  shall 
run  like  hghtning  through  Jerusalem.  And  when  he  takes  to  comforting  he  is  not 
to  be  bound  by  theories  of  theology  or  arguments  of  the  schools.  He  is  not  going 
to  ask  questions — whether  a  man  can  expiate  his  sins,  or  whether  a  nation  can  win 
repentance.  He  flings  all  this  kind  of  argument  to  the  wind,  for  he  has  come  out 
from  the  presence  of  the  Eternal,  who  does  not  keep  accounts  like  that,  and  he 
cries,  "Speakyehome  to  Jerusalem;  her  warfare  is  accompHshed. "  AccompHshed! 
More  than  that !  God  hath  now  repented !  It  was  His  people  repented  first,  now 
He  is  repenting.  They  repented  of  their  sins ;  behold,  God  has  begim  to  repent  of 
His  judgment !  "  I  have,"  he  makes  the  Eternal  say — "  I  have  been  over-hard  with 
these  people,  and  I  have  pimished  them  more  than  they  have  deserved.  Go  and 
comfort  them.  Comfort  them  royally.  Give  it  out  with  a  lavish  hand — they  have 
received  double  for  all  their  sins."  When  the  prophet  speaks  in  this  fashion  he  is 
not  referring  to  material  prosperity,  for  the  words  were  spoken  to  the  exiles  in 
Babylon.  He  comforted  the  exiles  because  they  had  repented  and  been  reconciled 
unto  God.  The  comfort  I  preach  is  not  based  on  arms.  It  is  based  on  the  nobler 
spirit  which  God  has  given  England  during  the  progress  of  the  war  in  South  Africa. 
We  sinned,  and  according  to  our  sin  was  our  punishment.  We  have  repented. 
Through  our  churches  and  through  our  homes,  and  individually,  we  have  laid  the 
lessons  of  the  Eternal  to  heart;  and  according  to  our  repentance  shall  be  the  blessing 
of  God.  (J.  Watson,  M.A.)  "Comfort  ye  My  people" : — This  command  ia 
adapted  to  the  needs  of  the  country  in  which  we  live.  There  is  a  good  deal  of  weari- 
ness and  depression  in  modem  Hfe.     If  the  blessings  of  an  advanced  civilisation 


164  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xl. 

can  make  people  happy,  there  are  multitudes  who  ought  to  be  em-aptured,  for  they 
are  surrounded  by  material  comfort.  The  gospel  of  recreation  is  preached  to  them. 
Outward  nature  is  enjoyed  and  reverenced.  Music  and  painting  are  filling  them  with 
sensibiUty ;  literature  is  contributing  to  their  intellectual  gratification ;  and  church 
privileges  abound.  Worship  to-day  gratifies  the  artistic  faculty,  without  putting 
a  very  great  strain  on  the  spiritual  nature  of  man.  There  never  was  so  much 
ingenuity  displayed  as  now  in  the  manufacture  of  forms  of  enjoyment.  People 
never  waged  such  a  successful  war  as  to-day  against  physical  and  social  discomfort. 
And  yet,  if  you  watch  them  closely,  you  can  see  that  they  are  not  really  satisfied. 
Affection  to-day  is  not  at  rest,  intellect  is  not  at  rest,  conscience  is  not  at  rest,  faith 
is  not  at  rest.  Thank  God,  there  is  sweet  satisfaction  of  soul  to  be  foimd.  "  Com- 
fort ye,"  &c.  I.  There  is  a  message  in  this  text  for  all  who  ajre  uuder  disciplinb 
ON  ACCOTJNT  OF  SIN.  The  connection  between  sin  and  pimishment  is  never  really 
broken.  Men  were  never  so  clever  as  they  are  to-day  in  the  efforts  they  have  put 
forth  to  evade  the  penalties  of  wrong-doing,  and  they  very  often  succeed  so  far  as 
outward  effects  are  concerned.  But  the  inward  penalty  is  always  sure.  Loss  of 
self-respect,  loss  of  faculty,  and  deterioration  of  natiire  itself.  "  Thy  warfare  is 
accomplished,"  thy  discipline  may  come  to  an  end.  It  is  the  spirit  of  rebellion 
wliich  lengthens  the  period  of  discipline.  Lay  down  your  weapons,  give  up  fighting 
against  God,  and  He  will  forgive  you  now,  and  the  consequences  of  your  wrong- 
doing shaU  inwardly  be  done  away.  Further,  your  pardon  will  tell  at  once  on  the 
outward  consequences  of  your  wrong- doing.  You  forfeited  the  confidence  of  your 
friends  by  your  sin;  that  will  come  back  to  you.  You  damaged  your  health;  that 
will  improve.  You  injured  your  social  position;  that  will  be  retrieved.  Just  as 
there  is  no  decree  in  God's  mind  as  to  the  length  of  time  during  which  a  man's 
discipline  shall  be  continued,  so  there  is  no  decree  as  to  the  amount  of  suffering  man 
can  endure.  The  suffering,  like  the  time,  may  be  reUeved  by  speedy  submission 
and  penitence.  II.  There  is  a  message  in  this  text  for  all  who  in  religious 
EXPERIENCE  HAVE  NEVER  GOT  BEYOND  CONVICTION.  Beyond  conviction  there 
is  the  forgiveness  of  God.  Beyond  the  sin  there  is  purity.  Beyond  doubt  there 
is  faith;  and  beyond  all  this  miserable  weariness  of  spirit  there  is  rest. 
in.  There  is  a  message  here,  also,  for  all  timid  Christians.  They  feel  it  would 
be  presumption  to  expect  conscious  pardon  and  Christian  perfection.  Cultivate 
your  capacity  to  take  in  the  comfort  of  God.  IV.  There  is  a  message  here 
for  ALL  DISCONSOLATE  CHRISTIANS.  You  want  new  ideas,  the  old  ones  are  about 
worn  out.  Thy  warfare  with  weariness  is  accomplished.  V.  There  is  a  message 
here  for  disconsolate  Churches.  The  Jewish  Church  was  disconsolate  at  the 
time  of  the  captivity,  and  there  are  Churches  to-day  which  are  in  a  sort  of 
captivity.  They  have  made  exceptional  provision  for  the  needs  of  the  people, 
yet  they  are  declining.  The  declension  of  Churches  in  great  populations  is  due  to 
many  causes,  but  due  to  one  cause  that  is  a  great  deal  overlooked,  and  that  is  the 
very  peculiar  temperament  of  the  generation  in  which  your  lot  has  been  cast.  Com- 
petition, in  particular,  has  led  to  a  vast  amount  of  advertising.  But  disconsolate 
Churches  may  be  comforted.  We  are  coming  out  of  the  captivity  of  those  habits 
and  conditions  which  have  come  down  from  the  restrictive  ages  of  society.  Modem 
evangelism  has  grown  steadily  in  the  elements  of  truth  and  spiritual  intelligence. 
It  is  resulting  to-day  in  the  deepening  of  spiritual  Ufe,  and  in  the  expansion  of  the 
kingdom  of  God.  VI.  There  is  a  message  here  for  the  nation  and  the  empire. 
The  return  from  captivity  was  the  beginning  of  a  new  spiritual  movement,  which 
was  destined  to  extend  over  many  countries.  The  classical  period  of  human 
history  was  about  to  begin.  My  text  is  the  new  strain  with  which  the  prophet 
greets  the  expanding  prospect.  As  one  has  said.  It  is  the  keynote  of  the  revived 
and  purified  Israel,  and  the  reason  of  the  hold  of  Christendom  on  Eiurope  and  on 
modem  times.  There  is  a  wonderful  correspondence  between  that  period  and 
ours.  England  is  the  centre  to-day.  Judaism  at  the  time  referred  to  was  rational- 
ised by  being  brought  into  contact  with  forms  of  Roman  and  Greek  thought. 
Christianity  is  being  rationalised  by  contact  with  natural  religion.  But  who  is  the 
leader  of  the  improvement  of  the  modem  world?  "  Who  is  this  that  cometh  from 
Edom  ?  "  &c.  (chap.  Ixiii.  1).  Was  it  some  king  ruling  the  nations  with  a  rod  of 
iron?  No.  Somesoldier  with  a  two-edged  sword?  No.  Some  philosopher  ruling 
the  intellect  of  the  race  ?  No.  Jehovah's  righteous  servant  and  witness  it  was :  "I 
that  speak  in  righteousness,  mighty  to  save."  And  the  Lord  Christ,  the  Son  of 
Grod,  never  spoke  to  the  race  as  He  is  speaking  to-day,  and  He  needs  His  messengers 
to  prepare  His  way.     (T.  Alien,  D.D.)        Conviction  and  comfort: — A  quaint 


CHAP.  XL.]  ISAIAH.  155 

Scotch  preacher  said  that  the  needle  of  the  law  opens  the  way  for  and  carries  the 
thread  of  the  Gospel.  I  once  quoted  this  saying  in  a  tent- meeting,  and  a  hearer 
remarked  to  me  afterwards:  "  Yes,  you're  right;  but  the  needle  should  be  pulled 
out  and  not  left  behind."     {H.  G.  Ghiinness,  D.D.) 

Ver.  2.  Speak  ye  comfortably  to  Jerusalem. — Voices  (hat  speak  to  the  heart: — 
This  is  one  characteristic  of  the  voices  that  reach  us  from  God:  they  speak  home 
to  the  heart  (R.V.,  marg.).  The  phrase  in  the  Hebrew  is  the  ordinary  expression 
for  wooing,  and  describes  the  attitude  of  the  suppliant  lover  endeavouring  to 
woo  a  maiden's  heart.  Love  can  detect  love.  I.  The  voice  of  forgiveness. 
The  first  need  of  the  soul  is  forgiveness.  It  can  endure  suffering;  and  if  that 
suffering,  like  the  Jewish  exile,  has  been  caused  by  its  own  follies  and  sins,  it 
wiU  meekly  bow  beneath  it,  saying  with  EU,  under  similar  circumstances,  "  It 
is  the  Lord;  let  Him  do  what  seemeth  good  to  Him."  But  the  sense  of  being 
unf orgiven !  This  bitterness  of  heart  for  sin  is  the  first  symptom  of  retiu?ning  life ! 
And  before  God  can  enter  upon  His  great  work  of  salvation,  before  He  can  ciear 
away  the  debris  and  restore  the  ruined  temple,  before  He  can  reproduce  Hia  image, 
it  is  needful  to  assm-e  the  penitent  and  believing  soul  that  its  time  of  service  is 
accomplished,  that  its  iniquity  is  pardoned.  In  dealing  with  the  question  of  sin 
and  its  results,  let  us  always  distinguish  between  its  penal  and  natural  consequences. 
The  distinction  comes  out  clearly  in  the  case  of  drunkenness  or  criminal  violenci. 
Society  steps  in  and  inflicts  the  penalties  of  the  fine,  the  prison,  or  the  lash;  but  ill 
addition  to  these,  there  is  the  aching  head,  the  trembling  hand,  the  shattered  nervcoi* 
system.  So  in  respect  to  all  sin.  The  natural  consequences  remain.  David  was 
forgiven,  but  the  sword  never  left  his  house.  The  drunkard,  the  dissolute,  the 
passionate,  may  be  pardoned,  and  yet  have  to  reap  as  they  sowed.  The  consequences 
of  forgiven  sin  may  be  greatly  sanctified ;  the  Marah  waters  cured  by  the  tree  of 
the  (>oss — yet  they  must  be  patiently  and  inevitably  endured.  It  was  thus 
that  Jerusalem  was  suffering,  when  these  dulcet  notes  reached  her.  The  back- 
sliding and  rebeUious  people  were  doomed  to  serve  their  appointed  time  and 
captivity,  and  suffer  the  natural  and  inevitable  results  of  apostasy.  Hence 
the  double  comfort  of  this  first  announcement.  II.  The  voice  of  deliverance. 
Between  Babylon  and  Palestine  lay  a  great  desert  of  more  than  thirty  days' 
journey.  But  the  natiural  difficulties  that  seemed  to  make  the  idea  of  return 
chimerical,  were  small  compared  with  those  that  arose  from  other  circumstances. 
The  captives  were  held  by  as  proud  a  monarchy  as  that  which  refused  to  let  their 
fathers  go  from  the  brick-kilns  of  Egypt.  Mountains  arose  in  ranges  between 
them  and  freedom,  and  valleys  interposed  their  yawning  gulfs.  But  when  God 
arises  to  dehver  His  people  who  cry  day  and  night  unto  Him,  mountains  swing 
back,  as  did  the  iron  gate  before  Peter;  valleys  Uft  their  hollows  into  level  plains; 
crooked  things  become  straight,  and  rough  places  smooth.  III.  The  voices 
OP  DECAY  AND  IMMORTAL  STRENGTH.  As  man's  soul  is  Still,  and  becomes  able 
to  distinguish  the  voices  that  speak  around  him  in  that  eternal  world  to  which 
he,  not  less  than  the  unseen  speakers,  belongs,  it  hears  first  and  oftenest  the  lament 
of  the  angels  over  the  transcience  of  human  life  and  glory.  In  a  stillness,  in  which 
the  taking  of  the  breath  is  hushed,  the  soul  listens  to  their  conversation  as  they 
speak  together.  "  Cry,"  says  one  watcher  to  another.  "  What  shaU  I  cry?  "  is 
the  instant  inquiry.  "  There  is,"  continues  the  first,  "  but  one  sentiment  sug- 
gested by  the  aspect  of  the  world  of  men.  All  flesh  is  grass,  and  all  its  beauty 
like  the  wild  flowers  of  the  meadow-lands,  blasted  by  the  breath  of  the  east  wind, 
or  lying  in  swathes  beneath  the  reaper's  scythe."  The  words  meet  with  a  deep 
response  in  the  heart  of  each  thoughtful  man.  But  hsten  further  to  the  voices 
of  the  heavenly  watchers.  The  failiu-e  of  man  shall  not  frustrate  the  Divine 
piurpose.  "  The  Word  of  the  Lord  shall  stand  for  ever."  IV.  Voices  to  herald 
THE  Shepherd-King.  The  Old  Version  and  the  margin  of  the  R.V.  are,  perhaps, 
preferable  to  the  R.V.  Zion,  the  grey  fortress  of  Jerusalem,  is  bidden  to  climb 
the  highest  mountain  within  reach,  and  to  lift  up  her  voice  in  fearless  strength, 
announcing  to  the  cities  of  Judah  lying  around  in  ruins  that  God  was  on  His 
way  to  restore  them.  "  Say  imto  the  cities.  Behold  your  God !  Behold  the 
Lord  God  will  come."  All  eyes  are  tmned  to  behold  the  entrance  on  the 
scene  of  the  Lord  God,  especially  as  it  has  been  announced  that  He  will 
come  as  a  mighty  one.  But,  lo!  a  Shepherd  conducts  His  flock  with  leisurely 
steps  across  the  desert  sands,  gathering  the  lambs  with  His  arm,  and  carrying 
them  in  His  bosom,  and  gently  leading  those  that  give  suck.     It  is  as  when,  in 


166  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  xl. 

after  centuries,  the  beloved  apostle  was  taught  to  expect  the  Lion  of  the  tribe 
of  Judah,  and,  lo !  in  the  midst  of  the  throne  stood  a  Lamb  as  it  had  been  slain. 
Do  not  be  afraid  of  God.  He  has  a  shepherd's  heart  and  skill.  (F.  B.  Meyer,  B.A.) 
God  the  Comforter  of  His  people : — The  skill  of  a  physician  is  shown,  in  the  first 
place,  in  selecting  out  of  many  diseases  that  imder  which  his  patient  suffers; 
and,  in  the  second  place,  in  choosing,  out  of  many  remedies,  that  which  is  most 
likely  to  effect  his  cure.  There  is  as  great  variety  in  the  diseases  of  the  soul  as 
in  those  of  the  body.  And  if  there  be  this  variety  in  spiritual  diseases,  and  this 
variety  of  remedy,  then  evidently,  in  ministering  to  a  mixed  people,  the  preacher 
of  Christianity  will  have  to  decide  in  each  separate  case  what  is  the  precise  form 
of  sickness,  and  what  the  exact  medicine  best  adapted  to  its  cure.  Where  the  soul 
is  utterly  insensible  to  the  truths  of  religion,  there  must  not  be  the  same  process 
as  where  the  conscience  is  busy  in  remonstrance.  There  are  spiritual  patients 
with  whom  we  must  try  argument;  but  there  are  others  with  whom  argument 
would  be  altogether  out  of  place,  whose  disquieted  minds  totally  incapacitate 
them  for  any  process  of  reasoning;  who  require  the  cordials  of  the  Gospel,  that 
they  may  be  strengthened  for  the  trials  and  endurances  of  life.  There  is  the 
lowering  medicine  for  the  over-sanguine  and  presumptuous;  and  there  is  the 
stimulating  for  the  timid  and  mistrustful.  I.  In  our  text,  there  is  a  specification 
of  one  large  class  of  medicine;  and  therefore,  by  inference,  one  laegb  class 
OF  SICKNESS.  "  Comfort "  is  the  staple  of  the  prescription.  And  what  was 
the  condition  of  these  patients?  We  may  ascertain  this  from  the  subsequent 
words,  "  Cry  imto  her,  that  her  warfare  is  accomplished,  that  her  iniquity  is 
pardoned:  for  she  hath  received  of  the  Lord's  hands  double  for  all  her  sins." 
Here  evidently  the  condition  of  Jerusalem  is  one  of  distress  and  anxiety  and 
distraction  ;  and  this  accords  most  exactly  with  a  passage  in  the  Psalms,  and 
with  which  we  shall  connect  our  text — "  Li  the  multitude  of  my  thoughts  within 
me,  Thy  comforts  delight  my  soul."  Here  there  is  the  same  medicine — "  com- 
fort ";  but  you  have  the  disease  more  clearly  defined — a  "  multitude  of  thoughts." 
Bishop  Austin's  version  is,  "  The  multitude  of  my  anxieties  within  me  ";  whilst 
the  representation  in  the  original  Hebrew  would  seem  that  of  a  man  involved 
in  a  labyrinth,  from  whose  intricacies  there  was  no  way  of  escape.  All  this  agrees 
precisely  with  the  case  of  Jerusalem  in  the  text.  And  what  cause  of  distressing 
anxiety  would  there  be  whilst  there  was  warfare  unfinished,  and  sin  unforgiven! 
A  multitude  of  thoughts  is  a  very  common  symptom;  but  in  different  patients 
it  requires  very  different  medicines.  A  man  might  be  "  a  man  after  God's  own 
heart,"  and  yet  subject  to  the  invasion  of  a  crowd  of  anxieties.  It  is  not  uncommon 
for  religious  persons  to  erect  standards  of  excellence,  failing  to  reach  which  they 
become  uneasy  and  doubtful  as  to  their  spiritual  state.  Reading  the  promises 
of  the  Bible,  which  speak  of  the  righteous  as  "  kept  in  perfect  peace,"  which 
breathe  tranquillity,  abstraction  from  earthly  cares  and  foretastes  of  the  blessed- 
ness of  heaven,  they  conclude  that  what  they  ought  to  experience  is  perfect  serenity 
of  mind;  and  when  they  often  experience  distracting  anxieties  which  the  spirit 
is  unable  to  throw  off  altogether,  and  when  in  times  of  approaching  in  prayer 
the  Lord  God  of  heaven  and  earth,  they  find  their  attention  broken,  then  they 
will  add  to  every  other  grief  a  worse  grief  than  all — they  will  suspect  their  own 
sincerity  in  religion.  And  never  can  it  be  a  part  of  our  business  to  lessen  the 
extent  of  what  is  blameworthy,  or  to  endeavour  to  persuade  the  righteous  that 
freedom  from  anxiety  is  not  a  privilege  to  be  sought  for,  or  that  the  concentration 
of  the  <phole  soul  is  not  to  be  attempted,  and  failure  therein  not  bitterly  lamented. 
But  we  know  that  amid  the  turmoil  of  this  busy  world  there  will  often  be  such 
an  invasion  of  the  altar  of  the  Lord  as  when  the  birds  came  down  on  Abraham's 
sacrifice.  "  The  spirit  indeed  is  willing,  but  the  flesh  is  weak."  And  whilst 
we  could  not  wish  men  to  regard  their  infirmities  as  sufficient  excuses,  or  to  be 
content  with  imperfection,  as  though  xmavoidable;  still,  where  there  is  the  honest 
endeavour  to  stay  the  mind  on  God,  and  abstract  it  from  earth,  we  may  tell  them 
that  piety  may  consist  with  anxiety,  and  sincerity  of  prayer  with  a  multitude 
of  thoughts.  God  is  speaking  to  those  who  were  sorely  distracted,  and  yet  He 
still  calls  them  "  My  people."  It  is  not  every  failure  which  should  fill  you  with 
apprehension  as  to  your  state  before  God.  So  wonderfully  are  we  made,  so 
many  are  the  inlets  into  the  mind,  so  great  are  the  facihties  with  which  evil  angels 
can  ply  their  suggestions,  so  difficult,  moreover,  is  it  to  keep  that  attention  to 
worldly  business  which  is  required  from  us  as  members  of  society,  from  being 
deformed  by  that  carefulness  which  is  forbidden  us  as  members  of  Christ's  Church; 


OHAP.  XL.]  ISAIAH.  157 

that,  indeed,  it  were  vain  to  hope,  however  it  be  right  to  desire,  that  anxiety  shall 
never  harass  us  in  a  world  that  teems  with  trouble.  So  far  from  being  necessarily 
a  cause  of  despair  or  despondency,  the  Christian  may  rise  superior  to  aU  these 
intruders,  and  prove  that  they  do  but  heighten  the  blessedness  of  the  blessing, 
though  invaded  by  the  influence  of  earth.  God  speaks  to  those  as  still  "  His 
people  "  who  are  wearied  and  worn  down  with  warfare  and  toil;  and  in  place 
of  speaking  to  them  reproachfully  He  has  only  soothing  things  to  utter — "  Comfort 
ye,"  &o.  n.  Our  latter  observations  have  somewhat  trenched  on  the  chabacter 
OF  THE  MEDicrNB  which  should  be  tried  when  the  disease  is  a  multitude  of 
thoughts ;  but  we  must  now  examine  with  attention,  and  endeavour  to  determine 
its  faithfulness  and  its  efficiency.  The  case  is  that  of  a  righteous  man  on  whom 
cares  and  sorrows  press  with  great  weight;  and  whose  mind  is  torn  with  anxieties 
and  thronged  by  a  crowd  of  restless  intruders  distracting  him  even  in  his  com- 
munings with  God.  Now,  the  very  disease  under  which  this  man  labours  in- 
capacitates him  in  a  great  measure  for  any  process  of  argument.  His  distracted 
mind  is  quite  unfitted  for  that  calm  and  searching  inquiry  which  is  required  into 
the  matter  of  the  evidences  of  Christianity  for  strictly  convincing  him  of  the 
inspiration  of  Scripture.  His  mind  is  evidently  unfitted  for  duly  considering, 
and  examining  with  that  singleness  of  purpose  which  is  demanded  by  their 
solemnity,  mysteriousness,  and  importance  such  truths  as  those  of  the  Trinity, 
the  Incarnation,  and  the  Atonement.  Ask  ye  what  these  comforts  are?  There 
are  the  rich  assurances  of  God's  forgiving  love;  there  are  the  gracious  declarations 
of  His  everlasting  purpose  of  preserving  to  the  end  those  whom  He  has  chosen 
in  Christ;  there  are  the  multiplied  promises  which  make  to  the  eye  of  faith  the 
page  of  Scriptiu-e  one  sheet  of  burning  brightness,  always  presenting  most  radiantly 
what  is  most  suited  to  the  necessity.  There  are  the  foretastes  of  immortaUty. 
You  may  without  sinfulness  and  merely  through  infirmity  be  invaded  and  harassed 
by  a  multitude  of  thoughts.  But  the  evil  is  that  when  thus  invaded  and  harassed 
the  Christian  is  apt  to  attempt  a  critical  examination  of  his  spiritual  state, 
to  encourage  doubts  as  to  his  acceptance  with  God,  and  to  try  and  satisfy 
himself  by  some  process  of  reasoning  as  to  whether  he  has  indeed  believed 
unto  the  saving  of  his  soul,  whereas  his  very  state  is  one  which  unfits  him 
for  reasoning,  for  sitting  in  judgment  on  himself,  and  delivering  an  accurate 
verdict.  He  is  sick,  and  requires  God's  comfort.  III.  The  comforting 
message  is  to  be  deUvered  to  Jerusalem,  and  annexed  is  a  statement  of 
her  warfare  being  accomplished;  and  if  you  connect  with  this  the  exclama- 
tion of  St.  Paul — "  I  have  fought  the  good  fight,  I  have  finished  my 
course,"  you  will  see  that  we  make  no  far-fetched  appHcation  of  the  text,  if 
we  affirm  it  as  specially  APPROPRLiTE  on  the  approach  of  the  last  enemy, 
DEATH.  Never  is  it  likely  that  there  wiU  be  a  more  tumultuous  gathering  of 
confiicting  emotions  than  when  the  mind  fixes  itself  on  approaching  death.  It 
is  here  that  the  power  of  all  mere  human  resources  must  eventually  faiL  Chris- 
tianity furnishes  an  abundance  of  what  is  needed  for  allaying  the  fear  of  death, 
and  soothing  man's  passage  to  the  tomb.  (H.  Melvill,  B.D.)  Her  warfare 
ia  accomplislied. — The  Christian'' s  warfare  : — The  acceptableness  of  any  announce- 
ment will  depend  very  much  upon  the  state  of  mind  and  feeling  in  which  we 
are  found  in  respect  to  the  subject  of  such  announcement.  Go  to  the  soldier, 
wearied  with  a  long  campaign,  and  many  a  hazardous  engagement,  longing  for 
a  sight  of  his  beloved  home — to  him  how  welcome  will  be  the  annoimcement, 
"  Thy  warfare  is  accomplished  !  "  It  was  on  this  principle  that  the  prophet 
Isaiah  was  directed  to  take  a  message  of  consolation  to  the  ancient  people  of 
God.  The  language  of  the  text  may,  without  any  impropriety,  be  applied  to 
the  termination  of  any  state  of  anxiety,  hardship,  and  grief.  I.  The  life  of 
THE  TRUE  BELIEVER  IS  A  WARFARE,  lYequcntly  IS  it  represented  to  us  in  the 
Holy  Scripture  by  this  form  of  military  phraseology.  Hence,  says  the  apostle, 
"  Fight  the  good  fight  of  faith  ";  and,  writing  to  Timothy,  "  That  by  these  thou 
mightest  war  a  good  warfare  " ;  "I  have  fought  a  good  fight,"  &c.  I.  The  great 
principle  of  the  conflict  is  faith,  founded  and  implanted  in  the  mind  by  a  super- 
natural agency.  No  man  will  ever  in  a  Christian  sense  contend,  until  he  is  united 
by  a  living  faith  to  Jesus,  the  Son  of  God :  for  faith  acquaints  him  with  his  spiritual 
enemies;  faith  is  the  principle  of  the  new  life  which  puts  itself  into  an  attitude 
of  resistance  against  all  that  is  hostile  to  itself.  "  This  is  the  victory  that  over- 
cometh  the  world,  even  our  faith."  When  a  man  is  slumbering  in  his  sin,  nothing 
is  further  from  his  thoughts  than  to  maintain  a  spiritual  conflict  with  invisible. 


158  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  xu 

spiritual  existences;  but,  iinder  the  influence  of  faith,  he  will  find  he  is  surrounded 
by  a  legion  of  foes.  He  looks  within,  and  there  he  finds  the  corruption  of 
fallen  nature.  Besides  the  corruption  of  an  evil  nature,  there  are  the  powers 
of  darkness.  The  world,  even  in  its  lawful  form,  is  a  very  serious  enemy  to  our 
spiritual  progress  and  our  spiritual  peace.  2.  This  contention  will  continue  as 
long  as  life  shall  last.  11.  The  hotjb  of  death  witnesses  the  accosiplishment 
OF  THIS  AVARFARE.  1.  Death  is  the  instrumental  means  of  separating  us  from 
our  connection  with  the  present  evil  world;  it  strikes  at  once  a  Hne  of  demarcation, 
which  throws  us  beyond  the  reach  of  all  the  elements  of  this  present  sensible 
life.  He  upon  whom  death  has  performed  his  solemn  office,  has  no  further  interest 
in  the  possessions,  the  endearments,  the  gains,  the  business,  the  pleasures,  and 
the  satisfactions  of  this  vain  world.  2.  Then,  death  terminates  the  strife  of  sin. 
3.  Death  confesses  that  the  believer  is  a  conqueror  over  himself,  and  yields  the  palm 
of  victory  at  the  moment  when  he  inflicts  the  blow  (1  Cor.  xv.  55-57).     TTT.  Thh 

CONSOLrNQ     AND     BXHILARATINQ     QUALITIES     OP    THIS     BLESSED     CONSUMMATION. 

1.  When  the  warfare  ends,  the  rest  begins.  2.  This  state  of  rest  is  also  a  state 
of  peculiar  and  inexpressible  delight.  It  is  something  more  than  rest,  as  implying 
a  cessation  from  toil  and  from  contention;  it  is  a  joyful  rest.  Think  of  the  place 
of  rest  ifito  which  the  departed  spirits  of  the  just  are  received.  They  are  where 
Christ  is;  they  behold  Bis  glory.  And  then,  consider  the  society  to  which  the 
ransomed  spirits  of  the  just  are  admitted.  Think  of  the  employments  to  which 
they  are  advanced.  They  serve  God  day  and  night  in  His  temple,  and  His  name 
is  in  their  foreheads.  3.  This  feUcity  is  evermore  increasing.  4.  This  felicity 
will  be  for  ever  and  ever.  "  So  shall  we  ever  be  with  the  Lord."  [G.  Clayton.) 
Undeserved  grace: — "  Fulfilled  is  her  warfare,  absolved  her  guilt,  received  hath 
she  of  Jehovah's  hand  double  for  all  her  sins."  The  very  grammar  here  is 
eloquent  of  grace.  The  emphasis  hes  on  the  three  predicates,  which  ought 
to  stand  in  translation,  as  they  do  in  the  original,  at  the  beginning  of  each 
clause.  Prominence  is  given,  not  to  the  warfare,  nor  to  the  guilt,  nor  to  the 
sins,  but  to  this,  that  "  accomplished  "  is  the  warfare,  "  absolved  "  the  guilt, 
"  sufficiently  expiated "  the  sins.  It  is  a  great  At  Last  which  these  clauses 
peal  forth;  but  an  At  Last  whose  tone  is  not  so  much  inevitableness  as 
undeserved  grace.  (Prof.  G.  A.  Smith,  D.D.)  .Grace  masked  by  grace : — 
How  full  of  pity  God  is,  to  take  so  much  account  of  the  sufferings  sinners  have 
brought  upon  themselves!  How  full  of  grace  to  reckon  those  sufferings  "  double 
the  sins  "  that  had  earned  them!  It  is,  as  when  we  have  seen  gracious  men  make 
us  a  free  gift,  and  in  their  courtesy  insist  that  we  have  worked  for  it.  It  is 
grace  masked  by  grace.  (Ibid.)  Doutile  for  all  her  sins. — "  Double  for 
all  her  sins  "  .• — It  is  not  to  be  pressed  arithmetically,  in  which  case  God  would 
appear  over-righteous,  and  therefore  unrighteous.     (F.  Delitzsch,  D.D.) 

Ver.  3.  The  voice  of  him  that  crleth  in  the  wilderness. — The  Baptist  a  pattern 
preacher: — I.  Depreciation  of  self.  Isaiah  had  predicted  simply  a  "voice"; 
and  John  Baptist,  accordingly,  with  a  humihty  which  ministers  of  the  New  Testa- 
ment should  follow,  laid  no  stress  on  anything  personal  to  himself — the  announce- 
ment of  his  birth  by  an  angel,  his  priestly  descent,  his  years  of  preparation — 
though  all  these  supplied  advantages  to  his  ministry.  He  concentrated  attention 
on  what  he  had  to  teU.  In  me  there  is  nothing  to  attract  or  benefit.  I  am  only 
what  centuries  ago  was  predicted — a  voice.  II.  Exaltation  of  his  messagh 
as  Divine.  ILL  A  proclaiming  as  the  central  topic  in  the  everlasting 
message  a  Divxnb,  and  therefore  effectual.  Helper  for  the  ruined.  "  He 
shall  gather  ";  "  He  shall  carry  ";  "  He  shall  gently  lead  ";  "  All  flesh  shall  see 
the  salvation  of  the  Lord  "  (vers.  10,  11,  with  5).  And  John  Baptist  accordingly 
announced,  as  ministers  of  the  New  Testament  should  now  announce,  the  presence 
in  Christ  Jesus  of  a  perfect  Saviour  (John  L  26,  27,  29;  Matt.  iii.  11;  John  iii. 
29,  30).  Who  among  the  audience  of  the  "  faithful  ambassador  "  have  rightly 
caught  the  message?  (1  Pet.  ii.  3.)  1.  Those  who  siureudcr  all  habits  inconsistent 
with  his  calL  2.  Those  who  rejoice  greatly  in  the  guardianship  and  guidance 
of  the  great  DeUverer  proclaimed  (1  Pet.  i.  5,  6).  3.  Those  who  steadily  tread 
in  the  blessed  steps  of  His  hfe  (Luke  i.  74,  75;  1  Pet.  i.  21).  His  sheep  hear 
His  voice;  He  knows  them;  they  follow  Him.     (X>.  D.  Stewart,  M.A.) 

Vers.  3-5.  Prepare  ye  the  way  of  the  Lord. — The  ivay  of  the  Lord  prepared  : — 
I.  The  Jewish  theocracy.     It  is  a  favourite  statement  with  those  who  seek 


CHAP.  XL.]  ISAIAH.  159 

to  account  for  Christianity  on  entirely  mundane  principles,  that  Christ  grew, 
as  it  were,  out  of  His  age.  The  age  was  waiting  for  some  such  Teacher,  some 
such  Gospel — and  Teacher  and  Gospel  came.  Just  as  the  wreck  of  the  Roman 
Republic  demanded  a  hand  and  brain  like  Csesar's,  and  they  appeared  at  the 
critical  moment  £ind  reorganised  the  State,  so  the  Great  Preacher  of  the  universal 
Gospel  was  called  for  by  His  times,  and  He  came.  There  is  something  in  the 
spirit  of  an  age,  we  are  told,  which  creates  the  heroes  and  teachers  of  the  age. 
This  is  very  interesting,  and  has  a  large  measure  of  truth  in  it.  Men  of  high 
genius  are  singularly  sensitive  to  the  influences  around  them,  and  are  created 
while  they  create;  but  it  is  blankly  impossible  to  account  for  Christ  and  Christianity 
by  natural  evolution,  with  the  Jewish  theocracy,  a  grand  prophetic  system  which 
for  nearly  two  thousand  years  looked  unto  and  prophesied  of  the  Messiah,  standing 
in  the  way.  There  was  existing  for  ages  in  the  world,  kept  alive  by  marvellous 
interventions  of  a  higher  hand,  a  national  community,  whose  function  was  distinctly, 
from  first  to  last,  to  prepare  the  way  for  the  Advent,  for  the  Divine  kingdom 
which  was  to  rule  over  and  to  bless  mankind.  These  Jews  were  set  to  bear  witness 
of  the  reaUty  of  the  Divine  rule,  and  its  necessity,  if  states  were  to  be  saved  from 
chaos,  and  the  whole  world  from  wreck.  There  was  a  period,  when  Moses  led 
them  in  the  wilderness,  when  the  theocracy  came  out  with  wonderful  clearness. 
Then  there  was  a  period,  under  their  kings,  when,  through  their  worldly  conformity 
to  the  life  of  surrounding  nations,  the  theocracy  was  obscured.  But  the  captivity 
ended  that  conformity  in  sorrow  and  in  shame.  From  the  time  of  the  captivity 
the  idea  of  the  theocracy  was  restored.  The  prophets  are  throughout  its  great 
witnesses.  The  expectation,  as  matter  of  history,  grew  intense  as  the  Advent 
approached.  The  expectation  of  the  Advent  of  a  Being,  a  Person,  who  should 
fulfil  the  promise  and  the  prophecy  with  which  their  national  life  and  literature 
were  charged ;  who  should  bring,  what  Christ  has  brought — a  Gospel  of  salvation 
to  the  world.  It  is  a  wonderful  featmre  of  the  preparation,  that  just  as  the  nation 
which  exhibited  the  theocracy  was  dying  away  as  a  nation  its  behef  in  the  theocracy 
grew  more  intense,  and  its  witness  grew  more  clear  and  impressive  to  the  approach- 
ing Advent  of  the  great  world  theocrat — the  Christ.  II.  The  Jewish  dispersion. 
It  was  a  very  wonderful  chain  of  providential  agencies  which,  before  the  Advent, 
scattered  that  people,  these  witnesses  so  charged  with  the  promise  and  the  pro- 
phecy, through  the  civilised  world.  Up  to  the  time  of  the  captivity  the  Jews 
kept  themselves  in  a  kind  of  stem,  or,  as  the  heathen  around  them  called  it,  a 
BuUen  isolation.  They  cherished  the  sense  of  a  lofty  superiority.  But,  after  the 
captivity,  they  displayed  a  singular  faciUty  of  dispersion,  a  happy  art  of  settling 
and  flourishing  among  the  Gentile  peoples,  which  makes  them  to  this  day,  pace 
the  Anglo-Saxon,  the  first  settlers  of  the  world.  In  every  chief  city  of  the 
empire  which  Alexander  founded  a  colony  of  Jews  was  sure  to  be  settled;  and  the 
same  state  of  things  afterwards  obtained  in  the  far  wider  empire  of  Rome.  In 
order  to  appreciate  the  significance  of  this,  you  must  estimate  the  utter  confusion 
of  human  beliefs  and  ideas  about  Divine  things  and  beings  which  had  been  the 
fruit  of  the  Greek  and  Roman  conquests.  Neither  Greek  nor  Roman  had  belief 
enough  in  his  gods  to  impose  them  on  the  conquered  nations;  nor  did  they  find 
anything  Divine  among  the  conquered  nations  which  seemed  better  worth  worship- 
ping than  their  o^vu.  This  confusion  of  reUgious  ideas  and  systems  and  deities,  none 
of  which  had  power  to  emerge  with  absolute  or  even  strong  claims  to  belief,  was 
profoundly  detrimental  to  moral  earnestness,  and  indeed  to  any  high-toned  belief 
about  Divine  things.  There  was  an  utter  confusion  and  decay  of  faith.  But 
here  were  communities  settled  among  them  who  had  an  absolute  and  indestruct- 
ible belief  in  their  Revelation.  They  had  a  God  to  worship  of  whom  they  could 
give  intelligible  account.  The  Jews  lived  among  the  heathen  in  isolation  still  ; 
but  the  isolation  was  visibly  based  on  a  religious  faith,  and  on  reUgious  records. 
These  Jews,  scattered  abroad,  were  witnesses  everywhere  of  the  reality  and  necessity 
of  Divine  revelation  to,  and  Divine  legislation  for,  man.  They  familiarised  men 
with  the  ideas  which  Christianity  proclaimed,  and  on  which  it  rested  its  authori- 
tative claim  to  the  homage  and  the  obedience  of  mankind.     III.  There  was 

A  VERY  REMARKABLE  CHANGE  WITHIN  THE  BOSOM  OF  HEATHEN  SOCIETY  ITSELF, 
IN  ITS  INTELLECTtTAL  AND  MORAL  IDEAS,  WHICH  NOT  ONLY  OPENED  THE  WAY  FOR 
THE   TRUTH   OF   CHRISTIANITY,    BUT   SEEMED   TO    DEMAND   SOME    SUCH   REVELATION 

OF  TRUTH  TO  MANKIND.  Students  of  philosophy  note  a  very  decided  progress 
between  the  age  of  Socrates  and  the  age  of  Seneca  in  the  consideration  of  questions 
bearing  on  man's  individual  Hfe  and  destiny.     The  supreme  interest  of  a  man's 


160  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xl. 

life  in  the  golden  age  of  Greek  philosophy  lay  in  hi8  relations,  as  a  member  of 
a  society,  as  a  citizen  of  a  State.  Within  the  Uttle  circle  of  Athenian  society  men 
realised  a  closeness  of  relation  to  each  other,  which  made  the  State  something 
of  a  household.  The  conquests  of  Alexander  created  an  entirely  new  order  of 
things.  The  Greek  became,  not  the  citizen  of  a  State  almost  domestic  in  its 
magnitude  and  character,  but  the  subject  of  a  great  Empire,  lost  in  an  undistin- 
guished mass  of  fellow-subjects,  and  quite  cut  adrift  from  the  landmarks  and  the 
moorings  by  which  he  had  been  wont  to  steer  and  stay  his  life.  The  Greek  must 
think  about  himself  and  his  world,  and  Alexander  led  him  out  into  a  world  too 
big  for  him,  which  oppressed  and  distracted  him,  and  overthrew  all  the  traditions 
of  his  schools.  It  was  a  world,  too,  of  ceaseless  conflict  and  change.  The  state  of 
the  Greek  world  between  Alexander's  conquests  and  the  establishment  of  Roman 
supremacy,  say,  roughly,  two  hundred  years,  was  such  as  to  throw  the  thinker 
back  upon  himself,  to  lead  him  to  realise  his  individual  responsibihty,  to  force 
on  him  the  question,  "  What,  after  all,  am  I?  Whence  did  I  come?  For  what 
am  I  here?  Whither  do  I  tend?  I  am  in  a  world  full  of  confusion  and  misery — • 
how  am  I  to  regulate  my  life,  so  that  my  happiness  may  not  become  a  wreck? " 
So  the  great  thinkers  increasingly  concerned  themselves  with  questions  which 
had  to  do  with  the  individual  man,  his  duty,  his  responsibility,  his  destiny,  his 
means  of  arming  himself  for  the  battle  of  life,  his  means  of  saving  himself  from 
utter  and  hopeless  loss.  Thus  there  was  a  growing  tendency  in  men  to  consider 
very  much  the  question  which  Christianity  came  to  treat  of  as  salvation.  The 
thoughts  of  man,  the  longings  and  aspirations  of  man,  seem  to  be  led  up  step 
by  step  to  the  point  in  which  the  cry,  "  Lord,  save,  or  I  perish!"  was  ready, 
did  he  but  know  all  the  meaning  of  his  dumb  pain,  to  fashion  itself  on  his  hps. 
All  was  waiting  for  the  proclamation,  "  The  Spirit  of  the  Lord  is  upon  me,  because 
He  hath  anointed  me  to  preach  the  Gospel  to  the  poor,"  &c.  When  men  went 
abroad  and  proclaimed  the  Advent  of  a  Saviour,  they  found  a  ready  entrance 
to  the  world's  sad,  wistful  heart.  IV.  The  Roman  Empibe.  Incomparably 
the  most  important  secular  herald  of  the  Advent  was  the  Empire — an  Empire 
under  whose  sceptre  such  a  decree  could  go  forth  (Luke  ii  1).  There  are  many 
points  of  view  from  which  the  Empire  may  be  regarded  as  the  herald  of  the  king- 
dom which  was  destined  to  master  it,  and  found  on  it  the  edifice  of  Christian 
society.  We  are  working  and  building  on  the  foundations  of  the  Empire  still. 
The  whole  of  modem  European  society  is  but  the  fully  developed  Empire  of 
Rome.  It  is  the  centre  of  the  secular,  as  the  Advent  of  Christ  is  the  centre  of 
the  spiritual,  history  of  mankind.  I  might  say  much  about  the  universal  peace, 
which  made  the  preaching  of  a  universal  Gospel  possible.  About  the  imiversal 
law  and  language,  which  ma  le  the  career  of  the  preachers,  at  any  rate,  far  easier 
and  more  rapid  than  it  could  have  been  in  any  previous  state  of  society.  The 
fundamental  question  opened  by  the  Empire  is  also  a  fundamental  question 
of  Christianity,  the  relation  of  men  to  each  other.  Is  it  enmity?  is  it  brother- 
hood? Is  the  struggle  for  existence  the  ruhng  principle  of  progress,  or  brotherly 
sympathy,  care,  and  love  ?  The  state  of  natural  enmity  and  constant  war  gave 
way  to  a  state  in  which  peace,  good-fellowship,  and  mutual  ministries  were 
regarded  as  the  natural  condition  of  society.  Briton  and  Egyptian,  Syrian  and 
Spaniard,  formed  together  a  great  political  unity;  and  were  drawn  into  bonds 
of  relation  to  each  other,  the  natiu-e  and  bearings  of  which  men  were  eager  to 
explore.  ,  There  rose  on  the  minds  of  men  the  idea  of  human  brotherhood-  Men 
began  to  speculate  about  a  common  good  in  which  civilised  humanity  was  to 
share,  and  a  duty  of  the  whole  human  community  to  its  weaker  members,  its 
sick,  its  poor,  its  wretched.  Men  wanted  to  know  why  and  how  they  were  brethren, 
why  and  how  they  were  to  love.  And  so  arose  perhaps  the  greatest  herald  of 
the  Advent  in  secular  society,  the  longing  for  a  kingdom  which  should  fulfil  the 
promise  which  Rome  in  the  nature  of  things  was  constantly  breaking;  and  give 
peace,  concord,  love  to  a  distracted  world.  Thus  the  way  was  prepared,  the 
highway  through  the  desert  was  made.  (J.  B.  Brown,  B.A.)  The  Divine 
glory  revealed  in  Christ : — I.  Its  literal  accomplishment.  1.  In  the  appeartuice 
of  John  the  Baptist.  Ages  rolled  away,  and  no  such  preparing  voice  was  heard 
in  the  desert  of  Judea.  But  it  was  at  length  heard.  2.  Following  the  footsteps 
of  the  servant,  comes  the  Master.  And  as  John  had  said,  "  Prepare  ye  the  way 
of  the  Lord,"  then  was  the  glory  of  God  manifested;  and  aU  flesh,  Uving  at  that 
time  in  Judea,  saw  it  together:  the  glory  of  God  in  human  nature.  Jesus  Christ 
was  the  visible  image  of  the  glory  of  God  all  the  time  He  was  on  earth.     The 


CHAP.  XL.]  ISAIAH.  161 

visible  image — (1)  Of  the  power  of  God.  His  works  were  Divine ;  His  word 
was  power.  See  His  power  over  the  elements.  (2)  Of  the  truth  of  God.  The 
doctrine  of  Christ  has  brought  us  nearer  to  the  unclouded  truth  of  the  Divine 
mind  than  men  were  ever  brought  before.  (3)  Of  the  holiness  of  God;  and  that 
even  while  He  was  man  upon  earth.  (4)  Of  the  justice  of  God.  Though  this 
is  not  so  frequently  adverted  to  as  other  attributes,  yet  it  is  important.  Why 
did  Christ  die  so  wilUngly?  If,  then,  the  glory  of  God  was  revealed  even  in  the 
lowUness  and  sufiferings  of  the  Saviour,  I  ask  if  the  coming  of  Christ  had  not  in  it 
more  real  pomp  than  if  He  had  come  with  all  the  grandeur  of  an  Eastern  monarch* 
to  a  people  who  waited  for  Him?  11.  Its  spiritual  accomplishment.  This 
is  seen  in  the  manifestation  of  Christ  to  the  hearts  of  men.  In  this  there  is  both 
preparation  and  manifestation;  for  Christ,  in  mercy,  no  more  bursts  upon  the 
soul  at  once  than  He  did  upon  the  world;  He  sends  His  messenger  to  prepare 
the  way  before  Him;  this  is  the  first  part  of  the  process.  That  preparing  herald, 
figured  by  John  the  Baptist,  is  repentance.  Consider  what  repentance  is,  and 
you  will  see  how  it  prepares  the  soul  for  Christ,  for  pardon,  happiness,  and  purity. 
1.  The  first  element  is  a  deep  and  serious  conviction  of  the  fact  of  our  sin.  For  if 
we  justify  ourselves,  there  will  be  no  preparation.  2.  The  second  element  is 
a  conviction  of  the  extreme  danger  of  sin  and  its  infinite  desert.  3.  The  third 
element  is  a  burdened  and  disquieted  spirit.  This  supposes  a  feeling  that  we 
are  not  able  to  deliver  ourselves.  The  way  of  the  Lord  is  then  plain ;  all  obstructions 
are  removed  when  we  come  to  this;  for  all  true  repentance,  Hke  the  preaching 
of  John  the  Baptist,  concludes  by  saying,  "  Behold  the  Lamb  of  God !  "  It  is 
here  alone  that  we  see  the  glory  of  God.  For  what  is  the  happiness  of  a  pardoned 
soul,  but  one  of  the  brightest  manifestations  of  the  glory  of  God  upon  earth? 
Here  is  a  visible  manifestation  of  the  glory  of  the  Divine  patience;  that  man, 
amidst  all  his  repeated  provocations,  should  at  last  be  saved  and  made  happy. 
The  glory  of  the  grace  of  God!  What  a  comment  on  the  words  of  the  apostle, 
"  By  grace  are  ye  saved!  "  And  then,  see  the  glory  of  that  working  of  the  Divine 
power  by  which  the  soul  is  finally  brought  into  the  enjoyment  of  all  the  mind  that 
was  in  Christ;  the  soul  changing  from  glory  to  glory,  and  the  work  completed 
by  an  abundant  entrance  into  the  everlasting  kingdom.  This  is  the  manifestation 
of  Christ  to  the  souL  III.  Its  allegorical  accomplishment.  It  is  seen  in 
the  establishment  of  Christ's  kingdom  upon  earth.  He  sends  forth  His  heralds. 
It  is  by  the  ministry  of  His  Gospel  that  !ffis  dominion  is  estabhshed.  The  doctrine 
to  be  preached  ia  that  of  repentance.  So  St.  Paul  preached  at  Athens.  The 
manifestation  of  the  Master  follows.  Here  is  a  manifestation  of  the  glory  of 
the  heavenly  wisdom,  raising,  exalting,  and  purifying  the  human  intellect;  of 
the  Divine  righteousness,  putting  a  stop  to  aU  cruelty  and  injury.  The  glory 
of  peace  and  harmony;  the  union  of  man's  heart  to  man,  the  extinction  of  external 
wars,  and  the  diffusion  of  internal  harmony.  The  glory  of  that  order  among 
families,  and  societies,  and  nations,  preserved,  and  sanctified,  and  so  regulated 
that  no  part  infringes  on  the  other,  but  the  whole  proceeds  harmoniously,  like 
a  piece  of  sound  mechanism.  The  glory  of  mercy  and  charity:  teaching  men 
to  remember  those  that  are  in  afflictions,  as  being  themselves  in  like  manner 
afflicted.  This  is  a  glory  peculiar  to  the  Christian  revelation.  (B.  Watson.) 
Preparation  for  the  Advent  of  Messiah  : — A  positive  preparation  of  the  race  itself 
was  necessary,  before  the  plan  of  redemption  could  be  successfully  revealed. 
This  preparation  was  gradually  going  forward  at  the  same  time  that  our  moral 
helplessness  was  so  amply  illustrated.  If  we  reflect  upon  the  nature  of  the  Chris- 
tian revelation  we  shall  be  convinced  that  its  conceptions  belong  to  an  advanced 
period  of  civilisation.  It  addresses  itself  exclusively  to  the  spiritual  nature 
of  man.  But,  in  the  earlier  periods  of  our  race,  oxa:  conceptions  are  all  from  with- 
out; they  have  to  do  almost  exclusively  with  sensible  objects.  The  Gospel  has 
to  do  with  thought,  feeling,  sentiment,  motive,  and  all  their  various  attributes  ; 
and  it  could  not  be  well  understood  until  the  mind  of  man  had  become  somewhat 
at  home  in  these  conceptions.  Nor  is  this  all.  The  Christian  religion  addresses- 
itself  to  the  moral  nature,  the  conscience  of  man.  I.  Hence,  a  remedial  dispensa- 
tion would  naturally  be  delayed,  until  the  moral  character  of  man,  both  individual 
and  social,  had  been  fully  displayed;  and  mankind  had  become  in  some  degreb 
capable  of  appreciating  the  facts  thus  presented  to  their  notice.  But, 
besides  this,  the  Gospel  is  a  revelation  communicated  toman  by  language,  and 
its  authenticity,  as  is  meet,  is  attested  by  miracles.  Now,  considerable  progress 
must  have  been  made  in  civilisation  before  such  testimony  could  be  given  as  we 

VOL.  II. — 1 1 


162  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  xu 

would  be  willing  to  receive  on  a  question  of  so  vital  importance.  Until  the  lawa 
of  nature  are  to  some  extent  known,  we  cannot  determine  whether  the  Creator 
has  or  has  not  in  a  particular  case  departed  from  them.  And  this  leads  us  to 
observe,  again,  that  a  revelation  from  God  to  man,  informing  him  of  this  wonderful 
change  in  the  conditions  of  his  probation, — a  revelation  designed  for  aU  ages 
to  the  end  of  time,  and  destined  to  work  a  perfect  transformation  in  the  moral 
character  of  our  race, — could  not  have  been  completed  until  language  had  arrived 
at  a  considerable  degree  of  perfection.  It  was  necessary  that  the  doctrines  and 
motives  peculiar  to  the  new  dispensation  should  be  promulgated  with  all  possible 
explicitness,  and  yet  guarded  from  aU  tendency  either  to  incompleteness  or  excess. 
Amidst  all  the  agitations  of  society,  throughout  all  the  overturnings  of  empire, 
the  human  mind,  during  this  long  period,  had  been  gradually  attaining  maturity. 
Each  nation,  during  its  brief  existence,  had  either  added  eomething  to  the  stock  of 
human  knowledge,  or  made  some  contribution  to  the  materials  for  human  thought. 
Every  revolution  had  illustrated  in  some  new  phase  the  principles  of  conduct, 
and  had  bequeathed  the  lesson  to  succeeding  generations.  II.  We  see,  then,  that 
God  not  only  prepared  a  language  in  which  this  revelation  for  all  coming  ages 
could  be  written,  but  He  DrETUSED  that  LANGUAaE  over  the  civilised  world. 
He  created  a  suitable  vehicle  for  the  truth,  and  He  made  that  vehicle,  as  far  as 
was  necessary,  universal.  And  this  work  was  accomplished  by  means  of  the 
ambition  of  Alexander,  and  the  aU-grasping  love  of  dominion  of  the  citizens 
of  Rome.  Men  ignorant  of  the  existence  and  character  of  the  true  God,  bowing 
down  to  the  senseless  images  wbich  their  own  hands  had  fashioned,  indulging 
without  restraint  their  own  corrupt  passions,  were  thus  advancing  His  purposes, 
and  opening  the  way  for  the  advent  of  His  Son.  III.  One  other  condition  remains 
yet  to  be  observed.  The  nations  inhabiting  the  shores  of  the  Mediterranean 
were  originally  distinct  in  government,  dissimilar  in  origin,  diverse  in  laws,  habits, 
and  usages,  and  almost  perpetually  at  war.  To  pass  from  one  to  the  other  with- 
out incurring  the  risk  of  injury,  nay,  even  of  being  sold  into  slavery,  was  almost 
impossible.  A  stranger  and  an  enemy  were  designated  by  the  same  word.  It 
was  necessary  that  these  various  peoples  should  all  be  moulded  into  one  common 
form;  that  one  system  of  laws  should  bind  them  all  in  harmony.  This  seems 
to  have  been  needful,  in  order  that  the  new  religion  might  be  rapidly  and  ex- 
tensively promulgated.  In  order  to  accomplish  this  purpose  was  the  Roman 
Empire  raised  up,  and  entrusted  with  the  sceptre  of  universal  dominion. 
In  many  respects  it  resembled  the  dominion  of  Great  Britain  at  the  present  day 
in  Asia.  We  perceive  that  the  overtiurnings  of  forty  centuries  were  required 
in  order  to  prepare  the  world  for  the  advent  of  the  Messiah.  The  same  omniscient 
wisdom  has  ever  since  been  engaged  in  carrying  forward  the  work  which  was  then 
commenced.  {D.  Wayland,  LL.D.)  Vox  clamantis : — It  were  surely  a  vain 
thing  for  a  voice  to  cry  in  the  wilderness  where  none  can  hear  but  the  startled 
wild  animals;  where  there  are  no  sympathetic  human  hearts  that  can  thrill  with 
its  message.  But  we  must  remember  that  of  old  the  wilderness  had  a  strange,  weird 
attraction  for  many  who  aspired  to  live  a  holy  hfe.  And  other  souls  who  had  similar 
longings,  but  did  not  possess  the  means  or  the  courage  to  gratify  them,  would 
resort  to  the  hermit  of  the  wilderness  for  counsel  and  benediction.  1.  The  metaphor, 
so  wild  and  striking,  of  a  voice  crying  in  the  wilderness,  is  as  appropriate  as 
metaphor  could  be  for  representing  the  man  of  God  who,  in  a  degenerate  age, 
lifts  up  his  voice  to  declare  the  truth,  to  reprove  sin,  to  call  men  to  a  new  life. 
Rocks  are  not  harder  than  hearts  sometimes;  the  wandering  blustering  winds 
are  not  more  inattentive  to  the  speaker's  message  than  are  some  souls.  To  a 
divinely  taught  spirit  nothing  is  so  truly  a  desert  as  the  crowded  city.  To  him 
it  is  lonely,  forbidding,  sad,  yet  mightily  attractive,  awakening  his  tenderest 
compassions,  calling  forth  his  mightiest  and  most  patient  exertions.  2.  Now 
that  it  has  been  done,  we  probably  fall  into  the  way  of  thinking  that  nothing 
was  easier  than  for  John  the  Baptist  to  preach  to  the  Jews  of  the  time  of  Herod, 
or  for  our  Lord  to  open  His  mission  to  the  same  people,  or  for  Paul  to  preach 
Christ  at  Corinth  and  Athens  and  Rome.  How  different  the  reality !  Could 
any  one  of  the  inhabitants  of  these  places  have  been  consulted  by  Grod's  messenger 
beforehand  he  would  probably  have  said:  "Do  you  think  that  these  cavillin:;, 
disputing^doctors  and  philoso]>hers  will  ever  give  credence  to  such  stories  as  you 
bring?  Do  you  think  that  these  pleasure-loving  people  will  ever  wear  the  yoke 
of  such  an  austere  religion  of  self-sacrifice  as  you  proclaim?  Go  home  to  your 
ordinary  work  again,  and  don't  trouble  yourself  to  speak  a  message  which  nobody 


OHAP.  XL.]  ISAIAH.  163 

will  hear;  or  if  you  canaot  be  at  peace  unless  you  say  something  about  it,  then 
go  into  the  desert  and  speak  it  to  yourself  and  to  nature;  for  your  chances  of 
succeeding  will  be  as  great  there  as  anywhere."  Strange  all  this,  yet  more  strange 
the  fact  that  it  is  the  wilderness  and  the  solitary  place  which  shall  rejoice  and 
be  glad  for  the  messenger  of  God  who  comes  to  prepare  Messiah's  way.  The 
unlikely  ground  yields  the  harvest;  they  that  are  afar  off  come  nigh.  The  voice 
in  the  wilderness  is  that  of  a  herald  announcing  that  a  Greater  One  is  on  His 
way;  be  ye  ready  to  receive  Him.  Widespread,  radical,  and  lasting  reformation 
was  not  achieved  through  the  word  of  the  Baptist;  but  such  souls  as  could  be 
prepared  for  the  coming  of  the  Lamb  of  God  were  aroused,  called,  separated 
from  the  hardened  and  worldly  and  unbelieving,  and  placed  under  discipline 
and  teaching.  From  among  their  number  our  Lord  chose  His  first  disciples  and 
chief  apostles.  Beyond  the  fringe  of  that  little  company  which  kept  close  to 
the  Baptist  something  of  good  also  was  done.  A  wave  of  spiritual  feeling  passed 
over  a  great  part  of  the  nation;  Jerusalem  was  greatly  excited,  if  not  savingly 
renewed.  A  general  condition  of  desire  was  produced.  3.  There  are  many  advents 
of  the  Son  of  God,  and  for  every  one  of  them  there  is  some  forerunner,  some 
voice  crying  in  the  wilderness:  "  Prepare  ye  Has  way;  make  straight  in  the  desert 
a  highway  for  our  God."  The  voice  of  some  John  the  Baptist  has  gone  ringing 
through  the  wilderness  of  a  dead  faith,  of  a  formal  worship,  of  a  worldly  life, 
and  men  have  been  startled  into  attention,  have  been  made  conscious  of  short- 
comings and  sins.  And  although  God  never  ceases  to  work  among  men,  yet  we 
come  on  barren  dreary  years  of  history,  a  very  desert,  when  the  signs  of  the  Divine 
working  are  not  apparent.  Then  arises  some  John  the  Baptist,  or  a  general 
sense  of  dissatisfaction  pervades  the  Churches,  a  sense  of  shortcoming  and  of 
shame,  and  the  obstructions  to  a  Divine  manifestation  are  swept  out  of  the  way. 
Hardly  a  decade  passes  now  without  a  cry  arising  from  the  Churches  themselves : 
"  Prepare  the  way  of  the  Lord;  make  His  paths  straight."  Their  conscience 
becomes  increasingly  quick  and  true;  their  ideal  grows  nobler;  their  conception 
of  the  Christian  Ufe  assimilates  to  the  standard  given  in  the  Word  of  God.  And 
with  attainment  comes  a  longing  for  more,  a  sense  of  need,  a  craving  for  God. 
Then  let  us  prepare  His  way,  as  we  would  that  of  a  dear  Friend  whom  we  long 
to  see,  and  whom  we  would  not  keep  from  us  by  any  neglect  or  disrespect  of  ours. 
(J.    P.    Gledstone.)        Prepare    ye    the   way  of   the   Lord : — I.    God    has   many 

MESSENGERS,  AND  THEY  HAVE  OFTEN  LIFTED  UP  THEIR  VOICE  IN  THE  WILDER- 
NESS. Some  speak  with  a  voice  of  thunder  to  arouse  a  sleeping  world.  The 
doctrine  of  others  distils  as  the  dew.  Some  open  new  paths  to  the  seekers  after 
wisdom:  to  others  it  is  given  to  contend  earnestly  for  the  faith  once  deHvered 
to  the  saints.  Ever  since  man  was  driven  from  Eden  he  has  been  a  wanderer 
in  the  desert.  The  thorn  and  the  thistle  arovmd  him  are  the  emblems  of  the  sin 
and  the  sorrow  which  spiritually  mark  his  nomad  state  of  existence.  No  wonder, 
then,  that  the  wilderness  is  so  often  used  as  an  emblem  of  this  present  Ufe,  in 
which  you  and  I  must  listen  to  the  voice  of  Heaven's  messengers.  We  want  more 
law  work.  Our  consciences  are  too  easily  satisfied.  Modern  rehgion  is  far  too 
superficial.  The  law  prepares  for  the  Gospel.  The  Comforter  must  Gist  convince 
of  sin.  n.  Isaiah  uses  it  as  an  illustration  of  his  own  ministry.  He, 
too,  living  now  probably  in  the  idolatrous  reign  of  Manasseh,  felt  himself  in  a 
spiritual  desert.  Yet  by  faith  he  sees  afar  off,  and  the  seer  is  himself  transported 
into  that  bright  future.  Already  foreseeing  the  seventy  j'ears'  captivity  of  Judah, 
and  then  the  joyful  return  of  the  exiles  under  the  decree  of  Cjtus,  Isaiah  writes 
of  these  events  as  if  himself  living  and  acting  amoncj  them.  Yea  more,  he  pictures 
the  dawn  of  the  day  as  ushered  in  by  that  return  fiom  Babylon.  III.  The  tran- 
sition is  easy  to  the  personal  times  of  the  Messiah,  and  of  His  herald, 
John  the  Baptist.  The  homely  and  heart-searching  appeals  of  the  Baptist 
proved  him  to  be  the  pioneer  of  the  righteous  King.  Before  this  v/ilderness  preacher 
the  mountains  of  Pharisaic  pride  were  levelled,  the  valleys  of  Sadducean  unbelief 
were  fiUed  up,  the  tortuous  vices  of  the  courtly  Judscan  were  corrected,  and  the 
rude  ignorance  of  the  Galilean  smoothed  and  reformed.  IV.  But  even  in  this 
day  the  words  had  a  wider  signification.  Not  only  the  land  of  Israel,  but 
the  Gentile  world,  even  "  all  flesh,"  was  then  being  prepared  "  to  see  the  salvation 
of  God."  The  former  was  accomphshed  by  John's  ovm  preaching;  of  the  latter 
he  was  only  the  herald.  Providential  agencies  were  even  then  at  work  preparing 
Christ's  way  among  the  Gentiles.  1.  At  the  time  when  our  Savioiur  was  born 
the  knowledge  of  the  Greek  language  had  spread  more  widely  throughout  Asia 


164  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  xt- 

and  Europe  than  has  since  been  the  cafse  with  any  other  tongue.  What  a  pre- 
paration was  this  for  the  spread  of  the  Christian  religion.  We  know  that  there 
is  no  greater  barrier  separating  nations  than  a  difference  of  language.  But  at 
the  very  period  when  Christianity  began  to  be  published  it  found  one  language 
generally  read  and  understood  from  the  Alps  to  the  Caucasus;  and  so  the  Septua- 
gint  Version  of  the  Old  Testament  could  now  travel,  with  the  gospels  and  epistles, 
to  the  many  provinces  of  the  Roman  Empire;  for  the  valleys  had  been  exalted, 
and  the  mountains  and  hills  made  low.  2.  A  second  preparation  designed  by 
God's  providence  was — the  extent  of  Roman  dominion.  The  chief  means  em- 
ployed by  that  great  Empire  for  consolidating  her  possessions  were  her  roads 
and  her  laws.  (1)  It  was  literally  true  that,  owing  to  Roman  dominion,  both 
in  Europe  and  Asia,  the  crooked  had  been  made  straight  and  the  rough  places 
plain.  That  sagacious  people  recognised  the  civilising  power  of  good  roads  through 
their  Empire,  just  as  we  do  now  of  railways  in  our  Indian  and  other  colonies. 
(2)  It  is  the  province  of  law  to  rectify  abuses  and  remove  difficulties:  and  to 
efifect  this  among  the  nations  Rome  ever  felt  to  be  her  mission.  Wherever  she 
planted  her  colonies  she  invited  all  people  to  share  her  privileges,  and  to  dwell 
in  safety  under  the  segis  of  her  laws.  Was  not  this,  then,  a  moral  via  strata  made 
for  the  spread  of  Christianity?  V.  How  this  prophecy  sheds  a  lustre  on 
THE  world's  future.  Onco  more  in  this  wide  desert  "  the  glory  of  the  Lord 
shaU  be  revealed,"  and  not  "  one,"  but  "  all  lands  shall  see  it  together."  Yes, 
He  who  ascended  into  heaven  shall  so  come  again.  Are  we  ready  for  that  day? 
Are  we  making  others  ready?  I  beUeve  that  every  Christian  should  be  as  the 
"  voice  of  him  that  crieth  in  the  wilderness.  Prepare  ye  the  way  of  the  Lord, 
make  straight  in  the  desert  a  highway  for  our  God."  The  true  Church,  in  short, 
must  remain  in  the  desert  until  the  mystic  "  times  "  are  fulfilled.  She  is  to  be 
"  the  voice  of  one  crying  in  the  wilderness."  Meanwhile  the  voice  of  prophecy 
is  given  to  cheer  her  amidst  trial  and  disappointment.  We  labour  for  years 
to  timnel  through  the  Alps:  shall  we  not  labour  patiently  to  prepare  the  way 
of  the  Lord?     (o.  P.  Jose,  M.A.)        Prepare  ye  the  way  of  the  Lord  : — I.  There 

ARE  CERTATN  THINGS  WHICH  HINDER  THE   SPREAD   OF  THE   REDEEMER'S  KINGDOM, 

spoken  of  here  as  vaUeys,  hUls,  &c.  Heathenism  abroad:  ignorance  and  vice 
at  home.  Intemperance  hinders  the  progress  of  God's  kingdom  on  every  hand. 
1.  Intemperance  hinders  the  progress  of  God's  kingdom  at  home.  Our  coiintry 
is  occupied  by  three  armies — an  army  of  paupers,  an  army  of  criminals,  and  an 
army  of  police,  to  stand  between  the  vicious  and  the  virtuous,  and  protect  the 
latter  from  the  assaults  of  the  former.  How  is  this?  There  is  this  huge  evil 
established  amongst  us,  which  casts  its  dread  shadow  over  everything  that  is 
lovely  and  of  good  report.  Where,  e.g.,  are  the  working  men  of  England  to  bo 
found  to-day?  Not  in  the  house  of  prayer.  In  the  case  of  many  of  them,  they 
have  no  suitable  clothes;  but  why  is  this?  Because  wages  are  low?  Because 
trade  is  bad?  I  answer,  because  the  money  is  carried  to  the  pubUc -house,  and 
is  thus  worse  than  wasted.  There  are  some  who  go  many  times,  perhaps  regu- 
larly, to  the  house  of  God,  and  yet  are  not  saved.  Why?  The  grand  neutraUser 
of  the  Gospel  is  the  habit  of  drinking  intoxicating  liquors.  2.  It  is  also  a  hindrance 
to  the  spread  of  the  Gospel  abroad.  (1)  They  tell  us  that  we  cannot,  as  Christians, 
take  possession  of  the  world,  because  we  have  not  the  means.  Is  it  a  truth  that 
England,  the  richest  land  upon  earth,  made  rich  too  by  her  Christianity,  has 
done  what  she  could  for  Him  who  redeemed  her  when  she  gives  eightpence  per 
head  for  the  conversion  of  the  world?  Is  it  so?  Alas!  no;  for  while  we  have 
done  this,  we  have  spent  £4  per  head  on  strong  drink.  (2)  They  say  the  world 
is  not  converted  because  we  have  not  the  men — especially  suitable  men.  How 
is  this?  There  are  men  to  be  found  for  everything  else.  One  reason  is,  that  the 
drinking  customs  have  done  much  to  enervate  the  Church.  Strong  drink  aims 
high.  It  aims  at  the  men  of  active  brain  and  warm  heart.  (3)  Then  there  is 
the  third  reason — want  of  success.  There  are  European  barriers  that  are  much 
stronger  than  heathenism  and  idolatry.  The  missionary  tells  us,  over  and  over 
again,  that  he  is  far  more  afraid  of  EngUsh  drinking  than  of  native  idolatry.    II.  It 

IS    THE    DUTY    OF    THE    CHRISTIAN    ChUROH    TO    SWEEP    THIS    ENEMY    AWAY.       God 

has  decreed  that  these  mountains  shall  perish.  1.  The  Church  can  remove  this 
mountain.  Look  at  her  power  as  a  teacher.  Are  not  the  children  of  our  country 
in  her  hands?  Look  at  the  political  power  which  she  possesses.  Is  there  an 
election  in  which  the  Christian  Church  cannot  turn  the  balance?  She  has  not 
only  the  ordinary  power  which  men  have,  but  she  has  omnipotence  at  her  command. 


CHAP.  XL.]  ISAIAH.  165 

2.  The  Church  must,  if  she  would  hold  her  own.  If  we  are  not  assailing  strong 
drink,  it  is  assailing  us.  3.  The  Chxirch  must,  if  she  wo\ild  please  her  Master. 
How  are  we  to  proceed?  Abstinence  first;  then  entire  prohibition  of  the  traflSc. 
III.  The  gloriotjs  result.  {C.  Garrett.)  Preparing  the  way  of  the  Lord  : — 
I.  The  advent  implied.  "  Prepare  ye  the  way  of  the  Lord."  1.  The  Lord 
here  spoken  of  is  doubtless  the  supreme  Jehovah;  and  from  the  appropriation 
of  the  passage  by  inspired  authority  to  Christ,  I  apprehend  nothmg  less  can 
be  intended  than  to  intimate  that  He  who  was  coming  was  the  true  God  and 
eternal  Life.  This  was  that  Immanuel  who  was  to  bring  in  an  everlasting  right- 
eousness, to  redeem  and  restore  the  Isrtiel  of  God,  and  accomplish  salvation  for 
all  the  ends  of  the  earth.  Let  us,  then,  inquire.  Is  this  interpretation  of  the  passage 
justified  by  other  scriptures,  and  especially  by  the  event  itself?  Assuredly  He 
came  with  aU  the  signs  and  demonstrations  of  incarnate  Deity.  He  Himself 
laid  express  claim  to  this  high  character,  and  most  manifestly  displayed  the  per- 
fections which  it  involves.  With  these  subhme  views  of  His  character  agrees 
the  testimony  of  all  Hjs  inspired  apostles.  2.  The  disciples  of  John  were  required 
to  contemplate  here  the  true  Messiah  coming  to  effect  salvation,  to  fulfil  all  the 
promises  made  of  old  to  their  fathers.  It  is,  therefore,  of  great  interest  and  im- 
portance to  ascertain  what  was  involved  in  that  character,  and  what  was  the 
work  assigned  Him  to  do.  It  is  expressly  declared  that  He  came  to  do  the  will 
of  God, — to  magnify  the  law  and  make  it  honoiurable, — to  render  to  it  a  perfect 
obedience,  and  make  reconciliation  for  iniquity.  3.  The  way  of  the  Lord  to  us 
must  be  understood  of  His  approach  to  our  consciences  and  hearts  by  His  word 
and  spirit.  11.  The  charge  to  "  prepare  the  way  of  the  Lord  "  implies  that  there 
ABE  DLBncTTLTiES  OR  OBSTACLES  IN  His  WAT.  1.  There  is  the  pride  and  seK-right- 
eousness  of  the  human  heart.  2.  The  heart  is  by  nature  hard  and  impenitent, 
blinded  to  its  own  defects,  and,  even  after  the  confession  of  them,  unwilling  to 
have  them  condemned  or  to  give  them  up.  3.  The  state  of  human  desires  and 
affections  presents  other  and  formidable  obstacles  to  the  claims  of  the  Lord. 
Their  desires  are  low — their  affections  carnal.  The  poor  grovelling  heart  must 
be  raised  to  noble  and  exalted  ends  and  aims.  4.  In  some  there  exists  a  mass 
of  prejudice,  and  the  truth  of  Christ  is  viewed  tmder  a  false  light,  or  through  a 
perverting  medium.  They  will  not  receive  the  kingdom  of  God  as  a  little  child, 
and  they  cannot  enter  therein.  Some  are  prejudiced  against  the  authority  of 
revelation — some  against  the  mysteries  of  godliness — some  against  the  doctrines 
of  grace  or  salvation  by  the  merit  of  another;  and  many  dislike  the  holiness, 
the  self-denial,  the  separation  from  the  world  which  Christianity  inculcates. 
5.  Repentance  is  necessary  to  prepare  the  way;  humility,  to  receive  and  learn 
the  doctrine;  prayer,  to  give  it  success  in  the  heart;  and  watchfulness,  to 
carry  it  out  into  practice.  Every  one  who  is  himself  a  disciple  of  the  Lord, 
has  something  to  do  in  preparing  the  way  of  Christ  in  the  earth.  {G.  Bed- 
ford, LL.D.)  The  road  maker  (with  Matt.  iii.  3): — To  the  writers  of  the  Gospel 
story  this  vivid  expression  seems  to  have  commended  itself  as  peculiarly  applicable 
to  the  Baptist.  He  came  heralding  the  speedy  advent  of  the  Messiah,  and  his 
Ufe  and  ministry  were  a  preparation  for  the  greater  life  and  more  potent  ministry 
of  Jesus  of  Nazareth,  tn  all  essentials  that  task  still  remains  to  be  performed. 
The  modern  road  maker — the  herald  and  hastener  of  a  better  and  holier  day — 
must  be  distinguished — I.  By  a  profound  sense  of  the  evil  of  the  present. 
The  prophet  was  no  blind  optimist  cherishing  a  foolish  hope  of  a  happier  future 
because  he  did  not  see  the  abounding  evils  around  him.  He  saw  with  clear, 
penetrating  eyes  the  moral  and  spiritual  degradation  of  his  nation  and  day.  He 
speaks  of  it,  ay,  and  of  the  national  evils  which  must  issue  from  it — exile,  defeat, 
the  overthrow  of  their  beautiful  city.  That  is  true  of  the  prophetic  band  from 
first  to  last — from  Elijah  to  John.  The  man  who  defiberately  closes  his  eyes 
to  the  evils  of  his  day,  or  seeing  them  minimises  their  importance,  or  in  thought 
disguises  them  by  some  euphonious  phrase,  will  never — let  his  life  be  prolonged 
to  beyond  the  age  of  the  patriarchs — prepare  the  way  of  the  Lord.  Too  many 
of  us  live  in  an  imaginary  world  as  different  as  possible  from  the  world  of  stern 
fact.  The  men  who  do  most  in  their  own  generation  to  make  a  way  for  a  better 
day  in  the  future  are  usually  the  men  who  see  clearly  one  wrong  which  needs 
righting,  one  obstacle  which  needs  removing,  one  he  which  needs  refuting,  and 
give  themselves  to  the  doing  of  that  one  thing — e.g.,  Wilberforce  and  slavery, 
Wesley  and  Evangelism,  Cobden  and  Free  Trade,  Booth  and  the  submerged  tenth. 
One  word  of  warning.     To  look  fearlessly  at  the  evils  of  your  own  day  is  not 


16C  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOl.  [chap,  xl. 

without  danger.  Not  until  that  Voice  which  speaks  of  comfort  through  forgive- 
ness has  been  heard  and  welconaed  does  the  call  come  which  bids  hands  and  feet 
and  active  will  prepare  the  way  of  the  Lord.  II.  Bv  an  cnquekchable  faith  in 
THE  FCTTUKE.  The  road  maker  is  an  optimist  because  he  is  a  man  of  faith.  There 
is  an  optimism  which  is  both  foolish  and  unfounded.  But  if  the  optimist  has 
first  looked  facts  in  the  face,  and  then  rises  by  sheer  force  of  faith  in  God  above 
all  that  contradicts  his  hope,  liis  optimism  is  not  a  vice,  but  a  shining  and  beneficent 
virtue.  Such  was  this  prophet's.  So  with  John.  He  is  certain,  despite  the 
manifold  evils — moral  and  social — that  affict  his  people,  that  the  day  of  the 
Lord's  anointed  wiU  be  a  glorious  day — a  day  of  great  things;  and  he  speaks 
of  it  and  of  Him  whose  shoe-latchet  he  is  not  worthy  to  imloose  with  an  unboxmded 
faith.  "He  must  increase;  I  must  decrease."  Note  on  what  the  road  maker 
rests — not  on  man.  "  All  flesh  is  grass;  the  grass  withereth,  the  flower  fadeth, 
but  the  Word  of  oiu:  God  endure th  for  ever."  The  people  have  God's  Word; 
when  all  their  human  leaders  have  fallen,  and  every  visible  authority  for  God 
is  taken  away,  this  shall  be  their  rally  and  their  confidence.  III.  By  his  beadi- 
KESS  TO  SERVE  OR  SUFFER.  So  Isaiah:  so  John.  No  good  cause  but  has  exacted 
its  toU  of  both  from  heroic  hearts  that  have  espoused  it.  (IF.  LI.  Williams.) 
Comfort  for  the  afflicted  Church  : — I.  The  design  of  this  prophecy  is  to  speak 
peace  and  comfort  to  an  aflflicted  Church.  Not  only  to  the  Jewish  Church 
under  a  temporal  captivity,  but  to  every  Christian  Church,  and  every  faithful 
Boul.  1.  "  Every  valley  shall  be  exalted."  As  the  way  St.  John  was  sent  to 
prepare  by  repentance  was  in  the  hearts  of  men,  this  must  express  some  change 
to  be  wrought  in  those  hearts.  And  what  does  it  proclaim,  but  that  humility 
is  the  way  to  glory?  2.  "  Every  mountain  and  hill  shall  he  made  low."  As 
the  lowly  and  fruitful  valleys  represent  the  meek  and  pious  servants  of  Christ, 
so  do  the  lofty  and  barren  mountains  point  out  to  us  the  haughty  and  unprofitable 
children  of  this  world  that  oppose  Him.  3.  "  The  crooked  shall  be  made  straight.'* 
This  is  a  most  essential  part  in  a  highway,  the  end  and  intent  of  which  is,  to  lead 
those  who  travel  in  it  directly  to  the  place  and  city  where  they  would  be.  Man, 
at  his  creation,  was  placed  in  the  straight  way  to  heaven  and  happiness.  Had 
he  kept  the  eyes  of  his  faith  steadily  fixed  upon  it,  and  walked  directly  on  in 
the  path  of  God's  commandments,  he  had  soon  arrived  at  it.  But  he  Hstened 
to  the  suggestions  of  the  devU,  who  drew  him  out  of  it,  pretending  to  show  him 
a  pleasanter  and  shorter  road  than  that  appointed.  But  no  sooner  was  man 
a  sinner  than  God  was  a  Saviour.  When  the  valley  of  humility  is  exalted  by 
faith  and  the  mountain  of  pride  and  self-sufficiency  brought  low  in  yoiu-  hearts, 
the  crooked  shall  instantly  be  made  straight  before  you.  4.  "  The  rough  places 
plain."  Wlien  the  low  ground  is  raised,  the  high  levelled,  and  the  whole  marked 
out  with  a  hne  and  made  straight,  nothing  remains  but  to  clear  away  all  ob- 
structions. II.  The  words  thus  explained,  what  remains  but  that  we  apply 
THEM  to  ourselves,  for  THE  direction  OF  OTJR  PRACTICE  ?  {Bp.  Home.)  Pre- 
paring the  way  of  the  Lord : — I.  The  duty  of  preparing  the  way  of  the  Lord. 
1.  The  herald.  AUusion  is  here  made  to  an  ancient  custom,  according  to  which 
heralds. were  sent  before  to  prepare  the  way  for  the  monarch  when  he  was  about 
to  march  from  one  place  to  another.  Christian  ministers  are  the  "  voice  "  of 
God  "  crying  in  the  wilderness."  The  very  circumstance  of  this  voice  being 
needed  shows  the  disordered  state  of  man  by  natm-e.  It  is  not  enough  for  ministers 
gently  to  remind  men  of  their  state  and  duty— they  must  "  cry."  Very  many 
are  the  souls  that  need  to  be  thus  roused.  2.  The  scene  of  his  labours — "  the 
wilderness."  This  is  highly  descriptive  of  the  state  of  men  in  every  age.  A 
wilderness,  a  desert,  indeed,  is  this  world,  while  void  of  God's  grace;  destitute 
of  beauty,  and  unfruitful  as  to  every  good  work.  3.  What  is  the  work  to  which 
the  herald  calls?  As  far  as  we  have  it  in  our  power,  we  are  to  aid  in  removing 
whatever  hinders  the  reception  of  Christ  in  the  world.  What  is  it  hinders  the 
reception  of  Christ  in  our  own  hearts?  The  success  of  the  messenger  will  ever 
dej)end  upon  his  looking  up  to  the  Lord.  II.  Our  encouragements.  I.  Every 
difficulty,  however  formidable,  shall  be  surmounted.  For  "every  valley  shall 
be  exalted,"  &c.  What  are  the  difficulties  which  present  themselves?  In  the 
work  of  salvation  there  are  two  leading  classes  of  impediments.  (1)  Internal. 
fThese  are  in  every  heart.  There  is  much  anxiety  and  depression:  we  are  ready 
\  to  imagine  there  is  no  hope;  here  are  the  valleys  to  be  exalted.  Some  are  puffed 
■<  up  with  conceit  of  their  own  merit,  and  will  not  come  to  Christ;  here  are  mountains 
to  be  made  low.     There  are  some  untractable,  obstinate  passions;  here  are  the 


U' 


CHAP.  XL.]  ISAIAH.  167 

roughnesses  which  are  to  be  made  plain.  Who  is  sufficient  for  all  this?  None 
but  the  Lord  alone.  (2)  External.  In  introducing  the  Gospel  among  the  heathen 
there  are  many  difficulties.  2.  There  shall  be  an  universal  manifestation  of  the 
Divine  glory.  "  The  glory  of  the  Lord  shall  be  revealed,  and  all  flesh  shall  see 
it  together,"  There  was  a  great  manifestation  of  the  Divine  glory  when  Cyrus 
and  the  foes  of  the  Church  were  made  the  instruments  of  delivering  God's  people 
from  their  captivity.  Christians  !  this  is  not  our  work,  or  we  should  soon  be  dis- 
mayed. It  is  the  way  of  the  Lord.  He  is  to  work;  He  is  to  display  His  own 
glory.  What  tenderness  and  condescension  has  God  shown!  3.  The  certainty 
of  all  this.  "  For  the  mouth  of  the  Lord  hath  spoken  it."  When  one  promises 
who  can  fulfil  our  wishes,  we  have  all  the  encouragement  we  can  possibly  need. 
In  no  blindness  of  mistaken  zeal,  in  no  rashness  of  enthusiasm,  yet  with  all  holy 
boldness,  let  us  labour  to  prepare  the  way  of  the  Lord.  (W.  Williams.)  The 
King's  highway : — I.  Valleys  mtjst  bb  levelled  up.  1.  Inattention.  (1)  If 
we  attend  not  to  the  Gospel  message  we  can  neither  reahse  its  importance  nor 
secure  its  benefits.  (2)  Those  who  absent  themselves  from  the  house  of  God 
are  indififerently  prepared  for  the  coming  of  the  Lord.  (3)  So  those  who  while 
there  allow  their  minds  to  wander  upon  their  merchandise,  pleasures,  &c.,  are 
ill  prepared  for  the  coming  of  the  King.  2.  Apathy.  (1)  Thousands  of  professors 
of  religion  put  forth  Uttle  effort  in  the  cause  of  God.  (2)  Begin  with  yourself. 
Make  a  stir  among  your  neighbours.  Begin  now.  3.  Despondency.  (1)  There 
are  those  who  are  so  affected  with  a  sense  of  their  sinfulness  that  they  fear  to 
trust  in  Christ  for  salvation.  (2)  Some  professors  take  a  morbid,  gloomy  view 
of  the  work  of  God.  11.  Eminences  must  be  levelled  down.  1.  The  mountain 
of  pride  must  be  reduced.  (1)  The  pride  that  wiU  not  make  full  confession  of 
sin.  (2)  The  pride  that  will  not  receive  the  kingdom  of  heaven  as  a  little  child. 
(3)  The  pride  of  reason  that  will  not  accept  salvation  until  its  mysteries  are  com- 
prehended. (4)  The  progress  of  Christ  is  also  hindered  by  the  worldly  pride 
of  professors.  2.  The  mountain  of  presumption  must  be  depressed.  (1)  Sinners 
are  presumptuous  when,  without  forsaking  their  sins,  they  attempt  to  beheve 
for  salvation.  (2)  Professors  are  presumptuous  when  they  expect  the  work  of 
God  to  revive  in  the  Church  without  exerting  themselves  to  promote  a  revival. 
(3)  While  we  work  as  though  everything  depended  upon  working,  we  must  trust 
as  though  everything  depended  upon  trusting.  3.  The  hills  of  ingratitude  must 
be  brought  low.  (1)  Some  are  ostensibly  so  zealous  for  the  conversion  of  sinners 
that  they  forget  to  thank  God  for  the  good  He  is  bestowing.  (2)  There  are  others 
who  will  not  rejoice  when  they  hear  good  tidings  of  the  work  of  God,  because 
they  are  not  themselves  the  subjects  of  that  work.  III.  The  ceooked  places 
must  be  stkaiqhtenbd.  1.  Prejudice.  (1)  Some  object  to  the  movements 
of  the  blessed  Jesus  because  He  comes  too  loudly.  (2)  Others  complain  because 
He  comes  too  silently.  (3)  Some  dislike  them  because  "  pubUcans  and  harlots  " 
are  getting  converted.  (4)  Others  find  fault  because  the  work  of  grace  takes 
hold  upon  the  better  classes.  (5)  And  there  are  those  who  disparage  the  work 
of  God  among  the  children  because  they  are  too  young.  Nothing  pleases  crooked 
prejudice.  2.  Jealousy.  (1)  It  hears  that  sinners  are  converted,  but  is  not  pleased 
because  the  converts  have  joined  other  churches.  (2)  We  may  be  anxious  for 
the  prosperity  of  God's  work  for  party  purposes.  (3)  How  admirable  was  the 
spirit  of  Pavd,  who  rejoiced  that  Christ  was  preached,  no  matter  by  whom !  3.  Cen- 
soriouaness.  (1)  None  of  us  are  so  perfect  that  we  can  afford  to  be  severely  scrutin- 
ised. We  should  therefore  endeavour  to  put  the  best  construction  upon  each 
other's  conduct.  (2)  We  should  be  especially  careful  not  to  impeach  good  men 
with  want  of  zeal  for  God  because  they  differ  from  us  in  judgment  as  to  the  best 
way  to  promote  His  work.  4.  Covetousness.  (1)  The  acquisition  of  property 
is  the  one  end  for  which  some  persons  appear  to  exist.  It  is  to  no  pmrpose  to 
remind  such  persons  that  the  world  is  perishing,  and  that  the  Church  missions 
are  languishing  for  want  of  fimds  (2)  Can  the  God  of  benevolence  bless  a  covetous 
Church?  (3)  The  cure  for  covetousness  is  giving.  IV.  The  bough  places  must 
BE  SMOOTHED.  1.  That  Ugly  rock  of  Sabbath  desecration  must  be  removed. 
(1)  God  did  not  institute  His  day  for  our  amusement.  (2)  It  was  not  instituted 
to  encourage  idleness.  It  is  separated  from  the  toil  of  secular  business.  2.  That 
rut  of  drunkenness  must  be  filled  up.  3.  Those  sinks  of  immorahty  must  be 
fiUed.  Lying,  cheating,  oppression,  uncleanness.  4.  The  rough  places  of  in- 
stabiUty  must  be  smoothed.  (1)  Like  the  chameleon,  which  takes  the  coloiir 
of  every  object  on  which  it  rests,  there  are  those  who  never  remain  the  same  person 


168  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xl. 

for  four-and-twenty  hours.  Treating  Church  membership  as  a  coat  that  might 
be  put  on  or  oil  at  pleasure.  (2)  At  one  moment  they  are  all  in  a  flame,  the  next 
moment  they  are  cold  as  ice.  Sometimes  they  appear  like  the  oak,  at  other 
times  like  the  reed  that  is  shaken  with  the  wind.  (3)  In  the  Church  they  are  one 
thing,  in  the  world  another.  Yet  are  they  the  noisiest  fault-finders  against  the 
quiet,  steady,  unostentatious  workers.  (F.  W.  Macdonald,  M.A.)  Preparing 
the  way  of  the  Lord  (with  Luke  iii.  10-14): — I.  External  preparation  (Isa.  xl.  3-5). 
Our  King  has  notified  us  that  He  wants  to  encircle  this  world  with  His  glory, 
and  we  are  the  pioneers  to  make  way  for  His  chariot.  Let  me  indicate  a  few 
things  about  this  work  if  you  are  going  to  make  it  a  grand  success.  1.  There 
must  be  a  willingness  to  undertake  it.  Indifference  will  kill  the  enterprise. 
Difficulties  will  appear;  there  must  be  courage  and  a  cool  head  to  guide  a  brave 
heart.  Three  things  must  be  prominent — (1)  Regularity  of  effort.  (2)  A  desire 
to  find  one's  own  particular  work.  (3)  Surrender  to  the  guidance  of  the  Spirit. 
2.  There  must  be  an  appreciation  of  the  importance  of  the  work.  If  the  King 
has  given  an  order,  there  must  be  some  reason  for  it;  and  when  the  carrying 
out  of  that  order  involves  careful  planning  and  difficult  execution  we  must  infer 
the  importance  of  the  result,  and  hence  of  the  preparation.  (1)  Cutting  down 
forests.  What  are  the  dead  trees  in  the  way?  Apostate  Christians.  They 
lie  right  across  the  King's  track,  and  He  has  to  rein  up  until  somebody  removes 
them.  What  are  the  strong,  sturdy,  even  luxuriant  trees  on  the  way?  Worldly 
Christians.  (2)  Levelling  the  hills.  Pride  is  a  high  hiU.  Unbelief  is  a  consider- 
able mountain.  Criticism  is  a  rocky  mound.  (3)  Filling  up  the  hollows.  Oh, 
the  deficiencies  in  the  Church  to  make  up!  II.  Internal  preparation  (Luke 
iii.  10-14).  Every  pioneer  of  the  coming  King  must  observe  these  demands. 
1.  Generosity.  A  niggardly  nature  is  too  narrow  quarters  for  the  Lord  to  dwell 
in.  2.  Justice.  3.  Peaceableness.  It  was  the  soldier's  duty  to  fight,  but  only 
when  necessary,  and  only  to  secure  peace.  The  ultimate  aim  of  justifiable  war 
is  always  peace.  When  you  have  got  the  way  all  prepared,  you  wiU  find  that 
it  is — (1)  A  highway  for  the  King.  (2)  A  way  of  blessing  for  His  subjects.  (3)  A 
way  beginning  with  a  cross  and  ending  with  a  crown.  ( W.  H.  G.  Temple. )  A 
great  work  requires  preparation  : — There  is  a  lesson  which  man  is  taught  in  many 
ways,  but  which  he  is  very  slow  to  learn.  It  is  the  necessity  of  preparation  before 
any  great  work  can  be  taken  in  hand  and  brought  to  a  prosperous  end.  Before 
men  begin  to  build,  they  must  dig  the  foimdation.  Before  they  reap  the  harvest 
they  must  sow  the  seed  and  prepare  the  soil.  The  truth  is  an  elementary  one, 
and  yet  through  neglect  of  it,  many  a  good  work  has  failed,  many  an  earnest  worker 

Lhas  despaired.  And  the  greater  and  more  lasting  the  work,  the  longer  and  deeper 
the  preparation  must  be.  Things  which  shoot  up  quickly,  quickly  pass  away. 
A  tree  does  not  spring  up  in  a  night.  A  nation  is  not  born  in  a  day.  History 
shows  us  the  long  period  of  conception,  and  the  painful  period  of  travail,  before 

1  great  ideas  can  be  brought  to  the  birth  and  great  changes  can  be  wrought  in  the 
poUtical  world.     Geology  again  teaches  us  the  countless  number  of  the  ages  of 

'~  preparation  in  which  this  earth  was  fitted  to  be  the  home  of  man.  (F.  Watson,  M.A.) 
Preparation  for  the  coming  of  Christ : — There  is  one  event  in  the  world's  history 
which  by  every  Christian  must  be  admitted  to  be  unique,  alike  in  itself  and  in  its 
consequences.  The  coming  of  God  in  the  flesh,  bringing  life  to  a  dying  world, 
light  to  a  dark  world,  peace  to  a  world  at  enmity  with  God,  may  find  its  types 
and  shadows,  but  it  can  find  no  parallels  amongst  other  historical  facts.  There 
had  been  comings  of  great  men,  but  never  the  coming  of  the  great  God.  There 
had  been  revelations  of  truth,  but  now  the  Truth  Himself  was  revealed.  Great 
kingdoms  had  been  set  up  quickly  to  pass  away,  but  now  the  workl-wide  eternal 
kingdom  was  established.  We  may  call  it  a  crisis  in  history ;  indeed  it  was.  It  was 
the  crisis,  the  turning-point  in  the  history  of  the  world,  the  turning-power  in  the 
history  of  each  individual  man.  We  may  describe  it  in  its  results  as  a  re-creation, 
but  even  that  word  is  inadequate,  unless  it  means  much  more  than  a  restoration 
of  the  old  creation  to  its  original  beauty  and  perfection.  The  preparation  for 
this  urn' que  event,  how  can  we  exaggerate  its  importance!  So  much  preparation 
was  needed  for  any  one  of  the  ages;  how  much  more  for  that  which  is  described 
as  the  fulness  of  them  all !  So  many  agencies  were  set  at  work  to  fit  this  world 
to  be  the  home  of  man;  how  can  we  overestimate  the  preUminary  work  by  which 
men  were  prepared  to  be  the  home  of  God?  {Ibid.)  The  gnostic  gospel: — 
It  is  well  worthy  of  notice  Ihat  almost  the  earliest  heresy  with  which  the  Church 
battled  was  one  which  denied  the  reaUty  of  this  preparation.     A  fundamental 


CHAP.  XL.]  ISAIAH.  169 

gnostic  doctrine  was  the  suddenness  of  the  appearance  of  the  Christ  in  human 
fashion.  There  was  indeed  a  preparation,  a  development,  so  to  speak,  of  the 
Supreme  Being  before  He  coiild  stoop  so  low  as  earth.  But  there  was  no  pre- 
paration of  man  for  the  reception  of  his  God.  Suddenly,  at  the  time  of  His  baptism, 
the  Christ  appeared  in  human  form  upon  the  earth.  His  human  nature,  or  human 
body,  if  indeed  it  could  be  called  human,  had  no  previous  history.  It  did  not 
grow  like  ours.  It  could  not  trace  its  origin  from  the  parents  of  the  race  like 
ours.  It  was  an  instrument  which  the  heavenly  Christ  took  to  Himself  for  His 
work,  and  which  He  flimg  away  when  He  had  no  fm-ther  use  for  it.  Thus  teaching, 
the  gnostics  cut  off  the  Christ  from  all  the  men  before  or  after  Him.  They  were 
not  bone  of  His  bone,  or  flesh  of  His  flesh.  Thus  was  denied  all  preparation 
of  the  human  nature  by  which  the  Saviour  of  men  worked.  And  the  world  into 
which  He  came,  it  also  had  not  been  prepared  for  His  coming.  If  the  supreme 
spiritual  God  had  in  any  way  come  in  contact  with  this  material  world,  it  had 
been  by  accident;  nay,  rather  by  mishap.  In  this  world  of  ours  God  had  not 
been  the  king,  and  never  could  be  king.  With  this  human  nature  of  ours,  God 
had  not  been  and  never  could  be  united.  The  Christ  did  not  come  to  give  this 
earth,  in  their  fulness,  truths  of  which  He  had  already  vouchsafed  us  foretastes, 
but  He  came  to  deprive  us  of  a  higher  life,  which  had  unawares  come  in  contact 
with  material  bodies,  and  had  been  contaminated  by  them.  Instead  of  hght 
struggling  with  the  darkness  to  subdue  it,  the  gnostics  imagined  light  struggUng 
in  the  darkness  to  escape  from  it.  If  fuller  light  was  revealed  by  their  Christ,  it 
was  only  that  He  might  gather  up  the  stray  Mght  lost  from  heaven  and  take  it 
for  ever  away.  This  is  the  gnostic  gospel.  This  is  the  gospel  without  the  Old 
Testament.  This  is  the  gospel  without  preparation  of  the  Man  Christ  or  man's 
world.  Not  such  the  teaching  of  the  Church.  She  has  taught  us  to  regard  the 
history  of  the  world  as  the  unfolding  of  the  great  plan  by  which  Grod  would  gather 
all  nations  and  peoples  to  Himself.  {Ibid.)  Preparation  among  the  heathen 
for  the  reception  of  Christianity: — This  preparation  is  not  to  be  regarded  as  con- 
fined to  the  chosen  people  of  Israel.  It  is  true,  "  Darkness  covered  the  efirth, 
and  gross  darkness  the  peoples."    But  even  darkness,  thick  darkness,  may  be 

Sreparatory  to  light.  It  was  so  at  the  creation  of  the  world.  It  is  so  in  every- 
ay  experience.  If  we  believe,  as  believe  we  must,  that  man  was  created  with 
capacities  for  comprehending  the  light;  if  we  believe  that  in  his  pure  and  unf alien 
state  it  was  natural  for  him  to  love  the  light;  if  we  believe  that  his  higher  nature 
IB  never  wholly  lost:  then  we  must  confess  that  the  very  darkness  in  its  depth 
and  grossness  must  have  caused  longings  deep  and  vast.  When  men  groped  in  the 
darlmess,  and  missed  their  way,  and  felt  they  had  missed  it,  they  must  have  longed 
for  the  Day  Star  to  arise  and  shine.  They  must  have  said,  we  were  meant  for 
something  better  than  this.  They  must  have  hoped  for  happier  times.  "  They 
sat  in  darkness  and  the  shadow  of  death,  being  fast  bound  in  misery  and  iron. 
They  feU  down,  and  there  was  none  to  help.  Then  they  cried  unto  the  Lord  in 
their  trouble,  and  He  delivered  them  from  their  distress."  He  in  whose  heart 
a  longing  for  better  things  has  arisen,  albeit  that  longing  may  be  indefinite  and 
ill-directed,  has  not  been  left  unprepared  for  receiving  a  gift  from  God.  (Ibid.) 
Israel's  preparation  for  the  coming  of  Christ : — Beyond  tlus  general  preparation 
of  the  nations  there  was  also  a  special  preparation  of  a  particular  people.  We 
•re  entitled  to  argue  this  from  the  condition  of  that  people  when  the  Saviour 
appeared.  You  fi^d  that  nation  scattered  all  over  the  world;  though  in  it,  yet 
not  of  it.  It  was  disliked  and  despised.  It  was  persecuted  and  down-trodden. 
In  most  places  it  was  a  mere  handful.  In  no  place  had  it  the  supreme  authority. 
Numbers,  educated  opinion,  popular  prejudice,  and  state  power  were  all  against 
it  and  its  distinctiveness.  Yet  it  was  never  crushed,  and  it  was  never  absorbed; 
it  never  ceased  to  exert  power  and  influence.  Low  as  its  fortunes  then  were, 
none  of  any  nation  were  so  proud  of  their  history,  none  were  more  hppeful  of 
their  future.  Indeed,  it  might  be  said,  with  some  truth,  that  at  that  time  the 
Jews  alone  had  hope.  The  nations  were  groaning  in  their  pains.  Old  institutions 
and  old  religions  were  worn  out.  Men's  hearts  were  failing  them  for  fear,  and 
for  looking  for  those  things  which  were  coming  upon  the  earth.  The  Jews  alone 
hoped  for  the  coming  of  new  and  better  times.  The  Jews  alone  thought  that 
the  pains  they  were  suffering  were  not  pains  of  dissolution,  but  birth-pangs, 
the  pains  followed  by  new  life  and  fresh  joy.  (Ibid.)  Vox  damantis  : — The 
note  of  all  times  that  are  progressive  is  a  note  of  urgency,  preparation,  advance. 
(J.    Parker,   D.D.)        T  e   appealing   "  voice "  .' — Sometimes   there   is   nothing 


170  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  tl, 

to  instruct  us  but  a  "  voice."  We  hear  it,  but  cannot  trace  it.  It  is  called  the 
spirit  of  the  times,  the  voice  of  the  day,  the  genius  of  the  hour.  Sometimes  it 
is  personated  in  one  man,  one  policy;  at  other  times  it  is  a  diffused  voice,  coming, 
apparently  to  the  ear,  from  all  the  points  of  the  compass  at  once,  but  with  singular 
unanimity,  emphasis,  truthfulness.  It  is  never  a  voice  of  despair,  or  a  tone 
that  would  cast  the  soul  into  dejection,  but  always  like  a  clarion,  or  a  chiming 
bell,  or  a  father's  call,  or  a  soldier's  resounding  peal.  {Ibid.)  Make  straight 
in  the  desert  a  highway  for  our  God. — A  Mghivay  in  the  wilderness  : — We  ought 
to  read  here,  not  "  the  voice  of  one  crying  in  the  wilderness,  Prepare  ye  the  way 
of  the  Lord,"  but  rather,  "  the  voice  of  one  crying.  Prepare  ye  in  the  wilderness 
the  way  of  the  Lord."  Now,  "  the  voice  of  one  crying  in  the  wilderness  " — if 
you  read  so — will  have  a  sufficiently  direct  application  to  John  Baptist  and  to 
few  men  besides.  But  "  the  voice  of  one  crying,  Prepare  a  highway  in  the  wilder- 
ness," is  no  more  exclusively  applicable  to  him  than  to  John  Calvin  or  John  Knox 
or  John  Ruskin.  It  is  applicable  to  everybody  who  does  anything  for  the  world, 
especially  in  its  waste  places  and  its  worst  places,  in  the  way  of  improvement. 
It  is  applicable  to  Copernicus,  Bacon,  James  Watt.  Above  all,  it  is  applicable  to 
Christ  Himself.  It  is  an  anticipation  of  better  and  still  better  times  for  all  mankind. 
1.  Does  it  matter  at  all  to  us  who  can  have  no  hope  of  seeing  it  in  our  time,  who 
have  certainly,  as  it  would  seem,  to  live  out  our  lives  in  a  condition  of  things 
in  which  not  so  much  the  presence  of  improvement  as  the  need  of  it  is  conspicuous  ? 
To  this  question,  I  think,  there  are  two  answers,  both  of  which,  for  religious  minds 
)'at  any  rate,  have  some  weight.  (1)  Our  idea  of  God,  of  a  Divine  order  in  the  world, 
is  very  much  our  whole  stock-in-trade  in  the  matter  of  religion.  The  question 
\  with  us,  as  regards  religion,  is,  how  much  we  can  see  of  God  in  what  is  not  God, 
■  and  in  what  seems  opposed  to  God?  Is  that  which  we  see  of  Him,  though  it  must 
be  little,  yet  enough  to  give  us  feeling,  emotion,  to  fill  our  minds,  not  with  a  thousand 
anxieties  and  alarms  about  things  clean  and  unclean,  but  to  fill  them  to  over- 
flowing with  reverence,  all  that  constitutes  the  mysterious  life  of  a  spirit  con- 
versing with  that  unutterable  Spirit  behind  the  veil  ?  Second  to  this  even,  though 
of  infinite  importance,  is  the  question  whether  we  shall  devour  widows'  houses 
and  for  a  pretence  make  long  prayers,  or  meditate  upon  the  Good  Samaritan, 
and  go  and  do  likewise.  It  obviously,  then,  concerns  very  much  oiu-  idea  of 
God,  our  experience  of  Him,  what  we  see  or  feel  of  Him,  our  stock-in-trade  in 
the  matter  of  religion,  what  notion  we  form  and  entertain  of  the  future  destiny 
of  mankind  We  know  that  the  past  has  not  been  all  that  could  be  wished.  Plenty 
of  desert  in  that  backward  view.  Will  the  future  be  better?  Evidently  that  is 
a  matter  which  must  go  to  shape  our  idea  of  God,  of  a  Divine  order  of  the  world. 
This  is  to  look  at  the  whole  instead  of  a  small  part,  and  form  some  conclusion 
or  other  about  the  whole.  It  does  matter  a  good  deal  to  us,  therefore,  though 
we  are  not  to  live  to  see  it,  that,  if  it  is  possible  or  right  to  entertain  it,  we  shomd 
entertain  the  belief  that  the  endless  ages  that  are  yet  to  come  will  exhibit  the 
Divine  order  as  beneficent  and  beautiful  in  a  way  in  which  past  ages  and  our 
own  age  have  had  scanty  experience  of  it.  (2)  Another  answer  to  the  question. 
What  does  it  matter  to  us  what  the  future  of  mankind  may  be?  is  obviously 
this:  It  is  not  so  much  a  duty  as  an  instinct  for  man  to  live  for  posterity.  We 
are  aU  of  one  stock.  With  reference  to  this  instinct  and  this  satisfaction,  the 
case  is  plain  as  regards  the  future  being  other  and  better  than  the  past  or  the  present. 
We  have  all  something  to  do,  and  can  do  something  for  posterity.  We  have  the 
conviction  or  the  hope  in  doing  this,  that  it  is  not  going  to  be  in  vain.  2.  *'  Pre- 
pare ye  in  the  wilderness  a  highway  for  our  God."  In  this,  possibly,  rather  than 
in  any  other  form,  there  comes  the  Divine  call  to  those  in  every  age,  and  especially 
in  this  age,  to  whom  the  Divine  order  is  most  of  a  reality  and  a  power.  Personal 
piety — you  must  have  that,  say  the  professors  of  ecclesiastical  pedagogy — before 
entering  upon  this  or  that  work.  It  is  quite  true  :  personal  piety  you  must  have 
to  be  fit  to  live,  not  to  say  to  teach  others  or  help  others  to  live  well.  But  if 
you  have  piety  enough  to  have  any  satisfaction  in  helping  to  leave  the  world 
a  little  better  than  you  have  found  it,  then  that  is  enough  of  a  qualification  and 
commission  for  taking  part  in  work  which  will  occupy  your  whole  life.  This 
general  view  of  the  Divine  order  and  of  the  demands  which  it  makes  upon  those 
who  are  most  conscious  of  the  reality  of  it  suggests  one  or  two  reflections.  ( 1 )  In 
regard  to  the  fulfilment  of  the  Divine  order,  it  often  happens  that,  while  weaker 
agencies  at  work  in  forwarding  it  are  recognised,  greater  ones,  even  the  greatest 
of  all,  escape  notice.     Since  the  Divine  order  is  not  always  clear,  it  must  often 


CHAP.  XL.]  ISAIAH.  171 

happen,  in  the  case  of  lives  of  good  men  and  even  great  men  devoted  to  the  advance- 
ment of  it,  that  efforts  to  advance  it  have  other  results  than  those  who  made 
them  contemplated — great  results  which  they  did  not  expect,  no  results  where 
they  expected  great  results.  (2)  As  it  is  often  not  the  mightier  but  the  weaker 
agencies  at  work  in  furthering  the  Divine  order  that  are  recognised  and  appreciated, 
so  in  the  case  of  men  who  are  more  or  less  consciously  devoted  to  the  advance- 
ment of  it,  there  is  often  a  failxire  of  insight;  and  they  are  found  working  for 
issues  which  they  did  not  anticipate,  both  in  the  way  of  failiire  and  in  the  way 
of  success.  In  regard  to  the  Divine  order  embracing  the  life  of  all  that  is,  has 
been,  shall  be,  the  clearest  sighted  of  mankind  see  through  a  glass  darkly.  Con- 
stantino was  agreed  that  the  triumph  of  the  Christian  faith  was  assiired  by  his 
making  it  the  reMgion  of  the  State,  though  John  Wesley  had  afterwards  some 
reason,  in  his  time,  for  thinking  perhaps  that  more  harm  was  done  to  it  by  that 
event  than  by  all  the  Christian  persecutions.  The  Christian  world,  all  but  a 
small  part  of  it,  was  certain  that  the  devil  had  broken  loose  in  the  Reformation 
in  Germany,  and  few  people  who  heard  it  did  not  devoutly  believe  that  Luther's 
mother  was  a  witch.  John  Baptist  himself  is  not  so  remarkable  for  what  he  knew 
as  for  what  he  did  not  know  of  his  own  life-work  and  its  effects.  I  mean,  as 
regards  the  eternal  order,  in  which  he  was  no  doubt  a  devout  and  a  brave  believer. 
As  a  forerunner  he  was  nothing  of  a  foreseer.  Not  only  are  the  greater  agencies 
at  work  in  furthering  the  Divine  order  least  recognised  among  the  mass  of  men, 
but  even  among  choice  spirits  devoted  to  the  furthering  of  that  order,  misunder- 
standing as  to  the  results  of  their  own  activity  and  the  activity  of  others  is  more 
common  than  insight.  Thus  stands  the  case  as  regards  one  class  of  agencies 
at  work  in  furthering  the  Divine  order.  That  which  is  valued  in  regard  to  it 
is  the  old  ecclesiastical  machinery,  creak  and  groan  and  rattle  as  it  may.  In 
the  meantime,  discredited  to  some  extent  by  its  association  with  enlightenment 
not  always  orthodox,  the  spirit  of  humanity  enters  from  the  outside  into  the 
religious  world,  to  the  creation  of  new  social  conditions  for  whole  communities. 
(3)  What  promise  there  is  in  this  of  a  better  era  both  for  the  Church  and  for  the 
world  is  better  seen  as  yet  by  the  world,  perhaps,  than  by  the  Church.  The 
importance  of  the  fact  cannot  at  any  rate  be  overrated.  Nothing  is  so  common 
in  religious  circles,  among  good  people,  as  lamentation.  The  good  old  times 
of  religion  are  no  more.  That  is  their  complaint.  (4)  In  the  meantime,  religious 
people  who  are  so  much  disposed  to  complain  of  the  good  old  times  passing  away 
are  helping  to  prepare  for  times  infinitely  better  than  the  good  old  times,  in  ways 
of  which  they  are  as  far  as  possible  from  conceiving.  They  are  deepening  dis- 
satisfaction with  the  life,  even  the  religious  Mfe  of  the  day,  by  their  lamentations. 
That  is  one  thing — a  negative  sort  of  thing.  More  positive  is  the  effect  of  their 
keeping  in  their  own  view  and  that  of  others  a  certain  high  ideal  of  life,  though 
it  be  not  the  highest  of  all.  {J.  Service,  D.D.)  Christ  requires  a  straight  road  : — 
The  King's  chariot  is  comiag;  you  must  fill  up  the  ravines  and  level  down  the 
hills.  He  will  not  accommodate  His  chariot  to  the  tortuous  lines  of  your  life. 
If  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ  is  coming  into  your  soul.  He  is  not  going  to  follow  the 
crooked  ways  of  your  iniquitous  conduct.  You  have  got  to  make  a  straight 
road  for  Him.     (A.  T.  Pierson,  D.D.) 

Vers.  4,  5.  Every  valley  shall  be  exalted,  and  every  mountain  and  hill  shall 
be  made  low. — Christianity  an  essential  element  in  true  civilisation  : — I.  The 

WOELD  IS  STILL  FULL  OF  THINGS  NEEDING  TO   BE   SET  STRAIGHT.      So  far  aS  the 

economy  of  our  earth  is  concerned  a  period  of  confusion  has  immediately  preceded 
the  establishment  of  Divine  order.  Chaos  preceded  Paradise.  Egyptian  bondage 
was  the  precursor  of  the  exodus,  which  was  the  beginning  of  a  national  life  Divinely 
ruled.  Judaism  was  at  its  worst  and  Paganism  in  its  most  corrupt  condition  when 
the  voice  of  the  preacher  of  righteousness  was  heard,  preparing  the  way  of  the  Lord. 
Isaiah  here  compares  the  social  and  religious  condition  of  a  people  awaiting  a 
revelation  of  Divine  glory  to  the  condition  of  a  country,  barren  as  a  desert,  and 
impassable  by  reason  of  mountains  and  valleys;  and  the  preparation  of  a  highway 
amongst  these  physical  obstacles  represents  the  exaltation  of  what  is  base  and  the 
abasement  of  some  things  that  are  high  in  human  life  before  the  coming  revelation 
of  God.  Around  us  here  in  England,  as  well  as  in  those  foreign  countries  to  which 
missionary  enterprise  addresses  itself,  is  a  wilderness,  in  which  what  is  good  cannot 
and  does  not  grow.  The  bodily  and  moral  degradation  of  some  of  our  own  people, 
if  it  were  revealed  in  all  its  nakedness,  would  startle  the  Church  from  its  stately 


172  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  xl. 

propriety.  A  "  wilderness  "  is  a  fit  emblem  of  a  large  section  of  our  own  population. 
Yet  in  this  land  we  have  had  the  Gospel  for  centuries.  How  much  more,  then, 
do  the  heathen  want  and  deserve  your  sympathy  !  Another  phrase  in  our  text, 
which  speaks  of  "  valleys,"  may  remind  us  further  of  depths  in  our  social  life  in 
which  corruption  hides.  Meanwhile  pride  covers  us,  as  with  a  garment.  We  talk 
of  "  the  progress  of  the  age,"  we  boast  ourselves  of  our  achievements  and  discoveries. 
There  are  "  mountains  "  of  pride  to  be  brought  down,  as  well  as  valleys  of  degrada- 
tion to  be  exalted.  And  how  many  "  crooked  "  things  have  yet  to  be  made  straight ! 
What  distortions  of  truth  are  to  be  found  in  England,  as  well  as  elsewhere !  The 
orderliness  of  Divine  progress  in  the  natural  world  is  a  truth  so  contorted  that 
some  argue  from  it  that  all  things  seen  were  originally  made  of  things  that  do 
appear,  and  that  there  was  no  Divine  Creator  in  whom  they  found  their  origin. 
The  mercifulness  of  God  is  used  as  an  argument  against  the  possibiUty  of  punish- 
ment for  sin.     II.  The  world  is  not  essentially  the  better  for  the  human 

INVENTIONS  op  WHICH  THE  NINETEENTH  CENTURY  IS  SO  BOASTFUL.      Much  of  the 

misery  of  modern  Ufe  is  due  to  the  fact  that  moral  and  religious  advance  has  not 
kept  pace  with  mechanical  advance,  and  our  danger  is  lest  developed  mechanism 
should  be  to  our  age  what  a  complicated  and  resistless  machine  would  be  in  the 
hands  of  a  child  who  knows  not  the  ends  for  which  it  is  designed.  Trains  and 
steamers  carry  us  over  land  and  sea  with  a  swiftness  which,  to  our  grandfathers, 
would  have  seemed  incredible.  Our  daily  bread  is  often  the  product  of  labour 
done  in  the  far-off  fertile  fields  of  California.  There  has  been  a  hteral  fulfilment 
of  these  words,  which  speak  of  conquering  mountains  and  valleys,  and  overleaping 
all  obstacles,  such  as  Isaiah  never  dreamed  of.  But  the  question  is  fairly  asked. 
Are  we  the  better  for  all  this  ?  Are  we  wiser,  are  we  happier,  are  we  nobler,  are 
we  more  Christ-like,  than  our  fathers  were  ?  We  have  greater  appliances  than  our 
fathers,  but  it  may  be  fairly  doubted  whether  we  surpass  them  either  in  capacity 
or  in  enjoyment.  When  you  go  for  a  holiday  you  can  rush  up  the  Rhine,  tlu"ough 
Switzerland,  and  back  across  France  in  a  fortnight,  but  probably,  in  a  dozen 
journeys  of  that  sort  you  see  far  less  than  poor  OUver  Goldsmith  did  when,  with  a 
fi[fe  as  his  companion,  he  trudged  along  the  highways  of  Europe.  Scientific  instru- 
ments are  marvellous  in  power  and  in  accuracy,  but  scientific  men  have  not 
advanced  in  genius  beyond  Newton  or  Herschel.  Music  is  heard  on  every  hand ; 
but  it  is  not  better  than  the  music  of  Handel,  or  of  Bach,  or  of  Haydn.  In  short, 
we  have  not  a  higher  life  because  we  have  higher  material  appliances,  and  you  and  I 
are  not  one  whit  the  nobler  men  because  we  can  read  all  the  news  of  the  world  in  a 
penny  paper,  and  transact  our  business  with  the  other  ends  of  the  earth  in  a  few 
hours.  What  do  we  all  gain  if,  in  covering  our  land  with  factories  and  steam 
engines,  we  are  covering  it  also  with  want  and  wretchedness?  In  spite  of  all 
scientific  discoveries  and  mechanical  appliances,  it  is  evident  that  the  world  wants 
something  more  than  these  can  give.  It  wants  freedom  from  its  sins,  and  a 
Redeemer  who  can  set  it  free.  It  wants  love  amidst  its  cruelties,  and  rest  amid  its 
weariness.  III.  The  world  requires  most  of  all  a  revelation  of  the  glory 
OF  God.  Many  say,  "  Let  our  trade  and  our  railways  and  all  our  conveniences 
first  find  entrance  to  a  heathen  land,  and  then  the  people  there  will  be  prepared  for 
the  Gospel."  A  grosser  delusion  could  hardly  be  promulgated.  Our  own  social 
condition  might  show  its  fallacy,  and  experiment  in  heathen  lands  has  confirmed  it. 
When  this  so-called  "  civilisation  "  has  preceded  Christianity,  idolaters  have 
become  atheists,  and  their  last  state  worse  than  their  first.  The  great  object  we 
Christians  are  to  keep  in  view,  in  all  our  achievements,  is  that  "  the  glory  of  God  " 
may  be  revealed — not  the  glory  of  man,  nor  of  a  society,  nor  of  a  sect,  but  the 
glory  of  God.  As  a  king,  a  man  finds  his  glory  in  the  contentment  of  his  people; 
as  a  father,  a  man  finds  his  glory  in  the  well-being  of  his  children;  and  so  the  great 
King  and  Father  of  us  all  finds  His  "  glory  "  in  our  contentment  and  well-being. 
And  how  can  that  be  brought  about?  It  is  by  the  work  and  words  of  those  who 
speak  "  comfortably  "  to  the  sinners,  who  proclaim  a  reconciled  God  revealed  in 
Jesus  Christ.  IV.  God  is  looking  to  the  Church  to  being  about  this  change. 
He  is  addressing  His  people  here,  and,  instead  of  saying  "  I  will  comfort,"  He  says 
"  Comfort  ye."  No  angel  messengers  now  wing  their  flight  from  heaven  to 
announce  the  glad  tidings  of  great  joy.  The  message  has  been  entrusted  to  us. 
Let  us  have  patience,  though  the  results  of  our  work  at  home  and  abroad  seem 
sparse  and  small.  The  upraising  of  valleys  and  the  levelling  of  mountains  is  no 
child's  play,  even  in  the  pnj'sical  world,  and  it  is  harder  still  in  the  spiritual  realm. 
When  we  remember  the  cost  at  which  some  modern  discoveries  were  won,  and  see 


CHAP.  XL.]  ISAIAH.  173 

the  patience  and  skill  and  risk  which  accompany  the  driving  of  tunnels  through 
mountains,  or  under  the  sea,  we  are  ashamed  of  the  ease  with  which  Christians  give 
way  to  disheartenment.  In  preparing  the  highway  here  spoken  of  we  must  work 
on  the  plan  the  Norwegians  adopt  for  keeping  up  their  roads.  Each  occupier  of 
land,  in  proportion  to  his  acreage,  has  his  own  allotted  portion  of  road  to  maintain, 
and  for  that  he  is  responsible.  So,  in  proportion  to  your  capacities  and  opportun- 
ities, you  have  your  work  to  do — in  your  home,  in  your  class,  in  your  sphere  of 
thought  or  activity,  and  from  that  responsibility  none  can  release  you.  {A. 
Rowland,  B.A.)        The  prospects  of  the  Church  : — I.  Somb  of  the  most  pokmid- 

ABLB  OBSTBTJCTIONS  TO   THE   DLFFUSION    AND   PROGRESS   OF  TRUE  RELIGION,   AND 

THE  CERTAINTY  OF  THEIR  REMOVAL.  1.  The  defective  character  of  personal 
religion.  There  are  many  features  of  the  Christian  character  scarcely  ever  brought 
out  to  public  view;  and  others  whose  nature  is  so  misapprehended  as  to  lead  to  a 
ntiisshapen  exhibition  of  the  spirit  and  precepts  of  the  Gospel  of  Christ.  Have 
you  never  been  pained  when  at  the  close  of  the  day  you  have  endeavoured  to 
ascertain  the  character  of  your  thoughts,  feelings,  and  actions  ?  Have  you  never 
been  surprised  at  the  moral  personage  who  has  presented  himself  to  your  view  at 
such  seasons  ?  There  is  much  of  secularity  mingled  with  the  religion  that 
prevails.  What  has  religion  done  for  us  if  it  has  not  so  elevated  the  tone  and  order 
of  our  feelings  as  to  render  us  indifferent  to  the  pleasures  of  sin  ?  As  a  natural 
consequence  of  this  defective  piety  much  is  withheld  from  the  service  of  God. 
There  is  so  much  of  self  mingled  with  our  religious  engagements.  The  purposes  of 
God  embrace  the  agency  and  co-operation  of  man.  If,  then,  the  piety  of  the 
Church  be  defective,  if  the  body  that  acts  for  God  be  enfeebled  by  disease,  or  mis- 
guided in  its  operations,  how  fatally  must  its  efficiency  be  counteracted!  But 
assuredly  an  end  will  be  put  to  this  state  of  things,  for  "  every  valley  shall  be 
exalted,"  &c.  2.  The  division  and  animosities  amongst  Christians.  A  sectarian 
character  has  thus  been  given  to  the  Church,  a  fictitious  and  morbid  zeal  has  been 
engendered,  and  those  resources  which  ought  to  have  been  expended  in  the  evan- 
gelisation of  the  world  have,  on  many  occasions,  been  laid  out  for  party  and  sinister 
purposes.  3.  The  connection  that  subsists  between  religion  and  State  politics. 
The  Christianity  that  has  been  patronised  by  the  State — that  has  been  adopted 
as  the  stepping-stone  to  emolument  and  power,  this  has  been  mistaken  for  the 
religion  of  the  Bible.     II.  The  results  which  the  prophet  represents  as 

CONSEQUENT  UPON  THE  REMOVAL  OF  THESE  OBSTRUCTIONS.     "  The  glory  of  the  Lord 

shall  be  revealed,  and  all  flesh  shall  see  it  together;  for  the  mouth  of  the  Lord  hath 
spoken  it."  Nothing  can  be  more  inspiring  than  this  prospect.  If  it  is  gratifying 
to  see  the  boundaries  of  science  enlarged,  or  the  elements  of  human  happiness 
increased;  if  the  pohtical  resurrection  of  a  nation  inspires  us  with  joy;  if  it 
invigorates  our  hearts  to  see  the  spirit  of  an  age  awakening  from  its  slumber  and 
preparing  itself  for  wise  and  virtuous  action,  what  should  be  the  emotion  of  our 
hearts  in  contemplating  such  a  consummation  as  is  represented  in  my  text?  It 
is  not  the  mere  promise  of  an  approaching  good  by  which  the  prophet  here  seeks  to 
inspire  our  mind.  It  contains  the  elements  of  all  conceivable  happiness.  It  will 
embody  and  secure  to  the  inhabitants  of  our  world  the  highest  enjoyment  of  which 
their  nature  is  susceptible.  The  glory  of  God  has  hitherto  been  but  partially 
unveiled.  The  sun  is  still  behind  the  cloud,  and  a  shadow  is  in  consequence  thrown 
on  our  path.  But  when  the  piety  of  the  Church  shall  be  freed  from  its  present 
stains,  when  her  divisions  are  healed,  then  shall  she  arise  and  shine,  for  her  light 
will  have  come,  and  the  glory  of  the  Lord  will  be  risen  upon  her.  But  we  are 
informed  that  "  all  flesh  shall  see  it  together."  The  EvangeHst  slightly  varies  the 
latter  part  of  the  prophecy — "  All  flesh  shall  see  the  salvation  of  God."  As  yet  the 
salvation  of  God  is  known  to  but  a  limited  portion  of  the  world.  But  the  salvation 
of  God  all  are  yet  destined  to  see.  {T.  Price. )  The  levelling  force  of  Christianity  : 
— There  are  and  ever  have  been  in  the  soul  of  society  opinions,  prejudices,  feelings, 
conventional  notions  which,  like  mountains  and  valleys,  have  separated  men  into 
classes,  and  prevented  the  free-flowing  interchange  of  soul.  Those  mountains  rear 
their  frowning  heads  and  throw  their  chiUing  shadows  in  every  district  of  society. 
Those  valleys  yawn  everywhere,  and  form  an  impassable  gulf  between  the  brothers 
on  either  side.  Christianity  has  a  power  to  remove  those  mountains,  fill  up  the 
valleys,  &c.  How  does  Christianity  do  this  ?  In  two  ways — I.  By  the  levelling 
TRUTHS  WHICH  IT  REVEALS.  L  A  commou  God.  2.  A  common  nature.  3.  A 
common  obligation.  4.  A  common  depravity.  5.  A  common  salvation.  II.  By 
THE  LEVBLLINQ  SPIRIT  WHICH  IT  GENERATES.     The  Spirit  which  Christianity 


174  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  xt 

generates  in  the  human  soul  is  such  that  raises  a  man  above  all  those  prejudices  of 
the  heart  and  conventionalities  of  life  that  divide  men.  What  is  the  spirit?  It  is 
a  spirit  that  has  supreme  regard  to  three  things — 1.  The  spiritual  in  man.  2.  The 
right  in  conduct.  3.  The  eternal  in  destiny.  The  socially  levelling  force  of 
Christianity,  however,  does  not  involve  spoliation.  (Z).  Thomas,  D.D.)  The 
crooked  shall  be  made  straight. — The  prophet  and  the  picturesque  : — There  is 
much  in  us  which  would  instinctively  resent  and  repudiate  this  ideal  that  he  has 
put  before  us.  Take,  for  instance,  that  sensitive  faculty  in  our  century  receiving 
BO  peculiar  and  overwhelming  a  development,  the  sense  of  the  picturesque.  The 
words  of  my  text  break  in  with  a  very  surprising  emphasis.     This  vehemence  of  the 

Srophet  clashes  with  all  the  primary  instincts  of  this  sentiment  of  ours.  Mountains 
attened  out,  valleys  filled  in,  highways  levelled  from  end  to  end,  every  broken 
piece  of  rotigh  ground  repaired,  every  turn  and  twist  in  the  path  straightened — 
what  a  picture  to  portray  with  such  rapturous  enthusiasm !  Could  any  result  be 
more  deplorable  ?  It  is  the  very  murder  of  the  picturesque!  The  picturesque 
asks  only  that  the  mountains  should  rise  yet  higher,  be  more  pathless,  more  craggy, 
more  perilous;  that  they  should  be  torn  by  glaciers  and  scoured  by  avalanches  and 
wasted  by  storms  and  bemoaned  by  winds,  and  be  aghast  with  lonely  desolation — 
that  is  what  it  prefers,  that  is  what  excites  it, — and  the  valleys  shall  plunge  yet 
deeper,  more  gloomy  vaults,  sunless,  with  hoarse  torrents  buried  in  awful  black 
gulfs  and  roaming  along  in  anger  out  of  sight.  There  should  be  no  roads  if  possible ; 
at  least,  never  level  or  straight  for  two  yards  together;  and  there  should  be  cliffs 
that  are  frowning  and  overhanging  and  ruinous  and  threatening,  and  high  and 
fierce  and  solitary  rocks.  Everything  should  be  rough,  everything  should  be 
crooked,  for  the  sake  of  the  picturesque!  {Canon  H.  Scott  -  HoUand,  M.A.) 
Picturesque  abuses  : — In  this  contrast  between  the  prophet  and  the  picturesque 
is  there  nothing  but  of  a  light  or  superficial  nature,  nothing  serious  ?  I  doubt  it. 
The  prophet's  thunderous  intensity  brings  our  sentiment  to  a  check  just  at  the 
point  where  it  is  apt  to  pervert  the  moral  judgment.  Where  is  that?  At  the 
point  where  it  helps  to  bUnd  us  to  the  actual  Hfe,  the  actual  needs  and  necessities 
of  a  hving  present.  The  feehng  for  the  picturesque  belongs  always  to  those  who 
are  outside  the  object  of  their  admiration.  They  are  looking  on  as  unconcerned 
spectators.  That  which  they  observe  lies  wholly  outside  their  own  living,  personal 
experience,  and  that  is  why  it  touches  them  and  startles  them,  and  pleases  because 
it  startles.  It  is  so  odd,  so  unexpected,  so  dreamy,  so  old.  That  is  the  sentiment 
bred  in  tourists,  in  passengers  tarrying  the  day,  gazing  from  without  at  a  scene, 
•unaffected  by  its  sorrows,  aloof  from  its  inner  reality.  We  Uke  these  strange, 
huddled,  dirty  streets,  and  these  swarming  beggars,  and  these  crumbling  walls, 
and  these  crooked  alleys,  and  aU  the  oddities  of  decay,  and  all  the  quaintness  of 
the  obsolete.  Abuses,  so  long  as  they  do  not  hurt  us,  are  much  more  picturesque 
than  their  remedies.  In  this  mood  what  serious  blunders  we  have  made  abroad 
— offences  against  our  best  English  self,  for  the  native  English  have  a  love  for 
hberty,  for  a  free  people.  How  much  has  our  love  for  the  picturesque  killed 
our  sympathy  for  freedom  in  Rome  or  in  Venice,  shall  we  say?  This  error  which 
we  make  again  and  again  abroad  is  very  apt  to  repeat  itself  here  at  home;  for 
those  who  have  leisiure  to  enjoy  the  picturesque  are  bound,  of  course,  to  have 
already  reached  some  comfort  themselves,  some  security  of  position.  That 
thatched  cottage  in  the  deU,  in  the  hollow  of  the  wood,  could  anything  be  more 
engaging?  We  have  sketched  it  again  and  again.  It  is  very  damp,  and  those 
colours  on  it  that  we  like  so,  the  greens  and  the  yellows,  reveal  the  dampness. 
It  is  buried  under  the  trees,  it  stands  on  soppy  ground,  and  there  is  no  drainage; 
there  is  a  cesspool  behind.  But  how  raw  the  new  brick  four-roomed  house  would 
look  without  an  offence  in  our  rustic  nook!  There  is  a  great  deal  more  of  this 
among  us  comfortable  and  educated  people  than  we  are  at  all  aware  of.  It 
acts  as  a  dead  weight  on  us,  it  counteracts  the  force  of  our  reforming  zeal. 
We  should  never  for  one  moment  dream  of  letting  the  picturesqueness  stand  in 
cur  way  if  we  had  to  sink  into  consumption  through  the  damp  or  die  of  typhoid  in 
some  undrained,  old-fashioned  street;  but  somehow  it  puts  in  its  plea  with  us 
with  far  greater  power  when  others  are  concerned,  and  we  are  but  spectators. 
It  is  against  all  this  that  the  prophet's  zeal  thunders.  The  picturesque  may 
rightly  widen  our  svmpathies  for  the  past;  it  may  plead  for  gentle  handhng  of 
what  is  so  fair  in  tne  deposits  of  the  past,  it  may  rightly  prompt  us  to  do  our 
Tery  utmost  to  save  what  is  beautiful  and  natural  from  cruel,  hideous  misuse 
by  commercial  greed,  but  there  is  one  supreme  law  which  it  never  must  gainsay, 


CHAP.  XL.]  ISAIAH.  176 

the  law  which  is  uttered  in  the  cry  of  the  recovered  king,  Hezekiah,  when  he 
recovered  from  his  sickness:  "  Death  cannot  celebrate  Thee.  The  Uving  shall 
praise  Thee,  as  I  do  this  day."  (Ibid.)  Redemptive  growth: — Since  the  cloud 
and  curse  of  sin,  all  this  growth  of  ours,  which  is  our  life,  is  remedial,  corrective, 
redemptive.  It  is  won  through  strife  over  wrong,  through  struggling  out  of 
evil,  and  always,  therefore,  it  must  witness  to  its  vitality  by  straightening  the 
crooked,  by  making  the  rough  places  plain.  It  must  always  testify  to  its  life. 
Always  it  must  be  bettering  bad  highways.  It  must  be  abasing  moimtains  that 
obstruct  and  daunt.  It  must  be  filling  up  valleys  that  cramp  and  choke  and 
darken.  That  is  the  necessity,  the  necessity  of  clearing  the  way  for  free  motion 
towards  a  better  day.  But,  again,  even  from  inside  this  growing  life,  even  after 
we  have  torn  ourselves  out  of  the  ranks  of  unconcerned  spectators  and  irrespon- 
sible tourists,  and  have  thrown  oiu-selves  with  heart  and  hope  into  this  remedial 
work,  and  are  keenly  striving  to  bring  the  crooked  straight  and  to  loosen  the 
terrible  burden  of  wrong;  even  then  this  old  perplexity  and  trouble  will  recur, 
and  recur  in  a  subtler  and  much  deeper  form.  Perhaps  in  the  very  midst  of 
our  reforming  zeal  there  will  suddenly  come  a  thought,  a  sight  crossing  our  mind 
of  all  OMi  hopes  achieved.  The  crooked,  now  so  cruelly  wrong  or  disastrously 
distorted,  has  at  last  been  made  perfectly  straight.  What  then?  Are  we  better 
off?  What  a  poor,  stale,  stupid  place  this  world  will  have  become.  All  wrongs 
redressed,  all  blunders  rectified,  all  inequaUties  levelled;  everybody  on  the  same 
platform,  decent,  snug,  comfortable — a  dull,  unbroken  mass  of  average  respect- 
abihties.  Comfort  for  the  comfortless — it  was  for  that  that  we  had  hungered  and 
toiled.  But  the  comfortable!  Look  at  those  who  have  already  attained  it. 
Are  they  so  encouraging  a  prospect?  What  if  all  were  as  they?  After  all,  moral 
character  is  our  sole  aim;  and  will  character  have  lost  or  gained  when  our  efforts 
have  succeeded?  Where  is  character  found  now?  we  say.  Is  it  found  amid 
the  comfortable?  Hardly.  Is  it  not  always  won  through  suffering,  strife, 
anguish  ?  Those  rare  simphcities  of  the  poor,  those  generosities,  those  devotions — 
are  they  not  worth  all  the  smugger  virtues?  Would  they  not  have  vanished 
in  a  world  where  there  was  nothing  crooked,  no  high  lights  and  no  dark  shadows, 
no  ups  and  downs?  Perhaps  we  take  up  some  industrial  Utopia,  some  book 
like  '  Looking  Backward,"  and  as  we  read  we  are  chilled  to  the  marrow.  There 
is  a  dull  recoil  How  utterly  repugnant;  how  flat  and  stale  and  unprofitable! 
All  that  makes  humanity  dear  and  pathetic  and  glorious  gone,  died  out !  "  No 
room  in  such  a  world,"  we  say,  "  for  high  adventures,  shining  heroisms;  no  trumpet 
calls,  no  splendid  risks,  no  holy  indignation,  no  exaltation  of  sacrifice,  no  pro- 
phetic passion.  Democratic  equaUty  has  levelled  aU  the  roads  straight  as  dies. 
They  run  between  their  kerbstones.  All  is  smooth,  orderly,  equitable,  and  there 
is  no  material  there  for  art,  none  for  music.  Where  shall  we  seek  for  Schubert's 
songs  that  float  like  dreams?  "  "  They  were  won,"  we  say,  "  by  his  tears." 
And  where  will  be  our  Hamlets  and  oiir  Lears  in  the  romance?  How  will  man 
ever  display  his  higher  capacities  except  through  pain  and  struggle  and  sorrow? 
Yet  those  are  the  very  conditions  that  we  are  labouring  to  deny  him,  Alas! 
our  hearts  sink,  our  imagination  protests,  our  hopes  flag,  and  the  glowing  passion 
of  the  prophet,  as  it  catches  sight  of  the  very  fulfilment  of  its  dream,  dies  away 
in  the  wail  of  the  preacher,  "  Vanity,  vanity,  even  this  is  vanity."  {Ibid.)  No 
fear  of  Utopia: — We  have  invented  a  terror  for  ourselves.  We  need  not  be  the  least 
afraid.  These  visions  of  the  future  deceive  us  by  suggesting  a  finaUty  at  which 
man  will  have  arrived.  These  Utopias  are  just  what  wiU  not  be  true.  That 
is  just  what  we  are  quite  certain  will  never  occur  while  this  present  age  endures. 
The  one  thing  that  we  know  of  the  future  is  that  it  wiU  not  be  like  that,  for  we 
know  that  at  each  moment  of  his  earthly  career,  imtU  his  Lord  Jesus  comes  again 
to  make  earth  and  heaven  anew,  man  will  be  found  warring  as  a  soldier — a  pilgrim 
pressing  on  towards  eternity  with  mountains  still  towering  ahead,  dark  with 
unknown  destiny,  with  vaUeys  into  which  he  must  plimge,  and  moaning  with 
perils  through  which  he  must  dare  his  way;  with  tough  tasks  still  set  him  to 
achieve;  with  nerves,  therefore,  still  stnmg  and  prophet  voices  calling  and  eyes 
strained  forward  into  the  night,  and  loins  girt,  and  heart  on  fire,  and  foes  to  fight, 
and  deaths  to  die,  and  victories  to  win.  But  you  will  say,  "  Is  that  a  very 
encouraging  message?  Why  waste  our  efforts,  then,  in  struggh'ng  to  set  things 
right  if  the  crooked  will  never  be  straight,  if  the  high  road  will  never  be  levelled? 
Why  grind  at  smoothing  down  our  present  hills  if  always  there  will  be  fresh  moun- 
tains beyond?  "     Just  because  man  is,  in  essence,  a  pilgrim,  a  soldier,  a  servant  of 


176  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  xl. 

Jesus  crucified,  and  it  is  his  very  life  to  bring  this  to  the  front.  He  discovers 
himself  in  and  through  this  struggle  and  pilgrimage,  through  the  strain  of  the 
war.  That  is  his  mission  in  which  he  proves  his  courage  and  his  nerve.  Unless 
he  is  always  correcting  evil,  unless  he  is  always  batthng  down  wrongs,  he  is  not 
himself,  and  he  knows  not  of  what  spirit  he  is  made.  What  the  particular  wrong 
may  be  which  he  is  called  upon  to  redress  at  this  moment,  or  at  that,  is  determined 
for  him  by  the  conditions  of  history,  by  God  Himself,  for  God  is  in  history — 
He  directs,  He  allots.  He  distributes  the  task  to  man — there  is  a  design  clearly 
disclosed.  One  by  one,  God  brings  up  to  men  the  difficulties,  the  obstructions 
that  He  would  have  them  encounter.  Our  forefathers  had  their  own  fight  to 
fight,  and  they  fought  it.  They  were  tested  and  proved  in  other  ways.  One 
fight  at  a  time!  They  fought  for  liberty,  they  fought  for  free  speech;  they  could 
not  attend  to  underlying  poverty.  Now  their  part  is  played,  their  mountains 
are  brought  low,  and  their  crooked  things  are  made  straight,  and  therefore  there 
is  time  and  opportunity  for  something  else.  There  is  another  task  for  us,  another 
test  applied.  We  are  not  to  enjoy  what  our  fathers  put  straight  without  doing 
our  own  part  to  bend  the  crooked  into  line,  to  make  rough  places  plain.  {Ibid.) 
The  battle  for  to-day: — Since  God  is  in  history,  there  is  continuity  in  our  pilgrimage, 
and  there  is  purpose.  The  old  wars,  by  healing  some  wrongs,  prepared  oppor- 
tunities for  new  efforts.  There  is  advance,  after  all,  along  this  highway,  how- 
/ever  much  there  is  stiU  always  a  roitgh  place  just  ahead,  a  cruel  corner  to  put 
V  straight.  We  are  farther  along.  There  are  wrongs  righted  and  thrown  behind 
»s,  and  therefore  the  nearer  we  draw  to  the  end.  Enough  for  us  that  we  know 
fthe  spot  on  the  road  at  which  we  stand,  that  we  know  what  are  the  crooked  things 
'  which  it  is  our  own  special  task  to  set  straight.  Let  us  look  at  them  and  leave 
the  rest  to  God.  Who  can  doubt  at  what  spot  on  the  road  we  stand  to-day? 
Those  crooked  things  on  which  the  Ught  of  God  has  been  turned  in  our  day — 
there  they  are;  we  know  them  and  we  see  them — the  commercial  pressure  that 
falls  on  the  weak,  and  that  breaks  and  spoils  the  humanity  under  it,  manhood, 
womanhood,  home,  joy;  the  heartless  mechanism  of  an  impersonal  economic 
system  which  crunches  the  aged,  the  women,  the  children;  the  sorrows  of  those 
who  labour  on  without  any  hope  of  reaching  an  end  of  their  labour;  men  and 
women,  jaded,  bruised,  disfigured,  always  under-fed,  invalided  by  penury,  un- 
quahfied  for  work,  unfit  for  what  they  do;  men  and  women  tossed  to  and  fro 
by  bUnd  tides  of  fluctuating  markets  over  which  they  have  no  control;  men  and 
women  accumulated  in  hordes,  unshepherded  and  unregarded  in  squalid  tene- 
ments, in  sordid  and  mean  dishonour,  living  environed  by  disease,  born  into  a 
world  too  masterful  for  their  infirmities,  sustained  at  the  edge  of  starvation  by 
a  competition  that  never  improves  them  and  yet  never  eliminates  them,  drawn 
under  by  demands  which  they  are  helpless  to  fulfil,  bruised  and  damaged  in 
trying  to  meet  them.  No  one  anticipated  that  our  industries  would  create  them 
or  sustain  in  existence  classes  of  this  type.  They  are  the  signals  of  some  defect  in 
our  system,  of  some  perversion,  of  some  disease,  of  some  disaster — that  something 
that  meant  well  enough  has  gone  crooked,  that  the  machinery  of  our  civilisation 
is  out  of  gear.  We  have  got  out  of  the  track.  That  much  is  plain.  Therefore 
a  responsibiUty  is  laid  upon  us;  a  thing  has  got  to  be  done.  {Ibid.)  And  the 
.  rough  places  plain. — The  rough  places  made  plain: — I.  We  may  take  this  to  be, 
in  outhne,  thb  dbscription  of  God's  work  with  otxr  world  and  with  mankind, 
REGARDED  AS  A  PREPARATION  FOR  THE  FUTiTRB.  It  is  the  voice  of  history,  of  nature, 
of  science,  of  revelation.  The  present  is  a  preparation  for  the  future,  as  the  past 
was  a  preparation  for  the  present,  and  as  the  future  will  be  a  preparation  for 
a  stiU  coming  and  greater  future.  We  know  the  history  of  religion;  how  slow 
its  progress — how  for  centuries  it  was  only  successful  in  casting  down  obstacles, 
and  preparing  the  hearts  of  men  for  the  entrance  of  a  faith  which  was  worthy  of 
its  Author.  It  required  not  the  labours  of  one  prophet  Uke  John  only,  but  the 
labours  of  many  generations  of  prophets,  to  prepare  for  the  advent  of  Jesus  Christ. 
Religion  passed  through  numerous  forms  before  it  arrived  at  that  form  which 
Christ  gave  it.  And  as  this  was  the  work  of  God  in  the  reUgious  thought  and 
life  of  man,  so  was  it  the  work  of  God  in  the  world.  The  kingdom  of  heaven  did 
not  come  imtil  the  world  was  in  a  measure  ready  for  it.     II.  So  we  may  say  that 

this  is  AN  INDEX  TO  THB  COURSE  OF  HiS  PROVIDENCE  IN  EVERY  AGE  AND  COUNTRY. 

This  lesson  may  be  learned — that  in  all  cases  the  spiritual  is  above  the  material ; 
and  that  all  progress  and  improvement  in  the  material  world  are  but  means  to 
an  end.  and  are  intended  to  serve  far  higher  interests.     All  these  benefits  of  rapid 


CHAP.  XL.]  ISAIAR.  177 

intelligence,  of  conveniences,  of  comforts,  are  but  the  removal  of  hindrances 
out  of  the  way  of  the  progress  of  what  is  spiritual  and  Divine.  If  they  leave 
men  devoid  of  better  aims — if  they  leave  us  selfish,  earthly,  false — they  are  no 
blessings  after  all!  If  we  use  the  gifts  of  nature  and  invention  and  discovery 
merely  to  attain  our  own  ends,  and  if  there  is  no  growth  of  the  spirit  of  truth 
and  charity,  we  have  gained  nothing:  we  have  merely  added  to  our  former  powers 
the  power  to  increase  our  selfishness.  But  such  is  not  the  use  for  which  these  new 
acquisitions  are  designed.  If  there  are  more  facilities  for  reaching  the  human 
mind  by  thought  and  speech  or  writing,  all  the  more  carefully  ought  everyone 
who  has  influence  over  his  feUows  to  see  that  that  influence  is  wholesome,  and 
not  hmrtful.  The  material  is  the  servant  of  the  spirituaL  What  John  the 
Baptist  was  to  Christ,  such  is  all  the  world  to  the  Christ.  All  nature  was  a 
preparation  for  Him,  all  knowledge,  all  discovery.  The  world  did  not  see  this 
at  the  time;  but  the  fact  is  true  for  all  that.  People  say  that  the  growth  of 
human  wisdom  and  the  increase  of  human  blessings  are  adverse  to  the  Gospel; 
but  on  looking  back  on  history  we  see  that  all  these  things  were  in  the  hands  of 
God,  and  were  aU  made  to  prepare  the  way  for  the  kingdom  of  God-  So  it  is, 
and  so  ought  it  ever  to  be.     III.  The  infujencb  op  temsTiAinTY  in  making 

THE  PATH  TO  GOODNESS  EASIBB.        IV.   ThIS  IS  OtTB  WORK  AS  CHRISTIANS  IN  THE 

WORLD  AND  FOR  THE  WORLD.  This  is  part  of  OUT  task  for  those  who  are  finding 
the  road  to  goodness  and  right  living  hard  and  rough.  Each  of  us  has  something 
in  his  power  to  prepare  the  way  for  the  kingdom  of  God  in  the  lives  and  hearts 
of  others.  To  many,  the  difficulties  of  a  right  life  are  very  great,  and  it  is  no 
easy  task  for  them  to  carry  it  out.  Everything  is  against  them:  training,  cir- 
cumstances, companions,  habits.  From  their  youngest  years  they  have  been 
famiUar  with  evil.  It  comes  to  them  naturally  to  deceive,  to  lie,  to  do  all  manner 
of  misdeeds.  How  can  such  a  youth  ever  open  into  a  manhood  of  worth  or 
goodness?  He  must  be  helped  by  education,  by  guidance,  by  living  examples 
of  affection  and  well-doing.  Christian  society,  the  Chtirch,  must  come  to  his 
aid.  And  what  is  aU  this  but  doing  the  work  of  Christ,  the  work  of  prophets 
and  evangelists,  the  work  of  the  Gospel,  preparing  a  highway,  helping  those 
who  caimot  walk,  making  the  rough  places  plain,  making  it  easier  for  a  man 
to  stand  in  goodness  and  truth?  After  all  is  done,  however,  both  for  nations 
and  individuals,  there  will  be  difficulties  to  overcome.  You  can  never  for  your- 
selves, or  for  those  whom  you  most  love,  so  arrange  things  that  all  personal  need 
for  care  and  effort  shaU  cease.  There  will  be  for  every  man  the  cross  to  carry, 
and  for  many  men  the  thorn  to  trouble  them-  {A.  Watson,  D.D.)  Rough 
places: — I.  Rough  places.  1.  In  general  human  history,  2.  In  individual 
human  life.  11.  Rottgh  places  made  plain.  I.  The  supreme  power  of  Jesus 
Christ.  2.  The  supreme  power  of  Jesus  Christ  used  for  the  advantage  of  man- 
kind. 3.  The  advantage  of  mankind  identified  with  the  coming  kingdom  of 
Jesus  Christ.  III.  The  tranqthl  and  blessed  futtjre  of  the  world.  Chris- 
tianity is  good  news.  InequaUties  are  to  be  rectified-  Relations  are  to  be 
adjusted.     (J.  Parker,  D.D.) 

Ver.  5.  And  the  glory  of  the  Lord  shall  be  revealed. — The  revelation 
of  God's  glory: — From  this  animating  prophecy  we  may  consider — I.  The  glory 
OF  the  Lord.  When  Isaiah  was  favoured  with  the  Divine  vision  the  angels 
sang,  "  Holy,  holy,  holy  is  the  Lord  of  hosts,  the  whole  earth  is  fuU  of  His  glory." 
Another  inspired  writer  observes,  "  The  heavens  declare  the  glory  of  God."  In 
the  display  of  this  glory  God  "  hath  clothed  Himself  with  light  as  with  a  garment " ; 
and  hath  peculiarly  manifested  it  in  those  two  grand  events,  the  creation  and 
redemption  of  the  world.  Hence  the  glad  tidings  are  emphatically  called  "  the 
glorious  Gospel";  and  the  spiritual  instruction  of  the  Gospel  is  called  "the 
light  of  the  knowledge  of  the  glory  of  God  in  the  face  of  Jesus  Christ."  This 
plan  of  redemption  is  the  arena  of  heaven,  into  which  the  angels  "  desire  to  look." 
It  is  the  rich  assemblage  of  love  and  mercy,  justice  and  faithfulness,  truth  and 
goodness.  II.  The  revelation  of  the  glory  of  the  Lord.  The  dispensation 
under  which  God  revealed  Himself  to  oiu*  first  parents  is  commonly  called  the 
Covenant  of  Works.  The  condition  required  was  perfect  obedience.  By  the 
sin  of  Adam  and  Eve  this  covenant  was  broken,  and  "  judgment  passed  on  all 
to  condemnation."  The  glory  of  the  Lord  shone  round  about  our  offending 
parents  when  the  very  sentence  of  condemnation  was  associated  with  an  inti- 
mation of  mercy.  The  glory  of  the  Lord  was  first  revealed  in  the  promise  that 
VOL.  II. — 12 


178  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  XU. 

the  seed  of  the  woman  should  bruise  the  head  of  the  serpent.  As  generations 
Bncceeded,  it  pleased  the  most  High  God  gradually  to  reveal  larger  discoveries 
of  this  sovereign  remedy  of  human  woe.  In  the  days  of  Abraham  the  promise 
of  mercy  was  repeated  (Gal.  iii.  8,  17).  The  inspired  compositions  of  King  David 
more  explicitly  unfolded  the  Divine  glory  in  the  redemption  of  sinners.  The 
grand  accomplishment  of  the  words  of  our  text  was  reserved  for  the  personal 
appearance  of  the  Son  of  God.  in.  The  glorious  extent  of  this  bevelation. 
All  flesh  shall  see  it  together."  At  the  period  of  this  prophecy  the  earth  was 
full  of  darkness  and  habitations  of  cruelty.  The  light  of  Israel  was,  compara- 
tively, but  as  the  light  of  a  taper.  The  space  which  it  illuminated  was  contracted. 
The  glory  of  the  Lord  to  be  revealed  under  the  Christian  dispensation  was  to 
resemble  the  sun  in  the  firmament:  it  was  to  shine  for  all  kingdoms,  nations, 
and  languages  under  heaven.  It  was  to  be  "  a  light  to  lighten  the  Gentiles, 
and  the  glory  of  God's  people,  Israel."  The  aspect  of  the  present  times  encourages 
us  to  hope  that  the  day  is  rapidly  advancing  when  "  all  flesh  shall  see  the  salvation 
of  God."  IV.  The  glory  of  this  antmatino  prospect  is  confirmed  by  its 
CEETAINTY.  "  For  the  mouth  of  the  Lord  hath  spoken  it  "  (2  Tim.  i.  9;  Psa.  ii. 
7,  8;   Isa.  xlix.  5,  6,  xlii.  6;  John  x.  16,  xii.  32).     V.  The  duty  of  missionary 

IXERTIONS   in    order   TO   PROMOTE   THE   REVELATION   OF   THIS   GLOEY.       1.    Doth 

any  one  ask,  "  Where  is  the  authority  for  missionary  exertions?  "  It  stands 
upon  the  authority  of  the  Most  High  God.  2.  The  duty  is  great,  as  you  regard 
the  exceeding  great  love  of  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ.  3.  The  duty  is  great,  as  you 
consider  the  personal  obligation  which  you  yourselves  are  under  to  missionary 
societies.  4.  The  duty  is  great,  as  God,  in  Ilis  bounty,  hath  entrusted  you  with 
talents  to  promote  this  charitable  work.  (Basil  Woodd,  M.A.)  The  glory 
of  the  King: — The  august  manifestation  promised.  I.  As  to  its  nature.  1.  It 
is  the  King  Messiah  in  person.  (1)  The  historical  allusion  is  to  the  Shechinah. 
(2)  But  prophetically  it  is  applied  to  Christ.  Jewish  expositors  apply  it  to 
Messiah.  It  follows,  then,  that — 2.  The  Shechinah  was  a  type  of  Christ.  (1)  It 
was  an  undoubted  symbol  of  Divinity.  It  was  the  medium  in  which  it  pleased 
God  to  reveal  Himself  in  ancient  times.  The  complement  of  such  a  symbol 
must  needs  be  a  Divine  person.  The  type  cannot  be  grander  than  the  antitype. 
(2)  It  was  a  standing  miracle.  In  it  vapour  and  fire  were  miraculously  supported 
in  union.  It  is  therefore  called  the  support  of  cloud  and  fire."  "  Pillar  " 
is  an  unfortunate  translation  of  the  Hebrew.  A  luminous  canopy  extending 
over  London  in  its  whole  extent  could  scarcely  be  called  a  pillar.  But  the  nation 
of  Israel,  whether  in  encampment  or  on  march,  could  scarcely  occupy  less  space. 
This  miracle  would  set  forth  the  wonderful  union  of  the  Godhead  and  manhood 
in  the  person  of  Christ.  (3)  But  further,  on  more  nearly  considering  the  She- 
ohinah,  it  was  found  to  enshrine  a  beatified  human  form.  This  is  distinguished 
as  the  "  similitude  of  Jehovah  "  (Exod.  xxiv.  10,  II;  Numb.  xii.  8;  Isa.  vi.  1-5; 
Ezek.  i.  26).  This  very  thing  is  seen  in  the  holy  mount,  only  that  the  true 
humanity  of  Jesus  transfigured  is  itself  the  similitude.  Behold,  then,  the  "  Image 
of  the  Invisible  God";  the  "brightness  of  His  glory  and  the  express  image 
of  His  person."  (4)  Tn  this  character  Messiah  will  come  when  in  full  form  He 
appears  as  the  King  (Dan.  vii.  13;  Matt.  xxiv.  30,  xxvi.  64;  Acts  i.  11 ;  Rev. 
i.  7).  3.  Meanwhile  Christ  reveals  Himself  in  His  Spirit.  He  displays — (1)  The 
glory  of  His  wisdom.  (2)  The  glory  of  His  power.  (3)  The  glory  of  mercy, 
justice,  and  holiness  in  His  method  of  pardoning  and  saving  siimers  II.  As 
TO  its  extent.  "  All  flesh  shaU  see  it  together."  1.  This  term  includes  the 
Jew.  The  day  is  coming  when  "  all  Israel  shall  be  saved  " — when  the  nation 
■hall  become  Christian.  2.  It  also  comprehends  the  Gentile.  (1)  Presage  of 
the  calling  of  the  Gentiles  was  given  when  the  Magi  worshipped  at  Betlilehem. 
(2)  Further  presage  was  given  when  Jesus,  though  "  sent  to  the  lost  sheep  of 
the  house  of  Israel,"  nevertheless  opened  His  ministry  in  "  Galilee  of  the  Gen- 
tiles "  (Matt.  iv.  12-16).  (3)  It  was  also  presaged  in  incidents  of  His  ministry. 
The  healing  of  the  centurion's  servant.  The  preaching  to  the  Samaritans  (John 
iv.  39,  42).  The  healing  of  the  Canaanite's  daughter  (Matt.  xv.  21-28).  3.  The 
grand  fulfilment  is  future.  (1)  As  yet  "all  flesh"  have  not  seen  the  glory  of 
the  Lord.  Certainly  all  flesh  have  not  seen  it  "  together."  (2)  But  this  shall 
be.  (3)  Distinctions  of  Jew  and  Gentile  will  merge  in  the  universal  blaze  of 
the  glory  of  Christ.  III.  As  to  its  certainty.  "  The  mouth  of  the  Lord 
hath  spoken  it."  \.  TTie  Lord  can  do  it.  2.  He  will  doit.  (I)  His  honour  is 
pledged.     (3)  His  existence  is  pledged.     (3)  "  He  cannot  deny  Himself."     "  The 


CHAP.  XL.]  ISAIAH.  179 

Scripture  cannot  be  broken."     3.  Are  we  prepared  to  meet  Christ?     (/.  A. 
Macdonald,  M.A.) 

Vers.  6-8.  The  voice  said  Cry.  And  be  said.  What  shall  I  cry?  All  fledi  fli 
grass. — The  earthly  transitory  :  the  heavenly  enduring  : — When  we  make  a  judg- 
ment of  the  objects  of  sense  and  of  faith,  the  things  that  are  seen  "  claim  the 
preference  over  "  the  things  that  are  not  seen."  The  appearance  which  the  world 
presents  is  seducing,  that  which  religion  exhibits  is  forbidding.  The  appearances 
are  deceitful,  and  the  judgment  we  form  of  them  false.  I.  The  vanity  of  thb 
THINGS  OF  THIS  LIFE.  Empty  88  is  every  thing  in  the  world,  and  limited  in  ita 
duration,  it  is  one  of  the  truths  the  most  common  and  the  least  received.  1.  The 
voice  of  reason  teaches  men  that  they  have  only  a  little  while  to  live.  If  they  will 
but  reflect  upon  their  constitution,  they  cannot  but  discover,  both  within  and 
without,  innumerable  principles  of  their  speedy  dissolution.  2.  This  the  Scripture 
teaches  without  ceasing:  adapting  its  lessons  to  the  importance  of  the  awakening 
truth,  no  strong  expressions  are  overlooked,  no  striking  images  escape  the  sacred 
writers.  3.  Besides,  our  own  experience  proclaims  to  us  the  fact  by  the  most 
indubitable  proofs,  n.  The  soundness  of  a  Christian's  hope  in  futubitt. 
The  future  is  as  enlivening  to  the  Christian  as  the  past  is  humiliating  to  the  man. 
Death,  properly  speaking,  is  only  the  lot  of  the  wicked.  The  Christian,  in  the 
estimation  of  the  Gospel,  never  dies;  he  falls  asleep,  he  "  rests  from  his  labours." 
(P.  Huet.)  The  fading  and  the  abiding: — I.  All  flesh  is  grass."  The 
prophet  describes  man  by  this  name  of  "  flesh,"  as  that  which  strikingly  sets 
forth  his  general  state  and  ordinary  habits.  What  is  man?  Is  not  the  care 
of  the  flesh  his  grand  concern? — the  pampering  the  body,  the  gratifying  its 
senses,  or  fulfilb'ng  the  lusts  thereof?  Here  and  there,  indeed,  we  meet  with 
one  who  has  broken  its  trammels;  whose  soul,  rising  up  on  the  wings  of 
faith  and  love,  seeks  for  happiness  in  God;  but  when  we  look  at  the  world 
at  large,  we  are  compelled  to  say  that  it  is  a  world  whose  aims,  pleasures, 
pursuits,  are  earthly.  Yet  how  vain  are  these  pursuits !  "  All  flesh  is  grass  " ; 
that  is,  like  the  grass  it  is  liable  to  various  casualties.  If  it  abides  to  its 
utmost  duration  it  soon  withers  and  is  gone.  The  blade  when  it  has  only 
just  sprung  above  the  ground  may  be  trodden  imder  foot,  may  be  parched 
by  the  heat,  cut  off  by  the  cold,  or  withered  by  the  blight;  may  bie  plucked  by 
the  hand,  or  mowed  down  by  the  scjrthe;  thus  is  it  with  man.  No  sooner  does 
he  appear  in  the  world  than  some  little  casualty  may  at  once  deprive  him  of  life. 
This  is  the  state  of  all — '*  for  all  flesh  is  as  grass,  and  all  the  goodliness  thereof 
as  the  flower  of  the  field  " :  "  the  wind  passeth  over  it  and  it  is  gone,  and  the  place 
thereof  shall  know  it  no  more!  "  But  is  there  no  difference?  Surely  there  are 
some  distinctions.  Yes,  there  are,  and  as  Archbishop  Leighton  observes,  this 
difference  is  beautifully  expressed  by  the  inspired  writer — "  the  goodliness  thereof 
is  as  the  flower  of  the  field."  When  we  enter  a  field,  it  is  not  so  much  the  common 
blade  which  attracts  the  eye.  It  is  the  flower — those  various  beautiful  ornaments 
with  which  the  creative  power  of  God  has  adorned  the  face  of  the  earth.  So  there 
are  various  external  embellishments  which  distinguish  some  from  the  ordinary  race 
of  men.  Every  soul,  indeed,  is  of  inestimable  value.  Still,  it  must  be  confessed 
that  there  are  properties  which  some  possess  which  are  more  attractive — youth, 
beauty,  honours,  talent.  But  what  are  they  all?  But  the  flower  of  the  grass. 
They  partake  of  the  fading  nature  of  the  plants  from  which  they  spring.  11.  Thb 
WoKD  OF  GoD  is  as  abidino  AS  HiMSELF;  and  this  notwithstanding  all 
the  attempts  that  have  been  made,  by  wicked  men  instigated  by  evil  spirits,  to 
destroy  it.  This  has  been  their  constant  aim,  for  the  Word  of  God  has  been  their 
constant  dread.  1 .  It  abides  in  its  doctrines.  These  are  not  evanescent  theories, 
like  some  of  the  dicta  of  the  philosophers;  they  are  eternal  truths.  2.  Its  promises 
endure.  Its  sanctions  also  stand  for  ever ;  namely,  the  rewards  and  punishments 
which  are  there  made  known.  Let  those  who  are  now  surrounded  with  many 
temporal  blessings  regard  them  as  flowers,  which  the  goodness  of  God  provides 
to  sweeten  their  present  path;  still  set  not  yom:  hearts  upon  them;  they  are  but 
short-lived  gifts,  fading  flowers.  There  is  but  one  flower  that  will  never  fade, 
"  The  Rose  of  Sharon."  (J.  H.  Stewart,  M.A.)  The  loithering  work  of  the 
Spirit  (with  1  Pet.  L  23-25): — Something  more  than  the  decay  of  our  material 
flesh  is  intended  here;  the  carnal  mind,  the  flesh  in  another  sense,  was  intended 
by  the  Holy  Ghost  when  He  bade  His  messenger  proclaim  those  words.  It  does 
not  seem  to  me  that  a  mere  expression  of  the  mortality  of  our  race  was  needed  in 


180  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xl. 

this  place  by  the  context;  it  would  hardly  keep  pace  with  the  sublime  revelations 
which  surround  it,  and  would  in  some  measiu-e  be  a  digression  from  the  subject 
in  hand.  The  notion  that  we  are  here  simply  and  alone  reminded  of  our  mortality 
does  not  square  with  the  New  Testament  exposition  of  it  in  Peter.  Look  at  the 
chapter  in  Isaiah  with  care.  What  is  the  subject  of  it?  It  is  the  Divine  consola- 
tion of  Zion.  The  Lord,  to  remove  her  sorrow,  bids  His  prophets  announce  the 
coming  of  the  long-expected  Deliverer,  the  end  and  accompUshment  of  all  her 
warfare,  and  the  pardon  of  all  her  iniquity.  Further,  there  is  no  sort  of  question 
that  the  prophet  goes  on  to  foretell  the  coming  of  John  the  Baptist  as  the  harbinger 
of  the  Messiah.  The  object  of  the  coming  of  the  Baptist,  and  the  mission  of  the 
Messiah  whom  he  heralded,  was  the  manifestation  of  Divine  glory  (ver.  5).  Well, 
what  next?  Was  it  needful  to  mention  man's  mortality  in  this  connection? 
We  think  not.  But  there  is  much  more  appropriateness  in  the  succeeding  verses, 
if  we  see  their  deeper  meaning.  Do  they  not  mean  this  ?  In  order  to  make  room 
for  the  display  of  the  Divine  glory  in  Christ  Jesus  and  His  children  there  would 
come  a  withering  of  all  the  glory  wherein  man  boasts  himself ;  the  flesh  should  be 
seen  in  its  true  nature  as  corrupt  and  dying,  and  the  grace  of  God  alone  should  be 
exalted.  This  would  be  seen  under  the  ministry  of  John  the  Baptist  first,  and 
should  be  the  preparatory  work  of  the  Holy  Ghost  in  men's  hearts,  in  all  time, 
in  order  that  the  glory  of  the  Lord  should  be  revealed  and  human  pride  be  for  ever 
confounded.  The  Spirit  blows  upon  the  flesh,  and  that  which  seemed  vigorous 
becomes  weak,  that  which  was  fair  to  look  upon  is  smitten  with  decay.  The 
withering  before  the  sowing  was  very  marvellously  fulfilled  in  the  preaching  of 
John  the  Baptist.  When  our  Lord  Himself  actually  appeared.  He  came  into  a 
withered  land  whose  glories  had  all  departed.  Biit  I  nm  coming  to  your  own 
personal  histories.  In  every  one  of  us  it  must  be  fulfilled  that  all  that  is  of  the  flesh 
'  in  us,  seeing  it  is  but  as  grass,  must  be  withered,  and  the  comehness  thereof  must 
be  destroyed.  I.  Turning,  then,  to  the  work  of  the  Spirit  in  causing  thb 
QOODLINESS  OP  THB  FLESH  TO  FADE,  let  US — 1.  Observe  that  the  work  of  the  Holy 
Spirit  upon  the  soul  of  man  in  withering  up  that  which  is  of  the  flesh  is  very 
unexpected.  In  our  text  even  the  speaker  himself,  though  doubtless  one  taught 
of  God,  when  he  was  bidden  to  cry,  said,  "  What  shall  I  cry?  "  Even  he  did  not 
know  that  in  order  to  the  comforting  of  God's  people  there  must  first  be  experi- 
enced a  preliminary  visitation.  Many  preachers  of  God's  Gospel  have  forgotten 
that  the  law  is  the  schoolmaster  to  bring  men  to  Christ.  They  have  sown  on  the 
unbroken  fallow  ground,  and  forgotten  that  the  plough  must  break  the  clods. 
Preachers  have  laboured  to  make  Christ  precious  to  those  who  think  themselves 
rich  and  increased  in  goods;  and  it  has  been  labour  in  vain.  It  is  our  duty  to 
preach  Jesus  Christ  even  to  self-righteous  sinners,  but  it  is  certain  that  Jesus  Christ 
will  never  be  accepted  by  them  while  they  hold  themselves  in  high  esteem. 
Wherever  there  is  a  real  work  of  grace  in  any  soul,  it  begins  with  a  pulling  down  : 
the  Holy  Ghost  does  not  build  on  the  old  foundation.  The  convincing  work  of  the 
Spirit,  wherever  it  comes,  is  unexpected,  and  even  to  the  child  of  God,  in  whom 
this  process  has  still  to  go  on,  it  is  often  startling.  We  begin  again  to  build  that 
which  the  Spirit  of  God  has  destroyed.  Having  begun  in  the  Spirit,  we  act  as  if  we 
would  be  made  perfect  in  the  flesh;  and  then,  when  our  mistaken  upbuilding  has 
to  be  levelled  with  the  earth,  we  are  almost  as  astonished  as  we  were  when  first 
the  scales  fell  from  our  eyes.  2.  rm-thermore,  this  withering  is  after  the  usual 
order  of  the  Divine  operation.  Observe,  the  method  of  creation.  There  seems 
to  be  every  probability  that  this  world  has  been  fitted  up  and  destroyed,  refitted 
and  then  destroyed  again,  many  times  before  the  last  arranging  of  it  for  the  habita- 
tion of  men.  What  was  there  in  the  beginning?  Originally,  nothing.  There  was 
no  trace  of  another's  plan  to  interfere  with  the  great  Architect.  The  earth  was, 
as  the  Hebrew  puts  it,  Tohu  and  Bohu,  disorder  and  confusion — in  a  word,  chaos. 
So  it  is  in  the  new  creation.  When  the  Lord  new  creates  us.  He  borrows  nothing 
from  the  old  man,  but  makes  all  things  new.  Take  another  instance  from  the 
ways  of  God.  When  man  has  fallen,  when  did  the  Lord  bring  him  the  Gospel? 
The  first  whisper  of  the  Gospel  was,  "  I  will  put  enmity  between  thee  and  the 
woman,  between  thy  seed  and  her  seed.  He  shall  bruise  thy  head."  That  whisper 
came  to  man  shivering  in  the  presence  of  his  Maker,  having  nothing  more  to  say 
by  way  of  excuse;  but  standing  guilty  before  the  Lord.  If  you  will  pursue  the 
meditation  upon  the  acts  of  God  with  men,  you  will  constantly  see  the  same  thing. 
God  has  given  us  a  wonderful  type  of  salvation  in  Noah's  ark;  but  Noah  was  saved 
in  that  ark  in  connection  with  death;  he  himself,  as  it  were,  immured  alive  in  a 


CHAP.  XL.]  ISAIAH.  181 

tomb,  and  all  the  world  besides  left  to  destruction.  All  other  hope  for  Noah  was 
gone,  and  then  the  ark  rose  upon  the  waters.  Remember  the  redemption  of  the 
chndren  of  Israel  out  of  Egypt:  it  occurred  when  they  were  in  the  saddest  plight, 
and  their  cry  went  up  to  heaven  by  reason  of  their  bondage.  As  in  the  backwoods 
of  America  before  there  can  be  tillage,  the  planting  of  cities,  the  arts  of  civilisation, 
and  the  transactions  of  commerce,  the  woodman's  axe  must  hack  and  hew:  the 
stately  trees  of  centuries  must  fall:  the  roots  must  be  burned,  the  old  reign  of 
nature  disturbed, — even  thus  the  Lord  takes  away  the  first,  that  He  may  establish 
the  second.  As  it  has  been  outwardly,  we  ought  to  expect  that  it  would  be  within 
us,  3.  We  are  taught  in  our  text  how  universal  this  process  is  in  its  range  over 
the  hearts  of  all  those  upon  whom  the  Spirit  works.  The  withering  is  a  withering 
of  what?  Of  part  of  the  flesh  and  some  portion  of  its  tendencies?  Nay,  "  All 
flesh  is  grass;  and  all  the  goodliness  thereof  " — the  very  choice  and  pick  of  it — 
*'  is  as  the  flower  of  the  field,"  and  what  happens  to  the  grass  ?  Does  any  of  it  live  ? 
"  The  grass  withereth,"  all  of  it.  The  fiower,  will  not  that  abide  ?  So  fair  a  thing, 
has  not  that  an  immortality?  No,  it  utterly  falls  away.  So,  wherever  the  Spirit 
of  God  breathes  on  the  soul  of  man,  there  is  a  withering  of  everything  that  is  of  the 
flesh,  and  it  is  seen  that  to  be  carnally  minded  is  death.  Wherever  the  Spirit  of 
God  comes,  our  righteousness  withers  as  our  sinfulness.  There  is  much  more  to 
be  destroyed,  and,  among  the  rest,  away  must  go  our  boasted  power  of  resolution. 
StiU  the  man  will  say,  "  I  believe  I  have,  after  all,  within  myself  an  enlightened 
conscience  and  an  intelligence  that  will  guide  me  aright.  The  light  of  nature  I 
will  use,  and  I  do  not  doubt  that  if  I  wander  somewhat  I  shall  find  my  way  back 
again."  Ah,  man!  thy  wisdom,  which  is  the  very  flower  of  thy  nature,  what  is  it 
but  folly,  though  thou  knowest  it  not  ?  When  the  withering  wind  of  the  Spirit 
moves  over  the  carnal  mind,  it  reveals  the  death  of  the  flesh  in  all  respects,  especially 
in  the  matter  of  power  towards  that  which  is  good.  We  then  learn  that  word  of 
oiir  Lord,  "  Without  Me  ye  can  do  nothing."  4.  Notice  the  completeness  of  this 
withering  work  within  us.  The  grass,  what  does  it  do?  Droop?  nay,  wither. 
The  flower  of  the  field :  does  it  hang  its  head  a  little?  No,  according  to  Isaiah, 
it  fades;  and  according  to  Peter,  it  falleth  away.  There  is  no  reviving  it  with 
showers,  it  has  come  to  its  end.  Even  thus  are  the  awakened  led  to  see  that  in 
their  flesh  there  dwelleth  no  good  thing.  What  dying  and  withering  work  some 
of  God's  servants  have  had  in  their  souls !  Look  at  John  Bunyan,  as  he  describes 
himself  in  his  Grace  Abounding!  For  how  many  months  and  even  years  was 
the  Spirit  engaged  in  writing  death  upon  all  that  was  the  old  Bunyan,  in  order  that 
he  might  become  by  grace  a  new  man  fitted  to  track  the  pilgrims  along  their 
heavenly  way.  The  old  nature  never  does  improve.  5.  All  this  withering  work 
in  the  soul  is  painful.  As  you  read  these  verses,  do  they  not  strike  you  as  having  a 
very  funereal  tone?  "  All  fiesh  is  grass,  and  aU  the  goodliness  thereof  is  as  the 
flower  of  the  field:  the  grass  withereth,  the  flower  fadeth."  This  is  mournful 
work,  but  it  must  be  done.  Those  who  experience  much  of  it  when  they  first  come 
to  Christ  have  great  reason  to  be  thankful.  Persons  who  come  to  Christ  with  but 
comparatively  little  knowledge  of  their  own  depravity,  have  to  learn  it  afterwards, 
and  they  remain  for  a  long  time  babes  in  Christ,  and  are  perplexed  with  matters 
that  would  not  have  troubled  them  if  they  had  experienced  a  deeper  work  at  first. 
6.  Although  this  is  painful,  it  is  inevitable.  Why  does  the  grass  wither?  Because 
it  is  a  withering  thing.  "  Its  root  is  ever  in  its  grave,  and  it  must  die."  How 
could  it  spring  out  of  the  earth,  and  be  immortal?  Every  supposed  good  thing 
that  grows  out  of  your  own  self,  is  hke  yourself,  mortal,  and  it  must  die.  The 
seeds  of  corruption  are  in  all  the  fruits  of  manhood's  tree ;  let  them  be  as  fair  to  look 
upon  as  Eden's  clusters,  they  must  decay.  7.  This  last  word  by  way  of  comfort 
to  any  that  are  passing  through  the  process  we  are  describing.  It  gives  me  great 
joy  when  I  hear  that  you  unconverted  ones  are  very  miserable,  for  the  miseries  which 
the  Holy  Spirit  works  are  always  the  prelude  to  happiness.  It  is  the  Spirit's 
work  to  wither.  "  Because  the  Spirit  of  the  Lord  bloweth  upon  it."  What  doth 
the  Lord  say?  "  I  kill."  But  what  next?  "  I  make  alive."  He  never  makes 
any  aUve  but  those  He  kills.  II.  The  implantation.  According  to  Peter, 
although  the  flesh  withers,  and  the  flower  thereof  falls  away,  yet  in  the  children 
of  God  there  is  an  un withering  something  of  another  kind.  "  Being  born  again, 
not  of  corruptible  seed,  but  of  incorruptible,  by  the  Word  of  God,  which  liveth  and 
abideth  for  ever."  "  The  Word  of  the  Lord  endureth  for  ever.  And  this  is  the 
word  which  by  the  Gospel  is  preached  unto  you."  The  Gospel  is  of  use  to  us 
because  it  is  not  of  human  origin.     If  it  were  of  the  flesh,  all  it  could  do  for  us 


182  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  xl. 

would  not  land  us  beyond  the  flesh;  but  the  Gospel  of  Jesus  Christ  is  superhuman. 
Divine,  and  spiritual.  If  you  believe  a  Gospel  which  you  have  thougnt  out  for 
yourself,  or  a  philosophical  Gospel  which  comes  from  the  brain  of  man,  it  is  of  the 
flesh,  and  wiU  wither,  and  you  wiU  die,  and  be  lost  through  trusting  in  it.  The  only 
word  that  can  bless  you  and  be  a  seed  in  yoiir  soul  must  be  the  living  and  in- 
corruptible Word  of  the  eternal  Spirit.  Do  you  receive  it?  Then  the  Holy  Spirit 
implants  it  in  your  soul.  And  what  is  the  result  of  it?  There  comes  a  new  life 
as  the  result  of  the  indwelling  of  the  living  Word,  and  our  being  born  again  by  it. 
A  new  hfe  it  is ;  not  the  old  nature  putting  out  its  better  parts ;  not  the  old  Adam 
refining  and  purifying  itself,  and  rising  to  something  better.  Wherever  this  new 
life  comes  through  the  Word,  it  is  incorruptible,  it  lives  for  ever.  (C.  H.  Spurgeon.) 
The  transitory  and  the  durable : — I.  The  transitory  nattjrb  of  all  earthly 
THiNQS.  Consider  some  of  those  things  which  constitute  the  goodliness  and  the 
glory  of  man,  and  see  how  they  justify  the  assertion  in  the  text.  1.  Personal 
endowments  of  beauty  and  of  form.  We  make  our  boast  of  beauty:  of  the  spark- 
ling eye,  of  comely  features.  Small  is  our  cause  for  boast!  That  body  which 
seemed  to  concentrate  in  it  all  that  was  beautiful,  see  it  when  wasted  by  accidents 
and  by  time,  when  blasted  by  the  touch  of  death !  2.  The  text  may  be  illustrated  by 
adverting  to  the  wisdom,  as  well  as  to  the  beauty  and  strength  of  man.  Since  the 
attention  of  man  was  first  directed  to  the  objects  of  nature,  what  an  innumerable 
succession  has  there  been  of  notions,  of  systems,  of  theories.  And  yet  we  look  on 
these  ill-digested  systems  as  belonging  only  to  days  which  are  gone  by,  and  as  now 
utterly  exploded.  For  the  fact  is,  that  all  knowledge,  except  that  which  is  derived 
from  the  Bible,  is  destined  to  pass  away.  3.  Advert  to  the  transitory  nature  of 
those  things  which  are  the  produce  of  the  imagination  and  taste.  Whatever  the 
pencil  of  the  painter  has  portrayed ;  whatever  the  chisel  of  the  sculptor  has  wrought; 
whatever  the  skill  of  the  architect  has  reared, — all  these  are  destined  shortly  to  be 
destroyed.  This  should  convey  a  very  forcible  reproof  to  those  who  expend  so 
large  a  portion  of  their  time  in  the  embellishments  of  life,  in  dress,  and  in  fimoitiure, 
and  in  equipages.  4.  In  reference  to  the  possessions  of  men, — wealth  and  fortune, 
and  their  concomitants — grandeur,  eminence,  pomp,  and  luxury.  5.  As  strikingly 
is  this  illustrated  by  the  emptiness  of  that  shapeless  thing, — that  shadow  of  a 
shade  called  fame.  6.  See  it  illustrated,  also,  as  to  dominion  and  power. 
Kingdoms  and  empires  rise  and  fall — flourish  and  decay.  7.  The  world  itself  is  an 
illustration  of  the  sentiment.  II.  The  DUEABrLiTY  of  that  dispensation  with 
WHICH  God  has  been  pleased  to  bless  the  world.  The  "  Word  of  our  God  shall 
stand  for  ever."  This  sentiment  is  greatly  illustrated,  and  abundantly  confirmed, 
by — 1.  The  utter  impotence  of  persecution.  2.  The  utter  failure  of  the  opposition 
of  infidelity.  3.  The  blessed  and  delightful  spread  given  to  it  in  our  day.  4.  The 
dispensation  of  truth  with  which  God  has  blessed  the  world  is  the  dispensation  of 
the  Spirit.  The  Word  of  our  God  is  a  living  word;  it  is  not  only  a  dispensation 
of  words,  addressed  to  the  understanding  and  wiU,  but  a  dispensation  of  the  Spirit 
coming  to  the  heart  of  man.  (</.  Bromley.)  Israel's  oppressors ;  JehovaKa 
promise  : — The  words  are  of  imiversal  import;  but  the  connection  shows  the  sense 
in  which  they  are  here  used  by  the  prophet.  Israel's  oppressors  are  mortal:  the 
promise  of  Jehovah — such  a  promise,  namely,  as  that  contained  in  vers.  4,  5 — 
remains  sure.  (Prof.  8.  R.  Driver,  D.D.)  The  abiding  Word: — I.  The  WE4K 
AND  perishable  NATURE  OF  THINGS  OF  B.iRTH.  The  word  translated  "  goodliness  " 
signifies  excellency.  Every  sort  of  excellency.  Is  it  external?  Beauty  of  person, 
strength  of  frame,  the  influence  which  rank,  title,  wealth,  power,  family  bestow? 
It  is  but  as  grass,  the  withering  flower.  Is  it  internal?  The  highest  order  of 
intellect,  the  finest  imagination,  the  soundest  judgment,  most  retentive  memory? 
But  the  word  is  wider  still.  It  takes  in  all  moral  excellency,  truth,  justice,  bene- 
volence, morality,  and  all  the  external  decencies  of  that  sort  of  religion  which 
often  is  taken  for  the  true  religion  of  the  heart,  yet  is  not  such.  It  embraces  that 
in  which  we  are  so  prone  to  confide,  human  power,  our  own  wisdom ;  all  are  as  grass, 
as  separated  from  the  Word  of  God,  and  the  regenerating  power  of  the  Holy  Spirit. 
The  wind  of  deep  inward  temptation,  of  sore  trial,  does  but  pass  over  it,  and  it  is 
gone.  If  man  deal  with  us,  we  find  it  sometimes  a  very  solemn  thing,  how  much 
more  when  God  deals  with  us.  When  He  comes  in  the  convincing  power  of  BAs 
Spirit,  in  the  solemn  hour  of  death,  and  in  the  thoughts  of  immediate  appearance 
before  Him,  ah!  how  wither  then  the  flowers  that  have  seemed  the  fairest.  But 
in  the  midst  of  all  that  fades  and  perishes  and  is  not,  there  is,  blessed  be  God, 
that  which  standeth  for  ever.     EL  The  abidinq  character  op  "  thb  Word  oi 


CHAP.  XL.]  ISAIAH.  18S 

otTE  God."  This  is  true  in  whatever  sense  we  take  it.  Is  it  the  decree  of  Godf 
(Isa.  xlvi.  10.)  Is  it  His  written  and  revealing  Word?  (Isa.  Iv.  9,  10.)  Is  it  His 
law?  (Matt.  V.  18.)  But  by  "  the  Word  "  here,  is  especiaUy  and  pre-eminently 
meant  the  Gospel  (1  Pet.  i.  23-25).  The  Gospel  stands  upon  the  immutable 
perfections  of  God.  There  is  not  an  attribute  that  does  not  uphold  it.  "  The 
Word  of  our  God  shall  stand  for  ever."  It  shall  stand  amidst  aJl  the  instabihty 
of  the  creature,  amidst  all  the  faithlessness  of  man,  amidst  all  the  unfaithfulness  and 
unbelief  of  our  own  hearts.  Is  the  grass  to  be  despised,  the  flower  to  be  scorned? 
Be  thankful  for  them  while  you  have  them,  admire  that  God  who  is  in  them, 
their  chief  Beauty,  their  only  real  Beauty.  Be  thankful,  seek  the  right  use  of 
them  by  seeking  to  glorify  God  in  them.  Is  it  strength  of  body?  strength  of 
intellect?  Use  them  for  Him,  and  in  Has  service.  But  remember,  they  fade  as 
you  behold,  and  wither  as  you  use  them.  Hold  them  as  perishable  memorials 
of  the  imperishable  God.  How  real  are  the  blessings  of  the  Gospel  when  realised 
in  the  soul!  The  righteousness  of  Christ.  It  stands,  it  is  everlasting  (Dan.  ix.  24). 
Consolation  is  everlasting  (2  Thess.  ii.  16).  Light,  everlasting  (Isa.  Ix.  19).  Love, 
everlasting  (Jer.  xxxi.  3).  Life,  eternal  (Rom.  vi.  23).  The  blessings  in  the 
Gospel  are  durable  riches,  because  the  Gospel  endureth.  Why  is  it  that  there  is  so 
much  instability  among  many  that  yet  are  true  believers?  Thej  are  not  rooted 
and  grounded  in  Christ.     {J.  H.  Evans,  M.A.) 

Ver.  8.  The  grass  withereth.  —  The  decay  of  the  material : — ^^ewed  in  its 
immediate  relations  to  the  context,  the  "  flesh,"  which  is  grass,  is  the  vast  popu- 
lation of  the  Babylonian  empire.  The  "  goodliness  thereof,"  which  is  the  flower 
of  the  grass,  is  the  pomp  and  pride  of  the  Babylonian  civilisation.  The  "  Word 
of  the  Lord  "  is  that  prophetic  word  of  the  future  glory  of  Israel  and  her  Messiah- 
King  which  seems  to  have  found  a  grave  of  oblivion  beneath  the  overshadowing 
growth  of  Babylonian  splendour.  I.  The  necessary  decadekce  of  all  that 
IS  SLMPLY  MATERIAL  AND  EARTHLY.  1.  The  world  had  never  looked  upon  a  more 
splendid  civilisation  than  that  which  greeted  the  eye  of  the  prophet  as  he  looked^^ 
down  in  vision  upon  the  great  empire  of  Nebuchadnezzar.  For  a  thousand  years  ^ 
Babylon  had  been  the  seat  of  empire,  but  under  her  present  sovereign  she  had  \ 
risen  to  a  glory  of  which  her  founders  had  never  dreamed.  Nebuchadnezzar, 
following  in  the  footsteps  of  Nabopolassar,  his  illustrious  father,  had  extended 
his  empire  by  conquest  until  he  was  in  fact  as  well  as  in  name,  "  Eang  of  men." 
Northward,  he  held  all  Assyria  in  subjection,  and  reigned  to  the  limits  of  the 
frozen  zone.  Southward,  he  had  subjugated  Egypt  with  its  vast  empire,  and 
reigned  to  the  limits  of  the  equatorial  belt.  Tyre,  with  all  her  world-wide  com- 
merce, was  his  vassal,  and  so  his  fame  had  been  carried  to  the  remotest  borders 
of  the  great  west.  This  vast  empire  it  was  now  the  ambition  of  Nebuchadnezzar 
to  consolidate  and  unify.  For  this  purpose  he  had  opened  long  lines  of  com- 
munication between  its  remotest  parts.  Canals,  one  of  which  was  five  hundred 
miles  in  length;  highways  across  the  great  deserts  connecting  with  the  lulls  of 
Arabia  and  the  Mediterranean  Sea,  with  caravansaries,  fortified  garrisons,  wells 
of  water,  &c.,  at  all  needed  points;  walled  cities  along  the  great  thoroughfares 
as  storehouses  and  resting-places  for  man  and  beast — these  were  amongst  the 
wise  provisions  for  bringing  the  people  of  various  nationahties  and  races  into 
the  cordial  relations  of  mutual  interchange  and  commerce.  But  the  purposes 
of  the  great  conqueror  went  further  than  this.  To  give  stability  to  his  empire 
he  sought  to  bring  about  an  amalgamation  of  all  the  races  and  a  unification  of 
all  the  religions  within  his  realm.  This  was  the  significance  of  the  image  of  gold 
which  was  set  up  in  the  plain  of  Dura,  and  which  all  were  required  to  worship 
on  penalty  of  being  thrown  iiito  the  furnace  of  fire.  And  when,  in  obedience 
to  the  Divine  voice,  the  prophet  declared  all  this  might  and  glory  to  be  but  as  the 
evanescent  and  fading  flower,  you  and  I,  if  we  had  been  present,  would  have 
looked  upon  him  as  some  misanthropic  churl.  And  yet,  what  were  the  real  facts 
in  the  case?  Within  less  than  forty  years  from  the  time  to  which  the  prophet 
alludes,  the  city  was  captured  and  pillaged,  the  seat  of  government  removed, 
and  the  empire  distributed  among  the  conquering  allies.  2.  We  find  oiurselves 
to-day  in  the  midst  of  a  civilisation  as  much  more  splendid  than  that  of  Rome 
as  the  latter  was  superior  to  that  of  Chaldea.  In  all  that  constitutes  true  greatness ; 
in  all  that  is  at  once  beneficent  and  beautiful;  in  hberty,  in  philanthropy,  in  literary 
and  aesthetic  culture,  in  adventure  of  science  and  perfection  of  art,  there  seems 
scarcely  anything  more  to  be  desired.     Humanity  seems  at  last  to  have  attained 


184  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  xl. 

its  goal.  Culture  is  in  its  richest  and  most  perfect  flower.  We  are  ready  to  say, 
"  Surely  this  consummate  civilisation  of  our  race  shall  not  wither  like  that  of 
Babylon  or  Rome !  "  Has  it  any  elements  of  durability  that  its  forerunners 
had  not?  The  answer  to  these  questions  will  be  found  in  the  answer  to  another, 
namely,  whether  this  civilisation  shall  root  itself  simply  in  that  which  is  material, 
or  shall  be  permeated  by  that  which  is  spiritual  and  Divine?  For  amidst  all 
the  decadence  of  the  past,  there  has  been  ever  that  which  could  not  perish,  which 
was  not  subject  to  change,  and  which  had  the  power  of  communicating  its  own 
stability  to  aU  that  came  under  its  influence.  II.  The  stability  of  that  which 
IS  spiritual  and  Divine.  "The  Word  of  the  Lord."  Other  things  undergo 
mutations,  but  it  abides  ever  the  same.  It  has  also  this  marvellous  property, 
that  it  communicates  the  elements  of  its  own  permanence  to  all  that  comes  under 
its  influence.  It  is  thus  like  a  seed  cast  into  the  soil,  wliich  takes  up  inert  matter, 
incorporating  it  with  itself,  and  thus  imparting  to  it  the  life  which  is  immanent 
in  itself.  Of  this  life-containing,  life-imparting  power  of  the  Word  of  God  we 
may  find  beautiful  illustration  in  the  history  of  the  decline  and  fall  of  the 
empires  to  which  we  have  referred.  Look  first  at  Babylon.  Is  there  anything 
that  shall  survive  the  wreck  of  the  imperial  city  ?  Yes,  there  is  a  captive  people, 
despised,  toiling  as  slaves  in  the  erection  of  the  splendid  architectural  monuments 
of  Nebuchadnezzar's  reign.  Few  and  feeble  apparently  they  are,  overshadowed 
by  the  countless  hosts  of  Chaldea.  But  they  are  believers  in  the  Word  of  the 
Lord.  That  Word  has,  as  an  incorruptible  seed,  found  a  lodgment  in  their  hearts. 
It  has  imparted  to  them  its  own  immortality.     Babylon,  that  rejects  this  Word, 

C shall  perish;  but  Israel  that  believes  it  and  lives  upon  it  shall  survive.  That 
which  we  have  seen  to  be  true  in  this  respect  of  Babylon  was  equally  true  of 
Rome.  The  eternal  city  was  "  laid  on  heaps,"  but  from  the  ruins  came  Christianity 
in  all  the  beauty  of  undying  youth.  The  Vandals  that  destroyed  everything 
else  had  no  power  over  it.  Nay,  in  the  breasts  of  the  very  slaves  whom  they 
bore  to  their  northern  homes,  they  carried  this  incorruptible  seed.  The  religion 
of  the  slave  conquered  the  master;  and  hence  came  that  hardy  type  of  Celtic  and 
Saxon  Christianity  which  made  the  north  of  Evuope  the  seed-bed  of  the  Reforma- 
tion. There  are  preserving  salts  which,  taken  up  into  the  pores  of  the  frailest 
grass  and  the  most  delicate  flower,  do,  as  it  were,  transfigure  them  in  their  beauty 
and  so  preserve  them  for  ever  from  decay.  And  thus  the  religion  of  Christ  has 
power  to  give  immortality  to  that  which  is  most  fleeting  and  evanescent.  It 
lays  its  wand  upon  that  frail  flower  of  physical  beauty  which  lasts  but  for  a  day, 
and  it  transforms  it  into  the  undecaying  beauty  of  the  resurrection.  It  enters 
into  the  pulses  of  youthful  ardour  and  enthusiasm,  and  makes  them  beat  high 
and  warm  in  pursuits  that  can  never  be  interrupted  and  from  motives  that  never 
pall.  It  lifts  ambition  to  a  higher  plane.  It  gives  to  all  the  activities  of  the 
soul  their  normal  and  healthful  development.  It  brings  the  favour  of  God  which 
is  life,  and  His  loving-kindness  which  is  better  than  life.  And  what  it  does  for 
individuals  it  does  in  a  certain  sense  for  nations  also.  Let  the  atheistic  materialism, 
which  is  seeking  to  supplant  Christianity,  become  the  dominant  influence  in  this 
country,  and  Ichabod  is  written  upon  all  our  institutions.  The  fate  of  Babylon 
and  of  Rome  will  be  ours.  The  nation  and  kingdom  that  will  not  serve  God 
shall  perish.  (T.  D.  Witherspoon,  D.D.)  The  flower  fadeth. — Progress  in 
decay : — There  are  at  least  two  sides  to  everything.  To  everything  in  morals 
there  is  a  dark  and  a  bright  side.  Every  truth  is  a  revelation  of  God — a  Theophany 
— a  Shechinah.  And  as  the  Divine  pillar  in  the  Exodus  had  sometimes  an  aspect 
of  cloud,  and  sometimes  of  fire,  so  is  it  with  all  truth.  Its  appearance  alters 
with  our  own  changes  of  character  or  condition  ;  to  the  eye  of  sense  it  may  be  a 
Shechinah  of  gloom,  to  the  eye  of  faith  a  Shechinah  of  glory.  Thus  is  it  with 
our  text.  I.  Let  its  contemplate  it  first  by  the  eye  of  sense.  Let  us  sit 
solemnly  together  in  the  shadow  of  the  Shechinah.  How  depressing  seems  the 
thought!  What  a  tender  and  fragile  growth  is  "  the  grass  "!  How  short-lived 
all  the  goodliness  of  "  the  flower  of  the  field  " !  Yet  such  is  human  life !  1.  "  The 
flower  fadeth!  "  How  impressive  the  truth  when  we  think  of  others — the  beloved 
of  home  and  life !  Where  are  the  happy  children  who  sat  with  you  in  the  school, 
and  went  forth  in  your  holiday? — the  men  and  women  who  shared  with  you 
life's  heavier  tasks  and  strangely  saddened  joys?  How  many  of  them  do  you 
meet  to-day?  2.  "  The  flower  fadeth!  "  How  impressive  the  truth  when  you 
t  hink  of  yourselves !  Where  now  is  the  bounding  heart  of  your  childhood  ?  Where 
the  unclouded  hopefulness  of  youth?    As  the  tide  of  time  rolls  on,  first,  youthful 


CHAP.  XL.]  ISAIAH.  185 

beauty  fades  like  a  flower.  Then  activity  declines:  the  airy  step  of  childhood 
flags  into  the  slow  measures  of  weary  feet!  Then  strength  decays:  the  right  arm 
loses  its  cunning,  the  form  bends  under  its  load!  Meanwhile,  even  the  moral  man 
seems  to  share  the  infirmities  of  the  physical;  the  tender  affections  are  chilled,  the 
glorious  intellect  unhinged  or  exhausted.  And  it  is  all  saddening — this  withering 
of  the  human  blossom,  and  the  heart  recoils  from  its  emblem — a,  fading  flower! 
Let  us  so  live  that  it  may  be  said  of  us  truly,  "  His  glorious  beauty  was  a  fading 
flower."  For  the  fading  flower  hath  fulfilled  well  its  ministry !  Was  its  life  long 
or  short;  was  its  beauty  great  or  little;  was  its  sphere  wide  or  narrow;  the  flower 
had  done  well  the  special  work  God  gave  it  to  do.  Richly  varied  and  full  of 
splendour  was  the  flora  of  the  now  barren  Palestine  in  the  days  when  Isaiah 
swept  from  his  harp  this  requiem  to  the  withering  flower!  In  nothing, 
perhaps,  are  there  more  notable  differences  than  in  the  spheres  and 
services  of  flowers.  In  the  wild  howling  desert  the  stately  palm  waves  its 
radiant  flower-tuft,  and  many  a  lowly  plant  and  shrub  open  fragrant  blossoms. 
And  amid  Polar  ice-fields  and  in  the  fissured  lava  of  volcanoes  come  forth 
these  sweet  children  of  the  summer  in  their  ministry  of  beauty  and  of  love. 
Meanwhile,  earth's  fairer  fields  are  beautified,  like  old  Eden,  with  their  blessed 
omnipresence.  They  are  all  of  different  classes  and  uses  ;  but  each,  in  its  own 
season  and  sphere,  makes  its  little  life  a  blessing — and  the  air  of  heaven  is  sweeter, 
and  insect-life  is  fed,  and  the  heart  of  childhood  is  thrilled  with  joy,  and  the  soul 
of  wearied  manhood  is  made  happier  and  holier,  because  of  the  sUent  yet  earnest 
ministries  of  the  fading  flower!  II.  To  the  eye  of  faith  the  Shechinah  is 
GLORIOUS.  Indeed,  did  these  tides  of  time  roll  over  a  sinless  world,  every  pre- 
monition even  of  our  mortal  decay  would  awaken  only  joyful  anticipations  and 
emotions.  For  what,  after  all,  is  a  flower?  Is  it  in  itself  a  perfection — a  consum- 
mation? No!  far  from  it!  It  is,  at  most,  a  phenomenon  of  progress!  And  its 
decay  is  only  the  passing  away  of  a  good  thing,  giving  place  to  a  better !  The 
great  end  and  purpose  of  all  vegetable  Kfe  is  the  perfected  seed !  And  analogous 
to  this  is  the  progress  and  development  of  man's  mortal  life.  Its  earthly  offices 
and  uses  are  only  for  the  strengthening  within  of  the  spiritual  and  immortal;  oiu* 
present  life,  with  all  its  activities  and  enjoyments,  is  but  the  flower-form  of  a  being 
whose  fruit- form  or  seed- form  is  in  an  after  and  higher  life!  And  death  itself  is 
no  more  than  the  falling  of  the  petals  from  the  well-set  fruit.  Therefore,  as  the 
wise  husbandman  grieves  not  when  his  orchards  shower  their  gay  blossoms,  but 
rejoices,  rather,  because  this  is  but  a  prophecy  and  promise  of  the  golden  wealth  of 
autumn,  so  we  should  not  grieve  when,  in  the  development  of  man,  the  mortal 
flower -leaves  fall  away  from  the  swelling  fruit  of  immortality!  1.  It  applies  to 
individuals.  Fruit  is  always  of  greater  value  than  flowers.  Therefore,  the 
trained  intellect,  the  calm  judgment,  the  sanctified  affections,  the  subdued 
passions,  the  strong,  regnant  conscience  of  the  mature  man,  are  worth  incalcul- 
ably more  than  the  fiery  impulses,  the  hot  and  headlong  passions,  and  all  the 
prodigal  bloom  and  aroma  of  his  younger  and  fairer  life.  It  appUes  as  well  to 
communities  or  nations — to  that  organic  life  of  the  race  which  constitutes  its  one- 
ness. Here,  too,  the  fruit  is  worth  more  than  the  flowers.  2.  The  world  has  had 
its  radiant  spring-time  and  its  gorgeous  flora.  In  Rome,  Greece,  Persia,  Egypt, 
Assyria,  Judaea,  human  nature  put  forth  splendid  blossoms  until  the  whole  air 
was  fragrant  with  intoxicating  aroma.  The  old  philosophy,  the  old  mythology, 
the  old  arts  and  eloquence  and  poetry — the  whole  power  and  passion  of  the  young 
imperial  genius  of  old  time  gave  to  earth  the  seeming  of  a  fairy  palace  fiUed  with 
shapes  and  sounds  of  surpassing  splendour.  And  verily  that  weird  glory  hath 
passed  away!  But  have  we  lost  by  the  decay?  Are  earth  and  life  sadder  than  in 
those  heroic  times?  Would  you  exchange  your  printing-press  for  aU  the  pencils 
of  old  artists,  and  the  tongues  of  old  orators,  and  the  harps  of  old  minstrels? 
Would  you  barter  railroad  and  telegraph  and  steamship  for  all  the  radiant  dreams' 
of  the  old  ideahsts?  Would  you  give  up  your  simple  Chi-istian  faith  for  the  old 
gorgeous  mythology?  3.  We  are  considering  the  whole  of  earthly  life  as  the 
flower-form,  rudimental  to  the  heavenly  fruit-form;  and  the  analogy  between 
flower-life  and  man-life  is  manifold.  ( 1 )  Flowers  differ  widely  in  their  beauty  and 
glory.  Among  species  ranking  as  equals,  how  the  lily  differs  from  the  rose;  and 
both  from  the  violet !  And  so  is  it  of  humanity.  It  has  its  roses,  and  lilies,  and 
violets;  and  now  and  then  a  magnificent  or  monstrous  aloe,  and  always  ita 
countless  myriads  of  flowers  of  the  grass.  And  although  to  the  eye  of  sense  the 
value  of  flowers  is  according  to  their  outward  manifestations ;  yet,  true  wisdom 


186  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.xu 

regards  colour  and  aroma  as  only  phenomenal  of  progress.  Presently  the  petals, 
alike  of  the  grand  flower  and  the  tiny  blossom,  will  wither,  and  of  both  the  value 
seems  only  in  the  accomplishment  of  their  Maker's  purpose  with  the  fruit  or  the 
seed.  So  God  accounts  of  His  children.  The  king,  the  conqueror,  the  man  of 
imperial  gifts  and  genius  will  die  as  fades  the  great  aloe,  and  the  humble  pass  away 
as  the  flower  of  grass.  And  then  the  search,  as  material  for  the  Judgment,  will 
be  the  fruit  or  seed  of  the  developed  character.  (2)  Flowers  differ  widely  in  their 
seasons  and  spheres  of  influence.  Fair  children  die  like  snowdrops  in  the  early 
spring.  Then  come  the  summer  flora.  Men  in  the  meridian  splendour  of 
their  powers  passing  away,  as  vineyards  and  orchards  and  meadows  shower  their 
prodigal  blossoms.  Nor  is  the  human  winter  without  its  flowers  of  exquisite 
fragrance  and  beauty.  We  have  them  in  our  midst,  men  whose  grey  heads  are 
our  crowns  of  glory.  And  as  in  their  seasons,  so  in  their  spheres,  men,  like  flowers, 
differ.  At  the  foot  of  the  awful  arctic  glacier  did  our  heroic  Kane  find  blossoms 
of  delicate  beauty;  and  in  the  dreariest  waste  of  Sahara  the  eye  of  the  fainting 
explorer  grew  bright  as  it  fell  on  a  bursting  flower.  So  is  it  of  human  influence. 
In  the  loneliness  of  obscurity,  in  the  humiliation  of  poverty,  in  the  dark  chamber 
of  patient,  unpretending  suffering,  have  saintly  spirits  wrought  a  gracious  work. 
(3)  Meantime,  human  life  and  flower-life  are  alike,  mainly  because  both  are  phen- 
omenal of  progress.  Earthly  life  is  short,  and  we  would  not  have  it  longer.  The 
season  of  flowers  is  full  of  peril  to  the  tender  germ  of  fruit.  Having  perfected  the 
seed,  nature's  next  care  is  to  disperse  or  distribute  them.  Some  are  borne  away 
on  their  own  airy  wings,  and  as  they  float  up  in  the  sunshine,  freed  of  their  heavy 
earthy  beauty,  the  perfected  seed,  as  a  spiritualised  blossom,  seems  fairer  than  all 
flowers !  Some  are  borne  across  oceans,  and  take  root  in  other  continents.  Such 
is  the  progress  and  development  of  that  whose  young  life  was  bom  of  a  fading 
flower!  Oh,  to  a  prescient  eye  what  possibilities,  what  colours  of  beauty,  what 
forms  of  majesty,  what  felicities,  what  glorious  hopes,  what  ineffable  fruitions, 
are  embosomed  in  a  seed!  And  analogous  to  thus — but  immeasurably  more 
wonderful — are  the  embryonic  powers,  and  shall  be  the  development  of  the  human 
soul  in  the  after-state!  (C.  Wadsworth.)  Summer  blossoms: — We  expect  the 
leaves  to  fade  and  fall  in  October.  They  have  had  their  full  time  of  growth  and 
unfolding,  and  their  fair  share  of  the  beauty  and  blessedness  of  the  world.  But 
there  is  nothing  to  prepare  us  for  the  fading  of  the  blossoms  of  early  summer. 
When,  therefore,  we  see  the  flowers  fading  on  the  ground  and  the  blossoms  falling 
from  the  tree,  our  feelings  receive  something  like  a  shock.  The  contrast  between 
the  death  of  these  fair  creations  and  the  bright  overflowing  fulness  of  life  around 
fiills  us  with  a  peculiar  sadness.  A  premature  fate,  we  feel,  has  overtaken  them; 
they  have  not  had  their  fuU  share  of  the  feast  of  life.  1.  Looking  exclusively  at 
the  fact  itself,  there  is  nothing  out  sadness  in  the  fading  of  the  flower.  It  seems  a 
wanton  destruction  of  so  mucn  life  and  beauty;  and  we  are  apt  to  ask,  "  To  what 
purpose  is  this  waste?  "  2.  But  much  as  we  mourn  aU  these  fading  flowers,  the 
human  as  well  as  the  natural,  we  cannot  wish  them  to  abide  for  ever.  It  is  the 
fading  flower  that  is  so  wonderfully  beautiful  Fix  its  beauty  unchanged,  and 
you  make  it  an  artificial  flower,  a  dry  mummy.  It  is  the  fleeting  human  blossom 
that  is  so  tenderly  dear.  We  love  each  other  more  devotedly  owing  to  the  shadow 
feared  of  man  that  falls  upon  and  consecrates  our  love;  because  we  must  soon, 
we  know  not  how  soon,  be  parted.  We  should  feel  everlasting  flowers  to  be  utterly 
incongruous  in  a  world  of  change  and  decay;  their  steadfast  continuance,  when 
there  was  no  reason  for  their  continuance,  would  weary  and  offend  our  minds. 
3.  But  the  truth  of  the  fading  flower  has  another  and  a  brighter  side.  It  is  not  all 
death  and  desolation.  We  shall  pass  at  once  out  of  the  shadow  into  the  sunshine 
when  we  consider  the  reason  why  the  flower  fades.  The  flower  fades  that  the 
fruit  may  take  its  place.  The  fading  of  the  flower,  rightly  viewed,  is  therefore  a 
natural  and  necessary  phenomenon  of  Ufe.  In  itself  it  is  joyous,  and  not  grievous. 
In  the  unfallen  Eden  the  fading  flowers  suggested  no  thought  of  gloom  to  Adam, 
but  only  of  bright  progress  from  life  to  fuller  life,  from  a  lower  to  a  higher  stage  of 
development  and  perfection.  Viewed,  then,  in  the  light  of  Him  who  hath  brought 
life  and  immortality  to  light  ia  His  Gospel,  and  free  from  the  cloud  of  sin,  the  fading 
of  human-life  and  of  flower-life  is  not  in  reality  sad,  but  joyful.  Man  dies,  but  his 
life  on  earth  is  only  for  the  formation  of  the  eternal  life.  Every  gift  we  receive 
is  but  a  promise;  every  beauty  we  behold  but  a  prophecy;  every  pleasure  we 
enjoy  but  a  foretaste.  The  Christian's  whole  life  is  but  the  earnest  of  the  inherit- 
ance that  awaits  him.     We  see  by  faith,  although  we  are  slow  of  heart  to  believ* 


CHAP.  XL.]  ISAIAH.  187 

it,  that  our  very  losses  and  privations  are  ministering  to  a  noble  and  goodly  develop- 
ment pregnant  with  an  everlasting  promise.  Death  itself  is  the  act  of  blossoming. 
It  is  a  scientific  fact  that  it  is  the  dying  plant  alone  that  flowers.  Blossoming  is 
the  highest  point  in  plant  life.  When  it  has  produced  its  blossom  it  perishes. 
In  human  life  it  is  so  likewise.  Our  existence  here  is  but  a  daily  dying,  the  con- 
tinual production  of  a  blossom,  within  whose  petals  as  they  wither  is  expanding 
the  immortal  frtiit;  and  death  is  but  the  final  falling  of  the  sere  petals  from  the 
fruit  when  it  has  set.  It  is  not  destruction,  but  development;  the  mortal  not 
destroyed,  but  putting  on  immortality.  4.  Then,  consider  that  the  blossom 
belongs  to  the  plant  itself,  the  fruit  to  the  race.  The  blossom  is  the  end  of  the 
selfish  life;  the  fruit  is  the  beginning  of  the  unselfish.  5.  Further  stUl,  the  plant 
that  flowers  is  confined  to  one  spot;  but  when  it  fruits  and  seeds  it  gets  wings,  as  it 
were,  and  can  fly  away  from  its  natal  place  to  long  distances,  as  you  have  often 
seen  the  thistle-down  or  the  fleecy  parasol  of  the  dandelion  do,  to  make  the  wilder- 
ness and  the  solitary  place  to  be  glad,  and  the  desert  to  rejoice  and  blossom  as  the 
rose.  Is  it  not  so  in  human  life  ?  That  death  which  seems  to  bound  our  Ufe, 
in  reality  gives  us  wings,  and  takes  us  out  of  this  cramped  and  narrow  sphere  of 
change,  and  sorrow,  and  sin,  into  the  freer  air  and  larger  sxmshine  of  God's  ever- 
lasting kingdom.  The  fruition  of  life  is  not  the  limitation,  but  the  freedom  and 
enlargement  of  life.  And  who  knows  what  life  and  beauty  and  blessedness  to 
others  may  spring  from  seed  dropped  by  our  losses  and  death  ?  Looking  thus  at 
this  life  as  only  the  flower- form  of  our  being,  we  see  the  reason  of  its  brevity.  The 
life  of  the  blossom  is  short  because  it  has  to  prepare  the  way  for  the  fruit;  and  the 
season  in  which  it  is  put  forth  is  dangerous  to  the  formation  of  the  tender  germ. 
We  should  welcome  the  growing  infirmities  and  decays  of  life  as  signs  that  summer, 
the  season  of  fleeting  glories,  is  passing  away,  and  that  autumn,  the  season  of  endur- 
ing fruition,  is  drawing  nigh.  They  proclaim  to  us  that  now  our  salvation  is 
nearer  than  when  we  believed.  6.  But  I  reserve  the  grandest  thought  connected 
with  my  theme  to  the  last.  The  flower  fades  and  falls  off  the  plant,  but  it  does 
not  altogether  vanish;  it  does  not  perish  utterly.  Some  part  of  it,  larger  or 
smaller,  according  to  the  species,  remains  behind  to  form  the  nucleus  of  the  fruit. 
In  every  case  the  lower  part  of  the  central  and  most  important  part  of  the  blossom 
is  left,  and  it  is  out  of  it  that  the  fruit  is  formed.  A  good  deal  of  the  fleeting 
flower,  indeed  all  that  is  essential  in  it,  is  thus  made  permanent  in  the  enduring 
fruit;  and  the  fruit  itself  may  be  looked  upon  as  a  more  perfect  and  lasting 
blossom,  retaining  the  colour,  and  fragrance,  and  grace  of  form  that  distinguished 
the  blossom,  but  superadding  qualities,  such  as  nutritiousness  and  flavour,  which 
the  blossom  lacked.  Is  not  the  analogy  here  very  instructive  and  consoling  ? 
Not  only  do  all  our  sanctified  losses  turn  to  gains,  but  the  gains  are  largely  com- 
posed of  what  we  lost.  We  take  up  with  us  into  every  stage  of  our  advancing  pro- 
gress what  was  best  and  most  serviceable  in  the  previous  stage;  and  in  the  fruit 
of  our  achievements  we  can  trace  much  of  the  fair  blossoms  of  hope  and  aspiration 
which  led  to  its  formation.  Nothing  that  is  really  good  in  human  life  ought  to 
be  thrown  away  as  useless  when  we  have  outgrown  it.  The  good  of  childhood 
ought  to  remain  in  manhood.  The  enthusiasm,  the  freshness  of  interest,  the 
innocent  simplicity,  the  spirit  of  hope,  inquiry,  and  wonder  which  characterise 
our  early  years,  ought  to  endure  late  in  life,  under  the  calmer  and  quieter  outside 
of  maturity.  Let  us  not  mourn,  then,  that  so  many  fair  and  precious  things  pass 
away  from  us  as  we  go  on  to  our  immortality;  for  nothing  that  is  really  essential 
to  our  well-being  shall  perish  utterly,  but  shall  be  absorbed  into  our  souls  and 
become  their  eternal  wealth.  {H.  Macmillan,  LL.D.)  The  thoiight  of  death 
is  not  to  be  dwelt  upon  morbidly  in  the  manner  of  Swift,  who  said,  "  I  was  forty- 
seven  years  old  when  I  began  to  think  of  death,  and  the  reflections  upon  it  now 
begin  when  I  wake  in  the  morning  and  end  when  I  am  going  to  sleep."  Bxit  it  is 
well  for  us  to  have  the  thought  at  hand.  (TF.  R.  Nicoll,  LL.D.)  The  Word  of 
our  God  shall  stand  for  ever. — The  higher  criticism: — I.  What  is  meant  by  "  the 
WoED  OF  OTJB  God  "  ?  You  answer,  "  The  Bible."  I  think  not.  At  least,  and 
certainly,  to  Isaiah  it  could  not  mean  more  of  the  Old  Testament  than  he  pos- 
sessed— a  mere  fragment  of  the  Book  in  our  hands.  Even  to  Peter  it  could  not 
have  meant  all  the  records  we  have,  seeing  that  some  had  not  been  written  when 
he  repeated  the  prophet's  statement.  What,  then,  are  we  to  understand  by  this 
phrase,  "  the  Word  of  oiur  God  "  ?  Simply,  truth.  Truth  in  its  very  widest 
sense,  whether  in  the  Bible  or  out  of  it,  is  "  the  Word  of  God."  11.  Higher  criti- 
cism proposes  to  solve  for  you  and  me,  what  we  have  neither  the  time  nor  ability 


188  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xl. 

to  do  for  ourselves,  to  what  extent  interpolation  has  gonb  on.  It  is  a 
strictly  honest,  unbiassed,  sincere  scrutiny  into  the  claims,  history,  authorship, 
date,  and  language  of  the  books  of  the  Bible.  III.  What  will  be  the  bestjlt  ? 
Only  good.  If  we  are  honest  we  shall  want  only  the  truth ;  and  after  the  examina- 
tion is  completed  truth  will  stand  more  grandly  than  ever  before  us.  IV.  OuB 
attxtude  toward  highbb  criticism  may  well  be  for  these  reasons — 1.  One  of  welcome. 
We  rejoice  in  every  honest  and  reverential  inquiry  for  truth.  2.  One  of  hope. 
The  future  of  our  faith  looks  all  the  brighter  from  the  discussions  and  questionings 
of  to-day.  Men  are  beginning  to  think.  An  interest  is  awakening  in  the  vast 
questions  that  relate  to  our  higher  life.  3.  One  of  confidence.  Are  we  wise  in 
our  fear  for  the  safety  of  "  the  Word  of  our  God  "  ?  Does  "  the  Word  of  our  God  " 
need  our  defence  T  Is  not  He  pledged  to  its  security  ?  That  which  cannot  stand 
the  test  of  criticism  had  better  go;  but  truth,  "  the  Word  of  om*  God,  shall  stand 
for  ever."  {J.  E.  W.  Cook.)  The  enduring  Word: — "The  Word  of  the  Lord 
endureth  for  ever."  How  do  we  know  that  ?  Certainly,  not  in  the  same  way  as 
we  are  sure  of  the  universality  of  death.  We  know  it  to  be  true  if  we  beheve  two 
things — 1.  That  God,  the  perfect  moral  being,  exists.  2.  That  He  has  spoken  to 
man.  The  Word  of  God,  speaking  in  conscience,  in  revelation,  is  like  God  Him- 
self— above  the  waterfioods  of  change;  it  lasts.  {H.  P.  Liddon,  D.D.)  The 
passing  and  the  abiding: — I.  Since  the  Word  of  our  God  shall  stand  for  ever,  the 
Bible  will  remain.  1.  Think  of  the  Bible  as  history.  "  The  Old  Testament  is  ' 
supported  by  the  exhumed  records  of  the  kings  of  Egypt  and  Babylon  and  Nineveh 
and  Moab.  We  are  now  shown  in  the  Boulag  Museum  at  Cairo  the  very  body 
of  the  Egyptian  king  who  oppressed  IsraeL  At  a  hundred  points  confirmatory 
evidence  has  been  dug  out  of  the  Assyrian  rtiins.  In  the  day  when  the  Bible  was 
attacked  by  unbelief,  there  appeared  out  of  the  very  ground  hosts  of  defenders. 
God's  Providence  supports  His  Book."  2.  Think  of  the  Bible  as  to  philosophy. 
John  Stuart  Mill  will  tell  us,  "  It  is  impossible  to  find  in  the  ideas  of  any  philo- 
sophy, even  the  latest,  a  single  point  which  is  not  anticipated  and  ennobled  in 
Christianity."  3.  Think  of  the  Bible  as  to  science.  It  is  true,  as  one  has  said 
wisely  and  wittily,  that  "  the  intention  of  Holy  Scripture  is  to  teach  us  to  go  to 
heaven,  and  not  how  the  heavens  go."  And  yet  the  great  astronomer  Sir  John 
Herschel  will  tell  us:  "  All  human  discoveries  seem  to  be  made  only  for  the  pur- 
pose of  confirming  more  and  more  strongly  the  truth  contained  in  the  Sacred 
Scriptures."  4.  Think  of  the  Bible  as  to  morals.  Those  words  of  James 
Russell  Lowell,  spoken  so  bravely  at  a  dinner  in  Lbndon,  before  a  company  of 
sceptics,  are  well  worth  treasuring:  "  The  worst  kind  of  religion  is  no  religion  at 
alL  And  those  men,  living  in  ease  and  luxury,  indulging  themselves  in  the  amuse- 
ment of  going  without  rehgion,  may  be  thankful  that  they  Uve  in  lands  where 
the  Gospel  they  neglect  has  tamed  the  beastliness  and  ferocity  of  the  men  who, 
but  for  Christianity,  might  long  ago  have  eaten  their  carcasses  like  the  South  Sea 
Islanders,  or  cut  off  their  heads  and  tanned  their  hides  Uke  the  monsters  of  the 
French  Revolution."  This  Bible,  the  Word  of  God,  which  history  substantiates, 
which  philosophy  cannot  anticipate,  which  science  reinforces,  which  is  the  source 
of  aU  true  morals  and  secure  civilisation,  is  to  abide.  11.  Since  the  Word  of  our 
God  shall  stand  for  ever,  the  kingdom  of  Christ  is  to  endure  and  conquer. 
For  the  very  heart  and  kernel  of  God's  Word  is  the  revelation  of  the  certainly 
vanquishing  kingdom  of  our  Lord  and  Saviour  Jesus  Christ.  III.  Since  the  Word  of 
our  God  standeth  for  ever,  heaven  will  shine  on  us  at  thb  last.  ( W.  Hoyt,  D.D. ) 
"The  Word  of  our  Ood" : — All  explanations  can  be  reconciled  by  suffering  the 
prophet  to  express  his  own  ideas,  without  any  adventitious  limitation  and  admit- 
ting, as  the  only  s\ire  conclusion,  that  by  "  Word  "  he  means  neither  promise,  nor 
prophecy,  nor  Gospel  merely,  but  "  every  word  that  proceedeth  out  of  the  mouth 
of  God"  (Deut.  viii.  3;  Matt.  iv.  4).  There  is  a  tacit  antithesis  between  the 
Word  of  God  and  man;  what  man  says  is  uncertain  and  precarious,  what  God 
says  cannot  fail.  Thus  understood,  it  includes  prediction,  precept,  promise,  and 
the  offer  of  salvation;  and  although  the  latter  is  not  meant  exclusively,  the  apostle 
makes  a  perfectly  correct  and  most  important  apphcation  of  the  verse  when,  after 
quoting  it,  he  adds,  "  and  this  is  the  Word  which  is  preached  {e6ayye\i(T6iy)  unto 
you  '■' ;  that  is  to  say,  this  prophetic  declaration  is  emphatically  true  of  the  Gospel 
of  Christ.  {J.  A.  Alexander.)  The  Bible  its  own  defence: — A  well-known 
Presbyterian  minister  is  reported  to  have  said,  "  We  must  defend  the  Bible." 
Must  we  7  The  Bible  is  badly  off  when  it  needs  your  defence  or  mine.  I  stood 
on  the  "  Big  Four  "  railway  track  the  other  day  watching  the  Cincinnati  and 


OHAP.  XL.]  ISAIAH.  189 

Cleveland  express  pass  by.  A  young  bee,  called  out  by  the  warm  April  winds  and 
bright  spring  sunshine,  flew  toward  tlie  train.  Supposing  I  had  rushed  for  a  club 
or  a  rifle,  and  had  run  down  toward  the  approaching  express,  crying  aloud,  "  I 
must  defend  the  cars  from  that  bee's  attack,"  would  you  not  have  said,  "  Get 
out  of  the  way;  let  the  train  defend  itself  "  ?  The  Bible  is  its  own  best  defence. 
(J.  E.  W.  Cook.) 

Ver.  9.  0  Zion,  that  bringest  good .  tidings. — The  tidings  the  Church  has  to 
publish : — The  text  has  been  variously  rendered-  The  best  authorities  give 
it,  "  Thou  that  bringest  good  tidings  to  Zion,"  which  rendering  better  agrees 
with  the  latter  part  of  the  verse,  with  some  parallel  passages,  and  with  the  scope 
of  the  passage.  Our  translators  took  Zion  and  Jerusalem  in  the  nominative 
case,  and  so  did  others  before  them,  as  if  the  prophet  called  on  the  chief  city 
to  acquaint  the  other  cities  of  Judah  with  the  joyful  news  of  their  returning 
inhabitants:  but  there  is  far  more  congruity  in  the  herald's  being  instructed 
to  ascend  the  high  mountains  that  the  Jewish  captives  in  the  remotest  comers 
of  Chaldea  may  hear  the  joyful  proclamation  of  liberty,  and  prepare  to  return 
to  their  own  country.  The  Jewish  Targum  (no  mean  authority)  paraphrases 
the  words  thus:  "  O  ye  prophets  that  bring  glad  tidings  to  Zion.  Vitringa 
supports  the  same  idea,  as  does  also  Bishop  Lowth.  The  language  may,  with 
great  force,  be  addressed  to  the  missionaries  of  every  denomination.  "  0  thou 
that  hast  good  tidings  to  tell,  get  thee  up  into  the  high  mountain.  Say  to  the 
cities  of  the  Eastern  and  the  Western  world.  Behold  your  God."  I.  The  Cheistian 
Chtjkch  has  great  tidings  to  tell  to  the  world  at  laegb.  The  Jewish 
prophets  were  the  heralds  of  a  Saviour  to  come,  and  beautiful  upon  the  mountains 
were  the  feet  of  those  who  published  peace;  but  the  Christian  Church  has  to 
proclaim  the  actual  accomplishment  of  the  great  salvation.  We  have  to  tell 
of  a  Saviour  incarnate,  crucified,  enthroned.  We  have  to  tell  of  a  justifying 
righteousness,  a  sanctifying  spirit,  a  pardoning  God:  of  Satan  vanquished.  The 
Christian  Church  has  to  reveal — 1.  A  system  of  truth  as  opposed  to  the  errors 
of  heathenism.  These  truths  are  universally  applicable.  AH  have  minds  to 
which  truth  is  precious  as  Ufe  to  the  eye,  and  the  truth  as  it  is  in  Jesus  is  more 
needful  than  life  itself.  2.  A  system  of  devotion,  as  opposed  to  the  absurdities 
of  their  superstition.  Would  you  choose  to  have  them  stUl  ignorant  of  the  attri- 
butes of  acceptable  devotion?  3.  A  system  of  pvurity,  as  opposed  to  the  shame- 
less vices  of  their  idolatry.  Morality  is  interested  in  the  triumph  of  missions. 
4.  The  Christian  Church  can  tell  them  of  the  life  and  immortality  brought  to 
bght  by  the  Gospel,  as  opposed  to  their  obscure  and  degrading  notions  of  futurity. 
if  These  tidings  ought  not  to  be  kept  secret,  but  are  to  be  urgently 
AND  universally  PROCLAIMED.  "  Lift  up  thy  voice  with  strength:  say,  Behold 
youB  God."  This  hght  ought  to  be  held  forth  as  a  burning  torch,  like  the  beacon- 
light  of  ancient  Pharos,  that  it  may  scatter  the  darkness  of  the  night,  and  guide 
the  tempest-tossed  vessel  of  distant  nations  to  the  safe  anchorage  and  peaceful 
haven  of  the  welcome  shore.  We  are  bound  by  every  tie,  by  all  that  can  con- 
stitute the  most  solemn  and  rehgious  obhgation,  to  diffuse  far  and  wide  the  grand 
principles  of  salvation.  Dwell  upon  the  moral  destitution  and  wretchedness 
of  the  nations  sitting  in  darkness,  and  simply  ask  whether  this  be  a  desirable 
state  of  things.  III.  The  certainty  that  these  tidings  shall  not  be  pro- 
claimed IN  VAIN.  God  has  said,  "  My  Word  shall  not  return  void."  The  Spirit 
is  promised.  {S.  Thodey.)  The  Church  and  her  message : — I.  The  thoughts 
that  cluster  around  the  name,  "  0  Zion,  that  bringest  glad  tidings."  That 
is  almost  a  definition  of  the  Church;  at  any  rate,  it  is  a  description  of  her  by 
her  most  characteristic  office  and  function — that  which  marks  and  separate 
her  from  all  associations  and  societies  of  men.  Her  true  dignity  is  that  she  bears 
a  Gospel  in  her  hand,  and  grace  is  poured  into  her  lips.  We  are  to  suppose  the 
manifestation  and  approach  of  the  Divine  DeUverer  ;  hence  what  constitutes 
Zion  the  messenger  of  good  tidings  is  the  presence  in  her  of  the  hving  God.  Trans- 
late that  into  New  Testament  language,  and  it  just  comes  to  tms  :  that  what 
constitutes  the  Church  the  evangehst  for  the  world  is  the  simple  possession  of 
Christ,  or  of  the  Gospel,  and  that  breaks  out  into  two  or  three  points.  1.  Who- 
ever has  Christ  has  the  power  to  impart  Him.  2.  The  possession  of  Christ  for 
yourselves  imposes  upon  you  the  obligation  to  impart  Him.  (1)  All  property 
in  this  world  is  trust  property,  and  everything  that  a  man  knows  that  can  help 
or  bless  the  moral  or  spiritual  age  or  intellectual  condition  of  his  fellows,  he  M 


190  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xi. 

thereby  under  solemn  obligation  to  impart.  There  is  an  obligation  arising  from 
the  bands  that  knit  us  to  one  another,  so  that  no  man  can  possess  his  good  alone 
without  being  untrue  to  the  solidarity  of  humanity.  You  have  got,  you  say, 
the  remedy,  healing  for  all  the  diseases  of  humanity.  What  would  you  think 
of  a  man  who  in  a  pestilence  was  contented  with  swallowing  his  own  specific, 
and  leaving  others  to  die?  You  have  got  the  Christ,  and  you  have  got  Him 
that  you  may  impart  Him.  (2)  It  is  an  obUgation  that  arises,  too,  from  the 
very  purposes  of  your  calling.  What  are  you  saved  for?  For  your  own  blessed- 
ness? Yes,  and  No.  No  creature  in  God's  great  universe  but  is  great  enough 
to  be  a  worthy  end  of  the  Divine  action.  But  no  creature  in  God's  universe 
so  great  as  that  he  is  a  worthy  end  of  the  Divine  action,  if  he  is  going  to  keep 
all  the  Divine  gifts  in  himseK.  We  are  all  brought  into  the  Ught  that  we  may 
impart  light.  3.  The  very  fact  of  the  possession  of  this  Gospel,  or  of  this  Christ, 
for  ourselves  ought  to — and  in  all  healthy  conditions  will — inspire  the  impulse 
to  impart.  All  deep  conviction  longs  to  be  vocal.  11.  We  have  here,  in  a  very 
picturesque  and  vivid  form,  the  setting  forth  of  the  mannek  in  ■w^hich  the 
Evangelist  Zion  is  to  proclaim  her  message.  The  fair-featured  herald 
is  bidden  to  get  up  into  the  high  mountain,  perhaps  a  mere  picturesque  detail, 
perhaps  some  reference  to  the  local  position  of  the  city  set  upon  a  hill,  Uke  the 
priests  of  Ebal  or  Gerizim,  or  Alpine  shepherds,  calling  to  each  other  across  the 
valleys,  to  secure  some  vantage  ground ;  and,  next,  to  let  her  voice  roll  out  across 
the  glen.  No  faltering  whisper  wiU  do,  but  a  voice  that  compels  audience. 
"  Lift  up  thy  voice  with  strength."  But  a  timid  heart  will  make  a  tremulous 
voice,  and  fear  and  doubt  will  whisper  when  courage  will  ring  it  out.  So  "  be 
not  afraid  ";  there  is  the  foundation  of  the  clearness  and  the  loudness  with  which 
the  word  is  to  be  uttered.  Our  message  is  to  be  given  with  a  courage  and  a  force 
that  are  worthy  of  it.  "  Be  not  afraid."  That  is  a  lesson  for  this  day.  There 
are  plenty  of  causes  of  fear  round  about  us,  if,  like  Peter  on  the  water,  we  look 
at  the  waves  instead  of  at  the  Master.  1.  Let  us  cherish  a  firm,  sovd-absorbing 
confidence  in  the  power  and  truth  of  the  message  we  have  to  telL  2.  Do  not  let 
us  make  too  much  of  the  enemy.  3.  Let  us  remember  the  victories  of  the  past. 
4.  Above  all,  let  us  remember  who  fights  with  us.  IH.  The  substance  and 
contents  oe  the  Evangelist  Zion's  message,  "  Say  unto  the  cities  of  Judah, 
Behold  yovu*  God!  "  They  were  to  be  pointed  to  a  great  historical  act,  in  which 
God  had  manifested  Himself  to  men;  and  the  words  are  not  only  an  exclamation, 
but  an  entreaty,  and  the  message  was  to  be  given  to  these  little  daughter  cities 
of  Judah  as  representing  all  of  those  for  whom  the  dehverance  had  been  wrought; — 
all  which  things  are  paralleled  in  the  message  that  is  committed  to  our  hand. 
We  all  have  given  to  us  the  charge  of  pointing  men  to  the  great  historical  fact 
wherein  God  is  visible  to  men.  You  caimot  reveal  God  by  word,  you  cannot 
reveal  God  by  thought.  There  is  no  way  open  to  Him  to  make  Himself  known 
to  His  creatures  except  the  way  by  which  men  make  themselves  knowTi  to  one 
another,  that  is,  by  their  deeds;  and  so  high  above  all  speculation,  high  above 
all  abstraction,  nearer  to  us  than  all  thought,  stands  the  historical  fact  in  which 
God  shows  Himself  to  the  world,  and  that  is  in  the  person  of  Jesus  Christ.  How 
beautiful  in  that  connection  the  verses  following  my  text  are :  "  Behold,  the 
Lord  God  will  come  with  strong  hand  ";  yet  "  He  shall  feed  His  flock  like  a  shep- 
herd." And  so  in  that  Christ  is  the  power  of  God,  for  He  is  the  arm  of  the  Lord; 
and  in  that  Christ  is  the  gentleness  of  God ;  and  whilst  men  grope  in  the  darkness, 
our  business  is  to  point  to  the  living,  dying  Son,  and  to  say,  "  There  you  have 
the  ultimate,  the  perfect  representation  of  the  unseen  God."  (A.  Maclaren,  D.D.) 
News  proclaimed  on  mountain-tops : — Some  suppose  an  allusion  to  the  practice 
of  addressing  large  assembUes  from  the  summit  or  declivity  of  hills  (Judg.  ix.  7; 
Deut.  xxviL  12;  Matt.  v.  1).  J.  D.  Michaehs  compares  the  ancient  practice  of 
transmitting  news  by  shouting  from  one  hill-top  to  another,  as  described  by 
Caesar  (Bell.  Gall.  vii.  3).  The  essential  idea  is  that  of  local  elevation  as  extending 
the  difEusion  of  the  sound.  (J.  A.  Alexander.)  Behold  your  Ctod. — The 
manifestation  of  God : — Taking  the  words  as  they  stand  in  the  text,  consider 
them  in — I.  Their  external  accomplishment  in  the  incarnation,  nativity, 
personal  appearance,  and  ministration  of  the  Son  of  God  in  Jerusalem  and  in 
_the  cities  of  Judah.  11.  Their  internal  accomplishment  in  the  hearts  of  all 
"those  who  have  spiritually  received  the  tidings  of  His  GospeL  It  is  the  process 
of  Christ,  from  Hi  a  incarnation  to  His  ascension,  spiritually  repeated  within  us; 
and  our  salvation  entirely  depends  upon  our  "  beholding  this  God  and  Saviour,** 


CHAP.  XL.]  ISAIAH.  191 

manifesting  Himself  in  all  His  amiable  attributes  within  us,  and  by  our  will 
cheerfully  co-operating  with  Him  in  His  great  work  of  love.  {J.  Duchi,  M.A.) 
The  beholding  of  Jesus  Christ : — The  prophet  is  directing  the  attention  of  his 
countrymen  and  of  the  Church  in  every  age  to  the  Messiah  who  is  the  true  God 
and  eternal  life.  This  illustrious  personage  we  may  behold  in  a  variety  of  interest- 
ing and  instructive  situations,  1.  Carry  your  thoughts  back  into  eternity,  and 
behold  Him,  who  in  time  was  made  of  a  woman,  sitting  upon  the  circle  of  the 
heavens,  in  the  essential  glory  of  the  Godhead;  His  habitation  immensity.  His 
duration  eternity.  His  perfections  uncreated  and  infinite.  2.  As  a  confirmation 
of  the  original  glory  and  Godhead  of  Jesus  Christ,  "  behold  your  God  "  at  the 
morning  of  creation,  the  dawn  of  time.  Was  it  not  His  effective  hand  that  planted 
the  piUars  of  the  imiverse  and  raised  the  magnificent  fabric  of  earth  and  heaven? 
What  He  formed  as  the  God  of  creation.  He  preserves  as  the  God  of  power.  3.  From 
the  fall  of  our  first  parents  to  the  birth  of  Jesus  Christ,  the  Redeemer  is  only 
to  be  seen  in  promises  and  prophecies,  in  sacrifices  and  ceremonies.  Passing 
over,  therefore,  this  long  lapse  of  time,  suffer  me  to  conduct  your  thoughts  to 
Bethlehem.  There,  "  behold  your  God."  4.  Omitting  the  occurrences  of  His 
childhood  and  youth,  let  me  invite  you  to  look  at  Jesus  entering  into  the  wilder- 
ness under  the  infiuence  and  direction  of  the  Holy  Ghost.  Behold  Him  tempted 
of  the  devil  forty  days  and  forty  nights.  It  is  a  Divine  maxim  that  "  God  cannot 
be  tempted,  neither  tempteth  He  any  man."  But  God  in  human  flesh  sustained 
the  hom:  of  trial  5.  After  this  strange  event,  permitted  to  the  powers  of  darkness, 
Jesus  appears  in  a  new  scene  of  life.  Behold,  then,  your  God  going  forth  as  a 
teacher,  accompanying  His  ministrations  and  instructions  with  signs  and  wonders, 
and  all  the  marks  of  Deity.  And  He  is  the  "  same  yesterday,  to-day,  and  for 
ever."  In  every  age,  as  well  as  in  the  days  of  His  flesh,  there  is  treasured  up  in 
Him,  for  the  free  use  of  aU  that  come  unto  Ham,  pardon,  and  peace,  and  grace, 
and  strength,  and  life,  and  salvation,  6.  Just  before  the  close  of  His  ministrations, 
a  profitable  view  of  the  Lord  Jesus  opens  to  us  in  the  garden  of  Gethsemane: 
there  "  behold  your  God!  "  He  appears  emphatically  a  "  man  of  sorrows,  and 
acquainted  with  grief."  But  let  us  foUow  Him  from  the  garden,  through  all 
the  intermediate  scenes  of  insult,  reproach,  and  ignominy,  to  the  bar  of  Pontius 
Pilate:  there  at  the  tribunal  of  man  "  behold  your  God!  "  He,  who  shall 
one  day  appear  to  judge  every  man  according  to  his  deeds,  now  stands  arraigned 
as  a  criminal  before  the  judgment-seat  of  man.  Judgment  is  perverted:  Pilate 
declares  Him  innocent,  yet  suffers  Him  to  be  mocked,  and  scourged,  and  crucified. 
Mingling  in  the  crowd,  follow  Him  from  the  common  hall,  and  "  behold  your 
God  "  as  He  passes  through  the  streets  of  Jerusalem,  bearing  EUs  cross  amidst 
the  revilings  and  tauntings  of  the  people,  who,  in  all  the  virulence  of  persecution, 
exclaim,  "  Away  with  Him,  away  with  Him!  crucify  Him!  "  "  Behold  your 
God  "  ascending  the  summit  of  Calvary.  Oh,  what  a  scene  was  here !  a  scene 
which  all  nature  seems  backward  to  behold.  Standing  at  the  foot  of  the  Cross, 
learn  that  "ye  were  not  redeemed  with  corruptible  things,"  &c.  (1  Pet.  i.  18,  19). 
7.  The  last  view  which  we  have  to  take  of  Jesus  Christ  closes  His  sufferings,  and 
accompUshes  oiu*  redemption.  "  Behold  your  God "  bursting  the  barriers  of 
the  tomb,  vanquishing  the  king  of  terrors,  despoUing  the  sepulchre,  breaking  the 
bands  of  corruption,  and  rising  to  life,  never  to  die  again.  Then  was  fulfilled 
that  prophecy,  "  0  death,  I  will  be  thy  plagues."  To  enter  into  the  spirit  of  the 
passage,  you  must  keep  your  mind's  eye  upon  the  Savioin-,  and  behold  your  God 
as  He  is  ascending  to  the  realms  of  bhss.  Conclusion — "  Now  is  the  accepted 
time,  now  is  the  day  of  salvation."  Now  it  is  your  privilege  by  faith  to  "  behold 
your  God  "  as  a  Saviour,  delighting  in  mercy.     {S.  Payne.) 

Vers.  10-12.  Behold,  the  Lord  God  will  come  wltli  strong'  hand. —  Power  and 
tenderness: — The  beauty  and  peculiarity  of  these  words  consist  in  the  combination 
of  the  might  of  Adonai-Jehovah  (ver.  10),  with  the  gentleness  of  the  Shepherd, 
carrjTing  in  His  bosom  the  weak  and  weary  of  the  fiock  (ver.  11).  I.  "  Behold  your 
God,"  VXTLL  OP  MIGHT  AND  MAJESTY  (ver.  10).  To  Christ  all  power  has  been  com- 
mitted. He  is  "  the  arm  of  God  "  (chap.  U.  9),  "  the  Man  of  Jehovah's  right  hand," 
&c.  (Psa.  Ixxx.  17).     His  name  is  "  Immanuel."     11.  He  combines  with  the 

POWER  OP  THE  VICTOEIOUS   KING,  THE    GENTLENESS   OP   THE   TENDER   AND   LOVING 

SHEPHERD.  "He  shall  feed  His  flock."  That  word  is  a  comprehensive  one.  It 
means  that  He  shall  act  all  the  part  of  a  shepherd  towards  them;  leading  them, 
protecting  them,  providing  aUke  the  green  pastures  and  the  still  waters.     Nay,' 


192  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  xi^ 

as  if  this  were  not  enough.  He  is  beautifully  represented  as  "  gathering  the  lambs 
in  His  arms "  ; — making  a  pillow  for  them  in  the  folds  of  the  loose  "  abbeh," 
or  shepherd's  mantle,  as  they  nestle  close  in  Hia  bosom.  And  while  thus  He  deaJs 
with  the  tender  lambs,  He  is  equally  merciful  and  considerate  not  to  overdrive 
their  nursing  mothers.  Exult  in  this  twofold  word  of  comfort,  "  Behold  thy 
Kitig  Cometh,  meek  and  lowly."  Behold  your  God!  Behold  your  Shepherd! 
strong  to  smite,  strong  to  save.  (J.  R.  Macdu§,  D.D.)  Characteristics  of  the 
great  Saviour: — These  words  exhibit  to  our  view  some  of  the  most  lively  char- 
acteristics of  that  illustrious  Saviour  by  whose  incarnation  our  fallen  race  are 
become  again  entitled  to  that  long-lost  inheritance  which  had  been  forfeited 
by  sin,  and  by  whose  redeeming  process  in  their  souls  they  are  rendered  capable 
of  enjoying  it.  The  illuminated  prophet  proceeds  to  point  out  the  personal 
character  of  this  great  Deliverer.  1.  '  Behold!  the  Lord  God  shall  come  with 
strong  hand,  and  His  arm  shall  rule  for  Him."  The  mistaken  Isrfielites  vainly 
j  ascribed  to  these  words  a  temporal  interpretation,  and  looked  for  a  deliverer 
i  whose  conquering  arm  should  effectually  rescue  them  from  the  earthly  powers 
0  to  which  they  were  tributary.  But  the  true  children  of  faithful  Abraham  wait 
■  'for  the  spiritual  accomplishment  of  this  prophecy  in  their  hearts;  and  see  and 
'feel  "the  strong  hand  "  of  their  Redeemer  in  that  inward  opposition  which  He 
raises  in  their  breasts  to  all  the  evil  desires  and  corrupt  passions  of  human  nature. 
2.  "  Behold!  His  reward  is  with  Him,  and  His  work  before  Him."  This  work  is 
no  other  than  the  complete  deliverance  of  man  from  the  captivity  of  sin  tuid 
Satan.  This  reward  is  no  other  than  the  glorious  acquisition  of  those  lost  or 
wandering  souls,  who  were  originally  His  by  creation,  and  are  now  doubly  so 
by  redemption.  The  prophet  seems  to  dwell  upon  the  power  and  majesty  of 
this  Deliverer.  He  represents  Him  as  coming  with  a  strong  hand:  and,  indeed, 
such  is  usually  His  first  appearance  in  the  sinner's  heart.  David  speaks  of  this 
first  appearance  in  the  most  alarming  terms  :  "  The  arrows  of  the  Almighty 
stick  fast  in  me,  and  His  hand  presseth  me  sore."  The  first  feelings  of  an  awak- 
ened and  convicted  conscience  are  agonising  indeed;  for  they  are  the  breaking 
forth  of  heaven's  majestic  light  upon  the  benighted  soul,  which  shakes  nature 
to  her  very  centre,  and  discloses  every  hidden  recess  to  which  conscious  guilt 
flies  from  its  approach.  But  when  viewed  with  composure,  and  received  with 
cheerfulness,  it  soon  becomes  as  mild  and  sweet  as  the  radiance  of  the  risen  day 
after  a  dark  and  tempestuous  night.  Hence  it  is  that  in  the  next  verse  we  find 
the  dignity  and  majesty  of  this  august  Personage  sweetly  tempered  with  con- 
descension and  love,  and  melting  into  heavenly  meekness,  gentleness,  and  com- 
passion. 3.  "He  shall  feed  His  flock  like  a  shepherd,"  &c.  (1)  "The  fiock  " 
here  mentioned  can  be  no  other  than  our  whole  fallen  race,  who  by  virtue  of  that 
"  incorruptible  seed "  that  was  inspoken  into  the  first  Adam,  are  put  into  a 
capacity  of  regaining  eternal  life  through  the  redeeming  power  of  Christ,  their 
second  Adam.  (2)  But  though  the  Shepherd's  love  is  thus  universal,  and  all 
men  are  the  objects  of  His  pastoral  care;  though  they  are  all  Hia  children 
by  redemption,  yet  all  do  not  alike  follow  the  "Shepherd's  voice";  all  are 
not  equally  willing  to  be  fed  with  His  "  bread  of  life."  (3)  Let  the  humble- 
minded  Christian  "  lift  up  his  head  and  look  up."  He  need  not,  as  the 
Psalmist  expresses  it,  "  run  here  and  there  for  food  ;  and  grudge,  because  he 
is  not  satisfied  ":  the  wants  he  feels,  reason,  he  well  knows,  cannot  supply; 
the  comforts  he  aspires  after,  are  such  as  the  world  cannot  give.  Wherever 
his  Shepherd  leads,  he  is  content  to  follow:  he  is  sensible  of  His  presence,  in 
darkness  as  well  as  in  light.  The  evils  by  which  he  is  oppressed  he  is  satisfied 
to  bear,  because  his  Deliverer  is  ever  at  his  side.  {J.  Duchd,  M.A.)  The 
magnitude  and  tenderness  of  Divine  dealings: — We  find  frequent  reference  in  Scrip- 
ture to  the  Divine  hand,  arm,  and  bosom,  by  which  God  is  brought  the  nearer 
to  the  level  of  our  comprehension,  and  within  touch  of  oiu"  love  and  confidence. 
In  these  verses  there  is  a  striking  combination  in  the  use  made  of  these  figiu-ea. 
I.  The  magnitude  of  God's  power  and  rule.  "  Who  hath  measured  the 
waters  in  the  hollow  of  His  hand,  and  meted  out  heaven  with  the  span?  "  &o. 
The  reference-to  the  Divine  hand  is  essentially  human,  man  being  the  only  creature 
on  God's  earth  who  has  a  hand.  How  wonderful  is  its  construction!  It  is  mar- 
vellously adapted  for  skill,  power,  and  authority.  It  is  that  which  in  happy 
combination  with  other  endowments  gives  man  dominion  over  creation.  It  ia 
his  hand  which,  in  more  senses  than  one,  sways  the  sceptre.  It  is  his  hand 
that  asserts  his  royal  nature,  his  power  and  authority  to  rule.     Again,  the  arm 


CHAP.  XL.]  ISAIAH.  193 

is  that  which  gives  leverage  to  the  hand,  and  without  which  the  hand  would 
be  useless.  The  hand  and  arm  of  God  are  spoken  of  here.  We  read  elsewhere 
that  the  heavens  are  the  work  of  His  fingers,  that  in  His  hands  are  the  deep  places 
of  the  earth,  and  that  His  hands  formed  the  dry  land.  Here  we  read,  Who 
hath  measured  the  waters  in  the  hollow  of  His  hand,  and  meted  out  heaven  with 
the  span?  "  The  great  Architect  and  Framer  of  the  universe  is  represented  as 
forming  and  adjusting  earth,  sea,  and  sky  with  His  hand.  This  is  the  graphic 
representation  of  the  Divine  Worker  at  work.  The  one  implement  used  is  the 
hand  of  the  Great  Worker — its  hollow  for  the  seas,  its  span  for  the  heavens! 
What  sublime  poetry  descriptive  of  creative  skill!  The  illustrations  are  taken 
from  primitive  life.  The  truest  poetry  comes  from  primitive  simplicity.  1.  "  Who 
hath  measured  the  waters  in  tie  hollow  of  His  hand?  "  What  is  the  sublime 
truth  which  this  richly  figurative  speech  conveys?  One  truth  at  least  is  the  self- 
sufficiency  of  God  in  His  creative  work.  He  needed  not  to  go  beyond  Himself. 
All  creation  is  the  outcome  of  His  own  power  and  skill,  independent  of  the  shifts 
of  machinery  and  tools.  When  this  has  been  stated,  the  prophet  proceeds  to 
draw  other  figures  from  primitive  life  in  the  simplicity  of  its  operations  to  describe 
God's  creative  work.  '  Comprehended  the  dust  of  the  earth  in  a  measure  " — 
that  is  a  tierce,  or  the  third  of  an  ephah.  It  is  the  same  word  as  that  used  in 
Psa.  Ixxx.  5,  "  Thou  givest  them  tears  to  drink  in  great  measure."  As  Delitzsch 
beautifully  expresses  it,  it  is  a  small  measure  for  the  dust  of  the  earth,  but  a  "  great 
measure  "  for  tears.  "  Weighed  the  mountains  in  scales,"  that  is,  a  steel-yard, 
that  by  which  the  greater  loads  are  weighed;  "  and  the  hills  in  a  balance  " — the 
tradesman's  balances  which  weigh  smaller  things,  but  with  greater  accuracy 
than  the  "  steel-yard."  Nothing  has  been  done  by  haphazard.  Every  world 
has  been  balanced,  and  the  equilibrium  of  the  universe  adjusted  with  infinite 
wisdom  and  skill.  Astronomical  observation  leads  to  this  conclusion;  Isaiah 
asserted  it  with  regard  to  this  earth  before  astronomy  was  bom.  2.  So  far  we 
have  dwelt  upon  Isaiah's  statement  of  what  God  had  done.  Now  we  notice  the 
prophetic  announcement  of  what  God  would  do.  The  former  refers  to  His  creative 
power,  the  latter  to  His  providential  rule.  "  The  Lord  God  will  come  with  strong 
hand,  and  His  arm  shall  rule  for  Him."  There  is  here  a  prediction  of  a  special 
Divine  advent  in  power,  but  I  take  this  as  typical  of  all  Divine  advents  and 
interventions  throughout  the  ages.  We  have  read  of  the  Divine  hand  in  the 
record  of  God  forming  and  adjusting  the  earth,  but  now  we  read  of  the  Divine 
arm  in  His  personal  advent  and  providential  rule.  There  is  a  Providence  as 
well  as  a  creation.  God  has  not  completed  His  work  by  His  creative  skill  and 
power.  "  He  worketh  hitherto."  The  hand  that  formed  and  adjusted  is  moved 
by  the  arm  that  rules  and  governs.  It  is  the  arm  that  wields  the  hand.  The 
Scriptures  abound  with  emphatic  references  to  the  Divine  arm.  "  Hast  thou  an 
arm  like  God?  "  (Job  xl.  9)  asked  God  out  of  the  whirlwind  of  Job.  "  Thou  hast 
a  mighty  arm "  (Psa.  Lxxxix.  13),  exclaimed  the  Psalmist;  and  again,  "  His 
holy  arm  hath  gotten  Him  the  victory  "  (Psa.  xcviii.  1).  Isaiah  wrote,  "  The  Lord 
hath  sworn  by  the  arm  of  His  strength  "  (Isa.  Ixii.  8),  and  again,  "  Therefore 
His  arm  brought  salvation  "  (Isa.  hx.  16).  In  these  and  similar  passages  the 
arm  of  God  is  the  symbol  of  His  power  in  providential  and  redemptive  works. 
"  His  arm  shall  rule  for  Him," — that  is,  shall  bring  all  foes  submissive,  and  make 
all  subjects  obedient  to  His  sovereignty  and  command.  It  is  instructive  to  notice 
the  different  names  applied  to  God  in  the  Scriptures  to  show  various  aspects  of 
His  character  and  work.  Observe  the  names  by  which  God  is  called  here.  "  The 
Lord  God  "  (Adonai-Jehovah) — a  combination  of  the  two  greatest  names  by 
which  God  was  known  under  the  Old  Dispensation.  The  consequent  announce- 
ment is  that  of  the  advent  of  the  "  Mighty  One  "  (R.V.).  Yet  these  words,  expres- 
sive of  power  and  dominion,  are  followed  by  others  which  have  all  the  tenderness 
and  grace  of  a  pastoral  symphony.  11.  The  tekderness  of  His  shepheedly 
CARE.  "  He  shall  feed  His  flock  like  a  shepherd,"  &c.  The  hand  that  meted 
out  the  heavens  and  measured  the  waters  of  the  deep  is  that  which  feeds  the 
flock,  and  the  arm  that  rules  for  Him  is  the  arm  that  gathers  the  lambs.  "  And 
carry  them  in  Has  bosom."  Ah!  I  have  not  read  of  "  His  bosom  "  in  this  context 
before  now.  I  heard  no  mention  of  His  bosom  when  He  was  spolvcn  of  as  measuring 
the  waters  in  the  hollow  of  His  hand,  and  meting  out  heaven  with  the  span ;  it 
is  only  when  the  prophet  speaks  of  the  lambs  that  he  mentions  not  only  God's 
arm  but  also  His  bosom.  The  hollow  of  His  hand  is  good  enough  for  the  waters, 
His  span  for  the  heavens.  His  arm  for  His  subjects,  but  only  His  bosom  for  the 

VOL.  II. — 13 


194  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  xu 

lambs.  This  is  a  tenderness  specially  adapted  to  the  peculiar  need.  "  And  shall 
gently  lead  those  that  are  with  young,"  or,  "those  that  give  suck"  (R.V.).  The 
great  Shepherd  will  not  forget  motherhood  with  its  cares  and  burdens.  God's 
omnipotence  can  only  be  equalled  by  His  compassion.  He  is  not  only  Almighty, 
but  also  "  Almighty  to  save."  Our  God  who  created  the  heavens  has  also  lifted 
up  the  Cross.  (D.  Davies.)  The  grandeur  and  pathos  of  theology: — In  those 
words,  "His  arm  shall  rule  for  ffim,"  we  have  the  grandeur  of  theology;  but  in 
these  words,  "  He  shall  feed  His  flock  like  a  Shepherd,"  we  have  the  pathos  of 
theology.  {Tbid.)  Consolation  from  the  thought  of  God's  omnipotence: — In  his 
autobiography,  Goethe  tells  us  that  the  earthquake  in  Lisbon  fairly  stumbled 
his  faith  and  awakened  his  alarm  at  the  time  when  he  first  heard  the  news  of  it. 
The  notion  of  Divine  reliability  fell  under  his  suspicion;  how  could  anyone  trust 
a  God  who  would  suffer  that  70,000  people  should  be  overwhelmed  by  one  awful 
tide  of  the  ocean,  rushing  up  and  back  as  the  earth  rose  in  imperious  strength 
of  upheaval;  where  was  His  goodness  ?  What  might  He  not  do  next  ?  The 
young  man  was  frightened  at  the  manifestation  of  so  much  almightiness.  Later 
on  in  life  he  saw  how  fine  it  was  to  have  for  his  God  a  being  who  could  rock  the  world 
at  His  wilL     (C.  S.  Robinson,  D.D.) 

Ver.  11.  He  shall  feed  His  flock  like  a  shepherd. — The  care  of  the  Good 
Shepherd  for  His  flock: — 1.  The  prophet  first  declares  the  general  office  of  the 
Saviour.  "  He  shall  feed  His  flock  like  a  shepherd."  2.  Here  His  people  are 
described  under  the  endearing  name  of  a  "  flock."  It  is  thus  descriptive  of  the 
happy  privileges  which  they  enjoy.  They  are  not  left  to  roam  at  large  hke  the 
beasts  of  prey;  but  they  are  brought  by  Divine  grace  into  a  settled  state.  They 
are  as  a  flock  of  sheep  under  the  shepherd's  eye.  They  are  distributed,  it  is  true, 
in  various  parts;  but- yet  under  the  Lord's  particular  care.  3.  "His  flock." 
This  is  to  make  known  more  especially  their  privileges — they  are  emphatically 
His.  They  are  "  His  "  as  given  to  Him  by  His  eternal  Father.  They  are  "  His  " 
by  His  own  immediate  purchase;  for  He  has  redeemed  them.  They  are  "  His  " 
also,  as  by  the  action  of  the  Holy  Ghost  upon  their  hearts  they  are  led  into  His 
fold.  4,  The  word  translated  "  feed "  properly  signifies  the  whole  care  and 
government  that  a  shepherd  exercises  towards  his  flock,  Christ  takes  a  general 
oversight  of  them;  but  He  has  them  particularly  in  His  eye.  So,  too,  a  shepherd 
distinguishes  the  different  states  of  his  flock,  and  suits  himself  to  their  particular^ 
want.s.  5.  By  the  "  lambs,"  those  are  meant  who  are  young  in  years,  and  young 
converts.  They  are  described  by  this  emblem  to  set  forth  their  weakness  and 
tenderness  and  inability  properly  to  take  care  of  themselves.  He  "  gathers 
them  with  His  arm,  and  carries  them  in  His  bosom."  Here  you  notice  a  most 
pleasing  union  of  power  and  love  employed  in  their  service.  It  is  thus  that  the 
Lord  Christ  exercises  the  tenderness  of  a  shepherd  towards  His  flock.  Remember 
how  many  sweet  promises  are  addressed  to  the  weak  and  to  the  young  in  the  ' 
flock  (chaps,  xxxv.  3,  4,  xlii.  3).  We  particularly  notice  this,  to  encourage 
those  who  may  be  setting  out  in  the  Lord's  way.  Sometimes  a  thought  comes 
into  the  mind,  "  Ah!  if  i  were  but  like  such  a  Christian!  if  I  had  as  much  zeal 
and  devotedness  to  my  Master's  service  as  he  has,  if  I  had  his  joy  and  peace  in 
believing, — then  I  should  be  able  to  go  on  my  way  rejoicing  in  the  Lord.  This 
is  a  mistaken  view.  The  love  of  the  Shepherd  to  His  flock  does  not  originate  in 
their  love  to  Him.  He  did  not  expect  to  find  them  angels;  He  knew  that  they 
were  sinners.  He  treats  them  as  a  shepherd  does  his  tender  lambs.  6.  "  He 
shall  gently  lead  those  that  are  with  young  ";  or,  "those  that  give  suck."  You 
see  this  beautifully  illustrated  in  the  nistory  of  Jacob,  after  his  meeting  with  his 
brother  Esau.  Esau  said  to  him,  "  Let  us  take  our  journey,  and  I  will  go  before 
thee  " ;  but  Jacob,  like  a  good  shepherd,  knowing  the  roughness  of  his  brother, 
said  to  him,  "  My  lord  knoweth  that  the  children  are  tender,  and  the  flocks  and 
herds  with  young  are  with  me ;  and  if  men  should  overdrive  them  one  day  " — 
only  one  day — "  all  the  flock  will  die."  How  many  resting-places  does  the  Good 
Shepherd  provide !  Conclusion — ( 1 )  Such  is  the  description  given  by  the  prophet 
of  our  blessed  Saviour.  Surely  it  is  plainly  that  on  which  our  faith  may  rest 
in  seasons  of  trial,  and  which  may  as  surely  attract  our  love  in  seasons  of  outward 
peace  and  prosperity.  Look  at  His  dealings  with  His  disciples  in  the  hour  of 
their  sorrow :  how  many  comforts  does  He  afford !  (2)  What  is  there  that  can 
so  attract  you  as  this  "  Shepherd  of  the  sheep"?  Everything  that  regards  the 
f  ilfilment  of  His  office  may  draw  forth  our  attachment.     {J.  H.  Stewart,  M.A.) 


CHAP.  XL.]  ISAIAH.  195 

Christ  the  Shepherd  of  His  people: — I.  A  DESCRrpxiON  OF  the  Church  and  people 
OP  God,  under  the  notion  of  a  flock.  1.  With  respect  to  God  they  are  called 
a  flock  because  they  are  separated  from  the  rest  of  mankind,  and  given  to  the 
Lord  Christ.  A  flock  is  a  company  of  sheep  which  is  the  property  of  some 
owner.  2.  With  respect  to  the  Lord  Jesus,  the  Church  is  called  a  flock  because 
He  brings  them  into  His  fold,  calls  them  out  of  a  natural  state  into  a  state  of 
grace,  and  fellowship  with  Himself.  3.  With  respect  to  other  men,  among  whom 
believers  converse,  they  are  called  a  "flock  "  upon  a  threefold  account.  (1)  As 
they  are  helpless.  (2)  As  they  are  harmless.  A  sheep  will  take  injuries,  but 
it  is  not  prone  to  return  them.  (3)  They  are  usefuL  Behevers  are  a  blessing 
by  their  prayers  and  by  their  example.  11.  The  relation  Christ  stands 
IN  TO  them  as  a  Shepherd.  Two  things  axe  implied  in  this  relation — care  and 
tenderness.  III.  What  Christ  does  fob  His  Church  and  people  as  their 
Shepherd.  IV.  The  way  in  which  this  is  done.  Suitably  to  everyone's  circum- 
stances and  condition.  1.  Christ's  carriage  towards  His  flock  is  according  to 
their  ages.  2.  It  is  according  to  their  strength  or  weakness.  Such  as  cannot 
walk  shall  be  carried;  and  they  that  are  heavy  laden  shall  be  gently  led.  Com- 
fort yourselves  with  this  ;  none  of  the  flock  shall  be  left  behind.  3.  It  is  according 
to  the  difficulties  or  dangers  His  sheep  are  in.  Uses — 1.  This  doctrine  affords 
a  just  word  of  reproof  to  those  who  are  shepherds  under  Christ,  but  act  not  accord- 
ing to  His  example  towards  the  flock.  Knowledge  of  the  state  of  the  flock  is 
one  great,  though  much-neglected  branch  of  a  pastor's  office.  2.  How  should 
souls  long  to  be  under  the  care  of  this  Good  Shepherd  !  You  are  exposed  to 
wolves  and  devils,  to  all  errors  and  sin,  whilst  you  keep  off  from  Christ;  there 
is  no  safety  for  you,  but  only  in  Hjs  arms;  no  provision,  but  in  His  covenant. 
3.  How  safe  are  all  the  saints  !  4.  What  a  blessed  plea  is  here  for  the  Church 
in  dangerous  times  !  Christ  will  spare  His  flock,  and  the  land  for  their  sake. 
5.  With  what  boldness  may  the  people  of  Christ  attend  upon  all  holy  ordinances. 
They  are  designed  for  your  support,  till  you  get  above  them.  (J.  Hill.)  The 
Shepherd  and  His  flock: — L  The  Shepherd.  He,  the  Lord  God,  whose  hand 
is  strong,  and  whose  arm  shall  rule  for  Him,  "  who  hath  measiu-ed  the  waters 
in  the  hollow  of  His  hand,  who  hath  meted  out  heaven  with  a  span,  who  hath 
comprehended  the  dust  of  the  earth  in  a  measure,  who  hath  weighed  the  moun- 
tains in  scales  and  the  hills  in  a  balance  " — He  for  whom  there  is  nothing  too 
hard  to  be  accomplished,  and  nothing  too  minute  to  be  observed,  offereth  to  be 
the  Shepherd  of  your  soul,  to  feed  it  and  to  watch  over  it.  Will  not  BUs  love, 
His  power,  His  wisdom,  be  sufficient  for  all  its  need?  11.  The  flock.  As  the 
Shepherd  is  powerful  and  wise,  and  full  of  love,  so  are  the  flock  weak  and  foohsh, 
and  ready  to  go  astray.  The  sheep  is  a  weak,  defenceless  creature,  having  neither 
strength  to  resist  the  wolf,  nor  speed  to  escape  from  him.  It  is  not  like  the  ant, 
provident,  and  able  to  care  for  its  own  sustenance.  If  once  astray,  it  is  rarely 
known  to  return  of  its  own  accord.  III.  The  Shepherd's  care  of  His  flock. 
"  He  shall  feed  His  flock  like  a  shepherd."  The  word  translated  "  feed  "  refers 
to  all  a  shepherd's  care  for  his  flock,  including  all  necessary  and  beneficial  atten- 
tion to  them  (Ezek.  xxxiv.  15,  16).  IV.  The  tenderness  op  His  care. 
{G.  Innes.)  The  Redeemer  as  a  Shepherd: — I.  The  Redeemer  under  the 
endearing  character  of  a  Shepherd.  1.  It  is  the  office  of  a  good  shepherd 
to  know  his  flock.  "  I  am  the  Good  Shepherd,  and  know  My  sheep,  and  am 
known  of  ]\Iine."  He  has  a  tender  feeling,  a  compassionate  concern  for  the 
meanest  and  most  sickly  of  His  flock.  2.  The  Good  Shepherd  defends  His  flock 
from  every  threatening  danger.  David  exposed  his  own  life  to  defend  his  flock. 
Those  holy  and  humble  shepherds  to  whom  our  blessed  Saviour's  birth  was  first 
notified,  kept  watch  over  their  flocks  by  night.  Will  the  Eedeemer  fall  short 
in  His  office?  No!  "  Behold,  He  who  keepeth  Israel  shall  neither  slumber  nor 
sleep."  3.  The  Good  Shepherd  gathers  His  flock,  whether  they  have  wandered 
from  the  fold,  or  have  been  driven  away  by  an  enemy,  or  scattered  by  storms 
(Ezek.  xxxiv.  12).  The  Shepherd  of  Israel  will  magnify  Fis  office  in  this  respect. 
Christ  shall  gather  the  Jews,  the  people  of  His  ancient  Church,  into  His  sacred 
fold.  4.  The  Good  Shepherd  heals  His  flock,  whether  languisliing  under  deep 
disease  or  smarting  wounds.  It  was  charged  upon  the  shepherds  of  Israel  as 
a  high  crime  that  they  had  not  healed  the  sick,  nor  bound  up  that  which  was 
broken,  nor  brought  again  that  which  was  driven  away,  nor  sought  that  which 
was  lost.  But  tms  could  not  be  objected  against  our  compassionate  Redeemer. 
5.  The  Grood  Shepherd  provides  green  pastures  and  pure  water  for  His  flock. 


196  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  xl. 


n.  What  kind  of  a  Shepherd  is  Cheist?  1.  He  is  a  great  Shepherd  (Heb. 
xiii.  10).  2.  He  is  the  chief  Shepherd  (1  Pet.  v.  4).  Other  shepherds  are  mere 
men,  of  like  passions  with  ourselves.     3.  He  is  the  good  Shepherd  (John  x.  14). 

4.  He  is  a  Shepherd  who  has  no  equal  This  is  obvious  in  numberless  instances. 
Other  shepherds  lay  down  their  commission  at  death.  But  the  Shepherd  of 
Israel  by  dying  conquered  death;  and  carries  on  His  work  by  His  Holy  Spirit, 
wth  all  that  power  and  success  which  attended  His  personal  ministry  on  earth. 
III.  The  flock  which  Christ  doth  tend.  1.  It  is  a  little  flock  (Luke  xii.  32). 
Though  small  and  despised  in  the  eyes  of  a  vain  world;  though  poor  in  spirit, 
humble  and  meek  in  their  deportment  among  men,  they  are  greatly  beloved  by 
their  God.  They  are  not  only  little  in  their  own  eyes,  and  in  the  eyes  of  a 
vain  world,  but  little  in  point  of  number,  compared  to  a  thoughtless  multitude. 

2.  They  are  in  some  degree  acquainted  with  their  own  hearts.  3.  They  are  a 
pecuUar  flock,  as  they  are  aU  purchased  with  blood.     4.  They  are  a  chosen  flock. 

5.  They  know  their  Redeemer's  voice,  and  are  charmed  with  it.  6.  They  follow 
the  blessed  Shepherd  (John  x.  27).  {J.  Johnston.)  Jesus  Christ  the  Shepherd 
of  Eis  people : — I.  How  this  title  of  Shepherd  agrees  to  Jesus  Christ.  Out 
blessed  Lord  is  spoken  of  in  Scripture  under  several  characters — as  a  Physician, 
a  Ruler,  the  Captain  of  our  Salvation,  &c.,  and  in  this  and  many  other  places,  as  a 
Shepherd :  a  metaphor  full  of  comfort.  A  shepherd  is  called  to  the  office  and 
trust ;  and  this  may  eminently  be  said  of  Christ.  God  the  Father  appointed 
Him  to  this  office,  and  fitted  Him  for  it  (Ezek.  xxxiv.  23).  And  upon  this  account 
God  calls  Him  "  My  Shepherd  "  (Zech.  xiii.  7).  A  good  shepherd  gives  an  accoimt 
of  his  sheep;  and  so  will  Christ  (Heb.  ii.  13).  II.  Some  of  the  characters 
THAT  BELONO  TO  HiM  AS  A  Shepherd.  1.  He  is  the  Shepherd  of  souls  (1  Pet. 
ii.  25).  2.  He  is  that  great  Shepherd  of  the  sheep  (Heb.  xiii.  20).  Great  in 
respect  of  the  dignity  of  His  person,  and  great  in  His  accomplishments  for  His 
office.  3.  He  is  the  Good  Shepherd  (John  x.  11).  He  is  the  very  best  Shep- 
herd— (1)  As  being  most  wise  and  discerning.  He  is  acquainted  with  the  state 
of  His  whole  flock,  as  their  different  circumstances  require.  (2)  As  being  most 
faithful  and  constant.  (3)  In  respect  of  His  love  for  His  flock  (John  x.  11). 
m.  What  is  implied  in  His  feeding  Btis  flock.  1.  As  being  the  Shepherd 
of  His  people's  souls,  the  food  wherewith  He  feeds  is  spiritual.  Even  our  common 
supplies  for  the  body  are  from  Him.  2.  Of  this  spiritual  food  He  makes  use  of 
great  variety.  (1)  He  feeds  His  flock  with  His  word  and  ordinances.  (2)  By 
the  influences  of  His  Spirit.  (3)  With  Himself,  with  Has  own  flesh  and  blood, 
as  received  by  faith.  (4)  By  the  various  dispensations  of  His  providence  towards 
them.  (5)  When  necessary,  by  afflictions.  (6)  After  Christ  has  fed  His  flock  /^ 
for  a  time  here,  He  will  eternally  feed  them  with  higher  entertainments  in  heaven. 

3.  The  food  wherewith  Christ  feeds  His  flock  is  precious,  even  the  privileges 
and  promises  of  the  Gospel.     How  costly,  how  precious,  are  such  things  as  these ! 

4.  Christ  feeds  His  people  with  pleasant  food.  5.  The  provision  Clu'ist  affords 
His  flock  is  plentiful  (Cant.  v.  1).  6.  The  food  with  which  Christ  feeds  His  flock 
nourishes  the  soul  to  eternal  life  (John  vi  50).  TV.  In  what  respect  may 
Christ  be  said  to  feed  His  flock  like  a  shepherd?  1.  As  He  feeds  them 
with  judgment  and  discretion,  with  due  regard  to  their  age  and  growth.  2.  As 
He  doth  this  with  the  greatest  care  and  compassion,  as  those  weak  creatures 
He  hath  paid  the  greatest  price  for,  and  stands  in  the  nearest  relation  to.  3.  As 
He  feeds  them  effectually,  so  as  to  make  them  to  thrive.  4.  As  He  will  go  on 
to  feed  them,  till  they  are  nourished  up  to  a  fitness  for  the  glory  He  designs  to 
bring  them  to.  (D.  Wilcox.)  Christ  the  Shepherd: — The  language  is  partly 
metaphorical,  because  spiritual  and  intellectual  ideas  are  taken  from  natural 
objects.  But  there  is  another  sense  in  which  the  language  is  not  exclusively 
metaphorical;  because  there  is  such  a  steadiness  and  determination  in  the  char- 
acter, that  we  know  at  once  what  it  means — it  almost  ceases  to  be  metaphor. 
The  metaphor  is  one  most  commonly  used  to  denote  a  king  or  ruler,  a  prophet 
or  instructor,  a  priest  or  sacrifice.  The  origin  of  this  is  obvious,  especially  in 
reference  to  the  first  of  these  titles.  In  the  country  in  which  the  scene  is  laid, 
all  wealth  consisted  in  possessions  of  flocks  and  herds.  Ancient  history  tells 
us  of  a  race  of  shepherd  kings,  whose  tyranny  over  the  people  was  so  great  that 
they  were  more  like  wolves  than  shepherds.  And  it  is  conjectujred  that  on  this 
account  chiefly  it  is  S£ud  of  the  Egyptians  that  "  every  shepherd  was  an  abom- 
ination to  them."  The  first  idea,  then,  which  the  title  of  shepherd  gives  us  is, 
that  of  the  kingly  character,  and  we  find  that  every  king  was  the  nigh  priest 


CHAP.  XL.]  ISAIAH.  197 

of  that  people  also.  Melchizedek  was  both  "  king  of  Salem  and  priest  of  the 
Most  High  God,"  And  he  who  was  recognised  thus  as  a  shepherd,  was  also 
regarded  as  the  principal  teacher  in  spiritual  matters.  Thus  we  see  how  the 
title  of  Shepherd  comprehends  all  the  other  characters  of  our  Lord — King, 
Instructor,  and  Priest.  It  would  naturally  follow  that  when  an  individual 
was  thus  recognised  as  "  shepherd,"  the  people  over  whom  he  was  placed  would 
be  denominated  his  "  flock"  or  his  "  sheep."  The  word  "shepherd"  includes  in 
it  all  that  pertains  to  the  office  of  a  shepherd.     I.  Skill.     EL  Tendbkness  and 

AFFECTION.       III.    WATCHFULNESS.       IV.    PoWER.       (C.     EvaUSOV,,    M.A.)  JeSUS 

the  Shepherd: — I.  Old  Testament  illustbations  of  the  maimer  in  which  the 
Lord  Jesus  Christ  discharges  the  office  of  feeding  His  flock  like  a  shepherd.  L  Out 
of  five  great  types  we  begin  with  Abel,  the  shepherd  slain.  Abel  was  a  type 
of  the  Savioiir,  in  that,  being  a  shepherd,  he  sanctified  his  work  to  the  glory  of 
God,  and  offered  sacrifice  of  blood  upon  the  altar  of  the  Lord,  and  the  Lord  had 
respect  xmto  Abel  and  his  offering.  Farther  down  the  page  of  sacred  history 
we  find  another  shepherd.  He  is  a  more  instructive  type  of  the  Saviour,  perhaps, 
than  the  first,  but  in  Abel  we  discover  a  truth  which  is  absent  in  all  others.  Abel 
is  the  only  one  of  the  typical  shepherds  who  dies  at  the  foot  of  the  altar,  he  is 
the  only  sacrificing  shepherd;  and  herein  you  see  Jesus  Christ  in  the  very  earliest 
ages  set  forth  to  manMnd  as  the  slaughtered  Victim.  2.  Now  we  turn  to  Jacob, 
the  toiling  shepherd.  Here  is  a  type  of  the  Good  Shepherd,  not  as  dying,  but 
as  keeping  sheep  with  a  view  to  get  imto  Himself  a  flock.  Jacob's  labour  was 
of  the  most  firduous  character.  It  is  sweet  to  dwell  upon  the  spiritual  parallel 
of  Laban  having  required  all  the  sheep  at  Jacob's  hand.  If  they  were  torn 
of  beasts  he  must  make  it  good;  if  any  of  them  died,  he  must  stand  as  surety 
for  the  whole.  And  did  not  the  Saviour  stand  just  so  while  He  was  here  below? 
Was  not  BQs  toil  for  His  Church  just  the  toil  of  one  who  felt  that  He  was  under 
suretyship  obligations  to  bring  every  one  of  them  safe  to  the  hand  of  Him  who 
had  committed  them  to  His  charge?  When  Jacob  had  received  a  reward  for 
all  his  toil  out  of  the  flock  which  he  himself  tended,  he  then  conducted  both  his 
family  and  his  flock  away  from  Laban.  Jacob  coming  back  from  Laban  to  the 
Promised  Land  is  a  true  picture  of  Jesus  Christ  coming  up  from  the  world, 
followed  by  His  Church,  to  enter  into  that  better  Canaan  which  has  been  given 
to  us  by  a  covenant  of  salt  for  ever.  3.  Joseph  is  a  type  of  Jesus  reigning  in 
the  Egypt  of  this  world  for  the  good  of  His  own  people,  while  they  are  here  below. 
Jesus  Christ  is  King  over  Egypt's  realm.  Observe  the  likeness  between  Joseph 
and  Jesus  in  this  respect.  Joseph  was  of  very  singular  advantage  to  the  Egyp- 
tians. They  must  have  starved  in  the  years  of  famine,  if  his  prescient  eye  had 
not  foreseen  the  famine,  and  stored  up  the  plenty  of  the  seven  previous  years. 
And  Jesus  Christ  is  of  great  service  even  to  this  wicked  world.  It  is  by  Him 
that  it  is  preserved.  4.  Moses,  when  he  kept  sheep,  kept  them  in  the  wilder- 
ness, far  away  from  all  other  flocks;  and  when  he  became  a  shepherd  over  God's 
people  Israel,  his  business  was  not  to  preserve  them  in  Egypt,  but  to  conduct 
them  out  of  it.  Here,  then,  is  a  representation  of  Jesus  Christ  as  the  Shepherd 
of  a  separated  people.  Jesus,  Uke  Moses,  might  have  been  a  king.  As  Moses 
refused  to  be  called  the  son  of  Pharaoh's  daughter,  so  Jesiis  Christ  said,  "  Get 
thee  behind  Me,  Satan,"  to  all  the  pomp  and  glory  of  this  present  world,  and 
preferred  to  take  part  with  His  despised  people,  who  were  crushed  down  by  the 
reigning  powers  in  the  Egypt  of  Hjs  days.  Now,  Moses  began  his  mission  by 
going  to  Pharaoh,  and  saying,  "  Thus  saith  the  Lord,  Let  My  people  go,  that 
they  may  serve  Me."  Jesus  Christ  begins  as  the  Shepherd  of  the  separate  ones 
by  demanding  that  they  should  be  let  go  from  the  bondage  of  their  natural  estate. 
Our  main  point  is  the  great  exodus  of  Moses.  Every  heir  of  heaven  is  brought 
right  out  of  Egypt,  led  through  the  Red  Sea  of  Jesus  Christ's  blood,  baptized 
into  Jesus,  and  brought  out  into  the  separated  position  in  the  wilderness.  It 
is  easy  to  see  how  Moses  was  a  shepherd  to  the  people  while  in  the  wilderness. 
5.  David.  This  shepherd  represents  Jesus  Christ,  not  at  all  as  the  others,  but 
as  King  in  the  midst  of  His  Church.  David,  like  Jesus  Christ,  begins  his  fife 
with  teials.  II.  New  Testament  descetptions.  III.  Impeessive  applica- 
tions. L  One  of  comfort  and  satisfaction  to  you  who  are  poor,  needy,  weary, 
troubled  lambs  or  sheep  of  the  flock.  "  He  shall  gather  the  lambs  with  His 
arms,  and  carry  them  in  His  bosom,  and  shall  gently  lead  those  that  are  with 
young."  The  lambs  have  not  the  value  of  mature  sheep,  yet  they  are  the  most 
thought  of  imder  the  great  Shepherd.      They  might  fetch  the  least  price  in  the 


198  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR,  [chap,  xii 

market,  but  they  have  the  greatest  portion  of  His  heart.  The  weaklings  and 
the  sickly  of  the  flock  are  the  special  objects  of  the  Saviour's  care.  2.  A  second 
application  containing  comfort  and  warning  too.  Sinner!  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ 
now  represents  Himself  as  being  a  Shepherd  who  is  come  to  seek  and  to  save 
that  which  was  lost.  Such  is  Jesus  now,  looking  after  stray  sheep.  Where  are 
you?  3.  So  we  shall  conclude  with  these  words,  which  may  be  for  both  saint 
and  sinner.  Let  it  never  be  forgotten  that  Jesus  Christ  is  pre-eminently  to 
be  preached  as  the  suffering  One  (Zech.  xiii.  7).  You  shall  know  about  the  toiling 
Shepherd  by-and-by;  the  Shepherd  reigning  in  Egypt,  the  Joseph  you  shall  know 
soon;  the  Shepherd  of  the  separated  flock,  you  shall  foUow  ere  long;  the  Shep- 
herd reigning  in  Jerusalem,  the  David  you  shall  rejoice  to  serve;  but  now  you 
have  to  do  with  the  Shepherd  bleeding  and  dying.  (C.  H.  Spurgeon.)  The 
Good  Shepherd : — The  blessed  Jesus  is  represented  imder  this  amiable  character. 
The  metaphor  suggests — I.  The  graciousness  and  benignity  of  His  natxtbb. 
It  was  goodness,  alike  unmerited  and  unsohcited,  that  originally  moved  Him  to 
interpose  in  our  behalf.  On  what  penitent  did  He  ever  look  with  coldness  and 
aversion?  n.  The  idea  of  provision.  As  the  shepherd  leads  about  his  flock 
from  one  spot  of  pasturage  to  another,  so  does  the  Redeemer  of  His  people  conduct 
them  to  places  where  nourishment  and  sustenance  may  be  obtained.  III.  The 
ideas  of  watchfulness  and  protection.  They  are  exposed  to  a  variety  of 
perils;  but  He  is  vigilant  to  observe,  and  omnipotent  to  defend.  IV.  Kind 
attention  to  the  feeble,  and  tender  solicitude  for  the  young.  "  He 
shall  gather  the  lambs  with  His  arm,"  &c.  V.  An  idea  of  the  final  blessed- 
ness reserved  for  the  flock.  From  the  tender  care  exercised  over  them 
here,  we  may  infer  somewhat  of  the  dignity  to  which  they  shall  be  advanced 
hereafter.  There  are  many  of  the  ordinary  phenomena  of  nature  that  fail  to 
engage  our  wonder,  merely  because  they  are  not  uncommon.  What,  for  example, 
if  it  did  not  come  under  our  daily  observation,  could  more  surprise  and  astonish 
us  than  the  progressive  development  of  our  own  faculties?  Who  could  believe 
that,  under  the  feeble  exterior  of  infancy,  there  slumbered  intellectual  energies, 
which,  when  a  series  of  years  had  gone  by,  would  expand  to  constitute  the  pro- 
found scholar,  the  enlightened  statesman,  and  the  accomplished  orator?  But 
multiplied  experience  has  taught  us  what  education  and  circumstances  can  do, 
and  we  cease  to  wonder  that  from  the  infant  mind  such  fruits  are  capable  of  being 
reared.  But  sm-ely,  when  we  thus  behold  the  admirable  progress  of  which  our 
nature  is  susceptible  within  the  narrow  compass  of  threescore  years  and  ten — 
when  we  remember  that  the  vast  intellect  of  Newton  was  lodged  in  an  infant's 
body — it  may  serve  to  remove  our  doubts  as  to  the  higher  perfection  of  which 
our  nature  is  capable  in  a  future  state  of  being.  The  goodness  of  the  Great  Shep- 
herd in  conducting  His  people  to  their  final  state,  is  most  beautifully  represented 
in  the  concluding  verses  of  the  7th  chapter  of  Revelation — a  passage  at  once 
so  tender  and  subUme,  that  it  is  said  our  great  Scottish  poet,  from  his  very  boy- 
hood, could  never  read  it  without  tears.  (J.  L.  Adamson.)  He  shall  gather 
the  lambs  with  His  arm. — The  Good  Shepherd's  consideration  for  the  weak  and 
tender   of    His    flock : — I.    Christ's    flock    is    made    up    op    believers    op 

SEVERAL  GROWTHS;     OF   LAMBS   AS   WELL  AS   MORE   GROWN   SHEEP.        1.    As   tO   the 

ages  and  years  of  Christians,  we  read  of  Paul  the  aged,  and  of  Mnason,  an  old 
disciple  (Acts  xsi.  16);  and  of  others  the  kindness  of  whose  youth  God  partieu- 
larly  remembers.  Josiah  (2  Chron.  xxxiv.  3);  Obadiah  (1  Kings  xviii.  12); 
Samuel  (1  Sara.  ii.  18);  Timothy  (2  Tim.  iii.  15).  2.  In  respect  of  stature,  strength, 
and  growth  in  grace,  Christ's  flock  is  made  up  of  Iambs  as  well  as  sheep.  Grace 
is  not  perfected  as  soon  as  implanted,  nor  does  it  thrive  in  all  alike.  In  some, 
the  good  seed  brought  forth  an  hundredfold,  in  others  sixty,  in  others  but  thirty 
(Matt.  xiii.).  God  has  ordered  it  thus  for  wise  purposes;  that  the  weak  may 
be  assisted  by  the  strong,  and  the  strong  have  opportimity  of  showing  their 
compassion  and  tenderness  to  the  weak;  that  the  strong  may  by  this  means  be 
kept  humble,  as  seeing  in  the  case  of  others  what  they  themselves  once  were; 
and  that  the  weak  may  not  be  discouraged,  but  reach  after  the  attainments  of 
the  strong.  II.  Tub  instances  here  mentioned  of  Christ's  compassionate 
regard  to  the  weak.  1.  The  Iambs,  when  wandering.  He  will  gather  with  His 
arm.  "Gathering"  supposes  oiur  proneness  to  wander.  (1)  Tliis  proceeds  from 
the  remains  of  corruption  in  us,  and  in  His  whole  flock,  which  are  not  yet  per- 
fectly renewed.  (2)  The  suddenness  and  surprise  of  a  temptation  may  some- 
times occasion  their  going  astray.     (3)  As  making  way  for  both  these,  Christiang 


CHAP.  XL,]  ISAIAH.  199 

too  often  let  down  their  watch;  upon  which  they  are  betrayed  by  corruption, 
and  Satan  gets  an  advantage  over  them.  Christ  will  gather  such  with  His  arm. 
Which  implies — (a)  That  He  looks  after  them,  even  when  they  are  going  astray 
from  Him,  and  He  is  concerned  for  them  still.  (6)  That  He  will  not  let  them 
wander  too  far,  not  beyond  the  reach  of  His  arm,  with  which  they  are  both 
encircled  and  restrained,  (c)  That  He  will  employ  His  power,  when  the  case  neces- 
sarily requires  it,  in  order  to  their  recovery,  (d)  That  He  wiU  gather  them  with 
gentleness  and  care,  (c)  That  He  will  gather  them  with  His  arm,  with  it 
stretched  out  kindly  to  receive  them,  and  to  give  them  a  gracious  welcome  to 
Him  again.  2.  He  wiU  carry  them  in  His  bosom.  This  implies  great  weakness 
in  some  that  belong  to  Christ's  flock,  and  great  compassion  and  grace  on  the 
part  of  Him,  their  Shepherd.  "  The  lambs,"  or  young  converts  of  Christ's  flock, 
may  be  in  many  respects  weak:  weak  as  to  knowledge,  faith,  and  love.  Such 
weaklings  as  these  Christ  has  in  His  flock;  and  yet  He  does  not  cast  them  off, 
but  "  carries  them  in  His  bosom,"  which  notes — (1)  That  He  observes  with 
compassion  the  very  weakest  in  His  flock,  and  has  His  heart,  as  well  as  His  arms 
open,  to  cherish  them.  (2)  That  He  will  take  them  into  a  place  of  safety.  (3)  In 
a  word,  Christ's  carrying  the  weak  of  His  flock  "  in  His  bosom,"  notes  His  accept- 
ance of  them  as  sincere,  notwithstanding  the  weaknesses  they  lament  over.  These 
shall  not  keep  them  from  His  heart.  3.  Oiu-  Lord  and  Shepherd  Jesus  Christ 
**  will  gently  lead  those  that  are  with  young."  These  words  may  set  forth  the  con- 
dition and  state  of  such  sheep  and  followers  of  Him  as  are  sorely  biu-dened.  And 
there  are  many  things  to  burden  Christ's  sheep,  as  their  difiicult  services,  the 
load  of  their  unmortified  sins,  and  the  bitter  fruits  of  them,  in  their  various  suffer- 
ings of  body  and  mind.  As  pressed  with  these,  some  of  Christ's  flock  may  be 
said  to  be  as  feeble  as  sheep  that  are  with  young,  or  give  suck:  but  such  "  He 
will  gently  lead."  Which  implies — (1)  That  He  will  go  before  them  in  the  way 
they  are  to  take.  (2)  He  will  lead  them  gently  on,  and  not  hurry  and  try  them 
by  any  means  beyond  their  strength.  (3)  He  will  bear  with  aU  their  weakness 
and  imperfections,  groans  and  complaints,  and  never  take  occasion  from  thence 
to  be  severe  with  them,  or  forsake  and  leave  them.  III.  Christ  will  make 
GOOD  His  chaeacteb  of  a  Shepherd  to  His  sheep  that  are  weak,  either 

THROUGH    their   SMALL   ATTAINMENTS    IN    GRACE,    OR   THE    GREATNESS    OF    THEIB 

BURDENS.  1.  This  is  here  expressly  asserted,  "  He  shall  gather  the  lambs  with 
His  arm,  and  carry  them  in  His  bosom,  and  gently  lead  those  that  are  with  young." 
2.  To  this  His  compassionate  nature  inchnes  Him  (Heb.  iv.  15).  Such  a  nature 
cannot  but  be  peculiarly  concerned  for  the  weaklings  of  His  flock,  whose  groans 
are  continually  going  to  heaven.  3.  This  He  has  in  His  commission.  (Is«k 
IxL  1.)  4.  This  has  all  along  been  His  dealing  with  His  flock;  and  He  is  "the 
same  yesterday,  and  to-day,  and  for  ever."  AppUcation — ^Will  Christ  gather 
the  lambs  with  His  arm,  and  carry  them  in  His  bosom?  What  an  inducement 
is  this  to  come  into  His  flock!  Be  humbled,  that  you  should  be  such  weaklings 
as  you  are,  so  apt  to  wander,  and  so  unable  to  return;  but  yet  remember  tne 
excellent  properties  of  Christ  as  the  Shepherd  of  His  flock.  {D.  Wilcox.)  Four 
attributes  of  Divine  love : — Isaiah  tells  us  here  of — I.  The  strength  of  the  Divxnb 
LOVE.  "  He  shall  gather  with  His  arm."  The  power  to  overtake  and  elevate 
such  an  one  as  Saul  of  Tarsus  is  no  power  less  than  "  the  arm  of  the  Lord 
revealed."  "  He  shall  carry  in  His  bosom."  Even  greater  power  is  involved 
in  this  than  in  first  gathering  in  the  arm.  The  power  of  endurance.  Such 
power  was  that  of  the  Divine  love  in  Christ  towards  Peter.  EL  The  gentle- 
ness OF  THE  Divine  love.  So  with  the  Divine  love  that  said  to  Mary, 
"  Why  weepest  thou?  "  or  to  Thomas,  "  Reach  hither  thy  hand."  HI.  The 
PROTECTiVENESS  OF  THE  DiviNE  LOVE.  That  may  be  the  chief  thought  in 
these  words.  He  promises  more  than  the  intervention  of  His  arm  between 
soul  and  dangers:  He  promises  the  intervention  of  His  entire  Being.  IV.  The 
ADAPTATIONS  OF  THE  DiviNB  LOVE.  (17.  jR.  Thomos,  B.A.)  A  Sabbath- 
school  sermon : — I.  We  have  to  examine  A  portrait  of  the  Good  Shepherd. 
1.  Men  carry  in  their  bosoms  their  gems,  their  jewels,  and  so  doth  Christ  carry 
the  lambs  of  the  flock,  regarding  them  as  His  peculiar  treasure.  He  puts  an 
estimate  upon  them  according  to  His  own  relationship  to  them.  He  knows, 
too,  what  the  child  cost  Him,  for  to  redeem  a  Mttle  child  from  going  down  into 
the  pit  He  must  needs  bear  the  penalty  due  to  justice,  and  suffer  even  unto  death. 
He  recollects,  moreover,  what  that  child  will  come  to  if  He  do  not  save  it  by  carrying 
it  in  His  bosom.    A  soul  is  a  precious  thing  to  Christ,  for  He  believes  in  its 


200  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xl. 

immortality.  And  He  knows,  too,  what  may  come  of  that  little  child  if  He  saveth 
it,  for  the  possibilities  of  blessing  within  one  little  saved  child  who  shall  estimate 
but  the  Lord  who  knoweth  all  things?  Jesus  knows  that  a  boy  may  be  the 
spiritual  father  of  hundreds  ere  he  dies.  There  may  be  in  the  congregation  a 
Chrysostom  or  an  Augustine.  Right  among  us  may  sit  s  Uttle  Whitefield,  or  s 
young  Luther.  IL  We  have  an  example  fob  the  Chttbch.  There  are  two 
great  things  which  a  Church  ought  always  to  have,  namely,  an  arm  to  gather 
with  and  a  bosom  to  carry  in.  IIL  A  practical  word  or  two  upon  the  model 
Teacher.  He  who  gathers  the  lambs  with  His  arm  and  carries  them  in  Hia 
bosom  is  the  model  of  a  Sunday-school  teacher.  Li  what  points?  1.  There 
should  be  about  the  teacher  attractiveness,  in  order  that  he  may  gather.     2.  After 

Sou  have  attracted,  uplift.  He  carries  the  lambs  in  His  bosom,  and  therefore 
[e  must  lift  them  up.  Everything  about  a  teacher  should  tend  to  raise  the 
children.  3.  When  He  lifted  up  the  lamb.  He  laid  it  on  His  heart.  If  you 
are  to  bless  the  little  ones,  they  must  lie  on  your  heart.  You  must  make  them 
feel  the  life  of  your  religion.  4.  Next,  bear  them  forward.  The  lamb  is  put 
into  the  shepherd's  bosom,  not  that  he  may  stand  stUI  with  it  all  the  day  long, 
but  because  the  sheep  are  going  this  way  and  the  Iambs  must  go  that  way  too, 
and  therefore  he  carries  it.  You  must  be  always  going  forward  yourself  if  the 
child  is  to  go  forward  with  you.  5.  Guard  the  children.  Christ  placed  the  lambs 
in  His  bosom  to  protect  them.  6.  The  next  word  is,  cheer.  7.  Delight  in  them. 
That  tenth  verse  has  a  great  charm  for  me.  "  The  Lord  God  will  come  with 
strong  hand,  and  His  arm  shall  rule  for  Him:  behold.  His  reward  is  with  Him, 
and  His  work  before  Him."  Well,  what  did  He  have  before  Him  but  the  sheep 
that  He  went  forth  to  find,  and  the  lambs  which  He  gathered  and  carried  in  Hia 
bosom?  They  were  His  work,  but  they  were  also  His  reward.  (C.  H.  Spurgeon.) 
The  lambs  and  their  Shepherd : — L  Describe  the  lambs.  L  They  are  truly  sheep. 
They  are  not  sheep  in  maturity,  but  they  are  sheep  to  a  certainty.  The  sheep 
of  God  are  harmless.  They  can  bear,  but  they  cannot  revenge.  The  sheep 
goes  fm^her  than  the  non-inflicting  of  evil,  it  bears  evil  without  complaint.  The 
extraordinary  patience  of  the  sheep  is  seen  in  God's  people,  when  they  joyously 
endure  a  weight  of  affliction,  and  pass  through  the  valley  of  death  with  composure. 
Sheep,  again,  are  cleanly  creatures  ;  cleanly  in  their  feeding — carrion  never  tempta 
them ;  cleanly  in  their  habits.  Furthermore,  the  sheep  is  guileless.  You  see 
the  Uon  creeping  through  the  thicket  full  of  cunning;  but  sheep  have  none. 
Again,  sheep  are  tractable.  When  a  man  tames  a  lion  so  that  he  may  sport 
with  it,  he  gets  the  name  of  lion-tamer;  nobody  is  renowTied  for  taming  a  sheep, 
for  it  has  a  tractable  disposition,  and  so  all  the  elect  of  God  have  an  obedient 
and  yielding  spirit.  Do  not  forget  that  the  lambs  are  truly  Christ's  sheep.  They 
are  as  dearly  bought  with  His  blood;  they  are  as  surely  objects  of  His  care; 
they  are  as  manifestly  illustrations  of  His  power;  they  shall  as  certainly  be  proofs 
of  His  faithfulness  as  the  strongest  of  the  flock.  2.  Why  are  they  lambs,  and 
in  what  are  they  distinguished?  (1)  Some  of  them  are  lambs  for  age,  though 
not  all;  for  there  are  some  young  Christians  who  are  full  growTi,  and  there  are  othera 
very  aged,  who  remain  to  be  lambs  stilL  (2)  The  distinguishing  mark  Ues  rather 
in  spiritual  deficiencies — they  are  but  children  in  knowledge.  They  are  imma- 
ture also  in  experience.  (3)  So  are  they  lambs  in  tenderness  of  feeling.  They 
are  too  susceptible,  and  therefore  feel  the  unkiudness  of  the  world  acutely. 
(4)  They  are  timid  and  trembling,  and  dare  not  courageously  proclaim  them- 
selves at  all  times  on  the  Lord's  side.  (5)  Perhaps,  too,  they  are  subject  to 
melancholy,  to  doubts  and  fears,  and  distresses  of  mind.     IL  Let  us  come  to 

EXPRESS    OUR   FEARS    CONCERNING    THESE    I.AMBS    OF   THE    FLOCK.       We    are    afraid 

for  them,  because  of  the  howling  wolves  there  are  about.  We  are  equally  alarmed 
because  of  their  association  with  the  goats.  Then  we  are  jealous  over  the  lambs 
because  of  the  old  lion.  We  are  even  more  concerned  when  we  think  of  the  bear. 
A  flattering  world  hugs  tightly.  When  we  put  all  these  dangers  together,  we 
add  to  them  the  fact  that  lambs  are  subject  to  the  same  diseases  which  are  incident 
to  all  sheep.  They,  too,  get  the  foot-rot  of  weariness  in  the  ways  of  God.  They 
begin  to  be  slothful  in  the  cause  of  God.  They  suffer  from  coldness  of  heart, 
have  a  tendency  to  wander,  and  catch  the  stiff  neck  of  pride.  III.  Let  ua 
REJOICE  IN  THE  GooD  Shepherd.  "  He  shall  gather  the  lambs  with  His  arm,  and 
carry  them  in  His  bosom."  1.  Who  is  He  of  whom  such  gracious  words  are 
spoken?  "  Behold,  the  Lord  God  will  come  with  strong  hand,"  &c.  But  let 
OS  read  on  (vers.  12-18).     2.  Why  doth  He  carry  lambs  in  His  bosom?     Becaose 


CHAP.  XL.]  ISAIAH.  201 

He  hath  a  tender  heart,  and  any  weakness  at  once  melts  Him.     But  more,  it  is  His 
office  to  consider  the  weak.     For  this  it  is  that  He  was  made  a  faithful  high  priest 
— that  He  might  have  compassion  on  the  ignorant.     He  was  a  lamb  Himself  once. 
He  purchased  them  with  blood.     Moreover,  He  is  responsible  for  that  lamb. 
They  are  all  a  part  of  His  glory.     3.  What  does  He  say  He  will  do?     "  Carry 
them."     Sometimes  He  carries  them  by  not  permitting  them  to  endure  mucn 
trouble.     At  other  times,  by  having  some  tender,  loving  person  to  take  care  of 
them.     He  carries  them  instrumentally.     At  other  times,  such  lambs  are  carried 
by  having  an  unusual  degree  of  love  given  them,  and  consequently  a  large  amount 
of  joy,  80  that  they  bear  up  and  stand  fast.     Though  their  knowledge  may  not 
be  deep,  they  have  great  sweetness  in  what  they  do  know.     4.  How  does  He 
carry  them?    He  carries  them  in  His  bosom — not  on  His  back — that  is  how 
He  carries  stray  sheep.     (1)  Here  is  put  forth  boundless  affection.     Could  He  put 
them  in  His  bosom  if  He  did  not  love  them  much?     Where  does  the  Father 
place  the  SonT    He  is  in  the  bosom  of  the  Father.     Where  did  Abraham  carry 
Lazarus?    In  bis  bosom.     Where  did  Naomi  bear  her  young  grandson  Obed? 
He  was  in  her  bosom.     Where  did  the  man  in  the  parable  put  his  little  ewe  lamb  ? 
In  his  bosom.     (2)  Then  there  is  tender  nearness.     How  near  to  a  man  is  that 
which  is  in  his  bosom.     (3)  Then  it  is  a  hallowed  familiarity.      Lambs  when 
put  into  the  bosom,  having  no  intellect,  cannot  therefore  learn  anything;    but 
the  lambs  of  Christ's  flock,  whenever  they  ride  in  Christ's  bosom,  talk  with  Him; 
they  tell  Him  all  their  secrets,  and  He  tells  them  His.     (4)  Then  there  is  perfect 
safety.     The  dear  ones  in  His  bosom — what  can  hurt  them?    They  must  hurt  the 
Shepherd  first.     How  can  they  get  the  lamb  out  of  the  Shepherd's  arm?    Must 
they  not  cut  off  the  Shepherd's  arm  before  they  can  hurt  the  lamb?     IV.  Lbt 
us  HEAR  THE  Shepherd's  VOICE.     If  you  be  the  lambs,  hear  the  Shepherd's 
voice,  which  says,  "  Follow  Me."      You  that  are  not  lambs,  hear  Has  words, 
*'  Come  unto  Me."      Those  of  us  who  are  His  sheep,  let  us  hear  the  Shepherd's 
voice,  saying,  "  Feed  My  lambs."     {Ibid,)        Greatness  in  league  with  gentleness : — 
In  the  chapter  before  us  our  Saviour  is  described  as  Jehovah  Grod.      Greatness 
in  league  with  gentleness,  and  power  linked  with  affection,  now  pass  before  us. 
Heroes  who  have  been  most  distinguished  for  fury  in  the  fight,  have  been  tender 
of  heart  as  little  children;    sharp  were  their  swords  to  the  foe,  but  gentle  their 
hands  towards  the  weak.      It  is  the  index  of  a  noble  nature  that  it  can  be  majestic 
as  a  lion  in  the  midst  of  the  fray,  and  roar  like  a  young  lion  on  the  scene  of  con- 
flict, and  yet  it  has  a  dove's  eye  and  a  maiden's  heart.     {Hid.)        Jesus  and 
fhe  lambs: — I.  Who  are  the  lambs  which  our  blessed  Lord  is  said  to  oathes 
AND  to  carry  EN  His  BOSOM?     1.  In  a  certain  sense  we  may  affirm  that  all 
His  people  are  lambs.     In  so  far  as  they  exhibit  the  Christian  spirit,  they  are 
lamb-like.     2.  StUl,  this  is  not  the  precise  meaning  of  the  text.     The  word  "  lamb  " 
frequently  signifies  the  young;    and  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ  graciously  receives 
many  young  persons  into  His  bosom.     The  ancient  teachers  of  the  Jewish  law 
invited  no  children  to  gather  around  them.     I  suppose  there  was  not  a  Kabbi 
in  all  Jerusalem  who  would  have  desired  a  child  to  listen  to  him,  and  if  it  had 
been  said  of  any  one  of  the  Sanhedrin,  "  that  man  teaches  so  as  to  be  imderstood 
by  a  child,"  he  would  have  thought  himself  insulted.     But  not  so  our  Master; 
He  always  had  children  among  His  auditory.     Some  in  om:  day  mistrust  youthful 
piety,  but  our  Saviour  lends  no  countenance  to  such  suspicions.     Some  cautiously 
whisper,  "  Let  the  pious  youth  be  tried  awhile  before  we  believe  in  his  religion;  let 
him  be  tempted;  let  him  bear  the  frosts  of  the  world;   perhaps  the  blossoms  will 
drop  away  and  disappoint  us."     Such  was  not  my  Master's  way.     3.  But,  again, 
by  lambs  we  may  quite  as  properly  understand  young  converts.     4.  We  shall 
not  strain  the  text  if  we  say  that  the  lambs  in  the  flock  are  those  who  are  naturally 
of  a  weak,  timid,  trembling  disposition.     5.  The  lambs  are  those  who  know  but 
little  of  the  things  of  God.     IT.  How  does  Jesus  show  this  special  care  foe 
the  weak  ones?     He  does  this,  according  to  the  text,  in  two  ways — 1.  By 
gathering  them.     The  shepherd's  kitchen  fire  is,  for  the  time,  the  lambs'  own 
nursery.     When  the  flock  is  on  the  march,  it  will  happen,  ui\less  the  shepherd 
is  very  watchfid,  that  the  lambs  will  lag  behind.     So  it  is  in  the  progress  of  the  great 
Christian  Church;   persecuted  often,  always  more  or  less  molested  by  the  outside 
world,  there  are  some  who  flag,  they  cannot  keep  up  the  pace;  the  spiritual  war- 
fare is  too  severe  for  them.     At  other  times  the  lambs  do  worse  than  this.     They 
are  of  a  skittish  natmre,  and,  feeling  the  natural  vigomr  of  new-bom  Ufe,  they  are 
not  content  to  keep  within  bounds,  as  the  older  sheep  do,  but  they  betake  them- 


202  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  xu 

selves  to  wandering,  so  that  at  the  close  of  the  day  the  lambs  cost  the  shepherd 
much  trouble.  So  are  there  many  immature  Christians  whose  minds  are  hung 
loosely,  and  are  unstable  as  water.  2.  After  He  gathers  them,  He  carries  them 
in  His  bosom.  That  is — (1)  The  safest  place,  for  the  wolf  cannot  get  them  there. 
(2)  The  tenderest  place,  where  we  should  put  only  a  poor  creature  that  had  a 
broken  bone,  and  could  not  bear  to  be  roughly  touched.  (3)  The  easiest  place. 
(4)  The  most  honourable  place.  We  would  not  put  into  our  bosom  that  which 
we  despised.  3.  Our  Lord  shows  His  care  for  His  lambs  in  His  teachings,  which 
are  very  simple,  mostly  in  parables,  full  of  winning  illustrations,  but  always  plain. 
He  is  pleased  to  reveal  His  teachings  gradually.  His  experimental  teachings 
are  all  by  degrees,  too.  4.  In  the  solemn  curses  with  which  He  guarded  the  little 
ones  (Matt,  xviii.  6,  10).  6.  How  many  of  the  promises  are  made  on  piirpose  for 
the  weak.  6.  The  Lord  Jesus  Christ's  tenderness  to  His  people  is  further  shown  in 
this,  that  what  He  requires  of  them  is  easy.  7.  He  shows  His  gentleness,  moreover, 
in  that  He  accepts  the  least  service  that  these  little  ones  may  offer.     III.  Wheee- 

FORE  THIS  CARS  OF  CHRIST  TOWARDS  THE  LAMBS  OF  THE  FLOCK?        Because  they 

need  it,  and  He  loves  them,  and  therefore  shall  they  receive  according  to  their 
necessities.  But  why  is  He  so  particularly  anxious  to  succour  them?  Surely, 
if  He  lost  a  lamb  or  two,  it  would  be  no  loss  among  so  many,  and  if  one  of  the 
feeble  minds  should  perish,  it  woidd  be  no  great  consequence  when  a  multitude 
that  no  man  can  number  shall  be  saved.  The  answer  is  plain.  1.  The  weak  are 
as  much  redeemed  by  the  blood  of  Christ  as  the  strong.  2.  In  the  new-born 
child  of  God  there  are  peculiar  beauties  which  are  not  so  apparent  in  others. 
3.  Jesus  has  such  care  for  the  weak  ones,  because  they  will  become  strong  one 
day.  4.  Our  Lord  Jesus  Christ's  suretyship  engagements  require  that  He  should 
preserve  the  weakest  as  well  as  the  strongest.  5.  Besides  His  suretyship  engage- 
ments, there  are  His  promises.  6.  Compassion  argues  that  if  any  should  be 
watched  it  should  be  these.  IV.  A  practical  conclusion.  1.  Let  us  gather 
the  lambs  for  Christ.  2.  Learn  to  carry  in  our  bosoms  those  who  are  gathered. 
(Ibid.)  "  /  like  your  Jtsus  "; — A  little  Moslem  child  accounted  for  her  prefer- 
ence for  the  Christian  religion  by  saying,  "  I  like  your  Jesus,  because  He  loves 
little  girls!  Our  Mohammed  did  not  love  little  girls."  With  unerring  instinct 
she  had  seized  upon  at  least  one  of  the  greatest  differences  between  the  two  reli- 
gions. Christ  and  children: — Ruskin  has  observed  that  there  are  no  children 
in  Greek  art,  but  that  they  abound  in  Christian  art — an  unmistakable  token 
that  it  was  the  eye  of  Christ  which  first  fully  appreciated  the  attractiveness 
of  childhood.  (J.  Stalker,  D.D.)  And  carry  them  in  His  bosom.  —  The 
saints^  final  perseverance  secured  hy  the  tenderness  of  Christ  to  the  weak: — I.  By 

THE    "  lambs  "    WE    ABB    CLEARLY    TO    UNDERSTAND    WEAK    BELIEVERS.        It   haS 

nothing  to  do  with  their  age,  either  natural  or  spiritual.  Sometimes  they  are 
called  babes."  Sometimes  we  are  told  of  "  the  day  of  small  things  "  ;  some- 
times of  "  smoking  flax."  They  are  weak  believers.  We  see  it  in  their  degree 
of  spiritual  knowledge.  They  little  know  themselves.  They  little  know  the 
hard  warfare  they  have  to  maintain.  They  are  surprised  because  they  find  the 
strong  workings  of  nature  and  of  the  flesh  within  them.  These  are  they  who 
live  much  upon  their  enjoyments  when  they  have  them,  and  are  exceedingly 
cast  down  when  they  have  thera  not.  They  are,  for  the  most  part,  persons  who 
are  more  affected  by  providences  than  by  God's  promises.  They  have  indistinct 
views  of  Christ,  of  His  great  atonement.  They  live  upon  their  happy  frames. 
They  draw  but  very  feeble  distinction  between  a  life  of  faith  and  a  uie  of  sense. 
They  love  to  discourage  themselves.  They  think  much  more  of  their  bitters 
than  of  that  Branch  that  can  make  the  bitter  waters  sweet.  And  too  oft  they 
think  more  of  their  own  sacrifices  than  they  think  of  the  great  Sacrifice.  They 
are  weak  in  knowledge  ;  weak  in  experience  ;  weak  in  courage.  They  fail  too 
oft  in  the  day  of  adversity.  And  yet  they  form  a  part  of  the  true  flock  of  Christ. 
There  are  but  few  folds  in  which  lambs  do  not  appear  a  large  proportion  to  the 
whole.  II.  The  gentle  conduct  that  they  meet  with.  "  He  shall  feed  His 
flock  like  a  shepherd;  He  shall  gather  the  lambs  with  His  arm,  and  carry  them 
in  His  bosom."  1,  Think  who  this  is  (ver.  12).  Observe  how  He  is  set  before  us 
in  the  tenth  verse:  Jehovah,  Elohim,  "  will  come  with  strong  hand:  He  shall 
feed  His  flock  like  a  shepherd,"  &c.  Wliat!  the  great  Eternal — "the  high  and 
lofty  One  that  inhabiteth  eternity  " — is  this  the  Being  that  "  gathers  the  lamba 
with  His  arm  and  carries  them  in  His  bosom  "7  2.  The  posture  contains  in  it 
much  for  our  prayerful  meditation  ;    carrying  these  lambs,  these  feeble  ones. 


CHAP.  XL.]  ISAIAH.  203 

these  ignorant  ones,  these  weak  ones,  '*  in  His  bosom  "  !    What  doth  it  imply? 

( 1 )  His  boundless  affection  for  them.     He  has  given  costly  proof  of  that  affection. 

(2)  See  how  He  takes  notice  of  their  least  graces.  I  love  that  instance  in  1  Eangs 
xiv.,  in  the  case  of  Abijah:  it  unfolds  the  tenderness  of  Him  that  carries  His 
lambs  in  His  bosom:  "  And  all  Israel  shall  mourn  for  him,  and  bury  him;  for 
he  only  of  Jeroboam  shall  come  to  the  grave,  because  in  him  there  is  found  some 
good  thing  toward  the  Lord  God  of  Israel."     There  is  His  cherishing  His  "  lamb." 

(3)  It  implies  their  tender  nearness  to  Him.  The  lamb  seems  to  be  so  near  its 
shepherd,  as  if  nothing  could  be  nearer.  And  what  stands  so  near  to  the  Lord 
Jesus  Christ  as  His  own  people?  "  In  all  their  affliction  He  is  afflicted."  (4)  It 
would  seem  almost  to  imply  more  than  this;  for  as  the  Lord  Jesus  is  spoken  of 
as  lying  in  the  bosom  of  His  Father,  as  if  there  He  learned  anew  as  man  all  the 
heart  of  the  Father,  so  who  can  say  what  there  is  in  that  posture  of  the  weak 
lambs  lying  in  the  bosom  of  the  Shepherd?  He  tells  us  the  secrets  of  His  heart. 
In  this  opening  of  the  heart  to  the  Lord  Jesus  in  trouble,  and  His  opening  His 
heart  to  us  in  giving  us  answers  of  peace,  doth  consist  some  of  the  highest  blessed- 
nesses to  be  known  on  this  side  heaven.  (5)  But  the  posture  does  evidently  bring 
with  it  deep  conviction  of  safety.  If  the  lamb  is  in  the  bosom  of  the  Shepherd, 
he  that  destroyeth  the  lamb  must  destroy  the  Shepherd.  There  is  all  encourage- 
ment in  this  verse,  to  one  that  feels  himself  the  weakest  of  all  God's  children. 
But  there  is  not  in  this  truth  that  which  encourages  a  weak  believer  to  remain 
in  his  weakness.  For  what  purpose  does  the  good  Shepherd  cherish?  It  is  to 
sanctify.  {J.  H.  Evans,  M.A.)  And  shall  gently  lead  those  that  are  with 
yoimg. — The  saints'  final  perseverance  secured  hy  the  gentleness  of  Christ  to  the 
burdened: — I.  With  regard  to  the  persons,  they  are  clearly  those  who  are  weary 
and  heavy-laden.  They  are  feeble  as  well  as  biu-dened.  Various  are  the  burdens 
that  might  be  placed  before  you.  1.  I  need  not  say  how  heavy  is  the  burden 
of  sin,  when  the  Spirit  of  God  first  unfolds  it  to  us.  2.  And  even  when  there 
is  80  much  perception  of  Christ  as  to  leave  the  spirit  without  any  acknowledged 
hope  but  in  Christ,  and  yet  with  so  much  of  self-righteousness  still  cleaving  as 
to  think  there  must  be  something  of  a  preparation  necessary  in  order  to  recommend 
the  soul  to  God  and  His  Christ — what  a  burden !  The  toU  of  ploughing  the  rock 
— of  counting  the  sands — of  measuring  the  mighty  waters — of  working  in  the 
fire,  the  fire  burning  our  work  as  soon  and  as  long  as  we  do!  3.  But  it  applies, 
too,  to  the  established  believer,  who  frequently  in  his  pilgrimage  acknowledges 
himself  and  feels  himself  a  burdened  man.  4.  The  constant  conflict — "  putting 
off  the  old  man,"  "  putting  on  the  new  man  "  ;  self-crucifixion,  mortification 
of  self,  self-denial.  5.  There  is  the  burden  of  a  burdened  conscience;  when  a 
man  sees  so  much  in  his  sin  as  not  to  see  enough  in  Christ  to  raise  him  above  it. 
6.  The  heavy  weight  of  afflictions,  accompanied  as  they  often  are  with  great 
and  sore  temptations.  7.  Their  very  bodies  are  a  burden  to  them.  8.  The 
constant  service  of  the  Lord  has  a  burden  in  it.  "  The  burden  and  heat  of  the 
day."  9.  There  is  a  burden  that  we  are  but  little  prone  to  look  into  as  we  ought 
to  do,  and  that  is — the  burdens  of  others.  For  we  are  to  bear  their  burdens. 
II.  The  Lord's  conduct  toward  them.  Infinite  power  is  required  to  control 
the  movements  of  these  burdened  ones;  so  many  thousands  as  He  has.  But 
the  great  truth  that  it  unfolds  is  His  infinite  tenderness.  He  does  not  drive — 
He  leads.  He  does  not  merely  lead,  but  "  gently  leads."  Who  can  unfold 
the  wondrous  tenderness,  patience,  forbearance,  compassion,  and  love  with 
which  He  has  led  each  one  of  us!  How  doth  He  wait  on  His  burdened  ones! 
How  doth  He  wait  for  them!  How  doth  He  encourage  them!  Sometimes  He 
encourages  His  burdened  ohes  directly.  By  His  Word.  How  oftentimes  do 
they  find  their  hearts  cheered,  led  onward  by  a  word  of  promise!  He  waiteth 
on  them.  He  waiteth  for  them.  And  He  suffereth  no  one  to  harm  them. 
in.  Whither  does  He  lead  them?  1.  The  first  object  that  our  Lord  has  in 
His  leading  of  His  burdened  ones,  is  to  lead  them  out  of  their  own  pasture.  His 
great  object  is  to  lead  them  out  of  the  creature  and  out  of  themselves.  "  I  abhor 
myself,  and  repent  in  dust  and  ashes."  2.  Whither,  then,  does  He  lead  them? 
Into  deeper  discoveries  of  Divine  truth.  How  little  know  we  of  a  truth  till  we 
have  had  experience  of  that  truth!  3.  Then  cometh  more  close  communion. 
vnth.  God.  4.  And  now,  it  may  be,  He  leads  them  into  deeper  afflictions  than 
they  have  ever  known.  Oh!  what  a  blessedness  to  have  such  a  Shepherd  for 
such  poor  burdened  souls!  Remember,  His  great  end  in  leading  is  holiness. 
{J.  H.  Evans,  M.A.) 


204  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xl. 

Vers.  12-28.  Wlio  hath  measured  the  waters  in  the  hollow  of  His  hand? — The 
grandeur  of  God : — The  prophet's  notions  of  God  are  diffused  through  all  the 
verses  of  the  text.  The  prophet's  design  in  describing  the  Deity  with  so  much 
magnificence  is  to  discountenance  idolatry,  of  which  there  are  two  sorts.  1.  Relig- 
ious idolatry,  which  consists  in  rendering  that  religious  worship  to  a  creature 
which  is  due  to  none  but  God.  2.  Moral  idolatry,  which  consists  in  distrusting 
the  promises  of  God  in  dangerous  crises,  and  in  expecting  that  assistance  from 
men  which  cannot  but  be  expected  from  God.  The  portrait  drawn  by  the  prophet 
is  infinitely  inferior  to  his  original.  Ye  will  be  fully  convinced  of  this  if  ye  attend 
to  the  following  considerations  of  the  grandeur  of  God.  I.  The  subluhty  of  His 
ESSENCE.  The  prophet's  mind  was  filled  with  this  object.  It  is  owing  to  this 
that  he  repeats  the  grand  title  of  Jehovah,  "  the  Lord,"  which  signifies  "  I  am  " 
by  excellence,  and  which  distinguisheth  by  foiu:  grand  characters  the  essence 
of  God  from  the  essence  of  creatures.  1,  The  essence  of  God  is  independent 
in  its  cause.  God  is  a  seLf-existent  being.  We  exist,  but  ours  is  only  a  borrowed 
existence,  for  existence  is  foreign  from  us.  2.  The  essence  of  God  is  imiversal  in 
its  extent.  God  possesseth  the  reaUty  of  every  thing  that  exists.  He  is,  as  an 
ancient  writer  expresseth  it,  a  boimdless  ocean  of  existence.  From  this  ocean 
of  existence  all  created  beings,  like  so  many  rivulets,  flow,  3.  The  essence  of 
God  is  unchangeable  in  its  exercise.  Creatures  only  pass  from  nothing  to  existence, 
and  from  existence  to  nothing.  We  love  to-day  what  we  hated  yesterday,  and 
to-morrow  we  shall  hate  what  to-day  we  love.  4.  The  Divine  essence  is  eternal 
in  its  duration.  "  Hast  thou  not  known,"  saith  our  prophet,  "  that  He  is  the 
everlasting  God,  the  Lord,  the  Creator  of  the  ends  of  the  earth?  "  H.  The  immen- 
sity OF  His  woeks  (vers.  22,  26).  A  novice  is  frightened  at  hearing  what 
astronomers  assert.  Over  all  this  universe  God  reigns.  III.  The  efficiency 
of  His  will.  The  idea  of  the  real  world  conducts  us  to  that  of  the  possible 
world.  The  idea  of  a  creative  Being  includes  the  idea  of  a  Being  whose  will  is 
efficient.  But  a  Being  whose  will  is  self-efficient,  is  a  Being  who,  by  a  single 
act  of  His  wiU,  can  create  all  possible  beings:  that  is,  all,  the  existence  of  which 
implies  no  contradiction;  there  being  no  reason  for  limiting  the  power  of  a  will 
that  hath  been  once  efficient  of  itself.  IV.  The  magnificence  of  some  of  His 
mighty  acts,  at  certain  periods,  in  favofb  of  His  Church.  The  prophet 
had  two  of  these  periods  in  view.  The  first  was  the  return  of  the  Jews  from  that 
captivity  in  Babylon  which  he  had  denounced;  and  the  second,  the  coming  of 
the  Messiah,  of  which  their  return  from  captivity  was  only  a  shadow.  Such,  then, 
are  the  grandeurs  of  God !  Application — We  observed  that  the  prophet's  design 
was  to  render  two  sorts  of  idolatry  odious:  idolatry  in  religion,  and  idolatry  in 
morals.  Idolatry  in  religion  consists  in  rendering  those  religious  homages  to 
creatures  which  are  due  to  the  Creator  only.  To  discredit  this  kind  of  idolatry, 
the  prophet  contents  himself  with  describing  it.  He  shames  the  idolater  by 
reminding  him  of  the  origin  of  idols,  and  of  the  pains  taken  to  preserve  them. 
A  man  is  guilty  of  moral  idolatry  when,  in  dangerous  crises,  he  says,  "  My  way 
is  hid  from  the  Lord;  my  judgment  is  passed  over  from  my  God."  God  is  the 
sole  arbiter  of  events.  Whenever  ye  think  that  any  more  powerful  being  directs 
them  to  comfort  you,  ye  put  the  creature  in  the  Creator's  place;  whether  ye 
do  it  in  a  manner  more  or  less  absurd;  whether  formidable  armies,  impregnable 
fortresses,  and  well-stored  magazines;  or  whether  a  small  circle  of  friends,  an 
easy  income,  or  a  country  house.  The  Jews  were  often  guilty  of  the  first  sort 
of  idolatry.  The  captivity  in  Babylon  was  the  last  curb  to  that  fatal  propensity. 
Thanks  be  to  God  that  the  light  of  the  Gospel  hath  opened  the  eyes  of  a  great 
number  of  Christians  in  regard  to  idolatry  in  religion.  Yo  who,  in  order  to 
avert  pubhc  calamities,  satisfy  yourselves  with  a  few  precautions  of  worldly 
prudence,  and  take  no  pains  to  extirpate  those  horrible  crimes  which  provoke 
the  vengeance  of  heaven  to  inflict  punishments  on  public  bodies;  ye  are  guilty 
of  this  second  kind  of  idolatry.  Were  your  confidence  placed  in  God,  ye  would 
endeavour  to  avert  national  judgments  by  purging  the  state  of  those  wicked 
practices  which  are  the  surest  foremnners  and  the  principal  causes  of  famine, 
and  pestilence,  and  war.  And  thou,  feeble  mortal,  lying  on  a  sick-bed,  already 
struggling  with  the  king  of  terrors;  thou,  who  tremblingly  complainest,  I  am 
undone  ! — thou  art  guilty  of  this  second  kind  of  idolatry,  that  thou  hast  trusted 
in  man  and  made  flesn  thine  arm.  Were  God  the  object  of  thy  trust,  thou  wouldest 
bolieve  that  though  death  is  about  to  separate  thee  from  man,  it  is  about  to  unite 
thee   to   God.     {J.    Saurin.)        The.   incomparableness   of  the  great   Ood : — "  To 


CHAP.  XL.]  ISAIAH.  2nr 

whom  then  will  ye  liken  God?  "  I.  That  the  greatest  things  in  the  material 
WORLD  ARE  NOTHTNG  TO  HiM.  The  ocean  is  great,  great  in  its  depths,  breadths, 
contents,  occupying  by  far  the  largest  portion  of  this  globe  of  ours.  But  He 
"  hath  measured  the  waters  in  the  hollow  of  His  hand."  The  heaven  is  great; 
its  expanse  is  immeasurable,  its  worlds  and  systems  baffle  all  arithmetic,  but  He 
"  meted  out  heaven  with  the  span."  The  earth  is  great,  great  to  us,  though 
a  mere  speck  in  the  universe,  and,  it  may  be,  an  atom  to  other  intelligences;  but 
"  He  comprehendeth  the  dust  in  a  measure,"  &c.  What  is  the  vmiverse  to  God? 
You  may  compare  an  atom  to  the  Andes,  a  raindrop  to  the  Atlantic,  a  spark  to 
the  central  fires  of  the  creation;  but  you  cannot  compare  the  universe,  great  as 
it  is,  to  the  Creator.  II.  That  the  greatest  mtnds  nsr  the  spiritual  universe 
ARE  NOTHING  TO  HiM.  "  Who  hath  directed  the  Spirit  of  the  Lord,  or  being 
His  counsellor  hath  taught  Him?  "  &c.  (vers.  13,  14).  The  Bible  gives  us  to 
understand  that  there  is  a  spiritual  universe  far  greater  than  the  material,  of 
which  the  material  is  but  the  dim  mirror  and  feeble  instrument — a  universe 
containing  intelligences  innumerable  in  multitude  and  incalculable  in  their  grada- 
tions of  strength  and  intelligence.  But  what  spirit  or  spirits  at  the  head  or  hier- 
archy of  these  intelligences  has  ever  given  Him  coimsel,  instructed  or  influenced 
Him  in  any  matter?  He  is  iminstructible :  the  only  Being  in  the  universe  who 
is  so.  He  knows  aU.  Sooner  speak  of  a  spark  enlightening  the  sim,  than  speak 
of  a  universe  of  intelligences  adding  aught  to  the  knowledge  of  God.  He  is 
absolutely  original:  the  only  Being  in  the  universe  who  is  so.  We  talk  of  original 
thinkers.  Such  creatures  are  mere  fictions.  He  being  so  independent  of  all  minds 
— 1.  Has  universe  must  be  regarded  as  the  expression  of  Himself.  No  other  being 
had  a  hand  in  it.  2.  His  laws  are  the  revelation  of  Himself.  No  one  covmselled 
Him  in  His  legislation.  3.  His  conduct  is  absolutely  irresponsible,  and  He  alone 
can  be  trusted  with  irresponsibility.  HI.  That  the  greatest  rN'STiTTJTiONS  in 
human  sociETT  ARE  NOTHING  TO  HiM.  Nations  are  the  greatest  things  in  human 
institutions.  But  "  nations  are  as  a  drop  of  a  bucket,  and  are  coimted  as  the 
small  dust  of  the  balance."  What  were  the  greatest  nations  of  the  old  world,  or 
the  most  powerful  of  modem  times?  What  are  the  greatest  nations  that  have  ever 
been,  or  are,  compared  to  Him?  Nothing,  emptiness.  Oh,  ye  magnates  of  the 
world,  ye  kings  of  the  earth,  what  are  ye  in  the  presence  of  God?  Less  than 
animalcula  dancing  in  the  sun.  IV.  That  the  greatest  productions  of  human 
LABOUR  ARE  NOTHING  TO  HiM.  "  There  is,"  said  an  eloquent  French  preacher, 
"nothing  great  but  God."  {Eomilist.)  The  transcendent  One: — The  grand 
object  of  this  sublime  chapter  seems  to  be  to  inspirit  and  to  comfort  the  Jews 
in  their  Babylonian  captivity.  Their  God  in  His  transcendent  greatness  is  brought 
imder  their  notice  for  this  piirpose — I.  In  the  exactitude  of  His  operations. 
He  ia  here  represented  as  "  measuring  "  the  waters,  as  "  spanning  "  the  heavens, 
as  "  comprehending  "  the  very  dust  of  the  earth  in  a  measure,  as  "  weighing  " 
the  mountains  in  scales.  As  the  physician  adjusts  in  nicest  proportions  the 
elements  in  the  medical  dose,  with  which  he  hopes  to  cure  his  patient;  the  engineer 
every  crank  and  wheel  and  pin  in  the  machine  which  he  has  constructed  for  a 
certain  purpose,  so  God — only  in  an  Infinite  degree — arranges  all  the  parts  of 
the  compHcated  universe.  It  is  seen  in  the  atmosphere  that  surroimds  this  globe; 
were  one  of  its  constituent  elements  more  or  less  than  it  is  the  whole  would  be 
disturbed.  This  is  seen  in  the  punctuahty  with  which  all  the  heavenly  orbs 
perform  their  movements;  they  are  never  out  of  time.  It  is  seen,  in  fact,  in  the 
unbroken  uniformity  with  which  all  nature  proceeds  on  its  march.  1.  This 
Divine  exactitude  should  inspire  us  with  unbounded  confidence  in  His  procedure. 
Because  God  works  with  such  infinite  precision.  His  works  admit  of  no  improve- 
ment. 2.  This  Divine  exactitude  should  inspire  us  to  imitate  Him  in  this  respect. 
When  we  act  from  blind  impulse,  or  from  imperfect  reflection,  we  risk  our  well- 
being,  n.  In  the  almightiness  of  His  power.  He  is  here  represented  as 
holdmg  the  waters  in  the  "  hollow  of  His  hand."  In  thinking  of  this  power  we 
should  remember — 1.  That  all  tliis  power  is  under  the  direction  of  intelligence. 
It  is  not  a  blind  force,  Uke  the  force  of  the  storm  or  the  tornado,  but  it  is  a  force 
directed  by  the  highest  wisdom.  Wisdom  uses  the  whole  as  the  smith  uses  his 
hammer  on  the  anvil,  as  the  mariner  the  rudder  in  the  tempest.  2.  That  all  this 
power  is  inspired  by  benevolence.  The  infinite  is  here  portrayed.  III.  In  the 
INDEPENDENCY  OF  His  MIND.  "  With  whom  took  He  counsel,  and  who  instructed 
Him?  "  From  this  absolute  mental  independency  of  God  the  following  things 
may  be  deduced — 1.  That  all, His  operations  must  originate  in  pure  sovereignty. 


TOB  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xi. 

All  that  exists  must  be  traced  to  the  counsels  of  His  own  will,  for  He  had  no  coun- 
seller.  2.  That  all  His  laws  must  be  a  transcript  of  His  mind.  What  they  are 
He  is;  they  are  the  history  of  Hamself.  Conclusion — What  an  argument  is  here 
for  an  entire  surrender  to,  and  a  thorough  acquiescence  in,  the  Divine  will.  (Ibid.) 
The  greatness  of  Israel's  God  : — How  httle  the  palm  of  a  man  takes,  how  little 
the  space  which  the  span  of  a  man  can  cover,  how  scanty  the  third  of  an  ephah, 
and  for  what  insignificant  measures  a  balance  suffices,  whether  a  steelyard  {statera), 
or  a  retail  balance  {libra)  consisting  of  two  scales  {lances).  But  what  Jehovah 
measures  with  His  palm  and  regulates  with  His  span  is  nothing  less  than  the 
waters  below  and  the  heavens  above.  He  uses  a  shalish,  in  which  the  dust  compos- 
ing the  earth  finds  place,  and  a  balance  in  which  He  weighs  the  colossus  of  the 
mountains.  {F.  Dditzsch,  D.D.)  Ood  in  relation  to  earth  and  ocean: — Put 
two  tablespoonfuls  of  water  in  the  palm  of  your  hand  and  it  will  overflow;  but 
Isaiah  indicates  that  God  puts  the  Atlantic  and  the  Pacific  and  the  Arctic  and 
the  Antarctic  and  the  Mediterranean  and  the  Black  Sea  and  all  the  waters  of 
the  earth  in  the  hollow  of  His  hand.  The  fingers  the  beach  on  one  side,  the  wrist 
the  beach  on  the  other.  "  He  holdeth  the  water  in  the  hollow  of  His  hand." 
As  you  take  a  pinch  of  salt  or  powder  between  your  thumb  and  two  fingers,  so 
Isaiah  indicates  God  takes  up  the  earth.  He  measures  the  dust  of  the  earth. 
The  original  there  indicates  that  God  takes  all  the  dust  of  all  the  continents  between 
the  thumb  and  two  fingers.  {T.  De  Witt  Talmage,  D.D.)  The  great  Ood  in  His 
relation  to  heaven  and  earth  : — There  was  an  engineer  by  the  name  of  Strasicrates 
who  was  in  the  employ  of  Alexander  the  Great,  and  he  offered  to  hew  a  mountain 
in  the  shape  of  his  master,  the  Emperor,  the  enormous  figure  to  hold  in  the  left 
hand  a  city  of  10,000  inhabitants,  while  with  the  right  hand  it  was  to  hold  a  basin 
large  enough  to  collect  aU  the  mountain  torrents.  Alexander  applauded  his 
ingenuity,  but  forbade  the  enterprise  because  of  its  costliness.  Yet  I  have  to 
tell  you  that  our  Eong  holds  in  His  one  hand  all  the  cities  of  the  earth,  and  with 
the  other  all  the  oceans,  while  He  has  the  stars  of  heaven  for  tiara.  {Ibid.) 
God  weighing  the  mountains : — What  are  aU  the  balances  of  earthly  manipidation 
compared  with  the  balances  that  Isaiah  saw  suspended  when  he  saw  God  putting 
into  the  scales  the  Alps  and  the  Apennines  and  Moimt  Washington  and  the  Sierra 
Nevadas  ?  You  see  the  earth  had  to  be  ballasted.  It  would  not  do  to  have  too 
much  weight  in  Europe,  or  too  much  weight  in  Asia,  or  too  much  weight  in  Africa 
or  in  America;  so  when  God  made  the  mountains  He  weighed  them.  God  knows 
the  weight  of  the  great  ranges  that  cross  the  continents,  the  tons,  the  pounds 
avoirdupois,  the  ounces,  the  grains,  the  milligrammes.  {Ibid.)  "  Why  say  est 
thou  ?  " — The  devout  thought  of  these  paragraphs  passes  in  survey,  first  the 
earth  (vers.  12-20)  ;  then  the  heavens  (21-26)  ;  finally,  the  experience  of  the 
children  of  God  in  all  ages  (27-31).  I.  The  testimony  of  the  eakth.  It  seems 
as  though  we  are  conducted  to  the  shores  of  the  Mediterranean,  and  stationed 
somewhere  near  the  site  of  ancient  Tyre.  Before  us  spreads  the  Great  Sea,  as 
the  Hebrews  were  wont  to  call  it.  Far  across  the  waters,  calm  and  tranquil, 
or  heaving  in  memory  of  recent  storms,  sea  and  sky  blend  in  the  circle  of  the 
horizon.  Now  remember,  says  the  prophet,  God's  hands  are  so  strong  and  great 
that  all  that  ocean  and  all  other  oceans  lie  in  them  as  a  drop  on  a  man's  palm. 
And  this  God  is  our  God  for  ever  and  ever.  All  men  may  be  in  arms  against  thee, 
encircling  thee  with  threats,  and  plotting  to  swallow  thee  up.  But  the  nations 
are  to  Him  as  the  drop  of  a  bucket,  and  are  counted  as  the  small  dust  of  the  balance. 
Thou  hast  no  reason,  therefore,  to  be  afraid.  II.  The  testimony  of  the  heavens. 
The  scene  shifts  to  the  heavens,  and  all  that  is  therein.  This  is  the  antidote  of 
fear.  Sit  in  the  heavenlies.  Do  not  look  from  earth  towards  heaven,  but  from 
heaven  towards  earth.  Let  God,  not  man,  be  the  standpoint  of  vision.  But 
this  is  not  all.  To  this  inspired  thinker,  it  seemed  as  though  the  blue  skies  were 
curtains  that  God  had  stretched  out  as  a  housewife  gauze  (see  Revised  Version, 
marg.),  or  the  fabric  of  a  tent  within  which  the  pilgrim  rests.  If  creation  be  His 
tent,  which  He  fills  in  all  its  parts,  how  puny  are  the  greatest  potentates  of  earth! 
Tho  child  of  God  need  not  be  abashed  before  the  greatest  of  earthly  rulers.  And 
even  this  is  not  all — day  changes  to  night,  and  as  the  twilight  deepens,  the  stars 
come  out  in  their  hosts;  and  suddenly,  to  the  imagination  of  this  lofty  soul,  the 
vault  of  heaven  seems  a  pasture-land  over  which  a  vast  flock  is  following  its  Shep- 
herd, who  calls  each  by  name.  What  a  sublime  conception!  Jehovah,  the 
Shepherd  of  the  stars,  leading  them  through  space;  conducting  them  with  such 
care  and  might  that  none  falls  out  of  rank,  or  is  lacking.     And  will  Jehovah  do 


CHAP.  xi»]  ISAIAB.  207 

so  much  for  stars,  and  nought  for  sons?  HE.  The  testimony  of  the  saikts. 
"  Hast  thou  not  heard  ?  "  It  has  been  a  commonplace  with  every  generation 
of  Grod's  people,  that  "  the  Lord  fainteth  not,  neither  is  weary."  He  never  takes 
up  a  case  to  drop  it.  He  never  begins  to  build  a  character  to  leave  it  when  it 
is  half  complete.  He  may  seem  to  forsake  and  to  plunge  the  soul  into  needless 
trial;  this,  however,  is  no  indication  that  He  has  tired  of  His  charge,  but  only 
that  He  could  not  fulfil  the  highest  blessedness  of  some  soul  He  loved  save  by 
the  sternest  discipline.  "  There  is  no  searching  of  TTia  understanding."  There 
is  another  point  on  which  all  the  saints  are  agreed,  that  neither  weariness  nor 
fainting  are  barriers  to  the  forth-putting  of  God's  might.  On  the  contrary,  they 
possess  an  infinite  attractiveness  to  His  nature.  {F.  B.  Meyer,  B.A.)  Nature 
ministers  to  the  suffering: — Nature  has  always  been  the  resort  of  the  suffering. 
Elijah  to  Horeb;  Christ  to  Olivet.  And  in  these  glowing  paragraphs,  whicL 
touch  the  high-water  mark  of  sacred  eloquence,  we  are  led  forth  to  stand  in  the 
curtained  tent  of  Jehovah,  to  Usten  to  the  beat  of  the  surf,  and  watch  the  march 
of  the  stars.    (Ibid,) 

Ver.  15.  Behold,  the  nations  are  as  a  drop  of  a  bucket — TJie  greatness  of  God 
and  His  works : — I.  The  greatness  of  God  and  His  works.  II.  God  constantly 
GOVERNETH  THE  WORLD  WHICH  Hb  HATH  MADE.  And  as  all  creaturcs  from  the 
highest  to  the  lowest  have  their  subsistence  in  the  power  of  God,  so  they  are  each 
of  them  noticed  by  His  eye  and  governed  by  His  providence  ;  that  is,  by  the 
immediate  energy  of  His  own  power,  or  by  agents  which  are  imder  His  direction, 
and  who  cannot  act  but  by  His  power.  That  care  of  the  Supreme  Being,  by  which 
this  general  order  or  stated  course  of  things  is  preserved,  may  not  unfitly  be  called  a 
general  providence.  Consider  the  great  extent  of  it.  It  taketh  place  not  only  in 
the  frame  of  the  universe,  the  regular  motion  of  the  vast  bodies  which  compose  it, 
by  which  we  have  spring  and  harvest,  summer  and  winter,  day  and  night;  not  only 
in  the  fruitfulness  of  the  earth,  and  the  state  of  the  several  lands  of  animals  which 
inhabit  it,  and  the  manner  in  which  the  kinds  and  the  individuals  are  preserved; 
but  in  human  affairs  hkewise.  But  it  is  particularly  pleasing  to  observe  how 
minutely  this  providence  of  the  Supreme  Being  descendeth,  even  to  the  notice  and 
direction  of  the  smallest  and  most  inconsiderable  things.  Our  Saviour,  and  this 
according  to  the  justest  philosophy  that  ever  appeared  in  the  world,  representeth 
His  Heavenly  Father  as  clothing  the  lilies  of  the  field,  and  as  feeding  the  ravens; 
and  argues  from  this,  that  if  He  attends  to  these  things,  which  are  comparatively 
of  the  smallest  account,  surely  His  providence  will  not  neglect  His  creatures  of  a 
nobler  order  (Luke  xii.).  Thus,  though  God  is  so  great,  "  He  humbleth  Himself 
to  behold  things  which  are  done  in  heaven  and  upon  earth,"  and  takes  notice  even 
of  the  lowest  orders  of  creatures,  and  of  every  individual  For,  besides  that 
general  order  of  causes  and  effects  which  He  hath  established,  and  maintaineth 
from  age  to  age,  there  are  plain  footsteps  of  a  particular  providence  regarding 
individual  persons.  By  the  interpositions  of  providence  things  are  so  governed 
and  conducted  that  His  purposes  are  pursued  and  carried  into  execution;  and 
manifold  are  the  means  by  which  this  may  be  effected.  How  important  the  events 
which  arise  out  of  things  which  appear  to  us  purely  accidental!  III.  These  reflec- 
tions naturally  lead  our  thoughts  to  the  happiness  of  the  Supreme  Being  in  His 
PERFECTIONS  AND  WORKS,  a  Subject,  indeed,  as  little  to  be  comprehended  by  us,  as 
we  can  find  out  the  Almighty  unto  perfection.  Yet  we  cannot  avoid  the  thought 
how  high,  and  in  all  respects  perfect,  the  felicity  of  the  first  cause  of  all  things  must 
be;  and  love  to  God  will  make  a  right  heart  rejoice  and  exult  in  it.  Nor  let  it  be 
objected,  that  in  the  universe  there  is  much  irregularity,  and  many  evils  and  suffer- 
ings. For  what  to  us  hath  the  appearance  of  irregularity  may  be,  nay,  assuredly 
is,  necessary  to  the  harmony  of  the  whole;  and  part  of  a  design  which  was  the  best 
and  worthiest  which  could  be  framed.  As  for  those  sufferings  which  the  subjects  of  a 
moral  government  bring  upon  themselves,  they  are  as  necessary  as  that  government 
itself;  which  is  indeed  the  glory  of  God's  creation,  and  without  which,  and  those 
orders  of  creatures  which  are  made  to  be  the  subjects  of  such  a  government,  the 
universe  must  have  been  nothing  to  what  it  is  now.  An  universe  without  angels, 
without  men,  without  any  such  orders  of  intellectual  and  moral  beings,  what  would 
it  have  been?  But  the  glorious  Head  and  Regent  of  that  vast  body,  which  is  all 
harmony,  all  order  and  oeauty,  and  in  which  no  part  of  the  grand  design  hath 

failed,  or  ever  can  fail,  what  happiness  must  He  taste !     Concluding  reflections 

1.  If  our  minds  are  rightly  impressed  with  a  sense  of  the  Divine  greatness  and 


208  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  xl, 

majesty,  how  little  must  what  we  are  apt  to  call  great  upon  earth  appear  in  our 
eye!  2.  Let  us  in  all  things  meekly  and  affectionately  submit  to  the  supreme 
Ruler;  in  humble  obedience  to  His  laws,  and  in  unreserved  resignation  to  Hia 
providence.     3.  Let  us  put  our  trust  in  God.     (J.  Drichala,  D.D.) 

Ver.  16.  And  Lebanon  is  not  sufficient  to  bum. — God's  indepcTuience : — He  is 
not  only  independent  of  the  power,  but  also  of  the  goodwill  of  His  creatures.  This 
general  allusion  to  oblation  as  an  act  of  homage  or  of  friendship  suits  the  connec- 
tion better  than  a  specific  reference  to  expiation.  The  insufficiency  of  these 
offerings  is  set  forth,  not  in  a  formal  proposition,  but  by  means  of  a  striking 
individualisation.     If  Lebanon  could  not  suffice,  what  could?    (J.  A.  Alexander.) 

Ver.  18.  To  whom  then  -will  ye  liken  God? — The  Trinity: — I.  The  cabnax 
NOTIONS  MEN  ARE  APT  TO  ENTERTAIN  OF  GrOD.  I.  We  find  that  the  knowledge  of 
the  true  God  soon  faded  from  the  minds  of  Noah's  descendants.  That  patriarch 
had  been  favoured  with  a  clear  revelation ;  and  he  had  offered  a  pure  worsmp.  But 
even  among  his  sons  depravity  began  to  manifest  itself.  And  in  a  generation  or 
two  very  gross  ideas  prevaUed.  Men  were  not  satisfied  with  the  fact  of  a  Being, 
piu-e  and  spiritual,  dweUing  in  the  highest  heaven,  apart  from  the  mortal  eye.  And 
they  chose  to  represent  Him  by  sensible  figures.  Some  practices  of  this  kind  are 
described  in  verses  19,  20.  2.  We  find  the  same  temper  at  work  in  the  Jews.  They, 
too,  imitated  the  heathen  in  desiring  idols,  gods  whom  they  might  see.  They  were 
continually  prone  to  let  their  carnal  reasonings  interfere  with  their  reception  of  the 
Divine  Word.  3.  We  may  trace  similar  consequences  even  down  to  our  times. 
There  have  been  men,  of  great  natural  parts  too,  who,  because  they  never  witnessed 
a  miracle,  have  boldly  denied  that  miracles  were  ever  performed.  He  who  will 
credit  nothing  that  is  not  apparent  to  his  senses,  cripples  himself  with  the  most 
enervating  chains.  He  who  does  not  allow  that  the  Deity  is  incomprehensible,  is 
in  truth  the  most  irrational  of  reasoners  :  for  he  would  make  out  that  this  vast 
universe  was  created  and  is  upheld  and  governed  by  one  whose  mind  he,  a  puny 
worm  of  the  dust,  is  able  to  comprehend.  And  he  that  would  reject  the  truth  <h 
the  Trinity  because  it  is  higher  than  his  thoughts,  would  compare  the  hkeness  of 
God  to  a  finite  creature.  It  is  not  intended  to  say  that  Scripture  asserts  or  that  the 
Church  maintains  ansrthing  that  is  contrary  to  reason.  We  are  every  day  obUged 
to  admit  as  truths  things,  the  reasons  of  which  we  are  unable  to  explain  or  account 
for;  and  no  one  imagines  that  this  is  irrational.  Why  should  it  appear  so  in 
spiritual  things?  11.  There  is  thus  a  wholesome  trial  op  cub  faith.  God 
might,  had  He  so  pleased,  have  revealed  His  will  so  plainly  that  men  could  no  more 
be  ignorant  of  it  than  they  can  of  the  fact  that  the  sun  is  shining  in  the  heavens. 
To  take  the  case  of  oiu:  blessed  Saviour,  He  might  have  been  shown  openly  to  the 
world,  and  have  been  pointed  out  so  evidently  as  the  One  of  whom  Moses  and  the 
prophets  wrote,  that  none  even  of  the  Pharisees  or  the  Sadducees  could  have  denied 
it.  Or,  take  the  fact  of  His  resurrection.  It  might  have  been  performed  before 
multitudinous  witnesses,  and  Christ  might  again  have  lived  openly  as  He  did  before 
His  death,  teaching  and  preaching.  But  where,  in  such  a  case,  would  have  been 
the  trial  of  faith?  The  whole  system  of  God's  dealings  would  have  been  changed; 
and  we  should  have  walked  by  sight  and  not  by  faith.  In  regard  to  providential 
circumstances  it  might  have  been  the  same.  God  might  have  disclosed  to  Abraham 
His  purpose  of  providing  a  ram  for  a  sacrifice  instead  of  Isaac.  Had  Shadrach, 
Meshach,  and  Abednego  learned  at  once  that  the  fire  would  not  kindle  upon  them, 
different  indeed  would  their  emotions  have  been ;  but  what  trial  would  there  then 
have  been  of  faith?  God's  dealings  are  secret,  because  He  would  prove  men,  and 
make  evident  what  is  in  their  hearts.  In  no  other  way,  it  is  cleai-,  could  the  graces 
of  humility  and  trust,  of  patience  and  faith  and  hope  and  long-suffering,  of  self- 
denial  and  spiritual-mindedness,  be  wrought  out.  And  so  with  regard  to  the 
revelation  of  doctrines.  The  Scripture  gives  us  this  most  remarkable  annoimce- 
ment  (1  Pet,  ii.  6-8).  It  is  thus  that  God  severs  the  precious  from  the  vQe :  it  is 
for  this  reason  that  He  has  allowed  difficulties  in  His  sacred  Word,  at  which  the 
worldly  and  the  self-sufficient  are  offended;  while  they  who  with  a  humble  spirit 
wait  patiently  upon  Him,  and  meekly  seek  His  guidance,  are  admitted  into 
the  secret  plaoe  of  the  Most  High.  It  is  not  that  God  throws  difficulties 
into  men's  ways  or  deliglits  to  perplex  them,  but  that  in  pursuing  His  great 
plan  of  moral  government  He  does  find  it  needful  to  train  and  lead  onward 
by  degrees,  thus  letting  it  be  seen  who  will  be  teachable  scholars  in  His  school,  and 


CHAP.  XL.]  ISAIAH.  209 

who  rebelliously  refuse  His  gracious  lessons.  There  is  a  point,  too,  which  must  not 
be  lost  sight  of.  The  revelation  of  the  Gospel,  such  as  we  find  it,  is  of  expanding 
character.  As  ages  roll  on,  more  and  more  light  beams  upon  it;  and  thus  the  Bible 
is  seen  to  be  the  book  not  of  untutored  nations  only,  but  of  those  farthest  advanced 
in  civlhsation;  not  merely  of  the  world  in  its  infancy,  but  of  the  world  come  to 
matured  age.  Other  books  are  soon  exhausted.  But  in  all  those  things  to  which 
I  have  adverted,  there  is  spiritual  food  for  the  humble  mind.  The  full  develop- 
ment of  God's  mysteries  must  patiently  be  waited  for.  Herein  are  some  of  the 
good  things  which  He  has  prepared  for  those  that  love  Him.  Concluding  reflec- 
tions— 1.  There  is  an  unfair  use  made  of  human  language  by  those  who  reject  the 
doctrine  of  the  Trinity.  Language  is  always  imperfect;  more  especially  so  when, 
by  terms  taken  from  human  things,  it  is  used  to  describe  those  that  are  Divine. 
2.  But,  after  all,  the  best  knowledge  is  a  practical  knowledge.  And  this  we  should 
strive  to  attain,  especially  in  respect  to  such  deep  things  of  God.  No  one  wiU 
stumble  at  the  doctrine  of  the  Trinity,  who,  enlightened  and  quickened  by  the 
Spirit,  comes  to  the  Father  by  the  Son.  Vain  speculations  will  be  cast  aside  as  we 
become  acquainted  with  what  each  blessed  person  in  the  Godhead  has  done,  and  is 
doing,  for  us.  In  this  way  seek  to  know  the  Triime  God.  The  Father's  love,  the 
grace  of  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  and  the  fellowship  of  the  Holy  Ghost,  experiment- 
ally known,  will  be  sure  to  be  the  Christian's  stable  foundation  and  his  richest  joy. 
(J.  Ayre,  3LA.) 

Ver.  20.  A  graven  image. — "  An  image  that  will  not  totter  "  / — If  an  idol  leant 
over  or  fell  that  was  the  very  worst  of  omens;  c/.  the  case  of  Dagon.  {Prof.  O.  A. 
Smith,  D.D.)  The  absurdity  of  idolatry  : — A  wooden  image,  planed  smooth 
below  and  heavier  than  above,  so  as  not  to  upset  at  every  push,  is  to  be  a  god ! 
{F.  Delitzsch,  D.D.)  The  helplessness  of  graven  images  : — When  John  iSaox 
was  a  prisoner  in  France,  "  the  officers  brought  to  him  a  painted  board,  which  they 
called  Our  Lady,  and  commanded  him  to  kiss  it.  They  violently  thrust  it  into 
his  face,  and  put  it  betwixt  his  hands,  who,  seeing  the  extremity,  took  the  idol, 
and  advisedly  looking  about,  he  cast  it  into  the  river  and  said,  '  Let  Our  Lady  now 
save  herself;  she  is  light  enough;  let  her  learn  to  swim!'  After  that  was  no  Scots- 
man urged  with  that  idolatry. ' '     (Rnox,  History  of  the  Reformation. ) 

Ver.  21.  Have  ye  not  known? — IsaiaKs  questions: — His  sharp  questions  are 
as  hooks  to  draw  from  his  hearers'  hearts  their  timid  and  starved  convictions, 
that  he  may  nourish  these  upon  the  sacramental  glories  of  natxure  and  of  history. 
{Prof.  0.  A.  Smith,  D.D.) 

Ver.  22.  It  is  He  that  sitteth  upon  the  circle  of  the  earth. — The  circle : — 
While  yet  people  thought  that  the  world  was  flat,  and  thousands  of  years  before 
they  found  out  that  it  was  round,  Isaiah  intimated  the  shape  of  it.  The  most 
beautiful  figure  in  all  geometry  is  the  circle.  God  made  the  universe  on  the  plan 
of  a  circle.  There  are  in  the  natural  world  straight  lines,  angles,  parallelograms, 
diagonals,  quadrangles;  but  these  evidently  are  not  God's  favourites.  Out  of  a 
great  many  figures  God  seems  to  have  selected  the  circle  as  the  best.  "  It  is  He 
that  sitteth  upon  the  circle  of  the  earth."  The  stars  in  a  circle,  the  moon  in  a 
circle,  the  sun  in  a  circle,  the  universe  in  a  circle,  and  the  throne  of  God  the  centre 
of  that  circle.  1.  The  history  of  the  world  goes  in  a  circle.  If  the  world  stands 
long  enough  we  may  have  a  city  as  large  as  they  had  in  old  times — Babyl  n,  five 
times  the  size  of  London.  You  go  into  the  potteries  at  Burslem,  England,  and 
you  wiU  find  them  making  cups  and  vases  after  the  style  of  the  cups  and  vases 
exhumed  from  Pompeii.  The  world  is  not  going  back.  But  it  is  swinging  in  a 
circle,  and  will  come  back  to  the  styles  of  pottery  known  so  long  ago  as  the  days 
of  Pompeii.  The  world  must  keep  on  progressing  until  it  makes  the  complete 
circuit.  2.  What  is  true  in  the  material  universe  is  true  in  God's  moral  government 
and  spiritual  arrangement.  That  is  the  meaning  of  Ezekiel's  wheel;  the  wheel 
means  God's  providence.  But  a  wheel  is  of  no  use  unless  it  turns  around,  and  if 
it  turns  around  it  moves  in  a  circle.  These  bad  or  good  actions  may  make  the 
circuit  of  many  years,  but  come  back  to  us  they  will,  as  certainly  as  Var.i  God 
sits  on  the  circle  of  the  earth.  Jezebel,  the  worst  woman  of  the  Bible,  slev/  ^iaboth 
because  she  wanted  his  vineyard.  While  the  dogs  were  eating  the  body  of  Naboth, 
Elijah  the  prophet  put  down  his  compass,  and  marked  a  circle  from  those  do^a 
clear  around  to  the  dogs  that  should  eat  the  body  of  Jezebel  the  murderess, 
VOL.  II. — 14 


210  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  xl. 

But  it  is  sometimes  the  case  that  this  circle  sweeps  through  a  century,  or  through 
many  centuries.  People  got  tired  of  a  theocracy.  They  said — "  We  don't  want 
God  directly  interfering  with  the  affairs  of  the  world;  give  us  a  monarchy."  The 
world  had  a  monarchy.  From  a  monarchy  it  is  going  to  have  a  Umited  monarchy. 
After  a  while  the  limited  monarchy  will  be  given  up,  and  the  republican  form  of 
government  will  be  everywhere  recognised.  Then  the  world  will  get  tired  of  the 
repubUcan  form  of  government,  and  it  will  have  an  anarchy,  which  is  no  government 
at  all.  And  then,  all  nations,  finding  out  that  man  is  not  capable  of  righteously 
governing  man,  will  cry  out  again  for  a  theocracy,  and  say,  "  Let  God  come  back 
and  conduct  the  affairs  of  the  world."  But  do  not  become  impatient  because 
you  cannot  see  the  course  of  events,  and  therefore  conclude  that  God's  government 
is  going  to  break  down.  History  tells  us  that  in  the  making  of  the  pyramids  it 
took  two  thousand  men  two  years  to  drag  one  great  stone  from  the  quarry  and  put 
it  into  the  pyramids.  If  men  short-Uved  can  afford  to  work  so  slowly  as  that, 
cannot  God,  in  the  building  of  the  eternities,  afford  to  wait?  What  though  God 
should  take  ten  thousand  years  to  draw  a  circle !  But  it  is  often  the  case  that  the 
rebound  is  much  quicker  than  that.  The  circle  is  sooner  completed.  You  resolve 
that  you  wiU  do  what  good  you  can.  In  one  week  you  put  a  word  of  counsel  in  the 
heart  of  a  Sabbath-school  child.  During  that  same  week  you  give  a  letter  of  intro- 
duction to  a  young  man  struggling  in  business.  During  the  same  week  you  make  an 
exhortation  in  a  prayer-meeting.  It  is  all  gone;  you  will  never  hear  of  it,  perhaps, 
you  think.  A  few  years  after  a  man  comes  up  to  you  and  says,  "  You  don't  know 
me,  do  you  ?  "  You  say,  "  No,  I  don't  remember  ever  to  have  seen  you."  "  Why," 
he  says,  "  I  was  in  the  Sabbath-school  class  over  which  you  were  the  teacher; 
one  Sunday  you  invited  me  to  Christ."  What  is  true  of  the  good  is  just  as  true 
of  the  bad.  You  utter  a  slander  against  your  neighbour.  It  has  gone  forth 
from  your  teeth;  it  wiU  never  come  back,  you  think.  You  think  it  will  never 
do  you  any  harm.  But  I  am  watching  that  word,  and  I  see  it  beginning  to  curve, 
and  it  curves  around,  and  it  is  aiming  at  your  heart.  You  maltreat  an  aged 
parent.  You  begrudge  him  the  room  in  your  house.  But  God  has  an  accoimt  to 
settle  with  you  on  that  subject.  What  are  those  rough  words  with  which  your 
children  are  accosting  you?  They  are  the  echo  of  the  very  words  you  used  in  the 
ear  of  your  old  father  forty  years  ago.  Retribution  in  a  circle!  I  wo\ild  Uke  to 
see  Paul,  the  invahd  missionary,  at  the  moment  when  his  influence  comes  to  full 
orb — his  influence  rolling  out  through  Antioch,  Cyprus,  Syria,  Corinth,  Athens, 
through  Asia,  through  Europe,  through  five  centuries,  through  twenty  cent^lries, 
through  aU  the  succeeding  centuries,  through  earth,  through  heaven,  and  at  last, 
the  wave  of  influence,  having  made  full  circuit,  strikes  his  great  soul.  I  should 
not  want  to  see  Voltaire  when  his  influence  comes  to  full  orb.  No  one  can  tell  how 
that  bad  man's  influence  girded  the  earth,  save  the  One  who  is  seated  on  the 
circle  of  the  earth.  {T.  De  WiU  Talmage,  D.D.)  The  inhatoitantB  thereof  are 
as  grasshoppers.  —  Men  as  grasshoppers :  —  1.  So  little  and  inconsiderable^ 
2.  Of  such  small  value.  3.  Of  such  little  use.  4.  So  easUy  crushed.  Proud  men's 
lifting  up  themselves  is  but  like  the  grasshopper's  leap;  in  an  instant  they  must 
down  to  the  earth  again.     {M.  Henry.) 

Vers.  23,  24.  That  hrlngeth  the  princes  to  nothing. — Or  eat  men  reduced  to 
nothing : — Earth  has  its  great  men.  Social  distinctions  grow  out  of  the  constitu- 
tion of  things,  and  are,  therefore.  Divine  in  their  foundation.  L  Eabth's  gbeat 
MEN  God  reduces  to  nothing.  1.  Death  is  the  destruction  of  all  mere  worldly 
distinctions.  2.  Death  is  effected  by  the  agency  of  God.  "  He  bringeth,"  &c. 
Not  chance,  fate,  accident,  &c.     II.  Earth's  great  men  He  reduces  to  nothing 

NOTWITHSTANDINa  THEIR  DETERMINED  EFFORTS  TO  BE  SOMETHING.       "  Their  StOCk 

shall  not  take  root  in  the  earth."  1.  The  implied  tendcncj  of  earth's  great  men 
in  relation  to  life.  They  seek  to  "  root "  themselves  here.  2.  The  manifest  folly 
of  earth's  great  men.  They  are  trying  to  do  what  they  cannot  accomplish. 
Heaven's  decree  is  against  it,  and  there  is  no  overcoming  that  decree.  The  roots 
of  ovir  earthly  life,  such  as  they  are,  are  only  hke  those  of  certain  marine  plants, 
that  spring  up  from  one  floating  wavelet  to  be  destroyed  by  the  next;  or  rather  like 
the  roots  of  those  atmospheric  plants  that  strike  only  into  a  wave  of  air;  that  roll 
swiftly  on.  Heaven  only  knows  where.  III.  He  does  this  with  the  greatest 
EASE.     "  He  blows  upon  them  and  they  wither,"  &c.     (Homilist.) 

Ver.  26.  Lift  up  your  eyes  on  high. — Looking  up  and  pressing  on  : — A  man's 


OHAP.  XL.1  ISAIAH.  211 

vision  broadens  as  it  lengthens.  Look  straight  down  at  your  feet;  what  do  you 
see  ?  A  few  inches  will  measure  the  diameter  of  the  circle  within  which  your  sight 
has  play.  Look  up  at  the  blue  which  spans  the  heavens,  and  what  see  you  then? 
Your  circle  of  vision  takes  a  sweep  which  demands  astronomic  computation.  The 
circumference  widens  with  the  distance.  But  that  is  not  all.  Within  the  near 
and  narrow  circle  there  is  room  only  for  small  details  and  severed  parts — mere 
fractions  and  fragments,  whose  drift  is  not  clear.  The  distant  and  wide  outlook 
shows  great  and  harmonious  aggregates,  shows  their  movement  and  drift,  shows 
their  obedience  to  the  time-beat  of  a  sovereign  purpose.  Herein  hes  the  explana- 
tion of  our  text.  It  was  a  call  to  men  to  look  at  the  stars,  and  to  get  therefrom 
a  larger  and  more  inspiriting  conception  of  God's  providence.  The  downward 
look  throws  an  exaggerated  emphasis  on  local  details  and  passing  experiences.  It 
shows  a  complexity  of  events  and  movements  whose  design  is  not  clear.  The 
outlook  is  too  confined  to  reveal  the  great  issues  which  give  meaning  and  value  to 
details.  Life  sinks  to  a  series  of  disjointed  commonplaces.  Man  is  robbed  of 
the  vision  which  inspires  creative  thought  and  heroic  endeavour.  Hope,  faith, 
courage  are  the  fruit  of  a  loftier  and  far-reaching  vision.  The  present  finds  its 
interpretation  in  the  eternal,  the  local  in  the  infinite.  The  soul  of  the  seer  expands 
with  his  vision.  Narrow  thought  and  hasty  judgment  become  impossible  to  him. 
Essentially,  then,  our  text  calls  us  to  a  broader  outlook,  bids  us  to  form  our  judg- 
ments and  to  feed  our  impulses  on  larger  views  of  life  and  providence.  This  is  far 
enough  from  bidding  us  to  become  visionaries  and  star-gazers  in  the  sense  usually 
associated  with  those  terms.  It  is  vision  in  order  to  labour,  not  vision  in  place  of 
labour,  to  which  we  are  called.  By  rising  in  vision  above  the  present,  we  shall 
more  adequately  fill  the  present  with  wise  thoiight  and  toil.  I.  This  thought 
GtriDES  ITS  TO  THE  PBOPER  UNDERSTANDiNQ  OF  Peovidence.  God  works  on  E  large 
scale.  His  purposes,  like  Himself,  inhabit  eternity.  In  His  government  there  is 
nothing  small,  arbitrary,  merely  local.  Every  passing  movement  is  part  of  a  big 
design.  And  the  man  who  would  read  even  the  plainer  words  of  that  purpose 
must  get  his  hght  from  a  wide  study  of  God's  ways.  Providence  cannot  be 
interpreted  by  details.  We  get  a  ghmpse  of  this  truth  when  we  engage  in  retrospect. 
Looking  back  over  a  long  stretch  of  years,  we  are  enabled  to  perceive  merciful 
meanings  in  crises  which  at  the  time  perplexed  and  burdened  us.  The  same 
truth  impresses  us  when  we  take  a  panoramic  view  of  nations  and  movements 
in  history.  To  the  man  of  downward  look  and  narrow  view,  few  things  are  more 
perplexing  than  the  oftentimes  apparent  breach  between  moral  worth  and  material 
progress.  He  sometimes  becomes  cynical  over  it.  He  has  been  heard  to  say 
that  righteousness  has  nothing  to  do  with  prosperity.  He  looks  down  at  the  few 
facts  lying  near  his  feet,  and  this  is  what  he  makes  of  them.  Think  you  that  the 
resources  of  civiUsation  have  banished  for  ever  the  dispensations  of  righteous, 
all-controlling  providence?  Read  history.  You  will  find  that  virtue,  truth, 
honour,  are  more  than  mere  sentiments — are  vital  elements  of  victorious  power. 
God  works  on  a  grand  scale.  We  must  look  far  if  we  would  adequately  see.  To 
this  grandeur  of  purpose,  which  is  the  glory  of  providence,  must  be  traced  our 
many  perplexities.  Higher  intelligence  and  larger  aims  must  ever  work  in  a 
manner  ill  understood  and  misunderstood  by  lower  capacity.  There  wiU  ever  be 
need  for  trust  and  patience,  but  there  may  be  moments  of  insight  and  reaUsation. 
But  these  can  only  come  to  the  man  who  attains  the  broad  outlook.  In  this  matter 
we  multiply  oiu*  inevitable  perplexities  by  the  persistence  of  our  downward 
look.  Our  thoughts  and  interests  are  so  centred  in  the  passing  day  and  the  current 
event  as  to  narrow  both  our  views  and  our  sympathies.  The  things  of  to-day  are 
what  we  are  eager  for;  and  on  God's  relation  to  us  through  them  do  we  often 
misjudge  His  character  and  purpose.  Give  scope  to  your  eyes.  The  tree  will 
then  sink  to  small  proportions.  It  will  become  a  pleasing  detail  on  the  broad 
expanse  which  stretches  away  to  the  horizon.  The  men  to  whom  the  text  was 
first  spoken  needed  this  exhortation-  They  had  been  trying  to  see  the  landscape 
while  placing  their  eyes  upon  the  tree.  II.  This  thought  guides  us  to  the 
PROPEE  standpoint  FROM  WHICH  TO  LOOK  AT  MAN.  The  downward  look  tends 
to  the  denial  of  God.  It  tends  equally,  and  as  a  consequence,  to  the  degradation 
of  our  thought  of  man.  It  is  by  enlarging  oui  vision,  by  taking  in  a  wider  view  of 
facts,  that  we  shall  rightly  see  God,  and  through  Him,  ourselves.  In  a  word,  as 
we  must  look  at  fife's  facts  in  the  fight  of  God's  great  purposes,  so  must  we  look 
at  man,  not  as  he  merely  is,  but  as  he  is  ideally  in  the  redeeming  thought  and 
design  of  the  Father.     Man,  looked  at  only  from  below,  does  not  inspire  great 


212  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xl. 

expectations  or  reverential  regard.  Before  us  looms  a  being  of  measurable  height, 
of  weight  and  bulk  definable,  acting  under  the  impulse  of  appetites  and  desirea 
which  he  holds  in  common  with  the  brutes,  showing  now  and  again  the  possession 
of  genius  and  virtues  clearly  not  brutish,  but  for  the  most  part  failing  to  rise  above 
sheer  commonplace  alike  of  power  or  sympathy.  The  natural  man  of  ordinary 
proportions  is  not  impressive.  And  the  observer  who  looks  downwards  at  him 
will  soon  lose  all  heroic  conceptions  of  life,  all  sense  of  man's  high  origin  and  destiny. 
We  become  the  vic+ims  of  a  delusion.  The  eye  tricks  us  into  the  belief  that  we  see» 
and  under  that  belief  we  begin  to  cherish  low  views  of  man's  worth.  Man,  like 
providence,  to  be  seen  aright  must  be  looked  at  on  high.  Here  we  come  under 
the  tyranny  of  his  too  obtrusive  parts.  It  is  "  in  Christ "  tkat  we  must  look  at 
our  life,  judge  its  possibilities  and  its  worth,  its  character  and  destiny.  Looking 
at  man  in  Him,  we  behold  a  being  God-Uke  in  the  proportions  of  power  and  quality. 
If  God,  looking  upon  the  very  imperfect  disciples  of  His  Son,  calls  them  "  saints," 
while  yet  they  are  a  long  way  from  sanctity,  I  will  be  guided  by  the  example. 
in.  This  thought  guides  us  to  the  proper  inspiration  of  work.  Never  yet 
was  great  work  done  by  the  man  of  mere  downward  look.  The  eye,  to  be  sure, 
must  look  steadily  at  the  object  and  instrument  of  its  toil,  must  look  down  and 
around  at  the  place  and  conditions  of  the  work  to  be  done;  but  nothing  much 
will  come  of  it  till  the  eye  kindles  the  soul,  and  the  soul  rekindles  the  eye  to  wider 
vision.  The  artist  who  painted  for  eternity  had  mastered  the  secret  of  most 
patient  and  potent  work  for  time  and  man.  In  the  same  spirit  of  lofty  consecra- 
tion did  the  men  work  who  planned  and  reared  our  great  cathedrals.  Not  for  pay, 
not  for  fame,  not  by  regulating  rule  of  trade  society  did  the  chisels  chip,  and  th© 
hammers  ring,  and  the  trowels  ply  their  busy  task.  The  worknien  consciously 
worked  for  God.  And  nothing  less  than  a  renewal  of  this  vision  can  redeem  the 
work  of  to-day  from  insignificance  or  degradation,  or  lift  men  into  the  confidence 
and  joy  of  patient  well-doing.  The  busy  housewife,  engaged  in  an  endless  round 
of  detailed  tasks,  would  surely  fail  through  very  weariness,  did  not  the  large  vision 
and  love  of  home  and  family  give  great  value  to  small  activities  and  lifelong  signifi- 
cance to  patient  fidelity.  It  is  when  the  preacher  or  the  Sunday-school  teacher 
looks  at  his  work  from  on  high,  and  sees  before  him  not  so  many  recognisable 
people  about  whom  he  knows  everjrthing,  but  a  company  of  immortal  spirits 
whose  life  passes  measvu-ement  or  comprehension,  that  he  is  strengthened  for  the 
drudgery  attaching  to  his  vocation,  and  rises  to  the  height  of  passionate  enthusiasm. 
The  commerce  and  industry  of  the  day  are  to  some  extent  smitten  with  debility 
through  the  narrowing  of  their  oatlook,  consequent  upon  hot  competition  and 
vigorous  clashing  of  rights  and  claims.  The  downward  look  has  resulted  in  th© 
blight  of  worldliness.  Only  the  broader  vision  can  raise  the  tone  and  quality 
of  life.  It  is  the  business  of  the  poet,  the  preacher,  the  leader,  to  bring  and  keep 
these  loftier  inspirations  within  the  practical  spheres  of  life.  The  tendency  of 
work  is  always  towards  absorption  in  its  own  immediate  occupation.     IV.  Thh 

PROPER  EFFECT  OF  THIS  UPWARD  LOOK  IS  THE  RENEWAL  OF  OUR  FAITH  AND  RESOLVE. 

It  is  to  grace  we  must  look  for  the  secret  of  all  that  is  beneficent  in  providence  and 
bright  in  the  prospects  of  man.  And  as  we  recall  these  blessings,  we  do  but 
emphasise  the  work  of  Jesus,  through  whom  man  is  crowned  with  favour  and 
immortality.  We  lift  up  our  eyes  on  high,  and  there  we  behold  Jesus  crowned 
with  glory  and  honour,  all  dominion  granted  to  Him,  holding  the  reins  of  power 
while  bearing  the  marks  of  conflict.  In  Him  we  see  the  Father.  _  (C.  A.  Berry,  D.D. ) 
The  universe  and  man : — These  words  remind  us  of  an  incident  in  the  life  of  the  first 
Napoleon.  On  board  the  ship  which  carried  him  across  the  Mediterranean  to  his 
campaign  in  Egypt,  there  were  French  savants  who  had  convinced  themselves, 
and  thought  they  could  convince  others,  that  there  is  no  God.  The  great  com- 
mander found  them  discoursing  boastfully  on  their  favourite  theme,  and,  calling 
them  upon  deck,  while  the  heavens  above  were  bright  with  innumerable  stars, 
he  .said  to  them,  "Tell  me  who  made  these."  Napoleon  was  no  philosopher, 
no  metaphysician,  no  theologian.  But  he  w£is  a  man  of  great  comnion  sense. 
We  are  not  content  to  be  told  conjectiu-ally  of  any  processes  through  which  things 
have  passed  into  their  present  forms  of  existence.  Nebular  hypotheses  and 
atomic  theories  explain  nothing.  If  assumed  as  true,  we  demand  to  know  whence 
the  nebulae  and  whence  the  atoms  came.  Nor  are  we  content  to  be  cheated  out 
of  an  answer  to  the  question,  "  Who  made  these?  "  by  a  metaphysics  which  ends 
hy  leaving  us  in  doubt  as  to  whether  these  stars  have  any  existence  except  in  our 
own  thoughts  and  thought-procefiBes.     There  was  a  time  when  the  children  of 


CHAP.  XL.]  ISAIAH.  213 

men,  lifting  up  their  eyes  on  high,  saw  in  the  hosts  of  heaven  not  creatures 
of  God,  but  gods.  And  we  scarcely  wonder.  The  living  God  once  forsaken  and 
forgotten,  who  or  what  so  worthy  of  adoration  as  sun,  moon,  and  stars?  I.  It  i3 
THIS  OLDER  FAITH  "WE  FIND  IN  OUR  TEXT — not  obscurely,  but  with  the  positiveness 
of  knowledge.  And  it  is  not  in  this  text  alone,  but  from  the  begiiming  to  the 
«ad  of  our  Bible.  Its  writers,  in  succession  to  one  another,  exphcitly  maintain 
the  faith  of  a  hving  God,  Maker  and  Ruler  of  aU.  And  in  doing  so,  they  stood  alone 
in  the  world.  The  wisdom  of  Egypt  and  the  wisdom  of  Assyria  gave  them  no 
countenance.  The  teaching  of  these  Hebrew  writers,  through  all  the  ages,  from 
Moses  to  Christ,  is  like  a  pure  crystal  stream  flowing  through  a  vast  desert,  un- 
absorbed  by  sand  or  smi,  and  undefiled  by  the  ten  thousand  impiu:itie8  on  ita 
banks.  The  old  Hebrew  faith  stands  as  firmly  in  the  light  of  modern  science  as  it 
did  when  science  in  its  modern  sense  was  a  thing  almost  unknown.  Sir  Isaac 
Newton,  in  closing  his  exposition  of  the  system  of  the  universe,  worshipped  and 
declared  that  its  cause  could  not  be  mechanical;  it  must  be  intelligent,  it  must  be 
found  in  a  voluntary  agent  infinitely  wise  and  mighty.  But  while  these  men  of  the 
old  Hebrew  race  knew  less  of  the  vastness  of  the  imiverse  than  we  do  now,  they 
did  not  feel  it  less.  The  man  of  science,  with  his  telescope  and  mathematical 
reckonings,  must  feel  himself  utterly  bewildered  when  he  attempts  to  imagine 
the  distances  which  his  demonstrations  reveal.  But  it  does  not  follow  that  his 
impression  of  that  vastness,  or  his  awe  in  the  contemplation  of  it,  is  in  proportion 
to  his  knowledge.  A  child,  with  a  true  child's  heart,  may  be  more  deeply  impressed 
with  the  glory  of  the  over-hanging  heavens,  than  a  full-grown  man  who  exercises 
aU  his  intellectual  power  in  endeavouring  to  understand  them.  The  Hebrews 
knew  enough  and  saw  enough  to  produce  the  profoundest  feeling.  Perhaps  the 
chief  explanation  of  the  feeling  with  which  the  Hebrews  contemplated  nature  is 
that  they  saw  God  in  everything.  II.  This  is  the  second  point  to  which  our 
TEXT  introduces  US.  "  He  caUeth  them  all  by  names  by  the  greatness  of  His 
might;  for  that  He  is  strong  in  power  not  one  faileth."  But  what  of  the  laws 
of  nature?  The  Hebrew  Scriptures,  instead  of  denying  the  constancy  of  nature, 
seem  to  afifirm  it  more  consistently  than  some  modem  scientists.  Take,  e.g., 
these  primitive  statements:  "  God  said.  Let  the  earth  bring  forth  grass,  the  herb 
yielding  seed,  and  the  fruit  tree  yielding  fruit  after  its  kind,  whose  seed  is  in  itself, 
upon  the  earth;  and  it  was  so.  And  God  saw  that  it  was  good."  But  the  Bible, 
while  explicit  in  regard  to  the  constancy  of  nature,  asserts  with  equal  expUcitness 
a  continued  Divine  agency  in  nature  (Psa.  civ.  14  ;  John  v.  17).     III.  All  this 

IS  MADE  THE  FOUNDATION  OF  AN  ARGUMENT  OF  COMFORT  PRIMARILY  TO  THE  ANCIENT 

Israel  of  God,  and  equally  to  all  the  spiritual  Israel.  "  Why  sayest  thou, 
O  Jacob,  and  speakest,  0  Israel  ?  "  &c.  Gahleo  approached  this  idea,  whether 
he  got  it  from  Isaiah  or  not,  in  a  very  significant  form-  "  I  would  not  that  we 
should  so  shorten  the  arm  of  God  in  the  government  of  human  affairs,  but  that 
we  should  rest  in  this,  that  we  are  certain  that  God  and  nature  are  so  occupied 
in  the  government  of  human  affairs,  they  could  not  more  attend  to  us  if  they  were 
charged  with  the  care  of  the  human  race  alone."  The  prophet  goes  a  step  beyond 
this,  and  draws  an  argument  from  God's  care  over  the  universe  to  assure  us  of 
His  care  over  us.  Christ  said,  "  Behold  the  fowls  of  the  air;  for  they  sow  not, 
neither  do  they  reap  nor  gather  into  barns;  yet  your  Heavenly  Father  feedeth 
them.  Are  ye  not  much  better  than  they?  "  But  the  prophet  seems  to  argue  from 
God's  care  over  the  greater  to  His  care  over  the  less.  As  if  he  said.  He  watches 
over  suns  and  stars,  therefore  He  will  watch  over  you.  More  than  this,  the  Bible 
story  of  creation  gives  us  the  keynote  of  the  Bible  idea  of  man.  Man  is  not  merely 
one  of  innumerable  living  creatures  made  to  people  the  earth;  the  earth  was  made 
for  him.  He  was  the  end  for  which  and  towards  which  progressive  changes, 
spread  over  vast  ages,  were  effected.  Glorious  as  that  star  may  be,  and  wonderingly 
as  I  contemplate  its  brightness,  I  am  more  to  God  than  it  is;  I  am  nearer  of 
kin  to  God  than  it  is;  and  if  God  cares  for  it,  much  more  will  He  care  for  me.  His 
own  child.  (J.  Kennedy,  D.D.)  The  heavens  testify  of  God  : — Cicero  could  ask, 
"  When  we  look  at  the  heavens,  first  in  all  their  unclouded  beauty,  and  then  with 
such  rapid  changes  passing  over  their  face;  when  we  consider  the  alternations 
of  day  and  night,  and  the  succession  of  the  four  several  seasons;  when  we  behold 
the  sun  which  regulates  all  these,  and  the  moon  and  stars  all  keeping  their  courses 
with  unfailing  constancy,  can  we  doubt  that  some  present  and  efficient  ruler 
is  over  them?  "  And  Seneca  says,  "  They  all  continue,  not  because  they  are 
eternal,  but  because  the  watchfulness  of  their  Governor  protects  them:  imperish- 


214  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  xi,. 

able  things  need  no  guardian;  but  these  are  preserved  by  their  Maker,  who,  by 
His  power,  controls  their  natural  tendency  to  decay."  And  Hume,  though  his 
philosophy  was  irreligious  in  comparison  with  that  of  either  Roman,  could  raise 
his  hands  to  the  starry  sky  and  show  that  he  too  had  a  human  heart,  by  exclaiming 
to  Fergusson,  "  Oh,  Adam,  how  can  a  man  look  at  that  and  not  believe  in  a  God!  ' 
(Sir  E.  Straehey,  Bart.) 


Vers.  27-31.  Why  sayest  thou,  0  Jacob,  and  speakest,  0  Israel,  My  way  Is  hid 
flrom  the  Lord  ? — The  attrihzttes  of  God :  a  reply  to  unbelief : — I.  The  universal  dis- 
position TO  UNBELIEF.  "  Why  sayest  thou,  0  Jacob,  and  speakest,  0  Israel  ?  "  &c. 
II.  The  account  which  God  Himself  gives  of  the  greatness  op  His  attributes. 
Well  to  Israel  might  the  Almighty  put  the  inquiry,  "  Hast  thou  not  known?  "  He 
spake  to  EDs  peculiar  people.  In  Jewry  is  God  known;  His  praise  is  great  in 
Israel.  How  could  they  but  know  His  attributes,  to  whom  He  had  Himself  mani- 
fested His  glory?  And  to  us  the  same  upbraiding  queries  might  well  be  put. 
m.  How  THE  Lord  employs  all  His  mighty  attributes  for  the  consolation 

AND  REFRESHMENT  OF  Hl8  PEOPLE  WHO  CALL  UPON  HlM.      "  He  giveth  power  tO 

the  faint,"  &c.  1.  Consider  the  case  of  those  who  are  convinced  of  their  own  natural 
sin  and  helplessness,  but  who  have  not  as  yet  sought  their  Saviour.  2.  The  consola- 
tions of  the  text  belong  also  to  those  who,  after  they  have  found  their  Saviour, 
are  mourning  under  peculiar  sin,  or  walking  in  peculiar  darkness.  3.  By  temporal 
sorrows,  too.  He  may  sorely  grieve  thee,  but  much  more  mayest  thou  trust  Bam  in 
them.  (T.  Scott,  B.A.)  When  the  way  seems  hidden : — I.  The  way  which  seems 
HIDDEN.  "  My  way  is  hid  from  the  Lord  " — what  a  common  cry !  Samuel  Taylor 
Coleridge  said  he  was  sure  the  Bible  was  the  Word  of  God  because  it  found  him  at 
deeper  depths  than  any  other  book.  How  surely  and  how  deeply  does  this  cry, 
"  My  way  is  hid  from  the  Lord,"  "  find"  each  of  us  in  many  a  mood!  1.  It  is 
into  the  future  that  the  prophet  is  looking.  Plainly,  by  the  vision-giving  Spirit, 
he  discerns  the  great  catastrophe  which  is  to  afflict  the  Jewish  nation.  The  Baby- 
lonian captivity  is  to  drag  them  into  exile.  By  the  severe  chastisement  of  the 
captivity  the  Jews  are  to  be  cured  of  an  almost  uncheckable  tendency  towards 
idolatry.  A  human  waywardness  needs  sometimes  a  bitter  medicine  to  compel  it 
back  to  paths  of  loyalty  to  God.  But  the  prophet  not  only  foresees  the  captivity, 
but  also  the  way  in  which  the  exiled  Hebrews  are  enduring  it.  It  is  as  though  he 
heard  them  talking  together  there  in  distant  Babylon.  2.  But  that  the  way  seems 
hidden  from  the  Lord  is  not  anything  peculiar  to  those  ancient  captives.  How  surely 
and  how  deeply  does  that  ancient  cry  "  find  "  every  one  of  us.  (1)  Delayed  answers 
to  prayer  sometimes  make  our  way  seem  hidden  from  the  Lord.  (2)  The  strange- 
ness of  the  way  makes  om:  way  sometimes  seem  hidden  from  the  Lord.  (3)  Our 
mistakes  sometimes  make  our  way  seem  hidden  from  the  Lord.  (4)  Our  moods 
sometimes  make  our  way  seem  hidden  from  the  Lord.  (5)  Our  sins  sometimes 
make  our  way  seem  hidden  from  the  Lord.     II.  A  great  and  enduring  truth 

ABOUT  QUE  WAY  WHICH  SOMETIMES  SEEMS  TO  US  HIDDEN  FROM  THE   LoRD.      This 

is  that  our  way  is  not  and  cannot  be  hidden  from  Him.  And  there  are  reasons  firm 
and  towering  as  the  mountain  peaks  for  this.  1.  Our  way  cannot  be  hidden  from  the 
Lord  because  He  is  everlasting — His  purpose  cannot  fail.  2.  Because  He  is  power- 
ful— "  the  Creator  of  the  ends  of  the  earth."  3.  Because  He  is  actively  Lord — 
"  He  fainteth  not,  neither  is  weary."  4.  Because  He  is  actively  wise —  '  there  is 
no  searching  of  His  understanding."  5.  Because  He  is  beneficent — "  He  giveth 
power  to  the  faint,  and  to  them  that  have  no  might  He  increaseth  strength." 
in.  Seize  the  precious  promise  for  your  help,  even  though  your  way  may 
seem  hidden  from  the  Lord.  "  But  they  that  wait  upon  the  Lord  shall  renew,"  &c. 
God  is  coming  to  your  help.  Even  while  the  captive  Jews  were  crying,  "  My  way 
is  hidden,"  &c.,  God  was  preparing  Cyrus  to  be  their  deliverer.  {Homiletic 
Review.)  Spiritual  despondency.' — I.  Isaiah's  despondency.  It  arose  from 
a  two-fold  source.  1.  The  sense  of  a  Divine  desertion.  "  My  way  is  hidden  from 
the  Lord."  It  was  the  necessary  result  of  the  prophet's  office  that  all  the  nation's 
sorrows  must  press  home  on  his  spirit,  and  must  woimd  with  their  keenest  anguish 
his  sensitive  soul.  Now,  remembering  this  imion  of  deep  sympathy  with  the 
people,  observe  the  tremendous  power  with  which,  for  fifty  years,  the  wickedness 
of  tne  land,  and  Grod's  great  judgment  upon  it,  must  have  pressed  on  his  large  and 
tender  heart.  It  made  his  very  office  often  seem  a  vanity.  Many  men  have  had 
the  same  experience;  perhaps  all  earnest  men  must  undergo  it.  2.  The  absence  of 
Divine  recompense.       My  judgment  is  passed  over  from  my  God."    The  prophet 


CHAP.  XL.]  ISAIAH.  215 

unquestionably  spoke  these  words  as  a  cry  uttered  only  by  himself.  The  people 
were  buried  in  God-forgetting  repose.  The  priests  were  dead  in  formalism.  The 
spiritual  life  of  the  land  was  decaying;  and  thimders  of  woe  were  muttering  ia  the 
nation's  future.  What  had  his  life  been  worth?  Apparently  nothing !  All  great 
men  think  that  they  die  in  failure.  Is  it  not  hard  for  a  man  who  has  given  to  Grod 
his  all,  and  worn  out  his  life  in  His  service,  to  go  out  into  the  eternal  silence  and  see 
no  reward  ?  11.  The  teuth  that  removed  Isaiah's  despondency.  In  the  verses 
following  our  text  we  perceive  that  the  double  manifestation  of  God's  greatness  in 
Nature,  and  the  tenderness  of  His  revealed  will,  dispelled  the  gloom.  1.  The  great- 
ness of  God  in  Natiire.  He  speaks  not  only  of  the  imsearchable  Creator,  but  of  the 
everlasting  God.  Thy  recompense  is  sure — thy  work,  and  conflict,  and  toil  are 
for  eternity;  then  "  why  sayest  thou,  0  Jacob,  that  thy  way  is  hidden  from  the 
Lord?"  2.  The  tenderness  of  the  revealed  will.  "  He  giveth  power  to  the  faint; 
and  to  them  that  have  no  might.  He  increase th  strength."  The  revelation  of  God's 
tenderness  is  far  more  fuU  for  the  Christian  man,  and  has,  therefore,  far  greater 
power  to  remove  our  despondency.  We  know  how  the  Great  Shepherd  gave  His 
life  for  the  sheep.  ITT.  The  results  of  its  removal.  1.  Strength  in  weakness. 
"  They  that  wait  upon  the  Lord  shall  renew  their  strength."  Feebleness  is  trans- 
formed into  power  when  God  has  taught  His  great  lesson  of  "  glorying  in  infirmity." 
2.  Immortal  youth.  "  They  shall  mount  up  on  wings  as  eagles."  You  have  heard 
the  old  Jewish  fable,  that  the  eagle  in  dying  recovered  its  youthful  power.  (E.  L 
Hull,  B.A.)        Faith  in  the  living  God: — I.  Isaiah  here  reaches  and  rests  upon  the 

VERY  foundations  OF  THE  FAITH,  TRUST,  AND  HOPE  OF  MANKIND — the  living  God. 

Creation  rests  on  His  hand;  man,  the  child  of  the  higher  creation,  rests  on  Hia 
heart.  What  His  power  is  to  the  material  universe  His  moral  nature  and  character 
are  to  the  spiritual  imiverse.  "  Have  faith  in  God."  Creation  lives  by  faith 
unconsciously,  and  all  her  voices  to  our  intelligent  ear  iterate  and  reiterate  Have 
faith  in  God."  II.  What  do  we  know  of  God  that  we  should  trust  Him? 
What  aspects  does  He  present  to  us  ?  We  have  two  sources  of  knowledge — what  He 
has  said  to,  and  what  He  has  done  for,  man.  1.  There  is  something  unspeakably 
sublime  in  the  appeal  in  ver.  26.  It  is  heaven's  protest  against  man's  despair. 
Nor  is  Isaiah  the  only  sacred  writer  who  utters  it.  There  is  something  very 
strikingly  parallel  in  Job  (Job  xxxviii.).  In  both  cases  God's  appeal  is  to  the  grand 
and  steadfast  order  of  the  vast  universe,  which  He  sustains  and  assures.  God  tells 
us  that  all  the  hosts  of  heaven  are  attendant  on  the  fortimes  of  mankind.  They 
all  live  that  God's  deep  pmrpose  concerning  man  may  be  accomplished.  2.  God 
declares  here  that  we  are  not  only  involved  inextricably  in  the  fulfilment  of  His 
deepest  and  most  cherished  coimsels,  but  that  we  are  needed  to  satisfy  the  yearn- 
ings of  His  Father's  heart,  m.  We  may  apply  these  principles  to  the  seasons 
of  our  experience  when  faith  in  the  living  God  is  the  one  thing  which  stands 
between  us  and  the  most  blank  despair.  1.  The  deep  waters  of  personal  affliction. 
2.  The  weary  search  of  the  intellect  for  truth,  the  struggle  to  comprehend  the 
incomprehensible,  to  know  the  inscrutable,  to  see  the  invisible,  which  is  part,  and 
not  the  least  heavy  part,  of  the  discipline  of  a  man  and  of  mankind.  3.  Dark 
crises  of  human  history,  when  truth,  virtue,  and  manhood  seem  perishing  fiom 
the  world.  (J.  Baldwin  Brown,  B.A.)  The  unbelief  of  the  Jews  reproved: — 
I.  The  titles  God  here  gives  them  were  enough  to  shame  them  out  of  their 
distrusts.  "  0  Jacob;  0  Israel!  "  Let  them  remember — 1.  Whence  they  took 
those  names — from  one  who  had  found  God  faithful  to  him,  and  kind  in  all  his 
straits.  2.  Why  they  bore  those  names — as  God's  professing  people,  a  people  in 
covenant  with  Him.  II.  The  way  of  reproving  them  is  by  reasoning  with 
THEM.  "  Why?  "  Consider  whether  thou  hast  any  groimd  to  say  so.  Many  of 
our  foolish  frets  and  fears  would  vanish  before  a  strict  inquiry  into  the  cause  of 
them,  m.  That  which  they  are  reproved  for  is  an  ill-natured,  ill- 
favoured  WORD  they  spoke  OF  GoD,  as  if  He  had  cast  them  off.  There  seems  to 
be  an  emphasis  laid  upon  their  saying  it.  It  is  bad  to  have  evil  thoughts  rise  in  our 
mind,  but  it  is  worse  to  put  an  imprimatur  to  them,  and  turn  them  into  evil  words. 
David  reflects  with  regret  upon  what  he  had  said  in  his  haste  when  he  was  in 
distress.  IV.  The  ill  word  they  said  was  a  word  of  despair  concerning 
their  present  calamitous  condition.  They  were  ready  to  conclude — I.  That 
God  would  not  heed  them.  "  My  way  is  hid  from  the  Lord."  2.  That  God  could 
not  help  them.  "  My  judgment  is  passed  over  from  my  God,"  i.e.,  my  case  is  so 
far  past  relief  that  God  Himself  cannot  redress  the  grievances  of  it.  {M.  Henry.) 
A  challenge  to  deejxmdent  unbelief: — "Why  sayest  thou,"  &o.,  that  all  the  &• 


216  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  xl. 

pensations  of  providence  and  grace  with  which  you  are  connected  appear  so 
intricate  and  inexplicable  that  you  cannot  attain  any  comfortable  acquaintance 
with  them;  that  God  doth  not  seem  to  regard  your  condition,  and  to  manifest  Hia 
tender  care  of  you,  but  acts  toward  you  as  if  your  forlorn  circumstances  were  un- 
known to  Him?  This  mournful  complaint  is  adopted  by  them  that  fear  ihe  Lord, 
on  one  or  other  of  the  three  following  accounts — I.  \Mien  they  do  not  perceive  thh 
PROCTJEING  CAUSES  from  whence  their  troubles  proceed.  This  perplexing  circum- 
stance greatly  increases  theii-  uneasiness,  and  induces  them  to  request  with  Job 
that  God  would  show  them  wherefore  He  contendeth  with  them.  II.  AA'hen  they 
do  not  discover  the  impokt.\2jt  purposes  to  which  they  are  especially  diiected. 
Uncertainty  as  to  the  particular  ends  which  afflictions  are  sent  to  accompHsh 
augments  not  a  little  the  pressure  of  distress,  and  disposes  good  people  to  bemoan 
themselves  in  the  language  of  the  dejected  Church,  "  He  hath  hedged  me  about 
that  I  cannot  get  out."  I  can  neither  see  the  reason  nor  the  end  of  my  affliction; 
my  way  seems  to  be  hid  from  the  Lord.  III.  When  they  do  not  discern  what  is 
PRESENT  DUTY.  Notwithstanding  the  blessed  God  hath  clearly  taught  in  His  word 
what  He  requires,  yet  there  are  particular  situations  wherein  the  best  of  men  have 
been  perplexed  as  to  what  course  they  ought  to  follow.  In  such  cases  they  have 
said  with  the  good  King  of  Judah,  we  know  not  what  to  do;  and  have  lamented 
that  their  way  was  hid  from  the  Lord.  {R.  Macctdloch.)  Doubt  and  encourage- 
ment : — Israel  had  suffered  in  exile  so  long  that  there  were  many  who  thought  that 
their  case  had  escaped  God's  eye,  and  that  their  "  judgment  "  [i.e.  their  cause)  had 
passed  beyond  His  notice:  the  prophet  rephes,  Jehovah  is  no  local,  Umited  God, 
as  you  imagine;  His  power  embraces  Babylon  not  less  than  Palestine  ;  His 
strength  is  not  exhausted;  "  there  is  no  searching  of  His  understanding  " — some 
inscrutable  purpose  must  guide  Him  in  delaying,  if  He  do  delay,  the  redemption  of 
His  people;  only  continue  to  trust!  {Prof.  S.  R.  Driver,  D.D.)  God  the  comfort 
of  His  people  :■ — Sorrow  ever  brings  God  nearer  to  us,  if  it  do  not  bring  us  nearer 
to  God;  and  whilst  Isaiah  was  pondering  the  greatness  of  his  apparent  failure,  God 
was  preparing  to  chase  away  his  darkness  and  to  rekindle  his  hopes.  Above  him 
in  the  silent  vault  of  night  God  was  bringmg  out  His  solemn  stars.  And  from  that 
heaven  where  God  numbered  and  named  and  watched  over  His  stars,  the  eternal 
chorus  swept  down  into  the  prophet's  soul — "  Why  sayest  thou,  0  Jacob,  and 
speakest,  0  Israel  ?  "  &c.  Now,  from  a  Uke  despondency  of  heart,  not  one  of  us  is 
entirely  free.  But  some  there  are  who  dwell  always  in  the  region  of  gloom.  The 
language  of  their  whole  life  is,  "  My  way  is  hid  from  the  Lord,  and  my  judgment  is 
passed  over  from  my  God."  Or,  perhaps,  it  is  that  the  shadow  of  a  long-past  grief 
isupon  their  life.  Or,  maybe,  it  is  that  they  walk  in  a  labjTinth  of  difficulty.  Or, 
like  Isaiah,  they  mourn  apparent  failure;  they  see  life's  higheat  purpose  ingloriously 
defeated.  I.  God's  power  the  coaiPORT  of  His  people.  Certain  it  is  that  our 
only  true  comfort  is  found  in  God.  Life,  when  we  can  tvirn  to  God,  is  never  cruel 
and  hard ;  however  full  of  trial  it  may  be  it  never  seems  unkind ;  for  we  know  that 
a  hand  of  love  appoints  what  a  heart  of  love  designs,  and  that  all  things  must  work 
together  for  good.  And  God  has  surrounded  us  on  every  side  with  reminders  of 
what  He  is.  When  the  heart  is  sad  and  low  go  out  and  be  a  witness  of  God's 
power;  go  out  in  the  quiet  evening  when  the  gold  and  fire  and  purple  of  the  sunset 
have  paled  away,  and  see  God  bringing  out  His  stars.  And  as  you  remember  that 
the  infinite  mind,  your  Father,  knows  their  number,  calls  them  aU  by  names,  as 
the  Eastern  shepherd  used  to  call  his  sheep,  and  so  follows  each  with  His  love, 
surrounds  each  by  His  care,  so  bathes  each  in  His  smile  that  "  not  one  faileth  " — 
do  they  not  with  a  loud  shout  of  song,  pour  dowTQ  upon  your  soul  the  same  consola- 
tion? Not  only  God's  power  as  manifested  in  the  sky,  but  His  power  as  seen  on 
earth  may  be  our  hope.  God  is  about  you  on  every  side.  No  star,  no  bird,  no 
flower  is  hid  from  Him.  Never,  then,  can  we  say,  "  My  way  is  hid  from  the  Lord," 
&c.  II.  But  a  further  source  of  c:)nsola',ion  is  God's  tenderness.  "  He 
giveth  power  to  the  faint,  and  to  them  that  have  no  might  He  increaseth  strength." 
God's  tenderness  is  only  rightly  seen  v/hen  viewed  in  conjunction  with  His  greatness. 
We  see  the  tender  in  contrast  with  the  mighty.  And  this  is  real  tenderness. 
Tenderness  is  strength  in  gentle  action.  When  the  power  that  might  crush  heals, 
uplifts,  and  strengthens,  then  we  see  tenderness.  Gentleness  is  not  weakness,  but 
it  is  calm,  quiet,  loving  strength.  When  the  wind — which  might  wTench  the  oak 
from  its  moorings,  snap  the  cables  it  has  thro\tTi  around  the  rocks,  and  carry  it  away 
on  its  wings — lifts  the  hair  and  fans  the  cheek  of  the  dying  child,  it  is  gentle.  When 
the  sun — mighty  in  his  strength,  pouring  his  scorching  light  on  far-off  worlds — 


CHAP.  XL.]  ISAIAH.  217 

Bhoots  down  a  golden  ray  to  cheer  the  drooping  plant,  or  to  "  increase  strength  ' ' 
in  the  Utile  seedling  which  a  raindrop  would  almost  crush,  it  is  gentle.  And  such 
is  the  God  of  whom  we  speak.  The  great  Father  has  also  a  mother's  tenderness. 
"  He  giveth  power  to  the  faint."  He  who  Himself  is  never  weary  stoops  to  those 
who  have  no  might,  that  He  may  increase  strength.  The  faint  and  weak,  they 
are  the  children  of  the  strong  and  mighty!  And  to  the  faint  He  giveth  "  power  " 
— power  to  suffer,  to  endine.  To  the  weak  He  giveth  "  strength  " — strength  to 
labour,  to  accomplish.  There  is  nothing  in  this  world  so  mighty  as  the  weakness 
which  takes  hold  of  the  Divine  strength.  Yonder  the  ocean  is  white  with  foam. 
Wave  chases  wave  across  the  dark  surface  of  the  deep  as  cloud  chases  cloud  across 
the  blackened  sky.  No  ship  could  live  in  such  a  storm.  The  mightiest  anchor 
ever  forged  could  give  no  safety  in  such  an  hour.  But  out,  where  the  storm  is 
fiercest,  on  those  dreadful  rocks  against  which  the  waves  dash  themselves  into 
clouds  of  spray,  is  a  tiny,  helpless  shell-fish.  Its  very  strength  is  weakness.  It 
clings  simply  by  its  emptiness ;  but,  clinging  to  that  rock,  not  aU  the  thunders  of 
the  ocean  dislodge  it  thence.  It  is  weakness  taking  hold  of  strength.  Tender  and 
yet  mighty  is  om:  God,  and  His  tenderness  is  His  people's  coinfort.  Whilst  we 
bow  ia  reverence  before  that  power  which  holds  untold  worlds  in  their  shining 
courses,  we  bow  in  profounder  reverence  and  love  before  that  power  when  we 
behold  it  in  gentle  exercise,  giving  power  to  the  faint.  III.  There  is  a  further 
source  of  consolation  open  to  us — God's  wisdom.  "  There  is  no  searchi»g  of  His 
understanding."  To  say  merely  that  man  cannot  \inderstand  God  is  to  say  very 
httle ;  but  the  language  is  the  statement  of  an  eternal  fact.  There  is  no  searching 
of  His  understanding;  not  by  the  brightest  intellects  of  earth  nor  by  the  grandest 
intelligences  of  heaven.  And  God's  infinite  wisdom  is  to  us  the  needful  complement 
of  His  infinite  power.  Power,  uncontrolled  by  wisdom,  is  rather  to  be  feared  than 
worshipped  and  loved.  And  shall  He  who  has  conceived  that  mighty  plan — that 
plan  which  embraces  all  worlds  in  its  grand  conception — not  understand  the  plan 
of  our  short  life?  Never  let  us  think  "  our  way  is  hid  from  the  Lord";  to  Him 
every  circumstance  of  our  life  is  known.  (H.  Wonnacott.)  Providence : — I.  The 
DOCTRINE  OF  A  GENERAL  PROVIDENCE.  The  doctrine  of  Providence  in  general  is 
alike  supported  by  reason  and  revelation.  1.  It  is  necessary  to  creation.  If  the 
world  were  from  eternity,  then  might  it  go  on  self -sustained,  as  it  had  ever  been: 
if  it  were  of  chance,  it  might  be  supported  by  the  same  contingency  which  proauced 
it.  If  a  fii-st  cause  was  necessary  to  the  production  of  these  things,  He  is  also 
essential  to  their  preservation;  and  the  same  voice  of  nature  which  proclaims  the 
being  of  a  God,  declares  His  Providence.  2.  We  must  take  the  testimony  of  Scrip- 
ture on  this  subject.  3.  From  prophecy.  II.  The  doctrine  of  a  partictjlar 
Providence.  1.  As  consistent  with  the  Divine  character.  The  grand  objection 
against  a  particular  Providence  has  been,  that  it  reduces  the  Deity  to  the 
necessity  of  superintending  such  minute  concerns  as  are  beneath  His  dignity 
— reduces  the  Deity  to  a  necessity!  What  necessity  can  subsist  but  in  His 
will?  The  objection  proceeds  upon  principles  entirely  erroneous.  It  is  an 
erroneous  calculation  to  call  anything  great  or  little  in  such  connection.  All 
affairs  are  not  to  us  of  equal  importance — the  bursting  of  a  bubble  and  the  ruin 
of  an  empire.  But,  in  reasoning  thus,  we  are  reducing  the  Deity  to  a  finite 
Btandard,  and  making  Him  altogether  "  such  an  one  as  ourselves."  With 
Him  the  affairs  of  an  empire  and  of  individuals  are  equally  manageable.  The 
reasoning  is  false,  also,  upon  the  principle  of  dignity.  It  deteriorates  nothing 
from  the  dignity  of  God  to  form  a  mite,  ^nth  all  the  vessels  and  organs 
adapted  to  its  existence:  mere  minuteness  of  operation  siu-ely  cannot  be  deterior- 
ating. What  it  was  no  degradation  to  God  to  create,  it  can  be  no  degradation  to 
God  to  preserve  and  manage.  2.  As  necessary  to  the  general  arrangements  of 
Providence.  Here  we  notice  the  operations  of  God,  as  demonstrating  His  govern- 
ment. The  constitution  of  nature  is  of  parts:  systems  compose  the  universe — 
worlds  compose  systems — a  conglomeration  of  particles  compose  a  world.  Take 
the  world  of  waters:  seas  form  oceans — rivers,  seas — streamlets,  rivers — drops, 
streamlets — and  the  atom  is  infinitely  divisible.  Take  the  human  frame;  made 
up  "  of  that  which  every  joint  supplieth."  Apply  this  scale  of  operations  to 
Providence,  and  then  we  afiirm  that  no  concern  can  be  so  Httle  as  to  be  below  the 
supermtendence  of  God;  for  none  can  be  so  small  as  not  to  form  a  part  of  the 
grand  scheme  of  Providence.  Our  ignorance  on  this  subject  can  be  no  objection 
against  its  reahty.  I  cannot,  indeed,  trace  the  link  which  knits  my  httle  concerns 
with  the  "ways  of  eternal  Providence";  but  neither  can  I  trace  the  invisible 


218  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xi. 

chain  which  holds  all  created  things  together  in  its  remotest  parts:  some  of  tho 
larger  links  I  discern,  but  more  are  invisible  to  me.  He  who  admits  the  doctrine 
of  a  genercl  providence  and  denies  that  of  a  particular  one,  is  a  being  whose 
obliqiuty  of  intellect  allows  him  to  conceive  of  a  whole,  while  he  denies  the  existence 
of  the  parts  of  which  that  whole  is  composed.  3.  As  demonstrated  in  the  course 
of  providential  dispensations.  Review  the  circumstances  of  your  separate  lives. 
That  life  will  furnish  each  of  you  with  the  desired  evidences  on  this  part  of  the 
subject.  How  frequently  have  the  best  concerted  plans  proved  unavailing! 
4.  As  harmonising  with  our  prescribed  duties,  it  is  supposed,  in  the  prescription  of 
prayer.  Where  would  be  the  utility  of  prayer,  or  the  propriety  of  prescribing  it, 
u  the  world  was  governed  by  a  fate  superior  to  the  will  of  the  Supreme  Being?  The 
prescription  of  prayer  supposes,  on  the  part  of  the  Deity,  a  will  as  well  as  a  power  to 
govern.  And  this  doctrine  is  reconcilable  with  the  use  of  means;  nay,  it  requires 
them.  6.  As  revealed  in  the  Scriptures.  6.  As  most  consolatory.  {W.  Patten.) 
Unbecoming  speech : — It  is  well  in  times  when  feeling  is  strong  to  say  Uttle,  lest  we 
speak  unadvisedly  with  oiu:  lips,  murmuring  at  our  lot,  or  complaining  against  God, 
as  though  He  had  forgotten  to  be  gracious,  and  had  shut  up  His  tender  mercies  in 
anger.  Speech  often  aggravates  sorrow.  We  say  more  than  we  mean;  we  drown 
in  the  torrent  of  our  words  the  stiU  small  voice  of  the  Holy  Ghost  whispering 
comfort;  we  speak  as  though  we  had  not  known  or  heard.  It  is  wise,  therefore, 
not  to  pass  grief  into  words.  Better  let  the  troubled  sea  within  rock  itself  to  rest. 
"  Why  sayest  thou,  0  Jacob,  and  speakest,  0  Israel?  "  {F.  B.  Meyer,  B.A.) 
"  My  way  hid  from  the  Lord"  : — The  flower  which  follows  the  sun  does  so  even  in 
cloudy  days:  when  it  doth  not  shine  forth,  yet  it  follows  the  hidden  comrse  and 
motion  of  it.  So  the  soul  that  moves  after  God  keeps  that  course  when  He  hides 
His  face;  is  content,  yea,  is  glad  at  His  will  in  all  estates,  or  conditions,  or  events. 
[T.  Leighton.) 

Vers.  28-31.  The  Lord,  the  Creator  of  the  ends  of  the  earth,  fainteth  not. — 
The  unwearied  God  and  wearied  men : — For  nations  and  for  individuals  in  view  of 
political  disasters  or  of  private  sorrows,  the  only  holdfast  to  which  cheerful  hope 
may  cling,  is  the  old  conviction,  "  The  Lord  God  omnipotent  reigneth."    I.  Isaiah's 

APPEAL  TO  THE  FAMTT.TAB  THOUGHT  OF  AN  UlTCHANGEABLE  GOD,  AS  THE  ANTIDOTE 
TO   AI-L   DESPONDENCY,  AND   THE   FOUNDATION   OF  ALL   HOPE.      "  Hast   thou   not 

known;  hast  thou  not  heard,  that  the  everlasting  God,  the  Lord,  the  Creator 
of  the  ends  of  the  earth,  fainteth  not,  neither  is  weary?  "  To  whom  is  he  speak- 
ing? The  words  of  the  previous  verse  tell  us,  in  which  he  addresses  himself  to 
Jacob,  or  Israel,  who  is  represented  as  complaining:  "  My  way  is  hid  from  the 
Lord."  That  is  to  say,  he  speaks  to  the  believing,  but  despondent  part  of  the 
exiles  in  Babylon.  There  is  wonder  in  the  question,  there  is  a  tinge  of  rebuke 
in  it.  The  prophet  takes  his  stand  upon  the  most  elementary  truth  of  religion. 
His  appeal  to  them  is:  "  What  do  you  call  God?  You  call  Him  the  Lord,  do  you 
not?  What  do  you  mean  by  calling  Him  that  ?  "  The  life  of  men  and  of  creatures 
is  like  a  river,  with  its  source  and  its  coiu-se  and  its  end.  The  life  of  God  is  like 
the  ocean,  with  joyous  movement  of  tides  and  currents  of  life  and  energy  and 
purpose,  but  ever  the  same,  and  ever  returning  upon  itself.  "  The  everlasting 
God  "  is  "  the  Lord  ";  and  Jehovah,  the  unchanged,  unchangeable,  inexhaust- 
ible Being,  spends,  and  is  unspent;  gives,  and  is  none  the  poorer;  works,  and  is 
never  wearied;  lives,  and  with  no  tendency  to  death  in  His  life;  fliames  with  no 
tendency  to  extinction  in  the  blaze.  "  He  fainteth  not,  neither  is  weary."  Here 
is  a  lesson  for  us  to  learn,  of  meditative  reflection  upon  the  veriest  commonplaces 
of  our  religion.  There  is  a  tendency  among  us  to  forget  the  indubitable,  and  to 
let  our  religious  thought  be  occupied  with  the  disputable  and  secondary  parts  of 
revelation.  The  commonplaces  of  religion  are  the  most  important.  Everybody 
needs  air,  light,  bread,  and  water.  Meditate,  then,  upon  the  things  most  surely 
believed,  and  ever  meditate  until  the  dry  stick  of  the  commonplace  truth 
puts  forth  buds  and  blossoms  like  Aaron's  rod.  We  all  have  times,  depending 
on  mood  or  circumstances,  when  things  seem  black  and  we  are  weary.  This 
great  truth  will  shine  into  our  gloom  like  a  star  into  a  dungeon.  Are  our 
hearts  to  tremble  for  God's  truth  to-day?  Are  we  to  share  in  the  pessimist 
views  of  some  faint-hearted  Christians?  Surely  as  long  as  we  can  remember 
the  name  of  the  Lord,  and  His  unwearied  arm,  we  have  nothing  to  do  with 
fear  or  sadness  for  ourselves  or  for  His  Church  or  for  His  world.  II.  Thh 
TTNWEABiBD  GoD  GiviNa  STBBNQTH  TO  WBABiED  MAN.     "  Even  the  youths  shall 


CHAP.  XL.]  ISAIAH.  219 

faint  and  be  weary,  and  the  young  men  shall  utterly  fall."  Earth  knows  no 
independent  strength.  All  earthly  power  is  limited  in  range  and  duration, 
and,  by  the  very  law  of  its  being,  is  steadily  tending  to  weakness.  But 
though  that  has  a  sad  side,  it  has  also  a  grand  and  blessed  one.  Man's 
needs  are  the  open  mouth  into  which  God  puts  His  gifts.  The  low  earth 
stretches,  grey  and  sorrowful,  flat  and  dreary,  beneath  the  blue  arched  heaven, 
but  the  heaven  stoops  to  encompass — ay !  to  touch  it.  "  He  giveth  power  to 
the  faint,  and  to  them  that  have  no  might  He  increaseth  strength."  Notice 
the  preceding  words,  "  Lift  up  your  eyes  on  high,  and  behold  who  hath  created 
these  things,"  &c.  In  the  simple  astronomy  of  those  early  times,  there  was  no 
failure,  nor  decay,  nor  change,  in  the  calm  heavens.  The  planets,  year  by  year, 
returned  punctually  to  their  places;  and,  unhasting  and  unresting,  rolled  upon 
their  way.  Weakness  and  weariness  had  no  place  there,  but,  says  Isaiah,  God's 
power  does  not  show  itself  so  nobly  up  there  as  it  does  down  here.  It  is  not  so 
much  to  keep  the  strong  in  their  strength  as  to  give  strength  to  the  weak.  It  is 
much  to  "  preserve  the  stars  from  wrong,"  it  is  more  to  restore  and  to  break  the 
power  into  feeble  men.  III.  The  weabied  man  lifted  to  the  level  of  the 
■UNWEAEIED  GoD,  AND  TO  His  LIKENESS.  "  They  that  Wait  upon  the  Lord  shall 
renew  their  strength."  That  phrase  means,  of  course,  the  continuous  bestowment 
in  unintermitting  sequence  of  fresh  gifts  of  power,  as  each  former  gift  becomes 
exhausted,  and  more  is  required.  That  continuous  communication  leads  to  the 
"  perpetual  youth  "  of  the  Christian  soul.  According  to  the  law  of  physical  life, 
decaying  strength  and  advancing  years  tame  and  sober  and  disenchant  and 
often  make  weary  because  we  become  familiar  with  all  things  and  the  edge  is 
taken  off  everything.  My  text  goes  on  to  portray  the  blessed  consequences  of 
this  continuous  communication  of  Divine  strength:  "  They  shall  run  and  not 
be  weary."  That  is  to  say:  this  strength  of  God's  poured  into  our  hearts,  if 
we  wait  upon  Him,  shall  fit  us  for  the  moments  of  special  hard  effort,  for  the 
crises  which  require  more  than  an  ordinary  amount  of  energy  to  be  put  forth. 
It  will  fit  us,  too,  for  the  long,  dreary  hours  which  require  nothing  but  keeping 
doggedly  at  monotonous  duties — "  They  shall  walk  and  not  faint."  {A.  Madaren, 
D.D.)  Energy  and  wisdom : — I.  The  Divine  Being  as  possessed  of  infinite 
ENERGY.  "  He  fainteth  not,  neither  is  weary."  His  most  stupendous  works 
are  rather  the  "  hidings  of  His  power,"  than  the  manifestations  of  His  might. 
The  fact  of  God's  possessing  infinite  energy  supplies  us  with  four  guarantees — 

1.  A  guarantee  of  the  regularity  of  the  physical  universe.  2.  A  guarantee  of 
ability  to  fulfil  His  promises.  Of  what  avail  are  promises  if  there  be  no  executive 
energy  ?  3.  A  guarantee  of  His  power  to  realise  His  threatenings.  4.  A  guaran- 
tee of  Christ's  final  enthronement.  Feeble  instrumentality  is  no  argument 
against  this  view.  Nor  is  the  guilty  indifference  of  the  Church.  II.  The  Divine 
Being  as  possessed  of  infinite  mental  capacity.  "  There  is  no  searching  of 
His  understanding."  In  God,  therefore,  there  is  a  combination  of  infinite 
strength  and  infinite  mind:  power  is  under  the  government  of  intelligence! 
The  universe  is  an  embodied  idea.  Its  minutest  members  are  parts  of  one  glorious 
thought.  The  infinite  understanding  of  the  Divine  Being  furnishes — 1.  An 
assurance  that  the  darkest  providences  are  imder  the  direction  of  infinite  wisdom. 

2.  That  no  plot  against  His  government  can  succeed.  3.  That  His  plan  of  salva- 
tion is  alone  sufficient.  Possessed  of  an  understanding  that  is  infinite,  God  knew 
the  exact  necessities  of  the  human  race,  and  provided  that  economy  which  alone 
could  satisfy  the  cravings  of  human  nature.  4.  That  He  understands  the  peculi- 
arities of  every  case.  "  Why  sayest  thou,  0  Jacob,  and  speakest,  0  Israel,  My  way 
is  hid  from  the  Lord,  and  my  judgment  is  passed  over  from  my  God?  "  These 
words  rebuke  the  idea  that  anything  can  escape  the  Divine  notice.  Christ  knew 
all  the  springs  of  life.  He  saw  the  maladies  which  tainted  the  blood  and  crippled 
the  faculties  of  man,  and  at  the  issue  of  His  fiat  the  most  malignant  affection 
retreated  as  if  in  haste  and  shame!  5.  An  assurance  of  eternal  variety  in  the 
study  of  His  nature.  "  There  is  no  searching  of  His  understanding."  The 
eldest  born  in  eternity  may  at  this  moment  employ  this  same  language;  for 
those  who  have  seen  most  of  the  Divine  glory,  confess  most  loudly  the  infinitude 
of  His  resources.  Application — (1)  What  is  your  relationship  to  this  all-glorious 
Being  ?  (2)  If  you  are  out  of  sympathy  with  this  all-glorious  Being,  what  is 
your  hope  for  eternity?  [J.  Parker,  D.D.)  The  inexhaustihleness  of  the 
Divine  Power  : — Power  is  a  faculty  for  producing  changes  and  performing  works. 
There  are  three  kinds  or  manifestations  of  power — physical,  intellectual,  and 


220  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  xu 


xaorsL     I  go  into  St.  Paul's  Cathedral  when  some  grand  religious  service  is  ppx- 
fonned,  the  choral  part  is  of  the  highest  order,  the  sermon  is  delivered  by  the 
grandest  preacher  of  the  day.     Here  I  receive  an  impression  of  three  manifesta- 
tions of  power.     The  bringing  together  and  adjusting  the  stone,  marble,  iron, 
timber  that  compose  the  enormous  structure,  impress  me  with  physical  power — 
power  to  act  on  material  bodies.    In  the  architectural  symmetry  of  the  whole  I  am 
impressed  with  the  intellectual  power — power  of  planning  and  contriving  so  as 
to  give  utility,  stability,  and  beauty  to  the  whole.     In  the  sacred  music  that 
floats  around  me  and  the  eloquent  sermon  that  is  addressed  to  me,  my  nature 
is  brought  under  the  influence  of  moral  power — power  that  rouses  the  conscience, 
that  stirs  the  deepest  sentiments  of  the  soul.     Out  in  open  Nature  these  three 
kinds  of  manifestations  of  power  appeal  to  man.     God's  power  is  inexhaustible 
in  all  these  phases.     I.   His  physical  poweb  is  inexhaustible.     This  will 
appear  if  we  consider — 1.  The  nature  of  His  work  in  the  material  deparibicnt. 
He  is  the  Originator  of  all.     2.  The  effect  of  BKa  work  in  the  material  department. 
3.  The  constancy  of  His  work  in  the  material  department.     II.  His  intellectual 
fowKB.  IS  INEXHAUSTIBLE.     Intellectual  force  is  as  visible  in  nature  to  a  thought- 
ful eye  as  physical.     Science  shows  that  everything — the  minute  and  the  vast,  the 
proximate  and  the  remote,  is  formed,  sustained,  and  directed  according  to  plan. 
In  Thy  book  all  my  members  were  written."     Think  of  the  boundless  variety 
amongst  all  the  flowers  and  trees  that  have  ever  grown.     Amongst  all  the  men 
of  all  the  generations  that  are  gone,  have  there  been  two  in  face  and  figure  exactly 
alike  ?     Here  is  intellectual  fertility !     The  little  intellectual  force  of  contrivance 
possessed  by  the  bee  or  the  bird  is  very  soon  exhausted.     Man,  too,  soon  reaches 
a  culminating  point  in  inventive  skill.     But  not  so  with  God.     But  in  the  crea- 
tions of  the  spiritual  world  the  same  inexhaustibleness  of  intellectual  energy  is 
displayed.     Each  spirit  involves  something  of  a  new  plan.     On  this  little  planet 
fresh  souls  appear  every  hour.     III.   His  moral  power  is  inexhaustible. 
1.  Look  at  His  moral  power  in  nature.     Nature  is  brimful  of  the  moral  power 
of  God;  power  appealing  to  the  souls  of  men.     2.  Look  at  His  moral  power  in 
the  Gospel.     What  is  moral  power?     "  Truth  and  grace."     (Homilist.)         The 
inexhaustible  energy  of  God  : — I.  His  eneegy  in  the  sphere  of  contrivancb 
IS  inexhaustible.     1.   Look  at  His  contrivance  in  relation  to  matter.     The 
rushing  currents,  the  surging  sea,  the  furious  tempest,  the  revolution  of  planets, 
and  the  recurrence  of  the  seasons — all  give  us  the  impression  of  power.     But  to 
the  thoughtful,  the  intellectual  force  is  as  clearly  developed  in  nature  as  the 
material,  nay,  is  implied  in  the  material.     2.  Look  at  His  contrivance  in  relation 
to  spirit.     Observe — (1)  Unceasing.creation  of  new  spirits.     (2)  The  government 
of  spirits.     (3)  The  moral  restoration  of  human  spirits.     What  contrivance  is 
here  !     II.  His  energy  in  the  sphere  of  execution  is  inexhaustible.     His 
power  of  working  out  His  plans  is  equal  to  His  power  of  invention.     1.  It  is  so  in 
the  material.     In  the  material  realm  God  seems  to  develop  His  plans  in  two 
■w&ja — directly  and  indirectly ;  without  means  and  by  means.     2.  It  is  so  in  the 
spiritual.     Let  us  look  at  His  power  to  save.     What  is  moral  power  ?     It  is 
the  power  of  truth.     But  the  Gospel   is   the   most   powerful   of  any  truth — 
(1)  Because  it  is  moral  truth.     (2)  I3ecause  it  is  remedial  truth.     (3)  Because  it 
is  divinely  embodied  truth.     Example  is  stronger  than  precept.     The  truths  to 
be  deduced  from  the  whole  are— (I)  That  the  delay  of  punishment  must  not  be 
referred  to  incapacity.     (2)  That  the  urging  of  difficulties  against  the  fulfilment 
of  Divine  promises  is  an  absurdity.     There  are  two  classes  of  promises  against 
which  we  urge  this.     One  relates  to  the  conversion  of  the  world.     The  other  to 
the  resurrection  of  the  dead.     It  is  not  only  possible  for  these  promises  to  be 
fulfilled,  but  impossible  for  them  not  to  be.     (3)  Thdfc  if  we  are  immortal  we  sball 
witness  new  manifestations  of  Divine  power  for  ever.     (4)  That  the  interest  as 
well  as  duty  of  every  man  is  to  cultivate  friendship  with  God.     You  are  safe  if 
you   have  God  as   a  refuge.     (Ibid.)         Profitable  reflection  in  dark  hours: — 
Was  it  a  true  thing  these  exiles  said  T     They  suggested  that  they  had  worn 
out  the  Divine  patience.     The}'  were  ready  to  admit  that  He  had  been  the  God 
of  their  fathers;  but  He  had  now  withdrawn  from  His  covenant  relationship, 
and  would  be  favourable  no  more.     That,  they  said,  was  the  reason  why  they 
were  allowed  to  languish  year  after  year  on  the  plains  of  Babylon.     They  spoke 
as  though  they  had  never  known  nor  heard  some  of  the  most  rudimentary  lacts 
about  the  nature  and  ways  of  God.     "  Hast  thou  not  known  ?     Hast  thou  not 
heard  ?  "     In  our  dark  hours  we  should  revert  to  considerations  which  have 


CEUP.  XL.]  ISAIAH.  221 

been  familiar  to  us  from  childhood,  but  have  of  late  ceased  to  exert  a  definite 
impression.  {F.  B.  Meyer,  B.A.)  Ood's  power  the  comfort  of  His  people: — 
The  terms  by  which  God  is  described  are  not  what  may  be  termed  the  gracious 
designations  which  are  often  employed  to  describe  Him;  it  is  not  the  Father,  the 
Redeemer,  the  Gentle  One;  it  is  the  everlasting  God,  the  Lord,  the  Creator  of 
the  ends  of  the  earth,  as  if  Divine  comfort  were  not  a  sentiment  only,  as  if  Divine 
comfort  did  not  come  only  out  of  the  Divine  emotions,  but  poured  itself  down 
upon  us  from  all  that  is  majestic,  dominant,  mighty,  immeasurable,  royal,  and 
grand  in  the  Divine  nature.  {J.  Parker,  D.D.)  God's  moment  the  perfect 
miniature  of  His  everlasting  days : — It  is  said  to  be  the  property  of  a  crystal  to 
assume  precisely  the  same  form  into  however  many  fragments  it  may  be  broken 
up.  The  infinitesimal  particle,  for  the  study  of  which  a  magnifying  glass  must 
be  used,  is  a  precise  facsimile  of  the  parent  crystal  from  which  it  came.  If  we 
could  take  God's  eternity  and  break  it  up  into  aeons,  if  we  could  take  the  aeons 
and  break  them  up  into  ages,  and  the  ages  into  centuries,  and  the  centuries  into 
years,  and  the  years  into  days,  and  the  days  into  hours,  and  the  hours  into 
moments,  we  should  find  each  separate  moment  of  God's  life  to  be  just  as  resplen- 
dent with  benignity,  compassion,  redeeming  grace,  and  helpfulness,  as  His  sub- 
lime eternity  itself.  (T.  0.  Selby.)  God  never  grows  weary  : — A  story  is  told 
of  a  little  girl  whose  faith  in  God  may  teach  us  a  lesson.  The  lamp  had  just 
been  put  out,  and  the  little  girl  was  rather  afraid  of  the  dark.  But  presently 
she  saw  the  bright  moon  out  of  her  window,  and  she  asked  her  mother,  "  Is  the 
moon  God's  light  ?  "  "  Yes,  Ethel,"  the  mother  replied;  "  the  moon  and  stars 
are  all  God's  lights."  "  Will  God  blow  out  His  light  and  go  to  sleep  too  ?  "  she 
asked  again.  '  No,  my  child,"  replied  the  mother,  "  God's  lights  are  always 
burning."  "  Well,  mamma,"  said  Ethel,  "  while  God's  awake,  I'm  not  afraid." 
There  is  no  searching  of  His  understanding. — Heartening  conceptions  of  God:  — 
How  to  reconcile  the  approving  verdict  of  creative  wisdom,  "  God  saw  that 
it  was  good,"  with  that  condition  of  things  of  which  St.  Paul  speaks  as  the  whole 
creation  groaning  and  travailing  in  pain  together;  how  to  reconcile  the  idea  of 
Almighty  goodness  with  the  existence  of  universal  and  apparently  aimless  con- 
flict and  struggle  for  destruction,  is  a  question  that,  in  itself,  would  seem  incapable 
of  exaggerated  statement.  It  is  the  old,  old  question,  which  we  shall  see  solved 
in  the  day,  and  not  before  the  day,  when  He,  the  Son,  the  Creator,  shall  have  put 
aU  things  under  Him;  the  question  between  life  and  death.  Still  if  wisdom  is 
to  be  justified  of  her  children,  we  cannot  bear  as  her  childien  not  to  try  to  justify 
her;  and  although  we  know  that  we  shall  not  attain  to  the  answer,  we  cannot 
help  hearing  and  thinking  of  the  question.  We  look  first  at  the  possibilities 
which  lie  in  what  God  has  not  revealed,  and  secondly  for  the  particulars  which, 
in  developing  His  message  and  expanding  our  power  of  receiving  it,  and  in  regu- 
lating our  conduct  under  and  in  consequence  of  it,  it  has  pleased  Him  to  make 
known  to  us  about  Himself.  We  may  without  presumption,  certainly  with 
nothing  short  of  the  most  timid  tentativeness,  approach  such  mysteries  as  the 
travaiUng  of  creation,  the  gradual  character  of  Divine  revelation,  the  delay  of 
the  consummation  of  the  mediatorial  work,  the  agency  of  external  and  previous 
influences  on  the  will,  the  conduct  and  the  responsibility  of  human  beings.  All 
these  four  matters  are  of  vivid  and  universal  interest,  ancient  questions,  older 
than  Genesis,  older  than  Socrates,  older  than  Archimedes,  older  than  Enoch; 
questions  that  no  new  theories  can  answer,  problems  that  admit  of  constant  new 
illustrations,  but  lie  in  the  very  incunabula  of  human  thought.  Take  them  in 
order.  1.  In  that  beginning  of  which  the  first  verse  of  the  Bible  speaks,  the 
Creator,  Almighty  and  All  good,  called  matter  into  being:  the  material  world, 
in  that  conformation  which  science  reveals  to  us,  may  be  the  result,  not  only  of 
immensely  long  periods  of  energy,  but  of  immensely  varied  methods  of  agency; 
when  it  comes  within  our  ken  it  is  seen  to  be  the  result  of  operations  into  which 
pain  and  death  largely  enter,  and  in  which,  so  far  as  we  can  see,  they  are  still, 
with  no  traceable  connection  with  mankind,  actively  at  work.  In  our  contempla- 
tion of  pain  and  death  in  human  morals,  we  trace  back  both  to  the  effect  of  sin, 
and  sin  to  the  depravation  of  the  free  will  at  the  fall  of  man.  What  hinders  us 
from  conceiving  that  the  existence  and  continuance  of  such  measures  of  pain  and 
death  as  are  found  anterior  to  the  existence  of  man,  and  external  to  the  operation 
of  his  moral  agency,  are  the  results  of  a  freedom  granted  to  pre-existent,  or  con- 
tinued, perverted,  and  fallen  agencies,  about  which  we  have  no  other  knowledge  ? 
It  may  surely  be  as  likely  that  the  creation  or  developing  of  man  on  earth,  for  thi; 


222  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  xu 

vanquishing  of  evil  and  the  working  out  of  blessing  in  redemptive  and  restorative 
work,  may,  mixed  as  are  its  effects  now,  be  a  step  in  a  very  gradual  victory,  by 
which  pre-existent  and  continuing  evil,  arising  from  a  pre-existent  and  continuing 
perversion,  is  being  brought  under  the  feet  of  the  Only  Begotten  of  the  Father  ? 
Interminable  cycles  of  the  years  measured  by  the  revolutions  of  the  earth,  by 
the  working  of  our  system,  and  by  the  cosmic  movements  of  the  universe,  might 
be  required,  but  what  obstacle  does  such  a  calculation  place  in  the  way  of  such  a 
possibility  with  an  Agent  Infinite  and  Eternal  ?  There  is  the  evil,  there  is  the 
slo\vness  of  the  working  of  law,  but  there  is  eternity  before  and  behind.  Who 
shall  say  to  Him,  What  doest  Thou  ?  There  shall  be  no  more  pain:  but  it  shall 
be  when  the  former  things  are  passed  away.  2.  Then,  the  slowness  of  revelation 
and  its  gradual  character  ?  We  can  either  account  for  that  by  the  reason  of 
law  that  works  so,  or  by  the  absolute  necessity,  the  terms  and  conditions  of 
the  situation  being  such  that  it  should  be  so ;  that  is,  we  may  either  assume  the 
law  or  justify  the  law.  We  have  no  more  right  to  lay  it  down,  as  an  axiom,  that 
the  perfect  God  could  or  would  reveal  Himself  entirely  by  one  act  of  revelation, 
than  that  He  would  give  men  free  wiU  and  always  keep  it  in  conformity  with  His 
own  will.  The  revelation,  to  be  a  part  of  the  victory,  must  be  a  revelation  that 
would  expand  with  the  expansion  of  the  receiving  minds,  giving  them  the  choice 
between  light  and  darkness,  and  suffering  and  enabling  them  to  rejoice  in  the 
light  rather  than  the  darkness.  It  must  have  a  beginning:  the  words  of  revela- 
tion must  be  spoken  in  the  language  that  the  receiver  can  comprehend;  must  be 
weighted  with  elements  that  will  hold  them  fast  in  his  mind;  must  be  seasoned 
with  a  stimulus  that  shall  provoke  his  appetite  for  knowledge.  And  now  that, 
in  the  fulness  of  time,  grace  and  truth  are  come  by  Jesus  Christ,  and  in  Him, 
the  brightness  of  His  Father's  glory  and  the  express  image  of  His  Person,  we 
recognise  the  perfection  of  the  revelation  by  which  He  guides  many  sons  unto 
glory,  we  yet  are  warned  that  the  guide  of  our  life  is  faith ;  and  heaven  itself,  in 
which  we  trust  to  know  more,  and  love  more,  and  be  conformed  to  the  Ukeness 
more,  in  wonderful  growths  of  the  finite  into  the  knowledge,  love,  and  Ukeness 
of  the  Infinite,  shall  be  a  perfection  of  revelation,  but  even  so  a  revelation  of  new 
vistas  of  perfection,  of  knowledge,  love,  and  likeness.  But  glorious  as  this 
prospect  is,  and  humble,  prostrate,  as  we  lie  now  on  the  threshold  of  the  vision, 
we  Imow  that  we  have  not  come  so  far  as  we  have  come,  but  by  a  long  series  of 
dispensations  and  disciplines;  a  method,  a  law  of  enlightenment,  that  ages  and 
generations,  rising  and  falling  nations,  tested  and  discarded  philosophies,  have 
exemplified.  God  could  have  revealed  the  plan  of  Redemption,  could  have 
redeemed  the  world  as  soon  as  Adam  fell,  as  He  might  have  kept  him  from  falling, 
or  stayed  the  propagation  of  evil  in  the  first  generation:  but  He  would  over- 
come evil  with  good,  and  bring  out  the  victory  in  His  own  way,  preparing  the 
world  by  the  experience  of  vanity,  disciplining  the  world  by  the  struggle  against 
the  causes  of  misery,  and  at  the  last  sending  His  Son.  3.  How  about  the  twilight, 
and  those  who  wandered  in  it  to  their  fall,  before  the  Daystar  arose  ?  How  about 
those  who  are  sitting  still  in  darkness  ?  Does  not  He  care  ?  Are  they  not  safer 
in  His  contemplation  than  in  our  perplexed  hearts  ?  But  now  that  grace  and 
truth  are  come; — eighteen  hundred  years  ago  He  founded  His  Church,  and  for 
all  that  time  she  has  been  working;  with  some  drawbacks  that  she  might  have 
overcome,  but  still  working;  and  three-quarters  of  the  globe  are  full  of  heathen- 
dom still,  and  seventy  generations  of  souls  have  passed  away  under  the  cloud 
of  darkness.  Is  not  this  strange  ?  Is  it  all  the  effect  of  a  neglect  that,  if  it  be 
unmodified  by  other  causes,  must  be  accounted  nothing  less  than  a  failure  of  a 
purpose  that  assumes  to  be  Divine  ?  Here  again  we  come  upon  a  trace  of  law 
that  is  not  to  be  broken.  For  fifteen  hundred  out  of  the  eighteen  hundred  years 
of  Christianity,  one-half  of  the  inhabited  world  was  unknown  to  the  other  half; 
no  revelation  of  God  opened  up  the  new  world;  it  was  left  for  discovery  to  human 
enterprise,  under  a  guidance,  active,  certain,  but  by  no  means  exceptional  to 
the  recognised  movements  of  society;  and  when  discovered  it  was  full  of  strange 
languages,  and  of  people  so  framed  and  disciplined  as  to  have  none  of  the  special 
training  by  which  the  old  world  has  been  broken  up  for  the  reception  of  the 
seed  of  the  Word;  and  when  it  had  been  claimed  and  appropriated  and  made 
intelligible  and  opened  up,  no  part  of  the  process  seemed  to  be  overruled  for 
the  rapid  progress  of  Gospel  light;  no  new  miracles,  no  new  manifestations;  all 
had  to  be  done  line  upon  line,  precept  upon  precept,  with  lisping  voice  and 
Btammering  tongue.     If  that  ancient  strange  darkness  is  indeed  evH — and  who 


CHAP,  XL.]  ISAIAH.  224 

shall  say  it  is  not  in  the  face  of  the  true  light  ? — surely  there  is  some  secret  in  the 
hand  of  the  Lord  that  shall  justify  the  delay,  and  shall  vindicate  the  means  in 
the  day  of  victory.  4.  But  once  more.  We  are  told,  and  we  know  it  in  its 
measure  to  be  true,  that  in  the  course  of  this  world  causes  and  consequences, 
multiplying  and  intensifying  from  generation  to  generation,  do  so  mould  the 
minds  and  thoughts  of  men  as  seriously  to  endanger  the  sense  of  personal  responsi- 
bility, and  practically  to  limit  anything  like  free  moral  agency.  We  are  told,  in 
fact,  that  we  are  what  our  forefathers,  our  circumstances,  our  manners  and 
customs,  our  teaching  and  religion  make  us,  and  scarcely  anything  more;  and 
so,  if  we  are  vicious  it  is  something  over  which  we  have  no  control  that  makes 
us  so ;  or,  if  we  are  virtuous  it  is  something  for  which  we  have  no  credit ;  and  if 
we  are  betwixt  and  between,  we  are  as  God,  if  there  be  a  God,  let  circumstances, 
heredity,  the  accidents  of  life,  and  the  stream  of  family  history  make  us.  There 
is  much  truth  in  the  statement  of  facts.  There  are  at  least  two  considerations 
to  modify  it:  first,  the  influence  of  circumstance  and  cause  is  not  unmixed; 
there  is  good  as  well  as  evil  in  the  force  that  impels  us;  secondly,  there  is  in  every 
one  of  us,  weak,  wavering,  as  we  may  be,  enough  of  freedom  to  determine  our 
choice  between  the  good  and  evil  of  the  circumstance.  Each  man  who  has  ever 
lived,  and  each  action  of  his  life,  has  contributed  something;  something  that  of 
course  only  the  Divine  knowledge  can  discriminate  or  appreciate,  but  which  is 
a  contribution  to  the  course  of  this  world  for  good  or  for  evil,  and  so  we  have  to 
do  the  same.  God  has  great  purposes  to  serve,  and  blesses  what  little  we  can 
consciously  do  towards  the  victory  of  His  Son.  When  we  look  at  the  chart  of 
human  history,  even  for  the  six  thousand  years  that  the  old  chronology  delimits 
for  us,  and  see  how  great  the  expanse  of  ages,  in  which  we  know  that  there  were 
human  lives,  making  experience  and  influence,  and  yet  whose  experience  and 
influence  had,  so  far  as  we  know,  nothing  to  do  with  the  existing  conditions  of 
modern  society,  and  see  how  all  that  consciously  constitutes  what  we  know  as 
modern  society  falls  into  a  comparatively  insignificant  section  of  the  chart; 
and  if  we  take  the  map  of  the  earth  and  stretch  our  compasses  across  the  breadth 
and  length  of  Christendom,  and  then  look  at  the  heavens,  the  work  of  His  fingers, 
and  the  stars  that  measure  His  times  and  seasons  for  us,  and  beyond  all  that  into 
eternity  and  infinity  of  energy;  surely  we  must  feel  that  we  cannot  limit  possibiU- 
ties  or  impossibilities,  the  measure  of  Goodness  and  Almightiness,  by  the  line 
and  plummet  of  our  own  intelligence.  What  is  man  that  Thou  visitest  him? 
Yet  Thou  hast  visited  him,  and  made  him  lower  than  the  angels  to  crown  him  with 
glory  and  power.     (Bishop  of  Chester.) 

Vers.    29-31.  He  giveth  power  to  the  faint. — The  Divine  Helper  : — I.  OuB 

SPIEITTJAI/  CONDITION  IS  INTIMATELY  KNOWN  TO  THE  DiVINE  FaTHEE.       He  knOWS 

the  strong  and  the  faint  alike.  As  a  wise  Shepherd,  He  is  acquainted  with  the 
state  of  His  entire  flock.  1.  There  is  our  inherent  antagonism  to  evangelical 
truth.  Man  is  prone  to  self -leaning.  When  we  leave  the  Cross  we  faint;  while 
we  glory  in  its  Sufferer  we  are  armed  with  irresistible  might!  2.  There  is  the 
seductive  influence  of  worldly  association.  3.  There  is  the  fierce  battle  for 
daily  bread.  4.  There  is  our  ever-recurring  unbelief.  II.  Mobal  faintness 
DOES  NOT  INVALIDATE  CHRISTIAN  CHAEACTER.  Were  all  the  "  faint  "  to  be 
excluded,  how  many  of  you  would  remain  as  children  of  God?  Does  the  parent 
cast  off  the  crippled  child?  It  will  be  necessary,  however,  to  guard  this  assur- 
ance with  two  explanations — 1.  It  contains  no  encouragement  to  moral  indolence. 
You  are  not  to  exonerate  yourselves  from  the  stern  duties  of  life  on  the  plea 
that  you  are  "  faint."  The  toiler  grows  strong;  exercise  develops  muscle.  2.  It 
affords  no  palliation  for  inconsistency.  We  are  never  allowed  to  plead  weakness 
as  a  reason  for  sin.  III.  Infinite  power  is  accessible  to  the  morally  feeble. 
1.  God  never  communicates  surplus  power.  "  As  thy  days  so  shall  thy  strength 
be."  2.  God's  method  of  communicating  power  teaches  the  dependence  of 
humanity.  God's  alone  is  original;  but  it  is  enough  for  man  if  he  can  shine  with 
radiance  borrowed  from  the  Fount  of  uncreated  light.  3.  God's  willingness 
to  communicate  power  fearfully  increases  the  responsibility  of  the  Church. 
What  power  we  might  have !  I  regard  the  declaration  in  the  following  aspects — 
(1)  As  the  sublimest  encouragement  to  the  Church.  "  He  giveth  power  to  the 
faint."  Who  is  this  Being  represented  in  the  pronoun?  (2)  As  the  tenderest 
assurance  to  the  penitent.  "  The  bruised  reed  He  will  not  break,  the  smoking 
flax  He  will  not  quench."     (3)  As  the  highest  tribute  to  the  work  of  Christ. 


224  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  xu 

(4)  As  a  glorious  pledge  of  God's  interest  in  humanity.  (5)  As  a  presumptive 
proof  of  man's  immortality.  But  how  so?  Can  they  who  faint  be  immortal? 
Why  all  this  feeding  like  a  shepherd?  Why  this  gentle  tending — this  inspira- 
tion of  life — this  sustaining  of  vigour — this  communication  of  power?  Is  the 
mysterious  process  undertaken  when  God  has  determined  that  all  shall  end  in 
dust  ?  Does  the  Divine  Being  sustain  merely  that  earthly  life  shall  be  prolonged  t 
Why  should  Jehovah  stoop  to  impart  power  to  the  faint,  when  He  knows  that  in 
a  few  brief  years  the  faint  one  will  have  crumbled  to  dust?  (J.  Parker,  D.D.) 
Almighty  Ood  helps  the  weak  : — The  arguments  which  demonstrate  the  folly  and 
guilt  of  worshipping  false  gods,  and  of  confiding  in  them,  equally  demonstrate 
the  duty  and  obligation  of  worshipping  the  true  and  living  God,  and  of  placing 
our  confidence  in  Him.  Indeed,  to  remove  our  adoration  from  an  idol  is  doing 
but  little,  unless  at  the  same  time  it  be  given  to  the  Holy  and  Great  Jehovah ; 
it  is  but  renouncing  polytheism — a  grievous  and  horrible  delusion — for  atheism, 
a  delusion  still  more  horrible  and  grievous.  I.  Jehovah,  the  tbub  God,  is  a 
Bbing  of  TTNLiinTED  POWER  (ver.  26).  11.  The  power  of  Jehovah,  the  trub 
God,  is  like  Himself,  ttndiminishable  and  eternal.  "  He  fainteth  not, 
neither  is  weary."  That  the  power  of  Jehovah,  the  true  God,  is  undiminishable 
and  eternal,  is  proved  by  the  conservation  of  nature,  as  the  existence  of  that 
power  is  proved  by  nature's  production.  Were  the  hand  which  framed  the 
universe  utterly  withdrawn,  the  universe  would  return  to  its  original  nothing. 
The  motion,  order,  and  safety  of  all  things  depend  upon  God.  What  a  contrast 
does  this  perfection  of  undiminishable  and  eternal  power  form  to  the  weakness  of 
the  creature — of  fallen  and  helpless  man  especially!  Weakness  is  the  attribute 
of  the  human  body.  Man  is  no  less  weak  as  it  relates  to  his  mind.  Sublime 
therefore  in  the  highest  degree  is  this  account  of  Jehovah.  He  never  lets  fall  the 
reins  of  dominion;  He  never  retires,  overcharged,  by  attention  to  ffis  friends, 
resistance  to  His  enemies,  or  the  superintendence  of  all!  III.  The  power  op 
Jehovah  the  true  God  is  coNDESOENDiNOLr  employed  in  behalf  of  fallen, 
HELPLESS  man.  "  He  giveth  power  to  the  faint,"  &c.  Let  us  attend  to  some 
instances  in  which  this  truth  is  illustrated.  1.  In  His  providential  interposi- 
tions in  favour  of  the  more  helpless  of  men.  Some  persons  constitutionally 
feeble  in  body,  or  perhaps  made  so  by  disease,  are  often  mysteriously  succoured. 
The  victim  of  oppression  also  ever  finds  a  Friend  in  heaven.  2.  In  the  work  of 
our  redemption  by  Christ  Jesus.  "  When  we  were  yet  without  strength  Christ 
died  for  the  ungodly  "  (Rom.  v.  6).  One  of  the  most  afflictive  circumstances 
attending  man's  fallen  state  is  that  of  utter  helplessness.  When  sin  entered 
into  the  world  it  not  only  erased  from  the  soul  of  man  the  image  of  his  Creator; 
it  also  annihilated,  as  far  as  man  was  concerned,  all  the  means  of  his  recovery. 
The  nerves  of  obedience  were  cut,  and  the  spirit  of  reverence  and  love  utterly 
blasted.  3.  In  that  invigorating  peace  communicated  to  the  heart  of  man,  when 
he  believes  to  the  salvation  of  his  soul.  Perhaps  we  are  never  fully  prepared 
for  the  mercy  of  God,  through  the  sacrificial  merits  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ, 
until  we  see  that  there  is  mercy  in  no  other  way.  4.  In  that  successful  resistance 
which  is  made  by  the  faithful  Christian,  to  the  assaults  of  our  great  spiritual 
adversary,  the  devil.  5.  In  the  season  of  personal  affliction.  6.  In  the  case  of 
every  one  who  dies  in  the  Lord.  (J.  Bromley.)  The  aid  of  the  Holy  Spirit  :— 
No  words  can  do  justice  to  the  feelings  of  joy  and  gratitude  which  this  gift  should 
excite  in  all  those  who  partake  in  its  inestimable  benefit.  When  the  heathen 
sage  had  sketched  out  virtue  in  her  goodliest  forms;  when  he  had  pointed  to 
the  steep  and  arduous  path  which  must  be  trodden  by  her  successful  votaries; 
when  he  had  urged  his  disciples  to  enter  upon  it  by  the  most  stimulating  motives 
with  which  the  light  of  nature  could  supply  him,  what  could  he  do  more?  What 
words  of  cheering  import  could  he  address  to  them,  when  sinking  with  dismay 
under  a  sense  of  their  own  infirmity,  when  trembling  with  apprehensions  of 
failure,  from  a  comparison  between  their  strength  and  the  task  allotted  to  them? 
He  had  no  authority  to  refer  them  to  one  who  "  giveth  power  to  the  faint,  and 
increaseth  strength  to  them  that  have  no  might."  What  he  could  not,  the 
Christian  philosopher  can  say.  (J.  Harriot,  M.A.)  A  spiritual  tonic: — 
I.  The  spiritual  health  of  the  Hebrew  Church  had  fallen  below  pab. 
1.  They  felt  they  had  lost  the  favour  of  God.  Their  way  was  hidden  from  Him, 
and  the}'  walked  in  darkness,  as  if  they  were  the  sport  of  chance  or  the  victims  of 
fate.  2.  They  felt  they  were  left  to  the  mercy  of  man.  It  appeared  as  if  judgment 
npon  them  and  their  way  was  transferred  to  caprice  of  men.     II.  Thb  impaibbd 


CHAP.  XL.]  ISAIAH.  225 

SPIRmjAL  STBBITGTH  OP  THB  HeBBBW  ChTTBOH  MIGHT  BB  BBSTOBED.      The  people 

needed — 1.  Faith  in  the  power  of  God.  2.  Hope  in  the  pity  of  God.  He  does  not 
crush  the  feeble  and  the  faint,  but  increases  their  power.  3.  Love  for  the  service 
of  God.  As  the  hearts  of  the  people  became  enthusiastic  for  the  worship  of 
Jehovah,  and  longed  to  get  back  to  Zion  to  restore  the  temple  and  rebuild  the 
city,  their  energies  would  revive  as  an  incoming  tide;  revived  spirit  would  bring 
revived  strength.  III.  With  eestored  spieitxtai,  health  the  Hebrew  Chtteoh 
WOTJLD  EESUME  ITS  WONTED  ACTIVITIES.  The  people  are  promised — 1.  Renewed 
vigour.  Strength  wotdd  come  from  waiting  upon  God.  2.  Renewed  vivacity. 
The  people  are  told  they  shall  *'  mount,"  '*  walK,"  "  run,"  without  weariness  or 
sense  of  exhaustion.  3.  Renewed  vitality.  Though  the  body  may  grow  old, 
and  physical  life  decline,  the  soul  shall  remain  young.  {F.  W.  Brovm.)  God's 
'power  in  the  heavens  and  on  earth  (with  ver.  26): — These  two  verses  set  forth  two 
widely  different  operations  of  the  Divine  power  as  exercised  in  two  sadly  different 
fields,  the  starry  heavens  and  this  weary  world.  The  one  verse  says,  "  He  is 
strong  in  power";  the  other,  "He  giveth  power."  In  the  former  verse,  "the 
greatness  of  His  might"  sustains  the  stars;  in  the  latter  verse,  a  still  greater 
operation  is  set  forth  in  that  "  to  them  that  have  no  might  He  increaseth 
Btrength."  Thus  there  are  three  contrasts  suggested;  that  between  unfailing 
stars,  and  men  that  faint;  that  between  the  unwearied  God  and  wearied 
men;  and  that  between  the  sustaining  power  that  is  exercised  in  the  heavens 
and  the  restoring  power  that  is  manifested  on  earth.  There  is  another  inter- 
locking between  the  latter  of  these  two  texts  and  its  context,  which  is 
indicated  by  a  similar  recurrence  of  epithets.  In  my  second  text  we  read 
of  the  "  faint,"  and  in  the  verse  that  follows  it  again  we  find  the  expression 
**  faint "  and  "  weary,"  while  in  the  verse  before  my  text  we  read  that 
*'  the  Lord  fainteth  not,  neither  is  weary."  So  again  the  contrast  between 
Him  and  us  is  set  forth,  but  in  the  verse  that  closes  the  chapter  we  read  how 
that  contrast  merges  into  likeness,  inasmuch  as  the  unfainting  and  unwearied 
God  makes  even  the  men  that  wait  upon  Him  unwearied  and  unfainting.  {A. 
Maclaren,  D.D.)  Unfailing  stars  and  fainting  men  (with  ver.  26): — I.  A  sad 
CONTRAST.  The  prophet  in  the  former  of  these  verses  seems  to  be  expanding 
the  thoughts  that  lie  in  the  name,  "  the  Lord  of  hosts,"  in  so  far  as  that  name 
expresses  the  Divine  relation  to  the  starry  universe.  The  image  that  underlies 
both  it  and  the  words  of  my  text  is  that  of  a  commander  who  summons  his 
soldiers,  and  they  come.  Discipline  and  plan  array  them  in  their  ranks.  The 
plain  prose  of  which  is  that  night  by  night,  above  the  horizon,  rise  the  bright 
orbs,  and  roll  on  their  path  obedient  to  the  Sovereign  will;  "  because  He  is 
strong  in  might,  not  one  "  is  lacking.  Scripture  bids  us  think  of  God,  not  as  a 
creative  energy  that  set  the  universe  in  motion,  and  leaves  it  to  roll  or  spin, 
but  as  of  a  Divine  Presence.  But  in  our  second  text  we  drop  from  the  illumina- 
tion of  the  heavens  to  the  shadowed  plain  of  this  low  earth.  It  is  as  if  a  man 
looking  up  into  the  violet  sky,  with  all  its  shining  orbs,  should  then  turn  to 
some  reeking  alley,  with  its  tumult  and  its  squalor.  Just  because  man  is  greater 
than  the  stars,  man  "  fails,"  whilst  they  shine  on  unwearied.  For  what  the 
prophet  has  in  view  as  the  clinging  curse  that  cleaves  to  our  greatness  is  not 
merely  the  bodily  fatigue  which  is  necessarily  involved  in  the  very  fact  of  bodily 
existence,  since  energy  cannot  be  put  forth  without  waste  and  weariness,  but 
it  is  far  more  the  weary  heart,  the  heart  that  is  weary  of  itself,  weary  of  toil, 
weary  of  the  momentary  crises  that  demand  effort,  and  wearier  still  of  the  effort- 
less monotony  of  our  daily  lives.  It  is  ever  to  be  remembered  that  the  faintness 
and  the  ebbing  away  of  might,  which  is  the  truly  tragic  thing  in  humanity, 
does  not  depend  upon  physicetl  constitution,  but  upon  separation  from  the 
Source  of  all  strength.  II.  Another  sad  contrast,  melting  into  a  blessed 
LIKENESS.  "  He  fainteth  not,  neither  is  weary."  "  He  giveth  power  to  the 
faint."  Is  that  not  a  higher  exercise  of  power  than  to  "  preserve  the  stars  from 
wrong"?  What  are  the  consequences  that  the  prophet  traces  to  this  restoring 
power  ?     "  They  shall  mount  up  with  wings  as  eagles,"  &c.     III.  The  way  by 

WHICH   THESE    CONTRASTS    CAN    BB   RECONCILED,    AND    THIS    LIKENESS    SECURED. 

"  They  that  wait  upon  the  Lord  " — that  is  the  whole  secret.  What  does  waiting 
on  the  Lord  include?  Keep  near  Him;  keep  still:  expect.  (liid.)  Two 
operations  of  God's  power  (with  ver.  26): — 1.  The  strength  that  restores  is  greater 
than  the  power  that  preserves.  2.  The  power  that  is  given  to  the  faint  is  greater 
than  the  strength  that  keeps  the  stars  from  falling,  because  there  is  in  it  an  actual 
VOL.  II. — 15 


226  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  tl. 

communication  of  actual  Divine  strength.     God  keeps  the  planet  in  its  course 
by  an  act  (for  we  must  not  speak  about  "  effort  "  in  regard  to  Him)  of  power 
brought  to  bear  upon  it.     But  He  brings  strength  to  us,  not  by  ministration 
from  without,  but  by  impartation  within.     3.  Once  more,  this  mirror  gives  us 
back  the  reflection  of  a  power  which  is  not  only  restoration  and  communication, 
but  multiplication.     "  To  those  that  have  no  might  He  increaseth  strength." 
4.  The  power  that  redeems,  ministers  not  only  restoration  and  communication 
and  multiplication,  but  assimilation.     There  is  in  the  context  a  very  remarkable 
play  upon  words.     "  Hast  thou  not  known,  hast  thou  not  heard,  that  the  ever- 
lasting God,  the  Lord,  the  Creator  of  the  ends  of  the  earth,  fainteth  not,  neither 
is  weary?"     He  stoops  to  the  faint,  and  gives  them  strength,  and  what  is  the 
result  in  them?     "  They  shaU  run  and  not  be  weary,  they  shall  walk  and  not 
faint."     What  God  is,  God's   child   in   his   measure   becomes,  unfainting  and 
unwearied  like  his  Father  in  the  heavens.      God  gives,  not  omnipotence,  but 
something  that  is  a  kind  of  shadowy  likeness  of  it.     "  All  things  are  possible 
to  him  that  believe th."     {Ibid.)        Encouragement  to  the  weary : — I.  The  Lord 
SPEAKS  OF  His  people  as  being  sometimes  "  FAINT."     The  expression  is  very 
significant;  it  implies  that  there  is  hfe,  yet  life  for  a  time  dormant,  inactive, 
powerless  either  for  defence,  service,  or  enjoyment.     There  is  one.  for  instance, 
who  has  watched  long  by  the  bedside  of  a  beloved  sick  one.     Others,  again, 
are  sorely  tried  by  anxieties  connected  with  their  business;  by  the  difficulty  of 
providing  daily  bread.     There,  again,  is  another  deeply  vexed  and  grieved  with 
the  plague  of  his  own  heart.     Of  such  as  these  the  Lord  seems  to  be  speaking. 
"  He  giveth  power  to  the  faint."     His  people  are  further  described  as  having 
"  no  might."     Self-sufficiency  is  one  of  the  plainest  marks  of  the  ungodly.     And 
thus  are  they  led  truly  into  the  third  mark  of  His  people,  which  the  Lord  here 
mentions,  "  They  that  wait  upon  the  Lord."    IL  How  He  deals  with  them. 
Three  expressions  are  employed  to  describe  this.     I.  To  the  faint  "  giving  " 
strength,  because,  under  their  sore  trials  and  afflictions,  they  have  utterly  fainted; 
their  strength  has  for  a  time  entirely  departed — to  them  the  Lord  "  gives  " 
strength.     2.  Then  observe  the  other  word  describing  His  dealings — "  He  in- 
creaseth strength."     That  is  a  very  suitable  word.     It  is  the  experience  of 
every  gracious  soul,  that  his  own  strength  decreaseth.     He  learns  more  fully 
that  he  hath  in  himself  no  strength.     Wherever  the  Lord  removes  any  of  the  props 
of  the  believer's  earthly  pride  and  self-sufficiency,  there  He  reveals  Himself 
as  the  believer's  strength.     So  that  growth  in  humility  is  necessarily  connected 
with  growth  in  spiritual  strength.      3.   They  that    wait    on  the  Lord  shall 
"  renew  "  their  strength.     They  renew  their  strength  because  the  Lord  renews 
it.     He  manifests  Himself  to  them  just  at  those  times  and  in  that  manner 
in  which  they  are  led  to  see  their  need  of  Him.     III.  The  blessed  bestjlts 
OP  THE  Lord's  dealings  with  His  people.     These  also  are  described  as  three- 
fold— 1.   "  They  shall  mount  up,"  borne  aloft  heavenward,   with  a  power  in 
comparison  with  which  the  eagle's  mighty  wings  are  powerless.     And  why? 
Because  they  are  borne  aloft  by  omnipotent  grace.     This  is  one  blessed  result 
to  those  who  wait  upon  the  Lord — heavenward  tendency.     2.  There  is  also 
promised  zeal  and  rapid  progress  in  their  heavenly  course.     "  They  shall  run 
and  not  be  weary."     Waiting  upon  the  Lord,  they  shall  be  so  renewed  in  strength, 
that  not  only  their  affections,  desires,  and  hopes  shall  be  lifted  up  to  heaven, 
but  they  shall  also  be  carried  forward  swiftly  and  mightily  in  their  gracious 
course.     They  shall  run  in  the  way  of  God's  commandments,  and  not  be  weary. 
Look  at  all  mere  human  strength;  how  soon  it  fails,  how  quickly  it  is  exhausted. 
3.  This  is  the  third  blessed  result — a  steady  perseverance  in  the  way  to  Zion. 
Whilst  their  progress  is  "  ruiming  "  for  zeal  and  success,  it  is  "  walking  "  for 
steady  persistency  unto  the  end.     It  is  harder  sometimes  to  walk  than  to  run. 
There  are  many  who  would  gain  heaven  if  it  were  to  be  won  by  a  hasty  run; 
but  when  the  heavenly  course  requires  not  merely  a  short,   quick,  impulsive 
run,  but  the  slow,  weary,  painful  walk,  they  soon  grow  tired,  and  ready  to  give 
all  up.     {0.   W.  Hills.)        The  influence  of  the  Holy  Ghost :  the  doctrine  abused 
by  neglecting  means: — The  grand  subject  here  is,   "waiting  upon  the  Lord." 
The  terra  is  of  frequent  occurrence  in  God's  Word.     It  sometimes  means  nothing 
more  than  a  quiet,  restful  frame  of  soul;  and  sometimes  it  will  be  found  to  set 
forth  a  waiting  for  the  Lord,  a  patient  waiting  on  BUm  in  expectation  of  deliver- 
ance.    But  "  waiting  on  Him  "  seems  to  imply  more  than  this;  it  implies  a 
dihgent  use  of  those  means  that  He  has  appointed  for  the  communication  of 


CHAP.  3X.]  ISAIAH.  227 

His  grace — waiting  on  Him  in  the  use  of  those  means.  It  is  not  an  indolent 
waiting.  I.  God's  gracious  communication  op  nebdful  help  to  His  poor, 
TRIED,  WEAK,  AND  HELPLESS  PEOPLE.  1.  Every  Creature  is  of  necessity  weak; 
it  is  not  his  fault — it  is  his  nature.  When  Adam  left  his  hold  on  God  he  neces- 
sarily fell;  as  necessarily  as  any  branch  would  fall  if  cut  off  from  the  parent 
stem.  The  creature  has  no  power  to  sustain  himself,  nor  to  help  himself;  and 
it  was  never  intended  that  he  should  have.  2.  If  man  as  an  unfallen  creature 
is  weak;  well  may  we  say,  that  as  a  fallen  creature,  he  is  altogether  weakness. 
3.  But  even  as  a  renewed  creature  he  is  weak,  and  if  left  to  himself,  unable  to 
cope  with  one  enemy,  or  to  maintain  his  own  standing  for  one  single  moment. 
'■  Without  Me  ye  can  do  nothing."  4.  Besides  this,  there  are  certain  periods 
in  which  the  behever  is  more  than  ordinarily  faint  and  weak.  There  are  many 
things  that  try  him.  6.  Oftentimes  too,  through  want  of  watchful,  prayerful, 
holy  seeking  and  turning  over  the  page  of  conscience,  he  weakens  his  little 
strength.  But  it  is  to  these  very  souls  that  the  Lord  communicates  strength. 
"  He  giveth  power  to  the  faint;  and  to  them  that  have  no  might  He  increaseth 
strength."  The  necessities  of  God's  people  seem  to  touch  the  very  heart  of 
God.  But  there  is  something  in  the  very  glory  of  God  that  constrains  Him 
to  grant  them  His  help  in  their  hours  of  need.  This  was  David's  plea:  "  pardon 
mine  iniquity,  for  it  is  great,"  but  "  for  Thy  name's  sake,"  he  says.  II.  Observe 
THROUGH  WHAT  CHANNEL  IT  COMES.  It  is  uot  a  natural  channel;  it  is  not  the 
strength  of  nature,  but  it  is  in  the  way  of  waiting  dependence  on  Himself.  There 
is  a  wondrous  analogy  between  the  operations  of  God  in  grace  and  in  nature. 
God  has  given  to  us  the  promise  that  "seed-time  and  harvest  shall  never  fail " 
while  the  world  remains;  but  does  this  hinder  the  necessity  of  casting  in  the 
seed  ?  Does  it  hinder  the  necessity  of  ploughing  the  land  before  it,  and  of  harrow- 
ing it  in,  and  protecting  it?  The  more  I  look  at  this  appointment  of  God,  the 
more  I  see  of  infinite  wisdom  in  it.  I  am  in  great  distress,  in  great  need,  no 
one  knows  of  my  pressure.  Perhaps  I  tell  my  friend,  but  I  find  no  relief  at  all. 
And  now  I  cast  myself  on  the  Lord^God  reveals  Himself  to  me  as  my  Father — 
it  quiets  me,  it  comforts  me.  See  how  the  Lord  makes  one  step  preparatory 
to  another,  and  makes  one  thing  the  means  of  obtaining  another.  Prayerfulness 
leads  to  strength;  that  leads  to  courage;  that  leads  to  submission;  that  leads 
to  patience,  and  that  leads  to  praise.  Observe  the  same,  too,  of  all  other  means 
of  grace.  Talk  we  of  the  Bible,  or  hearing  the  Word  unfolded?  In  prayer 
we  speak  to  God;  in  His  Word  He  speaks  to  us  by  His  Spirit.  Look  at  the 
very  means  of  grace  themselves:  there  is  the  unfolding  of  the  same  wisdom 
in  the  means  appointed.  What  a  suitable  and  reasonable  ordainment  it  is! 
III.  The  absolute  certainty  of  this  channel  of  communication.  "  They 
that  wait  on  the  Lord  shall  renew  their  strength."  When  God  puts  forth  His 
promise  He  pledges  all  that  is  in  Himself  to  fulfil  that  promise.  This  is  God's 
appointed  way.  Perhaps  we  can  say  there  are  no  instances  upon  record  in 
which  it  was  otherwise,  but  I  dare  not  say  that  God  may  not  in  one  moment 
80  break  in  upon  a  man's  soul,  by  the  holy  anointing  of  the  Spirit,  as  to  give 
him  the  most  perfect  conviction  that  he  is  a  child  of  God.  See  the  greatness 
of  the  commimication.  They  shall  "run";  they  shall  "walk";  and  they 
shall  "  mount  up."  Concluding  remarks  —  1.  Would  that  the  saints  of  God 
did  more  deeply  feel  that  they  are  fainting  and  full  of  weakness!  2.  Though 
it  is  no  small  mercy  to  be  deeply  conscious  of  our  utter  weakness  before  God, 
take  heed  how  you  abuse  this  glorious  doctrine  of  the  blessed  Spirit  by  living 
a  fife  of  ceaseless  and  useless  complaint.  There  is  an  observation,  I  think  in 
Owen,  that  the  religion  of  some  consists  in  Httle  more  than  in  going  from  house 
to  house,  from  friend  to  friend,  from  saint  to  saint,  telling  one's  nothingness, 
sinfulness,  and  wretchedness.  They  make  a  sort  of  secret  balm  of  it.  3.  What 
vast  encouragement  is  here!  {J.  H.  Evans,  M.A.)  Causes  and  cure  of  faint- 
ing:— I.  What  makes  us  faint?  1.  We  will  consider  the  case  of  the  awakened 
sinner.  (1)  They  may  very  well  faint,  for  they  have  made  a  most  alarming 
discovery.  (2)  They  have  tried  to  escape  from  their  dangerous  position,  but 
they  have  not  succeeded.  (3)  We  have  known  some  grow  so  faint  through 
a  sense  of  sin  and  a  dread  of  its  punishment  and  a  consciousness  of  their  own 
inability  to  save  themselves,  that  they  have  even  wished  to  die;  yet,  when  they 
have  looked  at  their  condition  aright,  they  have  asked  themselves  what  use 
death  would  be  to  them?  (4)  Perhaps  also,  at  such  a  time,  a  sore  trouble  may 
happen  to  the  man;  for,  in  the  parable  of  the  prodigal  son,  it  appears  that  he 


228  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xl. 

was  quite  as  much  influenced  by  the  peculiar  circumstances  without  as  by  his 
sense  of  sin  within.  2.  I  pass  on  to  another  character,  namely,  the  child  of  God 
in  his  fainting  fits.  There  is  a  degree  of  sinfulness  about  some  of  those  faintinga 
which  is  not  found  in  others.  (1)  Sometimes  the  children  of  God  faint  through 
want  of  faith  (Psa.  xxvii.  13).  So  the  ciu-e  of  fainting  is  faith,  and  the  best 
way  to  prevent  fainting  is  to  believe.  (2)  Some  are  brought  into  a  state  of 
faintness  through  a  selfish  want  of  resignation.  E.g.,  Jonah  and  the  gourd. 
It  was  not  alone  the  heat  of  the  sun  that  caused  him  to  faint;  it  was  also  the 
heat  of  his  temper.  Some  of  those  who  have  lost  dear  children  seem  as  if  they 
will  not  forgive  God  for  taking  them.  (3)  There  are  children  of  God  also  who 
fall  into  faintness  through  trusting  in  themselves.  "  Even  the  youths  shall 
faint,"  &c.  Why  is  that?  Because  the  youths  felt  themselves  able  to  do  any- 
thing. (4)  Faintness  may  also  arise  from  another  cause  which  is  sinful,  namely, 
neglect  of  prayer.  (5)  Children  of  God  fall  into  faintness  because  of  the  length 
of  the  way.  (6)  The  heaviness  of  their  burden.  (7)  A  sense  of  weakness. 
(8)  Another  frequent  cause  is  the  spirit  itself  sinking  (Psa.  xlii.).  (9)  Some  get 
faint  through  lack  of  spiritual  food.  (10)  Sometimes  God's  children  faint  when 
they  are  in  adversity.  (11)  There  are  some  who  faint  through  increasing  infirmity. 
II.  How  THE  Lord  deals  with  His  paintinq  people.  "  He  giveth  power," 
&c.  1.  See  how  tenderly  the  Lord  deals  with  His  fainting  people.  He  does 
not  desert  them,  saying,  They  are  no  longer  any  use  to  Me ;  they  can  do  nothing 
for  Me ;  I  will  leave  them  where  they  are.  He  gives  them  power.  2.  What  sort 
of  power?  (1)  You  may  be  sure  that  He  does  not  give  them  any  of  their 
own.  That  has  all  gone  from  them.  (2)  It  will  be  sufiicient  for  the  emergency, 
for  He  has  all-sufficient  power.  "As  thy  days,"  &c.  (3)  It  is  a  power  that 
the  devil  can  neither  defeat  nor  take  away.  3.  Why  is  it  that  He  gives  power 
to  the  faint?  (1)  Because,  in  His  great  goodness.  He  looks  out  for  those 
who  need  it  most.  (2)  Because  they  will  praise  Him  most  for  it.  (3)  Because 
they  will  be  sure  to  use  it.  When  a  person  who  has  been  faint  receives 
power  from  God  he  will  be  likely  to  be  sympathetic,  tender,  and  gentle 
towards  others;  at  least,  that  is  how  he  should  be.  Conclusion — 1.  If  God 
gives  power  to  the  faint,  let  us  be  thankful  if  we  have  fainted  and  have 
been  revived  by  Ham.  2.  Let  us  have  done  with  fainting  in  the  future, 
because  we  ought  to  have  no  more  fainting  now  that  we  have  received  God's 
power.  {C.  H.  Spurgeon.)  Strength  attracted  by  weakness: — We  have  seen 
a  little  weakling  child  draw  to  its  cot  some  strong  and  burly  man,  the  champion 
athlete  of  the  country-side.  Such  a  spell  can  weakness  exert  over  might,  and 
helplessness  over  helpfulness.  It  is  the  burden  of  Scripture  that  the  strong 
should  bear  the  infirmities  of  the  weak,  and  not  please  themselves.  Such 
is  the  law  of  God's  existence.  All  that  He  is  and  has  He  holds  in  trust  for  us, 
and  most  for  those  who  need  most.  {F.  B.  Meyer,  B.A.)  Ood's  streiigth  for 
the  weak: — Many  of  us  are  too  strong,  self-reUant,  and  resourceful  to  get  the 
best  that  God  can  do.  Jacob  must  halt  on  his  thigh  ere  he  can  prevail  with 
God  and  man.  (Ibid.)  Ood's  untiring  patience: — God  is  ever  blotting  out 
sins  from  His  remembrance — never  tiring.  I  will  tell  you  what  it  is  hke.  It 
i«  like  the  infinite,  tireless  patience  of  the  sea.  The  children  ply  their  spades 
upon  the  sands,  to  make  work  for  the  sea.  They  heap  the  sand  up,  they  dig 
deep  into  it.  Hundreds  of  them  disfigure  the  hard,  golden  siuface,  and  leave 
their  scars  upon  it;  and  then  quietly  the  old  sea  turns  upon  its  course,  and  rolls 
its  waves  across  the  sands,  and  every  trace  of  scar  is  obliterated,  becomes  as  if 
it  had  never  been;  when  the  tide  ebbs  again  there  is  no  trace  upon  the  smooth, 
shining  surface  of  the  sand  to  show  that  it  had  ever  known  distiurbance.  Day 
after  day,  day  after  day,  the  scene  is  repeated,  and  the  sea  is  never  tired  of  putting 
things  to  rights;  it  never  complains,  it  never  resents  the  new  work  imposed 
upon  it.  And  the  secret  is  that  there  is  such  infinite  reserve  of  power  that  all 
that  man  can  do  frets  it  no  whit.  It  is  only  a  question  of  time,  and  it  will  put 
•11  things  to  rights  again.  Again  and  again,  as  I  have  stood  by  the  sea,  this 
sense  of  its  tirelessness  has  come  over  me.  It  fainteth  not,  neither  is  weary. 
And  it  has  seemed  to  me  an  emblem,  as  the  stars  are  emblems,  moving  on  their 
courses,  as  the  world  is  an  emblem,  swinging  through  space,  as  nature  is  an 
emblem,  pursuing  so  patiently  and  unwearieoly  her  age-long  business — of  that 
mighty  God  whose  glorious  characteristic  it  is  that  He  fainteth  not,  neither 
is  weary;  but  He  giveth  power  to  the  faint,  and  increaseth  strength  to  him  that 
hath  no  might.     (C.  Silvester  Home,  M.A.) 


CHAP.  XL.]  ISAIAH.  229 

Vers.  30,  31.  Even  the  youths  shall  faint  —  TAe  unfaiiUing  spirit: — Th« 
Hebrew  tendency  to  lean  upon  the  most  muscular  arm  accessible,  to  buy  up  horses 
from  Egypt  in  imitation  of  the  warriors  of  the  plains,  to  form  alliances  with  neigh- 
bouring peoples  in  a  neighbourly,  instead  of  acting  in  the  true  Israelite  spirit — 
was  a  tendency  not  confined  to  Hebrew  blood.  It  is  in  human  nature  to  live  by 
eyesight,  and  to  go  on  doing  so  even  although  everything  should  go  to  wreck  under 
our  very  eyes.  The  true  Israelite  spirit  felt — wherever  that  spirit  prevailed — 
that  God's  assuring  word  had  more  muscle  in  it  than  an  army  of  Philistines; 
that  Egyptian  cavalry  was  an  encumbrance;  that  Assyrian  spears  might  be  turned 
into  withered  blades  of  grass  in  a  night's  time;  and  that  the  only  solid  ground  that 
never  quaked  was  the  Rock  that  faith  stood  upon-  For  the  unseen  is  harder, 
stronger — has  more  vitality  and  power  of  renewal  in  it — than  the  youngest,  freshest, 
fairest,  and  most  select  powers  that  are  seen.  Our  desire  is  to  show  wherein  lies 
the  power  of  renewed  life  and  force  in  a  soul  and  in  a  Church,  so  that  the  vigour 
ehall  be  real  and  elastic,  being  the  very  strength  of  God.     I.  Tas  pbophkt  expects 

THE    NATTTEAI.    FATNTINQ    AND    FALLING    OP    THE    SELECT    MEN.      "  Young    men  " 

reads  literally  "  the  select  men," — those  picked  out  for  an  enterprise  on  account 
of  their  youthful  vigour.  11.  A  spxrittjal  empowering  of  all  men  is  peovided 
THROUGH  WAITING  ON  GoD.  Panic  seized  our  Lord's  disciples  on  the  arrest  of  their 
Master,  and  their  flight  revealed  their  lack  of  power.  They  were  converted  men, 
but  they  fainted  and  failed.  They  were  young  and  select,  but  they  fled-  When 
about  to  part  from  them,  Jesus  bade  them  remain  where  they  were,  and  not 
attempt  the  discipling  of  the  world  imtil  they  should  receive  power.  The  word 
"  renew  "  in  this  place  signifies  "  change."  The  strength  sufficient  for  one  day, 
and  its  duty,  may  need  to  be  exchanged  for  something  larger,  deeper,  swifter  for 
the  next  day  and  its  severer  trials.  The  same  Spirit  works,  changing  the  force 
and  form  of  His  working.  How  is  the  Spirit  of  God  working  in  the  renewal  of 
strength  to-day?  What  are  the  best  people  feeling  the  need  of,  but  a  closer 
union  among  themselves  through  an  intenser,  completer  fellowship  with  God? 
III.  Isaiah  describes  the  manifestations  of  a  new  and  strong  life  in  God. 
A  cheering  succession  of  Saxon  sentences,  precious  powers,  most  desirable  energies. 
1.  There  is  heavenly  elevation.  "  They  shall  moimt  up  with  wings  as  eagles." 
Theodore  Monod  says:  "  If  you  want  to  do  something,  do  not  try  to  be  somebody." 
Certainly,  self-exaltation  is  not  heavenly.  It  ensures  your  poor  wings  being 
clipped  or  broken  very  soon.  We  speak  exclusively  of  the  spiritual  realm.  Live 
looking  unto  Jesus,  and  He  will  ere  long  set  you  with  Him  upon  His  throne.  2.  There 
is  quickened  activity.  "  They  shall  run  and  not  be  weary."  3.  There  is  the 
unf ainting  every-  day  walk.  ' '  They  shall  walk  and  not  faint. ' '  The  unf ainting  walk, 
the  steady  march  from  hour  to  hour,  is  the  sharpest,  truest,  final  test  of  a  strong 
life.  It  is  in  trifies  that  character  is  revealed.  It  is  in  small,  monotonous  duties 
that  we  often  est  break  down.  ((?.  H.  Dick.)  The  secret  of  immortal  yovih  : — 
I.  The  dreary  certainty  of  weariness  and  decay.  1.  The  words  point  to  the 
plain  fact  that  all  created  and  physical  Ufe,  by  the  very  law  of  its  being,  in  the  act 
of  living  tends  to  death;  and  by  the  very  operation  of  its  strength  tends  to  exhaus- 
tion. There  are  three  stages  in  every  creature's  Ufe — that  of  growth,  that  of 
eqiiilibrium,  that  of  decay.  You  are  in  the  first.  If  you  live  you  will  come  to 
the  second  and  the  third.  2.  The  text  points  also  to  another  fact,  that,  long  before 
your  natural  life  shall  have  begun  to  tend  towards  decay,  hard  work  and  occasional 
sorrows  and  responsibilities  and  burdens  of  all  sorts  will  very  often  make  you 
wearied  and  ready  to  faint.  In  your  early  days  you  dream  of  life  as  a  kind  of 
enchanted  garden.  Ah!  long  before  you  have  traversed  the  length  of  one  of  its 
walks  you  will  often  have  been  tired  of  the  whole  thing,  and  weary  of  what  is 
laid  upon  you.  3.  My  text  points  to  another  fact,  as  certain  as  gravitation,  that 
the  faintness  and  weariness  and  decay  of  the  bodily  strength  will  be  accompanied 
with  a  parallel  change  in  your  feelings.  We  are  drawn  onward  by  hopes,  and 
when  we  get  them  fulfilled  we  find  that  they  are  disappointing.  Do  you  not 
think  that,  if  that  is  so,  it  would  be  as  well  to  face  it  ?  Do  you  not  think  that  a  wise 
man  would  take  account  of  all  the  elements  in  forecasting  his  life,  and  would 
shape  his  conduct  accordingly?  11.  The  blessed  opposite  possibility  of  en- 
bxhaxtstible  and  immoetal  strength.  "  They  that  wait  upon  the  Lord  shall 
renew  their  strength,"  &c.  The  life  of  nature  tends  inevitably  downward,  but 
there  may  be  another  life  within  the  life  of  nature  which  shall  have  the  opposite 
motion,  and  tend  as  certainly  upwards.  Look  on  this  possibility  a  little  more 
closely.     L  Note,  how  to  get  at  it.     "  The^  that  wait  upon  the  Lord  "  is  Old 


230  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xx. 

Testament  dialect  for  what  in  New  Testament  phraseology  is  meant  by  "  Believe 
on  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ."  For  the  motion  expressed  here  by  "  waiting  "  is  that 
of  expectant  dependence,  and  the  New  Testament  "  faith  "  is  the  very  same  in 
its  attitude  of  expectant  dependence.  The  condition  of  the  inflow  of  this  un- 
wearied life  into  our  poor,  fainting  humanity  is  simply  the  trust  in  Jesus  Christ 
the  Redeemer  of  our  souls.  True,  the  revelation  has  advanced,  the  contents  of 
that  which  we  grasp  are  more  developed.  No  matter  where  we  stand  on  the 
course  of  life,  there  may  come  into  our  hearts  a  Divine  Indweller,  who  laughs  at 
weariness  and  knows  nothing  of  decay.  2.  What  is  this  strength  that  we  thus  get, 
if  we  will,  by  faith?  It  is  the  true  entrance  into  our  souls  of  a  Divine  life.  We 
who  have  Christ  in  our  hearts  by  faith  shall  share,  in  some  fashion  and  degree, 
in  His  wondrous  prerogative  of  unwearied  strength.  So  here  is  the  promise. 
God  will  give  Himself  to  you,  and  in  the  very  heart  of  your  decaying  nature  will 
plant  the  seed  of  an  immortal  being  which  shall,  like  His  own,  shake  off  fatigue 
from  the  limbs,  and  never  tend  to  dissolution.  The  life  of  nature  dies  by  living; 
the  life  of  grace,  which  may  belong  to  us  all,  lives  by  living,  and  lives  evermore 
thereby.  The  oldest  angels  are  the  youngest.  The  longer  men  live  in  fellowship 
with  Christ  the  stronger  do  they  grow.  And  though  our  lives,  whether  we  be 
Christians  or  no,  are  necessarily  subject  to  the  common  laws  of  mortality,  we  may 
carry  all  that  is  worth  preserving  of  the  earliest  stages  into  the  latest;  and  when 
grey  hairs  are  upon  us,  and  we  are  living  next  door  to  our  graves,  we  may  still  have 
the  enthusiasm,  the  energy,  and  above  all,  the  boundless  hopefulness  that  made 
the  gladness  and  the  spring  of  our  long-buried  youth.  "  They  shall  still  bring  forth 
fruit  in  old  age."  3.  The  mamier  in  which  this  immortal  strength  is  exercised. 
There  is  strength  to  soar.  Old  men  generally  shed  their  wings,  and  can  only 
manage  to  crawl.  They  have  done  with  romance.  Enthusiasms  are  dead.  For 
the  most  part  they  are  content,  unless  they  have  got  Christ  in  their  hearts,  to  keep 
along  the  low  levels,  and  their  soaring  days  are  done.  But  if  you  and  I  have 
Jesus  Christ  for  the  life  of  our  spirits,  as  certainly  as  fire  sends  its  shooting  tongues 
upwards,  so  certainly  shall  we  rise  above  the  sorrows  and  sins  and  cares  of  this 
"  dim  spot  which  men  call  earth,"  and  find  ampler  field  for  buoyant  motion  high 
up  in  communion  with  God.  Strength  to  soar  means  the  gracious  power  of 
bringing  all  heaven  into  our  grasp,  and  setting  our  affections  on  things  above. 
Life  on  earth  were  too  wretched  unless  it  were  possible  to  "  mount  up  with  wings 
as  eagles."  Again,  you  may  have  strength  to  run — that  is  to  say,  there  is  power 
waiting  for  you  for  all  the  great  crises  of  your  lives  which  call  for  special,  though 
it  may  be  brief,  exertion.  Such  crises  will  come  to  each  of  you,  in  sorrow,  work, 
difficulty,  hard  conflicts.  And  there  is  only  one  way  to  be  ready  for  such  times 
as  these,  and  that  is  to  live  waiting  on  the  Lord,  near  Christ,  with  Him  in  your 
hearts,  and  then  nothing  will  come  that  will  be  too  big  for  you.  Strength  to  walk 
may  be  yours,  i.e.,  patient  power  for  persistent  pvursuit  of  weary,  monotonous 
duty.  {A.  Maclaren,  D.D.)  How  to  grow  strong  : — I.  We  have  here  xtnaided 
NATURE  AT  ITS  BEST  PROVING  A  DISMAL  FAILURE.  Youths  and  youug  men  are  the 
personification  of  activity,  agility,  vigour,  and  "  go."  Their  eye  is  not  dim, 
nor  their  natm-al  force  abated.  Moreover,  the  word  here  employed  signifies  the 
pick  of  the  people,  the  flower  of  the  youth,  the  very  first  and  foremost.  These 
are  the  strongest  of  the  strong,  the  bravest  of  the  brave.  But  what  happens  to 
them?  Even  these  shall  faint  and  be  weary;  even  these  shall  fail  and  fall.  It  is 
in  spiritual  things  that  this  disappointment  is  most  to  be  deplored.  1.  This  is  a 
picture  of  those  who,  starting  in  their  own  strength,  are  presently  disillusioned. 
Here,  then,  is  a  picture  of  ourselves  in  our  unregenerate  condition.  2.  This  is  a 
picture,  too,  of  how  we  were  when,  having  been  convicted  «f  sin,  we  began  to  try 
to  cleave  our  own  way  to  heaven,  and  to  pave  it  too;  when  from  self-complacency 
we  turned  to  self-righteousness.  3. 1  see  here,  also,  an  all  too  accurate  picture  of 
some  true  Christians.  The  boastful  Christian  is  represented  here,  the  man  who 
fancies  that  his  native  courage  will  carry  him  through,  who  imagines  that  his 
wide  experience  will  suffice  in  his  extremity,  who  supposes  his  rigid  orthodoxy  is 
enough.  4.  There  are  some  well-nigh  prayerless  Christians,  too,  who  seem  to 
imagine  that  since  they  are  already  converted  to  God,  and  have  had  great  experience 
of  His  dealings,  they  need  no  longer  be  as  fervent  and  as  frequent  at  the  mercy- 
seat  as  in  early  days.  II.  Prayerful  dependence  upon  God  means  unquaofied 
SUCCESS.  "  They  that  wait,"  &c.  1.  What  is  this  waiting  upon  God?  (1)  It 
involves  humiliation  and  lamentation,  a  consciousness  of  need,  a  confession  of 
weakness,  an  acknowledgment  of  sin.     Do  not  think  to  get  to  the  other  stagea 


CHAP.  XL.]  ISAIAH.  231 

except  by  this  route.  It  is  most  unwise  to  seek  to  build  a  castle  in  the  air,  or 
even  on  the  sands.  Deep  digging  must  precede  lofty  building.  (2)  Then  comes 
supplication,  an  earnest  pouring  out  of  the  inmost  heart  to  God.  (3)  Mingled 
with  the  supplication  is  expectation.  (4)  Yet  with  supplication  and  expectation 
there  is  resignation.  (5)  There  is  not  necessarily  inaction;  indeed  those  that  wait 
upon  the  Lord  are  the  very  ones  who  are  most  in  earnest,  and  most  active.  2.  What 
is  the  result  of  waiting  upon  God?  (1)  "  They  shall  renew  their  strength."  This 
means  that  they  shall  change  their  strength.  They  shall  put  off  their  own  thread- 
bare, worn-out,  poverty-stricken  strength,  and  they  shall  be  clad  with  strength 
as  with  a  garment,  a  garment  that  has  been  woven  in  celestial  looms.  It  means 
among  other  things,  that  the  strength  they  have,  God-given,  shall  be  adapted  to 
special  circumstances,  and  applied  to  peculiar  conditions.  I  know  how  possible 
it  is  to  have  a  goodly  measure  of  strength,  and  yet  not  know  how  to  use  it.  Those 
who  wait  on  the  Lord  are  taught  spiritual  economy.  They  make  the  most  of  the 
little  they  have,  and  by  using  it,  it  is  increased.  They  are  as  those  who,  having 
a  long  journey  to  undertake,  have  made  arrangements  previously  that  at  each 
stage  there  shall  be  a  fresh  horse  awaiting  them.  (2)  "  They  shall  mount  up  with 
wings  as  eagles,"  that  is,  they  shall  fly.  I  have  often  wondered  what  the  sensation 
of  flying  may  be  like.  I  have  nothing  to  guide  me  except  sundry  dreams.  It  is  a 
most  delightful  sensation,  except  when  it  ends,  and  then  you  wish  you  had  not  gone 
in  for  it  at  all.  Alas!  that  so  many  of  our  fellow- men  have  set  their  minds  on 
flying.  They  have  invented  flying  machines,  so-called,  with  which  they  have 
almost  invariably  till  now  coiu-ted  disaster.  I  know  a  flying  machine  worth  all  of 
these.  I  will  not  soar  to  heaven  on  wings  of  wax,  which  melt  as  they  get  near  the 
sun,  but  on  wings  which  God  supplies,  wings  of  hope,  and  faith,  and  prayer,  and 
praise.  (3)  "  They  shall  run,"  and  however  much  they  run,  and  however  fast  they 
run,  they  shall  not  be  weary.  What  wonderful  progress  those  make  who  trust  God. 
(4)  "  They  shall  walk  and  not  faint."  Divine  strength  enables  us  for  patient 
continuance  in  well-doing.  What  is  the  secret  of  all  this?  God  is  at  the  bottom 
of  it.  Compare  verse  6  with  verses  10,  12,  &c.  There  is  nothing  impossible  to 
those  who  love  God.     {T.  Spurgeon.) 

Ver.  31.  But  they  that  wait  upon  the  Lord  shall  renew  their  strength. — 

Strength  for  the  returning  exiles  : — There  was  a  real  climax  in  the  prophet's  state- 
ment. And  its  application,  in  his  thought,  was  to  the  return  of  the  exiles  from 
Babylon  to  Jerusalem.  God's  helpfulness  would  be  adequate  to  their  needs  in  all 
the  stages  of  their  return.  In  the  first  flush  of  joy,  and  in  the  first  flights  of  eager 
anticipation,  "  on  which  we  see  them  rising  in  the  psalms  of  redemption  as  on  the 
wings  of  an  eagle  "  ;  again,  in  the  rush  and  excitement  of  their  hurried  departiure, 
the  running  to  and  fro  in  hasty  and  exhausting  preparation;  but  finally,  when 
they  wanted  it  most,  in  the  long  tramp,  tramp,  tramp  of  those  seven  hundred 
weary  miles,  day  after  day,  week  after  week,  when  their  pace  must  be  adapted 
to  those  of  the  heavily-laden  beasts  of  burden,  and  of  the  Uttle  ones  whose  strength 
would  often  fail  and  who  would  need  to  be  lifted  up  and  carried  in  the  father's 
arms.  How  often  on  that  tiresome  journey  would  the  sweet  music  of  the  prophet's 
words  return  to  their  memory,  "  they  shall  walk  and  not  faint."  Then  it  was  that 
their  trust  in  Jehovah  would  be  put  fully  to  the  proof.  It  was  in  the  walking 
and  not  in  the  flying  that  their  faith  would  triumph.  (J.  Halsey.),  The  Gospel 
of  the  Exile: — I.  This  is  the  GostEL  of  the  Exile;  the  "Gospel  before  the 
Gospel  "  (Cheyne);  the  good  news  of  the  swift  accession  of  power  and  deUverance 
to  the  Jewish  people,  humihated,  dispirited,  and  tired  out  by  monotonously 
waiting  in  their  Babylonian  captivity  for  a  long-delayed  good.  II.  Like  aU  Gospels, 
THIS  Gospel  of  the  Exile  is  God's.  Every  true  prophet's  great  appeal  is,  "  Hast 
thou  not  known,  hast  thou  not  heard  "  of  God !  The  whole  air  rings  with  His  name. 
The  universe  is  Ut  up  with  His  glory.  The  stars  speak  His  power.  In  His  ceaseless 
activity,  fatherly  solicitude,  and  imsleeping  watchfulness  for  His  people.  He  fainteth 
not,  nor  is  weary.  The  Exile  is  not  a  mistake.  You  are  not  in  the  wrong  school. 
He  knows  what  He  is  doing.  There  is  no  searching  of  His  understanding.  Believe 
in  Him,  wait  on  Him,  wait  for  Him,  and  you  wiU  become  younger  and  stronger 
than  ever.  So  Qiod  in  His  loving  care  for,  and  constant  education  of  souls,  is  the 
Alpha  and  Omega  of  this  whole  Gospel  for  captive  Israel.  We  cannot  have  any 
good  news  for  any  age,  or  for  any  people,  or  for  any  soul,  without  Him.  All  flesh 
is  as  grass.  The  grass  withereth,  the  flower  fadeth,  but  the  revelation  of  the 
inexhaustible  God  hveth  and  abideth  for  ever.     The  strength  of  God  is  the  salvation 


232  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xi. 

of  men.  HI.  Like  all  Divine  evangels,  this  good  news  foe  the  captives  of 
Babylon  is  addressed  immediately  to  a  special  need,  and  adapted  by  its 
FORM  TO  effect  A  PABTiCTTT.AR  RESULT,  namely,  that  of  patient  endurance  of  acute 
affliction.  The  Gospel  is  for  men  and  women  who  have  lost  their  strength  in 
living,  and  are  losing  it  more  and  more,  day  by  day,  tiU  they  fear  its  utter  extinction 
by  the  presence  of  thickening  despairs,  and  the  ceaseless  gnawing  of  spiritual  fibre 
by  silent  misery  and  unutterable  grief.  Nothing  tires  Uke  hopelessness.  Nothing 
makes  the  heart  sick  Uke  long  delays.  Unto  them,  therefore,  is  the  word  of  this 
salvation  sent.  "  Wait  for  God."  "  Wait  upon  the  Lord."  "  Trust  in  Him  at 
all  times."  He  will  come.  He  cannot  help  coming,  His  nature  urges  Him  towards 
you  with  all  the  tenderness  of  His  love,  and  all  the  helpfulness  of  His  omnipotence. 
Faith  in  God  takes  multitudinous  forms  in  the  long  story  of  the  soul's  life  with  God- 
It  is  a  Divine  law  on  which  this  direction  rests.  Grod  must  be  waited  for.  We 
cannot  anticipate  Him.  While  the  soil  is  frozen  and  hard  we  cannot  compel  the 
crop;  we  wait  for  the  spring.  The  farmer  of  the  Nile  waits  till  the  waters  rise 
and  then  casts  his  bread  upon  them,  hoping  to  see  his  harvest  after  many  days. 
There  is  a  time  for  growth,  and  we  must  take  facts  according  to  God's  plan.  Even 
yoimg  men  faint  in  the  conflict  because  they  will  not  wait  for  God.  Defeated  and 
overwhelmed  with  despair  you  say,"  It  avails  nothing,  I  am  no  forwarder  to-day 
than  I  was  last  week,  I  am  as  far  from  the  kingdom  of  God  as  ever;  my  passions 
are  as  wild,  my  mind  as  untameable  as  it  was  when  I  started  for  a  better  and 
manlier  life."  Recall  Moses.  Did  he  not  in  his  impatience  lift  up  the  standard 
of  freedom  forty  years  too  soon?  But  is  not  waiting  for  God  cowardly  indolence 
and  fataUstic  apathy?  Cowardly  indolence,  indeed!  Nothing  will  more  test 
any  fibre  you've  got!  IV.  Like  all  Gospels  from  the  heavens,  this  one  for  the 
Hebrew  exiles  obtained  its  full  and  complete  verification  from  the 
UNCONTRADICTED  FACTS  OF  HUMAN  EXPERIENCE.  ■^-The  captive  people  Waited  for 
God  and  on  God,  and  they  did  not  wait  in  vain.  The  ransomed  of  the  Lord 
returned:  but  the  retvun  was  the  least  good  they  received,  and  deliverance  their 
smallest  boon.  Grace  and  strength  came  by  the  prophets  and  by  prayer  in 
imbroken  continuity,  and  fresh  gifts  of  power  and  hght  and  zeal  and  joy  enlarged 
and  enriched  their  hves.  They  were  bom  again.  They  renewed  their  youth, 
and  became  a  regenerated,  pure,  missionary  people;  found  Babylon  a  better  school 
than  Jerusalem,  and  the  severities  and  perils  of  captivity  a  healthier  discipUne 
than  the  luxuries  and  security  of  freedom.  The  sevenfold  blessing  of  the  Exile 
stands  written  in  the  unimpeachable  Chronicles  of  Israel,  and  the  world.  1.  First 
and  most  distinctive  of  the  gains  of  the  Jews  from  their  captivity,  stands  their 
advanced  and  perfected  knowledge  of  God.  The  Divine  idea  was  hfted  above  all 
the  restrictions  of  race  and  locality  to  the  throne  of  the  universe;  the  God  of 
Abraham  and  Isaac  and  Jacob  was  recognised  as  the  Saviour  of  the  ends  of  the 
earth.  We  fret  and  chafe  in  our  sufferings  and  under  our  chastisements,  when  to 
patience  and  meekness  the  God  of  all  comfort  comes  with  His  sweetest  and  most 
refreshing  revelations.  2.  Next  comes  up  out  of  the  Exile  the  more  definitely 
shaped  and  clearly  conceived  image  of  the  Anointed  of  the  Lord,  the  Daysman 
or  Mediator,  the  Lord  our  Righteousness,  the  Herald  of  a  New  Covenant,  the  suffering 
and  conquering  Servant  of  God,  who  is  to  reaUse  the  ideal  Jerusalem,  and  bring 
a  new  heaven  and  a  new  earth.  3.  Fired  by  this  hope  of  a  personal  Redeemer, 
and  controlled  by  a  spiritual  conception  of  Jehovah,  the  worship  of  God  entered 
on  that  final  spiritual  phase  which  has  never  been  wholly  eclipsed,  though  it  has 
suffered,  and  still  suffers,  many  painful  obscurations.  (1)  There  is  such  a  signal 
and  hearty  recognition  of  the  power  of  prayer  in  the  individual  and  in  the  com- 
munity, as  to  warrant  the  idea  that  the  Exile  was  the  origin  of  the  prayer-meeting. 
(2)  There  is  a  total  detachment  from  all  ritual,  and  the  cheerful  acceptance  of  "  little 
sanctuaries,"  synagogues,  or  "  meeting-houses,"  and  even  of  quiet  spots  by  the 
river-side,  in  place  of  the  gorgeous  temple  and  its  arresting  and  impressive  symbol- 
ism. (3)  The  spell  of  idolatry  is  broken  for  ever.  4.  Bound  up  with  this  we  see  the 
generation  of  a  higher  ethic;  the  birth  of  a  nobler  conception  of  Ufe,  as  the  sphere 
for  rightness  of  aim  and  righteousness  of  character.  Through  this  gate  of  tribula- 
tion Israel  enters  into  the  kingdom  of  hoUness.  6.  The  temporary  Hmitations 
and  restrictions  of  Israel  being  annulled,  it  is  forthwith  Ufted  into  the  stream  of 
universal  history,  never  to  be  taken  out  again.  It  is  proved  that  Hebraism  can 
exist  without  a  temple  and  without  a  priest,  without  an  altar  and  without  a  land, 
without  anything  or  anybody  save  the  soul  and  God.  6.  With  glowing  ardour 
and  intense  enthusiasm  these  elect  souls  go  forth  on  this  service,  seelong  to  establish 


CHAP.  3X.]  ISAIAH.  233 

a  knowledge  of  the  true  God,  urging  the  heathen  to  accept  the  light  they  enjoy, 
and  sharing  with  them  as  proselytes  the  peace  and  prosperity  brought  by  truth 
and  righteousness.  The  missionary  spirit,  as  well  as  the  missionary  idea,  glowB 
and  throbs  in  the  oracles  and  songs  which  represent  the  highest  thought  and  the 
purest  emotion  of  this  time.  7.  This  was  completed  by  the  enlargement  and 
recension  of  that  unique  and  marvellous  missionary  agent,  the  Old  Testament 
literature,  so  splendidly  enriched  with  some  of  its  most  pathetic  and  consolatory 
contributions,  bo  carefully  transcribed  and  sacredly  guarded  by  the  "  Scribes, 
who  started  into  existence  in  these  days;  and  so  diligently  pondered  by  those 
choice  spirits  who  had  learnt  to  sigh  for  God  as  their  exceeding  joy,  and  to  serve 
Him  as  their  chief  delight.  It  was  the  Great  Missionary  Book.  "  Salvation  is  of 
the  Jews."  Believe  it,  then;  exhausted  men  get  fresh  strength  by  trustful  longing 
for  God;  renew  their  spiritual  energy,  their  faith  in  goodness,  their  power  for  sel^ 
sacrificing  work,  for  fleet-footed  missions  of  mercy,  by  waiting  on  God  and  for  God. 
It  is  history,  and  actual  experience.  V.  This  Gospel,  llee  aix  its  fellows,  neveb 
DIBS.  It  endures  for  ever  and  ever  as  a  living  message,  not  effete  though  old,  not 
wasted  though  abundantly  used,  but  partaking  of  the  unwearied  energy  and  eternal 
reproductiveness  of  its  infinite  source.  Man's  wants  are  too  diverse  to  be  met  by 
any  one  messenger.  God  speaks  at  sundry  times,  and  by  different  voices;  but 
no  voice  ever  dies  out,  no  message  is  ever  wholly  lost,  and  if  not  for  one  soul, 
yet  for  another  and  another,  it  is  quick  and  powerful,  renewing  faith,  and  hope, 
and  zeaL  (J.  Clifford,  /D.D.)  Waiting  upon  God : — I.  A  duty  suggested. 
I.  We  are  reminded  of  the  solemn  and  formal  acts  of  devotion,  as  implied  in  the 
words — "  wait  upon  the  Lord."  (1)  This  language  is  borrowed  from  the  custom 
of  subjects  entering  into  the  presence  of  their  monarch  with  petitions,  acknowledg- 
ments, or  gratulations.  They  presented  themselves  and  their  offering.  (2)  Grod 
invites  and  encourages  the  attendance  of  His  subjects.  Opportunities  of  waiting 
upon  an  earthly  sovereign  are  rare:  but  God  has  rendered  the  way  to  the  throne 
plain,  and  the  access  easy.  "  Though  the  Lord  be  high,  yet  hath  He  respect  unto 
the  lowly."  (3)  But  as  in  approaching  an  earthly  sovereign  there  is  required  an 
attention  to  the  prescribed  usages  and  decorum  of  a  coiirt,  so,  in  order  to  our 
acceptable  waiting  upon  God,  we  must  observe  the  defined  forms,  and  cultivate 
the  sacred  proprieties  of  His  worship;  those  which  belong  to  "  the  place  where  Hia 
honour  dwelleth."  Much  of  the  benefit  of  worship  is  lost  by  many,  simply  from 
the  absence  of  a  due  preparation  of  the  heart,  or  from  a  thoughtless  neglect  of  the 
decencies  of  God's  house.  These  are  auxiliaries  to  religion,  if  not  a  part  of  it. 
Too  many  professors  overlook  the  obHgation  to  "  worship  the  Lord  in  the  beauty 
of  holiness."  2.  The  words  of  the  text  are  descriptive  of  the  state  and  exercises 
of  the  mind;  of  the  feelings  and  aspirations  of  the  heart  in  Kvine  worship.  They 
imply — (1)  The  spiritual  recognition  of  God.  The  object  of  all  profitable  worship 
is  God,  and  the  end  is  intercourse  with  Him.  The  phrase,  "  wait  upon  God," 
represents  a  devotional  heart.  If  vanity  share  the  sacrifice,  or  irreverence  desecrate 
it,  God  will  turn  away  our  prayers  and  His  mercy  from  us :  our  service  will  be  an 
abomination  imto  Him.  Spiritual  worship  requires  a  strict  and  holy  discipline 
over  the  mind,  constant  vigilance  and  heartfelt  dependence  upon  Divine  grace. 

(2)  Earnest  desire  for  God;  a  keen  sense  of  want.  (3)  Confident  expectation  of 
the  Divine  mercy  and  grace;  reliance  upon  the  Divine  word  and  faithfulness; 
assurance  of  the  acceptance  and  answer  of  prayer  through  Christ.  (4)  Patient 
and  submissive  perseverance.  (6)  There  is  an  intimate  and  important  connection 
between  the  outward  acts  and  the  inward  feelings  in  devotion,   n.  We  are  asstirbd 

OP  THE  benefit  RESULTING  FKOM  THE  DISCHARGE   OF  THIS   DUTY.      "  They  that 

wait  upon  the  Lord  shall  renew  their  strength,"  or  change  their  strength;  its 
measure  shall  be  adapted  to  their  different  claims.  1.  The  Christian's  strength 
may  fail  amid  the  many  trials  and  temptations  of  life,  and  its  revival  become 
necessary.  The  soul  may  lose  its  energy,  its  decision  of  purpose,  its  promptitude 
of  action,  its  confidence  in  God,  and  become  weak,  irresolute,  and  fearful.  2.  Our 
situation  may  demand  additional  strength.  We  may  be  summoned  to  a  post  of 
great  responsibility,  to  the  performance  of  arduous  duty.  3.  Where  are  we  to 
obtain  this  power, — this  reviving  of  strength?  4.  With  pleasure  contemplate 
the  animating  result  of  this  renewal  of  strength.  In  conclusion,  our  text  suggests — 
(1)  Instruction.  We  are  taught  where  we  must  go  in  times  of  trouble.  (2)  Con- 
solation.    Circumstances  may  change;  man  may  change;  but  God  never  changes. 

(3)  Reproof.  To  the  presumptuous — those  who  seek  strength  and  comfort  and 
satisfaction  in  the  creature,  who  forsake  the  living  God.    {E.  E.  ChetUe.)       Waiting 


234  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  xu 

upon  the  Lord : — I.  What  it  is  to  wait  xtpon  the  Loed.  Three  things  make 
it:  service,  expectation,  patience.  We  must  be  as  those  Eastern  maidens,  who 
as  they  ply  their  needle  or  their  distafE,  look  to  the  eye  and  wait  upon  the  hand  of 
their  mistress,  as  their  guide  which  is  to  teach  them,  or  their  model  which  they  are 
to  copy.  Our  best  lessons  are  always  found  in  a  Father's  eye.  Therefore,  if  you 
would  "  wait  upon  the  Lord,"  you  must  be  always  looking  out  for  voices — those 
still  small  voices  of  the  soul, — and  you  must  expect  them,  and  you  must  command 
them.  But  service,  however  devoted,  or  expectation,  however  intense,  will  not 
be  waiting  without  patience.  Here  is  where  so  many  fail.  II.  The  action. 
Elevation,  rapid  progress,  a  steady  course — soar,  run,  waDc  Is  it  not  just  what 
we  want — to  get  higher,  to  go  faster,  and  to  be  more  calmly  consistent?  I.  Eleva- 
tion. What  are  the  tvings?  Beyond  a  doubt,  faith,  prayer;  or,  if  you  will, 
humility  and  confidence  in  a  beautiful  equipoise,  balancing  one  another  on  either 
side,  so  that  the  soul  sustains  itself  in  mid-air  and  flies  upward.  2.  The  servants 
of  God  in  the  Bible — from  Abraham  and  David  to  Philip  in  the  Acts — whenever 
they  were  told  to  do  anything,  always  ran.  It  is  the  only  way  to  do  anything 
well.  A  thousand  irksome  duties  become  easy  and  pleasant  if  we  do  them  with 
a  ready  mind,  an  affectionate  zeal,  and  a  happy  <alacrity.  3.  To  maintain  a  quiet 
sustained  walk,  day  by  day,  in  the  common  things  of  Ufe,  in  the  house  and  out  of 
the  house,  not  impulsive,  not  capricious,  not  changeable, — that  is  the  hardest 
thing  to  do.  Let  me  give  four  rules  for  this  walk:  (1)  Start  from  Christ.  (2)  Walk  . 
with  Christ.  (3)  Walk  leaning  on  Christ.  (4)  Walk  to  Christ.  (J.  Vaughan,  M.A.) 
Communion  with  God: — I.  The  secret,  of  life's  power.  II.  The  support 
OF  life's  journey.  "  They  shall  run,"  &c.  III.  The  basis  of  life's  exalta- 
tion. They  shall  "  mount  up,"  &c.  (J.  T.  Harwood.)  Waiting  upon  the 
Lord : — I.  The  duty  here  recommended.  "  Waiting  upon  the  Lord."  This 
expression  may  include  many  acts  of  the  mind,  but  the  connection  of  the  words 
shows  that  here  it  principally  refers  to  prayer.  Waiting  on  the  Lord  impUes — 
1.  A  sense  of  our  own  weakness,  and  our  need  of  Divine  help.  2.  A  persuasion  of 
the  power  and  goodness  of  God;  His  readiness  to  stretch  out  His  almighty  hand 
to  help  us,  amidst  the  difficulties,  infirmities,  and  temptations  to  which  we  are 
exposed.  3.  That  Divine  help  is  to  be  sought  by  prayer.  4.  If  we  hope  for  His 
interposition,  we  are  to  be  diUgent  in  the  use  of  those  means  which  He  hath 
appointed,  and  to  which  He  hath  promised  His  blessing.  11.  The  encouragement 
GIVEN.  Such  devout,  humble  souls  shall  "  renew  their  strength."  They  shall 
grow  more  steady  and  established  in  religion.  They  shall  find  a  supply  of  Divine 
help  proportioned  to  their  trials.  As  their  work  and  their  difficulty  are  renewed, 
BO  shall  the  vigour  of  their  souls  be  renewed.  How  far  this  strength  shall  operate, 
and  what  noble  -effects  it  shall  produce,  may  be  seen  by  the  following  words. 
m.  Waiting  upon  God  hath  in  itself  a  natural  tendency  to  establish 
AND  strengthen  thb  SOUL.  It  promoteth  that  humility  which  is  our  greatest 
security,  and  restrains  that  pride  which  goeth  before  a  fall.  It  will  also  lead  us 
to  exert  our  best  endeavours,  and  put  forth  aU  our  own  strength,  as  we  would  not 
be  chargeable  with  the  guilt  of  affronting  God  by  asking  His  help  without  them. 
The  nature  of  the  blessed  God  strengthens  this  encouragement.  Therefore  the 
prophet  had  suggested  to  Israel  this  thought,  that  "  the  everlasting  God,  the  Lord, 
the  Creator  of  the  ends  of  the  earth,  fainteth  not,  neither  is  weary."  His  power 
is  vast  and  unbounded,  and  nothing  is  too  hard  for  Him.  His  understanding  is 
infinite;  there  is  no  searching  it.  Therefore  He  can  never  be  puzzled  with  any 
difficulties,  but  must  know  how  in  every  possible  case  to  deliver  the  godly  out  of 
their  temptations.  Consider  also  His  promises  and  His  covenant.  (Job  Orton.) 
The  encouragement  of  true  worshippers  : — Nothing  can  give  a  better  conception 
of  the  strength  and  the  weakness  of  human  nature,  than  by  comparing  what  man 
has  done  in  subduing  the  material  powers  by  which  God  has  surrounded  him,  and 
in  providing  for  his  own  temporal  comfort,  and  liis  utter  helplessness  in  those  tiling^ 
which  relate  to  the  Ufe  of  the  souL  When  he  has  to  contend  with  the  powers  of 
nature,  he  is  strong  and  victorious;  but  when  he  has  to  contend  with  the  powers 
of  spiritual  wickedness,  and  with  his  own  ungodly  desires,  he  is  helpless.  The 
lord  of  nature,  he  is  the  slave  of  sin.  The  helplessness  of  man  in  spiritual  things 
is  a  disease  for  which  no  remedy  has  been  discovered,  and  for  which  no  remedy 
ever  will  be  discovered  but  that  which  the  Word  of  God  points  out.  I.  What  is 
MEANT  BY  WAITING  UPON  THE  LoRD  ?  Waiting  upon  God  is  a  duty  very  frequently 
enforced  in  Scripture,  and  to  which  the  highest  blessings  are  annexed.  "  Because 
of  His  strength,    says  the  Psalmist,  "  I  will  wait  upon  Him,  for  God  is  my  defence." 


CHAP.  XL.]  ISAIAH.  235 

"  Wait  on  the  Lord,  be  of  good  courage,  and  He  shall  strengthen  thine  heart." 
"  Our  soul  waiteth  for  the  Lord;  He  is  our  help  and  shield."  "  Walt  on  the  Lord," 
says  Solomon,  "  and  He  shall  save  thee."  "  Keep  mercy  and  judgment,"  saya 
the  prophet  Hosea,  "  and  wait  on  thy  God  continually."  It  is  an  expression 
peculiar  to  the  Old  Testament;  but  in  the  New  Testament  the  same  duty  is  repeat- 
edly inculcated,  though  in  different  language.  The  precept  is  the  same  in  substance 
with  the  exhortation  of  St.  Paul,  "  Be  ye  followers  of  God,  as  dear  children"; 
or  with  that  of  St.  James,  "  Draw  nigh  to  God,  and  He  will  draw  nigh  to  you." 
The  expression  denotes  a  feeling  of  need,  and  a  sense  of  dependence  upon  the 
Almighty,  without  whom  nothing  is  strong  or  holy.  For  one  to  wait  upon  another 
implies  inferiority,  and  a  desire  of  protection  and  assistance.  In  many  circum- 
stances we  require  the  protection  and  assistance  of  our  feUow-creatures,  but  in  all 
circumstances  we  require  the  protection  and  assistance  of  our  Creator.  He  is 
ever  ready  to  extend  to  us  that  protection  and  help  without  which  we  are  powerless 
and  defenceless.  But  He  requires,  as  the  condition  of  our  receiving  His  grace, 
that  we  sincerely  feel  and  humbly  acknowledge  our  need  of  it;  and  that,  ceasing 
from  our  own  wisdom,  and  confessing  from' the  heart  our  own  weakness,  we  throw 
ourselves  unreservedly  upon  His  wisdom  and  strength.  This  sense  of  entire 
dependence  upon  the  grace  of  God  will  naturally  express  itself  in  prayer,  and  in  a 
devout  and  regular  use  of  the  appointed  means  of  grace.  Not  only  in  the  immediate 
exercises  of  religion,  but  at  all  times  the  Christian  wiU  be  animated  by  a  spirit  of 
devotion.  He  will  keep  himself  constantly  near  to  God.  But  waiting  upon  God 
not  only  implies  worship,  it  also  implies  obedience.  In  short,  to  wait  upon  God 
is  to  be  a  religious  man.  II.  The  nattjee  of  this  great  blessing  which  God 
HAS  ASSXIRED  TO  ALL  THAT  WAIT  UPON  HiM.  In  the  Weary  pilgrimage  which  they 
have  to  finish,  in  the  sore  warfare  in  which  they  are  engaged.  He  will  strengthen 
and  uphold  them.  Not  merely  is  help  found  for  the  weakness  of  believers,  but  a 
provision  is  also  made  for  reUeving  and  substituting  for  it  a  buoyancy  and  joyful 
exaltation  of  spirit,  so  that  he  is  enabled  to  hold  on  his  way  with  gladness  as  well 
as  with  constancy.  The  pious  man  is  compared  in  Scripture  to  the  sun — "  his 
path  is  as  the  shining  hght,  which  shineth  more  and  more  unto  the  perfect  day." 
The  Gospel  is  a  message  of  joy.  {W.  Ramsay.)  Sovl-growth : — Wliat  are  some 
of  the  methods  by  which  men,  in  the  Divine  economy,  advance  in  spiritual  impulse, 
and  rise  permanently  higher?  1.  We  must  not  be  biassed  by  any  theory  of  Chmrch 
or  ordinances,  nor  by  any  preaching,  to  suppose  that  we  are  shut  up  to  the  dealings 
of  God  with  us  through  these  channels.  The  Church  is  a  very  powerful  instrument, 
and  will  be  indispensable  through  ages.  Does  not  the  village  common  school 
work  upon  the  human  soul?  Do  not  books?  Do  not  newspapers?  Do  not  men 
in  all  the  ten  thousand  struggles  of  busiuess?  Do  not  aU  the  influences  which  go 
to  make  up  the  ever-teeming  society?  Is  there  anything  which  God  does  not 
use  in  operating  upon  the  reason,  the  affections,  and  the  moral  sentiments  of  men? 

2.  It  pleases  God  to  make  the  spiritual  development  of  men  depend  on  time-growth. 
We  know  how  it  is  with  children.  We  know  that  they  develop  first  by  the  body. 
Then  come  the  social  affections,  with  the  elementary  forms  of  the  intellect.  Nor 
can  you  force  things  in  a  normal  and  healthy  child.  You  must  take  it  in  the  hour 
of  God's  appointment.  Third  in  the  order  of  time,  and  last,  is  the  spiritual  nature. 
We  rejoice  in  the  earliest  flower  because  it  is  the  earliest,  and  we  rejoice  in  the 
latest  flower  because  it  is  the  latest;  but  do  what  you  wiH,  you  cannot  make  the 
aster  blossom  in  spring.  You  must  wait  until  the  time  for  it  to  blossom  arrives. 
Now,  among  men  the  same  thing  happens.  There  are  those  who  have  a  prematmre 
development  of  spiritual  impulses.  But  because  the  higher  nature  of  some  people 
is  unfolded  early,  are  we  to  make  them  the  criterion  for  other  people?  It  is  better 
not  to  seek  to  produce  ecstatic  experiences  in  anticipation  of  the  normal  methods. 

3.  Then  there  are  many  persons  who  renew  their  strength,  who  develop  into  a 
higher  spiritual  life,  into  more  fervour,  more  joy,  and  more  stability  by  reason  of 
the  removal  of  false  or  imperfect  views  of  truth.  4.  There  are  many  persons  who 
faU  to  come  to  the  light  of  truth,  and  to  the  inspiration  of  the  higher  views  of 
religion,  by  reason  of  worldly  prosperity,  which  tends  to  satisfy  their  lower  nature. 
Under  such  circumstances  it  is  that,  in  the  Divine  ordering  of  things,  what  are 
called  distresses,  inflrmities,  and  even  great  sorrows,  are  blessed  of  God  to  the 
opening  of  their  nature  and  to  the  renewing  of  their  spiritual  strength.  Men 
never  could  see  the  corona  of  the  sun — the  red  flame  that  surrounds  that  orb — 
until  the  sun  was  eclipsed;  and  the  corona,  the  light,  the  glory  of  God  is  seen  when 
men  are  under  eclipse  and  in  darkness.     There  are  revelations  made  to  men  then* 


236  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xl. 

which  prosperity  never  brings  to  them.  We  are  rich  and  strong,  not  by  the  things 
which  we  possess,  but  by  the  amount  of  true  manhood  which  is  developed  in  us. 
5.  It  pleases  God,  also,  to  employ  the  companionship  of  friends  and  neighbours 
in  developing  men  in  the  direction  of  their  higher  manhood.  There  is  nothing 
that  is  so  helpful  to  a  soul  as  the  contact  of  another  soul.  6.  When,  by  the  use  of  . 
these  various  instrumentahties  our  souls  have  grown,  and  have  come  into  the 
possibility  of  a  higher  spiritual  disclosure,  then  there  is  a  further  soul-growth  in 
us.  We  come  to  a  state  in  which  there  is  a  direct  influence  of  the  soul  of  God  exerted 
upon  us — as  direct  as  sight  and  voice  are  to  the  bodily  senses.  The  Divine  Spirit 
comes  into  the  hearts  of  men  in  ways  that  are  inexplicable  to  the  lower  under- 
standing, and  that,  therefore,  men  who  are  on  the  lower  plane  of  life  do  not  com- 
prehend. When  men  come  to  a  higher  Christian  life  they  have  days  of  spiritual 
insight ;  and  those  days  grow  longer  and  longer,  hke  the  days  of  the  coming  summer, 
when  the  sun  goes  down  later  and  later,  and  rises  earlier  and  earher.  As  the 
result  of  a  whole  life  of  education  and  practice  in  Divine  duties  men  may  come, 
at  last,  into  that  state  in  which  the  Spirit  of  God  shines  with  a  steadfast  lustre 
iipon  them.  Then  there  is  the  triumph  of  grace  in  the  soul.  Then  intuitions 
become  truths — not  fitful,  nor  irregular,  not  based  upon  inchoate  and  undigested 
knowledge,  but  constant,  regular,  and  founded  on  sound  judgment.  {H.  Wcfrd 
Beecher. )  The  strength  of  believers,  and  the  renewing  of  it  : — I.  Good  men  akb 
POSSESSED  OF  spnuTiTAL  STRENGTH.  1.  It  is  that  Spiritual  vigour  of  mind  by  which 
sin  is  overcome.  2.  And  by  which  the  world  is  overcome.  3.  By  this  strength, 
spiritual  duties  are  acceptably  performed.  4.  This  strength  is  that  qualification 
of  mind  by  which  the  followers  of  Christ  are  enabled  to  endmre  trials  and  bear  the 
cross.  5.  "  A  deathbed  is  a  detector  of  the  heart."  But  death  does  not  "  make 
cowards  of  us  all."  He  who  said  this,  knew  but  little  of  the  courage  which  the 
grace  of  God  communicates  to  the  minds  of  the  most  timid  of  the  disciples  of 
Jesus.  II.  This  strength  requires  to  be  renewed.  1.  It  is  possible  for  the 
best  of  men  to  lose  much  of  the  influence  of  religion  from  the  heart,  and  for  a  time 
to  be  very  unconscious  of  it.  2.  The  corroding  cares  of  the  world  should  excite  them 
to  obtain  the  renewal  of  their  strength.  3.  Their  strength  requires  to  be  renewed, 
because  it  is  not  innate,  but  communicated.  4.  And  because  the  servants  of  God 
have  gone  awfully  wrong  when  it  has  not  been  renewed.  5.  Good  men  have  done 
wonders  when  their  strength  has  been  renewed.  III.  The  renewal  of  strejjgth 
IS  to  be  obtained  by  waiting  ttpon  the  Lord.  1.  Prayer  is  the  waiting  posture 
of  the  soul.  2.  Waiting  upon  the  Lord  includes  expectation.  "  My  eyes  are  unto 
Thee;  my  expectation  is  from  Thee."  3.  Watchfulness  is  implied  in  waiting  upon 
the  Lord.  IV.  The  blessedness  op  waiting  upon  the  Lord.  "  They  shall 
mount  up  with  wings  as  eagles,"  &c.  This  is  expressive  of — 1.  Steady  attachment 
to  the  ways  of  God.  "  Walk  without  fainting."  2.  Rapid  progress.  "  Run 
without  weariness."  3.  Elevated  devotion.  "  Mount  up  with  wings  as  eagles." 
"  They  shall  put  forth  fresh  feathers  as  the  moulting  eagle."  No  doubt  the  aUusion 
is  to  the  velocity  with  which  the  eagle  soars  towards  the. sun,  after  the  renewal 
of  his  feathers.  (IF.  Jones.)  The  waiting  Christian  strengthened: — I.  The 
DUTY  ENJOINED.  To  wait  upon  God.  This  implies  the  recognition  of  God  as 
the  supreme  Arbiter  and  Disposer  of  aU  human  events.     It  is  the  pasture  of  ex- 

fectancy  for  every  blessing  of  which  we  stand  in  need,  temporal  and  spiritual. 
I.  The  manner  in  which  wb  are  to  wait  upon  God.  1.  The  way  of  public 
ordinances.  2.  The  sacrament  of  the  Lord's  Supper.  3.  The  exercise  of  domestic 
worship  aiid  private  prayer.  4.  Seeking  to  become  wise  unto  salvation  out  of  His 
written  Word,  and  in  meditation  on  its  soul-inspiring  contents.     HI.  The  temper 

AND   frame   of  mind  INVOLVED  IN  THE   EXPRESSION,   WATTINO  UPON  GOD.       I.   It 

implies  the  existence  of  an  invincible  faith,  which  nothing  can  destroy,  although 
for  a  moment  it  may  be  disturbed.  2.  This  calls  into  action  another  principle 
closely  connected  with  faith,  and  emanating  from  it, — the  principle  of  patience 
and  Christian  resignation  to  the  will  of  God.     3.  Obedience.     IV.  The  encoubaob- 

MENT   HERE    BESTOWED    ON   THE   FULFH-MENT   OF   THE    DUTY   REQUIRED, — renewed 

Strength  shall  be  imparted.  This  imphes  a  declension  of  strength,  fainting,  and 
fatigue;  to  all  of  which  the  Christian  pilgrim  is  more  or  less  exposed.  1.  In  conse- 
quence of  the  exhausted  spirits  of  the  weary  traveller  never  being  renewed,  some 
who  did  run  well  are  hindered,  and  halt  in  their  career ;  while  others  adopt  altogether 
a  retrograde  movement,  return  to  the  path  of  their  former  deUghts,  apostatise 
from  the  faith,  and  become  worse  than  infidels.  2.  But  here  we  have  a  direct 
promise  from  a  covenant-keeping  God,  that  our  strength  shall  be  renewed  adequate 


CHAP.  XL.]  ISAIAH.  237 

to  all  the  demands  which  a  perilous  enterprise  can  render  necessary.  3.  We  most 
speak  in  the  language  of  reproof  to  all  those  who  are  strangers  to  this  operation 
in  the  soul;  who  never  do  humbly  wait  upon  God,  but  when  chastised  and  rebuked 
of  the  Lord  are  disposed  to  resist  His  authority,  to  impugn  His  character  as  merciful 
and  gracious;  who  give  utterance  to  all  the  outbreaks  of  a  rebellious,  unsanctified 
heart.  They  are  both  to  be  censured  and  pitied.  4.  But  we  speak  encouragement 
to  those  who  have  already  assumed  the  waiting  position,  and  are  thus  tarrying 
the  Lord's  leisure.  Endeavour  in  every  possible  way  to  cultivate  this  holy,  humble, 
dependent  spirit.  {H.  S.  Plumptre,  M.A.)  Exhaustion  and  renewal,  in  nature 
and  in  grace  : — As  it  is  the  same  God  who  works  in  natiu'e  and  in  grace,  so  a  most 
interesting  analogy  may  be  traced  between  His  operations  in  both.  When  the 
earth  is  parched  with  the  heat  of  summer,  and  its  productions  begin  to  languish 
from  excessive  drought,  it  is  watered  and  refreshed  by  the  showers  of  heaven,  and 
its  various  plants  and  fruits  not  only  resume  their  former  health  and  vigour,  but 
spring  up  and  flourish  with  greater  luxuriance  than  before.  The  flower,  too,  that 
had  drooped  and  withered  at  the  close  of  day,  is  revived  by  the  cool  and  the  dews 
of  night,  and  in  the  morning  puts  forth  its  buds,  and  expands  its  leaves  anew, 
delighting  the  eye  with  the  beauty  of  its  colours,  or  perfuming  the  air  with  the 
sweets  of  its  fragrance.  For  every  degree  of  exhaustion  in  nature,  indeed,  the 
wisest  and  most  adequate  provision  is  made  by  its  all-pervading  and  beneficent 
Author.  When,  in  like  manner,  the  spiritual  strength  of  the  Christian  is  impaired, 
and  he  is  ready  to  sink  under  the  pressure  of  temptation  or  distress;  when  his 
consolations  appear  to  be  nearly  exhausted;  or  when,  through  the  prevalence  of 
remaining  imbelief  and  corruption,  he  becomes  languid  in. duty,  or  faint  under 
affliction — his  decays  of  strength  are  recruited  from  above;  new  fountains  are 
opened  for  his  comfort;  he  rises  as  from  the  groimd,  on  which  he  was  sitting  in 
feebleness  and  sorrow,  and  no  longer  with  faltering,  but  with  firm  and  'Steady 
steps,  pursues  the  course  of  active  duty,  or  of  patient  suffering,  in  which  he  is 
appointed  to  move.  The  stores  of  Divine  grace  provided  for  him  are  inexhaustible, 
and  the  communications  of  this  grace  imparted  to  him  are  most  suitably  pro- 
portioned to  his  need  of  them  (Phil.  iv.  19).  (D.  Dickson,  D.D.)  Waiting  on 
Ood : — 1._  The  chakactee  of  those  cokcerning  whom  the  declabation  oe 
PROMISE  IN  THE  TEXT  IS  MADE,  Considered  as  "  waiting  on  the  Lord."  1.  They 
earnestly  desire  the  enjoyment  of  His  favour.  2.  They  diligently  attend  to,  and 
take  peculiar  delight  in,  all  His  service  and  will.  11.  The  import  of  the  declara- 
tion, that  they  who  thus  wait  on  the  Lord  shall  renew  their  strength;  or,  as  the 
words  might  be  translated,  shall  be  renewed  in  strength.  1.  That  the  principles 
of  the  s'piritual  life  within  them  shall  be  gradually  strengthened  and  increased. 
2.  That  increased  communications  of  Divine  grace  shall  be  made  to  them.    ni.  The 

tNTERESTTNG  EFFECTS  OF  ITS  BEING  SO  RENOVATED  OE  INCREASED.      "  They  shall 

mount  up  with  wings  as  eagles,"  &c.  This  may  intimate — 1.  That  their  devotions 
shall  become  more  elevated  and  intense.  2.  By  that  renovation  and  increase  of 
spiritual  strength  which  is  the  effect  of  waiting  on  the  Lord,  His  people  acquire 
greater  alacrity  and  perseverance  in  doing  His  will.  They  shall  run,  or  march  on, 
and  not  be  weary.  Here  the  metaphor  is  varied,  and  changed  into  one  that  is 
more  common  in  the  sacred  writings,  as  expressive  of  Christian  duty,  which  is 
frequently  compared  to  running  or  marching.  "  I  will  run  in  the  way  of  Thy 
commandments,  when  Thou  shalt  enlarge  my  heart."  3.  Fortitude  and  patience 
under  affliction  is  also  the  effect  of  that  renewing  and  increase  of  spiritual  strength, 
which  is  received  from  waiting  on  the  Lord.  "  They  shall  walk,  and  not  faint." 
Even  when  incapable  of  being  active  in  the  service  of  God,  grace  is  promised  for 
enabling  them  to  move  forward  without  fainting  in  the  path  of  submission  and 
suffering.  (Ibid.)  Strength  iy  patience  : — "  New  strength  "  is  often  our  deepest 
need.  The  machinery  of  the  steamship,  the  locomotive,  or  the  factory  may  he 
perfect  in  itself,  its  parts  exquisitely  adjusted,  and  all  ready  for  action;  yet  it  is 
inoperative  until  the  steam  is  generated  and  applied.  So,  what  a  human  being 
often  needs  is  just — motive  power.  Not  new  faculties  of  body  or  of  mind;  not 
new  opportimities  for  action,  or  new  fields  of  enterprise;  not  so  much  new  know- 
ledge either;  not  even  new  desires  and  affections;  but  "new  strength" — fresh 
inspiration.  It  is  painful  to  be  in  that  condition  in  which  we  feel  that  we  can, 
and  yet  cannot;  that  we  have  faculty,  yet  lack  inspiration;  that  we  have  wings 
of  heavenward  desire,  with  but  little  power  to  use  them.  The  prophet  here  points 
ns  to  the  source  of  all  true  inspiration :  "  He  giveth  power  to  the  faint."  He  points 
us  also  to  the  condition  on  which  this  Divine  energy  is  to  be  recovered:      They 


238  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  xu 

that  wait  upon  the  Lord  shall  renew  their  strength."  1.  What,  then,  is  meant  by 
this  "waiting  upon  the  Lord"?  We  use  the  word  "wait"  with  reference  to 
service:  a  servant  "waits"  upon  his  master  or  his  master's  guests.  We  use  it, 
too,  with  reference  to  the  holding  of  an  interview  with  a  superior :  a  deputation 
"  waits "  upon  the  Prime  Minister;  the  Prime  Minister  '  waits "  upon  BUs 
Majesty.  We  use  the  word  also  with  reference  to  a  state  of  expectation,  more  or 
less  prolonged :  as  when  we  say  that  we  are  "  waiting  "  for  some  friend.  It  is 
in  this  last  sense— the  sense  of  continuous  expectancy — that  the  word  is  used  in 
the  Bible.  To  "  wait  "  is  more  than  to  pray.  It  is  to  keep  looking  for  the  answer 
to  oiu:  prayers.  It  is  the  opposite,  therefore,  both  of  despair  and  of  impatience. 
Hence  the  Psalmist  says,  "  Rest  in  the  Lord,  and  wait  patiently  for  Him."  And 
again,  "  I  wait  for  the  Lord,  my  soul  doth  wait,  and  in  His  word  do  I  hope,"  &c. 
So  here  the  prophet  does  not  mean  to  say  that  iif  we  would  "  renew  our  strength,'* 
we  have  simply  to  seek  an  interview  with  God  and  lay  our  request  before  Him; 
but  that  if  we  keep  looking  to  God  with  a  believing  and  patient  expectation,  new 
vigour  will  come  to  us,  our  very  patience  wiU  be  a  source  of  strength,  and  the  God 
in  whom  we  hope  wiU  not  disappoint  us.  2.  "  Waiting  "  is  often  the  only  means  of 
receiving  fresh  energy.  "  Man  goeth  forth  to  his  work  and  to  his  labour  uptil 
the  evening."  But  when  the  evening  comes,  he  is  exhausted.  AH  the  organs 
are  there,  but  they  want  new  strength.  The  man  hes  down  on  his  bed,  and  "  waits." 
Sleep  comes  upon  him;  and  through  its  influence  the  waiting  body  recovers  all 
its  vigour,  so  that  the  man  rises  again  in  the  morning  ready  for  his  toil.  Often, 
too,  the  very  best  prescription  which  a  physician  can  give  is,  "  Rest  and  cheerful 
society."  Wait, — wait  with  the  confident  and  cheerful  hope  that  you  Will  by  and 
by  be  stronger;  and  even  whilst  you  are  thus  waiting  the  new  strength  will  come. 
And  that  fresh  life  which  stirs  at  the  roots  of  trees  and  plants  in  the  opening  spring, 
time, — does  not  even  that  follow  a  period  of  waiting?  The  prophet  woxild  here 
encourage  his  countrymen  to  look  for  a  similar  "  renewal "  of  their  national  life. 
A  godly  patience,  then,  is  the  grand  secret  of  spiritual  might.  For  such  patience 
not  only  carries  within  itself  the  germs  of  strength,  but  also  places  the  soul  in  that 
condition  in  which  it  is  most  susceptible  of  quickening  influences  and  can  most 
readily  take  advantage  of  fresh  opportunities.  Power  is  hidden  in  patience,  as 
the  subtle  force  of  the  lightning  slumbers  in  the  brooding  cloud.  Despair  paralyses. 
Impatience,  too,  weakens.  Magnetise  a  needle,  and  it  becomes  much  more 
sensitive  to  the  force  of  the  magnet.  And  so  a  human  heart  which  is  constantly 
looking  to  God  will  be  much  more  susceptible  of  all  influences  that  come  from 
God.  The  soil  is  ready  for  the  vitalising  shower.  The  sails  are  unfurled  to 
catch  the  heavenly  breeze.  The  ear  is  listening  for  the  whispers  of  the  Divine 
voice.  Whereas  the  man  who  has  worn  himself  out  by  impatience,  or  yielded 
himself  up  to  despair,  is  too  inert  or  too  distracted  to  take  adequate  advantage  of 
the  fresh  opportunities  which  may  come  at  last.  On  the  other  hand,  the  blended 
eagerness  and  calm  of  the  soul  that  is  "  waiting  upon  the  Lord  "  make  it  the  more 
receptive  of  all  Divine  influences,  and  keep  it  at  least  strong  enough  to  take 
advantage  of  fresh  sources  of  strength.  (1)  The  calm  of  a  beheving  soul  may  be 
heightened  into  a  kind  of  ecstasy.  Patience  has  sometimes  a  dull,  torpid,  chryslaUs 
aspect;  but,  when  the  time  is  ripe,  patience  passes  into  a  winged  rapture  which 
rises  gladly  into  the  sunshine  of  heaven.  In  all  godly  "  waiting  "  there  lies  the 
capability  of  Godwajd  soaring.  A  patient  spirit  has  the  wings  of  faith  and  hope. 
"  For  I  am  persuaded  that  neither  death  nor  life,"  &c.  There  is  the  eagle  again — 
keen-eyed  and  strong  as  before,  but  soaring  now  into  the  blue,  bearing  itself  up 
on  exultant  wing,  and  gazing  into  the  heavenly  radiance !  Exuberance  of  holy 
feeling  is  not  a  thing  to  be  manufactured.  These  loftier  moods  have  sometimes 
come  even  when  you  least  expected  them !  Although  we  cannot  always  account 
for  these  moods  of  the  soul,  we  might  all  experience  them  more  frequently  if  our 
habitual  attitude  were  more  of  a  "  waiting  upon  God."  We  cannot,  indeed, 
manufacture  inspiration;  but  what  if  the  "breath  of  God  "  comes  upon  us  and 
finds  our  souls  too  dull  or  too  distracted  to  respond  to  its  subtle  influences?  At 
the  best,  however,  these  lofty  flights  can  only  be  occasional.  (2)  There  are  races  to 
be  run  down  here  upon  the  earth,  special  duties  to  be  performed,  for  which  a  man 
must  gird  himself  by  special  effort.  Fatigue  will  oppress  us  long  before  the  goal 
is  reached, — our  running  in  the  path  of  duty  will  be  a  thing  of  fits  and  starts, — 
if  we  do  not  keep  expecting  that  God  will  bless  our  endeavours.  New  strength 
will  come  to  us  for  all  holy  enterprise  in  proportion  as  we  trust  in  God  for  results. 
Be  sure  that,  in  "  waiting  on  "  Him  to  do  what  we  cannot, we  receive  all  the  more 


CHAP,  xt.]  ISAIAH.  239 

energy  to  do  what  we  can.  (3)  There  is  also  "  walking  "  to  be  done  here  on  earth, 
the  ordinary  routine  of  life  to  be  trudged  through  every  day.  And  perhaps  it 
is  in  this  region  that  a  godly  patience  is  needed  most  for  the  constant  renewal  of 
our  spiritual  strength.  There  is  little  or  no  effort  in  holy  ecstasy,  and  its  very 
joy  is  an  inspiration.  Any  special  duty,  also,  tends,  by  its  very  specialty,  to  brace 
us  for  the  doing  of  it;  there  is,  moreover,  the  goal  in  view,  and  the  prize  to  be  won. 
But  the  ordinary  homely  duty  of  the  work-day  world — the  monotonous  path 
which  must  be  daily  trod,  this  indeed  requires  the  most  aliding  patience.  Men 
who  live  far  from  God  are  apt  to  grow  sick  and  weary  of  the  humdrum  monotony 
of  their  daily  life,  especially  if  they  have  to  bear  some  continuous  burden  from 
which  they  see  little  hope  of  escape.  Even  the  drudgery  of  life  can  be  transfigured 
in  the  light  of  the  Father's  love.  And  those  who  believe  that  their  ordinary  life 
has  a  Divine  significance — that  it  is  as  the  rough  scaffolding  within  which  a  very 
temple  may  be  built — and  who  are  striving  to  live  daily  as  under  the  eye  of  the 
heavenly  PViend,  have  within  their  souls  a  peace  which  keeps  them  from  "  fainting." 
(T.  C.  Finlayson.)  The  renewal  of  strength  : — I.  The  means  op  eeneweng  oub 
STRENGTH,  as  expressed  in  the  phrase,  "  they  that  wait  on  the  Lord."  1.  There 
must  be  approach  to  God.  2.  Expectation.  3.  A  patient  continuance  in  an 
expecting  attitude,  until  we  actually  receive  the  fulfilment  of  the  Divine  promise. 
Tins  phrase  is  descriptive,  not  merely  of  an  occasional  exercise,  but  of  what  is, 
or  ought  at  least  to  be,  the  constant  temper  and  frame  of  the  believer's  mind. 
n.  To  those  who  live  in  this  spirit  is  given  an  exceeding  great  and  peeciotts 
PBOMiSE.  They  "  shall  renew  their  strength."  Our  spiritual  strength  seems  to 
include  chiefly  three  things — 1.  Gear  and  comprehensive  views  of  the  truth  of 
God.  We  often  say  that  "  knowledge  is  power " :  certainly,  ignorance  of  the 
truth  of  God  is  weakness.  2.  A  correspondence  between  our  will  and  affections 
and  the  truth  existing  in  our  minds.  3.  Divine  consolation.  "  The  joy  of  the 
Lord  is  your  strength."  m.  The  happy  resuxt  of  this  renewal  of  strength. 
(J.  Entwisle.)  The  blessedness  of  Divine  service  : — There  are  three  blessings 
suggested  as  consequent  upon  this  waiting — I.  Renewed  viaouE.  "  They  shall 
renew  their  strength."  This  is  not  arbitrary,  but  necessary.  1.  The  intellect 
is  strengthened  by  holy  exercises  upon  Divine  themes.  2.  The  affections  are 
strengthened  by  holy  exercises  on  right  objects.  3.  The  will  is  strengthened  by 
holy  exercises  in  godly  purposes.  The  whole  soul  gets  strength  by  such  exercise. 
n.  Soul  elevation.  Mount  up  with  wings  as  eagles."  1.  Holy  gratitude  is 
a  wing  that  wiU  bear  the  soul  aloft  to  its  Benefactor.  2.  Holy  love  is  a  wing  that 
will  bear  the  soul  upward  to  its  object.  3.  Holy  hope  is  a  wing  that  will  bear  the 
Boul  above  to  its  anticipated  possessions.  III.  Interesting  progress.  '*  Bun, 
and  not  be  weary,"  &c.  1.  Godliness  is  progress.  It  is  not  a  stationary  state. 
It  is  a  running  and  a  walking.  "  Forgetting  the  things  that  are  behind,"  &c. 
2.  Godliness  is  progress  without  fatigue.  There  is  no  weariness  in  love.  (D. 
Thomas,  D.D.)  The  highest  strength  derived  from  the  highest  service  : — I.  Thb 
highest  strength  is  derived  from  the  highest  service.  1.  The  highest 
strength  is  not  physical  nor  intellectual,  but  moral.  Strength  to  resist  the  wrong, 
to  pursue  the  right,  to  honour  God  and  bless  humanity.  2.  What  is  the  highest 
service  ?  Waiting  upon  the  Lord.  To  wait  upon  Him  implies  a  practical  recogni- 
tion of  His  existence,  personal  superintendence,  and  absolute  authority.  This 
service  must  be — (1)  Spiritual.  (2)  Supreme,  n.  The  highest  strength  is 
DEVELOPED  IN  THE  HIGHEST  ACTIVITY.  What  IS  this  activity?  L  Soul  devotion. 
2.  Soul  progress.  (Ibid.)  Waiting  on  God: — The  Lord's  people  must  wait — 
1.  In  simplicity  of  intention.  On  Him'  only  (Psa.  Ixii.  5).  2.  In  faith.  They 
"  wait  for  the  Lord,  and  in  His  word  do  they  hope  "  (Psa.  cxxx.  5).  Even  when  He 
hides  His  face  (Isa.  viii.  17).     Their  faith  at  one  time  is  supported  only  by  the 

fromises,. — at  other  times  by  their  own  experience  (Psa.  xxvii.  14;  Lam.  iii.  25,  26; 
sa,  XXX.  18,  xlix.  23).  3.  They  wait  with  patient  perseverance.  It  is  not  only  an 
act,  but  a  gracious  habit  of  mind  (Psa.  xxv.  5).  4.  They  wait  with  humility  and 
self-denial.  They  wait  on  God,  asking  counsel,  seeking  strength,  and  imploring 
pardon  and  peace.  This  posture  of  mind  becomes  the  ignorance  and  guilt  and 
unworthiness  of  the  creature;  the  perfection,  the  wisdom  and  love  of  such  a  Being. 
6.  They  wait  with  submission  and  resignation.  They  wait  His  time,  acquiesce 
in  His  methods.  (J.  Cooke. )  Waiting  upon  the  Lord  : — These  consolations  are 
suited  to  men  in  all  ages,  and  in  all  countries.  We  are  precisely  in  the  same  position 
in  which  the  Jews  were  found — we  are  equally  apt  to  faint  when  under  God's 
rod;    and  He  seeks  to  inspire  us  with  hope  and  confidence.     L  Let  us  notico 


240  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  xi* 

THIS  WAITING  tTPON  THE  LoBD.  And  the  first  thing  that  strikes  us  is  the  language 
used  by  the  prophet — language  so  far  removed  from  mere  formal  expression. 
There  is  no  mention  here  of  the  use  of  many  words,  or  of  certain  external  marks 
of  devotion;  it  is  simply,  "  Waiting  upon  the  Lord!  '*  Evidently  the  prophet 
uses  it  as  representing  an  act  of  devotion,  looking  to  God  for  help  in  the  time  of 
need.  True  waiting  upon  the  Lord  seems  to  have  three  features,  which  we  suppose 
to  be  contained  in  the  words  here  used.  1.  Desire.  2.  A  collected  frame  of  mind. 
3.  Trust  in  the  Lord.  II.  "  They  that  wait  upon  the  Lord  shall  renew  theib 
STRENGTH."  We  are  altogether  dependent  upon  God  for  our  natural,  as  well  as 
for  our  spiritual  strength.  God  seems  to  observe  in  spiritual  things  a  similar  order 
to  that  which  exists  in  natural  things.  Our  natural  strength  requires  constant 
renovation  by  the  food  that  is  convenient  for  us.  So  it  is  in  the  spiritual  life: 
we  can  make  no  provision  of  grace  for  the  future;  we  are  called  to  depend  upon 
God  day  by  day.  There  are  various  reasons  why  we  should  constantly  apply  to 
God  for  a  renewal  of  our  spiritual  strength.  There  are  conflicts  to  be  endured 
with  our  spiritual  foes,  within  our  own  hearts;  we  live  in  a  world  that  is  lying 
in  wickedness;  we  have  to  do  with  matters  concerning  the  present  life  that  are 
often  very  trying  and  perplexing  in  their  natiu-e,  and  often  is  oiu:  courage  likely 
to  fail.  In  an  indirect  manner,  then,  this  encouraging  passage  of  Scripture  reminds 
us  of  the  cause  of  our  spiritual  declensions.  It  is  because  we  do  not  constantly 
wait  upon  the  Lord.  {J.  Hocart.)  Waiting  upon  the  Lord  : — I.  The  general 
PROPOSITION.  *'  They  that  wait  upon  the  Lord  shall  renew  their  strength." 
II.  The  demonstration  ob  confirmation  of  this.  "  They  shall  mount  up," 
&c.  {T.  Horton,  D.D.)  Waiting  in  patience  : — Profane  and  desperate  persons 
fly  off  in  a  discontent  and  impatience,  like  Jehoram  (2  Kings  vi.  33).  The  more 
willing  we  are  to  wait  upon  God  the  better  it  is  for  us;  for  He  pays  for  time  and 
gives  us  the  more  because  we  have  waited.  {Ihid. )  Strength  for  strength  : — 
Change  their  strength  "  (marg.).  This  seems  to  be  the  proper  sense  and  meaning. 
There  is  a  double  kind  of  change  to  be  observed.  1.  In  quality.  They  shall  have 
a  new  kind  of  strength  bestowed  upon  them,  over  what  they  had  before  conversion, 
as  Caleb  had  another  spirit,  and  Saul  another  heart.  For  even  before  conversion 
there  is  a  kind  of  strength  which  does  appear,  and  that  also  in  reference  to  religion, 
and  the  duties  of  it,  but  it  is  not  such  a  strength  as  any  are  to  rest  themselves 
contented  with.  There  is  the  strength  of  temper,  and  natural  constitution,  and 
a  man  may  be  able  both  to  do  and  suffer  very  much  by  it.  This  is  that  which  does 
for  the  most  part  extend  itself  to  the  outside  and  form  of  religion.  The  strength 
of  wit,  and  reason,  and  imderstanding,  and  memory,  and  the  like,  while  their 
heart  and  will  and  affections  have  no  saving  work  at  all  upon  them.  There  is 
the  strength  of  custom,  and  religious  education.  There  is  the  strength  of  civility 
and  moral  principles.  This  was  the  strength  which  was  in  Paul  before  his  conver- 
sion. They  that  wait  upon  the  Lord  shall  change,"  that  is,  they  shall  have  another 
strength  bestowed  upon  them,  and  such  as  will  be  more  useful  to  them.  Instead 
of  this  natural,  and  moral,  and  customary  strength,  they  shall  have  a  supernatural 
and  spiritual  given  unto  them.  This  is  different,  and  surpassing  the  other.  (1)  In 
regard  of  its  Original,  as  coming  from  the  Holy  Ghost  (Eph.  iii.  16).  (2)  In  the 
subject,  for  the  former  strength  is  only  in  the  outward,  this  in  the  inward  man. 
(3)  In  the  effects,  for  this  supernatiiral  strength  is  able  to  do  greater  matters  than 
the  other  can  do,  helping  a  man  to  deny  himself,  to  overcome  the  world,  to  mortify 
lusts  and  corruptions,  &c.  2.  In  quantity  and  degree.  Good  Christians  shall 
through  God's  grace  grow  stronger  and  stronger.  (1)  There  are  some  cases  and 
conditions,  especially  wherein  a  Christian  has  most  need  of  having  his  strength 
renewed  unto  him;  as,  against  a  new  service;  against  some  new  temptation  and 
conflict  with  Satan;  against  some  new  trial  and  affliction.  (2)  For  the  means, 
we  may  take  them  thus:  In  the  renewing  of  their  repentance;  in  the  renewing  of 
their  covenant;  in  the  renewing  of  their  obedience;  in  the  renewing  of  their  faith. 
{Ibid.)  The  strength  of  a  Christian  is  amplified  by  a  resemblance  to  a  threefold 
motion.  1.  Flying.  (1)  The  eagle  is  an  emblem  of  strength  renewed  (Psa.  ciii.  6). 
(2)  The  eagle  soars  aloft.  (3)  Here  is  the  swiftness  and  agility  of  the  motion. 
A  good  Christian  performs  good  duties  with  some  life  and  fervour  in  them. 
2.  Running.  (1)  The  motion  itself.  This  is  a  pace  which  is  very  requisite  for  the 
Christian,  (a)  Because  he  has  a  great  way  to  go,  much  ground  to  be  despatched; 
therefore  there  is  need  of  speed  for  the  passing  over  it.  (b)  But  a  little  time,  and 
much  time  lost  already,  (c)  The  vehemency  of  desire  to  the  thing  itself  which  we 
run  for.     It  is  a  crown  ( 1  Cor.  ix.  25).     (2)  The  continuance  of  this  motion.     There 


CHAP.  XL.J  ISAIAH.  241 

are  many  who  run,  but  run  themselves  out  of  breath  (Gal.  v.  7).     There  are  some 
kinds  of  people  in  the  world  who  all  on  a  sudden  will  amend  their  lives.     But  let 
them  meet  with  some  strong  temptation  and  they  are  presently  weary  of  those 
purposes  and  endeavours.     What  is  the  reason  of  all  this  ?     Because  they  wanted 
this  principle  of  spiritual  strength.     3.  Walking.     Walking  is  less  than  running,  and 
fainting  is  more  than  weariness.     If  then  those  who  run  are  not  weary,  the  same 
when  they  walk  shall  not  faint.     There  are  divers  things  which  we  are  liable  to 
faint  at,  which  yet  the  Scripture  takes  us  off  from  fainting  at.     (1)  The  delay 
of  answering  our  prayers  (Luke  xviii.  1).     (2)  Our  manifold  afflictions  (Heb.  xii.  5). 
(3)  The  afflictions  of  others,  and  the  scandal  of  the  Cross  (Eph.  iii.  13).     (4)  The 
many  businesses  in  religion — so  much  work  to  be  performed.     How  shall  we  avoid 
it?     Get  a  renewing  of  this  spiritual  strength  day  by  day.     {Ibid.)         Renewing 
strength  : — This  it  nearly  concerns  us  to  do  upon  these  considerations.     1.  In  point 
of  honour,  and  that  especially  with  God  Himself.     Spiritual  weakness  is  a  dis- 
paragement, especially  as  a  relapse,  and  after  some  former  degrees  of  strength. 
The  excellency  of  dignity  and  the  excellency  of  strength  go  both  together,  and  he 
that  falls  from  the  one  does,  with  Reuben,  faU  also  from  the  other.     Becoming  weak 
as  water,  he  shall  not  excel  (Gen.  xlix.  4).     2.  In  point  of  ease.     A  weak  Christian 
is  a  burden  to  himself  as  meeting  with  many  difficulties  which  he  cannot  grapple 
with,  but  which  prove  too  hard  to  him.     There  are  many  temptations  to  resist, 
and  many  afflictions  to  endure,  and  many  duties  to  perform.     3.  In  point  of  comfort. 
A  weak  Christian  will  be  an  uncomfortable  Christian.     (Ibid.)         Waiting  upon 
the  Lord : — I.  "  They  that  wait  upon  the  Lord  shall  renew  their  strength." 
L  This  sounds  as  if  they  were  in  danger  of  becoming  weary  and  faint  in  their 
minds.    Is  this  really  so  ?    What  do  you  say,  Christian  tradesman — you  upon  whom 
God  hath  laid  the  responsibilities  of  home  and  family — you  Christian  citizen — 
you  whom  the  arrows  of  affliction  have  wounded — you  proclaimer  of  the  Lord's 
message  ?     2.  The  least  that  it  can  mean  is  they  shall  stand  their  ground.     3.  But 
the  margin  speaks  of  this  renewal  as  a  change  of  strength,  as  if  it  would  remind 
us  of  the  manysidedness  of  the  grace  of  God,  and  its  perfect  adaptability  to  our 
everchanging  needs.    II.  "  They  shall  mount  up  with  wings  as  eagles."     This 
seems  to  say  that  the  life  of  communion  with  God  is  not  a  long  series  of  vapid 
and  unemotional  hours,  a  dead  level  of  mechanical  and  spiritless  employments, 
but  a  life  that  has  rare  and   glorious  experiences,  holy  aspirations,  ennobling 
thoughts,  ecstatic  emotions,  spirit-stirring  hopes.    1.  Purer  air.     2.  Clearer  vision. 
3.  Untroubled  quiet.     4.  Rare  landscape.     5.  Unclouded  simshine.     III.  "  Thby 
shall  run  and  not  be  weary."     Capacity  for  the  most  strenuous  exertion. 
IV.  "  They  shall  walk  and  not  faint."    Is  this  the  same  as  saying  that  we 
shall  have  the  power  of  steady  perseverance,  of  patient  endurance  under  protracted 
trial  ?     Did  the  prophet  put  this  last  in  his  brief  summary  becaiase  patience  is  one 
of  those  Christian  graces  that  has  its  perfect  work  the  latest?     (J.  H.  Anderson.) 
The  strong  in  danger  of  exhaustion ; — It  is  a  great  mistake  to  suppose  that  only 
the  puny  are  hable  to  downfalls.     The  truth  Mes  the  other  way!     The  more  alert 
and  bold  a  youth  wiU  be,  the  more  certainly  he  will  at  some  time  overtask  his 
strength.     The  boy  who  never  knew  what  it  was  to  be  fagsjed  out  at  school  is  not 
worth  much.     The  young  man  who  never  overdid  himself  and  felt  utterly  exhausted 
through  some  strenuous  exertion  in  a  great  contest  will  never  do  much  in  the  world 
— he  is  not  worth  much.     Not  the  tame,  slow  idlers,  but  the  forceful  men,  the 
men  who  rejoice  in  their  strength  and  to  use  their  strength,  the  men  who  would 
rather  drop  than  give  in  while  another  yard  can  be  run,  or  another  step  be  made, 
or  another  blow  be  struck  for  victory — these  are  the  men  who  will  assiuredly  be 
carried  on  in  the  great  enterprise  until  they  are  weary,  and  when  weary  will  be 
carried  on  by  their  indomitable  spirit,  while  others  are  seeking  rest,  until  at  last, 
they  reel  and  stagger  and  collapse.     Hence  it  is  for  these  that  the  prophet  chiefly 
writes.     For  the  old,  for  the  young,  for  the  sick  and  infirm,  and  even  for  such  as 
may  be  tottering  into  the  grave,  he  writes  for  them,  and  all  he  says  is  true  and 
needful  for  their  case.     But  more  than  all,  in  view  of  the  great  work  to  which  he 
is  caUing  his  countrymen,  he  writes  for  those  who  feel  called  upon  to  do  something 
in  the  world,  for  those  who  are  conscious  of  high  powers,  and  are  in  the  purest 
sense  of  the  word  ambitious.     {T.  V.  Tymms.)         Waiting  upon  Ood  : — I.  What 
IS  THIS  waiting?     1.  It  means  prayer — much  more  than  an  occasional  supphcation, 
however  real;    it  means  persistent,  persevering,  continual  prayer;    it  means  an 
abiding  attitude  of  trustful  dependence  upon  God;   it  means  all  that  is  wrapped 
up  in  those  beautiful  words,  "  Oh,  rest  in  the  Lord,  and  wait  patiently  for  Him"; 
VOL.  II. — 1 6 


243  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xl. 

it  means  trust  in  the  Lord  and  do  good;  it  means  trust  in  the  Lord  at  all  times, 
for  with  Him  is  everlasting  strength,  and  have  no  confidence  in  self.  2.  But  the 
prophet  has  a  deeper  thought  than  this.  There  are  many  things  for  which  we  can 
only  ask  and  then  wait  in  quiet  stillness,  things  which  we  cannot  help  God  to  give 
UB,  things  which  God  Himself  bestows  without  our  aid,  if  we  are  ever  to  possess 
them.  Renewal  often  comes  to  men  in  their  extremity  like  this.  3.  But  while 
we  cannot  pass  over  such  times  and  such  experiences,  it  would  be  unhealthy  to 
be  dwelling  upon  them  as  if  they  were  the  whole  of  life.  They  are  not.  We  are 
not  always  faint.  Usually  we  nave,  at  any  rate,  just  a  little  strength,  and  then 
waiting  upon  Him  means  not  only  prayer  and  uplooMng,  but  doing  His  command- 
ments like  the  angels,  who  because  they  do  them  excel  in  strength.  11.  What 
IS  THE  ISSUE  OF  STJOH  WAITING  UPON  GoD?  The  prophet's  imagery  is  startling, 
and  some  critics  would  presume  to  call  his  figures  somewhat  mixed;  but  the  thought 
conveyed  is  clear.  The  older  Jewish  commentators  imagined  they  discovered 
here  a  reference  to  an  ancient  belief  that  at  a  certain  time  the  eagle  plunged  into 
the  sea  and  bathed  off  his  worn-out  plumage,  and  that  afterwards  new  feathers 
grew.  The  Septuagint  translators  of  the  Old  Testament  were  so  sure  of  this  bit 
of  false  science  that  in  order  to  square  their  Hebrew  Scriptures  with  the  fashion 
of  thought  in  Alexandria,  they  ventured  to  alter  the  words  of  our  text,  and  to 
read,  "  They  shall  put  forth  new  feathers  like  eagles,"  and  so  the  old  Greek 
version  reads  to-day.  But  we  have  good  reason  to  beheve  that  the  prophet  drelv 
his  imagery  from  familiar  objects  in  the  land  of  exile.  There  could  be  Uttle  doubt 
but  that  from  childhood  he  had  often  looked  upon  some  of  those  carved  tablets 
on  which  men  with  wings  of  eagles  fastened  to  their  shoulders  were  common, 
that  he  had  often  looked  on  those  colossal  images  of  winged  bulls  and  lions  and 
men  such  as  may  be  seen  in  our  British  Museum  to-day.  Now  those  composite 
figures  had  subtle  meanings.  They  could  not  suggest  to  the  prophet  his  reUgioua 
thought,  but  his  inspired  genius  laid  them  under  tribute  to  assist  the  utterance 
of  a  thought  of  higher  inspiration.  At  any  rate  he  found  in  the  matchless  wing- 
power  of  the  eagle  a  sublime  image  of  an  inspiring  and  God-seeking  man.  The 
figure  of  one  flying  through  the  heavens,  coupled  strangely  with  the  promise  of 
running  without  being  wearied,  represents  the  godly  man  as  ever  having  courage 
to  entertain  great  hopes.  Never  failing  to  seek  and  obtain  fellowship  with  God 
in  the  highest,  always  daring  to  attempt  great  actions,  this  heavenly  minded 
man  has  thoughts  and  yearnings  which  raise  his  mode  of  life  above  the  level  of 
common  things.  This  man,  however,  has  this  double  life.  There  is  the  soaring 
Godward,  and  there  is  the  common  drudgery  of  daily  walk  and  conversation,  the 
practical  common  life.  {Ibid. )  Renewal  of  strength  : — ^As  we  look  back  on 
history  we  can  see  positive  evidence  that  the  promise  of  this  text  was  historically 
fulfilled,  and  in  the  cases  of  the  men  to  whom  the  message  came  first.  The  national 
life  was  restored,  and  that  restoration  of  national  Ufe  in  the  Jews  is  unique  in  the 
history  of  mankind;  you  cannot  point  to  anything  like  it  since  man  walked  this 
earth,  but  it  took  place.  It  seemed  impossible  that  these  few  exiles  could  escape 
from  those  nations,  and  go  back  to  their  own  land  and  restore  their  institutions, 
but  they  did.  And  who  did  it?  The  men  who  were  making  themselves  rich  in 
those  days  in  Eastern  cities  stayed  there.  The  men  who  led  the  remnant  back 
were  God-fearing  men  like  Ezra  and  Zerubbabel,  men  who  waited  on  God.  The 
wall  of  Jerusalem,  of  the  second  temple,  would  never  have  been  built  but  for  men 
like  Nehemiah  and  Haggai,  men  who  had  their  times  of  fear  and  depression  and 
weakness,  but  who  went  to  God  and  came  back  not  only  strengthened  tliemselves, 
but  able  to  strengthen  their  brethren,  so  that  the  great  work  was  done.  So  to-day 
in  every  Christian  Church,  in  every  Christian  enterprise,  in  every  modem  tight 
for  righteousness  and  truth,  there  are  some  men  who  never  know  when  they  are 
defeated ;  there  are  some  men  who,  because  of  this,  are  invulnerable  men ;  and  the 
men  who,  when  cast  down  always  say  there  is  Ufting  up,  the  men  who  can  live  and 
die  for  Divine  ideas,  the  men  who  to-day  are  converting  savage  races  into  Christian 
peoples  and  working  out  in  painful  and  prosaic  details,  and  with  much  danger  to 
their  fives  in  some  cases,  the  glowing  dreams  of  ancient  seers  respecting  the  trans- 
formation of  mankind,  these  are  they  who  wait  in  secret  on  their  God.  (Ibid.) 
Exhaustion  and  recovery  : — 1.  If  anything  were  needed  to  teach  men  the  necessity 
for  connecting  their  own  spirits  with  the  Divine,  it  is  the  quick  exhaustion  of 
individual  resources.  Even  "  as  the  stream  of  brooks  they  pass  away."  Faith 
and  hope  and  love  itself,  so  dewy  fresh  in  the  morning,  spend  themselves  in  noon- 
day's scorching  heat,  and  run  low  at  eventide.     Sometimes,  indeed,  long  before 


CHAP.  XL.]  ISAIAH.  243 

the  shadows  are  stretched  out,  in  manhood's  very  prime  the  wasting  is  manifest. 
I  can  strive  no  more,  says  the  tired  heart.  Who  does  not  know  the  temptatioiu 
of  reaction,  and  the  days  when  the  Hghts  bum  low?  2.  In  such  moods  we  need  to 
look  away  from  the  crowds,  and  from  the  glaring  lights  of  the  city,  to  the  calm 
glories  of  the  moon,  and  the  stars  above  our  heads.  All  these  evils,  so  fuD  of 
fierce  and  destructive  energies,  will  soon  be  as  the  dust  beneath  our  feet.  Truth 
and  hbliness  and  right  abide  for  ever.  To  "  look  off  "  unto  the  eternal,  to  get 
behind  the  veil  into  the  realm  of  true  being  is  the  need  of  the  fevered  and  exhausted 
Boul.  Hidden  in  that  secret  pavilion  we  see  things  as  they  really  are.  Wrong 
may  prosper  for  a  time.  Greed,  unrighteousness,  sensuality,  may  appear  to  be 
more  stable  than  granite.  But  they  are  only  painted  cloud.  We  see  the  years 
move  on,  and  the  everlasting  truth  subdue  all  to  itself.  Maybe  in  revj^utions 
and  bloodshed,  for  the  wheels  of  God  grind  inexorably  and  smaU.  But  at  the 
last,  evil  is  found  to  be  in  its  nature  only  decay.  "  Then  shall  the  righteous  shine 
forth  as  the  sim  in  the  kingdom  of  their  Father."  Such  a  vision  restores  the  heart 
of  faith.  To  think  that  we  are  labouring  in  vain  is  the  thought  that  paralyses. 
But  whatever  is  done  for  right  is  done  for  God  and  endures  eternally.  3.  But 
there  are  other  thoughts  that  come  to  us  in  the  quietude  of  the  Divine  fellowship. 
We  are  shown  the  infinite  powers  that  lie  concealed  in  the  heart  of  a  solitary  man 
of  faith.  Faith  is  Uke  a  spark.  Though  it  seems  tioy,  it  is  real  fire,  and  it  can 
set  the  world  ablaze.  Faith  can  work  miracles.  Our  Lord  trusted  to  faith  to 
subdue  humanity.  It  has  already  conquered  half  the  world,  and  controls  the 
whole.  Luther  changed  the  course  of  the  centuries  by  faith.  Wesley  fashioned 
modem  England  by  faith.  Booth  by  faith  has  changed  the  drunkard  and  the 
sensualist  into  saints.  All  things  are  possible  to  him  that  believeth.  If,  then, 
truth  is  eternal,  and  faith  is  omnipotent,  why  should  any  difficulties,  however 
stupendous,  or  failures,  however  extensive,  lead  us  to  despair  ?  {Sunday  School 
Chronicle.)  The  source  and  design  of  spiritual  strength : — I.  Spiritttal  stbength, 
HOW  IS  IT  TO  BE  OBTAINED?  There  was  a  time  when  our  human  nature  seemed 
to  possess  much  spiritual  strength,  but  there  came  a  time  when  it  was  all  lost; 
and  from  that  time,  in  the  experience  o(  every  human  being,  it  has  had  to  be 
renewed.  This  renewing  influence  must  come  from  God;  surely  that  is  a  state- 
ment in  harmony  both  with  reason  and  with  Scripture.  To  speak  of  a  man  as 
able  to  strengthen  himself,  so  as  to  dispense  with  Divine  aid,  is  as  unreasonable  as 
it  is  unscriptural.  As  weU  might  you  talk  of  a  leafless  tree  clothing  itself  with 
verdure  without  the  vemal  sun — as  well  of  an  enfeebled  body  recovering  tone  and 
energy  without  the  reviving  air  of  heaven.  Who  can  bring  strength  out  of  weak- 
ness? who  can  bring  life  out  of  decay?  How  is  this  renewing  influence,  then,  to  be 
obtained?  By  waiting  upon  the  Lord.  You  see  the  progression  of  ideas;  it  is 
strength  that  has  to  be  renewed,  and  it  has  to  be  renewed  by  God,  and  God  gives  it 
when  we  wait  upon  Him.  Some  who  like  to  trace  the  analogy  between  the  works 
of  nature  and  the  works  of  grace,  may  perhaps  have  seen  a  flower  which  the 
storms  of  night  have  severely  shaken,  towards  the  morning  turn  wistfully  to  the 
dawn,  and  seem  to  be  waiting  for  the  coming  day.  Nor  does  it  wait  in  vain. 
Beneath  that  bright  beam  the  moisture  that  encumbered  it  is  exhaled;  its  bent 
stalk  raises  itself  again,  its  shrivelled  petals  expand  into  beauty,  and  it  diffuses 
aroimd  a  cheering  fragrance  in  gratitude  to  the  power  that  has  renewed  its  strength. 
Yoin:  stalk  may  be  a  broken  one,  and  your  petals  may  be  shrivelled,  but  by  waiting 
npon  the  Lord  you  shall  renew  your  strength,  n.  How  should  spiritual  strength 
BE  EXHIBITED  ?  1.  In  rapturous  contemplation  of  the  things  of  God.  The  eagle 
is  a  bird  that  soars  upwards  towards  heaven:  so  is  the  Christian  to  moimt  upwards 
in  holy  contemplation.  He  has  powers  adapted  to  this  exercise — powers  with  which 
he  can  glorify  his  Maker;  and  he  must  not  point  those  eagle  faculties  to  the  dust, 
but  let  them  take  wing  and  rise.  The  most  vigorous  pinion  will  never  reach  the 
sun,  but  yet  it  may  reach  so  high  that  earth-bovmd  creatures  shall  fail  to  track  its 
flight,  and  lose  it  in  the  glare  of  the  excellent  glory.  2.  In  imtiring  activity  in  the 
direct  service  of  God.  In  common  daily  duty  we  are  to  nm  in  the  ways  of  God's 
commandments;  but  the  word  is  more  frequently  employed  to  denote  some  direct 
obedience  to  some  special  command.  We  are  not  to  spend  all  our  time  in  rapturous 
contemplation.  We  are  not  to  devote  all  our  lives  to  lonely  musing.  It  is  well 
to  rise  up  on  wings  of  eagles,  but  now  and  then  we  must  come  to  the  level  of  our 
fellow-creatiures,  and  in  their  service  we  are  to  run  and  not  be  weary.  I  may  be 
very  busy  in  connection  with  the  Church  of  Christ  and  the  advancement  of  the 
knowledge  of  Christ.     But  who  is  not  weary,  sometimes,  in  well-doing?    It  is  oo* 


244  TEE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xl. 

thing  to  begin,  and  another  thing  to  go  on.  3.  They  shall  walk  and  not  faint — 
words  which  seem  to  denote  consistency  in  common  daily  life.  In  vain  all  my 
lonely  musing,  in  vain  all  my  bustle  in  the  kingdom  of  Christ,  if  consistency  of 
daily  life  does  not  accompany  the  whole.  The  world  expects  it  of  me;  Christ 
demands  it  of  me.  This  is  the  religion  of  the  Bible:  isitnot  a  noble  thing?  There 
is  many  a  young  man  who  thinks, "  I  find  plenty  of  occupation  for  my  energy  in 
the  service  of  the  worid,  but  if  I  become  a  religious  man,  then  I  am  sure  to  become 
a  poor,  hfeless,  morose  character."  Not  so;  for  the  religion  of  the  Bible  is  this  : 
mounting  up  with  wings  of  eagles,  running  and  not  wearying,  walking  and  not 
fainting.  All  your  youthful  energy  will  be  useful  in  the  service  of  religion,  and 
you  will  find  it  much  more  happily  employed  than  in  the  service  of  the  world  and  of 
Satan.  {F.  Tuclcer,  B.A.)  The  privileges  of  those  who  wait  upon  God  : — I.  What 
IS  IMPLIED  IN  WAITING  UPON  GoD?  1.  Waiting,  in  Scripture  language,  is  a  term 
used  to  denote  dependence.  "  These  wait  all  upon  Thee;  that  Thou  mayest  give 
them  their  meat  in  due  season."  The  meaning  is  obviously,  They  all  depend  upon 
Thee;  men  and  beasts  aUke.  2.  Another  sense  in  which  the  word  waiting  "  occur* 
in  Scripture  is,  a  willingness  to  be  directed  by  the  person  waited  upon.  Thus  Job 
says,  '  Unto  me  men  gave  ear,  they  waited,  and  Kept  silence  at  my  counsel "  : 
which  is  as  if  he  had  said,  "  I  had  only  to  speak,  and  they  were  ready  to  obey  my 
directions."  And  when  a  contrary  disposition  is  charged  upon  Israel,  the  Psalmist 
expresses  it  by  saying,  "  They  waited  not  for  His  counsel '  :  that  is,  they  wanted 
it  not,  nor  meant  to  follow  it,  and  therefore  would  not  wait  to  receive  it.  This 
sense  of  the  word  gives  us  another  part  of  the  character  of  those  that  wait  upon  the 
Lord.  They  are  willing  to  receive  direction  and  instruction  from  Him.  3.  Waiting, 
in  the  Scriptures,  sometimes  includes  the  idea  which  we  affix  to  it  in  common 
life;  namely,  that  of  attendance  or  service.  11.  The  several  branches  of  thb 
PEOMISE.  {S,  Knight,  M. A.)  Despondency  and  hopeftdness : — 1.  Tlie  despondent 
are  unhappy  and  weak,  and  they  shrink  from  effort;  but  the  hopeful  are  joyous 
and  strong,  and  they  delight  to  put  forth  their  strength  in  aclion.  The  inertness 
of  the  despondent  continually  deepens  their  despondency,  increases  their  weakness, 
and  aggravates  their  misery.  But  hope  feeds  upon  every  act  to  which  it  prompts, 
and  it  grows  thereby.  2.  There  are  various  kinds  of  hopefulness,  which  differ 
greatly  in  their  nature  and  their  effects.  The  nature  of  each  man's  hopes  will  be 
in  accordance  with  his  ruling  desires,  and  the  amount  of  his  hopefulness  will  depend 
on  that  to  which  he  trusts  for  the  fulfilment  of  his  desires.  One  man's  desires, 
and  therefore  his  hopes,  will  go  forth  in  the  direction  of  the  pleasures  of  sense. 
What  has  he  to  trust  in  for  the  continuance  of  the  hope  that  these  desires  shall  be 
gratified?  But,  for  the  most  part,  these  exhaustive  pleasures  rapidly  fret  away 
that  on  which  they  depend.  Health,  hope,  and  desire  pass  quickly  away  together, 
and  a  loaded  table  becomes  an  object  of  revulsion.  If,  however,  his  desires  are 
set  on  the  more  refined  pleasures  of  sense,  such  as  the  enjoyment  of  works  of  art, 
his  hopes  depend  on  the  retention  of  the  deUcate  sensibility  of  the  organs  by 
which  he  receives  his  impressions.  But  in  time  the  eye  becomes  dim,  and  the  subtle 
beauties  of  a  fine  painting  cannot  be  seen;  the  ear  becomes  dull,  and  the  sweetest 
music  charms  no  more.  When,  again,  v.e  lliink  of  those  whose  pleasures  are  more 
purely  intellectual,  we  know  that  an  enfeebled  memory  puts  an  effectual  check  on 
the  acquisition  of  knowledge.  3.  The  slight  and  shifting  nature  of  the  foundations 
on  which  worldly  hopes  are  built  makes  it  evident  that  they  can  do  but  little  towards 
giving  abiding  and  progressive  strength  to  character,  while  frequent  failures  and 
disappointments  depress  and  enfeeble.  Let  us,  therefore,  see  what  there  is  in  reserve 
for  us  in  the  large  world  into  which  Isaiah  is  prepared  to  conduct  us.  We  are  at 
once  made  aware  of  its  vastness,  to  the  expanding  and  refreshing  of  our  spirits, 
for  we  are  brought  face  to  face  with  God  in  aU  the  majesty  of  His  perfections  : 
the  infinite  Greatness,  to  which  the  nations  are  as  tlic  small  dust  of  the  balance. 
This  large  world,  the  spiritual,  into  which  Isaiah  has  ushered  us,  includes  all  worlds, 
for  it  is  as  limitless  as  its  Ruler.  We  all,  therefore,  belong  to  it  in  one  sense  or 
another,  and  cannot  pass  out  of  it.  (IF.  Ilowells.)  Strength  of  soul  made  prfect 
by  hope  in  Ood: — I.  The  hopes  that  aee  based  on  faith  in  God  give  strength 
ENOUGH  TO  APPROACH  HiM.  This  is  the  highest  of  all  exercises  of  spiritual  strength, 
and  effectually  prepares  for  all  the  rest.  This  is  a  mounting  up  on  wings,  as  com- 
pared with  which  the  rest  are  but  running  and  wallcing.  Who,  then,  shall  give 
wings  to  a  heavy  laden  sinner,  strong  enough  to  sustain  him  in  his  upward  flight?  We 
have  not  far  to  search  for  the  answer.  1.  He  receives  strength  to  confess  his  sins  to 
ftheGodof  truth  from  the  hope  of  pardon  founded  on  God's  merciful  promise.  2.  Hope 


CHAP.  XL.]  ISAIAH.  246 

and  strength  rapidly  grow  when  faith  clearly  sees  and  steadfastly  rests  on  the  firm 
ground  of  forgiveness  in  the  death  of  Christ.  3.  The  justified  believer  derives 
strength  to  advance  to  closest  fellowship  with  God  from  the  hope  that  he  may  meet 
J  ELim  in  likeness  of  character.  4.  Who  can  measure  the  unfailing  strength  which 
inspires  the  Christian  when  he  feels  that  he  is  safe  in  the  threefold  grasp  of  the 
Triune  God?  11.  The  hopes  that  are  based  on  faith  give  strength  to  livb 
FOB  God.  If  we  take  the  running  of  the  text  to  mean  the  rendering  of  active 
pubhc  service  to  God,  and  the  walking  to  mean  steadfast  advance  in,  character, 
the  Christian  requires  the  strength  needed  for  both  in  the  approach  to  God.  He 
comes  down  from  the  moiint  made  ready,  like  Moses,  for  work  in  the  camp  at  large, 
or  in  the  retirement  of  his  tent.  In  so  far  as  the  spiritual  Ufe  is  one,  it  is  a  life  in 
God.  The  energy  of  this  life  manifests  itself  in  various  ways.  It  puts  forth  its 
utmost  strength  in  rising  towards  its  Source  when  the  Christian  enters  into  fellow- 
ship with  the  Father  and  the  Son.  1.  The  Christian  makes  a  hopeful  start  in  his 
course  of  service  when  he  clearly  reaUses  the  spiritual  security  of  his  own  position. 
2.  AU  the  motives  which  the  Gospel  presents  before  him  feed  his  hopefulness  and 
increase  his  working  power.  "  I  can  do  all  things,"  said  Paul,  "  through  Christ 
which  strengtheneth  me."  Our  deepest  affections  are  stirred  when  we  are  told 
that  redemption  was  made  in  love.  Once  more,  the  Christian  is  prompted  to 
strenuous  and  persevering  action  by  the  appeal  made  to  his  desires.  The  highest 
point  in  his  destiny  is  to  be  conformed  to  the  image  of  the  Son  of  God.  "  Every  man 
that  hath  this  hope  in  Him  purifieth  himself,  even  as  He  is  pure."  (1)  Thus  moved, 
the  believer  strives  above  all  things,  and  in  all  things,  after  perfect  likeness  to  his 
Saviour  in  personal  character.  (2)  Keeping  this  high  mark  ever  in  view,  he  becomes 
strong  enough  to  regulate  by  it  all  his  social  action.  If  called  upon  to  act  a  pubhc 
part,  he  will  seek  to  bring  every  thought  into  captivity  to  the  obedience  of  Christ, 
that  thus,  while  serving  the  Master,  his  own  character  may  continually  grow. 
(3)  He  also  regards  all  the  incidents  of  his  outward  history  in  their  relation  to  his 
eternal  future,  and  glorifies  God  by  steadfastly  acting  accordingly.  His  largeness 
and  clearness  of  view  give  corresponding  elevation  and  decision  to  his  character. 
Have  we  made  the  hope  that  is  laid  up  in  God  our  own?  If  not,  some  other  hope 
will  be  cherished,  for  not  to  hope  is  not  to  live.  But  without  God,  without  true 
hope.  (Ibid.)  Mounting  up  ;  running  ;  walking  : — Mount  up  with  wings  as 
eagles,  run,  walL  That  is  a  very  lame  finish.  Surely  there  must  be  some  mistake. 
The  man  with  so  keen  an  eye  for  rhetorical  effect  as  this  writer  shows  could  not  have 
ended  this  matchless  oration  so  tamely.  It  is  quite  clear  that  the  order  in  which 
the  prophet  wrote  was,  "  They  that  wait  upon  the  Lord  shall  walk  and  not  faint, 
shall  run  and  not  be  weary,  shall  mount  up  with  wings  as  eagles  "  I  That  is  the  way 
to  finish.  It's  a  sorry  thing  to  begin  with  the  eagle's  flight  and  come  down  to  four 
miles  an  hour!  "  So  I  saw  in  my  dream  that  he  went  from  running  to  going,  and 
from  going  to  scrambhng  on  his  hands  and  knees,  because  of  the  steepness  of  the 
place."  You  know  who  wrote  that,  and  how  true  to  the  experience  of  a  Christian 
is  his  picture.  Perhaps  that  is  the  commentary  on  this  verse.  The  order,  then, 
may  be  the  corrrect  one,  after  aU — not -so  good  as  a  rhetorical  finish,  but  true  to  life. 
And,  at  any  cost,  let  him  who  speaks  from  the  mouth  of  the  true  God  himself  be 
tme.  And  this  is  true  to  Hfe:  "  They  shall  mount  up  with  wings  as  eagles;  they 
shall  run;  they  shall  walk."  The  flash  of  inspfration  brings  eager  enthusiasm; 
you  actively  pursue  your  ideal  for  a  time,  and  then,  because  of  the  steepness  of  the 
place,  you  come  down  to  a  painful  walk.  Is  not  that  the  history  in  a  nutshell  of 
what  is  called  the  progress  of  nearly  every  society  or  opinion  that  you  know? 
Whether  it  be  philanthropic,  poUtical,  social,  or  religious,  that  seems  to  be  true. 
"  Mount  up  with  wings  as  eagles,  run,  walk,"  and  one  might  almost  dare  to  add  a 
fourth — "stand  stiU!  "  {F.  L.  Wiseman,  B.A.)  Untiring  progress: — But  ia 
the  prophet  translated  rightly?  Our  revisers  have  left  this  text  exactly  as  it  stands 
in  the  A.V.,  "  Mount  up  with  wings  as  eagles,  they  shall  run,  and  walk,"  and  yet  I 
do  not  think  it  is  what  the  prophet  meant.  As  we  read  his  words  the  image  they 
call  up  is  of  three  modes  of  motion,  three  rates  of  progression — the  flight  of  the 
eagle,  the  swift  foot  of  the  deer,  and  the  ordinary  pace  of  man.  But  the  idea  in 
his  mind  is  not  one  of  comparative  motions.  Let  me  translate  that  last  word 
again,  translate  it  by  a  word  that  is  about  as  wide  in  its  EngUsh  significance  as 
the  word  used  by  the  prophet  in  his  own  time,  "  They  shall  mount  up,  they  shall 
run,  they  shall  go."  The  word  does  not  say  anything  about  the  rate  at  which  they 
go,  and  is  used  of  the  flight  of  the  arrow  through  the  air,  or  of  the  way  of  the  ship 
driven  before  the  wind,  or  of  the  gait  of  a  swift-footed  animal,  or  of  the  ordinary 


246  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xl. 

pace  of  man.  The  prophet  is  not  speaking  of  three  rates  of  motion,  but  he  is 
rather  speaking  of  the  active  motion  and  then  onward  continuance.  "  They  shall 
mount  up  with  wings  as  eagles,  they  shall  run  and  not  be  weary,  and  they  shall  go 
on  and  on  and  not  faint."  This  is  the  truth  on  which  he  is  insisting  before  these 
downhearted  and  enfeebled  Babylonian  captives  whose  hands  hang  down,  whose 
knees  are  feeble.  The  man  of  God,  the  man  who  waits  on  God,  is  equal  to  any 
emergency,  is  equal  to  any  strength.  If  you  want  the  flash  of  a  new  inspiration 
the  man  of  God  will  receive  it;  if  you  want  swift  progress  the  man  of  God  is  equal 
to  it;  if  you  want  steady  perseverance  you  shall  find  it  in  the  man  of  God  also. 
With  a  stronger  stroke  than  the  eagle's  wing  will  he  be  able  to  beat  the  air  and 
penetrate  to  the  third  heaven;  he  will  run  before  the  chariot  of  the  king  and  get  to 
the  city  sooner  than  the  fleetest  horses  of  which  even  the  king  of  Israel  can  boast; 
like  Asahel  he  shall  be  lissom  of  limb  and  light  of  foot;  and  when  far  in  the  track- 
less desert  even  the  endurance  of  the  camel  gives  out,  shall  the  man  of  God  hold  on 
his  way.  The  man  who  waits  upon  God  has  three  cardinal  qualities  which  above 
all  others  will  tend  to  the  conquest  of  the  world — buoyancy  of  spirits,  activity, 
and  perseverance;  the  man  who  can  command  these  is  the  man  who  will  win. 
(Ibid.)  Recuperative  power  : — But  it  is  said  the  prophet  gives  us  the  natural 
order.  Then  I  have  a  question  to  ask.  What  did  your  man  of  the  natural  order 
stop  nmning  for?  He  stopped  running  becaiise  he  was  tired.  It  is  precisely 
because  he  is  not  tired  that  the  man  of  God  does  not  stop.  "  They  shall  fun,  and 
not  be  weary."  The  whole  point  is  there.  He  walks  and  does  not  faint,  and  he 
will  not  have  to  stop  and  take  rest  and  food  because  he  is  faint,  but  goes  on  and  on. 
There  is  no  need  for  the  word  of  inspiration  to  tell  us  that  you  can  begin  with  a  big 
inspiration  and  go  on  fast  for  a  time,  and  then  slow  down  to  the  ordinary  tramp. 
You  have  learnt  that  to  your  sorrow  by  the  bitter  teaching  of  experience.  But 
the  message  of  the  recuperative  power,  that  you  shall  mount  up  with  wings  as 
eagles,  rim  and  not  be  weary,  and  go  on  and  on  knowing  neither  weariness  nor 
faintness,  this  is  the  word  of  inspiration  alone.  It  is  a  power  that  is  not  your  own, 
a  power  that  comes  from  no  earthly  source,  a  supernatural  power,  power  from  on 
high  which  the  prophet  is  here  offering.  (Ibid.)  Strength  helping  weakness  : — 
At  a  certain  junction  the  train  by  which  I  was  travelling  was  divided  into  two 
parts.  One  part  was  taken  on  by  the  engine  to  the  higher  end  of  the  platform, 
the  other  and  hinder  remained  where  it  was.  Some  carriages  standing  on  the 
middle  line  of  rails  were  to  be  attached  to  our  train.  An  engine  came  down  and 
gave  them  a  push,  sending  them  towards  the  stationary  carriages  at  such  a  rate 
that  it  seemed  as  though  they  would  crash  into  the  train  with  violence.  But  as 
they  came  round  the  curve  from  one  line  to  the  other  friction  and  gravitation 
asserted  their  power.  Every  moment  the  speed  was  reduced,  and  finally  the 
carriages  came  to  a  standstill  a  foot  away  from  those  to  which  they  were  to  be 
attached.  Then  the  engine  and  carriages  of  the  detached  front  part  of  the  train 
came  back  and  all  were  coupled  up.  And  away  went  those  weary,  dilatory  carriages 
as  fast  as  the  rest.  They  were  now  coupled  up  to  the  source  of  the  power,  and  the 
effect  of  every  pulse  of  the  engine  was  communicated  to  them,  and  had  it  run  one 
himdred  miles  an  hour  so  would  they  have  done.  That  is  the  teaching  of  the 
prophet.  "They  that  wait  upon  the  Lord  shall  renew  their  strength,"  they  are  coupled 
up  to  the  source  of  power  without,  and  being  coupled  to  the  power  without,  the  effect 
of  every  throb  of  the  engine  is  communicated  to  the  carriages,  and  the  love  of 
every  beat  of  the  heart  of  God  comes  down  to  the  Church  of  the  living  God.  {Ibid.) 
The  power  to  realise  ideals  : — We  are  constantly  being  exhorted  to-day  by  good 
and  earnest  men  to  set  a  high  ideal  before  us.  But  I  believe  that  the  preaching  of 
the  high  ideal,  divorced  from  the  preaching  of  its  attainment  by  the  power  of  the 
Lord  Jesus  Christ,  is  the  reason  for  more  than  one-half  the  cynicism  that  you 
find  amongst  men  from  thirty-five  to  forty  at  the  present  day.  The  fact  is,  men 
are  led  to  think  they  are  going  to  conquer  the  whole  land  in  five  minutes,  and 
imagine  they  are  going  to  realise  their  ideal  before  they  are  five-and-twenty;  and 
when  they  find  that  the  nearer  they  ought  to  be  getting  to  their  ideal  the  farther  it 
recedes  into  the  distance,  they  are  discouraged,  and,  out  of  sheer  despair  of  ever 
reaching  their  ideal,  they  give  it  up,  and  laugh  at  those  who  try  to  pursue  it.  I  do 
not  say  "  Do  not  pursue  your  ideal,"  but  what  I  say  is  this,  "  If  you  ever  really 
want  to  make  your  ideal,  you  must  be  endued  with  the  power  from  on  high.  ' 
{Ibid.)  Oodhj  optimism: — The  knapsack  that  galls  and  oppresses  the  novice 
at  mountain  climbing  is  borne  without  fatigue  by  the  guide  wno  is  accustomed  to 
it.     There  are  amateur  and  spasmodic  philanthropists  who  dabble  occasionaUy 


CHAP.  XL.]  ISAIAH.  247 

with  the  great  social  problems,  and  they  feel  their  weight  and  cry  out  in  despair. 
But  the  Christian  has  had  that  care  upon  his  heart  daily,  and  he  knows  how  to 
bear  it,  and  before  whom'  to  lay  it.  But,  further.  He  who  has  only  seen  the 
sorrow,  the  grief,  the  sin  of  the  world  has  not  penetrated  to  the  depth  of  the  problem. 
He  sees  the  clouds  and  mist  around  the  planet,  but  not  the  world  itselt  Who, 
of  all  men  who  ever  Uved  upon  the  earth,  was  the  One  who  had  the  sorrow  of  the 
world  nearest  to  His  heart?  But  you  picture  the  life  of  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ 
from  the  wrong  angle,  if  you  picture  Him  only  as  "  the  Man  of  sorrows,  acquainted 
with  grief."  He  was  that,  but  that  is  not  the  last  analysis  of  the  character  of  the 
Lord  Jesus  Christ.  None  had  such  joy  as  Christ.  Do  you  remember  after  His 
statement  of  great  intellectual  and  moral  truths  that  make  the  brain  weary  and 
the  heart  of  the  uninitiated  faint,  it  is  recorded  that  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ's  spirit 
leapt  for  joy,  and  He  said,  "  Father,  I  thank  Thee  that  Thou  hast  hid  these  thongs 
from  the  wise  and  prudent,  and  revealed  them  unto  babes  "  7  He  mounted  up  on 
eagle's  wings  to  meet  the  down-coming  Spirit  of  the  Father.  And  look  at  that 
time  when  He  has  the  burden  of  the  world  upon  Him.  He  is  making  TTia  wifl. 
What  has  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ  to  leave  ?  His  Cross.  That  is  His  great  legacy 
to  the  Church.  But  how  does  He  leave  it?  Li  the  power  to  endure  it.  My 
peace  I  give  unto  you,"  that  is  the  legacy.  And  when  He  calls  us  home.  He  who 
sits  upon  the  circle  of  the  heavens,  and  sees  all  the  sorrow  of  this  world  as  you  and 
I  can  never  see  it,  bids  us  "  Enter  thou  into  the  joy  of  thy  Lord."  He  who  looks 
only  at  the  burden  of  the  world,  and  only  sees  its  sorrow  and  shame,  has  not  got 
to  the  last  analysis  of  its  meaning;  he  has  not  touched  the  Rock,  is  floundering 
in  the  mud.  You  must  get  deeper  and  deeper  yet,  and  when  you  touch  the  Rock — 
the  pillars  of  the  earth — you  will  come  to  the  fact  that  under  aU  there  is  the  eternal 
blessedness.  And  the  man  who  waits  upon  God  enters  into  that  eternal  calm  and 
blessedness.  (Tbid.)  Strength  renewed  by  waiting  on  the  Lord: — I.  Whebbin' 
CONSISTS  THE  STRENGTH  SPOKEN  OP  BY  THE  PROPHET?  I.  The  Philistines  were 
utterly  unable  to  find  out  in  what  the  amazing  strength  of  Samson  consisted, 
until  he  revealed  it  to  his  espoused  wife.  It  was  his  religious  observance  of  the 
laws  of  the  Nazarite  which  occasioned  his  extraordinary  power.  His  uncommon 
bodily  strength,  therefore,  was  from  the  Lord;  and  when  He  departed  from  him, 
he  became  weak  as  another  man.  2.  But  the  strength  spoken  of  in  our  text  is 
evidently  not  corporeal  strength;  it  is  a  power  seated  in  the  mind;  but  neither 
is  it  intellectual  vigour.  It  is  often  found  in  persons  of  weak  understanding, 
and  in  minds  not  highly  cultivated  by  refined  education.  3.  The  strength  spoken 
of  is  a  moral,  or  more  properly  a  spiritual  quality.  As  bodily  health  is  only  foiind 
in  a  weU-balanced  and  healthy  state  of  the  corporeal  functions,  so  spiritual 
strength  can  only  be  found  in  souls  into  which  new  L'fe  has  been  infused,  and  is 
in  vigorous  exercise.  The  elements  of  this  strength  are — (1)  Faith,  founded  on 
Divine  illumination.  This  is  the  mainspring  of  aU  spiritual  exercises.  All  men 
are  influenced  and  governed  by  some  kind  of  faith;  but  worldly  men  have  no 
true  faith  in  things  spiritual  and  invisible.  Spiritual  strength  especially  consists 
in  that  exercise  of  faith  caUed  trust  or  confidence.  (2)  The  affections.  When  love 
to  God  is  ardent  and  constant  in  its  exercise,  then  there  is  real  strength.  (3)  But 
the  essence  of  spiritual  strength  resides  in  the  wUl.  A  fixed  purpose  is  that  which 
more  clearly  characterises  the  genuine  Christian  than  anything  else.  When  the 
determination  of  the  will  is  not  only  fixed  but  strong,  then  the  soul  is  in  a  vigorous 
state.  Energy  properly  appertaios  to  the  will;  indeed,  it  is  nothing  else  but 
a  strong  ^-ill;  and  where  this  exists  there  will  be  active  exertion.  Where  there  is 
strength  there  will  be  diligence  in  well-doing.  (4)  Humility,  meekness,  peace,  and 
joy  may  not  seem,  at  first  view,  to  contribute  anything  to  strength,  but  in  truth 
they  are  among  the  necessary  elements  of  this  vigour  of  mind.  There  may  be  a 
vigour  which  is  the  effect  of  a  disordered  state  of  the  corporeal  system — a  feverish 
or  spasmodic  action  which  is  much  more  violent  than  the  strength  of  a  healthy 
man.  So  in  religion  there  often  is  observed  an  imnatural  energy  and  enthusiastic 
vehemence.  Tms  is  not  genuine  strength,  but  real  disease.  True  piety  has  no 
greater  enemy  than  fanaticism,  which  some  are  so  undiscriminating  as  to  confoimd 
with  the  fervours  of  true  religion.  There  are  also  occasions  when  the  best  thing 
the  believer  can  do  is  to  sit  still  and  cease  from  his  own  exertions;  when  every- 
thing must  be  looked  for  from  God.  "  In  quietness  and  confidence  shall  be  your 
strength."  Holy  joy  is  an  element  of  strength.  "  The  joy  of  the  Lord  is  your 
strength."  (6)  The  only  other  ingredient  of  spiritual  strength  is  zeal,  zeal  accord- 
ing to  knowledge.    Zeal  to  the  soul  is  what  animal  heat  is  to  the  body.    Without 


248  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  xl. 

warmth  in  our  desires  and  feelings  we  shall  be  found  sickly.  Zeal  fills  the  soul 
with  courage  to  encounter  enemies  and  surmount  obstacles.     II.  How  spnimTAij 

STRENGTH  MAY  BE   ACQTJIKED;    AND  HOW  RENEWED,  WHEN  IT  HAS  BEEN  rMPATEED. 

We  are  not  exhorted  to  be  strong  in  ourselves,  but  "  in  the  Lord,  and  in  the  power 
of  His  might."  But,  in  order  to  obtain  aid  from  on  high,  we  must  make  use  of  the 
appointed  and  appropriate  means.  These  are  all  comprehended  in  one  expression, 
"  waiting  on  the  Lord."  III.  What  benefits  and  aids  they  receive  who  watt 
TJPON  THE  Lord.  They  are  said,  in  our  text,  "  to  mount  up  on  wings  as  eagles." 
The  soul  of  fallen  man  naturally  grovels  on  the  earth;  his  face  instead  of  being 
raised  to  heaven,  is  prone  toward  the  ground.  But  when  the  Holy  Spirit  enters 
into  any  man,  his  thoughts  and  affections  are  raised  to  those  things  which  are 
above.  By  the  indwelling  of  the  Holy  Ghost,  faith,  love,  and  hope  are  brought 
into  hvely  exercise;  and  these  are  as  pinions  to  the  soul.  When  by  faith  the 
regenerated  soul  draws  near  to  God,  the  earth  appears  to  recede;  all  its  objects 
are  seen  to  be  diminutive;  and  the  realities  of  the  heavenly  state  are  perceived, 
and  operate  with  power  on  the  susceptible  mind.  But  such  seasons  of  elevated 
devotion  and  delightful  contemplation  are  not  constant.  Our  text  speaks  not 
only  of  flying,  but  of  running  and  walking.  Reflections — L  "  The  men  of  this 
world  are  wiser  in  their  generation  than  the  children  of  light."  When  the  body 
is  debilitated  and  needs  to  be  strengthened,  they  spare  no  pains  or  expense  to 
recover  impaired  health.  If  they  hear  of  a  medicinal  spring  far  off  in  the  mountains 
they  hesitate  not  to  undertake  the  journey,  and  undergo  the  hardships  of  the 
rugged  way,  that  they  may  test  the  efficacy  of  the  mineral  waters.  And  this  ia 
done  commonly,  in  the  greatest  uncertainty  whether  the  means  will  prove  effectual. 
2.  As  our  natiu-al  life  requires  to  be  nourished  by  suitable  food  from  day  to  day, 
without  which  it  would  decline  and  death  would  ensue,  so  the  spiritual  life  of  the 
Christian  needs  to  be  recruited  continually,  with  the  nutriment  which  is  suited  to 
its  growth  and  strength.  3.  Although  everv  degree  of  spiritual  strength  is  a 
precious  possession,  and  we  are  not  permitted  '  to  despise  the  day  of  small  things," 
yet  it  is  the  duty  and  privilege  of  every  believer  to  aim  at  high  attainments  in  the 
Divine  life,  and  to  encourage  and  aid  others  in  doing  the  same.  (-.4.  Alexander,  D.D.) 
Condition  and  conduct : — Every  river  needs  a  channel;  and  the  wider  and  deeper 
the  channel  the  fuller  and  more  copious  the  stream,  provided  the  waters  are 
inexhaustible.  The  river  is  God's  infinite  power;  the  channel  is  our  conscious 
weakness.  By  waiting  on  the  Lord  the  stream  flows  into  its  appointed  bed.  Let 
the  stream  flow  on  iminteiTuptedly,  and  all  your  need  in  the  way  of  weakness, 
helplessness,  ignorance,  emptiness  will  be  met  moment  by  moment.  The  result 
will  be  as  it  is  figuratively  expressed:  We  shall  mount  up;  we  shall  run;  we  shall 
walk.  I.  The  promise.  "  They  that  wait,"  &c.  "  Renew"  means  to  "  change 
your  strength."  1.  A  change  from  one  kind  of  strength  to  another.  Here  is  a 
Christian,  bewildered,  not  quite  knowing  why  he  has  so  perpetually  failed.  Now 
when  he  ceases  from  self  and  takes  God  as  his  strength,  he  changes  his  strength. 
2.  A  change  from  one  measure  of  strength  to  another.  It  is  hke  a  river  or  a  stream 
— always  passing  away,  and  yet  the  power  is  always  present;  the  power  moving 
the  mill-wheel,  not  by  jerks,  but  by  a  continuous  stream,  always  passing  away, 
and  yet  ever  flowing  in;  one  measure  of  strength  succeeding  that  wnich  has  been 
expended.  Our  whole  future  is  mapped  out  with  tests  and  trials,  but  we  need 
not  be  afiaid  of  these  things  if  we  are  in  the  stream  of  the  Divine  supply.  You  see 
the  eagle  mounting  up  by  a  power  that  God  has  given  it.  But  it  is  possible  to 
rise  by  another  kind  of  power.  By  a  sudden  impetus  or  effort.  You  throw  a  stone 
into  the  air.  Watch  it  a  bit  and  down  it  comes  again;  the  power  has  spent  itself. 
So  it  is  possible  for  the  Christian  to  be  moving  on  by  a  power  that  very  soon 
expends  itself,  and  by  a  process  of  exhaustion  he  falls  back  again  under  the  gravi- 
tating influence  of  his  evil  tendencies.  This  is  not  the  strength  spoken  of  here. 
Our  Lord  refers  to  a  similar  thought  in  John  iv.  14,  "  The  water  that  I  shall  give 
him  shall  become  in  him."  That  word  "  become,"  in  the  new  version,  is  full  of 
deep  meaning  in  this  connection.  It  puts  before  us  the  thought,  not  of  a  new  gift, 
but  of  a  new  experience  of  an  old  gift.  As  long  as  you  rest  in  the  place  of  power 
and  blessing  the  stream  will  flow  through  you  unceasingly.  II.  The  condition 
of  all  this.  "  Waiting  upon  the  Lord."  What  is  it  to  wait?  There  must  be  still- 
ness of  soul,  dependence,  expectation.  III.  The  result.  Heavenly-mindedness. 
"  He  shall  mount  up."  There  are  two  wings  in  our  spiritual  ascent — faith  and 
obedience.  If  we  try  to  rise  by  means  of  faith  alone  we  shall  be  like  a  bird  with  one 
wing.     If  we  trust  and  obey,  obey  and  trust,  we  rise  into  a  purer  atmosphere,  and 


CHAP.  XL.]  ISAIAH.  249 

have  a  clearer  vision — we  live  in  the  very  presence  of  God.  This  threefold  descrip- 
tion of  moiinting  up,  running  and  walking,  presents  three  aspects  of  the  same 
character.  If  I  am  to  run  and  walk  I  must  be  in  close  communion  with  God; 
I  must  know  what  it  is  to  mount  up.  Then  there  is  the  "  running,"  that  is  ready 
obedience — a  mark  of  the  true  servant.  The  "  walking  "  is  the  most  important 
part  after  all.  It  is  iaj:  easier  for  some  of  us  to  run  than  to  walk.  We  like  a  little 
bit  of  excitement  or  emotion.  To  walk  we  want  something  like  continuous, 
sustained  evenness  of  conduct,  progressing  quietly  and  steadily  day  by  day  in  the 
common  round  of  hfe;  not  impulsive,  not  capricious,  not  changeable;  without 
show,  humble,  and  always  the  same.  For  this  we  need  power.  And  that  power 
God  has  provided.  (Evan  H.  Hopkins,  B.A.)  Waiting  upon  God  : — One  brother 
in  the  ministry  asked  me,  "  Is  there  not  a  danger  of  too  great  passivity?  "  I  said — 
"  Oh  yes,  my  brother,  as  long  as  we  think  it  is  our  activity  that  must  do  it,  then 
passivity  robs  us  of  time  and  strength.  But  once  we  understand  that  it  is  God 
that  must  work  it  in  us,  then  I  understand  that  my  highest  passivity  wiU  be  my 
highest  activity,  for  when  I  give  myself  entirely  away  to  God,  God  can  work  in  me, 
and  then  I  wiU  work  as  they  that  wait  upon  the  Lord."  1.  If  you  are  to  wait 
aright  upon  the  Lord,  you  must  learn  to  know  Him,  you  must  turn  away  your 
thoughts  and  eyes  and  heart  and  trust  from  everything,  and  set  them  upon 
God  alone.  My  conduct  in  waiting  for  a  man,  or  waiting  on  him,  will  depend 
entirely  upon  what  I  think  of  him.  One  who  waits  upon  the  king  behaves  in  a 
different  way  from  one  who  waits  upon  an  ordinary  person.  And  all  our  waiting 
upon  God  wiU  depend  upon  one  thing — the  knowledge  that  we  have  of  Him.  But 
how  does  God  reveal  Himself  when  He  calls  upon  us  to  wait  upon  Him  ?  (vers.  25-29). 
He  never  is  weary.  He  has  kept  the  world  going  all  these  ages;  and  my  short 
life  of  sixty,  seventy,  or  eighty  years — wUl  my  God  not  care  for  and  maintain 
that  ?  When  I  look  at  what  He  does  for  the  stars,  I  reaUse  that  His  work  is  done 
every  moment.  And  God,  in  His  omnipotence  and  faithfulness,  is  willing  to 
work  in  my  heart  every  moment  of  the  day.  2.  The  second  great  thing  is  to  Imow 
ourselves,  to  be  willing  and  determined  to  accept  what  God  reveals  about  us. 
And  what  does  God  reveal  in  contrast  with  His  great  omnipotence?  Our  utter 
impotence.  If  a  number  of  ships  of  war  were  sent  out  to  sea,  and  were  ready  to 
start  at  any  moment,  and  if  the  question  were  asked,  what  are  they  waiting  for? — 
the  answer  would  likely  be  one  of  two  things :  either  that  they  were  waiting  for 
supplies,  or  waiting  for  orders.  Child  of  God,  that  is  to  be  your  position.  You 
are  to  wait  for  supplies.  Wait  for  the  power  of  the  Holy  Spirit  every  day. 
Cultivate  also  the  habit  of  waiting  for  orders.  Study  and  love  your  Bible,  but 
remember  it  is  God  who  must  give  the  orders,  and  you  will  fail  if  you  take  them 
from  a  book.  Love  your  Bible  and  fiU  your  heart  with  it,  but  let  God  apply  it  in 
your  daily  Ufe.  3.  Once  more,  if  I  am  to  wait  upon  the  Lord  aright  I  must  study 
well  what  this  word  "  wait "  in  itself  implies.  It  implies  patience.  The  Bible 
speaks  about  waiting  patiently,  and  also  about  waiting  quietly.  You  must 
cultivate  that  habit.  How  can  you  do  it?  When  you  go  into  your  closet  for 
your  morning  devotions,  do  not,  as  is  very  often  done,  read  the  Bible  and  think 
about  it  and  pray  about  it,  and  then  get  up  and  go.  But  do  something  else  in 
between.  Before  you  read,  set  yourself  still  that  your  soul  may  reaUse,  I  am 
waiting  for  God  to  come  in  and  take  possession  of  me  for  to-day.  That  is  your 
great  need.  And  then,  before  you  pray,  sit  stiU,  and  shut  yoiir  eyes  and  say, 
\SMU  God  now  listen  to  me  for  certain?  Learn  to  come  into  blessed  fellowship 
with  God.  Then  wait  continually — not  one  or  two  days,  not  one  moment, 
but  aU  the  day  (Psa.  xxv.  5).  {Andrew  Murray.)  Life's  order  and  the 
Divine  sufficiency : — We  find  here  the  true  order  of  experience  in  life.  1.  First 
comes  the  "  flying  "  stage.  The  period  of  fresh,  wild  enthusiasms;  the  season  of 
zeal  without  discretion,  when  aU  sorts  of  impossibilities  are  dreamed,  all  sorts  of 
vain  things  attempted.  This  mood  comes  at  the  beginning,  and  not  at  the  end  of 
our  career.  It  is  in  the  period  of  youth  that  we  have  our  ambitious  dreams,  and 
take  our  higher  flights.  Thank  God  for  the  flying  stage  while  it  lasts,  for  we  do  get 
visions  in  those  flights  that  abide  with  us  long  after  our  wings  have  dropped  off, 
and  we  have  learned  that  the  ether  is  not  our  element;  visions  whose  memory 
helps  to  cheer  us  as  hereafter  we  trudge  along  the  monotonous  and  dusty  ways  of 
life's  hard  routine.  Youth  is  full  of  impulses,  full  of  excesses,  full  of  exaggerations. 
Let  us  not  be  impatient  of  them.  It  is  a  grand  thing  that  there  is  one  time  in  our 
lives  when  we  have  wings.  Too  soon  the  wings,  like  those  of  Icarus,  melt,  and 
we  drop  to  mother  earth  again.     Too  soon  a  hard  and  cynical  world  converts 


250  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xl. 

our  ingenuous  confidence  into  self- mistrust.  In  religious  experience  youth  is  the 
time  of  wings.  Its  faith  is  romantic,  the  thrill  of  its  devotion  is  exquisite.  The 
spiritual  is  so  real.  God  is  so  near.  Doubt  seems  so  impossible,  and  elements  of 
character  are  forming  then  that  we  should  be  poor  indeed  without  in  future  time. 
But  the  period  comes  when  these  youthful  impulsions  give  place  to  the  more 
restrained  and  disciplined  energies  of  life,  like  those  of  the  runner  who  has  trained 
himself  to  maintain  his  pace,  and  to  maintain  it  by  not  exceeding  it.  But  running 
is  harder  than  flying.  Watch  the  bird  in  the  air.  Nothing  looks  less  like  efifort. 
2.  When  we  have  done  flying,  we  go  on  running.  We  have  found  that  after  all  we 
have  to  live  on  terra  firma.  But  there  is  immense  energy  in  us  still.  Thank  God, 
too,  for  the  running  stage.  That  is  the  time  when  we  are  spiritually  aggressive, 
when  we  count  as  an  active  force  in  the  world.  3.  But  that  stage,  too,  passes. 
And  then  we  come  to  the  quiet,  steady,  persistent  "  walk."  And  it  is  this  that 
tries  our  mettle  most  of  all.  For  we  have  lost  the  exhilaration  of  youth  and  the 
stimulus  of  strong  emotions.  We  traverse  the  solid  unromantic  ground  of  principle, 
while  the  ghost  of  many  a  shattered  illusion  haunts  our  path.  It  is  the  period  of 
disenchantment;  when  we  discover  the  bounds  of  the  practical,  and  when  we 
have  a  stronger  sense  of  life's  limitations  than  of  its  possibilities.  To  do  this 
makes  greater  demands  upon  our  moral  steadfastness  than  to  do  either  of  the 
before- mentioned  stages  in  our  life  experience.  Patiently  to  endure,  persistently 
to  press  on — whatever  the  burdens  we  must  carry,  whatever  the  inequalities  and 
roughnesses  of  the  way,  whatever  the  obstacles  that  he  and  the  enemies  that  lurk 
in  our  path,  whatever  the  tempests  that  beat  overhead — requires  a  strength  of 
character  and  a  heroism  of  soul  that  are  the  last  achievement  and  the  highest 
triumph  of  the  spiritual  life.  (J.  Halsey.)  The  Christian's  walk  : — We  find 
the  same  idea  also  in  the  New  Testament  with  spiritual  applications.  There, 
throughout,  we  find  the  Divine  life  in  man  described  as  a  *  walk,"  To  "  walk 
worthy  of  his  high  vocation "  is  the  supreme  exploit  of  the  Christian's  faith. 
Other  images  are  used;  those  of  the  runner  in  the  stadium,  and  the  wrestler  in 
the  arena;  but  it  is  always  on  the  walking  that  stress  is  laid.  It  is  the  daily  walk 
along  the  beaten  path  that  reveals  the  depth  and  sincerity  of  our  religion.  Paul 
had  had  his  eagle  "  flights,"  but  he  did  not  make  much  of  them.  "  Caught  up 
into  the  third  heaven  "  he  had  seen  "  visions  and  revelations  ";  but  he  does  not 
appeal  to  them  as  any  sign  of  special  grace.  He  had  "  run  "  swiftly  to  and  fro 
on  many  an  errand  of  evangelisation;  but  he  does  not  dwell  on  these  as  having 
called  forth  any  remarkable  manifestations  of  the  Divine  helpfulness.  It  was  as 
he  pursued  the  ordinary  routine  of  his  ministry  along  the  common  ways,  with  the 
humbling  "  thorn  "  ever  rankling  in  his  flesh,  that  he  felt  the  need  of  and  received 
special  succour.  It  was  in  this  greater  exigency  that  his  inner  ear  caught  the 
promise,  "  My  grace  is  sufficient  for  thee."  {Ibid.)  Standing  still : — But,  you 
say,  if  this  progression  of  ideas  is  a  true  climax,  flying,  running,  walking — why 
stay  there?  Why  not  logically  carry  the  idea  further,  and  say  that  standing  still 
is  the  sublimest  consummation  of  the  Divine  life  in  man?  Even  so.  That  ia 
precisely  what  Paul  does  say.  "Having  done  all,  to  stand!  "  It  is  when  all 
the  romance  is  past,  when  all  the  effervescence  of  youth  has  subsided,  when  all 
incitements  from  without  and  all  excitements  from  within  are  over,  when  life 
has  settled  into  its  groove,  and,  smrrounded  by  the  monotonous  and  the  sordid, 
we  find  our  horizon  limited  by  "  the  daily  round  "  and  "  the  common  task  " — 
it  is  then  that  faith  rises  to  its  true  heroism,  enabling  us  to  maintain  our  spiritual 
level  and  hold  our  ground  against  the  deadening  inroads  of  formaUty  and  in- 
differentism.  {Ibid.)  Renewing  strength  : — Human  strength  is  of  many  kinds — 
physical,  mental,  spiritual;  but  every  form  of  human  strength  must  of  necessity 
spend  itself.  All  strength  apart  from  God  is  derived  strength,  and  is  consequently 
measurable,  and  must  come  to  an  end.  On  the  other  hand.  Divine  strength 
never  fails.  These  two  things  seem  very  far  away:  man  with  his  faintness,  God 
with  His  eternity  and  inexhaustible  omnipotence.  If  we  can  bring  these  two 
together,  what  a  wondrous  thing  will  happen!  Then  the  sacred  words  of  the 
text  will  be  fulfilled.  I.  We  see  how  a  tbue  Church  may  be  described.  "  They 
that  wait  upon  the  Lord."  II.  We  see  what  the  Lord's  waiting  people  need. 
To  "  renew  their  strength."  1.  Because  they  are  human.  2.  Because  they  are 
imperfect.  3.  We  must  renew  our  strength,  for  it  is  for  our  honour,  comfort,  and 
safety.  4.  It  is  for  God's  glory  and  our  own  usefulness,  m.  How  are  we  to 
EENEW  OTJE  STRENGTH?  By  Continually  waiting  upon  God.  (C  H.  Spurgeon,) 
The  continued  renewal  of  atrength  : — No  man  is  as  strong  as  he  desires  to  be.     Many 


CHAP.  XL.]  ISAIAH.  251 

things  he  desires  to  do  but  cannot.     He  would  exhaust  his  strength  if  he  continued 
working.     God  has  provided  hours  for  rest  and  refreshment.     I.  SpiritxjaIj  ucfb 
DEMANDS  RENEWAL.     Strength  for  to-day  does  not  insvure  strength  for  to-morrow. 
Full  provision  has  been  made  to  supply  this  need  of  the  soul.     The  bread  of  life 
for  the  hungry,  the  water  of  life  for  the  thirsty.     II.  All  renewal  of  strength 
SHOULD  BE  REGULAR.     Spasmodic  efforts  are  dangerous.     There  must  be  a  regular 
feeding  on  God's  Word  and  promises.     III.  Kenewal  of  strength  means  a 
RENEWAL  OF  ACTIVITY.     Use  all  Strength  as  a  gift  of  God.     When  exhausted 
renew  your  power.     {R.  M.  Donaldson,  D.D.)         Waiting  on  God  : — This  passage 
has  the  ring  of  an  Alpine  horn.     It  is  very  easy  to  misunderstand  this  word     wait," 
and  regard  it  as  meaning  inactive  passivity.     There  is  a  vast  deal  of  verve  in  the 
original  Hebrew;  it  signifies  to  be  strong  enough  to  hold  out.     It  expresses  a 
solid  endurability  such  as  belongs  to  a  stiff  piece  of  oak  that  never  bends  and 
never  breaks  under  heavy  pressure.     Then6e  the  word  came  to  signify  patience 
as  opposed  to  worry  and  despondency.     "  Waiting  "  denotes  a  habit  of  mind — 
a  devout  habit  that  loves  to  call  on  God,  a  submissive  habit  that  is  ready  to  receive 
just  what  God  sees  fit  to  send,  an  obedient  habit  that  is  glad  to  do  just  what  God 
commands,  a  stalwart  habit  of  carrying  such  loads  as  duty  lays  upon  our  backs.     It 
is  a  religion  of  conscience,  and  not  a  mere  effervescence  of  pious  emotion.     In  short, 
it  is  a  grace,  just  as  much  as  the  grace  of  faith,  or  love,  or  humility.     If  you  and  I 
have  this  grace,  and  if  we  practise  it,  what  may  we  expect?     1.  That  God  will 
"  renew  our  strength."     For  every  new  occasion,  every  new  trial,  every  new 
labour,  we  shall  get  new  power.     If  we  have  failed,  or  have  been  foUed,  God  will 
put  us  on  our  feet  again.     I  have  often  gone  to  Saratoga,  in  the  heat  of  the  early 
summer,  quite  run  down,  and  my  vitality  burned  out  as  coal  gets  exhausted  in  the 
bunkers  of  a  steamer.     Then  I  repaired  to  one  of  the  tonic  springs  and  "  waited  " 
on  its  bubbling  waters,  trusting  them  and  taking  them  into  my  system.    Presently 
a  new  appetite  for  food  was  awakened,  and  a  new  life  crept  into  my  ten  fingers; 
walking  became  a  delight,  and  preachiag  as  easy  as  for  a  lark  to  sing.     All  this 
renewal  of  vitality  was  the  result  of  waiting  on  one  of  those  wonderful  health- 
fountains.     I  brought  but  little  there.     I  took  a  great  deal  away.     Just  such  a 
well  of  spiritual  force  is  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ.     All  the  men  and  women  of  power 
are  men  and  women  of  prayer.     "  Waiting  on  the  Lord  "  by  prayer  has  the  same 
effect  on  them  that  it  has  on  an  empty  bucket  to  set  it  under  a  rain-spout.     They 
get  filled.     When  I  have  heard  C.  H.  Spurgeon  pray  I  have  not  been  so  astonished 
at  some  of  his  discourses.     2.  Waiting  on  God  not  only  gives  strength,  it  gives 
inspiration.     "  They  shall  mount  up  with  wings  as   eagles."     God  means  that 
every  soul  which  waits  on  Him  shall  not  creep  in  the  muck  and  the  mire,  nor  crouch 
in  abject  slavery  to  men  or  devils.     When  a  soul  has  its  inner  life  hid  with  Christ 
and  lives  a  life  of  true  consecration  it  is  enabled  to  take  wing,  and  its  "  citizenship/ 
is  in  heaven."     He  gains  wide  outlooks ;  he  breathes  a  clear  and  crystalline  atmosi 
sphere.     He  outflies  many  of  the  petty  vexations  and  grovelling  desires  that  drag 
a  worldling  down  into  the  mire.     What  cares  the  eagle,  as  he  bathes  his  wings  in 
the  translucent  gold  of  the  upper  sky,  for  all  the  turmoil,  the  dust,  or  even  the 
murky  clouds  that  drift  far  beneath  him?     He  flies  in  company  with  the  sun. 
So  a  heaven-bound  soul  flies  in  company  with  God.     {T.  L.   Cuyler,  D.D.) 
Waiting  on  the  Lord  : — I.  One  of  the  oldest  and  best  tried  rules  of  religion  is  the 
SACRED  DUTY  OF  COMMUNION  WITH  GoD.     The  expression  "  wait  upon  "  is  a  most 
felicitous  one,  because  while  it  includes  prayer  it  means  and  covers  so  much  more. 
1.  To  wait  on  the  Lord  is  the  drawing  nigh  unto  Him,  to  pour  out  our  wants  before 
Him,  though  He  knows  them  so  well,  to  plead  the  necessities  arising  out  of  our 
own  ignorance,  waywardness,  and  poverty  of  soul,  to  ask  for  His  light  to  shine 
in  our  darkness,  to  clear  our  minds  of  the  mists  and  fogs  of  native  prejudice  and  of 
traditional  error,  to  make  plain  before  us  our  path  of  duty,  and  to  keep  our  feet 
steadfast  therein,  to  take  into  His  loving  hands  the  discipline  and  correction  of  our 
hearts,  and  to  make  us  willing  to  undergo  it,  to  keep  us  from  aU  vanity  and  Ues, 
and  from  every  form  of  subtle  self-deception,  so  that  we  may  ever  be  true  to  Him 
and  to  ourselves.     But  waiting  on  the  Lord  implies  much  more  than  this.    Although 
we  have  a  perfect  right  to  go  to  God  and  pour  out  every  wish  and  longing  of  our 
hearts,  worthy  and  unworthy  alike,  yet  this  is  not  by  any  means  the  whole  or  the 
highest  part  of  communion  with  Him.     Poor  and  barren  and  diseased  must  that 
heart  be  which  has  no  song  of  praise  to  sing,  no  gratitude  to  pour  forth  for  past 
deliverances  and  for  present  mercies,  which  has  no  emotion  oi  adoring  love  for  a 
goodness  so  infinite  and  untiring.     To  make  our  religion  a  delight  and  a  glory  we 


S62  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  xu 

must  surely  wait  on  the  Lord  with  songs  of  gladness  and  joy,  praising  Him  more 
for  what  He  is,  and  for  what  He  has  taught  us  to  know  and  believe  Him  to  be, 
than  for  the  good  gifts  which  His  bounty  hath  bestowed.     2.  Yet,  further,  there 
is  a  waiting  on  the  Lord  which  is  neithfer  prayer  nor  praise,  but  silent  and  serene 
contemplation,  when  the  mind  muses  upon  BQs  wondrous  works  and  ponders 
over  the  stupendous  fact  that  the  infinite  and  eternal  God  can  and  wiU  and  does 
come  near  to  the  soid  of  BQs  finite  and  imperfect  creature  man,  and  permits  the 
ineffable  solace  and  privilege  of  communion  with  Himself.     3.  But  all  forms  of 
waiting  on  the  Lord  involve  the  personal,  conscious,  voluntary  act  of  the  mind  or 
soul  within  us,  for  which  no  mere  ceremony  or  ritual  can  be  a  substitute.     All 
outward  observances,  whether  private  or  public,  have  no  meaning,  and  can  have 
no  avail  without  that  conscious  voluntary  movement  of  the  soul  towards  God. 
If  public  worship  helps  you  to  this  direct  personal  communion  with  God,  I  need 
not  say  you  are  bound  to  attend  it ;  you  are  sure  to  do  so  of  your  own  free  will 
without  any  pressure.     Experience  has  proved  that,  to  a  great  many  souls,  public 
worship  is  the  greatest  help  they  ever  get,  that  it  gives  wings  to  their  holiest 
prayers  and  brightness  to  their  gladdest  songs  of  praise,  and  that  it  does  bring  them 
nearer  to  God  than  any  other  external  agency  that  they  know  of.     But  this  is  not 
true  of  all.     And  I  am  bound  to  say  that  those  who  find  the  least  pleasure  and  the 
least  benefit  from  public  worship  are  those  who  do  not  wait  on  the  Lord  in  private. 
They  do  not  know  by  experience  the  blessings  of  communion,  and  therefore  these 
outward  aids  in  public  worship  are  of  little  use  to  them.     It  is  like  a  banquet  spread 
before  one  who  has  no  appetite  or  whose  habitual  food  is  altogether  different,  or 
like  a  rich  and  perfect  performance  of  music  to  one  who  is  altogether  destitute  of 
any  musical  sense.     11.  I  turn  now  to  dwell  on  the  natural  effects  of  wattino 
ON  THE  Lord,  as  stated  by  the  prophet,  and  vouched  for  by  myriads  of  the  faithful 
and  devout  in  all  ages.     1.  "  They  shall  renew  their  strength."     This  is  what  we 
all  need  in  this  weary  world,  whose  toils  and  cares  and  temptations  perpetually 
remind  us  of  our  weakness  and  the  need  of  invigorating  grace.     We  renew  our 
strength  in  the  battle  with  our  besetting  sin,  in  the  conquest  of  fierce  passions 
and  unruly  tempers,  and  in  the  maintenance  and  steadfastness  of  high  resolve.     We 
renew  our  strength  to  meet  misfortunes  and  to  carry  our  load  of  grief  or  bereave- 
ment, to  keep  a  cheerful  heart  under  the  depression  of  disease,  and  when  chilled 
by  the  cold  shadow  of  death.     And  we  renew  our  strength  for  all  enterprise  which 
makes  demand  on  our  courage  and  truthfulness.     2.  This  leads  us  to  notice  the 
three  degrees  of  moral  and  spiritual  activity  presented  to  us  in  the  figurative 
language  of  the  prophet:  "  They  shall  mount  up  on  wings  as  eagles:  they  shall 
run  and  not  be  weary:  they  shall  walk  and  not  faint."     (1)  The  first  typifies  lofty 
aspiration  and  heroic  action.     There  is  a  type  of  soul  which  soars  like  the  eagle,  its 
daring  eye  not  fiinching  from  the  dazzling  sun  itself  but  drawn  by  it  higher  and 
higher  with  steadfast  gaze  till  it  is  lost  to  sight  of  those  on  earth  below.  _  These  are 
the  great  seers  of  the  human  race  whose  absorbing  love  and  adoration  of  God 
has  filled  them  with  light  and  knowledge  of  Him  little  dreamed  of  by  the  many  who 
have  feebler  and  lower  aspiration.     The  brighter  the  light  before  them,  the  more 
eagerly  and  steadfastly  they  rise  upwards  to  greet  it  and  to  bathe  in  its  splendour. 
Yet  the  power  of  thus  rising  on  eagle's  wings  is  not  the  only  quality  to  be  noticed 
in  this  symbolism.     There  is  also  the  heroic  courage  in  speeding  one's  way  as  on 
eagle's  wings  in  defiance  of  earth-born  cries  and  warnings,  and  in  lofty  scorn  of 
earthly  interests  and  pursuits.     To  one  who  thus  heroically  soars  towards  God 
and  His  light,  the  things  of  time  and  earth  seem  trivial  and  contemptible.     Such 
strength  of  rising  as  this  can  only  come  by  closest  communion  with  God.     (2)  While 
only  the  few  can  thus  fly,  many  can  only  run.     Those  who  have  not  eagle's  wings 
BtiU  have  some  power  of  motion,  they  can  run  on  the  earth  and  in  the  path  of  God's 
commandments.     Whatever  it  be  in  their  power  to  do,  that  power  will  be  increased 
and  their  strength  renewed  by  waiting  upon  God.     Running  is  undignified,  say 
some,  it  is  more  stately  to  walk,  more  dignified  even  to  sit  still.     They  will  run 
nimbly  enough  after  pleasure,  wealth  and  fame,  but  not  after  the  things  which 
God  bids  them  run  after.     (3)  But  as  only  few  can  fly  and  only  some  can  run,  there 
are  still  some  who  can  only  walk.     And  for  them,  too,  the  promise  holds  good, 
"  They  shall  renew  their  strength,  they  shall  walk  and  not  faint."     God  never 
expects  more  from  us  than  He  has  already  given.     If  we  are  not  of  the  eagle  type 
and  have  but  feeble  aspirations;  if  we  are  not  of  the  active,  zealous  type  and  cannot 
run,  we  may  yet  be  able  to  walk,  to  move  as  fast  as  our  poor,  weak,  or  crippled  limbs 
will  carry  us,  and  if  we  do  not  wish  to  faint  by  the  way  we  shall  surely  wait  on  the 


CHAP.  XL.]  ISAIAH.  253 

Lord.  For  the  less  strength  we  feel  we  have,  the  more  we  shall  need  and  ask  from 
Him.  Indeed  I  think  we  poor  walkers  sometimes  make  the  most  progress,  for 
we  lean  more  entirely  on  God  and  draw  more  constant  supplies  of  His  grace. 
{C.  Voysey,  B.A.)  Running  and  walking  : — Any  racehorse  will  start  at  full 
speed;  but  how  few  have  staying  power!  The  tyro  in  cycling  will  go  at  full  pelt; 
but  only  the  experienced  rider  can  walk  or  stand.  To  pursue  the  common  track 
of  daily  duty — not  faltering  nor  growing  weary — to  do  so  when  novelty  has  worn 
off,  when  the  elasticity  of  youth  has  vanished,  when  the  applause  of  the  crowd 
has  become  dim  and  faint — this  is  the  greatest  achievement  of  the  Christian  life. 
For  this,  earthly  and  human  strength  will  not  avail.  But  God  is  all-sufficient. 
{F.  B.  Meyer,  B.A.)  God's  grace  sufficient  for  all  lifers  stages  : — The  spiritual 
teaching  of  this  verse  is,  that  for  all  the  stages  and  moods  of  our  life- pilgrimage 
Heaven's  grace  is  available  and  sufficient.  (J.  Halsey.)  They  shall  mount  up 
with  wings  as  eagles. — Ood'a  eagles  : — I.  The  eagle  is  built  for  flight.  1.  His 
structure  marvellously  combines  strength,  lightness,  and  muscular  power.  The 
anatomy  of  the  bird  shows  feathers,  bones,  muscles,  and  sinews  to  be  designed 
by  the  Creator  for  the  purpose  of  flying;  and  a  master  specimen  of  perfect  adapta- 
tion. E.g.,  the  cylindrical  structure  of  bones  and  feathers  makes  each  virtually 
a  balloon,  so  that  when  the  wings  are  spread  for  flight,  the  tendency  is  upward 
instead  of  downward,  and  no  effort  is  needed  to  support  the  body  upon  the  air,  which 
rather  buoys  it  up.  2.  Built  for  high  flights,  capable  of  mounting  above  all  other 
birds,  no  other  being  capable  of  rising  to  such  elevations,  or  being  so  at  home  in 
the  upper  atmosphere.  In  fact,  as  the  air  becomes  more  rarified,  the  bird  seems 
to  soar  with  greater  ease  and  rapidity,  and  finds  it  the  more  natural  to  ascend. 
3.  Built  for  sustained  and  tireless  flights,  maintaining  himself  without  exhaustion 
for  any  length  of  time,  and  resting  on  the  wing.  Those  who  have  watched  the 
eagle's  flight  have  observed  that  there  is  no  apparent  effort;  he  rather  finds  in  it 
rest  and  recreation  than  a  struggle  to  maintain  himseK.  4.  Built  for  fearless  flight. 
The  eagle  soars  above  the  abyss  without  even  a  trace  of  timidity,  a  stranger  to  all 
fear.  What  to  us  is  danger,  is  to  him  delight,  challenging  and  provoking  his 
flight.  II.  The  eagle  is  built  for  repose.  No  bird  can  be  so  stiU  and  motionless 
when  he  rests.  When  the  eagle  perches  on  the  crag,  and  grasps  it  with  his  talons, 
the  more  he  settles  down,  the  firmer  and  more  immovable  his  clutch.  The  anatomy 
of  his  legs  exhibits  the  adaptation  of  his  whole  structure  to  the  purposes  of  perching. 
The  weight  of  the  body,  resting  upon  the  lower  portion  of  the  legs,  increases  the 
tenacity  of  the  hold  upon  whatever  is  chosen  as  a  resting-place.  His  sleep,  there- 
fore, is  seciure,  for  his  grasp  can  only  relax  as  he  rises  upon  his  feet  and  so  releases 
all  the  sinews  by  which  his  talons  grip  the  rock.  He  goes  to  sleep,  therefore,  without 
a  doubt  that  he  will  find  himself  there  in  the  morning.  III.  The  eagle  is  built  for 
the  STORM.  He  perceives  it  afar  off  and  is  not  afraid.  This  king  of  birds  detects 
the  approach  of  the  storm-cloud,  not  only  with  eyes  and  ears,  but  with  mysterious 
senses  to  which  we  are  strangers;  and,  when  as  yet  there  is  no  appearance  of  the 
coming  tempest  above  the  horizon,  he  scents  its  approach,  Hfts  up  his  majestic 
head,  looks  toward  the  coming  storm,  and  prepares  himself  for  a  gigantic  grapple 
with  the  forces  of  nature.  He  welcomes  tempests  before  which  wild  beasts  flee 
to  their  dens  in  terror.  He  preens  his  feathers,  shakes  himself  as  tornado  and 
tempest  approach,  actually  takes  the  very  front  and  leads  the  storm,  outflying  it 
at  its  most  rapid  pace,  rejoicing  in  its  violence,  and,  when  he  wiU,  rising  far  above 
it  into  the  clear  heights  of  cloudless  day,  whence  he  looks  down  upon  it.  IV.  The 
eagle  lives  a  solitary  life.  There  is  no  bird  so  alone.  Other  birds  go  in  flocks ; 
the  eagle,  never;  if  two  are  seen  together,  they  are  mates.  Its  majesty  consists 
partly  in  its  solitariness.  It  lives  apart  because  other  birds  cannot  live  where  and 
as  it  lives,  and  follow  where  it  leads.  V.  The  eagle  is  trained  by  discipline. 
The  parent  bird  trains  the  young  to  fly;  and,  if  need  be,  the  mother  pushes  the 
young  bird  off  the  edge  of  the  cliff,  and  lets  it  fall  over  into  the  abyss,  and  tumble 
screaming  and  screeching,  apparently  doomed  to  be  dashed  in  pieces ;  but  the 
mother  bird  watching,  drops  like  a  plummet,  with  incredible  rapidity,  beneath 
the  young  bird,  and  receives  it  on  her  broad  maternal  wings  and  bears  it  up 
to  the  heights  only  to  let  it  drop  again;  until,  by  and  by,  the  fledgling  is 
prepared,  as  the  mother  bird  swoops  down  to  arrest  its  fall,  to  take  the 
wing  and  foUow  the  parent  on  her  majestic  flight.  VI.  The  healthy  eagle 
imparts  strength,  a  sick  eagle,  whose  vitality  had  been  reduced  by  long  con- 
finement, was  set  loose  and  placed  on  the  heather,  but  only  drooped  and  seemed 
ready  to  die.     Then  another  eagle,  that  from  the  heights  saw  the  feeble  bird. 


254  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xl. 

swept  down  and  touched  and  fanned  it  with  his  great  wings.     This  was  repeated 
until  the  sick  bird,  gradually  feeling  the  inspiration  of  the  other's  vitality,  preened 
itself,  expanded  its  wings,  and  ultimately  followed  in  the  upward   flight.     We 
seldom  get  an  upward  look,  aspiration,  or  ascent,  unless  someone  from  the  heights 
sweeps  down  and  touches  us.     VII.  The  eagle,  thus  built  for  the  heights,  is  not 
CONTENT  TO  DWELL  ON  EAKTH.     {W.  P.  Ray.)        Life  With  wings  .■ — Waiting  is 
not  so  much  a  transient  action  as  a  permanent  attitude.     It  is  not  the  restless 
vagrant  calling  at  the  door  for  relief,  it  is  rather  the  intimacy  of  the  babe  at  the 
breast.     They  who  thus  wait  upon  the  Lord  shall  obtain  a  marvellous  addition 
to  their  resources.     They  shall  obtain  wings.     We  do  well  in  pictmring  the  angel 
presences  to  endow  them  with  wings.     At  the  best  it  is  a  clumsy  symbolism. 
What  do  we  mean  by  wings?     We  mean  that  life  has  gained  new  powers,  extra- 
ordinary capacity;  the  old  self  has  received  heavenly  addition,  endowing  it  with 
nimbleness,  buoyancy,  strength.     What  are  some  of  the  characteristics  of  life  with 
wings?     1.  It  is  life  characterised  by  buoyancy.     We  become  endowed  with  power 
to  rise  above  things!     How  often  we  give  the  counsel  one  to  another,  "  You  should 
rise  above  it!  "     If,  when  we  give  the  counsel,  we  could  give  the  wings,  the  things 
that  bind  to  the  low  plains  of  life  might  be  left  behind.     How  frequently  we  are 
held  in  bondage  by  grovelling  to  the  mean  and  trifling.     Some  small  grievance 
enters  into  our  life  and  keeps  us  from  the  heights.     Some  disappointment  holds 
us  in  depressing  servitude.     Some  ingratitude  paralyses  our  service  and  chills 
our  delight  in  unselfish  toil.     Or  some  discourtesy  is  done  to  us,  we  cannot  get 
away  from  it.     Or,  perhaps,  it  is  "  the  murmur  of  self-will,"  or  "  the  storm  of 
passion  "  which  prevents  oiir  emancipation.     When  we  get  the  wings  we  have 
the  power  to  rise  above  these  trifles,  and  even  above  the  things  that  may  be  larger 
than  trifles  and  may  appear  like  gigantic  hUls.     The  life  with  wing-power  is  not 
the  victim  of  "  the  spirit  of  heaviness."     2.  Life  with  wing- power  is  characterised 
by  loftiness.     "Mount  up!"     We  speak  of  a  "  lofty  character  "  as  opposed  to  one 
who  is  low  or  mean.     There  is  no  feature  that  the  Bible  loves  more  to  proclaim 
than  this  "aboveness."     "Seek  the  things  that  are  above";  "Set  your  mind 
on  things  above."     It  speaks  also  of  dwelling  "  with  Christ  in  the  heavecJy  places." 
3.  The  wing-life  is  characterised  by  comprehensiveness.     High  soaring  gives  wide 
seeing.     Loftiness  gives  comprehension.     One  man  oiJers  his  opinion  on  some 
weighty  matter  and  he  is  answered  by  the  charge,  "  That  is  a  very  low  ground  to 
take."     The  higher  you  get,  the  greater  will  be  the  area  that  comes  within  your 
view.     We  may  judge  om:  height  by  the  measure  of  our  outlook.     We  have  not 
got  very  high  if  we  only  see  ourselves ;  nay,  we  are  in  the  mire !     "  Look  not  every 
man  on  his  own  things,  but  every  man  also  on  the  things  of  others."     It  is  well 
when  we  get  so  high  that  our  vision  comprehends  our  town,  better  still  when  it 
includes  the  country,  better  still  when  it  encircles  other  countries,  best  of  all  when 
it  engirdles  the  world.     It  is  well  when  we  are  interested  in  home  missions;  better 
still  when  home  and  foreign  work  are  comprehended  in  our  vie   .     "  Lord,  we  saw 
one  casting  out  devils  in  Thy  name  and  we  forbad  him,  because  he  followeth  not 
with  us."     How  narrow  the  outlook!     One  day  the  vision  of  the  disciples  will 
be   immeasurably  enlarged.     4.   The   wing-life  is   characterised   by   proportion. 
To  see  things  aright  we  must  get  away  from  them.     We  never  see  a  thing  truly 
until  we  see  it  in  its  relationships.     We  must  see  a  moment  in  relation  to  a  week,  a 
week  in  relation  to  a  year,  a  year  in  relation  to  eternity.     Wing-power  gives  us  the 
gift  of  soaring,  and  we  see  how  things  are  related  one  to  another.     An  affliction 
looked  at  from  the  lowlands  may  be  stupendous;  looked  at  from  the  heights  it  may 
appear  little  or  nothing.     "  This  light  affliction  which  is  but  for  a  moment  worketh 
for  us  a  far  more  exceeding  and  eternal  weight  of  glory."     What  a  breadth  of 
view!     (J.  H.  Jowett,  M.A.)        The  happy  effects  of  waiting  upon  God :— They 
that  wait  upon  the  Lord  mount  up.     I.  With  the  vigotjb  of  eagles.     In  tiil 
true  Christians  there  must  be  a  considerable  attention  to  heavenly  things.     They 
are  all  exhorted  to  "  set  their  affections  on  things  which  are  above,  and  not  on 
things  which  are  on  the  earth."     Therefore,  they  cannot  be  true  believers  whose 
minds  are  not  under  the  influence  of  spiritual  and  heavenly  objects.     But,  among 
true  Christians  there  is  a  great  difference.     Some  have  their  minds  much  more  in 
heaven  than  others.     This  difference  arises  from  their  difference  in  waiting  upon 
Ood.     Waiting  upon  God  their  faith  becomes  strong  and  lively;  their  J.oye  pure 
and  fervent;  their  hope  joyful  and  blessed.     These  graces,  like  the  wings  of  an 
eagle,  lift  their  souls  above  worldly  things.   .Their  flight  is  sustained  so  long  as 
these  wings  of  the  renewed  soul  continue  unwearied;  and  when,  like  all  things 


CHAP.  XL.]  ISAIAH.  255 

belonging  to  the  human  soul,  they  wax  feeble,  their  strength  is  renewed  by  waiting 
upon  God.  They  who  do  not  wait  upon  God  are  weighed  down  to  the  earth,  and 
find  the  concerns  of  this  world,  like  the  fogs  and  mists  of  a  darkened  atmosphere, 
clouding  their  prospects  and  obstructing  their  progress.  11.  With  the  ease  ott 
THE  BAGLB.  There  is  not  only  a  strength  of  character,  but  a  simplicity,  an  ease 
belonging  to  them  who  wait  upon  God  with  diligence  and  constancy  to  which 
others  who  are  deficient  in  this  duty  can  never  attain.  Now  religion  is  eminent 
and  exalted  in  proportion  as  it  is  easy  and  unconstrained.  III.  With  the  elevation 
OF  EAGLES.  With  what  majesty  does  the  eagle  soar  through  the  heavens  and 
pursue  his  lofty  comrse,  unmoved  by  those  little  persecutions  of  the  feathered 
race  which  equally  bespeak  their  fear,  and  their  conscious  inferiority !  Here  you 
behold  a  fit  emblem  of  the  man  who,  by  waiting  upon  God,  mounts  up  with^wings; 
«nd,  nobly  disregarding  the  censures  of  the  world,  which  originate  in  a  conscious- 
ness of  its  own  inferior  excellence,  and  in  a  hatred  of  those  qualities  it  can  never 
reach,  pursues  his  heavenly  flight  without  one  retaliating  stroke,  without  one 
malignant  feeling.  And  see  how,  even  in  his  sublimest  course,  his  eagle  eye 
surveys  with  interest  the  concerns  of  this  lower  world.  By  waiting  upon  God 
he  is  enabled  to  iinite  the  benevolence,  the  magnanimity,  and  the  heavenliness  of 
the  saint,  with  the  sobriety,  the  wisdom,  and  the  activity  of  the  citizen  of  the  world. 
{M.  Jackson.)  Mounting  as  on  eagle's  wings  : — This  is  the  disposition  of  good 
Christians  to  be  heavenly  in  their  meditations  and  desires.  This  they  are  upon 
these  grounds — 1.  Out  of  respect  to  Christ  who  is  their  Head,  and  is  in  heaven 
already  (Col.  iii.  1).  2.  The  new  nature  which  is  in  Christians  inclines  them 
hereunto  likewise.  What  makes  fire  to  go  upward?  It  has  a  principle  in  it  which 
does  so  dispose  it.  Everything  acts  suitably  to  its  principles,  and  so  it  is  here. 
Believers  are  bom  from  above,  and  therefore  it  is  that  they  are  carried  up  thither. 
3.  The  end  they  are  ordained  to.  They  are  "  begotten  to  a  Uvely  hope,"  and  to  a 
"  heavenly  inheritance."  Now  where  should  the  minds  of  great  heirs  be  but  where 
their  estates  lie?  (1  Pet.  i.  3,  4.)  (T.  Horton,  D.D.)  Wings :— I.  The  real 
marrow  of  life  is  in  its  higher  experiences.  We  manage  to  endure  a  great  deal 
that  is  disagreeable  and  depressing,  if  now  and  then  come  seasons  of  spiritual 
uplifting,  moments  of  soul  glow  and  sunrise.  "  They  shall  mount  up  on  wings 
as  eagles."  This  is  our  privilege.  The  soul  is  free.  It  has  wings  in  the  joy  of 
pure  emotion,  in  the  upspringing  might  of  faith,  iu  the  ardour  of  heavenly  aspira- 
tion, in  the  swift  flight  of  love,  in  the  liberty  of  exultant  hope.  2.  With  some 
these  wings  are  often  folded.  They  droop  often  through  sheer  weariness.  They 
trail  frequently  in  the  dust.  Making  ample  allowance  for  differences  in  tempera- 
ment and  scope  of  thought  in  individuals,  the  devout  nature  is  not  ignorant  of 
blessed  experiences  that  impel  the  soul  onward — sympathies,  insights,  ardours — 
refreshing  and  enriching  to  the  hidden  life.  3.  A  few  hints  wiU  awaken  precious 
memories.  You  remember  how  the  spring  odours  of  the  tender-leaved  woods 
,  seized  your  finer  sense  as  you  came  forth  from  the  place  of  pra3'er,  and  wafted 
your  thought  to  the  trees  of  Paradise.  More  than  once,  in  the  solitude  and  by  the 
sea,  amid  the  noon's  delicious  peacefulness,  and  when  the  fresh  winds  blew  health 
and  music  out  of  the  west,  over  l^gues  of  prairie,  starred  with  unnumbered  fiowers, 
your  heart  overran  with  sacred  emotion,  and  expanded  to  embrace  the  beautiful 
repose!  Wings  were  yours.  Then,  too,  after  a  season  of  spiritual  depression, 
where  you  had  gone  mournfully  with  a  sense  of  barrenness  and  biu-den,  the  painful 
speU  was  finally  broken,  and  you  seemed  set  in  "  a  large  place."  Your  soul  bounded 
outward  into  blessed  light.  Great  freedom  was  yours,  and  you  wondered  why 
such  doubt  could  have  fettered  the  faith  that  now  exults  in  the  joyful  confidence 
of  a  son  beloved.  You  remember  how,  before  now,  you  have  come  into  the  church 
heavy,  gloomy,  discouraged,  an  evil  world  shadowing  your  hope,  and  life  looking 
sepulchral  and  poor  amid  earth's  losses  and  changes  and  delusions,  and  how  hymn 
and  psalm  and  confession  and  prayer  have  little  by  little  stolen  away  yom-  unrest, 
and  then  how  the  Word  of  grace  uttered  from  the  dejjths  of  a  prophetic  soul  flowed 
with  healing,  and  light,  and  comfort,  to  your  heart,  and  how,  on  the  •  ings  of  its 
benediction,  you  rose  up  stronger  and  clearer  visioned,  and  went  forth  as  on  the 
landscape  of  a  better  world.  But  it  is  in  the  closet,  if  you  live  nobly,  that  your 
strength  is  most  graciously  renewed.  4.  We  give  grudgingly,  we  labour  in 
heaviness,  we  minister  painfuUy,  we  worship  coldly,  we  live  meanly,  until  the 
higher  life  is  begotten  within  us — until  the  soul  gets  a  glow,  and  an  earnestness, 
and  a  breadth  of  sympathy,  and  an  impulse  of  high  and  pure  aspirations  that 
make  it  a  joy  to  do  good.     Love  is  always  winged.     If  you  would  conquer  your 


256  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xl. 

besetments,  rise  to  a  more  gracious  benevolence,  enjoy  a  livelier  consciousness 
of  eternal  things,  and  have  your  Christian  duties  delightful;  get  the  ardent,  un- 
selfish, consecrated  heart  of  love,  through  the  grace  of  the  Holy  Spirit,  the  Inspirer 
and  Comforter.  {H.  N.  Powers.)  As  eagles : — I.  The  illustbation.  1.  Eagles' 
wings  are  coimected  with  strength.  God  spoke  by  Moses  to  the  children  of 
Israel  on  this  wise — "  Ye  have  seen  what  I  did  unto  the  Egyptians,  and  how  I 
bare  you  on  eagles'  wings,  and  brought  you  unto  Myself."  Here  God's  almighty 
power,  displayed  in  the  deliverance  from  Egypt,  and  with  all  the  varied  privileges 
of  Israel,  is  compared  to  the  strength  of  eagles'  wings.  In  Deut.  xxxii.  11,  it  is  said, 
"  As  an  eagle  stirreth  up  her  nest,  fluttereth  over  her  yoimg,  spreadeth  abroad  her 
wings,  taketh  them,  beareth  them  on  her  wings,  so  the  Lord  alone  did  lead  him." 
Here  the  eagle's  wings  are  brought  before  us  in  coimection  with  the  support  of  the 
young,  but  at  the  same  time  with  the  purpose  which  the  parent  bird  has  in  dis- 
turbing her  nest  and  her  young,  namely,  to  teach  them  to  provide  and  to  fly.  All 
this  is  more  than  verified  in  the  experience  of  those  who  wait  upon  the  Lord. 
They  are  strong,  and  their  strength  is  continually  being  renewed — which  no  cir- 
cumstances can  exhaust,  and  which  in  no  emergency  will  be  allowed  to  fail  them. 
Wherein  does  the  strength  of  the  believer  rest,  then?  The  apostle  John  describes 
this  strength  when  he  says,  "  I  have  written  unto  you,  young  men,  because  ye  are 
strong,  and  the  Word  of  God  abide th  in  you ;  and  ye  have  overcome  the  wicked  one." 
In  other  words,  the  strength  of  the  believer  is  manifested  in  opposition  to  moral 
and  spiritual  evil — in  opposition  to  all  that  is  erroneous  and  contrary  to  the  will 
and  mind  of  God.  Error  is  very  attractive  to  some  minds,  but  he  who  waits  upon 
the  Lord  obtains  that  spiritual  vigour  of  mind  which  enables  him  to  thi'ow  off  the 
poisonous  influence  of  error,  and  to  abide  in  the  truth.  True  manliness  consists  in 
refusing  to  do  what  is  wrong,  whoever  be  the  teoipter,  or  whatever  inducements 
there  be  to  give  way  to  the  temptation.  True  Christian  manhness  fears  God,  and 
fears  no  one  besides.  The  promise  of  the  text,  then,  is  that  such  true  energy  of 
mind  shall  belong  to  those  who  wait  upon  the  Lord.  It  is  strength  which  St.  Paul 
describes  as  connected  with  the  power  of  God's  might.  It  is  strength  which  is 
manifested  oftentimes  in  connection  with  human  weakness,  and  with  the  changes 
that  are  incident  to  our  human  and  worldly  condition.  Observe  the  expression, 
"  shall  renew  their  strength  ";  for  the  eagle,  although  noted  for  its  strength,  is  not 
always  strong.  There  is  a  season  when  it  loses  the  feathers  of  its  wings,  and  aits 
soUtary,  drooping,  and  sad,  unable  to  seize  upon  its  prey,  and  no  longer  the  terror 
of  the  smaller  birds;  but  it  is  noted  that  during  that  season,  though  the  eagle 
cannot  rise  to  the  sun  as  she  was  wont  to  do,  she  shows  herself  to  the  sun,  and 
basking  in  the  sunshine,  her  feathers  grow  again,  her  strength  comes  back,  and  she 
mounts  up  and  meets  the  sun  as  of  old.  And  what  a  striking  indication  this  is  of 
the  experiences  of  those  who  are  "  strong  in  the  Lord,  and  in  the  power  of  His 
might " !  It  is  not  strength  which  is  liable  to  no  variableness.  There  are  seasons 
of  depression  for  those  who  are  strong  in  the  Lord.  2.  But  the  Bible  speaks 
of  the  eagle,  and  of  eagle's  wings,  in  connection  with  swiftness.  If  you  refer  to 
Deut.  xxviii.  49,  you  will  find  it  said,  in  reference  to  the  judgment  which  the  Lord 
would  bring  upon  Israel  if  they  persevered  in  sin,  "  The  Lord  shall  bring  a  nation 
against  thee  from  far,  from  the  end  of  the  earth,  as  swift  as  the  eagle  flieth;  a 
nation  whose  tongue  thou  shalt  not  understand."  We  may  see  the  fulfilment  of 
this  by  referring  to  the  Lamentations  of  Jeremiah  fLam.  iv.  19).  The  eagle's 
wings  are  used  for  the  swiftness  with  which  they  propel  the  eagle  in  his  flight.  The 
believer,  waiting  upon  God,  is  one  whose  experience  is  described  in  the  sacred  song 
in  this  remarkable  language — "  Or  ever  I  was  aware,  my  soul  made  me  like  the 
chariots  of  Ammi-nadib  " — chariots  noted  for  swiftness.  3.  The  eagle  is  noted 
for  its  peculiarity  of  flight.  It  is  said  that  it  is  furnished  with  two  pairs  of  eyelids, 
and  that  the  inner  one  is  transparent,  and  is  drawn  over  the  eye  because  its  flight 
is  always  directly  towards  the  sun.  Whereas  other  birds  see  other  objects  in  the 
light  of  the  sun,  it  is  the  eagle's  peculiarity  of  flight  that  its  eye  seems  to  be  fixed 
upon  the  sun,  and  the  eyelid  of  which  I  speak  seems  to  be  for  the  purpose  of  pro- 
tecting the  eye  from  the  scorching  brilliancy  of  the  sunlight.  Now,  in  this  respect 
there  is  a  similarity  to  the  experience  of  those  who  wait  upon  the  Lord.  The 
believer  in  Jesus  Christ  is  one  whose  tendency  is  directly  to  the  Sun  of  Righteous- 
ness. And  what  a  consolation  it  is,  that  in  the  humanity  of  Jesus  the  believer 
finds  protection  from  all  that  is  awful  in  contemplation  of  Deity  !  4.  The  flight  of 
the  eagle  is  the  flight  of  Ufe.  Think  of  the  contrast  between  the  flight  of  an  arrow 
and  the  flight  of  an  eagle.     The  flight  of  the  arrow  is  only  as  high  as  it  is  propelled 


CHAP.  XL.]  ISAIAH.  257 

by  the  impulse  that  is  given  to  it  from  the  bow;  when  that  impulse  ceases,  down 
comes  the  arrow  again.  It  is  not  the  flight  of  life,  but  of  impulse.  The  flight 
of  the  arrow  may  be  likened  to  those  impulses  for  good  which  some  who  profess 
and  caU  themselves  Christians  have.  11.  Who  are  they  that  wait  upon  the 
Lord?  And  when  is  it  that  they  are  experiencing  this  blessed  promise?  The 
eagle  is  flying  highest  when  she  sees  the  world  the  least.  The  eagle  rejoices  in 
light.  When  she  mounts  up  with  her  strongest  wings  it  is  in  the  sunlight,  con- 
trasting in  this  respect  with  the  flight  of  the  bird  of  night.  It  is  always  a  good 
eign,  when  we  want  the  light  thrown  upon  everything  that  we  have  to  do  with — 
when  we  want  to  bring  all  owe  motives,  and  all  our  actions,  and  all  our  plans 
into  the  light  of  God's  truth.  On  the  other  hand,  "  He  that  doeth  evil  hateth 
the  light,  neither  cometh  to  the  light,  lest  his  deeds  should  be  reproved."  {W. 
Cadman,  M.A.)  The  wings  of  surrender  and  trust  : — We  might  name  our 
wings  the  wings  of  surrender  and  of  trust.  If  we  will  only  surrender  ourselves 
utterly  to  the  Lord,  and  will  trust  Him  perfectly,  we  shall  find  our  souls  "  mount- 
ing up  with  wings  as  eagles  "  to  the  heavenly  places  in  Christ  Jesus,  where  earthly 
annoyances  or  sorrows  have  no  power  to  disturb  us.  {Mrs.  Pearsall  Smith.) 
Crawling  and  soaring  : — The  caterpillar,  as  it  creeps  along  the  ground,  must 
have  a  widely  different  view  of  the  world  around  it,  from  that  which  the  same 
caterpillar  will  have  when  its  wings  are  developed,  and  it  soars  in  the  air  above 
the  very  places  where  once  it  crawled.  And  similarly  the  crawling  soul  must 
necessarily  see  things  in  a  very  different  aspect  from  the  soul  that  has  "  mounted 
up  with  wings."  (Ibid.)  Overcoming  : — This  is  what  the  soul  on  wings 
does.  It  overcomes  the  world  through  faith.  To  overcome  means  to  "  come 
over,"  not  to  be  crushed  under;  and  the  soul  on  wings  flies  over  this  world  and 
the  things  of  it.  (Ibid.)  Spiritual  difficulties  : — A  friend  once  illustrated 
to  me  the  difference  between  three  of  her  friends  in  the  following  way.  She 
said,  if  they  should  all  three  come  to  a  spiritual  mountain  which  had  to  be  crossed, 
the  first  one  would  tunnel  through  it  with  hard  and  wearisome  labour ;  the  second 
would  meander  around  it  in  an  indefinite  fashion,  hardly  knowing  where  she  was 
going,  and  yet  because  her  aim  was  right,  getting  around  it  at  last;  but  the  third, 
she  said,  would  just  flap  her  wings  and  fly  right  over.  (Ibid.)  Wings  must 
he  used  : — Not  the  largest  wings  ever  known  can  lift  a  bird  one  inch  upward  unless 
they  are  used,  (Ibid.)  Weights  holding  the  soul  to  earth  : — As  well  might 
an  eagle  try  to  fly  with  a  hundred-ton  weight  tied  fast  to  its  feet,  as  the  soul  try 
to  "  mount  up  with  wings  "  while  a  weight  of  earthly  cares  and  anxieties  is  hold- 
ing it  down  to  earth.  (Ibid.)  "  With,  wings  as  eagles  "  .• — Once  when  I  was  in 
Switzerland  I  saw  an  eagle,  a  splendid  bird,  but  it  was  chained  to  a  rock.  It 
had  some  twenty  or  thirty  feet  of  chain  attached  to  its  legs,  and  to  an  iron  bolt 
in  the  rock.  There  was  the  king  of  birds,  meant  to  soar  into  heaven,  chained 
down  to  earth.  That  is  the  life  of  multitudes  of  believers.  Are  you  allowing 
business,  are  you  allowing  the  cares  of  the  world,  are  you  allowing  the  flesh  to 
chain  you  down,  so  that  you  cannot  rise  up  ?  1.  You  ask  me,  How  can  I  get 
these  eagle  wings  ?  I  answer.  How  did  the  eagle  get  its  wings  ?  By  its  birth. 
It  was  born  a  royal  eagle;  it  had  a  royal  descent.  And  every  child  of  God  is 
bom  with  eagle  wings.  God  means  you  to  live  a  heavenly  life.  2.  How  does 
God  teach  His  eaglet  children  to  use  their  wings  ?  He  comes  and  stirs  up  their 
nest.  Sometimes  with  a  trying  providence,  with  a  death,  with  sickness,  with 
loss,  with  some  tribulation,  with  temptation.  Why  ?  Just  as  those  eaglets, 
ready  to  sink,  find  the  mother  coming  under  them  and  carrying  them,  so  the 
everlasting  arms  are  stretched  out  underneath  the  soul  that  feels  itself  ready  to 
perish,  and  God  calls  upon  the  soul  to  trust  Him.  As  the  eaglet  triists  the  mother 
to  carry  it,  God  asks  me  to  trust  Him,  that  He  will  bear  me.  And  God  longs 
to  teach  His  children  to  mount  on  eagle  wings.  But  how  can  they  do  it  ?  "  They 
that  wait  upon  the  Lord  shall  mount  up  with  wings  as  eagles."  God  often  comes 
to  the  Christian  worker  and  stirs  up  the  nest,  because  He  sees  the  eagle  wings 
are  not  being  used.  3.  What  is  the  characteristic  of  the  eagle  wings?  To  he 
able  to  mount  up  to  heaven,  the  wings  of  the  eagle  must  have  greater  strength 
than  the  wings  of  any  other  bird.  And  God  wants  His  children  to  be  so  strong 
that  they  can  live  above  the  world.  The  great  mark  of  the  disciple  of  Christ 
that  Christ  spoke  of  in  His  prayer  to  the  Father  was,  "  They  are  not  of  the  world, 
as  I  am  not  of  the  world."  They  belong  to  heaven,  their  life  and  heart  are  there. 
This  idea  of  strength  is  the  great  idea  of  our  text,  and  you  have  it  in  the  words' 
that  precede  (vers.  28-31).  You  find  that  word  "  faint  "  four  times  in  the  passage.. 
VOL.  II. — 17 


258  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xl. 

First,  it  is  God  "  fainteth  not  ";  and  then  it  is,  He  giveth  power  to  the  "  faint  "; 
and  then  it  is,  the  young  men  shall  "  faint."  All  human  strength  shall  faint — 
the  very  strongest  shall  faint  and  be  of  no  avail.  Then,  "  They  shall  run,  and 
not  be  weary;  and  they  shall  walk,  and  not '  faint.' "  (Andrew  Murray.)  The 
glory  of  the  common  life  : — This  movement  from  the  wing  of  the  eagle  to  the  foot 
of  man  is  no  descending  path,  no  record  of  decaying  spiritual  vigour,  but  rather 
the  ascending  line  of  hfe.  1.  Religion  is  not  some  highly  wrought  emotional  experi- 
ence— rare,  ecstatic,  lifting  us  into  the  seventh  heaven;  out  an  accession  of 
permanent  spiritual  power  to  enable  us  to  do  the  work  of  our  everyday  hfe  and 
grow  in  the  grace  of  a  normal  Christian  character.  In  the  common  experience 
of  man  all  true  rehgion  begins  on  the  soaring  wing  of  some  strong  emotion, 
some  wave  of  feeling  that  comes  over  the  heart  for  mercies  received.  It  was 
as  Moses  when  God  met  him  in  the  desert  of  Horeb  and  showed  him  the  burning 
bush,  a  rare  sight,  a  moment  of  vision  of  heavenly  things  from  which  all  future 
experiences  were  to  be  dated.  The  common  lot  of  man  falls  upon  the  believer; 
the  moment  of  thrill  and  ecstasy  passes  away.  Moses  has  to  go  down  to  Egypt 
among  the  politicians  and  do  the  hard  work  and  drudgery  of  Ufe.  Is,  then,  the 
ecstasy  a  waste  of  force  ?  Moses,  as  he  turned  to  the  worrying  work  of  rounding 
up  the  Israelites  for  the  long  journey  over  seas  and  across  the  desert,  may  frequently 
have  thought  that  God's  service  had  not  procured  for  him  either  the  ease  or  the 
honour  that  the  ecstatic  experiences  of  the  burning  bush  had  promised.  But 
when  we  look  back  on  the  Ufe  and  work  of  the  great  statesman  we  can  see  that 
the  burning  bush  was  but  an  ancillary  incident  in  a  great  moral  career;  and 
that  the  patient,  daily  labour,  the  unflinching  loyalty  to  duty,  which  for  forty 
years  had  to  be  pursued  in  all  weathers  and  in  all  moods,  are  the  facts  that  loom 
large  like  mountain  peaks  in  this  great  Ufe.  It  was  to  warm  his  heart  and  inspire 
his  spirit  for  those  days  of  toil  and  nights  devoid  of  ease  that  the  vision  was  given. 
It  was  precisely  the  same  truth  that  we  find  illustrated  in  the  reUgious  experience 
of  the  apostle  Paul.  His  spiritual  life  began  with,  a  celestial  vision;  and  in  its 
upward  development  he  came,  not  to  more  and  clearer  visions,  but  to  the  per- 
ception of  a  sanctity  and  nobility  which  lay  in  the  common  work  of  Ufe.  The 
Christian  man  as  father  and  priest  in  his  own  household  hallows  his  home  by  the 
benediction  of  his  morning  prayers.  You  do  not  regard  your  morning  prayer 
as  false  and  futile  because  during  the  day  you  cannot  Uve  up  to  aU  your  own  high 
ideals.  The  aspiration  to  be  better  is  itself  the  accession  of  power  to  do  better. 
This  truth,  so  full  of  the  poetry  of  passion  and  the  deepest  philosophy  of  life, 
is  brought  to  us  with  wonderful  force  and  tenderness  in  Hogg's  "  Skylark."  The 
wild  abandon  of  feeling  that  carried  the  songster  so  far  into  the  sky  was  not  frenzy 
nor  foolishness  because  he  had  to  come  back  and  gather  worms  for  the  nestUngs. 
On  the  contrary,  there  had  been  no  nestUngs  but  for  the  emotion  that  produced 
that  song.  And  the  song  of  rapture  found  its  crowning  glory  in  the  lowly  service 
of  the  obscure  nest.  2.  The  inteUectual  man  is  in  danger  of  disparaging  the 
emotions  and  of  setting  aside  the  mysticism  and  ecstasy  of  the  soul  as  mere  fancies 
and  dreams.  But  the  emotional  man  is  in  still  greater  danger  of  regarding  them 
as  the  only  kind  of  religious  experiences  worth  seeking  after,  the  only  evidence 
of  true  religion  in  the  heart,  and  certainly  the  glory  of  the  Christian  life.  In  a 
word,  the  emotional  man  regards  the  glory  and  crown  of  life  to  be  the  rapture 
and  ecstasy  of  the  love  and  faith,  and  not  the  works  and  character  which  these 
feelings  should  produce.  He  mistakes  the  means  for  the  end.  In  the  effort  to 
correct  tliis  mistake  we  must  go  the  length  of  saying  that  love  to  and  trust  in 
Christ  are  not  reUgion  at  aU;  just  as  seeds  are  not  trees.  They  become  reUgion 
only  as  they  are  transmuted  into  Christian  character  in  the  daily  work  and  warfare 
of  the  common  Ufe.  It  is  of  vital  importance  that  people  should  understand 
the  laws  of  Ufe  in  regard  to  the  relation  of  emotions  to  acts.  Pleasure  is  not  an 
end,  but  the  servant  of  higher  and  nobler  ways  of  Uving.  Nature  provides  that 
eating  and  drinking  shaU  be  a  pleasure  to  man;  but  what  is  the  man  called  who 
cares  merely  for  the  pleasure  of  eating;  who  Uves  to  gratify  his  appetites  and 
never  does  an  honest  day's  work  for  the  food  he  consumes  ?  No  deeper  stain, 
no  more  deadly  practice  can  come  into  our  Ufe  than  the  pursuit  of  pleasure  for 
its  own  sake.  The  moment  you  love  the  excitement  more  than  the  work,  so 
that  vou  come  soon  to  steal  the  excitement  and  shirk  the  work,  nature  revenges 
herself  on  you  by  making  all  such  work  as  you  are  forced  to  do  a  drudgery  instead 
of  a  pleasure.  1  have  heard  hard-working  wives  and  mothers  say,  "  I  have  lost 
my  reUgion  !     I  have  so  many  little  children  to  care  for,  so  many  duties  in  the 


CHAP,  xu]  ISAIAH.  259 

home  that  I  cannot  get  to  chorch."  Is  not  this  mother's  care  and  self-sacrifice 
for  her  children  her  religion?  What  did  she  love  and  trust  Christ  for?  That 
she  might  gad  about  at  rehgious  meetings,  or  that  she  might  bring  up  her  little 
ones  in  the  fear  of  God  ?  She  and  her  child,  with  the  sense  of  the  presence  of 
the  Father- God,  make  that  nursery  the  holiest  of  shrines.  If  a  youth  should 
learn  mathematics  and  mensuration  in  school  for  the  purpose  of  making  him 
a  surveyor,  and  then  be  sent  out  into  the  prairies  or  the  Rocky  Mountains  for 
six  months  to  apply  his  theoretical  knowledge  to  the  practical  work  of  his  pro- 
fession, you  would  pronounce  him  crazy  if,  when  he  came  back  with  a  successful 
survey  of  the  region,  he  should  say,  "  Yes,  that  is  good  work,  but  I  have  lost  my 
mathematics;  I  was  not  in  a  school  all  those  six  months."  The  mathematics 
were  a  means  to  an  end.  If  faith  and  love  to  God  are  spiritiial  things,  then  their 
glory  Ues  just  in  this — that  they  are  not  dependent  on  times  and  places,  on  churches, 
on  moods  or  sentiments.  It  is  not  the  state  of  "  feeling  good  "  that  makes  a  man 
a  humble,  true  Christian,  but  the  act  of  doing  good.  Faith  and  prayer  and  the 
emotional  exaltation  of  the  church  service  are  only  the  raw  material  out  of  which 
religion  is  made.  ReHgion  is  life,  and  the  deepest  and  grandest  of  all  the  reaHties 
of  hfe.  Life  is  known  and  expressed  only  as  we  test  and  try  the  religious  emotions 
in  all  those  various  phases  of  business  and  social  activity.  The  eagle's  wing  can 
carry  me  far,  but  it  is  in  danger  of  leaving  me  remote,  and  so  out  of  touch  with 
common  men  and  compion  interests.  I  want  to  be  able  to  walk  without  weariness, 
to  sympathise  with  plain  people,  to  enter  into  the  lowly  door  of  pity,  to  keep 
company  with  the  plodding  man  on  the  highway,  and  the  toilers  in  the  field. 
(D.  Beaton,  D.D.)  The  ecstasies  and  commonplaces  of  love  : — Nature  makes  no 
mistakes  in  the  manner  in  which  it  moves  its  creatures  in  those  elemental  feeUngs 
which  have  the  perpetuation  of  hfe  as  their  object.  She  is  far-sighted,  she  has 
purposes  in  view.  The  lover  is  to  become  a  husband;  the  husband  is  a  protector 
and  provider:  the  duties  incident  to  that  lot  are  prosaic  and  often  dull.  In  a 
word,  the  common  lot  is  soon  to  fall  upon  those  two  souls  now  transported  into 
the  seventh  heaven  by  the  ecstasies  of  love.  They  will  have  to  discuss  ways  and 
means  of  domestic  economy.  Salaries  and  savings,  the  price  of  meat  and  babies' 
clothes,  not  to  speak  of  new  gowns  for  this  paragon  of  beauty  herself,  will  all  be 
serious  questions  that  cannot  be  effectually  settled  without  a  good  deal  of  the 
tenderness  that  still  warms  their  hearts  from  the  old  ecstasy.  {Ibid.)  The 
Christian's  air-ship  : — I.  Note  ceetain  facts  of  aeeial  flight  to  illustrate 
some  experience  of  a  soul  elevated  to  fellowship  with  God.  1.  As  with  the  aeronaut 
BO  with  the  Christian,  the  higher  he  rises  from  earth  the  smaller  the  world  appears. 
Afflictions  seem  "  light "  and  "  but  for  a  moment."  Honour,  wealth,  and  all 
material  things  seem  mere  earth  toys.  2.  As  with  the  air  navigator,  so  with  the 
Christian  rising  from  the  earth,  impurities  and  discord  are  left  below.  The  soul 
that  waits  upon  God  and  rises  to  the  high  privileges  tendered  by  the  grace  of  God, 
rises  above  the  nauseating  vices  and  conquering  swarms  of  poisonous  temptations, 
and  the  annoying,  stinging  adversities  incident  to  sinful  human  life.  3.  As  with 
the  sailor  of  the  air  in  his  realm,  so  with  the  Christian  in  his,  each  gets  a  better, 
broader  view  and  a  truer  perspective  as  he  rises.  To  the  aeronaut  the  horizon 
is  widened.  True  experimental  religion  is  exceedingly  broad,  sane,  and  tolerant. 
It  holds  truest  ideas  as  well  as  loftiest  ideals.  Not  he  who  comes  close  and  stays 
close  to  some  little  wall  of  prejudice,  some  river  of  personal  preference,  some 
moimtain  of  hereditary  impulse,  or  some  self-constructed  village  of  creeds,  but 
he  who  on  wings  of  faith  rises  to  higher  altitudes  for  observation  and  sees  all 
and  each  in  its  relation  to  all  others — such  hold  opinions  most  in  accord  with 
truth.  4.  As  with  the  navigator  of  the  air  in  his  realm,  so  with  the  Christian  in 
the  spiritual  realm,  each  is  inspired  with  healthful  vigour  as  he  rises,  the  one  on 
the  wings  of  the  wind  and  the  other  on  the  wings  of  an  intelligent,  rational  faith 
and  the  exercise  of  his  soul  in  prayer.  Dr.  Naiger,  at  a  meeting  of  the  Academy 
of  Medicine  in  France,  tells  us  that  ascension  into  the  air  acts  as  a  powerful  tonic  ; 
that  the  red  corpuscles  of  blood  are  multiplied  in  a  remarkable  degree  and  with 
astonishing  rapidity ;  further,  that  the  recuperated  condition  remains  for  some 
time  after  the  navigator  returns  to  the  ground.  He  gives  it  as  his  professional 
opinion  that  five  brief  air-ship  trips  are  of  more  value  to  a  consumptive  than  would 
be  a  summer  in  the  mountains.  As  Christians,  we  cannot  get  permanently 
away  from  the  world  of  sin  any  more  than  the  air  navigator  can  get  permanently 
away  from  terra  firma.  We  go  like  the  disciples  of  old  with  Jesus  to  the  Mount 
of  Transfiguration,  to  our  public  and  private  devotions,  to  gather  strength  for 


260  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [cHijp.  xi» 

the  duties  that  will  appear  in  the  valley.  II.  Note  some  of  the  peinciples 
UPON  WHICH  SUCCESSFUL  AEEiAL  NAVIGATION  DEPENDS,  as  typical  of  the  principles 
of  true  spiritual  life.  1.  One  principle  which  has  been  quite  lately  discovered, 
and  which  is  held  by  at  least  one  school  of  aerial  scientists,  ia  that  the  elevating 
power  and  the  propelling  power  must  be  from  the  same  source,  and  all  are  agreed 
that  they  must  be  in  harmony,  and  so  arranged  that  they  will  in  no  way  conflict. 
The  balloon  idea  as  an  elevating  power  is  constantly  lifting  straight  upward, 
while  a  propelling  power  of  some  kind  of  enginery  drawing  horizontally  is  con- 
stantly in  conflict  with  the  elevating  power.  Prof.  Thomas  May,  in  The  Aero- 
nautical Journal,  declares  that  before  there  can  be  successful  navigation  of  the 
air,  the  propelling  power  and  the  elevating  power  must  be  in  exact  harmony,  if 
not  produced  by  the  same  appliance  Some  very  successful  experiments  have 
been  made  with  "  gliding-machines,"  the  balloon  idea  having  been  abandoned 
in  these  appliances.  And  with  this  principle  the  Wright  brothers  have  been 
enabled  to  move  their  machines  near  the  earth  or  far  away  as  they  choose,  some- 
times gliding  only  a  few  inches  from  the  surface.  For  the  Christian  to  make 
progress  in  his  spiritual  flight,  whether  near  to  or  far  from  the  earth,  this  principle 
must  be  rigidly  enforced  and  carefully  observed.  God's  Spirit  is  the  elevating 
power.  Our  own  wills  and  purposes  constitute  the  propelling  power  of  the  soul. 
These  must  be  in  harmony  with  the  will  of  God,  be  submerged  into  His  will, 
BO  that  the  elevating  power  and  the  propelling  power  are  one  in  every  essential, 
though  some  way  God  needs  the  modifying  elements  of  our  own  consecrated  pur- 
poses. For  while  "  we  can  do  nothing  without  Him,"  it  is  equally  true  that 
in  practical,  spiritual  grace  He  has  so  arranged  His  plans  that  He  does  nothing 
without  us.  2.  Note  one  more  principle  of  aerodynamics,  which  is  called  the 
Langley  law  because  it  was  discovered  and  applied  by  Prof.  S.  P.  Langley,  secre- 
tary of  the  Smithsonian  Institution  and  the  inventor  of  an  air-ship  device  known 
as  Langley's  aeridrome.  The  law  is  that  as  the  speed  of  a  flying-machine  increases, 
the  power  necessary  to  propel  it  decreases  in  definite  proportions.  Theoretically, 
this  is  true  indefinitely;  but,  practically,  only  to  a  certain  limit.  Just  why,  when 
the  working  hypothesis  is  tried,  the  experiment  fits  the  theory  only  to  a  certain 
limit,  has  not  yet  been  fuUy  explained ;  but  the  theory  has  been  demonstrated 
so  that  it  is  worthy  of  a  place  among  scientific  principles.  The  law  certainly 
prevails  within  the  limit  of  natural  and  acquired  ability,  and  modified  by  oppor- 
timity,  in  the  human  soul  in  its  operations  in  the  spiritual  realm.  The  more 
decidedly  and  persistently,  determinedly  and  vigorously,  the  Christian  prosecutes 
his  spiritual  movements,  the  easier  it  becomes  for  him  to  do  so,  and  he  finds  by 
practical  experiment  that  as  he  advances  he  is  able  to  accomplish  more  and  more 
with  less  and  less  of  propelling  power.  More  and  more  he  speeds  along  with 
less  of  emotional  feeling  and  persistent  determination.  {F.  W.  Luce,  D.D.) 
The  eagle's  strength : — The  swiftness  of  its  flight  shows  its  strength.  The  eagle 
is  often  known  to  fly  at  the  rate  of  between  forty  and  fifty  mUes  an  hour.  Then, 
the  great  height  to  which  it  flies  shows  its  strength.  Then,  in  the  food  which  it 
carries  to  its  nest  for  its  young  ones  to  eat,  we  see  the  strength  of  the  eagle.  It 
carries  geese,  and  turkeys,  and  kids,  and  lambs,  and  even  little  children  for  its 
young  ones  to  feed  on.  In  one  of  the  cantons  of  Switzerland,  two  little  girls 
were  playing  together  in  a  meadow ;  one  of  them  was  about  three  years  old,  and 
the  other  flve.  While  they  were  busy  in  their  play,  an  eagle  came  and  swooped 
down  upon  them.  He  seized  hold  of  the  elder  child,  and  carried  her  away  to  his 
nest,  which  was  about  the  distance  of  a  mile  and  a  half  from  where  he  found  the 
child.  And  there  the  remains  of  the  poor  child  were  found  by  a  hunter  some 
time  afterwards.  [R.Newton,  D.D.)  Living  above  the  world: — Observatories 
used  to  be  erected  in  the  heart  of  cities,  but  it  was  found  that  these  were  the 
worst  places  for  them.  The  atmosphere  is  obscvned,  the  instruments  do  not  act 
properly,  and  now  they  are  built  thousands  of  feet  above  the  sea.  We  must  rise 
into  God's  own  climate  if  we  would  see  things  in  God's  own  light,  and  correct 
our  consciences  by  the  eternal.  Just  as  man  lives  on  a  high  level  he  is  safe  from 
moral  contamination  and  hurt.  I  have  read  that  when  the  eagle  flies  in  the  depth 
of  blue  the  bullet  of  the  sportsman  merely  brushes  his  feathers.  Its  force  is 
all  spent  before  it  reaches  him.  The  eagle  shakes  it  disdainfully  from  his  wings, 
and  soars  away  into  the  heavenly  places.  Travellers  tell  us  that  in  the  Australia* 
forests  it  is  almost  impossible  to  bring  down  a  cockatoo,  because  the  bird  seeks 
refuge  in  the  highest  branches  of  the  gigantic  trees.  It  is  no  use  fighting  tempta- 
tion on  a  low  level.     Fly  high,  and  its  bullets  will  be  spent  before  they  reach  you. 


OHAP.  XLi.]  ISAIAH.  261 

{W.  L.  Watkinson.)  They  shall  run,  and  not  be  weary. — The  unwearied 
runner  : — I.  The  running.  There  are  different  paces  among  the  Lord's  servants  : 
Ahimaaz  is  swifter  than  Cushi,  and  John  outruns  Peter,  but  he  who  by  faith  has 
truly  entered  upon  the  road  to  heaven,  though  his  march  be  slow  and  limping, 
shall  nevertheless  ultimately  reach  his  journey's  end.  Scores  of  timid  believers 
creep  towards  heaven  as  the  snail  crept  into  the  ark.  However,  there  is  no  reason 
why  you  should  imitate  these  slowly  moving  pilgrims  ;  if  Mephibosheth  be  lame 
in  both  his  feet,  it  is  not  desirable  that  you  should  imitate  his  limp.  1.  Rxmning 
is  the  pace  of  energy.  Be  it  yours  and  mine  to  outstrip  the  energy  of  this  world, 
and  so  to  run  in  our  Master's  ways  as  to  prove  that  the  servants  of  Christ  can 
render  Him  more  loyal  and  devoted  service  than  princes  win  from  their  favourites 
and  flatterers.  2.  Running  is  a  pace  which  indicates  fulness  of  alacrity.  Mark 
often  uses  about  our  Lord  the  words  "  straightway  "  and  "  immediately."  Mark's 
is  the  Gospel  descriptive  of  Christ  as  a  servant,  and  it  is  one  of  the  attributes  of 
a  good  servant  that  he  is  prompt  at  once  to  do  his  lord's  bidding.  3.  To  run 
is  to  be  diligent.  4.  Running  indicates  thorough-going  hearty  zeal.  11.  I  shall 
COMMEND  THE  RUNNING.  1.  Riuming  is  most  commendable,  because  it  is  a  warming 
pace.  2.  Running  is  a  pace  that  clears  the  ground.  3.  It  is  a  cheering  pace. 
4.  It  is  the  winning  pace.  5.  It  is  a  fitting  pace  for  a  believer.  HI.  Thb  runner's 
GIRDLE.  "  They  that  wait  upon  the  Lord  shall  run,  and  not  be  weary."  What 
is  it  to  "  wait  upon  the  Lord  "  ?  Singleness  of  eye  in  serving  God,  simplicity 
of  dependence  upon  the  Divine  power,  and  constant  expectation  that  the  power 
will  be  given.  IV.  The  runner's  staff.  The  runner's  consolation  lies  in  this 
promise,  that  "  he  shall  not  be  weary."  How  is  it  that  running  Christians  do  not 
become  weary  ?  1.  Because  they  have  daily  strength  given  them  for  all  their 
daUy  needs.  (  2.  As  the  Christian  advances  he  finds  fresh  matter  to  interest  him. 
3.  Above  all,"  there  is  one  fact  that  keeps  the  Christian  from  weariness,  namely, 
that  he  looks  to  the  end,  to  the  recompense  of  the  reward.  {C.  H.  Spurgeon.) 
They  shall  walk,  and  not  faint. — They  shall  walk,  and  not  faint : — When  [the 
prophet]  says  last,  and  most  impressively,  of  his  people's  fortimes,  that  they 
shall  walk,  and  not  faint,"  he  has,  perhaps,  just  those  long  centuries  in  view, 
when,  instead  of  a  nation  of  enthusiasts  taking  humanity  by  storm,  we  see  small 
bands  of  pioneers  pushing  their  way  from  city  to  city  by  the  slow  methods  of 
ancient  travel, — Damascus,  Antioch,  Tarsus,  Iconium,  Ephesus,  Thessalonica, 
Athens,  Corinth,  and  Rome — everjrwhere  that  Paul  and  the  missionaries  of  the 
Cross  found  a  pulpit  and  a  congregation  ready  for  the  Gospel ;  toiling  from  day 
to  day  at  their  own  trades,  serving  the  alien  for  wages,  here  and  there  founding 
a  synagogue,  now  and  then  completing  a  version  of  their  Scriptures,  oftentimes 
achieving  martyrdom,  but  ever  living  a  pure  and  a  testifying  life  in  face  of  the 
heathen,  with  the  passion  of  these  prophecies  at  their  hearts.  It  was  certainly 
for  such  centuries  and  such  men  that  the  word  was  written,  "  they  shall  walk, 
and  not  faint."    (Proj.  Q.  A.  Smith.  D.D.) 


CHAPTER  XLL 


VxB.  1.  Keep  silence  before  Me,  0  islands. — The  convocation  of  the  nationt 

(whole  chapter) : — The  conception  of  this  passage  is  superb.  Jehovah  is  represented 
as  summoning  the  earth,  as  far  as  the  remote  isles  of  the  west,  to  determine  once 
and  for  ever  who  is  the  true  God:  whether  He,  or  the  idols  and  oracles  of  which 
there  were  myriads  worshipped  and  believed  in  by  every  nation  imder  heaven. 
The  test  proposed  is  a  very  simple  one.  The  gods  of  the  nations  were  to  predict 
events  in  the  near  future,  or  to  show  that  they  had  had  a  clear  imderstanding  of 
the  events  of  former  days.  On  the  other  hand,  the  servant  of  Jehovah  was  pre- 
pared to  show  how  fast-sealed  prophecies,  committed  to  the  custody  of  his  race, 
had  been  precisely  verified  in  the  event,  and  to  utter  minute  predictions  about 
Cyrus,  "  the  one  from  the  East,"  which  should  be  fulfilled  before  that  generation 
had  passed  away.  Not^  as  in  Elijah's  case,  would  the  appeal  be  made  to  the 
descending  flame;  but  to  the  fitting  of  prophecy  and  historical  fact.  Immediately 
there  is  a  great  commotion,  the  isles  see  and  fear,  the  ends  of  the  earth  tremble, 
they  draw  near  and  come  to  the  judgment-seat.     On  their  way  thither  each  bids 


262  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xu. 

the  other  take  courage.  There  is  an  industrious  furbishing  up  of  the  dilapidated 
idols,  and  manufacturing  of  new  ones.  The  carpenter  encourages  the  goldsmith; 
and  he  that  smooths  with  the  hammer  him  that  smites  the  anvil.  They  examine 
the  soldering  to  see  if  it  will  stand,  and  drive  great  nails  to  render  the  idols  stead- 
fast. The  universal  desire  is  to  make  a  strong  set  of  gods  who  will  be  able  to  meet 
the  Divine  challenge — much  as  if  a  Roman  Catholic  priest  were  to  regild  and  re- 
paint the  images  of  the  saints  on  the  time-worn  altar  of  a  fishing  hamlet,  in  the 
hope  of  securing  from  them  greater  help  in  quelling  the  winter  storms.  Amidst 
the  excitement  of  this  vast  convocation  the  idols  are  dumb.  We  can  almost  see 
them  borne  into  the  arena  by  their  attendant  priests,  resplendent  in  gold  and 
tinsel,  flasliing  with  jewels,  bedizened  in  gorgeous  apparel.  They  are  set  in  a  row, 
their  acolytes  swing  liigh  the  censer,  the  monotonous  drawl  of  their  votaries  arises 
in  suppUcation.  Silence  is  proclaimed  that  they  may  have  an  opportunity  of 
pronotmcing  on  the  subject  submitted  to  them;  but  they  are  speechless. 
Jehovah  pronounces  the  verdict  against  which  there  can  be  no  appeal.  Behold, 
ye  we  of  nothing,  and  your  work  of  nought;  an  abomination  is  he  that  chooseth 
you  "  (ver.  24).  As  Jehovah  looks,  there  is  no  one.  When  He  asks  of  them,  there 
is  no  counsellor  that  can  answer  a  word.  "  Behold  they  are  all  vanity;  their 
works  are  nought;  their  molten  images  are  wind  and  confusion."  (F.  B.  Meyer, 
B.A.)  HeatJien  orades  and  Scripture  prophecy: — History  furnishes  some  inter- 
esting confirmations  of  this  contrast  between  the  predictions  of  heathen  oracles 
and  the  clear  prophecies  of  Old  Testament  Scripture,  which  were  so  literally  and 
minutely  reaUsed.  For  instance,  Herodotus  tells  us  that  when  Croesus  heard  of 
the  growing  power  of  Cyrus,  he  was  so  alarmed  for  his  kingdom,  that  he  sent  rich 
presents  to  the  oracles  at  Delphi,  Dodona,  and  elsewhere,  asking  what  would  be 
the  outcome  of  his  victorious  march.  That  at  Delphi  gave  this  ambiguous  reply, 
"  That  he  would  destroy  a  great  empire,"  but  whether  the  empire  would  be  that 
of  Cyrus  or  of  Croesus  was  left  unexplained:  thus,  whichever  way  the  event  turned, 
the  oracle  could  claim  to  have  predicted  it.  This  is  a  fair  illustration  of  the  maimer 
in  which  the  oracles  answered  the  appeals  made  to  them  by  men  or  nations  when 
in  the  agony  of  fear.  How  striking  a  contrast  the  precise  prediction  of  these  pages 
which  give  us  the  name  of  the  conqueror;  the  quarter  from  which  he  would  fall 
upon  Babylon;  the  marvellous  series  of  successes  that  gave  kings  as  dust  to  his 
sword,  and  as  the  driven  stubble  to  his  bow;  his  reverence  towards  God,  his  sim- 
pUcity  and  integrity  of  purpose  (vers.  2,  3,  25,  xlv.  1).  {Ibid.)  A  drama: — In 
form  the  chapter  is  dramatic.  Two  great  debates  are  imagined:  the  first  (vers.  1-7) 
between  Jehovah  and  the  nations;  the  second  (vers.  21-29)  between  Jehovah 
and  the  idols,  the  subject  of  both  being  the  appearance  of  Cyrus.  In  the  inter- 
vening passage  (vers.  8-20)  Jehovah  encourages  ffis  servant  Israel  in  view  of  this 
great  crisis  of  history.  (Prof.  J.  Skinner,  D.D.)  A  trial  at  law: — Chapter  xli.  is 
loosely  cast  in  the  same  form  of  a  trial  at  law  which  we  found  in  chapter  i.  {Prof. 
G.  A.  Smith,  D.D.)  God's  response  to  Israelis  complaint: — In  reply  to  Israel's 
complaint  (chap.  xl.  27)  that  his  cause  against  the  heathen  oppressors  is  neglected 
or  dismissed  by  the  Great  Judge,  God  now  summons  the  nations  to  His  court  of 
justice;  and  as  Israel  had  just  been  assured  that,  if  they  would  wait  upon  Jehovah, 
they  would  renew  their  strength  and  discern  His  wisdom,  an  interval  is  granted 
to  the  heathen  and  their  gods,  in  which  they  too  may  renew  their  strength  and 
have  time  to  produce  evidence  of  the  powers  of  design  and  action  possessed  by 
their  gods,  and  in  virtue  of  which  they  claim  the  right  to  keep  Israel  in  subjection. 
The  solemn  pause  thus  allowed — "  Keep  silence  .  .  .  then  let  them  speak  " — is 
filled  (how  bitter  the  irony!)  by  the  nations  emplo3dng  their  carjjenters  and  gold- 
smiths to  make  a  particularly  good  and  strong  set  of  gods,  because  there  is  a 
general  alarm  that  the  emergency  is  great.  For  it  is  already  seen  that  the  judg- 
ment goes  against  them  by  default:  that  these  gods  can  show  no  plans,  can  do 
nothing  good  or  bad;  and  that  they  and  their  worshippers  have  neither  right 
nor  power  to  break  up  the  designs  of  Almighty  wisdom.  They  have  been  trying 
to  do  this  by  those  oppressions  of  Israel  which  were  only  permitted  for  a  time, 
becavise  they  fell  into  and  formed  a  part  of  God's  own  plan.  But  Israel  had  from 
the  first  an  appointed  and  chief  place  in  that  plan:  He  who  is  at  once  King  of 
Israel  and  God  of  all  the  earth,  has  been  maintaining  His  chosen  people  in  their 
place,  generation  after  generation,  when  He  made  Abraham  His  friend,  and  gave 
the  blessing  to  his  seed,  and  then  He  made  the  well  yield  springs  of  water  under 
the  rod  of  ]Moses;  and  now,  though  they  are  reduced  to  extremity  of  weakness 
and  dismay,  the  Holy  One  of  Israel  bids  them  fear  not,  for  He  has  taken  upon 


CHAP.  XLi.]  ISAIAH.  263 

Himself  to  be  their  Redeemer.  (Sir  E.  Strachey,  Bart.)  A  lawsuit: — If  Jehovah 
is  a  party,  who  then  is  the  presiding  judge?  This  question  is  to  be  answered  as 
in  chap.  v.  3.  The  decisive  authority  is  reason,  which  must  acknowledge  the 
state  of  the  case  and  the  conclusions  following  therefrom.  (F.  Delitzsch,  D.D.) 
A  fair  trial : — 1.  The  cause  of  God  and  His  kingdom  is  not  afraid  of  a  fair  trial. 
If  the  case  be  but  fairly  stated  it  will  be  surely  carried  in  favour  of  religion.  2.  The 
enemies  of  God's  Church  and  His  holy  religion  may  safely  be  challenged  to  say 
and  do  their  worst  for  the  support  of  their  unrighteous  cause,  (if.  Henry.) 
Islands: — A  characteristic  word  of  the  second  half  of  Isaiah  occurring  twelve 
times.  In  the  general  usage  of  the  Old  Testament  it  denotes  the  islands  and  coast- 
lands  of  the  Mediterranean  (comp.  the  use  of  the  singular  by  Isaiah  in  chap.  xx.  6). 
Etymologically,  it  probably  means  simply  "  habitable  lands  "  ;  and  this  prophet 
uses  it  with  great  laxity,  hardly  distinguishing  it  from  "lands"  (chap.  xlii.  15). 
(Prof.  J.  Skinner,  D.D.)  Solemn  pleadings  for  revival : — We  also  who  worship  the 
liord  God  have  a  controversy  with  Him.  We  have  not  seen  His  Church  and  His 
cause  prospering  in  the  world  as  we  could  desire;  as  yet  heathenism  is  not  put 
to  the  rout  by  Christianity,  neither  does  the  truth  everywhere  trample  down  error. 
We  desire  to  reason  with  God  about  this,  and  He  Himself  instructs  us  how  to  prepare 
for  this  sacred  debate.  He  bids  us  be  silent;  He  bids  us  consider,  and  then  draw 
near  to  Him  with  holy  boldness  and  plead  with  Him,  produce  our  cause  and  bring 
forth  our  strong  reasons.  I.  First,  then,  let  us  be  silent.  1.  Before  the  con- 
troversy opens  let  us  be  silent  with  solemn  awe,  for  we  have  to  speak  with  the 
Lord  God  Almighty!  Let  us  not  open  our  mouths  to  impugn  His  wisdom,  nor 
allow  our  hearts  to  question  His  love.  We  are  going  to  make  bold  to  speak  with  Him, 
but  still  He  is  the  eternal  God,  and  we  are  dust  and  ashes.  It  is  the  glory  of  God 
to  conceal  a  thing,  and  if  He  chooses  to  conceal  it,  let  it  be  concealed.  Truly, 
God  is  good  to  Israel,  and  His  mercy  endureth  for  ever.  2.  Our  silence  of  awe 
should  deepen  into  that  of  shame;  for,  though  it  is  true  that  the  cause  of  God 
has  not  prospered,  whose  fault  is  this?  3.  Go  further  than  this,  and  keep  the 
silence  of  consideration.  This  is  a  noisy  age,  and  the  Church  of  Christ  herself 
is  too  noisy.  We  have  very  little  silent  worship,  I  fear.  Let  us  be  silent, 
now,  for  a  minute,  and  consider  what  it  is  that  we  desire  of  the  Lord.  The 
conversion  of  thousands,  the  overthrow  of  error,  the  spread  of  the  Redeemer's 
kingdom.  Think  in  your  minds  what  the  blessings  are  which  your  soiil  pants 
after.  Suppose  they  were  to  be  now  bestowed,  are  you  ready?  If  thousands 
of  converts  were  to  be  bom  unto  this  one  Church,  are  you  prepared  to  teach 
them  and  comfort  them?  You  pray  for  grace — are  you  using  the  grace  you  have? 
You  want  to  see  more  power — how  about  the  power  you  have?  Are  you  employing 
it?  If  a  mighty  wave  of  revival  sweeps  over  London,  are  your  hearts  ready? 
Are  your  hands  ready?  Are  your  purses  ready?  If  you  reflect,  you  will  see  tliat 
God  is  able  to  give  His  Church  the  largest  blessing,  and  to  give  it  at  any  time. 
Keep  silence  and  consider,  and  you  will  see  that  He  can  give  the  blessing  by  you 
or  by  me.  Ask  yourselves  in  the  quiet  of  your  spirits,  what  can  we  do  to  get  the 
blessing  ?  Are  we  doing  that  ?  4.  Then  we  shall  pass  on  to  the  silence  of  attention. 
Keep  silence  that  God  may  speak  to  you.  We  cannot  expect  Him  to  hear  us  if 
we  will  not  hear  Him.  5.  If  you  have  learned  attention,  be  silent  with  submission. 
n.  In  that  silence  let  us  eenew  our  strength.  Noise  wears  us;  silence  feeds 
us.  To  run  upon  the  Master's  errands  is  always  well,  but  to  sit  at  the  Master's 
feet  is  quite  as  necessary;  or,  like  the  angels  which  excel  in  strength,  our  power 
to  do  His  commandments  arises  out  of  our  hearkening  to  the  voice  of  His  Word. 
But  how  happens  it  that  such  silence  renews  our  strength?  L  It  does  so  by  giving 
space  for  the  strengthening  word  to  come  into  the  soul,  and  the  energy  of  the  Holy 
Spirit  to  be  really  felt.  2.  We  must  be  silent  to  renew  our  strength,  by  using 
silence  for  consideration  as  to  who  it  is  that  we  are  dealing  with.  We  are  going 
to  speak  with  God  about  the  weakness  of  His  Church,  and  the  slowness  of  its  pro- 
gress. We  are  coming  to  plead  now  with  One  whose  arm  is  not  shortened,  and 
whose  ear  is  not  heavy.  Renew  your  strength  as  you  think  of  Him.  Hath  not 
the  Lord  said  concerning  His  beloved  Son  that  He  shall  divide  the  spoil  with  the 
strong,  and  the  pleasure  of  the  Lord  shall  prosper  in  His  hands?  Shall  it  not  be 
BO?  Think,  too,  that  you  are  about  to  appeal  to  the  Holy  Spirit.  What  cannot 
the  Spirit  of  God  do?  3.  In  silence,  too,  let  us  renew  our  strength  by  remembering 
His  promises.  There  are  a  thousand  promises.  Let  us  think  of  that,  and  however 
difficult  the  enterprise  may  be,  and  however  dark  our  present  prospects,  we  shall 
not  dare  to  doubt  when  Jehovah  has  spoken  and  pledged  His  Word.    4  Our  strength 


2«4  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xli. 

will  be  renewed  next,  if  in  silence  we  yield  up  to  God  all  our  own  wisdom  and 
strength.  5.  Keep  silence,  then,  ye  saints,  till  ye  have  felt  your  foUy  and  your 
weakness,  and  then  renew  your  strength  most  gloriously  by  casting  yourselves 
upon  the  strength  of  God.  III.  Our  text  proceeds  to  add,  "  Then  let  them  draw 
near."  You  that  know  the  Lord  draw  near.  You  are  silent,  you  have  renewed 
your  strength,  now  enjoy  access  with  boldness.  The  condition  in  which  to  inter- 
cede for  others  is  not  that  of  distance  from  God,  but  that  of  great  nearness  to  Him. 
Even  thus  did  Abraham  draw  nigh  when  he  pleaded  for  Sodom  and  Gomorrah. 
1.  Let  us  remember  how  near  we  really  are.  We  are  one  with  Christ,  and  members 
of  His  body.  How  could  we  be  nearer?  2.  You  are  coming  to  a  Father.  3.  The 
desire  in  our  heart  for  God's  glory  and  the  extension  of  His  Church,  is  a  desire  written 
there  by  the  Holy  Spirit.  4.  What  we  ask,  if  we  are  about  to  plead  with  God  con- 
cerning His  kingdom,  is  according  to  His  own  mind.  5.  Moreover,  there  is  this 
further  consideration;  the  Lord  loves  to  be  pleaded  with.  He  might  have  given 
all  the  covenant  blessings  without  prayer;  wherefore  does  He  compel  us  to  use 
entreaties,  unless  it  be  that  He  loves  to  hear  the  voices  of  His  children?  IV.  I  now 
come  to  the  last  point,  which  is,  "  let  its  speak."  Be  silent,  renew  your  strength, 
draw  near,  and  then  speak.  What  have  we  to  say  upon  the  matter  which  concerns 
us?  1.  Let  us  first  speak  in  the  spirit  of  adoring  gratitude.  How  sweet  to  think 
that  there  should  be  a  Saviour  at  all.  To  think  that  there  should  be  a  heavenly 
kingdom  set  up,  as  it  is  set  up;  that  it  should  have  made  such  advances  as  it  has 
made,  and  should  still  grow  mightily !  2.  Next,  let  us  speak  in  humble  expostula- 
tion. 3.  Then  turn  to  pleading.  4.  Let  us  speak  in  the  way  of  dedication.  5.  Let 
us  speak  still  in  the  way  of  confidence.  (C.  H.  Sturgeon.)  Silence  and  speech 
before  God : — God  addresses  men  here  by  two  designations,  the  one  having  reference 
to  their  remoteness  and  isolation,  and  the  other  to  their  unity.  The  series  of 
injunctions  begins  with  silence  and  ends  with  speech.  Right  silence  before  God, 
passing  on  through  stirring  up  of  energy  and  earnest  confiding  approach,  issues 
in  speech.  We  shall  consider  the  beginning  and  the  end  of  this  series — silence 
before  God  and  speech  to  God.  I.  Silence  before  God.  Shall  we  not  be  silent 
in  the  endeavour  to  realise  that  God  is,  and  what  He  is?  Would  not  this  do  more 
for  us  than  any  urging  of  ourselves  or  any  kind  of  activity  and  noise  whatever? 
And  can  anything  have  its  proper  effect  on  our  soul  without  this  ?  If  we  but  realise 
with  ourselves  that  we  have  to  do  with  an  Infinite  One,  that  there  is  One  Being 
of  spotless  perfection,  almighty  power,  unchangeableness,  boundless  love,  complete 
and  earnest  opposition  to  evil,  what  an  effect  this  will  produce  on  us !  Unless  we 
can  bear  to  be  silent  and  brood,  the  thought  of  God  will  not  rise  before  us  in  fulness 
and  splendour.  But  God  speaks,  and  we  must  listen  in  silence.  With  what  glad 
eilence  should  we  listen  to  the  Divine  voice.  A  single  word  of  God  must  be  worth 
more  to  us  than  all  other  words.  When  we  read  the  Word  of  God  we  should  say 
to  ourselves.  Hush !  God  is  speaking.  We  should  listen  to  it  as  a  message  conveying 
what  we  are  to  believe  and  embrace  and  ponder  and  do.  We  may  spoil  every- 
thing by  letting  the  murmur  of  our  own  thoughts  arise.  Our  silence  in  the  presence 
of  God  will  often  take  the  form  of  thinking  of  ourselves.  Thinking  of  self  becomes 
sincere  and  profitable  when  it  goes  on  consciously  in  (Sod's  presence.  The  felt 
presence  of  God  revives  memory,  prevents  besetting  self-deception,  and  turns 
the  survey  of  the  future  from  chaotic  dreams  into  earnest  outlook.  Can  any  man 
make  such  a  survey,  however  imperfectly,  without  shame?  Shame  makes  him 
silent.  He  who  knows  the  bitterness  of  being  put  to  silence  in  the  presence  of  (Jod, 
will  scarcely  be  without  experience  of  the  sweetness  of  silent  satisfaction  and  rest. 
He  will  be  led  to  see  such  a  graciousness  in  God,  such  a  benign  healing  aspect  of 
His  mercy,  such  a  fulness  in  Christ,  such  a  might  of  forgiveness,  such  a  sublime 
oblivion,  that  he  will  feel  for  a  while  as  if  he  had  nothing  more  to  ask.  This  satis- 
faction passes  into  expectation.  II.  Speech  to  God  followino  tjpon  the  silence. 
Silence  before  God  in  which  such  thoughts  as  these  go  on  leads  to  a  stirring  of  the 
soul,  a  forth- putting  of  endeavour,  and  a  drawing  near  to  God.  Silence  before 
God  heaps  a  load  on  the  heart  which  can  only  be  thrown  off  by  speaking  to  God. 
One  thing  after  another  brings  fresh  penitence,  new  discovery  of  sin,  new  sense 
of  the  greatness  of  God ;  new  fears  spring  up,  new  resolutions  gather,  and  all  these 
weigh  very  heavily.  And  much  more  than  freedom  from  pressure  will  be  experi- 
enced. The  convictions  that  gather  in  silence  will  be  strengthened  by  speech- 
If  they  did  not  find  expression  they  would  begin  to  decay.  In  short,  speaking 
to  God  of  the  things  that  have  lain  on  the  soul  in  its  silence  is  a  necessity  at  once 
for  reUef,  for  xmderstanding,  for  intensity,  for  permanence,  and  for  growth.     It 


CHAP.  XLi.]  ISAIAH.  265 

would  be  a  wrong  inference  to  draw  from  this  passage  that  one  ought  not  to  speak 
to  God  without  consciously  going  through  these  stages  of  the  text.  There  may 
be  true  speaking  to  God  which  seems  to  break  forth  at  once  and  immediately  from 
the  soul.  It  is  not  always  a  bad  sign  when  we  feel  that  we  cannot  speak,  but  must 
be  silent  before  God.  This  state  is  not,  indeed,  to  be  prolonged-  Nor  must  it  be 
a  dull,  dead,  distant  silence,  but  one  that  has  its  own  pecidiar  activities.  Hasting 
to  cut  short  the  period  of  silence  may  enervate  and  chill.  The  silence  may  be  more 
acceptable  to  God  for  the  time  than  any  words  could  be.  We  should  expect  times 
of  silence  before  God — times  in  which  speaking  to  God  is  not  indeed  absent,  but 
in  which  silence  is  the  dominating  element.  If  it  is  a  silence  before  God,  it 
is  a  leaving  of  space  for  God  to  speak,  and  surely  this  is  impUed  in  communion. 
(J.  Leckie,  D.D.)  The  silence  of  reverence  is  the  soil  in  which  earnestness  and 
energy  grow.  By  this  reverent  silence  resolution  takes  shape  and  gathers  force. 
Men  gird  up  their  energies  afresh  when  in  solemn  silence  they  have  gone  over 
the  actualities  and  the  possibilities  of  life.  Then  with  purpose  and  intensity  they 
come  near  to  God.  (Ibid.)  The  relief  of  speech  after  sUence: — You  may  have 
seen  a  reservoir  of  water  which,  by  continuous  rain,  had  become  so  full  that  it 
threatened  to  overflow  all  its  banks  or  burst  them — the  rain  through  days  and 
nights  had  been  pouring  on  its  broad  bosom,  and  the  brooks  and  riUs  from  miles 
around  had  been  hurrying  their  foaming  tributes  into  it,  till  the  ordinary  small 
outlet  is  wholly  unable  to  reUeve  the  immense  pressure,  and  the  very  edge  of  ruin 
is  reached,  when,  lo !  the  great  sluice  is  raised,  and  away  rushes  the  pent-up  flood 
in  immense  volume.  There  is  relief  and  safety  at  once.  So  is  it  with  the  burdened 
eoul  on  which  silence  before  God  has  been  laying  load  after  load,  pressing  and  crush- 
ing it  with  memories,  convictions,  fears,  resolutions.  ReUef  and  freedom  are  gained 
by  pouring  out  the  soul  in  words  before  God.  {Ibid.)  Conviction  aided  by  both 
silence  and  speech : — In  silence  there  is  the  rooting  of  conviction,  but  in  speaking 
to  God  its  expansion  and  growth.  When  you  have  hyacinths  in  water  glasses,  you 
put  them  first  in  darkness  for  some  weeks  till  the  roots  strike  down  into  the  water. 
You  find  that  the  roots  have  spread  and  filled  the  glass,  but  there  is  scarcely  a 
sign  of  growth  upward,  the  stalk  remains  undeveloped.  Light  is  needed  for  that. 
So  speech  to  God  is  needed  to  raise  and  expand  the  feelings  that  have  been  rooted 
in  silence.     (Ibid.) 

Ver.  2.  The  righteous  man  from  the  East. — The  righteous  man  from  the  East : — 
The  question,  whose  appearance  is  predicted,  has  been  always  a  subject  of  dispute. 
Eusebius,  Theodoret,  and  Procopius  understand  it  as  describing  the  triumphs 
of  the  true  religion,  or  the  Gospel,  here  called  "righteousness."  Cyril  and 
Jerome  apply  it  to  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ  Himself,  as  the  Righteous  One,  or  the 
Lord  owe  Righteousness.  Cocceius  stands  alone  in  his  application  of  the  verse 
to  the  apostle  Paul.  The  Jews  make  Abraham  the  subject  of  the  passage, 
excepting  Aben  Ezra,  who,  with  Vitringa  and  all  the  latest  writers,  understands 
it  as  a  prophecy  of  Cyrus.  The  inappropriateness  of  the  terms  employed  to 
our  Saviour  or  the  Gospel,  to  Abraham  or  Paul,  is  almost  self-evident, 
and  equally  clear  is  its  appropriateness  to  the  case  of  Cjtus.  The  argument  in 
favour  of  the  latter  application,  drawn  from  the  analogy  of  chaps,  xlv.  1, 
xlvi.  11,  is  less  conclusive,  because  he  is  there  expressly  named.  The 
truth  appears  to  be  that  this  is  a  more  general  intimation  of  a  great  eventful 
movement  from  the  East,  which  is  afterwards  repeated  with  specific  reference 
to  Cyrus  and  his  conquests.  It  might  even  be  supposed  without  absvtrdity 
that  there  is  here  an  allusion  to  the  general  progress  of  the  human  race,  of  con- 
quest, civilisation,  and  religion  from  the  East  to  the  West.  Umbreit  supposes 
a  specific  reference  to  the  course  of  the  sun,  from  which  the  name  of  Cyrus  was 
derived.  (J.  A.  Alexander.)  Cyrus  raised  up  by  God: — "Stirred  up";  the 
sense  is  "  impelled  into  activity."  (Prof.  3.  R.  Driver,  D.D.)  Cyru^  from  the 
East,  yet  from  the  North: — "From  the  East";  Cyrus'  home,  Susiania,  being 
to  the  east  of  Babylonia.  "  From  the  North  "  (ver.  26),  alludes  to  the  Medes, 
who  united  with  the  Persians  under  Cyrus,  and  whose  home  was  to  the  north 
or  north-east  of  Babylonia.  (Ibid.)  Cyrus  called  in  righteousness  (see  R.V.): — 
Cyrus'  career  being  a  furtherance  of  God's  righteous  purpose  for  the  government 
of  the  world.  (Ibid.)  Cyrus  coiled  to  God's  foot: — To  call  to  one's  foot  is  a 
Hebrew  idiom  for  caUing  to  one's  service,  or  summoning  to  take  a  place  among 
one's  followers.     {J.  A.  Alexander.) 


266  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xu. 

Ver.  4.  I  the  Lord,  the  first,  and  with  the  last. — I.  Look  at  God  ht  His 
PRIMARY  RELATION  TO  His  CREATURE.  Understand  clearly  that  every- 
thing which  is  was  first  an  idea  in  the  mind  of  God.  Thence,  by  a 
creative  act,  it  came  forth  and  took  form  and  being.  So  God  was  first,  long 
before  all  His  works — as  the  mo\ild  is  before  the  castings.  Here  is  the  truth 
and  glory  of  predestination,  that  great  argument  of  all  comfort.  It  places  God 
far  away,  beyond  our  little  horizon,  in  advance  of  everything.  Wnatever  is, 
is  to  fulfil  its  preordained  purpose;  each  thing  coming  up  and  rising  in  its  turn; 
everything  a  reflection  of  the  eternal  love,  care,  and  wisdom  which  dwelt  from 
everlasting  in  the  mind  of  God.  11.  "  With  the  last."  There  are  those 
who  say,  '  This  world  is  on  the  decline  and  growing  worse."  Can  it  be,  if  He 
who  was  First  is  with  the  last — the  same  God  yesterday,  to-day,  and  for  ever, 
the  equal  portion  of  all  times?  Is  it  not  sufiQcient  argument?  The  golden  age 
cannot  be  over.  From  the  fleeting  and  the  changing,  from  the  disappointing 
and  the  dying,  I  yearn  to  ask,  "  Where  is  the  true?  "  Where  is  that  which  my 
soul  wants,  and  for  which  my  restless  spirit  has  so  long  been  craving,  what  shall 
satisfy  my  immortality?  And  the  answer  comes,  as  a  whisper  in  the  desert, 
louder  and  clearer  from  the  solitude  of  my  heart's  waste  places,  "  I  the  Lord, 
the  First,  and  with  the  last;  I  am  He."     (J.  Vatcghan,  M.A.) 

Vers.  6,  7.  They  helped  every  one  his  neighbour. — Idolatry  the  subject  of 
sarcasm: — The  sarcasm  consists  in  making  the  idolaters  dependent  upon  idols 
which  are  themselves  dependent  upon  common  workmen  and  the  most  trivial 
mechanical  operations  for  their  form  and  their  stability.  Hence  the  particular 
enumeration  of  the  different  artificers  employed  in  the  manufacture  of  these 
deities.  The  last  clause  implies  that  the  strength  of  the  idol  is  not  in  itself,  but 
in  the  nails  that  keep  it  in  its  place,  or  hold  its  parts  together.  (J.  A.  Alexander.) 
Lessons  from  the  idol-makers : — Idolatry  being  threatened  with  an  overthrow, 
their  "  craft "  was  endangered,  and  hence  the  earnestness  and  co-operation  of 
these  makers  of  idols.     The  text  is  suggestive.     I.  It  affords  an  illustration  of 

THE  WAY  the  WICKED  COMBINE  IN  THEIR  FIGHT  AGAINST  THE  RIGHT.      Jeremiah 

gives  us  a  picture  of  this  combination  in  the  family  (Jer.  vii.  17,  18).  Isaiah, 
carrying  it  up  higher,  here  shows  how  the  different  crafts  cheer  and  help  each 
other.  Take  the  history  of  the  world;  follow  the  struggle  between  the  powers 
of  light  and  the  powers  of  darkness,  and  you  will  find  that  this  has  always  been 
the  case.  When  Jesus  Christ  made  His  appearance  upon  the  earth  for  the  purpose 
of  inaugurating  the  overthrow  of  paganism  and  planting  His  kingdom  on  its 
ruins,  witness  what  varied  and  unhallowed  combinations  arrayed  themselves 
against  Him.  See  how  the  liquor-dealers  are  now  banded  together  in  that  strong 
association,  which  has  for  its  object  the  protection  and  perpetuity  of  their  iniqui- 
tous traffic.  And  if  certain  questions  are  touched  there  are  manifested  some 
strange  combinations.  11.  We  see  the  importance  of  ttnanimity  of  feelino  and 
CONCERT  OF  ACTION  IN  Church  WORK.  1.  This  should  be  true  in  the  individual 
Churches.  The  various  ages,  classes,  and  organisations  of  a  Church  ought  to 
work  for  the  same  ends.  2.  On  the  great  leading  questions  there  must  be  co-opera- 
tion between  the  various  denominations.  III.  We  have  a  suggestion  as  to  THa 
MUTUAL  dependence  OF  MEN.  Notice  how  many  crafts  the  idols  passed  through 
before  they  were  finished.  Take  any  article  in  your  possession,  and  a  great  many 
different  persons  and  trades  have  contributed  to  its  production.  No  profession 
or  trada  is  independent  of  other  professions  and  trades;  no  class  is  independent 
of  other  classes.  IV.  We  are  reminded  that  our  aim  in  lifb  should  be  to  help 
THOSE  WITH  WHOM  WE  COMB  IN  CONTACT.  "  They  helped  every  one  his  neighbour." 
Jesus  Christ  came  into  this  world  not  to  seek  His  own  ease  or  profit  or  pleasure, 
but  to  help  the  needy  sons  of  men.  Have  we  caught  anything  of  His  spirit? 
There  are  many  ways  in  which  we  can  help.  I.  Like  these  idolaters,  we  can  do  it 
by  our  words  of  cheer.  We  are  too  chary  with  our  praise.  2.  Help  hj  our  deeds. 
{J.  W.  Rogan.)  Mviual  encouragement : — How  much  of  mutuality  there  is 
in  the  teaching  of  the  Bible !  This  is  mutual  encouragement,  and  applies  to 
higher  forms  of  service.  The  next  verse  reads,  "  But  thou,  Israel,  art  My  servant." 
To  be  a  carpenter  who  works  on  wood  is  merely  to  do  something  outward,  but 
"  thou  art  My  servant "  introduces  us  into  the  moral  sphere  of  action.  Now 
encouragement  is  not  flattery.  You  are  not  to  forget  the  great  ethical  basis 
on  which  all  our  life  must  rest.  It  is  not  right  to  flatter.  It  is  right  to  encourage, 
because  there  are  always  circumstances  in  human  life  that  tend  to  depress,  and 


CHAP.  XLi.]  ISAIAH.  267 

there  are  specific  temperamental  constitutions  that  need  a  great  deal  of  gladdening 
from  without,  for  some  are  not  easUy  inspired.  I  believe  in  encouragement 
all  through.  Many  young  people  never  play  the  piano  well  because  their  parents 
have  not  encouraged  them.  Sometimes  we  fail  to  encoxurage  our  servants. 
I.  Encouragement  must  be  uvbd  as  well  as  spoken.  We  are  to  give  courage 
through  the  possession  of  it.  It  will  not  do  for  those  who  are  to  inspire  others 
to  whimper  over  their  troubles  !  If  the  general  is  beaten  the  army  is  often  defeated. 
n.  Encouragement  must  begin  at  the  nearest  point.  "  Everyone  said 
to  his  neighbour."  The  man  next  to  me  is  to  catch  the  influence.  If  I  do  not 
encourage  him  it  is  a  poor  compliment  to  encourage  somebody  in  Spain  or  Jeru- 
salem. It  is  of  no  use  for  me  to  write  the  foreign  letter  to  my  friend  far  away, 
if  I  do  not  encourage  the  charwoman  who  comes  for  a  day's  work.  All  these 
splendid  heroics  of  distance  are  mere  romance.  Your  neighbour  nigh  you  often 
needs  encouragement,  and  God  has  placed  you  there  to  give  it.  EH.  Encourage- 
ment must  not  be  merely  seasonal.  Because  you  do  not  know  when  a  man 
wants  you  !  It  is  to  be  the  atmosphere  of  duty  ;  you  are  to  Uve  in  it.  We  need 
encouragement  when  things  are  bright  with  us  to  stimulate  us  to  make  a  right 
and  thankful  use  of  our  mercies.  We  need  encouragement  in  adversity,  for 
patience  needs  sustaining  in  long  hours  of  pain,  in  mysteries  we  cannot  fathom, 
in  paths  where  we  see  no  turning.  You  can  enco\irage  someone  best  of  all  when 
you  can  say.  Thus  and  thus  it  has  been  with  me.     IV.  Encouragement  must 

NOT   BE   WITHDRAWN   BY  FREQUENT   FAILURES.        Do   not  Say,   I   will  give  it  up, 

it  is  a  bad  job.  As  the  R.V.  says,  "  Despairing  of  no  man."  What  do  yon 
say  ?  Am  I  to  encourage  the  man  who  has  broken  so  many  vows  ?  Yes,  His 
next  step  may  be  on  to  the  rock.  Am  I  to  be  the  one  to  bear  upon  my  heart 
the  responsibility  of  cheering  those  who  never  seem  to  cheer  me  ?  Yes.  Your 
relation  to  me  is  not  to  affect  my  relation  to  you.  Encourage  the  doubter,  the 
erring,  the  deserter,  as  you  would  be  encouraged  yourself.  V.  Encouragement 
MUST  BE  TRUE,  BASED  ON  REASONS.  No  One  Can  really  encourage  me  unless 
he  speaks  on  the  ground  of  truth.  For  truth  will  not  encourage  me  by  hiding 
my  symptoms  and  using  soft,  seductive  words !  Encourage  one  another,  because 
the  work  in  which  we  are  engaged  is  the  only  immortal  work  of  the  ages,  and  to 
unite  in  Christian  work  is  to  lay  hold  of  the  "  everlasting."  {W.  M.  Statham.) 
Mutual  help  a  law  of  nature : — 1.  The  commonwealth  is  not  served  till  the  different 
branches  of  industry  merge  their  jealousies  in  goodwill.  2.  The  very  composition 
of  the  earth  we  walk  over  offers  a  strong  hint  of  this  intention.  You  read  it  in 
the  beautiful  balancings  of  clouds  and  tides,  the  equations  of  astronomy,  the 
adjustments  of  growth  and  chmate,  all  the  musical  accord  by  which  the  Divine 
Spirit  has  attuned  His  creation  to  an  everlasting  anthem.  Sky  and  water,  vapour 
and  vegetation,  earth  and  sun  are  ever  friendly  and  hospitable;  they  are  per- 
petually running  on  some  missionary  errand  on  each  other's  behalf.  3.  Indeed, 
it  is  most  interesting  to  see  how  liberally  the  Creator  has  given  hints  and  illustra- 
tions of  this  social  principle  by  His  own  arrangements,  even  in  what  we  call  the 
humbler  departments  of  His  creation.  For  society  does  not  stand  apart  from 
nature,  but  interlinks  its  laws  with  hers.  Very  wonderful  it  is,  and  very  beautiful, 
to  see  how  God  twines  together,  into  a  system  of  mutual  benefits,  the  operations 
that  different  creatures  carry  on  for  their  own  advantage,  thus  revealing  His 
intention  that  they  should  be  fellow- helpers,  even  these  dumb  and  soulless  things. 
He  scarcely  lets  any  good  end  with  the  being  that  produced  it,  but  carries  it  over 
into  some  wider  usefulness.  He  pushes  out  the  doings  of  each  animal  and  person 
into  results  that  help  other  animals  and  other  persons.  The  silkworm,  with 
no  thought  of  a  charity,  spins  for  himself  an  elaborate  and  complicated  cofl&n, 
to  hold  the  chrysalis,  till  its  resurrection  with  wings.  But  the  strands  of  that 
delicate  fabric,  the  ingenuity  of  man  winds  off  into  the  material  of  his  costliest 
and  most  durable  vestures.  Coral  insects  build  their  reefs  with  the  slow  toil 
of  ages,  not  certainly  as  philanthropists,  but  simply  by  the  instinct  that  bids 
living  things  provide  a  habitation.  Yet  they  are  all  the  time  la3dng  the  foundations 
of  islands  that  men  will  some  time  inhabit,  when  overpoptdated  continents  shall 
send  out  their  swarming  colonies,  and  thus  God  "  layeth  the  beams  of  His  chambers 
in  the  waters."  The  spider  weaves  a  web,  out  in  the  air,  for  certain  economical 
purposes  of  his  own.  But  God  bathes  it  overnight  in  drops  of  dew,  and  in  the 
morning  sun  it  hangs  like  a  silver  shield,  with  miniature  rainbows  for  its  quarter- 
ings,  "  a  thing  of  beauty  "  at  which  children  clap  their  hands  with  rapture,  and 
which  every  beauty -loving  passenger  is  the  better  for.    The  spider  had  no  thought 


268  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xli. 

of  being  an  artist;  but  the  Creator  made  him  one  to  shed  delight  imconsciously. 
Or  else  astronomy  stretches  one  of  those  slender  fibres  across  the  glass  in  her 
telescope  to  mark  the  passage  of  a  star,  and  the  little  insect  under  a  clover  leaf 
gives  a  measuring  line  to  science  to  tell  the  august  motions  of  the  constellations 
of  the  sky.  4.  So  in  another  and  higher  grade  of  creation.  When  men  forget 
to  help  each  other,  God  overrules  their  plans,  and  makes  them  do  it,  to  a  certain 
extent,  in  despite  of  themselves.  He  is  for  ever  defeating  the  plots  of  selfishness. 
He  suffers  no  immunities  to  be  strictly  personal  It  is  the  settled  policy  of 
Providence,  so  to  speak,  to  break  up  monopolies.  He  regards  always  the  good, 
not  only  of  the  greatest  number,  but  of  the  whole.  He  allows  no  mortal  to  live 
for  himself  alone,  however  much  disposed  to.  A  capitalist,  without  the  remotest 
intention  of  being  a  public  benefactor  perhaps,  founds  a  factory,  to  enlarge  hia 
private  fortune.  But  the  enterprise  calla  into  employment  an  army  of  labourers, 
and  the  wages  forestall  their  starvation.  A  few  men,  in  a  corporation,  as  the 
case  may  be,  build  a  railway,  for  the  sake  of  the  dividends;  but  it  becomes  an 
immeasurable  facility  of  travel  and  transportation,  and  while  it  enriches  a  few 
is  a  convenience  to  millions.     (F.  D.  Huntington,  D.D.) 

Yet.  7.  So  the  carpenter  encouraged  the  goldsmith. — The  TiardsTiips  of  toorking 
men  : — If  men  in  bad  work  can  encourage  each  other,  should  not  men  engaged  in 
honest  artisanship  and  mechanism  speak  words  of  good  cheer  ?  1.  Men  see  in  their 
own  work  hardships  and  trials,  while  they  recognise  no  hardships  or  trials  in  any- 
body else's  occupation.  Every  man's  burden  is  the  heaviest,  and  every  woman's 
task  is  the  hardest.  We  find  people  wanting  to  get  other  occupations  and 
professions.  Now,  the  beauty  of  our  holy  religion  is  that  God  looks  down  upon 
all  the  occupations  and  professions;  and  while  I  cannot  understand  your  annoy- 
ances, and  you  cannot  understand  mine,  God  understands  them  alL  I  will  speak 
this  warning  of  the  general  hardships  of  the  working  classes.  You  may  not  belong 
to  this  class,  but  you  are  bound  as  Christian  men  and  women  to  know  their  sorrows 
and  sympathise  with  them,  and  as  political  economists  to  come  to  their  rescue. 
You  do  a  great  wrong  to  the  labouring  classes  if  you  hold  them  responsible  for 
the  work  of  the  scoundrelly  anarchists.  You  may  do  your  duty  toward  yomr 
employes,  but  many  do  not,  and  the  biggest  business  firm  to-day  is  Grip,  Gouge, 
Grind  and  Company.  By  what  principle  of  justice  is  it  that  women  in  many 
of  oiir  cities  get  only  two-thirds  as  much  as  men,  and  in  many  cases  only  half? 
Here  is  the  gigantic  injustice,  that  for  work  equally  well,  if  not  better,  done  woman 
receives  far  less  compensation  than  man.  Has  toil  frosted  the  colour  of  your  cheeks  ? 
Has  it  taken  aU  spontaneity  from  your  laughter?  Has  it  subtracted  the  spring 
from  your  step,  and  the  lustre  from  your  eye,  until  it  has  left  you  only  half  the 
man  you  were  when  you  first  put  your  hand  on  the  hammer  and  your  foot  on  the 
wheel?  To-morrow  in  your  place  of  toil,  listen,  and  you  will  hear  a  voice  above  the 
hiss  of  the  furnace,  and  the  groan  of  the  foundry,  and  the  clatter  of  the  shuttle — 
a  voice  not  of  machinery  nor  of  the  task-master,  but  the  voice  of  an  all-sympathetic 
God,  as  He  says,  "  Come  unto  Me,  all  ye  that  labour  and  are  heavy-laden,  and 
I  will  give  you  rest."  Let  all  men  and  women  of  toil  remember  that  this  work 
will  soon  be  over.  Have  they  not  heard  that  there  is  a  great  hoUday  coming? 
Oh,  that  home,  and  no  long  walk  to  get  to  it !  I  wis'h  they  would  put  their  head 
on  this  pillow  stuffed  with  the  down  from  the  wing  of  all  God's  promises.  "  There 
remains  a  rest  for  the  people  of  God."  2.  Another  great  trial  is  privation  of  taste 
and  sentiment.  I  do  not  know  of  anything  much  more  painful  than  to  have  a 
fine  taste  for  painting  and  sculpture  and  music  and  glorious  sunsets  and  the  expanse 
of  the  blue  sky,  and  yet  not  to  be  able  to  get  the  dollar  for  the  oratorio,  or  to  get 
a  pictmre,  or  to  buy  one's  way  into  the  country  to  look  at  the  setting  sun  and  at 
the  bright  heavens.  3.  Then  there  are  a  great  many  who  suffer  not  only  in  the 
privation  of  their  tastes,  but  in  the  apprehension  and  the  oppressive  surroundings 
of  life.  (T.  De  Witt  Talmage,  D.D.)  Encouragements  for  working  men: — 
1.  One  of  the  greatest  safeguards  against  evil  is  plenty  to  do.  I  see  a  pool  of  water 
in  the  country,  and  I  say,  "  Thou  slimy  fetid  thing,  what  does  all  this  mean? 
Didn't  I  see  you  playing  with  those  shuttles  and  tiurning  that  j^ist-mill?  "  "  Oh 
yes,"  says  the  water,  "  I  used  to  earn  my  living."  I  say  again,  '  Then  what  makes 
you  look  so  sick?  Why  are  you  covered  with  this  green  scum?  Why  is  your 
breath  so  vile?  "  "  Oh,"  says  the  water,  "  I  have  nothing  to  do.  I  am  disgusted 
with  shuttles  and  wheels.  I  am  going  to  spend  my  whole  lifetime  here,  and  while 
yonder  stream  sings  on  its  way  down  the  mountain-side,  here  I  am  left  to  festef 


CHAP,  xu.]  ISAIAH.  269 

and  die  acciirsed  of  God  because  I  have  nothing  to  do !  "     Sin  is  an  old  pirate  that 
bears  down  on  vessels  whose  sails  are  flapping  idly  in  the  wind.     The  arrow  of 
sin  has  hard  work  to  puncture  the  leather  of  an  old  working-apron.     2.  Another 
encouragement  is  the  fact  that  their  families   are  going  to  have  the  very  best 
opportunity  for  development  and  usefulness.     That  may  sound  strange  to  you, 
but  the  children  of  fortune  are  very  apt  to  turn  out  poorly.     The  son  of  the  porter 
that  kept  the  gate  learns  his  trade,  gets  a  robust  physical  constitution,  achieves 
high  moral  culture,  and  stands  in  the  front  rank  of  Church  and  State.     3.  Again, 
I  offer  as  encouragement  that  you  have  so  many  opportunities  of  gaining  informa- 
tion.    The  Coimtess  of  Anjou  gave  two  hundred  sheep  for  one  volume.     Jerome 
ruined  himself  financially  by  buying  one   copy  of   Origen.     Oh,  the   contrast! 
4.  Your  toils  in  this  world  are  only  intended  to  be  a  discipline  by  which  you  shall 
be  prepared  for  heaven.     {Ibid.)        A  call  to  action  : — I  propose  to  address  myself — 
I.  To  THOSE  WHO  PROFESS  THE  FAITH  OF  Cheist.     Is  there  no  work  for  you  to  do  ? 
Join  some  of  the  regiments;  belong  to  the  artillery,  or  the  cavalry,  or  the  infantry 
of  the  Church.     Woe  unto  them  that  are  at  ease  in  Zion.     II.  To  those  who  profess 
NOT  TO  BE  Christians.     1.  There  are  some  of  you  who  say  you  are  kept  back  by 
your  worldly  engagements.     Will  you  let  your  store,  your  office,  your  shop,  stand 
between  you  and  heaven?    2.  There  is  somebody  who  says:  "  I  am  afraid  some- 
one will  laugh  at  me  if  I  become  a  Christian."     Will  you  allow  your  soul  to  be 
caught  in  such  a  thin  trap  as  human  scorn?     Can  these  people  who  laugh  at  your 
seriousness  insure  you  for  the  future?     3.  There  may  be  young  people  who  say, '  We 
are  too  young  yet.     Wait  a  little  while,  after  we  have  enjoyed  the  world  more;  and 
then  we  will  become  Christians."     I  ask  any  young  man  if  that  is  fair — to  sit  down 
at  a  banquet  all  your  life  long,  and  have  everything  you  want,  and  then  at  the 
close,  when  you  are  utterly  exhausted,  say,  "  Lord  Jesus,  there  are  dregs  in  that 
cup;  you  may  drink  them.     Lord  Jesus,  there  are  crumbs  under  that  table;  you 
may  take  them  up  "  ?     4.  I  heard  some  say,  "  I  am  too  old."     If  thou  canst  not  do 
any  more  than  tremble  towards  the  Cross,  if  thou  art  too  weak  to-m'ght  to  hold 
the  staff,  if  aU  thy  soul  seems  to  be  bowed  down  with  sorrow,  just  stumble  the 
way,  and  put  thy  withered  arms  arovmd  that  Cross,  and  life,  and  joy,  and  pardon, 
and  salvation  will  come  to  you.     5.  I  hear  someone  say,  "  Give  me  more  time 
to  think  of  this!  "     What  is  time?     {Hid.)        A  model  Church  : — I.  It  is  a  scene 
of  ACTIVITY.     We  all  enjoy  activity  in  the  natural  world.     When  the  winter  frosts 
have  melted,  and  the  streams  gush  down  the  mountain-side,  and  the  trees  begin 
to  put  out  their  livery  of  green,  we  enjoy  it.     Life  is  a  scene  of  activity  in  the 
physical  universe.     So  it  is  in  the  business  world.     So  it  is  with  intellectual  activity. 
The  long  years  of  the  Middle  Ages  have  passed,  and  the  darkness  enveloping  Europe 
lifts  up.     The  printing-press  is  doing  a  work  beyond  that  of  the  old  feudal  castle. 
Still  more  is  it  the  case  when  there  comes  spiritual  Hfe  in  a  church  or  in  a  parish; 
everybody  feels  happy.     II.  It  is  a  scene  of  cheerful,  courageous  toil.     The 
carpenter  encourages  the  goldsmith.     Many  people  discourage.     The  carpenter  is 
querulous,  and  he  says,  "  Look  here,  Mr.  Goldsmith,  I  think  you  had  better  do 
your  work  so."     "  What  do  you  know  about  goldsmithing?  "  says  the  other;  "  you 
are  a  carpenter;  attend  to  your  own  business,"  and  thus  angry  words  pass  between 
them.     It  is  so  in  our  churches.     "  Singing,"  says  one;  "  what  do  you  know  about 
singing?  "     "You  don't  preach  quite  right,"  says  one.     "  Would  you  like  to  try?  " 
A  sensible  man  says,  "  I  cannot  preach;  I  think  my  minister  knows  how  to  preach, 
and  I  will  pray  for  him  if  he  makes  a  mistake  now  and  then."     He  knows  how  to 
encourage  him.    III.  It  is  a  scene  of  prompt  industry  and  thorough  work.    When 
a  man  gets  a  reputation  for  dilatoriness  his  fate  is  sealed.     The  model  Church  does 
thorough  work,  and  does  it  promptly.     IV.  They  are  all  working  for  one 
COMMON  END.     The  Church  has  one  end.     This  man  attends  to  the  singing;  this 
man  to  the  children;  this  man  looks  after  the  working  men's  class;  this  man  attends 
to  outdoor  rehef;  another  visits  the  mothers;  others  attend  to  this,  that,  and  the 
other,  but  they  are  all  working  for  one  end.     The  Chvu-ch  is  a  unity— a  unity  iu 
spirit,  in  aim,  in  end.     {E.  P.  Thwing. )        All  at  work  :—l.  They  were  all  at  work. 
Many  of  us  like  activity.     In  the  intellectual  world  all  is  hfe  and  go.     In  the 

{lohtical  world  it  is  the  same.  "  Rest  and  be  thankful  "  belongs  to  other  days, 
t  should  be  just  like  that  in  the  Church  of  Jesus  Christ.  Here,  stagnation  means 
death.  II.  The  encouragement  which  they  gave  each  other.  Men  will 
work,  and  work  well,  when  their  efforts  are  appreciated.  Even  the  dumb  animals 
which  have  become  the  companion  and  worker  for  man  seem  to  understand 
encouragement,  and  will,  in  many  ways,  show  their  appreciation  of  it.     III.  Thh 


270  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  xix 

QUAUTY  OF  THEiB  woEK.  "  It  WES  fastened  with  nails,  and  coiJd  not  be  moved." 
Work  done  under  the  circumstances  of  the  text  was  sure  to  be  good.  Do  your 
work  well.  Do  not  catch  the  spirit  of  the  age.  This  is  the  day  of  the  jerry- builder. 
Quantity  is  often  considered  rather  than  quality.  Outward  show  is  the  order  of 
the  day.  It  is  important  for  us  all  to  remember  that  what  we  can  do  for  God 
depends  upon  what  we  are  before  God.  We  can  only  teach  what  we  know. 
(C.  Leach,  D.D.)  A  society  of  encouragers  : — Societies  already  exist  in  multitude 
— societies  religious,  political,  social,  literary,  &c;  but  there  is  room  for  another. 
It  need  not  displace  any  existing  ones  that  are  worthy  of  continuance;  it  can 
fulfil  its  purpose  by  infusing  into  them  all  a  new  spirit — a  spirit  of  brightness,  of 
good  cheer,  and  strengthening  comradeship.  I  propose  to  call  it  "  The  Society  of 
Encouragers."  L  Its  basis  is  laid  in  nkighboubltness  and  bbothbeliness. 
Does  anyone  ask,  "  Who  is  my  neighbour?  "  Let  him  read  again  the  parable  of 
the  Good  Samaritan.  In  that  story  neighbourliness  stands  for  love,  sympathy, 
kindness,  help,  and  all  those  qualities  that  constitute  practical  religion.  It  bridges, 
at  a  leap,  the  chasm  of  national  distinctions.  My  neighbour's  house  may  be  near 
or  far  in  situation,  his  rental  may  stand  at  £80  a-year,  and  mine  at  £20.  ffis  walls 
may  be  adorned  with  the  costliest  pictures,  and  I  may  be  indebted  to  the  enter- 
prising activity  of  tradesmen  at  Christmas- time  for  any  adornment  on  mine;  or 
the  financial  positions  of  each  may  be  transposed,  but  we  are  neighbours.  We 
live  to  help  each  other.  Is  there  trouble  anywhere?  That  is  enough,  my  place 
is  there;  and  when  the  hour  of  distress  comes  for  me,  I  shall  not  be  without  a  friend. 
But  there  is  a  deeper  word  stilL  In  the  new  society  we  are  brothers.  "  Every 
one  said  to  his  brother,  Be  of  good  cheer."  This  strikes  a  yet  tenderer  chord. 
*'  Have  we  not  all  one  Father  ?  "  This  will  settle  the  relations  between  capital 
and  labour  by  uniting  master  and  man  in  a  common  bond  of  reciprocal  interest. 
Carry  it  to  its  furthest  issue,  and  it  will  solve  all  questions  of  national  and  inter- 
national strife  by  bringing  in  the  reign  of  "  Peace  on  earth  and  goodwill  to  men." 
n.  As  to  its  raison  d'etre.  1.  The  new  society  exists  for  kindly  speech  to  one 
another.  "  Every  one  said  to  his  brother.  Be  of  good  courage."  A  word  in  season, 
how  good  it  is !  There  is  helpfulness  and  inspiration  in  kindly,  encouraging  speech. 
The  ministry  that  never  fails  is  the  ministry  of  encouragement.  2.  It  exists  for 
kindly  speech  of  one  another.  In  the  new  society  we  pledge  ourselves  to  think 
and  act  towards  the  living  as  we  do  for  those  who  have  passed  into  the  Great  Silence. 
Many  have  died  before  their  time  for  want  of  a  Society  of  Encouragers.  Sympathy 
is  vain  that  is  reserved  for  the  eulogy  of  the  dead  or  flower-wreaths  for  the  coSm-lid. 
Expend  it  now.  3.  The  new  society  exists  also  for  mutual  effort.  "They  helped 
every  one  his  neighbour."  The  kindly  word  is  valuable  and  precious,  but  it  is 
better  stUl  when  crystallised  into  action.  What  the  world  wants  is  the  practical 
application  of  the  religion  of  Jesus  Christ,  whose  human  life  is  summed  up  in  the 
brief  sentence,  "  Who  went  about  doing  good."  4.  The  new  society  is  a  society 
of  workers.  "  The  carpenter  encouraged  the  goldsmith."  You  can  put  your 
own  trade  or  profession  in.  All  may  be  included  whose  calling  is  honest,  just,  and 
pure.  What  is  wanted  is  a  sense  of  comradeship,  and  this  the  new  society  provides. 
The  isolation  is  removed.     We  no  longer  work  alone,  but  side  by  side,  in  the  world's 

freat  workshop.  III.  The  uniting  bond  of  all  is  love.  Love  is  the  common 
ond  that  unites  man  to  man,  neighbour  to  neighbour,  brother  to  brother,  and  all 
together  to  Him  who  is  Love's  primal  fount  and  source.  {A.  Hancock.)  Humble 
co-operation: — A  traveller,  standing  outside  Cologne  Cathedral,  expressed  his 
admiration  of  its  beauty.  "  Yes,"  said  a  labourer,  who  was  near;  '  it's  a  fine 
building,  and  took  us  many  a  year  to  finish."  "  Took  you !  "  exclaimed  the  tourist; 
*'  why,  what  have  you  to  do  with  it?  "  "  I  mixed  the  mortar,  sir,"  was  the 
modest  yet  proud  reply.     (Home  Magazine.) 

"Ver.  8.  But  thou,  Israel,  art  My  servant. — The  servant  of  Jehovah : — It  is 
reasonable  to  seek  the  origin  of  the  idea  in  the  first  passage  in  which  the  term 
occurs  (Isa.  xH.  8).  Here  there  can  be  no  doubt  as  to  what  the  term  denotes. 
It  denotes  the  Israelitish  nation,  treated,  however,  not  as  the  mere  aggregate 
of  the  members  composing  it,  but  as  a  unity,  developing  historically,  and  main- 
taining its  continuity  and  essential  character  through  successive  generations. 
{8.  E.  Driver.)  The  seed  of  Abraliam,  My  aiend. — Qod  blessing  for  the 
take  of  another  : — God  turns  the  eyes  of  Israel  to  the  past.  He  reminds  them 
that  they  are  the  children  of  His  friend  Abraham.  You  may  find  a  man  in  distress, 
and  may  be  tempted  to  turn  away  from  him;  but  as  he  talks  to  you  about  himsell 


CHAP.  XLi.]  ISAIAH.  271 

and  his  antecedents,  you  find  that  he  is  the  son  of  an  old  friend  of  youra  That 
alters  the  case.  There  ils  another  motive  operating  on  you  now — the  desire  to 
be  faithful  to  your  friend.  Israel  was  the  seed  of  God's  friend  Abraham.  God 
would  be  faithful  to  them  for  His  friend's  sake.  "  For  Jesus  Christ's  sake  "  is  the 
highest  expression  and  application  of  this  principle.  (J.  A.  Davies,  B.D. )  Theseed 
of  Abraham  (withMatt.  iii.  9): — There  is  between  these  two  passages  an  ascertainable 
relation.  In  the  passage  which  we  have  read  from  the  Book  of  Isaiah  is  exhibited 
the  greatest  element  in  the  Israelitish  national  consciousness.  Apparently  these 
people  never  forgot  their  vocation  as  the  children  of  Abraham.  Sometimes  they 
attributed  more  importance  to  it,  sometimes  less.  When  the  nation  was  at  its 
best  they  spiritualised  the  ideal ;  when  it  was  at  its  worst  they  materialised  it ; 
but  they  never  wholly  ignored  it.  Here  is  a  prophet  speaking  in  a  stern  time 
with  the  purpose  of  heartening  the  people  who  were  listening  to  him.  See  how  he 
does  it.  In  the  chapter  which  precedes  the  one  whence  our  text  is  taken  the 
opening  sentences  are  :  "  Comfort  ye,  comfort  ye.  My  people,  saith  your  God,"  &c. 
The  last  verse  of  the  chapter  is  more  beautiful  still :  '  They  that  wait  u  pon  the  Lord 
shall  renew  their  strength,  they  shall  mount  up  with  wings  as  eagles,  they  shall  run 
and  not  be  weary,  and  they  shall  walk  and  not  faint."  We  see  the  mood  in 
which  Isaiah  speaks  and  the  tenderness  which  is  evident  in  his  message.  It  is  as 
though  he  would  say  to  Israel :  You  have  passed  through  a  stern  testing  time, 
but  you  have  not  ceased  to  be  the  people  of  God.     Indeed,  the  testing  time  was 

Eermitted  because  you  are  never  to  be  anything  else  than  the  chosen  ones,  Grod's 
srael.  You  have  Abraham  for  your  father,  and  the  covenant  which  God  made 
with  Abraham  He  will  keep  with  you.  "  Fear  thou  not,  for  I  am  with  thee  ;  be 
not  dismayed,  for  I  am  thy  God.  I  will  strengthen  thee,  yea,  I  will  help  thee,  yea, 
I  will  uphold  thee  with  the  right  hand  of  my  righteousness."  In  the  light  of  this 
Old  Testament  consciousness  let  us  now  look  at  the  passage  which  we  have  chosen 
from  the  New.  Isaiah  and  John  are  both  heralds  ;  there  is  at  least  this  similarity 
between  them,  that  they  both  come  as  the  bearers  of  good  tidings  concerning  a 
better  day.  But  they  are  different  in  this :  while  Isaiah  speaks  with  the  gorgeous 
magnificence  of  Oriental  symbolism,  and  his  message  is  one  full  of  comfort  and 
tenderness,  the  words  of  St.  John  are  utterly  unadorned  ;  rugged  and  grim  is  the 
speech  of  this  child  of  the  desert.  He  comes  less  with  a  message  of  comfort  than 
with  one  of  rebuke  ;  and  yet,  like  Isaiah,  he  is  the  herald  of  a  glorious  day.  But 
the  people  are  not  ready  for  his  message  nor  for  the  blessing  which  he  announces. 
And  so  his  words  to  them  are  words  of  warning,  especia]lj%  shall  I  say,  to  the 
Pharisees.  The  people  and  their  leaders  had  been  too  much  inclined  to  content 
themselves  with  making  much  of  the  tradition  of  the  covenant  of  God  with  Abraham, 
and  they  thought  comparatively  little  of  what  was  required  from  them  in  the 
keeping  of  it.  "  0  generation  of  vipers  !  who  hath  warned  you  to  flee  from  the 
wrath  to  come  ?  Bring  forth,  therefore,  fruits  meet  for  repentance."  The 
Pharisees  were  conspicuous  for  two  particular  vices  ;  and  may  I  say,  in  parenthesis, 
that  Pharisees  were  by  no  means  in  their  entirety  bad  men.  There  were  many 
sincere  men  in  their  ranks,  and  yet  Jesus,  like  John,  had  more  difficulty  with  the 
Pharisees  than  with  any  other  class  in  the  community.  Their  chief  sin  was  that  of 
spiritual  pride  ;  but  another  was,  they  believed  in  the  externals  of  religion  rather 
than  in  change  of  heart.  They  insisted  much  upon  their  lineage :  here  we  are  the 
chosen  people,  the  descendants  of  Abraham — would  not  God  keep  His  word  to 
US  ?  What  part  or  lot  has  the  race  of  mankind  in  this  which  is  a  special 
privilege  of  Israel  ?  John's  reply  to  them  is  this :  "  Think  not  to  say  within 
yourselves,  We  have  Abraham  to  our  father."  Why  should  God  trouble  to  show 
His  favour  to  men  like  you,  for  you  are  very  different  from  Abraham  ?  God  is 
able  to  raise  up  from  these  stones  children  unto  Abraham.  Shall  we  spend 
a  little  more  time  in  discovering  what  John  the  Baptist  means  by  saying, 
"  God  is  able  of  the  stones  to  raise  up  children  unto  Abraham  "  ?  I  have  heard 
an  exegesis  of  this  kind,  and  it  is  not  a  modern  one  only  :  "  Oh,  it  is  obvious  that 
St.  John  meant  that  the  hearts  aroimd  him  might  be  changed  by  his  glorious 
message,  that  God  would  give  to  these  men  a  heart  of  flesh  in  place  of  a  heart  of 
stone,  and  then  they  would  be  children  of  Abraham  indeed."  Well,  the  inference 
is  not  unjustifiable,  but  I  do  not  think  it  is  correct.  I  believe  that  St.  John  meant 
exactly  and  literally  what  he  said :  "  God  is  able  of  these  stones  to  raise  up  children 
unto  Abraham."  To  beheve  that  he  meant  it  literally  adds  force  to  the  warning 
and  the  appeal.  What  he  meant,  then,  was  something  like  this :  It  is  in  the 
power  of  God  to  breathe  the  breath  of  life  into  these  rocks  of  the  desert,  and  they 


272  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xu. 

should  become  living  souls  ;  and  if  so  it  is  conceivable  they  would  be  better  men 
than  you  and  worthier  successors  of  Abraham,  the  friend  of  God.     For  who  was, 
what  was,  this  Abraham  ?     If  you  turn  to  Hebrews  xi.  you  will  read  a  Christian 
description  of  the  man  and  his  character  :  "  By  faith  Abraham,  when  he  was  called 
to  go  out  into  a  place  which  he  should  after  receive  for  an  inheritance,  obeyed ; 
and  he  went  out,  not  knowing  whither  he  went,"  &c.     Momentous  results  followed 
that  far-off  choice.     It  was  the  dawning  of  a  great  hour  in  which  Israel  was  born, 
and  with  Israel  the  Messiah,  and  with  the  Messiah  the  gospel  under  which  you 
and  I  live  our  lives  to-day.     Here,  then,  is  the  Abraham  of  whose  seed  these 
Pharisees  claimed  to  be.     They  had  not  his  moral  courage,  nor  his  noble  spirit ; 
these  were  not  of  the  kind  who  would  have  gone  out  in  pursuit  of  a  spiritual  ideaL 
These  were  men  who  had  hardened  into  insensibility,  who  by  their  lives  denied 
the  spiritual  idea  Abraham  had  bequeathed  to  them,  and  therefore  the  Baptist's 
remonstrance  was  apt  indeed.     "  Think  not  to  say,  we  have  Abraham  to  our 
father."     You  are  not  of  the  spiritual  lineage  of  Abraham ;  you  would  never 
dare  for  God ;  you  are  content  with  the  grovelling  things,  your  gaze  is  never 
lifted  to  the  eternal.     Grod  could  raise  up  another  Abraham,  yea,  of  these  stones 
he  could  raise  up  children  worthier  than  you.     As  an  illustration  of  what  the  fiery, 
indomitable  prophet  of  the  desert  meant,  let  me  remind  you  of  something,  perhaps, 
that  may  have  crossed  your  lips  but  yesterday.     Looking  upon  the  degenerate  son 
of  a  noble  sire,  what  was  it  you  remarked  to  your  companion  ?     "  His  only  recom- 
mendation is  that  he  is  his  father's  son."     Any  worthless  profligate  who  soils  a 
noble  name  and  brings  degradation  upon  the  record  of  a  noble  race  receives  and 
deserves  the  reprobation  of  honest  men.     The  question  whether  England  is  Israel 
is  not  worth  discussing,  believe  me.     If  you  could  prove  it  to-morrow,  some  John 
the  Baptist  might  rise  and  tell  you  you  are  out  of  the  spiritual  succession  altogether. 
This  is  merely  the  negative  side  of  the  question.     The  seed  of  Abraham  in  spirit 
and  in  truth  are  those  who  hear  the  Word  of  God  speaking  within  their  own  hearts, 
and  rise  and  go  forth  and  obey.     Hear  what  Jesus  has  to  say  on  this  theme  in 
John  viii.  39.     If  Jesus  is  correctly  reported  by  one  who  at  any  rate  knew  BUm 
well,  as  addressing  the  indignant  Jews,  He  says  :  "  I  speak  that  which  I  have  seen 
with  My  Father ;  and  ye  do  that  which  ye  have  seen  with  your  father.     They 
answered  and  said  unto  Him,  Abraham  is  our  father.     Jesus  saith  unto  them. 
If  ye  were  Abraham's  children,  ye  would  do  the  works  of  Abraham.     But  now  ye 
seek  to  kill  Me,  a  man  that  hath  told  you  the  truth,  which  I  have  heard  of  God : 
this  did  not  Abraham."     We  can  classify  easily  the  men  that  are  of  the  quality  of 
Abraham.     Did  these  pharisaic   time-servers,   these  bigoted  Jews,   who  were 
questioning  Jesus  with  the  object  of  destro3dng  Him,  really  think  that  they 
stood  in  the  succession  of   him   who    was   the  friend   of   God  ?     Verily   they 
did ;    but   the   consciousness    of    humanity    since    has    put    them    right.      An 
Ambrose,  in  the  early  years  of  Christianity,  a  rough  soldier,  is  chosen  by  the 
people,  who  know  him  and  his  character,  to  be  their  bishop  ;  and  now  as  prelate 
of  Milan  it  is  the  duty  of  this  erstwhile  soldier  to  turn  from  the  church  door  the 
bloodstained  emperor  who  had  been  his  commander.     He  dare  not  do  otherwise, 
for  he  is  serving  a  greater  than  the  emperor.     Here  speaks  the  seed  of  Abraham. 
And  who  knows  T     God  knows,  maybe,  that  in  this  church  this  morning  there  are 
some  of  the  lineage  of  Abraham  of  whom  the  world  will  never  hear.     The  rest  of 
us,  perhaps,  in  the  gaze  of  heaven,  may  have  to  be  put  in  another  category — the 
category  of  those  who  have  not  dared  for  justice  and  right  and  truth.     There  is 
one  more  thought  suggested  in  our  second  text.     There  is  something  contained  in 
the  very  phrase  "  these  stones,"  which  I  think  was  not  merely  accidental.     The 
prophet  knew  well  what  he  meant :  the  stones  are  unpromising  materiaL     Con- 
version is  a  turning  from  sin  and  a  turning  towards  God.     Get  firm  hold  of  that 
fact.     Feelings  are  an  endowment  which  may  or  may  not  accompany  it ;  but  th© 
man  whose  heart  is  right  with  holiness  and  truth,  whose  faith  is  turned  that  way, 
is  of  the  seed  of  Abraham  and  the  friend  of  God.     I  want  you  to  recognise,  what 
is  the  very  truth,  that  Abraham  had  far  less  to  guide  him  than  you.     He  heard  th© 
same  voice  as  you,  but  it  had  not  told  the  world  as  much  then  as  it  has  told  it  since. 
When  you  take  up  this  Old  Testament  again  and  read  of  the  wonders  achieved 
by  the  heroes  of  old,  remember  that  the  voice  that  spake  to  them  spake  within 
their  own  hearts,  and  not  without,  just  as  it  speaks  now  to  you.  This  Abraham  heard 
a  voice,  and  he  said  he  would  obey  it ;  he  could  trust  it ;  he  established  his  covenant 
with  God,  and  it  never  failed  him.     How  shall  I  know  I  am  of  the  seed  of  Abraham  ? 
Is  my  face  turned  the  way  his  was  ?     How  shall  I  know  I  belong  to  the  Lord  Christ  ? 


CHAP.  xLi.]  ISAIAH.  273 

Here  is  my  charter  :  "  Whosoever  shall  do  the  will  of  God  (even  seek  to  do  it), 
the  same  is  My  brother  and  sister  and  mother."  Jesus  will  never  turn  away  from 
His  own  spiritual  kindred.  Yet  there  may  be  one  more  experience  here  to  which 
I  ought  to  speak.  There  is,  perhaps,  a  man  who  says,  "  Ah  yes  ;  but  I  have  made 
shipwreck  of  my  career.  Such  lives  as  these  may  look  back  upon  their  life  and  say, 
'  I  have  done  the  best  I  could  with  my  manhood.'  But  I  have  failed  ;  my  road 
is  strewn  with  the  dust  and  ashes  of  vain  regrets.  '  The  stones  are  the  rubbish 
of  the  desert.  They  only  serve  to  accentuate  its  desolation.'  Just  so  ;  I  am  the 
stones."  Well,  I  want  you  to  hear  a  voice  that  I  am  fond  of  listening  to — with 
deepest  reverence  be  it  spoken — One  that  spoke  with  authority  ;  and  I  think  you 
will  agree  with  me  it  has  power  in  it  still : — John  viii.  56  :  "  Your  father  Abraham 
rejoiced  to  see  My  day,  and  he  saw  it  and  was  glad."  Picture  the  astonishment 
of  those  Jews.  "  Thou  art  not  yet  fifty  years  old,  and  hast  Thou  seen  Abraham?" 
Poor  literalists  !  Abraham  in  Ins  lonely  desert  vigil  never  saw  Jesus  ;  he  had  no 
foregleam  of  the  day  when  Jesus  should  speak  such  words  as  these ;  but  what  he 
did  have  was  the  vision  by  which  he  saw  the  Sun  of  Righteousness  arising  in  his 
own  heart.  That  was  Jesus'  day.  The  Abraham  who  spent  his  early  days  in  a 
guilty  household,  in  the  midst  of  men  who  never  thought  of  the  unwortliinesj 
of  serving  God  by  lascivious  rites  and  brutal  deeds,  one  day  said  to  himself, 
"  This  life  has  to  be  left  behind."  So  soon  as  he  had  seen  that,  he  had  seen 
Jesus'  day,  and  he  rose  up  and  went  out  to  meet  it.  And  that  is  just  what 
we  have  to  do.  For  the  same  voice  that  spake  to  Abraham  is  speaking 
to  the  world  to-day,  is  speaking  through  Jesus :  "  Before  Abraham  was  I  am." 
Children  of  Abraham,  friends  of  Jesus,  is  not  that  voice  speaking  to  you  even 
now  ?      (i?.    J.    Campbell,    M.A.)  Scripture    characters :  —  1.  There    is   in 

Scripture  a  hidden  truth  which  we  gradually  become  acquainted  with,  and 
which  we  may  not  thoroughly  know  for  years.  God  has  attached  certain 
names  and  titles  to  men  in  the  Bible  which  seem  to  have  some  great  hidden 
meaning,  as  showing  what  character  God  approves.  There  are  certain 
men  to  whose  characters  He  has  attached  a  distinct  approval  which  is 
most  striking.  Abraham  is  called  "  the  friend  of  God "  ;  David,  "  the  man 
after  God's  own  heart"  ;  St.  John,  "the  beloved  disciple."  There  is  some  deep 
meaning  in  each  of  these  titles  not  to  be  passed  by  casually.  2.  The  characters 
of  Holy  Scripture  are  so  various  that  we  are  impressed  with  the  view  that  the 
Old  Testament  is  a  volume  of  character,  written  to  show  the  application  of  religious 
privileges  to  the  varieties  of  men.  Look  at  Abraham.  What  is  our  first  feeling 
in  thinking  of  him?  thnt  is,  in  what  did  his  character  seem  peculiar?  In  faith 
and  unworldliness.  In  what  David's?  A  tender  love  of  God.  In  what  St. 
John's  ?  Love.  Now  how  do  they  assimilate  essentially  with  each  other  ?  Who 
else  was  especially  faithful  ?  Not  so  strikingly,  Jacob  or  Isaac  or  Solomon.  Abra- 
ham's faithfulness  bore  the  great  fruit  of  faithfulness,  unworldliness.  Samuel, 
Elijah,  and  Ezekiel  were  characters  who  seemed  especially  to  have  lived  by  faith, 
to  have  lived  free  of  the  world.  How  did  Abraham  differ  from  them?  In  having 
a  tender  disposition,  a  deeper  weU-spring  of  human  feeling.  He  was  a  man  of 
much  strong  and  domestic  affection,  really  attached  to  earthly  ties,  and  mentioned 
in  close  connection  with  them  throughout  his  history.  The  three  characters, 
then,  which  are  thus  distinguished  by  especial  names  of  God's  favour,  all  agree 
in  this  respect,  a  deep  and  tender  love  in  their  dispositions;  yet  prevented  from 
so  ruling  them  as  to  draw  off  their  faith  from  God,  which  faith  was  shown  by 
a  life  of  freedom  from  the  world.  3.  Let  this,  then,  be  the  lesson  and  comfort 
we  draw,  that  however  little  we  may  be  living  a  life  of  public  usefulness,  yet  a 
retired  one  may  be  the  life  God  has  placed  us  in.  {E.  Monro.)  The  friend 
of  God  (with  James  ii.  23): — Abraham  was  called  the  friend  of  God  because  he 
was  so.  The  name  does  not  occur  in  his  life  as  given  in  the  Book  of  Genesis, 
and  it  has  been  questioned  whether  it  occurs  anywhere  else  in  Holy  Scripture; 
for  many  have  preferred  to  translate  the  word  in  Isaiah,  and  in  2  Chron.  xx.  7, 
as  "  lover,"  or  beloved,"  rather  than  "  friend."  However  this  may  be,  it  is 
quite  certain  that  among  the  Jewish  people  Abraham  was  frequently  spoken 
of  as  "  the  friend  of  God."  At  this  present  moment,  among  the  Arabs  and  other 
Mohammedans,  the  name  of  Abraham  is  not  often  mentioned,  but  they  speak  of 
him  as  KhalU  Allah,  or  the  "  friend  of  God,"  or  more  briefly  as  El  Khalil,  "  the 
friend."  Those  tribes  which  boast  of  their  descent  from  ham  through  Ishmael, 
or  through  the  sons  of  Keturah,  greatly  reverence  the  patriarch,  and  are  wont 
to  speak  of  him  under  the  name  which  the  Holy  Spirit  here  ascribes  to  him.     It 

VOL.  II. — 1 8 


274  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xli. 

is  a  noble  title,  not  to  be  equalled  by  all  the  names  of  greatness  which  have  been 
bestowed  by  princes,  even  if  they  should  all  meet  in  one.  Patents  of  nobility 
nre  mere  vanity  when  laid  side  by  side  with  this  transcendent  honour.  I  think 
I  hear  you  say,  "  Yes,  it  was  indeed  a  high  degree  to  which  Abraham  reached: 
BO  liigh  that  we  cannot  attain  unto  it."  Think  not  so.  We  also  may  be  called 
friends  of  God  (John  xv.  14).  I.  A  title  to  be  wondered  at.  I.  Admire  and 
adore  the  condescending  God,  who  thus  makes  of  a  man,  like  ourselves,  His  friend. 
In  this  case  the  august  Friend  displays  His  piire  love,  since  He  has  nothing  to  gain. 
Surely  God  does  not  need  friends.  How  sweet  it  is  to  mingle  the  current  of  our 
life  with  that  of  some  choice  bosom  friend!  Can  God  have  a  friend?  Friend- 
ehip  cannot  all  be  on  one  side.  In  this  particular  instance  it  is  intended  that 
we  should  know  that  while  God  was  Abraham's  Friend,  this  was  not  all;  but 
Abraham  was  God's  friend.  He  received  and  returned  the  friendship  of  God. 
Friendship  creates  a  measure  of  equality  between  the  persons  concerned.  I  say 
not  that  absolute  equahty  is  at  all  necessary  to  friendship,  for  a  great  king  may 
have  a  firm  friend  in  one  of  the  least  of  his  subjects;  but  the  tendency  is  towards 
an  equalising  of  the  two  friends:  the  one  comes  down  gladly,  and  the  other  rises 
up  in  sympathy.  Friendship  begets  fellowship,  and  this  bridges  over  the  dividing 
gulf.  We  must  keep  our  place,  or  we  shall  not  be  friends.  2.  Note  the  singular 
excellence  of  Abraham.  How  could  he  have  been  God's  friend  had  not  grace 
wrought  wonderfully  in  him?  Although  a  plain  man,  dwelling  in  tents,  the 
father  of  the  faithful  is  always  a  right  royal  personage.  A  calm  dignity  surrounds 
him,  and  the  sons  of  Heth  and  the  kings  of  Egypt  feel  its  power.  His  character 
is  well  balanced.  3.  Note  some  of  the  points  in  which  this  Divine  friendship 
showed  itself.  (1)  The  Lord  often  visited  Abraham.  (2)  Secrets  were  disclosed. 
(3)  Compacts  were  entered  into.  On  certain  grand  occasions  we  read:  "  The 
Lord  made  a  covenant  with  Abram."  (4)  This  friendship  resulted  in  the  bestowal 
of  innumerable  benefits.  The  life  of  Abraham  was  rich  with  mercies.  (5)  Since 
Abraham  was  God's  friend,  God  accepted  his  pleadings,  and  was  moved  by  his 
influence.  (6)  There  was  also  between  these  friends  a  mutual  love  and  dehght. 
Abraham  rejoiced  in  Jehovah !  He  was  his  shield,  and  his  exceeding  great  reward, 
and  the  Lord  Himself  dehghted  to  commune  with  Abraham.  The  serenity  of 
the  patriarch's  life  was  caused  by  his  constant  joy  in  God.  (7)  This  friendship 
was  maintained  with  great  constancy.  The  Lord  never  forsook  Abraham :  even 
when  the  patriarch  erred,  the  Lord  remembered  and  rescued  him.  He  did  not 
cast  him  off  in  old  age.  Constancy  is  also  seen  on  the  human  side  of  this  renowned 
friendship.  Abraham  did  not  turn  aside  to  worship  any  false  god-  (8)  The 
Lord  kept  His  friendship  to  Abraham  by  favouring  his  posterity.  That  is  what 
our  text  tells  us.  The  Lord  styled  rebellious  Israel,  "  the  seed  of  Abraham,  My 
friend."  11.  The  title  vindicated.  Abraham  was  the  friend  of  God  in  a  truth- 
ful sense.  There  was  great  propriety  and  fulness  of  meaning  in  the  name  as 
applied  to  him.  1.  Abraham's  trust  in  God  was  implicit.  He  "  staggered  not 
at  the  promise  through  unbelief,"  for  he  knew  that  what  the  Lord  had  promised 
He  was  able  also  to  perform.  2.  There  was  joined  to  this  imphcit  trust  a  practical 
confidence  as  to  the  accomplishment  of  everything  that  God  had  promised. 
3.  Abraham's  obedience  to  God  was  imquestioning.  4.  Abraham's  desire  for  God's 
glory  was  uppermost  at  all  times.  5.  Abraham's  communion  with  God  was  con- 
stant. III.  Regard  this  name  as  the  title  to  be  sought  after.  Oh,  that  wo 
may  get  to  ourselves  this  good  degree,  this  diploma,  "  friend  of  God  "  1  1.  You  must 
be  fully  reconciled  to  Him.  2.  We  must  exercise  a  mutual  choice.  The  God  who 
has  chosen  you  must  be  chosen  by  you.  3.  There  must  be  a  conformity  of  heart, 
and  \vill,  and  design,  and  character  to  God-  4.  There  must  be  a  continual  intercourse. 
The  friend  of  God  must  not  spend  a  day  without  God,  and  he  must  undertake  no 
work  apart  from  his  God.  6.  If  we  are  to  be  friends  of  God,  we  must  be  co- 
partners with  Him.  6.  Friendship,  if  it  exists,  will  breed  mutual  delight.  IV.  Thh 
title  to  be  utilised  for  practical  purposes.  1.  Here  is  a  great  encouragement  to 
the  people  of  God.  See  what  possibilities  he  before  you !  2.  Here  is  a  solemn 
thought  for  those  who  would  be  friends  of  God.  A  man's  friend  must  show 
himself  friendly,  and  behave  with  tender  care  for  his  friend.     (C.  H.  Spurgeon.) 

Ver.  10.  Fear  thou  not ;  for  I  am  with  thee. — "  Fear  thou  not  ! " — I.  Thj 
CIRCUMSTANCES  IN  WHICH  GoD  ADDRESSES  His  PEOPLE.  They  are  poor  and  needy. 
It  is  necessary  that  God  should  have  room  in  which  to  work.  Emptiness  to  receive 
Him;  weakness  to  be  empowered  by  TTim.     It  is  into  the  empty  branch  that 


CHAP,  xu.]  ISAIAH.  276 

the  vine-sap  pours;  into  the  hollowed  basin  that  the  water  flows;  the  weakness 
of  the  child  gives  scope  for  the  man's  strength.  IT.  The  assxtbances  that  Ha 
MAKES  TO  THEM.  No  height,  however  bare,  nor  depth,  however  profound,  can 
separate  us  from  His  love.  HI.  The  Divinb  provision  fob  their  need.  Lif« 
is  not  easy  for  any  of  us,  if  we  regard  the  external  conditions  only:  but  directly 
we  learn  the  Divine  secret,  rivers  flow  over  bare  heights  in  magnificent  cascades; 
fountains  arise  in  the  rock-strewn  sterile  valleys;  the  wilderness  becomes  a  pool 
(vers.  17,  18).  To  the  ordinary  eye  it  is  probable  that  there  would  appear  no 
difference.  Still  the  tiny  garret,  and  the  wasting  Alness;  still  the  pining  child; 
stUl  the  straitened  circumstances — stfll  the  deferred  hope.  But  the  eye  of  faith 
beholds  a  paradise  of  beauty,  miirmuring  brooks  filling  the  air  with  melody,  leafy 
trees  spreading  their  shade.  What  makes  the  difference?  What  does  faith  see? 
How  is  she  able  to  work  such  transformations?  1.  Faith  is  conscious  that  God 
is  there,  and  that  His  presence  is  the  complement  of  every  need.  To  her  eye  common 
desert  bushes  burn  with  His  Shechinah  2.  Faith  recognises  the  reality  of  an 
eternal  choice,  that  God  has  entered  into  a  covenant  which  cannot  be  dissolved, 
and  that  His  love  and  fidelity  are  bound  to  finish  the  work  He  has  commenced. 
3.  Faith  knows  that  there  is  a  loving  purpose  running  through  every  moment  of 
trial,  and  that  the  Great  Refiner  has  a  meaning  in  every  degree  of  heat  to  which 
the  fiurnace  is  raised;  and  she  anticipates  the  moment  when  she  will  see  what  Grod 
has  foreseen  all  the  time,  and  towards  which  He  has  been  working.  4.  Faith  realises 
that  others  are  learning  from  her  experiences  lessons  which  nothing  else  would 
teach  them;  and  that  glory  is  accruing  to  God  in  the  highest,  because  men  and 
angels  see  and  know  and  consider  and  understand  together  that  the  hand  of  the 
Lord  hath  done  this,  and  the  Holy  One  of  Israel  hath  created  it  (ver.  20).  {F.  B. 
Meyer,  B.A.)  No  fear  for  Ood's  people: — I.  The  Speaker.  The  words  derive 
all  their  importance  from  this.  So  many  are  our  enemies,  so  mighty,  so  subtle, 
80  maUgnant,  so  ceaseless  in  their  attacks,  that  aU  finite  beings  would  be  powerless 
to  help.  We  want  Omniscience,  Omnipotence,  Omnipresence  on  our  side.  A 
patience,  a  compassion,  a  pity,  a  love  that  belongs  only  to  God.  We  want  One 
to  help  who  embraces  all  being,  all  time,  all  eternity.  We  want  even  more  than 
this.  We  want  One  who  has  engaged  all  these  perfections  on  our  behalf.  W© 
want  even  more  than  this:  One  who  stands  in  the  tenderest  relation  to  us  in  all 
these.  And  such  is  the  Speaker  of  these  words.  11,  The  persons  to  whom 
SPOKEN.  LiteraUy  to  His  ancient  people.  But  spirituaUy  to  all  the  people  of 
God,  the  true  descendants  of  Jacob,  everywhere,  in  all  ages.  They  need  them 
in  every  stage  of  their  journey,  every  moment  of  their  hves,  every  step  they  take. 
They  are  strangers  on  the  earth.  The  world  is  a  strange  place  to  them,  and  they 
are  strangers  in  it.  The  path  which  they  are  treading  was  never  trod  by  them 
before.  The  rehgion  of  the  world  is  not  theirs;  its  habits,  amusements,  principles, 
practice,  are  aU  foreign  to  them.  It  is  a  strange  land,  and  hostile  too,  for  there 
is  much  in  it  that  opposes  them.  They  are  sailors  on  a  stormy  ocean,  where  sun 
and  stars  in  many  days  appear  not,  and  no  small  tempest  Ues  on  them.  They 
are  soldiers  in  a  field  of  hard  fighting;  their  enemies  vastly  out-number  them, 
overmatch  them,  and  besides  this,  in  themselves  they  are  but  weak,  yea,  powerless, 
and,  unless  perpetually  encouraged,  timid.  HI.  The  words  themselves.  "  Fear 
not."  He  says  it  more  than  seventy  times  in  the  Scripture.  (J.  H.  Evans,  M.A.) 
Fear  not ! — Three  times  within  the  compass  of  a  few  verses,  the  exhortation,  "  Fear 
not,"  is  given.  I.  The  exhortation.  "  Fear  not."  A  great  honour  comes 
to  anyone  who  is  thus  addressed  by  God.  It  shows  that  God  cares  for  that  person, 
and  desires  to  live  on  terms  of  intimacy  with  him;  for  God  binds  His  friends  to 
Him  by  ties  of  love  as  well  as  reverence.  True  religion  differs  from  false  in  this 
respect.  How  wonderful  to  hear  God  say  to  any  man,  "  Fear  not "  ;  because 
all  have  reason  to  fear  Him.  Ever  since  Adam  hid  himself  in  the  garden,  fear 
has  been  characteristic  of  our  attitude  towards  God.  We  sin  against  Him.  He 
hates  and  punishes  sin.  Does  it  not  look  like  mockery  for  us  sinners  to  be  told, 
"  Fear  not "  ?  Terror  often  disappears  as  a  fuller  Imowledge  is  gained  of  the 
object  which  caused  it.  Friday  trembled  all  over  on  first  meeting  Robinson  Crusoe; 
but  soon  his  terror  vanished.  Much  of  our  fear  of  God  arises  from  ignorance;  and 
will  vanish  when  the  hght  of  the  knowledge  of  God  in  Christ  dawns  on  our  souls. 
XL  The  groxjnds  on  which  this  injunction  is  based.  Remember  that  God 
never  gives  His  children  a  stone  when  they  ask  Him  for  bread.  If  He  says,  "  Fear 
not,"  He  means  it.  Why  "  Fear  not "  ?  "I  am  with  thee,"  He  assures  IsraeL 
How  tenderly  God  speaks  to  Israel  in  vers.  8,  9.    His  voice  is  like  that  of  a  mother 


276  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xu. 

crooning  to  her  child — Israel,  whom  I  have  chosen,  the  seed  of  Abraham  "^ly  friend, 
I  have  taken  thee,  and  called  thee,  and  chosen  thee,  and  not  cast  thee  away.     Grod 
is  nearer  to  us  than  He  was  to  even  the  Old  Testament  saints.     Immanuel  means 
"  God  with  us."    III.  This  teaches  us  to  cling  to  Christ  all  through  lipb. 
Lord  Chamberlain  Leslie  was  once  riding  through  a  dangerous  ford  with  the  Queen 
of  Scotland  sitting  behind,  in  the  old  fashion,  and  fastened  to  him  by  a  belt.     As 
she  slipped  backwards  during  the  steep  ascent  out  of  the  river,  the  Lord  Chamberlain 
shouted  encouragingly,  "  Grip  fast."     "  Ay,"  said  Her  Majesty,  "  gin  the  buckle 
hand  "     They  landed  safely,  and  to  make  security  double  sure  in  the  future,  two 
additional  buckles  were  sewed  on  to  the  belt.     God's  command  to  us  regarding 
Christ  is,  "  Grip  fast."     The  bond  that  binds  a  beUeving  sinner  to  Him  will  never 
break.     Why,  then,  should  we  fear?     (D.  A.  Mackinnon,  M.A.)        Encouragement 
not  to  fear: — I.  The  temper  of  spirit  that  the  Lord  aims  to  reduce  His  people  unto. 
"  Fear   not;  be   not  dismayed."     Quietness,  settledness,   and   undauntedness   of 
spirit.     II.  The  course  He  takes  to  reduce  them  to  it.     A  proposal  of  motives 
and  arguments  of  sufficient  effect  and  prevalency  to  pull  down  vain  fear  out  of 
the  heart.     {T.  Crisp,  D.D.)        Fear,  arid  its  remedy  : — I.  What  it  is  for  a  person 
not  to  fear,  nor  be  dismayed.     Fear  is  a  very  distracting,  disturbing,  confounding 
passion;  it  is  a  kind  of  besetting  passion  that  makes  men  lose  themselves,  especially 
if  it  be  in  the  extremity  of  fear;  it  ariseth  from  an  apprehension  of  some  unavoid- 
able, insupportable  evil  growing  upon  a  person,  and  occasioned  either  by  some 
symptoms  of  that  evil,  or  by  some  messenger  or  other  relating  it,  or  by  some  fore- 
sight of  it  in  the  eye.     Now,  as  evil  appears  greater  or  lesser,  and  more  or  less 
tolerable,  so  the  passion  of  fear  is  more  or  less  in  persons.     II.  What  the  people 
OF  God  should  not  fear.     There  is  a  threefold  fear;   a  natural,  a  religious, 
and  a  turbulent  fear.     A  natural  fear  is  nothing  else  but  such  an  affection  as 
is  in  men  by  nature,  that  they  caimot  be  freed  from ;  such  a  fear  was  in  Christ 
Himself,    without   sin.     A   religious   fear    is   nothing    but   an   awful   reverence, 
whereby  people  keep  a  fit  distance  between  the  glorious  majesty  of  God  and  the 
meanness  of  a  creature.     A  turbulent  fear  is  a  fear   of  disquietness.     Now  all 
disquieting  fear  is  that  which  the  Lord  endeavours  to  take  off  from  His  people. 
1.  The  people  of  God  need  not  be  afraid  of  their  sins.     I  do  not  say  they  must 
not  be  afraid  to  sin  (Rom.  viii.  1).     2.  Neither  ought  we  to  fear  the  sins  of  others. 
They  cannot  do  God's  people  any  hurt.     3.  They  that  have  God  for  their  God 
must  not  be  afraid  of  men.     III.  What  the  fruit  of  feae  is;  or  what  prejudice 
or  disadvantage  fear  and  dismayedness  bring  along  with  them.     1.  Fearfulness 
of  spirit  casts  many  slanders  upon  God.     Upon  His  power.  His  faithfulness.  His 
care  and  providence,  the  freeness  of  His  grace,  the  efficacy  of  the  sufferings  of 
Christ.     2.  As  it  respects  God's  service.     (1)  It  is  the  cut- throat  of  believing.     (2)  It 
is  prejudicial  to  all  rehgious  duties:  it  is  a  damper  to  prayer.     It  makes  all  duties 
merely  selfish.     Fear  puts  a  man  beside  his  wits,  that  while  he  is  in  such  a  passion, 
he  is  to  seek  for  common  ways  of  safety;  so  that,  whereas  men  think  that  fear 
will  help  them  to  avoid  danger,  commonly,  in  amazement,  you  shall  have  people 
stand  still,  not  able  to  stir  to  save  themselves.     Besides,  this  fear  is  such  a  torment, 
that  commonly  those  evils  so  much  feared,  prove  not  so  hvirtful  nor  evil  to  a  person 
as  the  present  fears;  and,  besides  this,  it  many  times  doth  not  only  daunt  the 
spirit  of  a  man  in  himself,  but  proves  very  dangerous  to  others.     IV.  God's  motives, 
by  which  He  attempts  to  prevail  over  the  spirits  of  His  people,  not  to  be  afraid 
or  dismayed,  come  what  can  or  may.     God  is  our  God.     I.  What  is  it  for  God  to 
be  our  God  ?     While  you  have  all  things  else  but  this,  you  have  the  rays  of  the  sun; 
while  you  have  this,  you  have  the  sun  itself  in  its  brightness  and  lustre.     "  I  am 
thy  God,"  is  as  much  as  to  say.  Thou  hast  a  propriety  in  Me.     God's  all-sufficiency 
reaches   beyond  all  wants.      2.  What  a  person  hath  in  this.      There  are  three 
particulars  whereby  specially  you  may  observe  what  great  treasure  i)eople  have 
in  having  God.     (1)  In  regard  of  the  quahty  of  the  treasure.     (2)  In  regard  of  the 
virtue  of  it.     The  quintessence  of  all  virtues  is  in  Him.     (3)  In  regard  of  the 
sovereignty,  universahty,  and  variety  of  help  in  it.     3.  How  it  is  so  well  with  those 
that  are  the  Lord's.     God,  in  giving  Himself  unto  persons,  gives  Himself  to  be 
communicated  nnto  them  at  sundry  seasons,  and  in  divers  kinds  and  measures,  and 
vet  so  that  He  will  be  the  judge  of  the  fitness  of  the  time.     4.  How  He  becomes  their 
God,  and  upon  what  terms.     The  gift  of  Him  is  as  cheap  as  it  is  rich.     He  never 
looks  the  creature  should  brkig  anything  that  he  might  procure  it.     5.  How  He  will 
be  found  of  them.     The  way  of  finding  out  God  efficiently  to  be  our  God,  is  the 
Spirit  of  the  Lord.    God  makes  Himself  known  passively  to  be  the  God  of  Has  people. 


CHAP.  XLi.]  ISAIAH.  277 

by  the  word  of  His  grace,  and  faith  laying  hold  upon  it  revealed,  and  more  sub- 
ordinately  in  prayer,  fasting,  receiving  of  the  Lord's  supper,  and  such  ordinances, 
80  far  as  they  are  mixed  with  faith.  {Ibid.)  Fear  conquered: — Many  good 
people  are  full  of  fears.  Bunyan  says  of  Mr.  Fearing,  "  He  was  a  man  that  had  the 
root  of  the  matter  in  him,  but  he  was  one  of  the  most  troublesome  pilgrims  that  I  ever 
met  with  in  all  my  days."  Many  things  may  help  us  to  conquer  our  fears.  I.  It  is 
■WEONG  TO  FEAR.  We  are  quite  safe  in  God's  hands,  and  fear  is  really  imbehef.  It 
dishonomrs  God.  II.  It  prevents  vs  from  doing  our  duty.  If  a  gardener  is  afraid 
to  sow  his  seed  he  will  have  no  flowers,  or  if  the  farmer  is  afraid  to  plough  he  will 
have  no  crop.  If  a  boy  is  afraid  it  is  of  no  use  to  try  for  the  prize,  he  wUl  not  get 
it.  Fear  is  ruinous  to  our  work.  III.  It  discourages  others  (Numb.  xiii.  31-33, 
xiv.  1).  Fear  kept  the  IsraeHtes  out  of  the  promised  land.  IV.  It  is  unnecessary. 
We  are  afraid  because  the  dangers  seem  so  great,  or  the  work  so  hard,  and  ourselves 
BO  weak.  But  we  forget  who  is  for  us — more  than  all  that  can  be  against  us. 
1.  God  is  with  us.  2.  God  is  our  God.  What  a  possession  God  is!  (1)  Vast. 
(2)  Rich.  (3)  Secure.  (4)  Everlasting.  3.  God  will  strengthen  us  as  He  did  David 
and  Samson.  4.  He  wiU  hold  us  up  by  His  right  hand.  Who  then  can  lay  us  low? 
Away  then  with  fear  for  ever.  (R.  Brewin. )  Never  despair  : — I.  God's  people 
PASS  through  adversity.  it.  Tribulation  strengthens  God's  people. 
m.  God  is  with  His  people  in  the  day  of  their  trouble.  TV.  A  personal 
BNCOURAgement.  "  I  am  with  thee."  1.  Your  fellow-men  may  ridicule  you  because 
you  have  become  religious.  2.  In  your  trade  you  may  have  to  pass  through  much 
tribulation.  3.  You  may  have  felt  much  fear  about  making  a  profession  of  your 
faith.  4.  Temporal  calamity  often  visits  the  people  of  God.  6.  There  may  be 
affliction  and  pain  coming  to  you.  V.  An  invitation  to  sinners.  You  say  this 
invitation  is  not  in  the  text.  Never  mind,  I  must  go  over  hedge  and  ditch  to  call 
the  siimer  to  Jesus.  (W.  Birch.)  Missionary  encouragement: — The  missionary 
could  not  take  with  him  a  higher  word  of  manifold  comfort  than  is  here  contained. 

1.  The  command.  1.  "  Fear  not,  thou."  Fear  throws  a  paralysis  over  the  senses 
and  faculties  of  man,  so  that  flight  and  safety  are  more  thought  of  than  holding  one's 
grotmd,  or  making  headway  against  the  enemy.  2.  "  Be  not  dismayed."  If  one 
have  fear,  he  loses  both  coiirage  and  hope;  and  in  this  state  no  valuable  work  can 
be  done.  The  soldiers  of  the  first  French  Revolution  were  destitute  of  fear,  and  by 
nothing  dismayed;  hence,  aU  the  armies  of  Europe  prevailed  not  against  them, 
until,  in  the  terms  of  Carlyle,  they  had  provoked  all  men,  and  the  Gaehc  fire  had 
kindled  another  kind  of  fire — the  Teutonic  kind.  11.  Its  ground.  1.  "  I  am  with 
thee."  God  promised  Moses  that  His  presence  should  go  with  him;  and  without 
that,  said  Moses,  send  me  not  up.  2.  "  For  I  am  thy  God."  It  is  Jehovah  that 
speaks,  who  created  the  imiverse  and  governs  it  stiU.  3.  "  I  wiU  strengthen  thee." 
God  will  renew  not  merely  such  strength  as  is  natural  to  us,  but  a  siu-plusage  of 
strength  for  special  service.  In  the  strength  of  heavenly  food  and  drink  Ehjah 
"  went  forty  days  and  forty  nights."  4.  "  Yea,  I  will  help  thee."  Joseph  in  Egypt, 
or  Daniel  in  Babylon,  would  have  been  destroyed  by  their  enemies,  and  would  never 
have  become  prime  ministers  but  for  the  Divine  interposition.  5.  "  Yea,  I  will 
uphold  thee  with  the  right  hand  of  My  righteousness."  The  right  hand  is  an  emblem 
of  power — here,  of  omnipotent  power — so  that  the  work  of  righteousness  which  you  do 
shall  never  cease.  Truth  is  omnipotent,  and  shall  rule  the  eternal  years.  III.  Its 
encouragement.     1.  If  God  be  for  us  in  mission  work,  who  can  be  against  us? 

2.  If  He  favom-  and  command  it,  how  can  it  ever  cease  ?  Deus  vidt,  said  Peter  the 
Hermit,  and  for  two  centuries  the  Crusades  flamed  on  high.  3.  If  truth  and  right- 
eousness be  eternal,  how  bold  and  hopeful  ought  the  missionary  to  be !  The  Gospel 
is  stronger  than  the  strongest  battalions.  (Homiletic  Review.)  The  Christian's 
fears  arid  the  Christian's  encouragement: — I.  The  Christian's  fears.  It  may  be 
asked  why  does  the  Christian  fear  ?  I  answer,  because  of  his  knowledge.  Do  you 
say,  "  If  this  be  so,  then  ignorance  is  bliss  "  ?  I  answer.  No.  I  do  not  say  that  ovu: 
knowledge  causes  our  danger,  I  only  say  it  produces  our  fear.  I  may  be  in  danger 
and  not  know  it;  but  my  ignorance  does  not  diminish  my  danger;  it  rather  in- 
creases it.  See  Captain  WiUiams  in  the  Atlantic.  He  is  asleep  in  his  cabin ;  maybe 
dreaming  of  wife,  and  home,  and  joys  to  come.  He  knows  nothing  of  the  rocks 
ahead  on  which,  in  a  few  moments,  the  vessel  may  dash,  and  where  many  a  precious 
life  will  soon  be  gone  for  ever.  H  he  were  awake,  there  would  be  agony  in  his  face 
instead  of  a  smile;  but  there  would  be  a  chance  of  escape.  His  knowledge  would 
produce  fear,  but  might  lead  to  safety.  So  with  the  sinner;  he  enters  upon  thi?  year 
amidst  smiles  and  songs,  and  little  dreams  that  ere  the  next  year  comes  he  wil.  be  in 


278  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  xll 

eternity.  If  he  were  to  awake  there  would  be  deep  anxiety,  but  that  anxiety  might 
end  in  life  and  heaven-  The  Christian,  however,  is  awake.  1.  He  knows  that  he  is 
on  trial  for  eternity.  2.  That  he  is  surrounded  by  enemies.  3.  He  knows  himself: 
every  day  he  lives  he  makes  discoveries  of  his  character  that  fill  him  with  shame  and 
sorrow.  His  constant  a*cknowledgment  is,  "By  the  grace  of  God  I  am  what  I 
am."  4.  He  knows  that  many  a  fellow-soldier  has  fallen.  11.  Thb  Chbistiah's 
■NCOUEAQEMENT.  1.  There  is  the  assurance  of  God's  presence.  2.  There  are 
several  exceeding  great  and  precious  promises.  Conclusion — "  To  whom  wilt 
thou  flee  for  help?  and  where  wilt  thou  leave  thy  glory?  "  Talk  about  destitution, 
there  are  none  so  destitute  as  those  who  have  no  God.  (C.  Garrett.)  Courage : — 
There  is  no  virtue  more  highly  and  widely  esteemed  than  courage,  and  no  vice 
more  generally  detested  than  cowardice.  Courage  makes  heroes,  and  amongst 
the  ancients,  at  least,  heroes  were  second  in  rank  to  the  gods.  Amongst  savage 
tribes  it  may  almost  be  said  that  courage  is  the  only  virtue,  for  without  it  aJl 
other  good  quahties  lose  their  value,  and  where  it  exists  it  covers  a  multitude  of  sins. 
This  is  also  the  virtue  which  children  most  admire.  Jack  the  Giant  Kaller  is  a  story 
of  perennial  interest  to  the  children.  Nor  is  hero-worship  a  thing  unknown  among 
older  people.  I.  The  need  for  coueage.  Courage  is  the  quaUty  which  enables 
one  to  resist.  It  is  the  power  to  say  "  No."  11.  The  natube  of  courage.  Courage 
displays  itself  in  many  ways.  It  may  be  seen  on  the  battlefield,  and  in  the  quiet 
endurance  of  difficulties  in  the  home.  It  may  be  seen  in  maintaining  unpopular 
opinions  amid  difficult  or  dangerous  circumstances,  or  in  meeting  death  with  un- 
blanched  cheek.  What  is  courage?  1.  Courage  is  not  blindness  to  danger.  It  is 
no  virtue  to  be  imconcerned  in  the  presence  of  dangers,  about  which  one  is  totally 
ignorant.  The  greatest  courage  often  goes  along  with  the  keenest  sense  of  danger. 
The  young  officer  who  was  fighting  by  the  side  of  an  old  veteran  was  surprised  to 
find  his  face  blanched  with  fear.  The  young  man  being  reckless  of  danger  himself, 
asked  with  considerable  surprise,  "  You  are  not  afraid,  are  you?  "  "  I  am  afraid," 
was  the  reply;  "  and  if  you  were  half  as  afraid  as  I  am  you  would  run."  Two  of  our 
Lord's  disciples  once  displayed  the  courage  of  ignorance.  When  Christ  asked  them 
if  they  were  able  to  diink  of  the  cup  which  He  should  drink,  and  be  baptized  with 
His  baptism,  they  readily  rephed  that  they  were  able.  They  were  unconscious 
of  the  greatness  of  the  task  to  which  they  were  willing  to  pledge  themselves. 

2.  Courage  is  a  true  estimate  of  dangers.  "  Knowledge  is  the  antidote  to  fear." 
"  Courage  is  equahty  to  the  problem  before  us."  Socrates  was  condemned  to  drink 
the  hemlock  cup  because  he  taiight  the  youth  of  Athens  noble  truths  about  God, 
which  were  esteemed  by  the  authorities  as  heresy.  He  might  have  won  his  life  by 
a  recantation,  or  an  apology  to  his  judges.  He  preferred  death.  When  the  execu- 
tioner brought  in  the  poison  cup,  the  friends  who  were  gathered  round  him  wept, 
and  Socrates  alone  was  calm.  He  explained  to  them  that  he  knew  it  was  a  dangerous 
thing  to  tell  a  lie;  but  that  it  might  even  be  a  blessing  to  die.  At  least  he  would 
not  do  what  he  knew  to  be  evil,  in  preference  to  suffering  what  might  possibly 
be  evil,  or  what  might  even  prove  a  blessing.  The  lie  was  the  greater  danger. 
TTT  Motives  for  courage.  The  possession  of  such  courage  is  to  be  coveted.  How 
is  it  to  be  gained?  What  motive  can  be  found  sufficient  to  inspire  one  to  such  acts 
of  bravery?  1.  Pity  for  the  oppressed.  2.  Consciousness  of  companionship.  3.  Know- 
ledge that  the  cause  is  God's.  (iJ.  C.  Ford,  M.A.)  Fear  aiid  dismay — an  anti- 
dote : — There  is  no  doubt  of  the  fact  that  we  have  all  some  fears,  and  that  there  are 
moments  when  we  are  dismayed,  for  life  stands  connected  not  only  with  to-day  and 
man,  but  with  God  and  eternity.  The  words  of  our  text  come  to  those  who  are 
faithful.  I.  The  reasons  why  some  of  God's  people  have  occasion  at  times 
TO  fear  and  even  to  be  dismayed.  1.  Our  own  nature  is  our  enemy.  In  its  de- 
pravity, in  its  ungodliness,  the  flesh  lusteth  against  the  Spirit  and  the  Spirit  against 
the  flesh,  and  these  are  contrary  the  one  to  the  other.  2.  Then  there  are  these 
things  that  surround  us,  and  those   people   who   constitute   the  world   around. 

3.  Then  there  is  the  great  enemy.  God  often  teaches  us  our  inabibty.  Is  it  not  a 
•olemn  thing  to  stand  in  the  midst  of  these  enemies  with  that  other  world  coming, 
and  Christ  to  be  the  Judge?  Is  it  not  a  solemn  life  when  we  think  of  all  its  responsi- 
biUties,  if  we  are  not  found  looking  to  the  true  source  and  finding  the  true. power? 
XL  The  encouragement  in  the  text.  1.  "  Fear  thou  not,  for  I  am  with  thee  ; 
be  not  dismayed,  for  I  am  thy  God."  Do  not  imagine  for  a  moment  that  it  is 
your  wants  that  bring  to  you  this  succour.  The  tendency  with  us  all  is  always 
to  make  it  our  doing.  Let  us  lay  aside  the  thought  that  we  have  any  power. 
Mid  remember  that  from  first  to  last  it  is  all  of  grace.     The  first  encouragement* 


CHAP.  XLi.]  ISAIAH.  279 

then,  is  found  in  the  Divine  presence:  "  I  am  with  thee."  2.  But  there  is 
yet  a  deeper  depth.  Sometimes  the  spirit  of  dismay  comes  over  us.  What 
will  be  the  end?  Cast  away?  What  does  the  prophet  tell  us  in  regard  to  our 
covenant-keeping  God?  "  Be  not  dismayed,  for  I  am  thy  God."  Here  is  the  most 
endearing  relationsliip  in  the  universe !  There  is  not  an  angel  in  heaven  l?ut  feels  as  he 
thinks  of  God  that  he  is  all  safe.  Now  it  is  the  same  relationship  between  us  and 
God;  nay,  it  is  a  more  sanctified  one,  for  it  is  a  relationship  which  exhibits  the 
infinitude  of  His  love,  the  unspeakableness  of  His  mercy.  3.  I  am  thy  God,  I  will 
strengthen  thee."  One  of  the  finest  things  that  one  finds  after  affliction  is  when  the 
strength  is  returning  and  weakness  is  departing.  There  is  a  gladness  and  a  gratitude 
in  connection  with  such  an  experience  as  this  which  only  those  who  have  been 
afflicted  can  know.  The  downcast  ones  who  are  in  the  depths  and  ready  to  perish, 
ready  to  faint  by  the  way,  in  that  condition  hear  a  voice;  and  what  does  it  say  to 
them?  "  I  will  strengthen  thee."  4.  That  is  not  all.  "  I  will  help  thee."  Now 
this  implies  one  step  further.  It  implies  that  you  and  I  have  a  burden,  and  as  we 
are  going  through  the  world  we  are  carrying  it;  but  the  burden  is  too  heavy  for  us. 
We  are  tired;  we  are  overloaded,  and  there  is  one  Traveller  by  our  side  who  can  help 
us.  5.  Then  His  support  is  effectual.  "  Yea,  I  will  uphold  thee  with  the  right  hand 
of  My  righteousness."  There  is  no  left-hand  work  with  God;  no  sinister  work;  it 
is  all  right-hand  work  with  Him.  And  then  all  that  is  with  it  and  all  that  it  intro- 
duces is  righteousness.  I  know  of  no  encouragement  like  this  text  if  we  properly 
appreciate  it.  {A.  M.  Brovm,  LL.D.)  God's  all-sufficiency  a  reason  for  fearless- 
ness : — God  can  be  God  and  fearless,  but  we  can  scarcely  be  creatures  and  fearless. 
StiU  less  is  it  likely  that  sinful  creatiires  should  be  fearless.  It  is  more  than  the 
Father  looks  for  under  the  present  mode  of  our  existence.  But  when  the  fearful 
thing  is  coming  down,  or  when  the  children  see  it  looming  in  the  distance  and  are 
frightened,  and  they  catch  the  Father's  countenance,  and  see  that  He  is  not 
frightened,  it  wonderfully  reassures  the  poor  children  to  see  a  fearlessness  on  the 
Father's  face.  Heaven  is  full  of  "  Fear  nots."  And  if  you  have  faith  as  a  grain  of 
mustard  seed,  it  will  break  out  of  your  midnight,  and  up  from  your  deepest  valley 
too,  that  voice  of  the  Father,  the  All-in-all.  I.  The  meaning  of  the  word  is  that  God 
IS  OTJB  All-sufficiency,  and  not  dis-related,  but  related  to  us.    11.  Consideb  the 

USE  THE  CHrLDKEN  SHOULD  MAKE   OF  THIS  SUFFICIENCY  OF  THEIR  FaTHES.      See 

what  liberties  we  take  with  God's  earth.  We  get  stones  wherever  we  like.  They 
are  not  our  stones.  And  we  get  gold  wherever  we  like,  and  we  get  iron  wherever  we 
like,  and  we  get  coal  wherever  we  can.  I  hope  the  day  will  come  when,  even  without 
thought  or  intention,  we  shall,  from  the  new  nature  of  our  being,  take  up  God  as 
easily  as  the  blade  of  grass  takes  up  atmosphere  and  light.  Let  us  enter  our  home^ 
enter  and  be  comforted,  as  all  helpless  things  are,  to  find  their  source  of  supply  so 
near.  And  let  us  not  leave  our  nest  and  then  fret  that  our  rest  is  gone,  but  abide 
encircled  by  the  everlasting  strength.  (J.  Pvlsford.)  The  sweet  harp  of 
consolation : — We  sometimes  speak  very  lightly  of  doubts  and  fears;  but  such  is  not 
God's  estimate  of  them.  Our  Heavenly  Father  evidently  considers  them  to  be  great 
evils,  extremely  mischievous  to  us,  and  exceedingly  dishonourable  to  Himself,  for  He 
very  frequently  forbids  our  fears,  and  as  often  affords  us  the  most  potent  iremedies 
for  them.  "  Fear  not  "  is  a  frequent  utterance  of  the  Divine  mouth.  "  I  am  with 
thee  "  is  the  fervent,  soul-cheering  argument  to  support  it.  Martin  Luther  used  to 
say,  that  to  comfort  a  desponding  spirit  is  as  difficult  as  to  raise  the  dead;  but,  then, 
we  have  a  God  who  both  raises  the  dead  from  their  graves  and  His  people  from  their 
despair.  Saul  was  subject  to  fits  of  deep  despondency,  but  when  David,  the  sldlful  • 
harper,  laid  his  hand  among  the  obedient  strings,  the  evil  spirit  departed,  overcome 
by  the  subduing  power  of  melody.  My  text  is  such  a  harp.  I.  We  shall  note  thb 
TIMES  WHEN  ITS  SWEET  STRAINS  ABE  MOST  NEEDED.  Occasions  when  comfort  is 
needed  are  many;  for  some  there  be,  who,  like  the  willow,  will  only  fiourish  in  a  soil 
which  is  always  wet  with  consolation-  If  their  mothers  did  not  bear  them  with 
sorrow,  Kke  Jabez,  they  commenced  very  early  on  their  own  account  to  accumulate 
a  heritage  of  woe.  As  John  Bunyan  would  say,  they  need  not  be  afraid  of  the  Slough 
of  Despond,  for  they  carry  a  slough  within  their  own  hearts,  and  are  never  out  of 
it,  or  it  is  never  out  of  them.  They  are  plants  which  fiourish  best  in  shady  places, 
among  the  damps  of  sorrow.  They  delight  most  to  dwell  in  the  Valley  of  Humilia- 
tion; and  when  they  are  journejdng  through  that  peaceful  vale,  like  Mr.  Fearing, 
they  could  lie  down  and  kiss  the  flowers,  because  the  place  is  so  suitable  to  their  meek 
and  lowly  spirit.  There  is  something  sadly  weak  about  this  state  of  experience, 
though  there  is  also  much  to  admire:  these  are  they  whom  the  Master  carries  in  Hia 


280  TEE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  ill 

bosom,  and  doth  gently  lead.  More  or  less,  believers  need  consolation  at  all  times, 
because  their  life  is  a  very  peculiar  one.  1.  Yet  are  there  special  occasions  when  the 
Comforter's  work  is  needed,  and  one  of  these  certainly  is  when  we  are  racked  with 
much  physical  pain.  Many  bodily  pains  can  be  borne  without  affecting  the  mind, 
but  there  are  others  whose  sharp  fangs  insinuate  themselves  into  the  marrow  of  our 
nature,  boring  their  way  most  horribly  through  the  brain  and  the  spirit:  for  these 
much  grace  is  wanted.  2.  When  the  trouble  comes  in  another  shape,  namely,  in 
our  relative  sorrows,  borne  personally  by  those  dear  to  us.  3.  When  all  the  currents 
of  providence  run  counter  to  us.  4.  Some  of  us  know  what  it  is  to  hear  this  voice  of 
God  in  the  midst  of  unusual  responsibilities,  heavy  labours,  and  great  enterprises. 
6.  Did  you  ever  stand,  as  a  servant  of  God,  alone  in  the  midst  of  opposition?  Have 
you  heard  the  clamour  of  many,  some  saying  this  thing,  and  some  the  other — some 
saying,  "  He  is  a  good  man,"  but  others  saying,  "  Nay,  but  he  deceiveth  the  people  "  7 
Did  you  never  feel  the  delight  of  saying,  "  The  best  of  all  is,  God  is  with  us;  and,  in 
the  name  of  God,  instead  of  folding  up  the  standard,  we  will  set  up  our  barmers  "? 
If  you  have  ever  passed  through  that  ordeal,  then  have  you  needed  the  w6rds,  "  Fear 
thou  not;  for  I  am  with  thee:  be  not  dismayed;  for  I  am  thy  God."  "  Who  art 
thou,  that  thou  shouldest  be  afraid  of  a  man  that  shall  die,  and  of  the  son  of  man 
which  shall  be  made  as  grass?  "  6.  We  shall  want  this  word  of  comfort  most  of  all 
when  we  go  down  the  shelving  banks  of  the  black  river.  7.  After  death,  we  read  in 
this  Word  of  great  events,  what  shall  happen  to  us;  but  we  feebly  comprehend  the 
revelation.  Solemnities  shall  follow  which  may  well  strike  a  man  with  awe  as  he 
thinks  upon  them.  What  about  that  future  ?  Why,  faith  can  look  forward  to  it 
without  a  single  tremor;  she  fears  not,  for  she  hears  the  voice  of  the  everlasting  God 
saying  to  her,  "  I  am  with  thee."  Thus  have  I  mentioned  a  few  of  the  occasions  in 
which  this  harp  sounds  most  sweetly.  AU  through  life  I  may  picture  the  saints  as 
marching  to  its  music,  even  as  the  children  of  Israel  set  forward  to  the  notes  of  the 
silver  trumpets.  II.  We  come  to  you,  harp  in  hand,  and  pray  you  distlnctly  to 
HEAE  ITS  KOTES.  The  sweetness  of  all  the  notes  melt  into  each  other,  but  now  we 
shall  touch  each  string  severaDy  and  by  itself,  and  if  you  have  an  educated  ear  you 
will  hear  that  which  will  solace  your  souls.  "  Fear  thou  not;  for  I  am  with  thee." 
What  does  it  mean?  1.  "  I  am  with  thee  in  deepest  sympathy."  When  you  suffer, 
you  suffer  not  a  new  pang;  Christ  knew  that  pain  long  ago.  2.  Tte  Lord  is  with  us 
in  community  of  interests.  That  is  to  say,  if  the  believer  should  fail,  God  himself 
would  be  dishonoured.  Luther  rej  oiced  greatly  whenever  he  felt  that  he  had  brought 
God  into  his  quarrel.  "  Well,"  said  he,  "  if  it  were  I,  Martin  Luther,  and  the  Pope 
of  Rome  who  had  to  fight  it  out,  I  might  well  despair;  but  if  it  be  the  Pope  against 
Martin  Luther  and  Martin  Luther's  God,  then  woe  be  unto  Antichrist."  God  is  in 
the  quarrel  of  the  man  who  attacks  error;  God  is  in  the  quarrel  of  the  man  who  is 
trying  to  do  good,  to  reclaim  his  fellow-creatures  from  sin,  and  to  establish  the  king- 
dom of  Christ.  Ay,  and  when  you  can  quote  a  Divine  promise,  God  is  engaged  in 
your  affairs,  because  if  He  do  not  keep  that  promise,  He  is  not  true.  It  is  with  us 
as  it  is  with  the  timid  traveller  in  the  Alps,  who  is  attended  by  a  faithful  guide.  He 
shivers  as  he  passes  under  overhanging  cliffs,  or  glides  down  shelving  precipices,  or 
climbs  the  slippery  steeps  of  glaciers,  but  if  his  guide  has  linked  himself  with  him  he 
is  reassured.  The  guide  has  said,  "  You  are  trembling,  sir,  but  the  way  is  safe ;  I 
have  passed  it  many  a  time  with  many  a  traveller  as  weak  as  you  are.  But  to 
reassure  you  and  make  you  feel  how  safe  you  are,  see  here!  "  and  he  straps  a  rope 
round  the  traveller  and  round  himself.  '  Now,"  says  he,  "  both  of  us  or  neither. 
We  shall  both  get  safely  home  or  neither."  3.  The  next  string  of  the  harp  gives  this 
Bound,  "  I  am  with  thee  in  providential  aid."  In  the  old  days  of  the  post  horses, 
there  were  always  relays  of  swift  horses  ready  to  carry  onward  the  king's  mails.  It 
is  wonderful  how  God  has  His  relays  of  providential  agents;  how  when  He  has  done 
with  one,  there  is  always  another  just  ready  to  take  his  place.  4.  God  is  with  us  in 
secret  sustaining  power.  He  well  knows  how,  if  He  do  not  interpose  openly,  to 
deliver  us  in  trouble,  to  infuse  strength  into  our  sinking  hearts.  I  have  read  of 
those  who  bathe  in  those  baths  of  Germany  which  are  much  impregnated  with  iron, 
that  they  have  felt  after  bathing  as  if  they  were  made  of  iron,  and  were  able  in  the  heat 
of  the  sun  to  cast  off  the  heat  as  though  they  were  dressed  in  steel.  Ha]>))y  indeed  are 
they  who  bathe  in  the  bath  of  such  a  promise  as  this,  "  I  am  with  thee!  "  5.  There 
is  a  way  by  which  the  Lord  can  be  with  His  people,  which  is  best  of  all,  namely, 
by  sensible  manifestations  of  His  presence,  imparting  joy  and  peace  which  surpass 
all  understanding.  III.  Meditate  much  upon  the  sweetness  of  those  notes. 
1.  The  comfort  ol  my  text  excels  all  other  comfort  imder  heaven.    2.  There  is  all 


CHAP.  XLi.]  ISAIAH.  281 

the  comfort  here  that  heaven  itself  could  afford.  The  Manx  people  have  for  their 
motto  three  legs,  so  that  whichever  way  you  throw  them  they  are  sure  to  stand;  but 
as  for  the  saints,  it  is  impossible  for  them  to  be  thrown  down  by  misfortune,  or  even 
by  the  infernal  powers.  Weshallstand,  for  God  upholds  us.  Now  divide  the  words, 
and  view  them  separately.  "  I  am."  Know  you  what  this  meaneth?  God  is  self- 
existent,  eternal,  independent,  sitting  on  no  precarious  throne,  nor  borrowing  leave 
to  be.  It  is  no  other  than  "  Jehovah,"  "  Jah,"  "  I  am,"  who  has  become  the  Friend 
of  His  people.  Note  the  tense  of  it — not  "  I  was,"  not  "  I  shall  be,"  but  "  I  am." 
We  have  yesterday,  to-day,  and  for  ever,  the  same  great  "  I  am."  "  I  am  " — what? 
"  I  am  with  thee,"  poor,  feeble  thing  as  thou  art.  IV.  Though  I  have  spoken  of  my 
text  as  a  harp  yielding  rarest  music,  yet  it  needs  that  the  ear  be  ttjned  before 
ITS  MUSIC  CAN  BE  APPRECIATED.  It  is  not  every  man  that  imderstands  the  dehghts 
of  harmony,  even  in  ordinary  music.  So  there  are  tens  of  thousands  of  men  who 
know  notMng  at  all  of  what  it  is  to  have  God  with  them.  Yea,  this  would  be  their 
dread;  they  would  be  glad  to  escape  from  God  if  they  could-  {C.  H.  Spurgeon.) 
Fear  and  its  antidote : — To  whom  are  these  words  spoken?  We  must  not  steal  from 
God's  Scripture  any  more  than  from  man's  treasury.  They  were  spoken — 1.  To 
God's  chosen  ones  (ver.  8).  2.  To  those  whom  God  has  caUed  (ver.  9).  3.  They 
are  God's  servants,  doing  His  wiU  (ver.  8).  4.  They  are  those  whom  He  has  not 
rejected  from  His  service,  in  spite  of  the  imperfections  of  which  they  are  penitently 
conscious  (ver.  9).  To  these  every  honey-dropping  word  of  this  text  belongs.  I,  A 
TERY  COMMON  DISEASE  OF  GOOD  MEN — FEAR.  1.  This  disease  came  into  man's 
heart  with  sin  (Gen.  iii.  8).  2.  Fear  continues  in  good  men  because  sin  continues 
in  them.  3.  Fear  coming  in  by  sin,  and  being  sustained  by  sin,  readily  finds  food 
upon  which  it  may  live.  4.  If  fear  finds  food  within,  it  also  readily  finds  food  without. 
Poverty,  sickness,  &c.  5.  In  certain  instances  the  habit  of  fearing  has  reached  a 
monstrous  growth.  6.  Even  the  strongest  of  God's  servants  are  sometimes  the 
subjects  of  fear  (1  Kings  six.  4).  II.  God's  command  against  fear.  "  Fear  thou 
not;  be  not  dismayed."  That  precept  is  absolute  and  unqualified;  we  are  not  to 
fear  at  aU.  Why?  1.  Because  it  is  sinful.  It  almost  always  results  from  unbelief, 
the  sin  of  sins.  2.  It  feeds  sin.  3.  It  injures  yovu-self.  4.  It  weakens  the  believer's 
influence  and  so  causes  mischief  to  others.  III.  The  projhses  which  God  gives 
TO  PREVENT  FEAR  AND  DISMAY.  1.  Many  a  man  fears  because  he  is  afraid  of  loneli- 
ness. You  are  not  alone,  because  God  is  with  you.  2.  Men  fear  they  may  lose  all 
they  have  in  the  world,  and  they  know  very  well  that  if  they  lose  their  property  they 
usually  lose  their  friends.  Your  goods  may  go,  but  your  God  will  not.  3.  Fear 
sometimes  arises  from  a  sense  of  personal  weakness.  "  I  will  strengthen  thee."  God 
can,  if  He  wills  it,  put  Samson's  strength  into  an  iofant's  arm.  4.  Some  fear  that 
friendly  succour  will  fail.  If  the  work  on  which  we  have  set  our  hearts  is  God's 
work.  He  will  send  to  our  aid  all  the  succour  we  need.  5.  Many  a  child  of  God  is 
afflicted  with  a  fear  that  he  shall  one  day,  in  some  unguarded  moment,  bring  dishonour 
upon  the  Cross  of  Christ.  This  is  a  very  natural,  and  in  some  respects  a  very  proper 
fear.  "I  wUl  uphold  thee  with  the  right  hand  of  My  righteousness."  (Ibid.) 
Helpfvi  presence : — It  was  said  of  Simpson,  the  discoverer  of  chloroform,  that  his 
presence  in  a  sick-room  half  cured  his  patients.  Pain  lost  half  its  terror,  and 
seemed  to  expect  its  dismission,  once  he  stood  by  the  sick.  {J.  A.  Davies,  B.D.) 
A  trinity  of  Divine  forces  : — "  Strengthen,"  "  help,"  "  uphold,"  a  trinity  of  Divine 
forces,  a  triple  wall  of  Divine  protection.  "  If  God  be  for  us,  who  can  be  against 
us?"  (J.  R.  Macduff,  D.D.)  A  grand  staircase : — When  the  late  Dr.  William 
Anderson  lay  dying,  lus  friend,  Mr.  Logan,  read  this  passage  to  him,  and  the  noble  old 
man  at  once  seized  it,  and  looking  at  his  friend,  said  with  great  emphasis,  "  What  a 
grand  staircase  that  is  up  which  to  go  to  God  !  "  (C.  Garrett.)  Security  in  God's 
company : — If  Caesar  could  say  to  the  fearful  ferryman,  in  a  terrible  storm,  "  Be  of 
good  cheer;  thou  carriest  Caesar,  and  therefore  canst  not  miscarry,"  how  much  more 
may  he  presume  to  be  safe  that  hath  God  in  his  company !  A  child  in  the  dark  fears 
nothing  while  he  hath  his  father  by  the  hand.  {J.  Trapp.)  The  protection  of 
God's  presence  : — Zwingle,  in  spite  of  all  the  machinations  of  his  enemies,  went  about 
unharmed.  It  was  as  though  an  unseen  bodyguard  encompassed  him,  and  his 
enemies  despaired  of  attaining  their  end.  "  God  is  with  me,"  he  said;  "  and  with 
Him  on  my  side  I  fear  my  enemies  as  little  as  the  crag  fears  the  ocean's  foam." 
(Sunday  School  Chronicle. )  .  God  a  background : — Dr.  Dale  of  Birmingham,  towards 
the  close  of  his  life,  made  the  following  entry  in  his  diary:  "  Of  course,  when  Sir 
Andrew  Clark  was  sent  for,  and and came,  I  understood  that  my  posi- 
tion was  regarded  as  critical.     I  was  too  weak,  however,  to  be  much  moved  by  it — 


282  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  \CBA.t.  xli. 

too  weak  to  find  much  direct  consolation  in  the  eternal  springs  of  strength  and  joy. 
Grod  was  a  kind  of  background  to  everything — hardly  discerned,  but  there;  this  was 
all."  (Life  of  R.  W.  Dale.)  General  Oordori's  faith: — "I  go  as  alone,"  wrote 
General  Gordon,  as  he  started  from  Cairo  to  KLhartoum,  "  with  an  infinite  almighty 
God  to  direct  and  guide  me,  and  I  am  so  called  to  trust  in  Him,  as  to  fear  nothing,  and, 
indeed,  to  feel  sure  of  success."  (Sunday  School  Chronicle.)  I  will  help  thee. — 
Ood'a  "  I  vnUa  "; — I  will,  I  will,  I  will.  Oh,  the  rhetoric  of  God!  Oh,  the  certainty 
of  the  promise  !  (J.  Trapp.)  The  best  Helper : — Two  persons  are  spoken  of  here: 
*'  I "  and  "  thee."  "  I,"  the  person  speaking,  is  our  God  and  Saviour;  and  "  thee," 
the  person  spoken  to,  means  everybody  who  needs  His  help  and  seeks  it.  There 
are  four  reasons  why  Jesus  is  the  best  Helper.  L  Beoausb  Hb  is  always  nkae  to 
HELP.  God  is  always  near  when  people  are  in  trouble.  He  always  could  help  them 
if  He  saw  it  best.  But  sometimes  He  sees  good  reasons  for  not  helping  those  who 
are  in  need.  EC.  Becatjsb  Hb  is  always  able  to  help.  m.  Because  He  is 
always  willing  to  help.  He  may  not  always  be  willing  to  help  us  just  at  the 
time,  or  in  the  way  we  desire, — that  may  not  be  best;  but  in  His  own  time  and  way 
He  is  always  willing  to  help.  IV.  Because  He  is  always  kind  in  helping.  There 
are  some  people  who  are  willing  and  able  to  help  others,  and  who  do  help  them  too, 
but  it  is  done  in  a  very  rough  manner.  (R.  Newton,  D.D. )  Our  Helper : — I.  Who 
MAKES  THE  PROMISE  ?  A  promise  is  nothing  to  me  unless  I  have  good  security  that 
it  will  be  kept.  When  a  man  makes  a  promise  to  me  that  he  will  do  so  and  so,  I  value 
the  promise  according  to  his  ability  and  disposition  to  make  it  good.  If,  now,  you 
read  from  verse  10,  you  will  see  who  it  is  that  promises  help.  It  is  a  well-guaranteed 
promise.  He  who  made  you  knows  all  about  you.  His  knowledge  of  you  is  even 
more  exact  than  is  the  watchmaker's  knowledge  of  the  delicate  machinery  which  he 
takes  apart  and  puts  together  again,  n.  How  much  we  all  need  help.  We 
begin  to  need  it  in  many  ways  as  soon  as  we  are  bom,  and  we  never  cease  to  need  it 
as  long  as  we  live.  (J.  W.  Teal.)  Ood'a  help : — A  minister  was  one  day  bringing 
his  books  upstairs  into  another  room,  for  he  was  going  to  have  his  study  on  the  first 
floor,  instead  of  downstairs,  and  his  little  boy  wanted  to  help  father  carry  some  of  the 
books.  "  Now,"  said  the  father,  "  I  knew  he  could  not  do  it,  but  as  he  wanted  to  be 
doing  something,  to  please  him  and  to  do  him  good  by  encouraging  his  industry,  I 
told  him  he  might  take  a  book  and  carry  it  up."  So  away  he  went,  and  picked  out 
one  of  the  biggest  volumes — Caryl  on  Job  or  Poll  Synopsis,  I  should  think — and 
when  he  had  climbed  a  step  or  two  up  the  stairs,  down  he  sat  and  began  to  cry.  He 
could  not  manage  to  carry  his  big  book  any  farther;  he  was  disappointed  and  un- 
happy. How  did  the  matter  end  ?  Why,  the  father  had  to  go  to  the  rescue,  and  carry 
both  the  great  book  and  the  little  man.  So,  when  the  Lord  gives  us  a  work  to  do, 
we  are  glad  to  do  it,  but  our  strength  is  not  equal  to  the  work,  and  then  we  sit  down 
and  cry,  and  it  comes  to  this,  that  our  blessed  Father  carries  the  work  and  carries 
the  little  man  too,  and  then  it  is  all  done  and  done  gloriously.     (C.  H.  Spurgeon.) 

Ver.  13.  For  I  the  Lord  thy  God  will  hold  thy  right  hand. — The  Christian^ a 
help : — I.  It  is  a  personal  help.  "  I  will  help  thee."  When  the  religious 
element  was  strongly  felt  amongst  the  Jews,  they  looked  to  the  King  eternal  for 
guidance  and  protection;  nothing  but  His  counsel  would  satisfy  them.  Man 
seems  to  have  the  special  intuition  of  a  personal  God,  as  if  nothing  but  personal 
contact  with  Hira  could  revive  the  latent  powers.  Truth  in  the  abstract  cannot 
touch  the  heart  so  as  to  cause  an  inner  revolution.  Truth  must  come  from  God 
as  from  a  living  Being.  II.  This  personal  help  will  be  given  only  in  the 
WAY  OF  RIGHTEOUSNESS.  The  children  of  Israel  had  departed  from  the  right  way, 
and  as  long  as  they  sought  their  own  gratification  they  covdd  not  expect  help  from 
the  God  of  their  fathers.  The  way  of  righteousness  is  not  the  most  pleasant  at 
all  times  for  flesh  and  blood,  but  it  is  always  the  safest.     III.  It  is  thb  most 

TENDER   AND   CONSTANT   HELP   WITHIN   THB   REACH   OF   MAN.      The   Jewish   people 

were  bruised  by  their  terrible  fall,  they  had  but  little  strength  left,  they  were 
almost  hopeless  of  ever  seeing  their  own  country.  The  Lord  know  their  helplessness, 
BO  these  words  are  full  of  the  greatest  kindness.  The  way  of  hoUness,  the  way  to 
heaven,  is  so  strange  to  a  person  who  has  defiled  himself  with  sin  that  but  Uttle 

Eress  could  be  made  without  a  guide.  So  the  Lord  tenderly  takes  each  traveller 
le  hand.  (Homilist. )  The  promised  help  :—L  The  Lord  qiveth  strength. 
t  a  precious  truth  is  this,  if  believed  in,  to  such  a  feeble  creature  as  man.  It 
is  as  a  covenant  God  in  Christ  that  the  Lord  comforts  the  beheving  soul  with 
the  promise,  "  I  the  Lord  thy  God  will  hold  thy  right  hand,"  &o.     The  Lord  "  thy  " 


CHAP.  XLi.]  ISAIAH.  283 

God.  n.  Man  needs  the  strength  which  the  Lord  promises,  and  which  He 
alone  can  give.  Man  needs  strength  for  obedience  to  God's  holy  laws.  Vain  is 
the  help  or  salvation  of  man,  even  far  more  in  things  spiritual  and  eternal  than  in 
our  temporal  concerns;  so  that  those  who  trust  in  and  pray  to  saints  and  angels, 
and  expect  salvation  from  them,  will  be  overcome :  they  will  not  tread  down  their 
enemies,  nor  obtain  the  conqueror's  crown.  {W.  Firth,  B.D.)  Courage,  its 
source  and  its  necessity: — I.  Its  source.  "I  will  hold  thy  right  hand."  The 
grasp  of  the  hand  is  significant  of  close  and  present  friendship,  of  the  hving  nearness 
of  the  deliverer.  And  that  sense  of  God's  presence,  so  near  that  o\ir  faith  can  touch 
His  hand  and  hear  the  deep  still  music  of  His  voice — realised  as  it  may  be  in  Christ, 
is  the  sovu-ce  of  a  courage  which  no  danger  can  dispel,  no  suffering  exhaust,  and  no 
death  destroy.  The  clearest  way  of  illustrating  this  will  be  to  take  the  higher  forms 
of  courage  among  men,  and  observe  what  states  of  soul  are  most  conducive  to  it. 
1.  Beginning  with  the  courage  of  active  resistance,  we  find  its  great  element  in 
the  fixed  svirvey  of  the  means  of  conquest.  2.  Passing  on  to  the  courage  needful 
for  passive  endiu-ance,  we  find  that  its  great  feature  is  self -surrender  to  the  highest 
law  of  life.  The  Christian  endures,  because  the  law  of  his  being  has  become 
resignation  to  the  will  of  God.  II.  Its  necessity.  1.  It  requires  courage  to 
manifest  the  Christian  character  before  men.  2.  To  maintain  steadfast  obedience 
to  the  wiU  of  God.  3.  To  hold  fast  to  our  highest  aspirations.  (E.  L.  Hull,  B.A.) 
The  repetitions  of  love  : — God  repeats  His  love  for,  and  His  purpose  concerning, 
Israel.  Lacordaire  said  that  love  is  always  sajdng  the  same  thing,  yet  never 
repeats  itself.  And  though  God  repeats  in  both  parts  His  love  and  piu-pose, 
yet  it  would  be  new  all  through  to  the  Jew,  sick  with  his  sorrow  and  captivity; 
and  the  sum  of  the  consolation  is — "  I  am  with  thee.  Fear  not;  rather  rejoice." 
No  trial  could  or  would  befall  the  Jew  but  God  would  help  him  to  bear  it. 
(J.  A.  Davies,  B.D.)  Held  by  God's  hand: — A  little  lad  in  the  hospital  was 
asked  if  he  could  bear  a  severe  operation.  "  Yes,"  was  his  reply,  "  if  father  will 
hold  my  hand."  When  we  feel  God's  hand  holding  us  in  times  of  trial,  the  touch 
gives  us  nerve  and  calm.     {Ibid.) 

Ver.  14.  Fear  not,  thou  worm  Jacob. — Fear  not! — I.  The  first  qualification 
for  serving  God  with  any  amount  of  success,  and  for  doing  God's  work  well,  is  a 
sense  of  our  own  weakness.  When  God's  warrior  marches  forth  to  battle  with 
plumed  helmet,  and  with  mail  about  his  loins,  strong  in  his  own  majesty — when 
he  says,  "  I  know  that.  I  shall  conquer,  my  own  right  arm  and  my  mighty  sword 
shall  get  unto  me  the  victory,"  defeat  is  not  far  distant.  God  will  not  go  forth 
with  that  man  who  goeth  forth  in  his  own  strength.  The  text  addresses  us  as 
worms.  Now,  the  mere  rationahst,  the  man  who  boasts  of  the  dignity  of  human 
nature,  will  never  subscribe  his  name  to  such  a  title  as  this.  Not  so,  however, 
he  who  is  wise  and  imderstandeth ;  he  knows  that  he  is  a  worm,  and  he  knows  it  in 
this  way — 1.  By  contemplation.  Those  who  think,  must  think  their  pride  down — 
if  God  is  with  them  in  their  thinking.  Lift  up  now  your  eyes,  behold  the  heavens, 
the  work  of  God's  fingers;  and  if  ye  be  men  of  sense  and  yom:  souls  are  attuned  to 
the  high  music  of  the  spheres,  ye  will  say,  "  What  is  man  that  Thou  art  mindful  of 
him,  and  the  son  of  man  that  Thou  visitest  him?  "  2.  Again,  if  you  want  to  know 
your  own  nothingness,  consider  what  you  are  in  suffering.  3.  Try  some  great 
labour  for  Christ.  II.  There  should  be  trust  in  the  promised  strength. 
There  is  no  sajdng  what  man  can  do  when  God  is  with  him.  Put  God  into  a  man's 
arm,  and  he  may  have  only  the  jawbone  of  an  ass  to  fight  with,  but  he  will  lay  the 
Philistines  in  heaps:  put  God  into  a  man's  hand,  and  he  may  have  a  giant  to  deal 
with,  and  nothing  but  a  sling  and  a  stone,  but  he  will  lodge  the  stone  in  the  giant's 
brow  before  long;  put  God  into  a  man's  eye,  and  he  will  flash  defiance  on  kings  and 
princes;  put  God  into  a  man's  lip,  and  he  will  speak  right  honestly,  though  his 
death  should  be  the  wages  of  his  speech.  III.  Wb  must  labour  to  get  rid,  as 
much  as  possible,  of  fear.  The  prophet  says,  "  Fear  not ";  thou  art  a  worm, 
but  do  not  fear;  God  wiU  help  thee;  why  shouldest  thou  fear?  L  Get  rid  of  fear, 
because  fear  is  painful.  2.  Fear  is  weakening.  3.  Fear  dishonours  God.  4.  Doubt 
not  the  Lord,  oh,  Christian,  for  in  so  doing  thou  dost  lower  thyself.  The  more  thou 
believest,  the  greater  thou  art;  but  the  more  thou  doubtest,  the  less  thou  becomest. 
(C.  H.  Spurgeon.)  "Thou  worm  Jacob!" — I.  Jacob  was  a  worm  in  other 
people's  eyes.  Is  there  not  many  a  "  worm  "  still  under  the  same  experience? 
I  may  be  speaking  to  a  clerk  who  gets  laughed  at  by  his  feUow-cIerks,  with  their 
master's  permission,  because  he  is  a  Christian.     I  may  be  speaking  to  some  one 


284  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xli. 

who  is  despised  and  scoffed  at,  and  called  a  Sabbatarian,  because  he  keeps  the 
Sabbath  day.  Take  comfort!  He  who  is  now  thy  Redeemer  was  treated  as  a 
worm.  "  I  am  a  worm,  and  no  man,"  sang  the  Messianic  psalmist.  11.  Jacob 
WAS  ALSO  A  WORM  IN  HIS  OWN  EYES,  which  is  far  more  to  the  purpose.  Look  at  the 
Jews  drawing  together  into  some  httle  sanctuary  on  a  Sabbath  morning  or  evening, 
amid  the  scoffs  of  the  Babylonians.  Look  at  the  aged  patriarch  when  the  doora 
are  shut,  opening  the  roll  of  the  prophet  Isaiah,  and  reading,  "  Fear  not,  thou  worm 
Jacob."  Ay,  worms  indeed  !  "  the  hearers  would  reply  from  the  bottom  of 
their  hearts;  "  worms  indeed  !  "  We  may  writhe  under  men's  contempt;  but 
there  is  no  writhing  like  the  writhing  under  a  sense  of  personal  sin.  There  is  no 
nerve  like  the  nerve  that  passes  through  the  conscience.  Job  was  perhaps  the 
noblest  man  of  his  day;  and  yet  we  find  him  saying,  "  I  have  said  to  corruption. 
Thou  art  my  father:  to  the  worm,  Thou  art  my  mother  and  my  sister."  None 
of  you  are  so  low  as  that!  Our  Lord  called  Himself  a  worm  because  He  was  treated 
as  a  worm;  but  Job  uses  the  word  in  a  very  different  sense;  for  Job  knew  he  was  a 
sinner,  and  it  is  almost  an  insult  to  a  worm  for  a  sinner  to  call  himself  by  the  name. 
The  Septuagint  has  left  out  this  word  in  the  text.  How  that  came  about  passes 
my  comprehension.  Were  these  proud  translators  of  Alexandria  too  good  for  the 
Bible?  Were  they  too  high  and  holy  to  put  in  what  Isaiah  wrote?  Coleridge 
says,  "  God's  Word  is  God's  Word  to  me,  because  it  finds  me."  Has  it  found  us? 
Have  we  seen  the  sin  and  the  misery  of  our  own  heart?  Can  we  look  back  on 
that  action  we  did  yesterday,  and  say,  "  It  was  the  action  of  a  worm,  and  not  of 
a  man  "  ?  ITT.  Jacob  was  a  woem  in  God's  eyes.  "  God,"  says  Calvin,  "  here 
seems  to  speak  disrespectfully  of  His  people  " ;  but  if  you  are  to  speak  to  worms, 
you  must  speak  in  their  language.  Fine  names  would  never  suit  Jacob  in  this 
case,  and  the  Jacob-minded  soul  finds  comfort  in  such  words,  knowing  that  they 
were  used  in  love.  "  Fear  not,  thou  worm  Jacob,  I  wiU  help  thee."  "  Thee  " 
is  an  individualising,  singularising  word.  The  Lord  places  His  finger  upon  the 
humble  man's  heart,  and  says,  "  I  wiU  help  thee.  I,  the  Highest,  will  seek  out 
the  lowest,  and  let  others,  who  think  themselves  better,  help  themselves."  "  The 
Holy  One  of  Israel  " — blessed  name !  name  He  will  never  lay  aside ! — is  the  Portion, 
the  Helper,  the  Friend  of  "  worm  Jacob."  Oh  "  worm  Jacob,"  it  doth  not  yet 
appear  what  thou  shalt  be;  but  when  He  shall  appear  whose  thou  art,  "  thoa 
shalt  be  like  Him,  for  thou  shalt  see  Him  as  He  is."  {A.  Whyte,  D.D.)  Fears 
dispelled: — I.  The  character  of  God's  people.  1.  The  language  employed 
refers  to  the  Jews  as  the  descendants  of  Jacob,  afterwards  called  Israel.  2.  The 
epithet  which  designates  their  character.  "  Worm."  This  word  describes  a 
person — mean,  wea^  vile,  and  despised  (Job  xxv.  5,  6).  This  epithet  imphes — 
(1)  Meanness.  This  meanness  is  frequently  felt  by  Christians  when  they  think 
of  the  grandeur  and  glory  of  God,  as  seen  in  His  works  and  recorded  in  His  Word 
(Psa.  viii.  3,  4).  When  they  think  of  their  sins  and  imperfections  (1  Cor.  xv.  9). 
When  they  think  of  their  duties,  trials,  their  ignorance,  and  their  tendency  to 
the  grave.  (2)  Pollution.  A  worm  is  regarded  as  unclean.  Its  element  is  putres- 
cence. Man  is  now  degraded  from  his  original  dignity.  Every  Christian  feels 
his  tendency  to  pollution.  (3)  Danger.  A  worm  is  frequently  exposed  to  danger. 
Every  foot  is  ready  to  crush  it.  The  body  of  man  is  Uable  to  casualties.  And 
the  precious  soul  of  man  is  surroimded  by  danger.  (4)  Weakness.  A  worm  ia 
not  able  to  make  resistance.  What  resistance  can  a  sinner  make  to  God  ?  II.  God's 
people  are  subject  to  fear.  "  Fear  not,  worm  Jacob."  The  Israelites  in 
Babylon  were  sadly  depressed  in  mind,  fearing  that  God  woidd  be  gracious  no 
more.  The  people  of  God  are  subject  to  fear.  1.  Their  character,  as  represented 
by  meanness,  pollution,  danger,  and  weakness,  causes  them  to  fear.  2.  The 
multitude  of  their  enemies  causes  fear  3.  They  fear  Divine  chastisements. 
These  are  needful,  but  "grievous"  (Heb.  xii.  II).  4.  They  sometimes  fear  the 
tests  and  trials  of  the  futiure.  5.  They  fear  death.  III.  The  exhortation  and 
promise.  "Fear  not,  thou  worm  Jacob,  I  will  help  thee."  "Fear  not!" 
Look  from  earthly  resources  to  the  mighty  God  of  Jacob.  Fear  not  thy  foes. 
"  He  that  is  for  thee  is  more  than  all  that  are  against  thee."  I  will  help  thee, 
for — 1.  I  have  chosen  thee.  2.  I  have  redeemed  thee.  3.  I  have  adopted  thee. 
4.  I  have  the  abihty  as  well  as  the  will.  By  all  means.  6.  I  will  help  thee  with 
the  ministration  of  My  angels,  by  the  events  of  providence.  6.  I  will  guide  thee 
in  all  perplexities.  7.  I  will  not  only  help,  but  will  glorify  thee.  Thou  art  a 
worm  here.  I  will  change  thy  vile  body  when  the  dead  shall  be  raised,  even  as 
th*  chrysalis  becomes  a  beautiful  being  after  its  temporary  sleep.     {Homilist.) 


CHAP.  XLi.]  ISAIAH.  285 

Biblical  illustrations  from  the  a7i,imai  kingdom : — It  is  not  unusual  to  find  the  Bibis 
writers  borrowing  names  from  the  animal  kingdom  and  applying  them  to  men. 
Isaiah  does  so  again  and  again.  Bold  in  his  calling,  he  stands  beside  Jehovah 
in  the  circle  of  the  heavens,  and  sees  men  hke  grasshoppers.  But  among  the 
grass  and  the  grasshoppers  he  sees  a  people  over  whom  Jehovah  rules,  and  he 
caUs  them  "  sheep,"  and  the  httle  people  he  calls  "  lambs."  And  then  he  sees 
his  sheep  and  his  lambs  changing  into  eagles  and  eaglets — "  They  shall  mount  up 
with  wings  as  eagles."  Prophets,  psalmists,  apostles,  all  employ  the  same 
method,  and  draw  their  illustrations  from  the  same  source.  There  is  fine  educa- 
tion in  the  Bible  !  No  wonder  that  John  Bunyan  wrote  the  finest  style  in  the 
Enghsh  language,  getting  his  vocabulary  between  its  boards  !  {A.  Whyte,  D.D.) 
*'  Thou  worm  Jacob  !  "  ; — The  worm  here  indicated  is  elsewhere  referred  to  as  being 
injurious  to  vineyards  (Deut.  xxviii.  39).  It  was  the  destroyer  of  Jonah's  gourd 
(Jonah  iv.  7).  It  is  said  to  be  the  coccus,  a  genus  which  includes  the  cochineal 
insect.  Naturalists  describe  the  coccus  as  living  upon  trees  and  plants,  and  as 
being  very  small.  When  collected  in  districts  where  these  insects  are  cultivated  for 
the  dye  which  they  yield,  there  are  found  to  be  about  70,000  of  them  in  a  pound. 
Two  kinds  of  insect  are  designated  "  worm  "  in  Isa.  xiv.  11.  "  The  worm  (mite 
of  corruption)  is  spread  under  thee^  and  worms  (cocci)  cover  thee."  This  is  also 
t^e  case  in  Job  xxv.  6.  In  the  passage  before  us,  then,  the  descendants  of  Jacob 
are  compared  with  a  creature  that  is  despicable,  because  it  is  insignificant  and 
noxious  (Psa.  xxii.  6).  OreUi,  explaining  that  "  worm  Jacob  "  denotes  here 
BmaUness,  weakness,  and  helplessness,  seems  to  have  presented  to  his  mind  some 
such  insignificant  creature  as  the  coccus  ;  but  the  commentators  generally  have 
thought  rather  of  the  familiar  earthworm,  which  they  regard  as  a  symbol  of  debase- 
ment and  aflliction,  after  the  manner  of  Glo'ster  in  King  Lear,  when  he  says 
of  the  supposed  idiot  beggar — 

"I'  the  last  night's  storm  I  such  a  fellow  saw. 
Which  made  me  think  a  man  a  worm." 

"  God's  people,"  says  Henry,  "  are  as  '  worms  '  in  humble  thoughts  of  themselves, 
and  in  their  enemies'  haughty  thoughts  of  them  :  worms,  but  not  vipers,  or  of 
the  serpent's  seed."  Other  writers  use  the  expressions  "  despicable  and  trampled 
upon  "  (Lowth) ;  '*  weak  and  despised,  and  trodden  under  foot  "  (Wordsworth) ; 
"  creature  of  the  dust,  prostrate  and  helpless  "  (Kay) ;  "  abject,  weak,  and 
wretched  of  thyself  "  (Diodati).  We  must  turn  to  IVIic.  vii.  17  for  a  passage 
in  which  reference  is  expressly  made  to  the  earthworm.  The  comments  supplied 
by  Cornelius  k  Lapide  show  that  expositors  have  not  always  been  content  to  regard 
the  epithet  "  worm  Jacob  "  merely  as  a  suggestion  of  lowliness  and  meaimess. 
In  the  opinion  of  the  more  ancient  among  them  it  signifies,  historically  and  typi- 
cally, the  Jews  afficted  by  the  Assyrians,  but  antitypically  the  apostles  and  early 
Christians,  tum  oh  paucitatem,  turn  oh  contcmptum  et  humilitatem.  Allusion 
was  made  to  Luke  xii.  32  and  1  Cor.  iv.  9  ;  while  Ezek.  xxviii.  11,  12  was  referred 
to  as  a  parallel  passage.  Jerome  is  quoted  as  saying,  Sicut  vermis  terram  penetrai, 
ita  sermo  Apostolicus  penetravit  Gentium  civitates,  et  ingressus  est  corda  prius 
durissima.  On  Luke  xii.  32  Bengel  comments,  Qrez  est  non  numerissimus,  at 
ad  mundum  comparetur  ;  and  by  applying  the  thought  thus  expressed  to  the 
phrase  under  discussion  we  get  a  slight,  but  useful,  addition  to  the  suggestions 
made  elsewhere.  {F.  Jarratt^  Thy  Redeemer. — Tht/  Redeemer  : — And  why  does 
it  say,  "  and  thy  Redeemer  "  ?  What  was  the  use  of  appending  the  Redeemer's 
name  to  this  precious  exhortation  ?  I.  It  was  added  fob  amplification.  There  are 
some  preachers  from  whom  you  will  never  learn  anj^hing  j  not  because  they  do 
not  say  much  which  is  instructive,  but  because  they  just  mention  the  instructive 
thought  once,  and  immediately  pass  on  to  another  thought,  never  expanding 
the  second  thought,  but  immediately  passing  on,  almost  without  connection, 
to  a  third.  Other  preachers,  on  the  other  hand,  follow  a  better  method.  Having 
given  one  idea,  they  endeavour  to  amplify  it,  so  that  their  hearers,  if  they  are 
not  able  to  receive  the  idea  in  the  abstract,  at  least  are  able  to  lay  hold  upon 
some  of  its  points,  when  they  come  to  the  amplification  of  it.  Now  God,  th© 
great  Author  of  the  Book,  the  great  Preacher  of  the  truth  by  His  prophets, 
when  He  would  preach  it,  and  when  He  would  write  it,  so  amplifies  a  fact,  so 
extends  a  truth,  and  enlarges  upon  a  doctrine.  "  I  will  help  thee,  '  saith  Jehovah. 
That  means  Father,  Son,  and  Holy  Ghost.  "  Ah  !  but,"  said  God,  "  My  people 
will  forget  that,  unless  I  amplify  the  thought,  so  I  will  even  break  it  up ;  I  will 


286  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  xul 

remind  them  of  My  Trinity.  They  understand  My  Unity ;  I  will  bid  them  re- 
collect that  there  are  Three  in  One,  though  these  Three  be  One  "  ;  and  He  adds, 
"  Thy  Redeemer,  the  Holy  One  of  Israel."  Jehovah — Redeemer — Holy  One  of 
Israel — three  persons,  all  included,  indeed,  in  the  word  Jehovah,  but  very  likely 
to  be  forgotten  unless  they  had  been  distinctly  enumerated.  Suffer  your  thoughts 
to  enlarge  upon  the  fact,  that  the  promise  contained  in  this  verse,  "  Fear  not,  I 
will  help  thee,"  is  a  promise  from  Three  Divine  Persons.  II.  It  is  a  sweetening 
OF  THE  PROMISE.  All  the  promises  are  yea  and  amen  in  Christ  Jesus  ;  but  when 
a  promise  mentions  the  name  of  the  Redeemer,  it  imparts  a  peculiar  blessedness 
to  it.  It  is  something  like,  if  I  may  represent  it  by  such  a  figure,  the  beautiful 
effect  of  certain  decorations  of  stained  glass.  There  are  some  persons  whose 
eyes  are  so  weak  that  the  light  seems  to  be  injurious  to  them,  especially  the  red 
rays  of  the  sun,  and  a  glass  has  been  invented,  which  rejects  the  rays  that  are 
injurious,  and  allows  only  those  to  pass  which  are  softened  and  modified  to  the 
weakness  of  the  eye.  It  seems  as  if  the  Lord  Jesus  were  some  such  a  glass  as 
this.  The  grace  of  God  the  Trinity,  shining  through  the  man  Christ  Jesus,  be- 
comes a  mellow,  soft  light,  so  that  mortal  eye  can  bear  it.  III.  I  think  this  is 
put  in  by  way  of  confirmation.  Read  the  promise,  recollecting  that  it  says, 
"  Thy  Redeemer"  ;  and  then,  as  you  read  it  through,  you  will  see  how  the  word 
"Redeemer"  seems  to  confirm  it  all.  Now  begin.  "/  will  help  thee":  lay 
a  stress  on  that  word.  If  you  read  it  so,  there  is  one  blow  at  your  unbehef.  "  / 
will  help  thee,"  saith  the  Redeemer.  There  is  the  Master's  handwriting;  it  is 
His  own  autograph,  it  is  written  by  Himself;  behold  the  bloody  signature! 
It  is  stamped  with  His  Cross.  And  now  let  us  read  the  promise  again,  and  lay  the 
stress  on  the  "  ivill."  Oh,  the  "  wills  "  and  the  "shalls":  they  are  the  sweetest 
words  in  the  Bible.  When  God  says  "  I  will,"  there  is  something  in  it.  And 
now  we  lay  stress  on  another  word:  "  I  will  help  thee."  That  is  very  httle  for 
Me  to  do,  to  help  thee.  Consider  what  I  have  done  already.  What!  not  help 
thee?  Why,  I  bought  thee  with  My  blood.  And  now,  just  take  the  last  word, 
"I  will  help  thee."  (C.  H.  Spurgeon.)  "Thy  Redeemer":  —  The  word 
"  Redeemer  "  would  suggest  to  a  Hebrew  reader  the  idea  of  a  near  kinsman 
(Lev.  XXV.  24,  2.5),  and  of  deUverance  from  bondage  by  the  payment  of  a  ransom. 
Its  highest  apphcation  occurs  here  and  in  Job  xix.  25.  The  reference  to  the  Son 
of  God,  although  it  might  not  be  perceptible  of  old,  is  now  rendered  necessary  by 
the  knowledge  that  this  act,  even  under  the  old  dispensation,  is  always  referred 
to  the  same  person  of  the  Trinity.  (J.  A.  Alexander.)  The  Holy  One  thy 
Redeemer : — Of  the  two  names  applied  by  Isaiah  to  the  Saviour,  which  are  nearly 
pecuhar  to  him,  Qudosh,  or  Holy  One,  is  common  to  both  sections  of  his  book, 
while  Goel,  the  Redeemer,  though  not  confined  to  the  second  part,  receives  there 
its  peculiar  significance.  Here  it  is  that  "  the  Holy  One  thy  Redeemer,"  becomes 
altogether  merged  in  the  Goel.     {F.  Sessions.) 

Ver.  15.  A  new  sharp  threshing  instrument. — EvU  and  good  • — I.  Thk  fobhs 
OF  GOOD  AND  EVIL.  Evil  is  a  mountain — a  big  thing  occupying  immense  space, 
boimding  the  horizon  and  darkening  the  sun.  Good  often  appears  as  small 
as  a  worm.  II.  The  conflict  of  good  and  evu,.  The  worm  shall  "  thresh 
the  mountain."  Worms  in  nature  are  mighty  things;  they  build  up  islands 
fair  as  Eden.  Good  has  made  an  attack  upon  evil,  and  it  will  thresh  its  "  mountains 
and  beat  them  small."  {Homilist.)  Worm  Jacob  threshing  the  mountains: 
— I.  What  the  Church  and  people  of  God  are.  They  are  named  by  Him 
who  misnames  none,  "  worm  Jacob."  Their  name  from  their  nature  is  a  worm; 
they  are  weak,  despised  creatures,  ready  to  be  crushed  by  the  foot  of  every  passer- 
by: yet  "  worm  Jacob,"  beUeving,  praying,  wrestling  worm  as  he  was.  II.  What 
they  shall  certainly  and  infallibly  do.  "  Thresh  the  mountains,"  &c. 
Interpreters  generally  understand  by  the  "  mountains  "  the  great  and  lofty  poten- 
tates of  the  earth,  setting  themselves  against  the  Church.  And,  no  doubt,  these 
were  in  the  prophet's  view;  but  the  view  was  not  confined  to  them.  God's 
bringing  down  the  Babylonian  monarchy  at  their  prayers,  and  the  victories 
afterward  of  the  Maccabees  over  their  enemies,  cannot  reasonably  be  supposed 
to  complete  the  intent  of  this  prophecy.  We  must  needs  look  to  the  kingdom 
of  Christ  for  it,  of  which  there  is  plainly  an  account  (vers.  17-19).  Compare 
Dan.  ii.  34,  35.  And  we  must  carry  on  our  view  all  along  to  the  end  of  time 
(Rev.  ii.  26,  27);  the  rather  that  it  is  the  manner  of  the  prophet  to  wrap  up  in 
one  expression,  temporal,  spiritual,  and  eternal  deUverance;    the  dehverance 


CHAP,  xu.]  ISAIAH.  287 

from  Babylon,  which  was  temporal,  being  the  first  and  nearest  in  view,  but  not 
terminating  it.  Here  then  we  may  consider — 1.  What  "  worm  Jacob  "  has  to 
encounter.  "  Mountains,"  and  "  hiUs,"  whose  weight  is  sufiBcient  to  crush  millions 
of  him;  diflSculties  quite  disproportionable  to  his  strength,  as  a  mountain  to 
that  of  a  worm.  2.  The  success  of  this  so  very  unequal  match.  The  mountains 
shall  not  crush  the  worm ;  but  the  worm  shall  thresh  the  mountains,  as  one  does 
a  sheaf  of  corn  with  repeated  strokes.  3.  The  degree  and  pitch  of  the  worm's 
success  against  those  mountains.  It  shall  beat  them  small,  till  they  be  hke  dust 
or  chafE:  so  that  they  shall  be  blown  away  with  the  wind,  and  no  vestige  of  them 
remain.  4.  The  insurance  of  this  success  of  the  worm.  Who  could  insure  it, 
but  the  mighty  God?  Jesus  Christ,  Jehovah,  the  most  high  God,  and  worm 
Jacob's  Kinsman-Redeemer,  hath,  by  His  word  of  promise,  engaged  His  almighty 
power  on  the  side  of  the  worm  against  the  mountains.  Let  not  then  the  worm 
fear  or  doubt  the  success.  (T.  Boston.)  A  mystery  of  grace  : — I.  The  char- 
acter OF  THE  SUBJECT  wherein  this  mystery  of  grace  is  carried  on  by  Jesus 
Christ.  It  is  in  worm  Jacob,  denoting  the  Church  in  general,  and  every  behever 
or  true  member  thereof  in  particular.  One  would  think,  that  one  designed  to 
be  a  thresher  of  the  mountains  should  be  a  party  of  a  signally  great  and  swelUng 
character,  a  hero,  a  giant,  or  if  there  were  anything  could  carry  the  character 
higher :  but,  on  the  contrary,  it  is  very  low,  surprisingly  low,  worm  Jacob.  II.  The 
MYSTERY  OF  GRACE  CARRIED  ON  IN  THEM  BY  Jesus  Christ.  1.  An  apparently  hope- 
less  encounter  they  are  led  to  by  Him.  Worm  Jacob  threshing  the  mountains. 
(1)  The  Lord  lays  in  His  people's  way  mountains  of  difficulties  quite  above  their 
strength;  difficulties  which  they  look  to,  as  a  worm  to  a  mountain  before  it 
(2  Cor.  i.  8).  (2)  They  must  not  go  about  the  mountains  in  their  way,  shifting 
the  diffic\ilties  which  the  Lord  caUs  them  to;  but  they  must  make  their  way  over 
them,  threshing  them  down.  (3)  Therefore  worm  Jacob  falls  a-threshing  the 
mountains,  combating  the  difficulties  which  the  Lord  lays  in  his  way.  There  is 
a  spirit  in  worm  Jacob  more  daring  and  venturous  than  ever  was  in  any  unbelieving 
hero.  (4)  They  continue  the  combating  of  difficulties  resolutely  and  patiently. 
Threshing  is  a  continued  action,  consisting  of  repeated  strokes.  (5)  Worm  Jacob 
has  many  mountains  to  thresh.  2.  A  surprising  success;  even  as  surprising  as 
a  worm's  threshing  and  beating  the  mountains  small  to  dust,  and  threshing  them 
away.  (1)  Partial  successes  in  their  way,  very  surprising;  surprising  to  others 
and  to  themselves.  (2)  A  total  success  at  the  end  of  their  way,  which  will  swallow 
them  up  in  surprise  and  eternal  wonder.  III.  I  shall  account  for  this  mystery. 
L  God  has  said  it,  and  therefore  it  cannot  fail.  2.  The  glory  of  His  grace,  which 
is  the  great  design  of  the  whole  mystery  of  God,  necessarily  requires  it.  3.  By 
an  unalterable  decree,  there  must  be  a  conformity  betwixt  the  Uttle  worm  and  the 
great  worm  Jacob,  the  httle  one's  Kinsman- Redeemer.  The  great  worm,  the 
man  Christ,  "  a  worm  and  no  man,"  has  encountered  mountains,  and  threshed 
them  away.  Where  are  the  four  monarchies,  the  most  towering  mountains 
that  ever  set  up  their  heads  on  the  earth  ?  The  chief  worm  Jacob  has  threshed 
them  away  to  chaff,  which  is  away  with  the  wind  (Dan.  ii.  35).  The  mountains 
stood  before  Him  through  the  world,  with  aU  the  fastness  that  human  learning 
and  the  power  of  the  sword  could  give ;  but  by  His  few  fishermen  He  threshed 
them  away.  4.  The  Httle  worm  Jacob  is  in  reahty  but  a  member  of  the  great 
one,  Jesus  Christ.  5.  AU  the  mountains  that  stand  before  worm  Jacob  are  burnt 
mountains  ;  so  they  are  far  easier  to  thresh  than  one  would  think.  {Ibid. )  God's 
sharp  threshing  insirziment : — Three  things  this  threshing  instrument  is  shod 
with.  1.  A  word  of  command,  calUng  to  the  work.  2.  A  word  of  promise,  securing 
the  success.  3.  The  use  of  means  of  Heaven's  appointment  for  reaching  the  end. 
(Ibid.)  "  A  sharp  threshing  instrument  having  teeth  "  ; — A  people  who  shall 
leave  their  mark  on  the  world.  {Prof.  G.  A.  Smith,  D.D.)  A  threshing  roller  : — 
"  Behold,  I  have  made  thee  a  threshing-roller,  a  sharp  one,  new,  with  double 
edge."  {F.  Delitzsch,  D.D.)  Earth-worms  useful: — People  hate  the  obscure 
animal,  popularly  said  to  play  undertaker  to  aU  flesh,  although  as  a  matter  of 
fact  worms  seldom  burrow  deeper  than  a  few  inches,  except  to  go  to  sleep.  Sud- 
denly, however,  the  gentle  sunbeam  of  genius  has  shone  into  the  dark  region 
where  these  despised  beings  dwell  and  work.  Dr.  Darwin  has  studied  these 
among  other  neglected  denizens  of  our  common  planet,  and  gives  us  the  fruits 
of  his  investigations  in  a  httle  volume  bearing  the  title  of  Vegetable  Mould  and 
Earth-worms.  At  the  touch  of  his  transcendently  patient  intellect  a  new  glory 
breaks  over  the  degraded,  writhing,  offensive  worm.     Instead  of  being  useless 


288  TEE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xi*. 

or  even  harmful,  it  turns  out  that  we  could  never  do  without  these  humble  creature*. 
They,  and  they  alone,  in  their  countless  millions,  and  by  their  ceaseless  hidden 
toil,  have  made  the  globe  what  it  is,  fit  for  agriculture  and  the  residence  of  man. 
The  bulk  of  the  humus  or  vegetable  mould  of  his  fields  everywhere  is  mainly 
of  their  manufacture,  and  goes  perpetually  through  and  through  their  organs  to 
be  fitted  and  perfected  for  fertility.  The  most  assiduous  and  wealthy  farmer 
does  not  lavish  half  as  much  nourishment  upon  his  crops  as  the  earth-worms, 
which  in  many  parts  of  the  British  Isles  make  and  bring  to  the  surface  of  each 
acre  of  land  ten  tons  or  more  of  rich  fine  mould  yearly.  All  things  considered. 
Dr.  Darwin  inclines  to  rank  the  earth-worm  higher  in  the  scale  of  constructive 
agencies  than  the  coral  insect  itself,  though  the  last  named  rears  islands,  and 
ocean-kingdoms.  It  is  the  worm  which,  by  perpetually  consuming  decayed 
leaves  and  small  particles  of  soil,  disintegrates  and  renews  all  the  face  of  our 
earth.  Their  castings,  hardly  noticed,  alter  invisibly  the  contour  of  a  whole 
coimtry.  Brought  up  from  below,  they  make  stones  and  rocks  gradually  sink, 
covering  these  by  the  collapse  of  their  tiny  burrows,  so  that  the  surface  grows 
smooth  for  our  use  by  their  viewless  help.  Antiquarians  owe  to  the  earth-worm 
the  preservation  of  almost  every  ancient  pavement  and  foundation  by  the  soft 
coat  of  mould  with  which  they  overlay  these  relics.  They  remove  decaying  leaves, 
facilitate  the  germination  of  seeds  and  the  growth  of  plants,  and  create  for  ua 
most  of  our  wide,  level,  turf-covered  expanses.  Thus  at  one  stroke  our  great 
natural  philosopher  has  raised  them  to  an  honourable  rank  in  the  vast  family 
of  creation.     {Public  Opinion.) 

Vers.  17,  18.  When  the  poor  and  needy  seek  water. — An  image  of  God's  care: — 
The  thought  of  the  caravans  returning  homewards  through  the  thirsty  desert 
suggests  to  the  prophet  an  effective  image  symbolising  the  Divine  care  which 
will  attend  them :  the  ground  at  their  side  bursts  into  waterpools,  and  noble  trees 
cast  their  shade  about  them!  (Prof.  S.  R.  Driver,  D.D.)  God^ s  promise  to 
the  poor  and  needy  : — I.  By  the  "  poor  and  needy  "  are  not  meant  those  who 
are  poor  and  needy  in  the  things  of  this  world;  but  in  a  spiritual  point  of  view. 
1.  The  life  of  the  Christian  may  be  compared  to  a  barren  wilderness,  leading  from 
this  world  to  that  which  is  to  come;  in  their  journey  through  this  wilderness 
the  Lord's  people  often  feel  themselves  to  be  "  poor  and  needy  "  without  the 
cheering  presence  of  their  God,  destitute  of  the  usual  manifestations  of  His  love 
and  the  consolations  of  His  Spirit.  Water  is  an  emblem  frequently  employed 
in  Scripture  to  represent  Divine  influences,  which  refresh,  gladden,  and  cleanse 
the  soul,  as  water  does  the  body.  The  children  of  God  are  sometimes  reduced 
to  straits ;  they  "  seek  water,  and  there  is  none,  and  their  tongue  f aileth  for  thirst." 
They  reaHse  the  feeling  of  David  whilst  they  are  constrained  to  adopt  his  language 
in  the  Forty-second  Psalm,  "  As  the  hart  panteth  after  the  water  brooks,  so 
panteth  my  soul  after  thee,  0  God,"  &c.  2.  But  there  is  another  sense  in  which 
the  Lord's  people  may  be  represented  as  "  poor  and  needy,  seeking  water  and 
finding  none  ";  it  is  when  they  are  anxiously  desirous  of  larger  measures  of  grace 
and  knowledge,  increasing  holiness  and  spirituality  of  mind,  more  complete 
superiority  to  the  world  with  the  affections  and  lusts  of  the  flesh,  and  a  growing 
conformity  to  the  precepts  of  the  GospeL  It  is  a  striking  feature  in  the  character 
of  every  real  Christian,  that  he  is  never  satisfied  with  present  attainments  in 
religion.  The  real  Christian  wUl  daily  labour  to  abound  yet  more  and  more  in 
the  fair  and  beautiful  "  fruits  of  righteousness,  which  are  by  Jesus  Christ  unto 
the  glory  and  praise  of  God."  Here  is  the  difference  between  nominal  Christianity 
and  real  Christianity.  11,  The  consolatory  promise.  The  Lord  assures  His 
people  that  they  shall  not  be  disappointed  in  the  objects  of  their  desire  :  in  their 
extremity  of  distress,  and  when  they  are  almost  without  hope,  the  Lord  will 
hear  their  cry.  Prayer,  which  is  the  earnest  expression  of  the  desires  of  the 
heart,  shall  never  be  offered  up  in  vain.  Nothing  is  impossible  with  God; 
possessed  of  infinite  power  and  infinite  love.  He  can  and  will  do  for  His  people 
more  than  they  ask  or  think.  But  further,  He  is  represented  as  "  the  God  of 
Israel."  The  history  of  the  saints  in  all  ages  will  bear  testimony  to  the  truth 
of  that  Scripture,  "  He  giveth  power  to  the  faint,  and  to  them  that  have  no  might 
He  increaseth  strength."  [C.  Rowlings,  B.A.)  Water  for  the  needy: — The 
first  sense  of  this  passage  belongs  to  God's  ancient  people,  and  was  partially  accom- 
plished after  their  return  from  Babylon,  partially  when  the  kingdom  of  heaven 
was  spiritually  set  up  at  Jerusalem,  but  was  to  be  still  more  gloriously  fulfilled 


CHAP.  XLI.]  ISAIAH.  289 

hereafter.  But  a  child  of  God  claims  all  the  promises.  I.  The  description 
OF  THE  PEOPLE  OF  GoD  HERE  GIVEN.  1.  "  Poor,  and  needy."  All  creatures  are 
poor  compared  with  God — even  the  pure  spirits,  the  highest  angel,  yea,  archangels 
themselves.  Especially  must  this  be  true  of  a  fallen  creature,  yea,  a  restored 
creature.  2.  "They  seek  water."  This  spiritually  sets  forth  the  sacred  influences 
of  the  Holy  Spirit.  They  want  refreshing  views  of  God's  love,  realising  appre- 
hensions of  an  interest  in  Christ,  more  of  the  real  power  of  religion,  more  faith, 
more  repentance,  more  love,  more  uprightness,  more  purity  of  heart,  more  humility, 
more  true  prayer,  more  gratitude  and  praise,  more  brokermess,  more  joy,  more 
devotedness.  They  seek  this  water.  Sometimes  with  great  ardour,  sometimes, 
alas!  with  httle.  In  the  means  of  grace  they  seek  it,  and  it  seems  as  if  "  there 
is  none."  They  strive,  they  fight,  but  they  only  find  their  own  weakness,  their 
enemies,  darkness,  and  deadness  in  their  souls.  3.  "  Their  tongue  faileth  for 
thirst."  Few  states  are  so  disconsolate.  It  is  vast  discouragement.  That  this 
is  a  state  into  which  the  soul  has  brought  itself  through  its  own  sin,  I  am  led  to 
conclude — (1)  By  considering  the  state  in  which  this  promise  finds  the  Jews,  to 
whom  it  primarily  belongs.  (2)  By  remembering  the  promise  which  sets  forth 
God's  usual  dealings  (Matt.  vii.  7-9).  (3)  By  retracing  the  history  of  one's  own 
experience.  If  this  be  so,  beware  of  the  steps  which  lead  to  this  desolate  region. 
n.  The  vast  encouragement.  My  people  are  honestly,  uprightly  seeking  Me. 
Out  of  Infinite  love.  Infinite  wisdom,  Infinite  grace  and  mercy,  I  have  delayed 
the  answer.  Their  faith  is  small,  their  strength  little,  their  souls  discouraged. 
But  I  have  not  forgotten.  "  I,  the  Lord,  will  hear  them."  The  subject  is  one 
of  unutterable  sweetness  and  consolation  to  a  true  child  of  God-  In  few  things, 
perhaps,  are  we  more  tried  than  in  prayer.  But  the  words  of  the  text  encourage 
not  only  persevering  prayer,  they  do  more.  They  encourage  expecting  prayer. 
Be  not  afraid  of  seasons  of  need.  They  are  usually  seasons  of  prayer,  and  these 
are  our  greatest  seasons  of  happiness.  {J.  H.  Evans,  M.A.)  God's  tenderness 
to  the  poor  and  needy : — I.  God  has  left  peculiarly  tender  and  gracious 
promises  to  the  poor  and  needy.  It  is  not  the  healthy  and  strong  child  of 
the  family  around  whom  the  father's  love  is  most  closely  entwined-  "Like  as 
a  father  pitieth  his  children,"  &c.  IL  God  has  pledged  His  almighty  powbb 
to  work  miracles,  if  necessary,  to  sutply  their  need.  "  I  will  open  rivers 
in  high  places,"  &c.  This  would  be  reversing  the  order  of  nature.  Rivers  do 
not  flow  in  high  places;  foxmtains  do  not  spring  in  the  depths  of  valleys.  God 
simply  says  that,  ere  the  poor  and  needy  shall  lack  water.  He  will  reverse  the 
order  of  nature  and  turn  the  world  upside  down.     III.  The  promises  are  made 

ONLY  TO  THOSE  WHO  SEEK  AND  CRY  tTNTO  GoD  FOR  HiS  HELP.      God's  unchanging 

tenderness  does  not  make  prayer  unnecessary.  There  must  be  expectation, 
desire,  and  confidence.  {Homiletic  Review.)  Spiritual  thirst : — The  application 
is  world-wide.  Who  is  there  to  whom  this  description,  more  or  less,  does  not 
apply — "  The  poor  and  needy  seek  water — there  is  none — their  tongue  faileth 
for  thirst"?  Is  it  not  the  too  faithful  delineation  of  weary  humanity?  It  is 
a  commonplace  saying,  but  its  truthfulness  redeems  its  triteness,"  that  there  is 
nothing  in  this  world  which  can  satisfy  immortal  longings.  "  Thirst  again,"  is 
the  too  frequent  verdict  after  its  sweetest  fountains  have  been  drained.  Its  best 
joys  leave  behind  them  aching  voids,  unfulfilled  aspirations.  After  the  thirst 
of  its  votaries  has  apparently  been  quenched  at  their  favourite  rills,  of  riches, 
honours,  ambition,  glory, — their  name  is  the  same  as  before,  "  Poor  and  needy  "; 
their  search  is  the  same  as  ever,  "  They  seek  water";  the  epitaph  they  write 
over  every  fresh  grave  of  their  hopes  is  the  same,  "  There  is  none — their  tongue 
faileth  them  for  thirst."  And  where,  then,  is  that  thirst  to  be  quenched;  where 
else  are  the  wells  of  water  to  be  had,  "  springing  up  into  everlasting  life,"  but 
in  the  grace  and  promises  of  God  as  revealed  in  His  blessed  Word?  And,  like 
the  waters  seen  by  Ezekiel  bursting  from  the  threshold  of  the  sanctuary,  "  Every- 
thing lives  whither  the  river  cometh."  (J  R.  Macduff,  D.D.)  Supply  for 
the  poor  and  needy  : — This  double  promise  to  the  poor  and  needy  stands  in  con- 
nection with  other  great  promises  which  guarantee  the  gift  of  wonderful  strength 
and  blessing  to  God's  people.  These  promises  seem  to  be  such  as  the  mightiest 
servant  of  God  might  well  desire  to  have  fulfilled  in  himself.  Look,  for  instance, 
at  the  one  in  verses  15,  16.  I  think  that  the  promise  of  our  text  specially  comes 
in,  not  for  you  mountain-threshers, — not  for  you  who  are  made  so  strong  in  the 
Lord,  but  for  some  who  caimot  as  yet  get  a  grip  of  that  grand  word  of  His.  When 
the  poor  and  needy  "  are  not  trying  to  thresh  mountains,  but  are  looking  for 
VOL.  II. — 19 


290  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xli. 

that  which  is  needful  for  the  supply  of  their  own  personal  wants, — seeking  water; 
when  they  are  in  too  low  a  condition  to  be  able  to  rise  to  the  dignity  of  service, 
but  are  just  like  poor  Hagar  and  Ishmael  in  the  wilderness,  seeking  water;  when 
they  have  fallen  into  such  a  sad  and  sorrowful  state  of  heart  that,  instead  of 
testifying  to  the  goodness  of  God  they  cannot  testify  to  anything,  for  "  their 
tongue  faileth  for  thirst " ; — it  is  then,  in  their  extremity,  that  the  blessed  promises 
shall  come  to  them:  "  I  the  Lord  will  hear  them,  I  the  God  of  Israel  will  not 
forsake  them."  {C.  H,  Spurgeon.)  Wordless  prayers  heard  in  heaven : — 
I.  Here  is  poverty  of  condition.  "  Poor  and  needy."  This  description  applies 
to  poverty  of  spiritual  condition.  1.  Most  of  us  would  take  the  position  of  great 
poverty  as  to  anything  like  merit.  2.  We  have  poverty  as  to  anything  Uke  strength. 
3.  As  to  grace,  many  of  the  children  of  God  are,  to  their  shame,  obhged  to  confess 
that  they  are  poor  and  needy  where  they  ought  to  be  rich,  and  where  they  might 
be  rich;  poor  in  patience,  in  courage,  in  faith,  in  hope,  in  love,  in  private  prayer, 
in  public  influence,  poor  in  every  way.  There  are  many  of  God's  children  who 
seem  scarcely  to  have  a  penny  of  spending-money,  and  they  never  appear  to  go 
to  the  King's  treasury,  and  dip  their  hand  in,  and  take  out  great  handfuls  of  the 
precious  gold  of  grace.  II.  Ukgency  of  need.  "  When  the  poor  and  needy 
seek" — what?  Money?  No;  that  is  only  to  be  poor  and  needy.  Bread? 
Ay;  that  shows  a  harder  poverty  than  merely  being  '  poor  and  needy."  But  it 
is  not  bread  that  these  jjoor  and  needy  ones  are  seeking,  but  "  water."  Why, 
that  is  generally  to  be  had  for  nothing, — a  drink  of  water.  It  must  be  very  hard 
times  indeed  when  poor  souls  are  in  such  a  state  that  they  are  longing  for  water, 
and  seeking  for  it  afar,  as  though  there  were  none  near  at  hand.  Are  any  of  you 
in  such  a  condition,  sighing  after  the  living  water?  Though  you  have  drunk  of 
it  before,  you  are  still  sighing  for  more  of  it,  and  feel  as  if  you  could  not  tell  where 
to  find  it.  1.  This  is  an  urgent  necessity,  for  it  touches  a  vital  point.  A  man 
can  exist  without  money,  he  can  Uve  without  garments,  he  could  live  longer 
without  bread  than  without  water.  2.  Do  I  address  one  in  whom  this  vital  neces- 
sity has  become  an  agonising  thirst  ?  3.  Fiurther,  there  is  an  immediate  necessity. 
When  a  man's  tongue  faileth  for  thirst,  and  he  seeks  water,  he  wants  it  at  once. 
III.  The  third  step  down — and  it  is  a  very  long  one — is  this,  disappointment  of 
HOPE.  "  There  is  none."  1.  "  There  is  none  "  even  where  they  have  foimd  it 
before.  Have  not  some  of  you  at  times  found  it  so  in  attending  the  means  of 
grace?  2.  It  makes  their  case  even  more  disappointing  when  they  have,  side 
by  side  with  them,  others  who  are  seeking  water,  and  finding  it.  Have  you  never 
been  to  the  Lord's  table, — say,  with  your  own  wife, — and  when  she  has  been 
going  home,  she  has  said,  "  Oh,  what  a  precious  communion  service !  Was  not 
the  Lord  manifestly  among  His  people  in  the  breaking  of  bread?  " — and  you  have 
hardly  liked  to  tell  her  that  you  have  not  seen  the  Lord  even  in  His  own  ordi- 
nance? 3.  If  you  go  to  places  where  there  is  none  of  the  living  water,  then  you 
have  only  yourself  to  blame  when  you  cannot  find  it.  IV.  The  necessity  op 
pkayer.  "  And  their  tongue  faileth  for  thirst."  L  They  cannot  speak;  they 
cannot  tell  their  fellow- Christians  about  their  trouble.  They  are  ashamed  to 
tell  others  what  they  feel.  If  a  hymn  is  given  out,  they  feel  as  if  they  must  not 
sing  it.  If  there  is  a  promise  quoted,  they  feel  as  if  they  could  not  appropriate 
it,  and  sometimes  the  prayer  of  a  joyous  brother  seems  to  shoot  over  their  head, — 
they  cannot  attain  to  his  experience.  2.  If  they  were  called  upon  to  state  their 
own  feelings  and  convictions  before  the  living  God,  it  may  be  that  they  have 
become  so  mournful  that  they  could  not  describe  themselves.  I  think  we  have 
gone  about  as  low  as  we  can.  Here  is  a  man  who,  to  begin  with,  is  poor  and 
needy.  Here  is  a  man  who  is  wanting  water,  who  has  sought  it,  but  who  cannot 
find  it.  Here  is  a  man  whose  tongue  is  so  parched  with  thirst  that  he  cannot 
now  say  a  single  word,  he  must  sit  down  in  sorrowful  silence.  V.  Yet,  strange 
to  say,  now  is  the  time  that  he  learns  that  salvation  is  of  God.  "  I  the  Lord 
will  hear  them."  What?  Why,  they  cannot  speak:  "  their  tongue  faileth  for 
thirst."  1.  That  brings  me  to  this  point,  that  God's  great  object  in  bringing 
His  people  down  so  low  as  this,  is  to  make  them  pray  directly  to  Himself;  that 
now  they  may  not  seek  any  water,  but  just  cry  to  Him  who  is  the  Fountain  of 
living  waters ;  that  now  they  may  not  tell  their  friends  about  their  need,  nor 
even  tell  it  to  themselves,  but  just,  in  the  very  silence  of  their  soul,  speak  with 
God,  for  there  is  a  kind  of  speech  which  is  perfectly  consistent  with  silence, — 
the  speech  of  sorrow, — the  exhibition  of  the  wounds  of  misery, — the  opening 
up  of  the  brokenness  of  the  heart, — the  setting  before  God,  not  in  eloquent  descrip- 


CHAP,  xu.]  ISAIAH.  291 

tions,  but  in  indescribable  revelation,  the  intolerable  want  which  lies  withia  the 
soul.  The  text  does  not  even  say  that  they  pray;  because,  sometimes,  even 
prayer  becomes  a  mechanical  act,  and  we  are  apt  to  rely  upon  it  for  comfort, 
instead  of  upon  our  God.  2.  The  prayer  which  is  hidden  away  in  the  text — 
for  although  there  is  no  mention  of  prayer  in  it,  yet  it  is  hidden  away  there — 
is  the  prayer  of  inward  thirst.  3.  This  is  the  prayer  of  one  who  despairs  of  all 
means.  4.  This  is  the  prayer  of  faintness.  5.  Now  comes  the  declaration  of 
God.  "  I  the  Lord  will  hear  them,  I  the  God  of  Israel  will  not  forsake  them." 
Is  it  not  something  that  God  hears  you?  I  have  frequently  had  to  explain  this 
word  by  speaking  of  the  poor  woman  who  was  so  pleased  to  see  her  minister. 
She  was  very  poor,  and  so  was  her  minister;  what  good,  then,  did  he  do  her? 
Did  he  speak  to  her  a  very  comforting  word?  No.  The  good  man  did  not  happen 
that  day  to  be  in  much  of  a  mood  to  do  so,  yet  he  did  that  sister  a  deal  of  good, 
she  said.  Why?  Because  he  let  her  talk,  and  she  just  told  out  all  her  trouble, 
and  he  looked  sympathetic,  for  that  is  how  he  felt,  and  that  was  just  what  she 
wanted.  She  wanted  somebody  who  would  listen  to  her.  It  is  wonderfully 
condescending  on  God's  part  to  listen  to  us.  Many  of  our  complaints  are  only 
rubbish,  yet  He  hears  them  patiently.  Sometimes,  when  people  begin  groaning 
and  grumbling,  I  wish  I  was  down  the  next  street;  but  God  is  so  patient  and  long- 
suffering,  that  He  hears  all  that  His  people  say.  6.  You  know  that  you  have 
only  to  get  a  hearing  from  God,  and  you  know  what  the  consequence  will  be  when 
your  Heavenly  Father  knoweth  what  things  you  have  need  of.  {Ibid.)  God's 
faithfulness  tested: — The  late  Dr.  Parsons,  of  York,  had  a  tea-caddy  whiich  he  in- 
herited from  his  father,  who  was  also  a  spiritual  preacher.  Its  history  was  cmrious. 
A  husband  and  father,  reduced  to  abject  poverty,  set  out  on  a  Sabbath  morning 
to  drown  himself,  and  so  escape  the  agony  of  looking  at  starving  wife  and  children. 
A  crowd  was  entering  the  Tottenham  Court  Road  Chapel,  London,  and  the  man 
somehow  was  drawn  along  with  the  crowd.  Mr.  Parsons  preached  from  Isa.  xli.  17, 
"  When  the  poor  and  needy  seek  water,"  &c.  He  appealed  to  his  hearers  needing 
temporal  and  spiritual  blessings,  "  Have  you  put  the  God  of  Jacob  to  the  test?  " 
"  No,"  thought  the  desperate  man,  "  I  have  not."  He  went  back,  told  his  wife, 
joined  in  prayer,  and  all  day  seeroingly  in  vain.  But  next  morning  temporary 
aid  came,  with  directions  as  to  work,  which  he  found,  did  faithfuUy,  and  rose 
to  comfort  and  notable  prosperity.  He  offered  a  large  gift  to  the  good  preacher, 
but  it  was  declined.  He  sent  the  tea-caddy  as  a  memento  of  his  gratitude,  which 
he  felt  could  not  be  refused.     (J.  Hall,  LL.D.) 

Ver.  18.  I  will  open  rivers  in  high  places. — God^s  "I  wiUa": — In  this  verse 
the  Lord  twice  says,  "  I  will  ";  and  in  that  respect  this  verse  is  in  harmony  with 
the  rest  of  the  chapter.  When  we  come  to  the  "  I  wills  "  of  God,  then  we  get 
among  the  precious  things,  the  deep  things,  the  things  which  minister  comfort  and 
strength  to  the  people  of  God.  We  sometimes  say  "  I  will  "  ;  but  it  is  in  a  feeble 
fashion  compared  with  the  way  in  which  God  says  it.  People  say  "  '  Must '  is  for 
the  king."  So  "  I  will  "  is  for  the  King  of  kings.  It  is  His  prerogative  to  wiU. 
1.  It  is  an  "  I  will,"  uttered  with  deliberation.  James  said,  "  Known  unto  God 
are  all  His  works  from  the  beginning  of  the  world."  We  say,  "  I  will "  in  a  hurry, 
and  then  we  take  time  to  repent  of  it.  We  are  under  excitement,  persuasion,  or 
compulsion,  and  we  say,  "  I  wiU,"  and  we  are  very  sorry  afterwards,  and  perhaps 
we  are  so  imfaithful  as  not  to  keep  our  word;  but  God  never  speaks  imder  com- 
pulsion; He  is  almighty.  God  never  speaks  in  a  hvirry;  He  has  infinite  leisure. 
Now,  when  a  man  speaks  a  thing  prudently  and  wisely,  you  believe  that  he  will 
carry  it  out,  if  he  can.  You  may  have  much  more  confidence  with  regard  to  what 
the  Lord  says,  for  He  has  not  spoken  without  due  deUberation.  2.  When  Grod 
says,  "  I  will,"  His  resolution  is  supported  by  omnipotence.  You  say,  "  I  will," 
but  you  cannot  do  what  you  have  promised.  That  can  never  happen  with  God. 
3.  When  God  says,  "  I  will,"  it  is  sealed  with  immutability.  We  are  always 
changing.  Hence,  we  say  to-day,  "  I  will,"  and  we  mean  it;  but  to-morrow  we 
wish  that  we  had  never  said  "  I  will,"  and  the  next  day  we  say,  "  I  will  not." 
But  God  never  changes.  4.  When  God  says,  "  I  will,"  it  will  be  carried  out  in 
faithfulness.  {C.  H.  Spurgeon.)  Two  "  /  wills  "  in  Isaiah  xli.  : — I  propose  to 
apply  the  text  as  a  general  promise  to  many  things.  I.  To  the  trials  of  saints. 
1.  Their  temporal  trials.  What  though  there  is  nothing  at  present,  perhaps  by 
to-morrow  morning  the  Lord  may  have  opened  rivers  in  high  places,  and  fovrntains 
in  the  midst  of  the  valleys.     2.  The  spiritual  experience  of  believers.     There  are 


292  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xli. 

in  our  text  four  words  relating  to  water.  Everything  had  been  dry  before,  and 
there  was  no  water  for  the  thirsty  to  drink.  Now,  here  you  have  rivers,  fountains, 
a  pool,  and  springs  of  water.  There  is  a  difference  in  the  four  words.  The  first 
is  "  rivers."  There  shall  come  directly  from  God  a  rush  of  mighty  grace, 
like  the  streams  of  flowing  rivers.  There  shall  be  "  waters  to  swim  in."  You  shall 
have  abundance  where  before  you  had  nothing.  The  next  word  is  "  fountains," 
which  may  be  rendered  "  wells."  Wells  are  places  to  which  people  regularly  go 
for  water.  They  represent  the  means  of  grace.  Perhaps  you  have  been  to  the 
means  of  grace,  and  obtained  no  comfort.  But,  on  a  sudden,  God  appears,  and 
opens  wells  in  the  midst  of  the  valley.  Now  the  service  is  all  full  of  refreshment. 
There  is  a  third  word,  "  I  will  make  the  wilderness  a  pool  of  water."  Here  you 
have  the  idea  of  overflowing  abundance.  God  can  give  you  so  much  joy  that  you 
will  not  know  how  to  hold  it  all;  you  will  have  to  let  it  be  like  a  pool  that  overflows 
its  banks.  God  can  give  you  so  much  earnestness  that  you  can  hardly  employ  it 
all  in  the  work  that  you  have  to  do.  He  can  give  you  so  much  nearness  to  Himself, 
that  your  heart  shall  scarcely  be  able  to  contain  your  deUght.  The  fourth  word  is 
''  springs."  It  seems  to  indicate  a  perpetual  freshness.  Where  there  was  a  long- 
continued  drought,  there  shall  come  perpetual  freshness;  always  something  new — 
new  thoughts  of  Christ,  new  deUghts  in  holy  service,  new  prospects  of  the  world 
to  come,  new  communion  with  God.  II.  To  the  expekience  of  converts. 
1.  Who  were  these  people  to  whom  the  Lord  spoke  ?  They  were  people  who  were 
poor  and  needy.  God  will  not  do  much  for  spiritually  rich  people;  I  mean  you 
who  say  that  you  are  rich  in  yourselves.  2.  When  will  He  do  it  ?  When  they 
begin  to  seek  Him.  "  When  the  poor  and  needy  seek  water."  Can  you  expect 
God  to  bless  you  if  you  do  not  seek  Him  ?  3.  But  the  time  is  noted  further  stilL 
It  is  not  only  when  they  begin  to  seek,  but  when  they  begin  silently  to  plead. 
"  When  their  tongue  faileth  for  thirst,  I  the  Lord  will  hear  them."  They  could 
not  speak.  Yet  says  the  Lord,  "  I  will  hear  them."  A  glib  tongue  is  bad  at 
praying.  When  a  man  prays  in  his  heart,  he  is  often  hke  Moses,  slow  of  speech. 
4.  But  the  time  mentioned  is  more  sorrowful  still;  these  people  were  in  abject 
distress,  "  When  the  poor  and  needy  seek  water,  and  there  is  none."  "  My  day 
of  grace  is  past,"  says  one.  I  wonder  whoever  told  you  that  lie  T  "Ah,  well," 
says  one,  *  I  have  gone  to  look  for  mercy,  and  there  is  none."  So  you  think. 
Now  is  the  time  for  Divine  interposition.  When  you  seek  water,  and  find  none, 
God  will  open  rivers  for  yoxi.  5.  The  promise  also  relates  to  those  who  are  in 
various  positions.  Some  are  in  very  high  places.  You  run  up  to  the  very  tops 
of  the  moimtains,  and  you  fancy  God  cannot  reach  you  there,  but  He  says,  "  I  will 
open  rivers  in  high  places."  A  river  on  the  top  of  a  mountain  is  a  wonderful 
thing;  but  God  can  make  it  so.  Others  are  ordinary  sinners  down  in  the  valleys. 
"  Well,"  says  the  Lord,  "  I  will  open  fountains  in  the  midst  of  the  valleys."  Yes, 
and  to  vary  the  promise  still  more  the  Lord  says,  "  I  will  make  the  wilderness  a  pool 
of  water."  Have  you  ever  seen  a  large  extent  of  flat  country  covered  with  sand 
and  stones  ?  God  pictures  you  as  being  like  that  barren,  dried-up  land,  and  He 
says  that  He  will  turn  you  into  a  pool  of  water.  In  a  word,  no  condition  can  be 
so  bad  but  God  can  change  it.  III.  To  the  labours  of  workers  for  God.  God 
can  soon  change  the  condition  of  the  plot  of  ground  on  which  you  are  at  work.  L  I 
may  be  speaking  to  one  who  says,  "  Mine  is  a  very  bad  place  to  work  in,  for  I  cannot 
get  the  people  to  come  and  hear  the  Gospel;  there  seems  to  be  no  spirit  of  hearing." 
Do  not  give  up  preaching;  do  not  give  up  working,  you  who  long  for  souls  to  be 
saved,  for  God  can  suddenly  give  a  love  for  His  house,  and  an  eagerness  to  hear 
the  Gospel.  2.  Another  says,  "  I  get  the  people  to  hear,  but  there  is  no  feeling." 
When  the  old  St.  Paul's  Cathedral  had  to  be  taken  down  for  the  present  one  to  be 
built,  Sir  Christopher  Wren  had  to  remove  some  massive  walls  that  had  stood  for 
hundreds  of  years;  so  he  had  a  battering-ram,  with  a  great  mass  of  people,  work- 
ing away  to  break  down  the  walls.  I  think  that  for  four-and-twenty  hours  they 
kept  right  on,  and  there  seemed  to  be  no  sign  of  giving  way,  the  walls  were  so  well 
built,  very  different  from  our  modem  walls.  The  structure  was  like  a  rock,  it 
could  not  be  stirred;  but  the  battering-ram  kept  on  and  on  and  on,  blow  after 
blow,  stroke  after  stroke,  and  at  last  the  whole  mass  began  to  quiver,  like  a  jelly, 
and  by  and  by  over  went  the  massive  walls.  You  have  only  to  keep  on  long 
enough,  and  the  same  thing  will  happen  in  your  work.  The  first  blows  upon  the 
wall  were  not  wasted;  they  were  preparing  for  the  others,  and  getting  the  whole 
structure  into  a  condition  of  disintegration  ;  and  when  that  was  done,  down  it 
came,  and  great  was  the  fall  thereof.     3.  "  Well,"  says  one,  "  what  we  want  in 


CHAP.  XLi.]  ISAIAH.  293 

our  place  is  for  the  ministry  itself  to  be  supplied."  If  the  minister  himself  is  dry, 
what  is  to  be  done  ?  Find  fault  with  him,  and  leave  him  ?  No !  if  he  is  a  man  of 
God,  pray  for  him,  and  never  rest  till  the  Lord  makes  the  dry  land  springs  of 
water.  4.  But  what  is  wanted,  too,  is  the  same  blessing  upon  the  helpers.  What 
is  the  preacher  to  do,  what  is  the  Church  to  do,  if  the  workers  are  half  asleep  T 
One  sleepy  Christian  in  a  Church  may  do  much  mischief.  In  some  businesses 
the  whole  thing  is  so  arranged,  that  if  one  person  goes  to  sleep,  all  the  machinery 
goes  wrong;  and  I  believe  that  it  is  very  much  so  in  the  Church  of  God.  5.  Then 
we  may  look  for  a  change  throughout  the  whole  congregation.  Men  and  women 
will  cry  out,  "  What  must  we  do  to  be  saved  ?  "  There  wiU  be  plenty  of  people 
to  be  talked  to  about  their  souls.  We  shall  have  no  difficulty  in  increasing  the 
Church,  month  by  month,  with  such  as  shall  be  saved-  6.  Then  all  the  neighbour- 
hood will  be  transformed.  {Ibid.)  God's  abounding  generosity  : — He  does  not 
measure  His  gifts  of  water  by  the  pint  and  by  the  gallon;  but  here  you  have  pools, 
and  springs,  and  rivers.  When  He  has  given  waters,  He  will  give  trees  to  grow 
by  the  waters.  When  God  gives  blessing.  He  makes  other  blessings  to  spring  out 
of  it.     (Hid.) 

Ver.  19.  I  •will  plant  In  the  wilderness. — Trees: — The  "  cedar"  grew  on  Mount 
Lebanon,  and  was  of  great  height,  and  had  extended  branches,  which  afforded 
kindly  shade.  The  "  smttah  "  tree  is  probably,  as  the  R.V.  renders  it,  the  acacia. 
This  was  "  a  large  tree,  growing  abundantly  in  Egypt  and  Arabia,  and  is  the  tree 
from  which  gum-arabic  is  obtained.  It  is  covered  with  black  thorns,  and  the 
wood  is  hard,  and  when  old  resembles  ebony."  The  "  myrtle  "  rises  eight  or 
ten  feet  high,  its  characteristic  being  "  a  dense,  full  head."  It  is  thus  convenient 
for  shade.  The  "  oil  tree  "  is  probably  the  olive  tree.  The  "  fir  tree  "  usually 
denotes  the  cypress,  an  evergreen.  This  is  also  a  tree  whose  wide-spread  foUage 
would  afford  shade.  The  "  pine  "  tree  is  perhaps  the  poplar  (according  to  the 
Septuagint),  or  elm  (according  to  the  Vulgate),  or  a  kind  of  hard  oak  (according 
to  Gesenius).  The  "  box  "  tree  is  probably  some  tall  tree  of  the  cedar  kind,  also 
affording  shade.  The  chief  common  characteristic  of  these  trees  is  that  they 
afford  welcome  shade.  In  Western  lands  the  intensity  of  the  sun's  heat  and 
rays  is  not  felt;  but  in  the  East  he  is  at  his  fiercest,  and  a  shadow  is  a  most  grateful 
possession.  A  missionary  from  the  South  Seas  said:  "  Oh,  the  shining  of  the 
sun!  The  one  thing  we  wanted  to  hide  from  was  the  sim.  Its  glare  was  intoler- 
able!" {J.  A.  Davies,  B.D.)  The  rejoicing  wilderness: — What  meaneth  this 
figurative  picture  of  a  vast  oasis — a  well- watered  grove  of  stately,  fragrant  shady 
trees?  Observe,  there  are  seven  kinds  of  these  mentioned;  seven — the  Hebrew 
symbol  of  abundance,  diversity,  perfection.  The  words  may  well  be  taken, 
therefore,  to  denote  the  plenitude  of  Divine  grace  vouchsafed  in  the  hour  of  deepest 
perplexity  and  sorrow.  (J.  R.  Macduff,  D.D.)  Divine  grace  adapted  to  human 
need : — ITie  beautiful  part  of  the  picture  is,  that  God  bestows  grace  varied  in  its 
manifestations;  adapted  in  its  wondrous  diversity  to  meet  the  wants  and  neces- 
sities and  trials  of  aU  His  suffering  people.  He  has  sustaining  grace  for  one, 
restraining  grace  for  another;  strengthening  grace  for  one,  sanctifying  grace  for 
another ;  comforting  grace  for  one,  dying  grace  for  another.  But  all  these  "  trees 
of  God  "  are  "  full  of  sap,"  from  the  lowly  "  nabk  "  or  mountain- thorn,  to  the 
"  cedar  of  Lebanon  which  He  hath  planted."  Each  tree  may  be  taken  as  the 
type  or  emblem  of  a  cluster  of  Bible  promises.  To  the  weak,  there  is  the  cedar 
in  its  strength;  to  the  bereaved,  there  is  the  olive,  with  its  ashen  leaves,  and  yet 
with  its  "  oil  of  joy  "  for  the  mourner;  to  the  fainting  and  downcast,  there  is 
the  tail  pine  and  tapering  cypress  pointing  upwards;  to  the  wounded  spirit, 
there  is  the  balsam  tree  of  Gilead  and  the  fragrant  myrtle;  to  the  dying,  there  is 
the  palm  tree  with  its  graceful  fronds,  according  to  the  Eastern  tradition,  whisper- 
ing in  the  ear  the  name  of  Jesus !  Ajid  the  further  pecuUarity  of  this  promise  is, 
that  it  is  in  the  hour  of  sorest  want  and  trial  and  perplexity  that  that  grace  is 
most  abundant.  It  is  in  the  depths  of  the  arid  desert,  with  hillocks  of  sand  on 
all  sides  bounding  the  horizon, — in  season.s  of  loneliest  bereavement  and  uttermost 
sorrow, — that  these  palm  and  acacia  and  olive  and  myrtle  groves,  as  if  by  the 
hand  of  an  enchanter,  rise  up  to  view.  It  was  "  at  the  fourth  watch  of  the  night  " 
(when  the  darkness  was  deepest,  and  the  hearts  of  the  disciples  were  most  despair- 
ing and  desponding)  that  Jesus  "  cometh  unto  them  walking  upon  the  sea." 
Man's  extremity  is  often  God's  opportunity.  {Ibid.)  The  symbolism  of  trees:-^ 
In  the  more  figurative  sense  it  intimates  that  the  Ix)rd  God  would  raise  up,  for 


294  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xu. 

the  benefit  of  His  Church,  men  of  distinguished  eminence  and  usefulness,  such  aa 
judges  and  generals,  to  afford  them  protection;  rulers  and  governors,  who  should 
prove  both  ornamental  and  useful  to  them;  and  choice  ministers  of  the  Word, 
from  whose  doctrine  they  were  to  derive  defence  from  evil,  spiritual  nourishment, 
and  consolation.     (R.  Maccvlloch.) 

Ver.  21.  Produce  your  cause. — Heaven's  appeal  to  the  reason  of  the  sinner: — 
The  text  implies — I.  That  the  sinner  has  some  reasons  for  the  evil  coursb 
HE  PURSUES.  II.  That  these  reasons  he  is  bound  to  state  before  his  Maker. 
"  Bring  forth  your  reasons."  Why  bring  them  forth  ?  1.  The  question  of  a  sinful 
course  of  conduct  is  a  public  question.  The  sinner  has  no  right  to  say  that  his 
conduct  concerns  no  one  but  himself.  2.  Because  it  is  the  only  way  of  exposing 
their  moral  absurdity.  They  will  scarcely  bear  to  be  stated.  Bring  them  out 
and  they  will  frighten  you.  III.  That  his  Maker  will  give  the  statement 
OF  them  His  attention.  1.  His  readiness  to  attend  to  them  shows  that  your 
conduct  towards  Him  will  not  bear  investigation.  2.  His  readiness  to  attend  to 
them  shows  the  existence  of  mediation.  He  does  not  attend  to  the  reasons  of 
the  lost.  3.  His  readiness  to  attend  to  them  shows  His  infinite  condescension. 
(Homilist.)  God's  challenge  to  the  sinner:— These  words  are  a  challenge  to 
such  as  serve  not  God.  The  study  of  this  question  may  be  a  wise  anticipation 
of  the  judgment  day.  Now  we  may  search  for  our  reasons;  and  if  they  be  foimd 
to  be  unsoimd,  we  may  put  our  conduct  right;  but  when  we  stand  before  the 
judgment-seat  of  Christ  it  will  be  too  late  for  repentance.  To  form  a  court  now 
in  which  to  hear  this  cause,  it  is  only  needful  that  we  should  remember  that  the 
great  God  can  judge  the  very  secrets  of  om-  hearts.  The  Judge  of  all  the  earth 
is  upon  His  holy  seat.  Tefore  Him  we  now  stand.  While  the  doom  of  each  is 
not  yet  fixed,  the  voice  of  the  Almighty  is  heard,  "  Produce  your  cause,"  &c. 
1.  The  great  Searcher  of  hearts  may  come  into  the  midst  of  such  as  are  given  to 
the  love  of  present  things,  and  say,  "  Produce  your  cause."  What  such  wiU  bring 
forward  is  this:  they  are  not  persons  addicted  to  any  particular  vice;  they  are 
amiable,  kind,  sincere;  they  live  without  strife  with  men;  they  live  without 
hostility  towards  God.  But  they  have  great  love  for  things  as  they  are:  they  are 
))owerfuIIy  influenced  by  things  seen  and  temporal;  they  are  contented  with  their 
earthly  portion;  and  they  seldom  have  any  strong  concern  or  desire  about  the 
things  n  t  seen  and  eternal.  Their  cause  is  that  of  listlessness  about  the  things 
of  the  soul,  of  an  imwilUngness  to  admit  what  seem  to  be  melancholy  thoughts, 
as  they  cast  a  shadow  over  a  fair  scene  of  earthly  comfort,  with  which  they  feel 
that  they  can  remain  content.  It  is  that  of  the  orderly  members  of  society, 
towards  whom  our  respect  and  our  affection  are  so  soon  drawn.  It  seems  almost 
unkind  to  wake  up  such  out  of  their  soft  sleep.  But  God  says,  "  Bring  forth  your 
strong  reasons  "  to  justify  such  a  hfe.  And  reasons  are  given.  It  is  so  pleasant 
to  be  a  peace,  that  we  care  not  to  be  disturbed.  Yes,  if  there  were  to  be  no 
sudden  shock  of  death:  if  this  loved  world  were  to  continue  unchanged:  if 
there  were  no  cunning  enemy  plotting  while  the  careless  sleep:  if  there  were 
no  holy  service  to  be  done  for  God,  no  brotherly  counsel  to  be  given  to  man! 
But  love  of  ease  is  no  strong  reason  to  justify  a  careless  career,  which  is  to  end 
in  unrest  for  ever.  You  may  say,  we  are  of  the  quieter  sort;  and  may  we  not 
float  in  the  eddies  of  life,  without  being  hurried  on  by  the  current  of  evil  ?  Why 
cannot  our  religion  be  of  the  passive  order?  I*ut  the  answer  comes  at  once. 
Are  you  so  safe  as  you  endeavour  to  think?  Is  there  really  the  calm  which  your 
spirits  in  their  drowsiness  think  there  may  be?  There  are,  no  doubt,  beautiful 
Christian  graces  which  bloom  best  in  the  shade.  But  do  not  such  daily  open  their 
petals,  and  breathe  out  fragrance  towards  heaven?  The  cause  of  the  careless, 
or  the  worldly-minded,  of  such  as  sit  still  in  s  oth  as  to  spiritual  concerns,  will 
not  stand  in  the  judgment.  2.  How  much  less  will  that  other  man  prosper,  whose 
cause  may  be  thus  pro  uced.  He  is  a  man  willing  to  admit  that  much  may  be 
said  in  favour  of  a  religious  life.  Up  to  a  certain  point  he  is  prepared  to  accept 
and  to  carry  into  effect  the  .  uties  which  rise  because  of  a  man's  relation  to  God 
who  made  him.  But  religion  has  been  made  to  ask  too  much:  is  pressed  too 
indiscriminately  upon  every  period  and  transaction  of  life.  The  law  of  God 
cannot  be  observed,  and  therefore  it  ought  to  be  owered,  or  adapted  to  the  con- 
dition of  modem  thought  and  feeling.  The  man  will  not  pretend  to  justify  all 
he  docs.  But  his  stro  ig  reasons  are  that  it  cannot  be  otherwise.  He  lives  in 
a  world  where  perfect  obedience  is  not  to  be  expected.     Other  men  sin,  and  their 


CHAP.  xLi.]  ISAIAH.  296 

sinning  involves  sin  in  him.  He  is  made  with  passions  which  d^  and  will  t  ke 
fire,  when  temptation  finds  its  convenient  seasons.  He  is  ready  to  listen  to  advice 
how  h?  may  avoid  the  grossest  sins ;  but  he  is  not  prepared  to  care  about  opinions 
concerning  a  holiness  which  he  never  hopes  to  reac  .  B  hind  these  strong  reasons 
men  entrench  themselves,  and  seem  to  keep  the  conscience  Tintouched  by  the 
arrow  from  the  Lord's  bow.  The  cause  so  produced  wants  one  great  feature; 
there  is  no  real  sorrow  for  sin.  The  blame  of  sin  is  skilfully  shifted  from  the  sinner 
to  his  God.  "  Why  hast  Thou  made  me  thus?  "  is  the  complaint  which  such  a 
man  makes.  It  is  considered  a  misfortune  rather  than  a  faiilt,  that  he  has  not 
obeyed  the  commandment  of  the  Lord.  How  can  God  justify  a  man  who  thus 
blames  his  Maker!  How  can  a  man  justify  himself,  when  it  shall  be  brought 
out  against  him  that  if  he  had  hated  sin  it  might  have  been  forgiven,  if  he  had 
resisted  sin  it  might  have  been  overcome  in  the  strength  and  according  to  the 
grace  which  God  gives.  Such  reasons  to  support  a  cause  will  be  weak  in  the 
day  of  the  Lord.  3.  A  man  will  say.  My  hfe  is  not  right,  my  conscience  is  not  quiet, 
my  ])osition  is  not  safe ;  but  what  am  I  to  do  ?  The  reUgion  of  many  so  disgusts 
me  that  I  have  no  faith  to  follow  them.  The  opinions  vary  so  much  among  those 
who  call  themselves  Christ's  servants  that  I  am  at  a  loss  what  to  believe.  My 
cause  is  bad:  but  which  shall  I  accept  as  a  better?  And  my  reasons  for  remaining 
as  I  am  are  strong,  from  the  difficulty  as  to  whether  I  may  not  move  and  only 
sink  lower.  And  such  arguments  satisfy  a  man  for  a  time :  they  excuse,  if  they 
do  not  justify.  But  are  they  really  sound?  Is  it  true  that  there  are  no  sincere 
followers  of  Jesus  ?  Is  it  true  that  there  are  no  saving  truths  which  stand  out  as 
a  rock,  notwithstanding  aU  that  party  spirit  has  done  to  hide  it  by  party  walls  ?  Is 
Christ  so  covered  that  He  cannot  be  found  ?  I  boldly  assert  that  no  such  difficulties 
exist.  There  are,  it  may  be,  hypocrites  everywhere.  Sincere  Christians  are 
inconsistent  and  weak  in  many  things;  but  salvation,  God's  grace.  Divine  life 
in  the  soul,  is  a  real  thing.  The  sinner  who  searches  for  a  perfect  Church  or  a 
perfect  Christian,  and  stands  aloof  from  Christ  because  such  things  are  not  to  be 
found,  may  have  groimds  for  finding  fault  with  his  neighbour,  but  he  has  no 
strong  reason  by  which  to  defend  himself.  Such  a  cause,  so  supported,  must 
fall  to  the  ground,  when  the  truthful  test  of  God's  own  touch  shall  show  what 
manner  of  cause  it  was.  4.  But  it  is  time  to  produce  another  cause:  that  of 
a  man  who  holds  the  truth  in  unrighteousness;  who  is  orthodox  in  creed  and  in- 
correct in  life;  who  has  the  form  of  godliness,  but  denies  the  power  thereof.  It 
is  the  case  of  many  to  be  found  in  the  house  of  God  on  each  Sabbath  day:  pro- 
fessors of  Christ,  but  followers  of  the  world,  its  vanities,  or  its  sins.  Such  men 
bring  no  objections  against  the  truth  or  service  of  God;  but  they  do  not  savingly 
believe,  they  do  not  honestly  serve.  Religion  with  them  is  a  thing  without  life. 
They  have  a  horror  of  over-zeaL  The  reasonable  man  is  earnest.  He  is  calm 
and  self-contained;  but  he  has  been  strongly  moved  at  the  sight  of  sin,  he  has 
been  deeply  moved  by  the  power  of  grace,  and  he  cannot  but  give  himself, 
body,  soli,  and  spirit,  to  do  tus  Lord's  wiU.  He,  too,  can  produce  his  cause  and 
bring  forth  his  strong  reasons.  Is  it  not  reasonable  that,  when  God  works  by 
the  Holy  Ghost  upon  a  sinner's  soul,  the  effect  should  be  felt  and  seen?  Conclusion 
— The  behever  has  his  strong  reasons.  He  says  the  time  is  short,  and  the  work 
is  great.  He  says  sin  is  too  terrible  to  be  trifled  with:  salvation  is  too  great  a 
thing  to  be  dealt  with  carelessly.  The  devil  is  in  earnest — Jesus  is  in  earnest 
— the  wicked  are  in  earnest;  why  should  the  Lord's  people  hang  back,  as  from 
a  cause  they  doubt  or  a  conflict  about  which  they  feel  afraid?  And  these  reasons 
have  the  solidity  of  truth  and  the  power  of  truth.  They  commend  themselves 
to  a  man's  judgment  the  more  he  weighs  them  well  and  the  nearer  he  comes  to 
the  day  of  death.  Let  us  all  be  warned.  It  is  not  a  question  about  one  man 
taking  another  man's  advice.  It  is  a  far  higher  matter  than  a  triumph  of  beUever 
over  unbehever.  As  those  who  would  not  part  when  the  Lord  comes, — as  those 
who  cannot  envy  each  other  a  place  in  heaven, — let  xis  "  give  diligence  to  naake 
DUX  calling  and  election  sure."     (J.  Richardson,  M.A.) 

Ver.  27.  One  that  bringeth  good  tidings. — Divine  ordination: — ^L  Ministees 
ABB  DIVINELY  OEDAINED.  They  come  from  God.  "  /  will  give."  The  ministry 
is  not  one  of  the  literary  professions,  nor  a  secular  office.  Colleges  and  seminaries 
do  not  make  them.  11.  They  aee  a  gift  of  God's  gkace.  Neither  the  Church's 
merit,  wealth,  or  respectability  has  a  claim  to  them,  nor  does  a  salary  hire  them, 
nor  ordination  commission  them  in  the  highest  sense.     They  are  a  benefaction. 


296  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap  xui. 

lEL  Thi  ministbb's  chief  work  is  to  be  the  beabeb  of  good  tidings.  It 
does  not  exclude  other  things  that  accompany  salvation,  but  the  Gospel  pro- 
clamation is  to  be  his  specific,  constant,  cheerful,  enthusiastic,  confident  employ- 
ment. In  season,  out  of  season,  in  pulpit  and  private,  his  heart  and  lips  are  to 
overflow  with  the  "  good  tidings."  Because — 1.  They  are  what  men,  aU  men, 
all  men  everywhere  and  always  need,  and  need  most  imperatively.  2.  The  more 
the  good  tidings  are  preached  the  more  open  is  the  way  for  everything  else  con- 
nected with  the  pastor's  work,  and  the  more  effective  all  departments  of  his 
ministry.  3.  It,  and  it  alone,  is  the  power  of  God  and  the  wisdom  of  God  unto 
salvation  and  eanctification.     {Homiletic  Review.) 


CHAPTER  XML 


Vee8.  1-17.  Behold  My  Servant. — Who  is  the  "servant  of  Jehovah"? — The 
following  are,  in  brief,  the  leading  opinions  which  have  been  held :  (1)  BUtzig's, 
that  the  Jewish  people  in  exile  is  referred  to,  as  distinguished  from  the  heathen; 

(2)  that  of  Paulus  and  Maurer,  that  the  servant  is  the  pious  portion  of  the  people; 

(3)  that  of  Gesenius,  that  the  prophetic  order  is  intended;  (4)  that  of  Hofmann, 
combining  (2)  and  (3),  that  it  means  Israel,  the  prophetic  people,  suffering  on 
behalf  of  the  heathen  world;  (5)  that  of  Oehler  and  Delitzsch,  that  "  the  con- 
ception of  the  servant  of  Jehovah  is,  as  it  were,  a  pyramid,  of  which  the  base  is 
the  people  of  Israel  as  a  whole,  the  central  part  Israel  '  according  to  the  Spirit,' 
and  the  summit,  the  person  of  the  Mediator  of  salvation,  who  arises  out  of  Israel." 
{Prof.  T.  K.  Cheyne,  D.D.)  The  Mediator  is  the  centre  : — 1.  In  the  circle  of  the 
kingdom  of  promise — the  second  David.  2.  In  the  circle  of  the  people  of  salvation 
— the  true  Israel.  3.  In  the  circle  of  humanity — the  second  Adam.  (F.  Delitzsch, 
D.D.)  The  servant  of  Jehovah: — In  the  subhmest  description  of  the  servant 
I  am  unable  to  resist  the  impression  that  we  have  a  presentiment  of  an  individual, 
and  venture  to  think  that  our  general  view  of  the  servant  ought  to  be  ruled  by 
those  passages  in  which  the  enthusiasm  of  the  author  is  at  its  height.  "  Servant 
of  Jehovah  "  in  these  passages  seems  equivalent  to  "  son  of  Jehovah  "  in  Psalm 
ii.  7  ("  son  "  and  "  servant "  being,  in  fact,  nearly  equivalent  in  the  Old  Testament), 
namely,  the  personal  instrument  of  Israel's  regeneration,  or,  as  we  may  say  in 
the  broader  sense  of  the  word,  the  Messiah.  {Prof.  T.  K.  Cheyne,  D.D.)  Jehovah 
and  Jehovah's  servant : — This  servant  is  brought  before  us  with  all  the  urgency 
with  which  Jehovah  has  presented  Himself,  and  next  to  Jehovah  He  turns  out 
to  be  the  most  important  figure  of  the  prophecy.  Does  the  prophet  insist  that 
God  is  the  only  source  and  sufficiency  of  His  people's  salvation  ?  It  is  with  equal 
emphasis  that  He  introduces  the  servant  as  God's  indispensable  agent  in  the 
work.  Cyrus  is  also  acknowledged  as  an  elect  instrument.  But  neither  in  close- 
ness to  God,  nor  in  effect  upon  the  world,  is  Cyrus  to  be  compared  for  an  instant 
to  the  servant.  Cyrus  is  subservient  and  incidental.  .  .  .  But  the  servant  is  a 
character,  to  delineate  whose  immortal  beauty  and  example  the  prophet  devotes 
as  much  space  us  he  does  to  Jehovah  Himself.  As  he  turns  again  and  again  to 
speak  of  God's  onmipotence  and  faithfulness  and  agonising  love  for  His  own,  so 
with  equal  frequency  and  fondness  does  he  linger  on  every  feature  of  the  servant's 
conduct  and  aspect:  His  gentleness.  His  patience.  His  courage.  His  purity.  His 
meekness:  His  daily  wakefulness  to  God's  voice,  the  swiftness  and  brilliance  of  His 
speech  for  others.  His  silence  under  His  own  torments;  His  resorts — among  the 
bruised,  the  prisoners,  the  forwandered  of  Israel,  the  weary,  and  them  that  sit 
in  darkness,  the  far-off  heathen;  His  warfare  with  the  world.  His  face  set  like  a 
flint;  His  unworldly  beauty,  which  men  call  ugliness;  His  unnoticed  presence  in 
His  own  generation,  yet  the  effect  of  His  face  upon  kings;  His  habit  of  woe,  a  man 
of  sorrows  and  acquainted  with  sickness;  His  sore  stripes  and  bruises,  His  judicial 
murder.  His  felon's  grave;  His  exaltation  and  eternal  glory — till  we  may  reverently 
say  that  these  pictures,  by  their  vividness  and  charm,  have  drawn  our  eyes  away 
from  our  prophet's  visions  of  God,  and  have  caused  the  chapters  in  which  they 
occur  to  be  oftener  read  among  us,  and  learned  by  heart,  than  the  chapters  in 
which  God  Himself  is  lifted  up  and  adored.  Jehovah  and  Jehovah's  servant — 
these  are  the  two  heroes  of  the  drama.  {Prof.  0.  A.  Smith,  D.D.)  The  servant, 
first  Israel  as  a  whole,  then  Israel  in  part: — Nothing  could  be  more  clear  than  this, 


CHAP,  xui.]  ISAIAH.  297 

that  in  the  earKer  years  of  the  exile,  the  servant  of  Jehovah  was  Israel  as  a  whole, 
Israel  as  a  body  poUtic.  .  .  .  Very  soon  the  prophet  has  to  make  a  distinction, 
and  to  sketch  the  servant  as  something  less  than  the  actual  nation.  ...  In  modern 
history  we  have  two  famiUar  illustrations  of  this  process  of  winnowing  and  idealis- 
ing a  people,  in  the  light  of  their  destiny.  In  a  well-known  passage  in  the  "  Areo- 
pagitica  "  Milton  exclaims:  "  Methinks  I  see  in  my  mind  a  noble  and  puissant 
nation  rousing  herself  and  shaking  her  invincible  locks;  methinks  I  see  her  as  an 
eagle  renewing  her  mighty  youth,  and  kindling  her  undazzled  eyes  at  the  full  midday 
beam, .  .  .  while  the  whole  noise  of  timorous  and  flocking  birds,  with  those  also  that 
love  the  twilight,  flutter  about,  amazed  at  what  she  means."  In  this  passage  the 
"  nation  "  is  no  longer  what  Milton  meant  by  the  term  in  the  earlier  part  of  hia 
treatise,  where  "  England "  stands  simply  for  the  outline  of  the  whole  English 
people;  but  the  "  nation  "  is  the  true  genius  of  England  realised  in  her  enlightened 
and  aspiring  sons,  and  breaking  away  from  the  hmderuig  and  debasing  members 
of  the  body  politic.  Or,  recall  Mazzini's  bitter  experience.  To  no  man  was  his 
Italy  more  really  one  than  to  this  ardent  son  of  hers,  who  loved  every  born  Italian 
because  he  was  an  Italian,  and  counted  none  of  the  fragments  of  his  unhappy 
country  too  petty  or  too  corrupt  to  be  included  in  the  hope  of  her  restoration. 
To  Mazzini's  earliest  imagination,  it  was  the  whole  Itahan  seed  who  were  ready 
for  redemption,  and  would  rise  to  achieve  it  at  his  summons.  But  when  his 
summons  came,  how  few  responded,  and  after  the  first  struggles  how  fewer  still 
remained,  Mazzini  himself  has  told  us  with  breaking  heart.  The  real  Italy  was 
but  a  handful  of  born  Italians;  at  times  it  seemed  to  shriok  to  the  prophet  alone. 
Prom  such  a  core  the  conscience  indeed  spread  again,  tiU  the  entire  people  was 
delivered  from  tyranny  and  from  schism,  and  now  every  peasant  and  burgher 
from  the  Alps  to  Sicily  understands  what  Italy  means,  and  is  proud  to  be  an 
Italian.  But  for  a  time  Mazzini  and  his  few  comrades  stood  alone.  It  is  a  similar 
winnowing  process  through  which  we  see  our  prophet's  thought  pass  with  regard 
to  Israel.  Him,  too,  experience  teaches,  that  "  the  many  are  called,  but  the  few 
chosen."  Perhaps  the  first  traces  of  distinction  between  the  real  servant  and 
the  whole  nation  are  to  be  found  in  the  programme  of  his  mission  (chap.  xlii.  1-7). 
{Ibid. )  The  ideal  servant  of'iJehovah: — That  mysterious  form  of  the  ideal  servant 
of  Jehovah,  which  seems,  as  we  read,  to  shift  and  change  its  aspect,  was  to  Israel 
what  the  "  colossal  man  "  of  the  idealist  is  to  humanity  at  large  {E.  H.  Plumptre, 
D.D.\  The  servant  of  the  Lord  : — The  figure,  as  it  first  appears  in  this  half  of 
what  are  called  Isaiah's  prophecies,  evidently  represents  Israel  as  God  intended 
it  to  be,  chosen  for  His  service  and  for  the  diffusion  of  His  Name;  the  conviction 

fradually  steals  over  the  prophet  that  the  nation  cannot  discharge  these  functions, 
ut  that  the  Israel  within  Israel,  the  devout  core  of  the  people,  is  the  Servant  of 
the  Lord ;  and  finally,  the  knowledge  seems  to  have  been  breathed  into  him  that 
not  even  "  that  holy  seed  "  which  "  is  the  substance  thereof  "  is  adequate  to  do 
all  that  the  Servant  of  the  Lord  is  to  do ;  and  thus  finally  the  figure  changes  into 
a  Person,  who  can  be  and  do  all  that  Israel  ought  to  have  been  and  done,  but  was 
not,  and  did  not.  In  other  words,  whether  the  prophet  discerned  it  or  no,  the 
role  of  the  Servant  of  the  Lord  is  only  fulfilled  by  Jesus  Christ.  {A.  Maclaren,  D.D. ) 
Cyrils  and  the  Servant  of  Jehovah: — His  relation  to  Cyrus,  before  whose  departure 
from  connection  with  Israel's  fate  the  Servant  does  not  appear  as  a  person,  is  most 
interesting.  Perhaps  we  may  best  convey  it  in  a  homely  figure  On  the  ship  of 
Israel's  fortunes — as  on  every  ship  and  on  every  voyage — the  prophet  sees  two 
personages.  One  is  the  pilot  through  the  shallows,  Cyrus,  who  is  dropped  as  soon 
as  the  shallows  are  past;  and  the  other  is  the  captain  of  the  ship,  who  remains 
always  identified  with  it — the  servant.  The  captain  does  not  come  to  the  front 
till  the  pilot  is  gone;  but,  both  alongside  the  pilot,  and  after  the  pilot  has  been 
dropped,  there  is  every  room  for  his  office.  (Prof.  0.  A.  Smith,  D.D.)  The 
ideal  servant's  work: — The  chief  aspects  of  the  ideal  servant's  work  may  be  classed 
as  foUows:  1.  He  is  to  be  the  embodiment  of  a  new  covenant  between  Jehovah  and 
His  people,  to  restore  the  actual  nation  exiled  at  the  time  in  Babylon,  and  to  re- 
establish them  in  their  own  land  (chaps,  xlii.  6;  xhx.  5,  6,  8).  2.  But  He  has 
a  mission  not  to  Israel  merely,  but  to  the  world:  He  is  to  teach  the  world  true 
religion,  and  to  be  a  "  light  of  the  Gentiles  "  (chaps,  xlii.  1,  3,  6,  xUx.  6).  3.  He 
is  to  be  a  prophet,  patient  and  faithful  in  the  discharge  of  His  work,  in  spite  of  the 
contumely  and  opposition  which  He  may  encounter  (chap.  L  4-9).  4.  Being 
innocent  Himself,  He  is  to  suffer  and  die  for  the  sins  of  others  (chap.  liii.  4-9). 
{Prof.  S.  R.  Driver,  D.D.)        The  Trinity  in  unity  : — This  is  the  language  of  th» 


298  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xxn. 

Eternal  Father;  but  it  contains  a  description  of  our  blessed  Lord  and  Saviour  in  His 
character,  as  the  Redeemer  of  the  world.  Then  the  Spirit  of  God  is  represented 
as  resting  upon  Christ,  to  qualify  Him  for  that  work  of  redemption  ;  and  thus  in 
this  one  verse  we  have  brought  before  us  suggestions  concerning  the  Father's 
sovereign  will,  the  Son's  willing  obedience,  and  the  Spirit's  fulness  of  grace  mani- 
fested in  the  Person  of  the  Son,  and  the  setting  Him  apart  for  His  real  work. 

1.  The  Scriptural  revelation  concerning  the  Trinity  in  unity.  1.  No  one 
can  doubt  that  Holy  Scripture  teaches  the  unity  of  God.  2.  Yet  Scripture  speaks 
of  this  one  God,  this  one  Jehovah,  Israel's  Lord,  as  revealing  Himself  in  three 
distinct  characters  and  relations,  and  only  three.  3.  Then  Scripture  attributes 
works  and  qualities  to  each  of  these  three  Persons  which  could  not  be  attributed 
to  them  justly  if  each  of  them  were  not  truly  God.  4.  Then  Holy  Scripture 
teaches,  notwithstanding,  that  these  Three  Divine  Persons,  each  spoken  of  as  God, 
are  yet  one  God,  and  this  without  any  difference  or  inequality.  II.  The  practical 
view  of  the  Trinity  which  this  passage  contains.  We  gather  fro?n  it  that  it 
is  the  will  of  the  Eternal  Jehovah  that  the  glory  of  the  Trinity  should  be  specially 
manifested  in  connection  with  the  Person  and  work  of  Christ.  Observe  the 
description  of  the  Second  Person  in  the  blessed  Trinity.  1.  He  is  God's  Servant. 
How  can  the  Second  Person  in  the  Trinity  be  spoken  of  as  the  Servant  of  the 
Eternal  Father  ?  The  very  expression  denotes  the  manhood  of  Christ.  He  can- 
not be  a  Servant  except  by  creation,  and  His  body  was  created  in  order  that  He 
might  sustain  the  position  of  Servant  to  the  Eternal  God.  "  A  body,"  we  are 
told  in  the  Epistle  to  the  Hebrews,  quoting  from  the  Psalms,  "  hast  Thou  prepared 
Me  ....  Lo,  I  come  to  do  Thy  will,  0  God."  Here  is  the  Son  speaking  to  the 
Father.  Then  the  expression  God's  "  Servant "  denotes  the  humiUation  of  our 
blessed  Lord  (Phil.  ii.  7).  As  God's  servant  we  have  to  consider  Him  in  con- 
nection with  His  office,  as  well  as  with  His  humiliation  and  with  His  manhood. 
The  office  which  He  had  to  sustain  was  to  bring  sinful  men  back  again  to  God. 

2.  Then  He  is  God's  beloved — "  Mine  elect,  in  whom  My  soul  dehghteth."  3.  The 
Man  Christ  Jesus  has  the  Spirit  of  God — "  I  will  put  My  Spirit  upon  Him,"  that 
is,  I  will  put  it  on  Him  as  a  garment.  At  the  conception,  and  at  His  baptism  and 
ordination  to  His  work,  this  was  specially  manifested.  Then  Jesus  had  the  Spirit 
for  the  special  work  which  He  had  to  perform  as  Mediator.  There  were  three 
objects  to  be  accomplished,  if  man  was  to  have  a  suitable  remedy.  Man  was 
ignorant  of  God's  will  through  sin:  he  needed,  therefore,  a  prophet  to  teach  him, 
not  only  what  to  do,  but  the  actual  doing  of  it,  and  Jesus  was  anointed  to  be  that 
Prophet.  Then  man  was  rebelHous,  and  he  needed,  therefore,  a  king  who  should 
rule  over  his  inward  passions,  and  subdue  them,  as  well  as  over  his  outward  enemies, 
and  quell  them:  and  therefore  Jesus  was  anointed,  that  He  might  sustain  the 
office  of  King.  And  man  was  in  a  sinful  condition,  under  the  curse  of  the  broken 
law,  and  therefore  he  needed  a  priest  to  sacrifice  for  him,  and  to  make  intercession 
for  him,  and  Jesus  was  that  Priest,  anointed  with  the  Spirit  of  God,  in  order  that 
He  might  make  that  satisfaction,  and  offer  that  sacrifice,  and  present  that  inter- 
cession through  which  sinners  may  be  brought  nigh  unto  God.  Thus  qualified, 
the  Saviour  will  "  bring  forth  judgment  to  the  Gentiles."  (W.  Cadman,  M.A.) 
The  servitude  of  Jesus  : — I.  In  Christ,  service  and  freedom  were  perfectly 
combined.  He  gave  the  service  of  being,  the  service  of  work,  the  service  of 
suffering,  the  service  of  worship,  the  service  of  rest  each  to  the  very  highest  point 
of  which  that  service  is  capable.  But  when  He  came,  knowing  as  He  did  all  to 
which  He  was  coming.  He  came  with  these  words  upon  His  lips,  "  I  delight  to  do 
it."  II.  Christ  had  many  masters,  and  He  served  them  all  with  perfect 
SERVICE.  1.  There  was  His  own  high  purpose,  which  had  armed  Him  for  BUs 
mission,  and  never  by  a  hair's-breadth  did  He  ever  swerve  from  that.  2.  There 
was  the  law.  The  law  had  no  right  over  Christ,  and  yet  how  He  served  the  law, 
in  every  requirement,  moral,  poUtical,  ceremonial,  to  the  smallest  tittle.  3.  There 
was  death,  that  fearful  master  with  his  giant  hand.  Step  by  step,  inch  by  inch, 
slowly,  measuredly,  He  put  Himself  under  its  spell.  He  obeyed  its  mandate, 
and  He  o\vned  its  power.  4.  To  Hjs  Heavenly  Father  what  a  true  Servant  He 
was,  not  only  in  fulfilling  all  the  Father's  will,  but  as  He  did  it,  in  always  tracing 
to  Him  all  the  power,  and  giving  back  to  Him  all  the  glory,  m.  There  is  a 
depth  of  beauty  and  power,  of  liberty  and  humiliation,  of  abandonment 
AND  LOVE,  IN  THAT  WORD  "  SERVAiiT,"  which  none  ever  know  who  have  not  con- 
sidered it  as  one  of  the  titles  of  Jesus.  But  there  is  another  name  of  Jesus,  very 
dear  to  His  people,  "  The  Master."     To  understand  "  the  Master  "  you  must 


CHAP.  XLH.]  ISAIAH.  290 

yourself  have  felt  "  the  Servant."  (J.  VaugJian,  M.A.)  The  dignity  of  service  :~— 
He  is  not  a  man  of.  clear  and  weighty  judgment  who  sees  nothing  of  honour  even 
in  the  word  "  servant."  HI  times  have  befallen  us  if  we  attach  to  that  word 
nothing  but  the  idea  of  humihation,  lowness,  valuelessness.  That  word  must  be 
restored  to  its  right  place  in  human  intercourse.  If  any  man  proudly  rise  and 
say  he  is  not  servant,  there  is  a  retort,  not  of  human  invention,  which  might 
overwhelm  any  who  are  not  swallowed  up  of  self-conceit  and  self-idolatry.  We 
do  not  know  what  it  is  to  rule  until  we  know  what  it  is  to  serve.  {J,  Parker,  D.D. ) 
Ood's  programme  for  the  world  : — This  programme  is  entrusted  to  the  servant  of 
the  Lord,  who  is  the  Christ  of  the  New  Testament.  I.  The  relatiokship  BETWEBir 
Jehovah  and  His  Servant.  In  all  His  Ufe  of  ministry  this  Servant  was  assured 
of  three  things — 1.  That  He  was  chosen  of  God  for  the  service  to  which  He  came. 
2.  That  He  dwelt  deep  in  the  love  of  God  His  Father.  3.  That  His  hfe  lay  entirely 
within  the  will  of  God-  He  was  chosen,  beloved,  approved.  All  this  is  possible 
to  those  who  say,  "  I  am  the  Lord's."  II.  The  Servant's  Divine  eqitipment. 
"  I  have  put  My  Spirit  upon  Him."  III.  The  mission  op  the  Servant:  its 
temper  and  method.  Christ  came  to  reveal  God,  to  restore  all  things  to  the 
pattern  of  the  Divine  mind,  to  make  God's  judgment  the  standard  of  all  life  and 
conduct,  so  that  the  world  should  be  governed  by  the  principles  of  God's  righteous- 
ness. This  is  to  be  accomplished  without  noise  or  ostentation.  This  description 
of  Christ's  character  is  remarkable  for  its  omissions:  it  is  a  striking  list  of  omis- 
sions. The  Spirit  works  by  a  process  of  exclusion  in  revelation  and  sanctification, 
and  in  the  restoration  of  righteousness  in  the  world.  {S.  Chadwick.)  The 
ideal  Israelite: — Long  before  Christ  appeared  in  the  flesh.  He  had  already  appeared 
in  the  Spirit.  The  chapter  carries  us  back  to  a  time  when  the  conception  of  a 
Saviour  definitely  began.  Up  to  then  there  had  been  vague  presentiments;  after 
then  there  was  a  character  prepared  for  the  Jesus  who  was  to  come.  So  it  is  with 
all  heroes,  they  are  needed  before  they  are  born ;  they  could  not  work  their  work 
unless  they  were  needed  and  discerned;  they  have  prophets  to  beget  them  as 
well  as  parents.  I.  An  ACTtrAL  name  applied.  The  title  of  "  God's  servant  '* 
is  one  that  runs  through  all  Oriental  language.  The  Israelite  people  at  large 
had  failed, — the  Jewish  people,  as  reformed  by  Josiah,  had  failed,  —  it  remained 
for  God  to  justify  His  purpose  by  manifesting  a  "  new  model,"  who  should  repre- 
sent Him  rightly  to  the  Gentiles.  II.  An  ideai,  description  given.  1.  This 
genuine  man  of  God  must  be  a  man  of  gentleness,  and  yet  He  should  inherit  the 
earth-  2.  A  method  equally  new  would  prevail  in  religion;  there  the  true  Mis- 
sionary would  proceed  with  tolerance;  He  would  not  thrust  His  revelation  upon 
aHens,  He  would  open  their  eyes  to  behold  their  own  revelation;  they  also  had 
lamps,  dimly-burning,  but  still  alight.  God's  servant  must  not  extinguish  them. 
He  must  revive  them.  3.  But  to  be  gentle  in  forwarding  the  right,  tolerant  in 
inculcating  the  true,  tender  in  making  allowance  for  the  weak — all  this  belongs 
to  consummate  sympathy,  and  sympathy  demands  compensating  qualities,  for 
it  has  besetting  defects.  Converse  with  sensitive  consciences  is  often  enfeebling. 
Virtue  goes  out  of  us  in  the  endeavour  to  impart  strength,  and  the  infection  of 
fear  overtakes  the  very  physician.  But  our  prophet  has  a  strong  intellect  in  view, 
a  Helper  who  shall  not  be  bruised  by  anything  He  has  to  bear.  4.  There  is  about 
the  perfect  character  the  distinction  of  patience.  He  bums  brightly  in  mind. 
He  bears  up  bravely  in  heart,  "  until  He  have  set  judgment  in  the  earth."  This 
true  service  has  been  fulfilled  by  the  Carpenter  of  Nazareth — His  qualities  are  on 
record;  His  spirit  lasts.  {B.  H.  Alford.)  Messiah  and  His  work  : — I.  Thb 
character  and  spirit  op  the  Messiah.  IL  The  work  with  which,  as  thb 
Father's  Servant,  He  had  been  entrusted.  III.  The  wat  in  which  He  was 
TO  execute  it.  "  He  shall  not  fail,"  &c.  {Original  Secession  Magazine.)  The 
service  of  God  and  man : — I.  The  conscience  of  the  service.  Before  being  a 
service  of  man,  it  is  a  service  for  God.  "  My  servant."  II.  The  substancb 
op  service.  "  Judgment  for  the  nations  shall  He  bring  forth."  "  According 
to  truth  shall  He  bring  forth  judgment."  "  He  shall  not  flag  nor  break,  till  He 
Bet  in  the  earth  judgment."  III.  The  tesiper  of  service  (vers.  2,  3).  IV.  The 
POWER  BEHIND  SERVICE  (vcrs.  6,  6).  {Prof.  G.  A.  Smith,  D.D.)  "  Behold, 
My  Servant ! " — They  are  rare  qualities  which  Jehovah  calls  us  to  behold  in 
the  elect  Servant:  a  Divine  modesty;  a  Divine  humility;  a  Divine  perseverance. 
I.  The  modesty  op  the  best  work.  God  is  always  at  work  in  our  world,  leading 
the  progress  of  suns,  refreshing  grass  with  dew,  directing  the  flight  of  the  morning 
beams.     But  all  His  work  is  done  so  quietly,  so  unobtrusively,  with  such  reticenoo 


300  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xui. 

as  to  His  personal  agency,  that  many  affirm  there  is  no  God  at  all.  Thus  was  it 
with  the  work  of  Christ.  He  put  H!is  hand  on  the  mouths  of  those  who  proclaimed 
ITia  deity,  or  blazoned  abroad  His  fame.  This  quality  is  God's  hall-mark  upon  the 
best  work.  His  highest  artists  do  not  inscribe  their  names  upon  their  pictures, 
nor  introduce  their  portraits  amongst  their  groups.  11.  The  humility  of  thh 
BEST  WOEK-  He  has  put  down  the  mighty  from  their  seat,  and  exalted  the  humble 
and  meek.  And  so  was  it  with  our  Lord.  He  passed  by  Herod's  palace,  and 
chose  Bethlehem  and  its  manger  bed.  He  refused  the  empires  of  the  world,  and 
took  the  way  of  the  cross.  Bfe  selected  His  apostles  and  disciples  from  the  ranks 
of  the  poor.  He  revealed  Has  choicest  secrets  to  babes.  He  left  the  society 
of  the  Pharisee  and  Scribe,  and  expended  Himself  on  bruised  reeds  and  smoking 
flax,  on  djdng  thieves  and  fallen  women,  and  the  peasantry  of  Galilee.  HE.  DrvrNB 
PEESEVEEANCE.  Though  our  Lord  is  principally  concerned  with  the  bruised  and 
the  dimly-burning  wick.  He  is  neither  one  nor  the  other  (see  R.V.,  marg.).  He  is 
neither  discouraged  nor  does  He  fail.  This,  again,  is  the  quality  of  the  best  work. 
That  which  emanates  from  the  flesh  is  fuU  of  passion,  fury,  and  impulse.  It 
essays  to  deUver  Israel  by  a  spasm  of  force  that  lays  an  Egyptian  dead  in  the 
sand;  but  it  soon  exhausts  itseM,  and  sinks  back  nerveless  and  spent.  It  is 
impossible  too  strongly  to  emphasise  the  necessity  of  relying  in  Christian  work  on 
the  co-witness  of  the  Spirit  of  God.  {F.  B.  Meyer,  B.A.)  Purpose  and  method 
of  the  Redeemer  : — I.  The  Redeemee's  PtTEPOSB.  "  He  shall  bring  forth  judg- 
ment to  the  Gentiles";  "He  shall  bring  forth  judgment  unto  truth,"  and  He 
is  to  "  set  judgment  in  the  earth."  The  word  "  judgment,"  as  here  used,  has  no 
better  equivalent  than  righteousness,  in  the  sense  of  that  which '^is  essentially 
right  in  heart  and  life,  both  toward  God  and  man.  This  righteousness — rightness — 
in  all  the  powers  and  operations  of  the  soul,  and  in  all  its  relations  to  God  and  the 
universe,  is  the  master-need  of  mankind.  The  Redeemer  has  undertaken  to  meet 
this  great  need  of  the  world.  He  came  not  to  establish  certain  forms  of  theo- 
logical thought  and  expression;  not  to  set  up  certain  ecclesiastical  organisations 
and  rituals — aU  these  are  of  httle  worth,  except  in  so  far  as  they  can  be  made  the 
means  to  a  vastly  grander  end.  Jesus  Christ  came  to  establish  essential  righteous- 
ness in  individual  human  souls,  and  so  in  the  community  and  in  the  world.  It  is 
His  grand  purpose  to  enlighten  the  ignorance,  to  quicken  the  conscience,  to  energise 
the  wiU,  to  purify  the  affections,  and  to  exalt  the  aims  of  men,  bringing  them  thus 
into  harmony  with  God.  He  came  to  make  every  wrong  right— to  break  the 
oppressor's  yoke,  to  banish  cupidity  and  caste,  ignorance  and  selfishness,  and 
every  form  of  sin.  In  the  prosecution  of  this  sublime  purpose  the  Redeemer 
calls  all  His  disciples  into  co-operation  with  Himself.  In  this  they  are  to  find  the 
development  of  their  own  spiritual  character,  and  by  this  the  world  is  to  be  won 
for  Christ.  II.  The  Redeemee's  method.  This  is  set  before  us  by  the  prophet 
in  a  fourfold  view — 1.  As  authorised.  "  Behold  My  Servant,  whom  I  uphold; 
Mine  elect,  in  whom  My  soul  delighteth;  I  have  put  My  Spirit  upon  Him."  Here 
the  Redeemer  is  represented  as  acting  vmder  the  appointment  and  authorisation 
of  the  Eternal  Father.  Nor  is  it  difficult  to  perceive  why  this  is  necessary.  God, 
as  the  Sovereign,  against  whom  man  has  offended,  was  alone  competent  to  determine 
whether  any  mediation  could  be  admitted  between  Himself  and  His  rebellious 
creatures,  and,  if  any,  what  the  nature  of  that  mediation  should  be.  It  is  essential 
to  any  man's  faith  in  redemption  that  he  should  recognise  it  as  of  God  from  the 
beginning.  The  interposition  of  Christ  is  first  of  all,  and  more  than  aU,  the  mani- 
festation of  the  Father's  impartial  and  everlasting  love  for  lost  men.  The  Redeemer 
is  God,  the  equal  of  the  Father  in  glory,  majesty,  power,  divinity,  and  eternity; 
but  He  is  God  manifest  in  the  flesh.  As  it  was  necessary  that  the  Redeemer 
should  be  authorised,  so  it  was  necessary  that  the  authority  under  which  He  acted 
should  be  explicitly  attested.  It  was  thus  attested.  "  Sline  elect  in  whom  My 
eoul  delighteth;  I  have  put  My  Spirit  upon  Him  "  (Luke  iv.  14).  This  aspect  of 
His  mission  was  clearly  understood  by  His  apostles  (Acts  iv.  27,  x.  38).  At 
intervals  during  His  ministry  there  came  to  Him  Divine  attestation;  at  its  close 
He  "  was  declared  to  be  the  Son  of  God  with  power,  according  to  the  Spirit  of 
holiness  by  the  resiurection  from  the  dead  " ;  and  having  ascended  to  the  Father 
He  was  constituted  "  Head  over  all  things  to  the  Church,"  principalities  and 
powers  being  made  subject  to  Him,  for  "  it  pleased  the  Father  that  in  Him  should 
aU  fulness  dwell."  2.  As  unostentatious  (ver.  2).  Messiah's  mission  was  to  be 
distinguished  by  no  secular  pomp,  by  no  mihtary  glory.  The  Redeemer's  appear- 
ance was  to  be  lowly,  His  operations  silent  and  unobtrusive.     The  Saviour  of  men 


CHAP,  xm.]  ISAIAH.  301 

is  great  in  gentleness.  On  this  point  prophecy  is  mysteriously  impressive.  History 
answers  to  prophecy.  In  the  life  of  Jesus  Christ  there  is  a  marvellous  mingling 
of  grandeur  and  humility.  The  same  principle  pervades  the  whole  of  His  ad- 
ministration. There  is  marvellous  grandeur,  but  there  is  deep  lowliness.  The 
Gospel  has  mysteriously  subdued  the  hearts  of  men,  forming  into  its  own  spirit 
tempers  and  habits  the  most  alien  from  its  nature.  3.  As  compassionate.  "  A 
bruised  reed,"  &c.  Advancing  to  the  realisation  of  His  sublime  purpose  the 
Redeemer  will  not  overlook  the  smallest  acquisition;  and  His  attention  will  be 
especially  directed  to  those  who  are  specially  needy,  weak,  and  helpless.  4.  As 
persevering.  "He  shall  not  fail,"  &c.  He  was  not  discouraged.  He  ploughed 
His  way  through  all  opposition  from  Bethlehem  to  Golgotha.  The  risen  and 
exalted  Redeemer  is  moving  steadily  on  to  His  final  and  complete  triumph. 
(B.  R.  Meredith,  D.D.)  The  Servant  of  Jehovah  : — I.  The  chaeacter  He 
SUSTAINS.  "  Behold,  My  Servant,"  &c.  In  this  capacity  God  sustained  and 
protected  BQm.  He  is  also  set  forth  as  the  object  of  His  special  choice 
and  affection.  "Mine  elect,"  &c.  He  delighted  in  Him  on  account — 1.  Of  the 
close  relationship  that  existed  between  them.  Not  merely  was  He  Jehovah's 
Servant,  but  Has  only-begotten  Son.  2.  The  resemblance  He  bore  to  Him.  3.  His 
having  engaged  to  execute  the  Divine  purposes.  II.  The  work  He  had  to  accom- 
plish. 1.  For  this  work  He  was  endowed  with  every  requisite  qualification. 
"  I  have  put  My  Spirit  upon  Him."  2.  The  work  assigned  to  Him  was  very  exten- 
sive in  its  range.  "  He  shall  bring  forth  judgment  to  the  Gentiles."  3.  The 
character  of  His  work  is  here  intimated.  He  was  to  bring  forth  "  judgment  "; 
for  the  religion  He  would  establish  was  to  be  pre-eminently  distinguished  by  truth 
and  righteousness.  HI.  The  manner  in  which  it  was  to  be  effected.  1.  The 
absence  of  all  ostentation  and  clamour.  It  is  invariably  found  that  it  is  not  the 
most  noisy  that  do  the  most  work.  2.  He  was  to  evince  great  tenderness  and 
compassion.  "A  brnised  reed,"  &c.  These  words  were  verified  in  His  conduct 
towards  two  classes — (1)  The  humble  penitent.  (2)  His  bitterest  foes.  This 
passage  is  thus  applied  by  Matthew  (chap.  xii.).  3.  Perseverance  in  the  face  of 
all  difficulties  and  discouragements.  "  He  shall  not  fail  nor  be  discouraged,"  &o. 
(Anon.)  The  coming  Saviour: — About  these  chapters,  as  a  unit,  a  halo  of 
Messianic  brightness  gathers,  Uke  the  aureole  with  which  painters  surround  the 
brow  of  Christ.  In  these  verses  (1-11)  the  prophet  taught  that — I.  The  coMiNa 
Saviour  was  to  set  up  a  kingdom  which  shotild  be  universal  (vers.  1,  4,  6). 
Those  whom  Isaiah  addressed  supposed  that  true  religion  was  to  reach  the  world, 
if  at  all,  through  the  channels  of  Judaism ;  they  thought  the  only  way  to  heaven 
was  through  the  portals  of  the  Jewish  Church.  The  prophet  declares  that  the 
benefits  of  Christ's  Idngdom  are  to  extend  to  Jew  and  Gentile  alike.  No  dis- 
tinctions of  race  or  clime  are  to  arrest  its  growth.  No  wonder  that  under  the 
thrill  of  such  a  vision  he  shouts,  "  Sing  \mto  the  Lord  a  new  song,  and  His  praise 
from  the  end  of  the  earth!  "  It  is  sometimes  said  that  the  religious  spirit  of  the 
Old  Testament  is  narrow;  that  it  makes  God  bestow  His  favours  on  the  few,  and 
not  on  the  many.  Can,  however,  a  larger  measure  of  grace  be  conceived  than  is 
here  expressed  7  II.  Christ's  kingdom  was  to  be  extended  by  peaceful 
MEASURES  (vers.  2,  3).  The  prophet  addressed  those  who  thought  religious  con- 
quest was  to  be  achieved  by  force.  Hitherto  conflicts  had  marked  the  intercourse 
of  God's  chosen  people  with  the  Gentiles.  The  Jews  looked  for  their  coming 
king  to  be  warlike.  How  strangely,  then,  does  Isaiah  describe  their  conquering 
prince, — "  He  shall  not  cry,"  i.e.  shout  as  He  advances,  "  nor  Hft  up,"  i.e.  make 
demonstration  of  His  power,  "  nor  shall  He  cause  His  voice  to  be  heard  in  the 
street.  A  bruised  reed  shall  He  not  break,  and  the  smoking  flax  shaU  He  not 
quench:  He  shall  bring  forth  judgment  unto  truth,"  i.e.  truth  shall  be  His 
victorious  weapon.  The  element  in  Christianity  to  which  oiu:  text  refers  makes 
that  which  is  feeble  among  men  powerful  for  Christ.  It  also  makes  it  possible 
for  all  Christ's  servants  to  be  efficient  labourers.  They  become  such  by  imbibing 
the  spirit  of  the  Master.  Not  all  can  publicly  proclaim  the  Gospel,  but  every  on© 
can  seek  for  the  "  same  mind  which  was  in  Christ."  m.  Christ's  kingdom  was 
to  reveal  God's  sympathy  with  man,  especially  in  His  suffering  (ver.  7). 
The  primary  reference  in  these  figures  is  undoubtedly  to  spiritual  results.  Eyes 
morally  blind  are  to  be  opened,  and  captive  soids  emancipated  from  the  prison- 
house  of  sin.  It  is,  however,  no  less  true  that  bodily  and  mental  freedom  are 
included  in  the  blessings  of  Messiah's  reign.  The  Church  is  now  the  representative 
of  the  Divine  sympathy  for  suffering;  and  she  should  not  forget  that,  as  of  old. 


302  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xui. 

believers  will  be  multiplied  when  it  is  seen  that  through  her  Christ  now  cares 
for  bodies  as  well  as  souls.  IV.  Chbist's  kingdom  was  to  fill  the  earth  with 
jov  (vers.  10,  11).  As  lessons  from  our  subject  we  learn — 1.  Christians  should 
labour  in  hope.  Isaiah  suggests  one  of  the  strongest  proofs  of  our  Lord's  divinity 
by  aflSrming,  "  He  shall  not  fail  nor  be  discouraged  until  He  have  set  judgment 
in  the  land."  When  we  learn  of  the  Master  we  catch  a  hopeful  spirit.  2.  The 
results  of  serving  Christ  are  permanent.  (Sermons  by  the  Monday  Club.) 
Silent  spread  of  Christianity: — This  prophecy  accords  with  fact.  Gibbon,  in  his 
History  of  the  Decline  and  Fall  of  the  Roman  Empire,  has  the  following  words 
describing  the  silent  but  rapid  spread  of  Christianity:  "  While  the  Roman  Empire 
was  invaded  by  open  violence  or  undermined  by  slow  decay,  a  pure  and  humble 
religion  gently  insinuated  itself  into  the  minds  of  men,  grew  up  in  silence  and 
obscurity,  derived  new  vigour  from  opposition,  and  finally  erected  the  triumphant 
banner  of  the  Cross  on  the  ruins  of  the  Capitol."     (Ibid.)        The  coming  Saviour: — 

1.  Otjb  Lord's  character  as  portrayed  in  prophecy.  1.  That  our  Lord  should 
come  as  a  servant  (ver.  1).  (1)  This  was  His  own  testimony  when  He  came 
(Matt.  XX.  28;  John  vi.  38).     (2)  This  is  the  testimony  of  the  apostles  (Phil.  ii.  6-8). 

2.  That  our  Lord  was  Divinely  chosen  for  His  work.     "  IMine  elect  "  (1  Pet.  ii.  6,  7). 

3.  That  our  Lord  should  be  endowed  with  the  Holy  Spirit.  "  I  have  put  My 
Spirit  upon  Him  "  (Matt.  iii.  16,  17;  Luke  iv.  14,  18,  19;  Heb.  ix.  14;  Heb.  i.  9). 

4.  That  our  Lord  would  institute  a  religion  for  the  Gentiles  (ver.  1).  Such  is  the 
force  of  the  word  "  judgment."  5.  That  His  Spirit  would  be  most  tender  and 
gentle  (vers.  2,  3).  (1)  This,  surely,  is  a  correct  description  of  the  historic  Christ. 
His  own  testimony  (Matt.  xi.  29).  The  testimony  of  His  apostles  (Heb.  vii.  26, 
xii.  2,  3;  1  Pet.  ii.  21-24).  (2)  In  this  He  gave  His  disciples  an  example.  6.  That 
His  courage  would  be  equal  to  His  gentleness  (ver.  4).  (1)  It  is  not  the  noisy 
and  boastful  that  are  the  most  courageous  and  reliable.  (2)  The  deeper  our 
conviction  of  the  truthfulness  of  our  cause  the  more  patient  and  gentle  may  we 
be  in  its  advocacy.  (3)  The  commission  of  Christ  to  His  disciples  proves  His 
entire  confidence  in  the  success  of  His  cause.  II.  Our  Lord's  commission  fore- 
told IN  prophecy.  1.  In  its  authority  (vers.  5,  9).  The  authority  is  the  highest 
in  respect  to  power  and  principle.  2.  In  its  purpose  (ver.  7).  (1)  Our  Lord 
appropriates  the  terms  of  this  commission  to  Himself  (Luke  iv.  17-19).  (2)  This 
is  the  commission  He  fulfilled  in  His  life.  III.  Both  the  character  and  com- 
mission of  Christ  are  just  incentives  to  thanksgiving  to  God  (ver.  10). 
1.  AU  should  praise  God.  2.  To  praise  God  for  Christ  intelligently  we  must  per- 
sonally experience  His  saving  power.  Lessons — 1.  The  study  of  prophecy  is 
the  imperative  duty  of  every  chUd  of  God.  2.  The  most  inspiring  portions  of 
prophecy  are  those  which  centre  in  the  person  and  work  of  our  Lord  Jesus.  3.  No 
prophecy  can  be  fully  understood  that  is  not  interpreted  in  the  light  of  Christ's 
work.  "  For  the  testimony  of  Jesus  is  the  spirit  of  prophecy."  4.  Christianity 
is  a  religion  for  the  whole  race  (ver.  4).  5.  The  gentleness  with  which  its  advocates 
should  be  characterised  and  the  beneficent  designs  of  its  mission  must  commend 
it,  when  rightly  represented,  to  all  nations,  chmes,  and  tongues.  6.  Under  no 
circumstances  will  our  Lord  justify  His  disciples  in  an  advocacy  of  His  Gospel 
in  a  spirit  antagonistic  to  His  own.  7.  Let  all  disciples  of  Christ  copy  His  life, 
spirit  and  love,  and  work  for  the  gracious  ends  for  which  He  lived  and  died! 
(Homiletic  Review.)  The  servant  of  Jehovah: — This  chapter  exhibits  to  our 
view  the  servant  of  Jehovah,  i.e.  the  Messiah  and  His  people,  as  a  complex  person, 
and  as  the  messenger  or  representative  of  God  among  the  nations.  1.  His  mode 
of  operation  is  described  as  being  not  violent  but  peaceful  (vers.  1-5).  2.  The 
effects  of  His  influence  are  represented  as  not  natural  but  spiritual  (vers.  6-9). 
3.  The  power  of  God  is  pledged  for  His  success,  notwithstanding  all  appearances 
of  inaction  or  indifference  on  His  part  (vers.  10-17).  (J.  A.  Alexander.)  Mine 
elect  in  wliom  My  soul  delighteth. — Christ  delighted  in  by  the  Father: — Christ 
Jesus  was  the  elect  of  God,  inasmuch  as  from  all  eternity  infinite  wisdom  had 
chosen  Him  to  execute  the  sovereign  purposes  of  infinite  mercy.  We  may  pro- 
nounce that  the  Father  delighted  in  His  elect,  because — I.  The  mediation  of 
Christ  magnified  every  Divine  attribute.  IL  It  also  met  every  humah 
necessity.     (H.  Melvill,  B.D.) 

Vers.  2,  3.  He  shall  not  cry. — Jesus  Christ  not  a  controversialist : — He  is 
not  a  debater;  He  does  not  belong  to  the  society  of  men  who  walk  up  and  down 
in  the  open  square,  called  the  "  street,"  or  agora,  or  the  market-place,  saying. 


CHAP,  XLH.]  ISAIAH.  303 

Who  will  talk  with  Me  to-day?  What  shall  we  debate?  My  sword  is  ready, 
who  will  fence?  He  does  not  belong  to  the  word  gladiator;  from  that  school 
He  abstains.  There  were  men  who  delighted  in  controversy  in  the  open  squares 
of  the  city.  Such  controversy  took  the  place  of  modern  hterature,  morning 
joiu-nals,  and  the  means  of  publicity  of  every  kind,  open  to  modern  society.  Jesus 
Christ  spoke  whisperingly  to  hearts.  Men  had  to  incline  their  ear  to  hear  'Sim. 
{J.  Parker,  D.D.)  Chrisfs  message  self-evidential : — What  He  brings  is  its 
own  evidence,  and  needs  no  beating  of  drums.  {Prof.  F.  Delitzsch,  D.D. )  Christ's 
ministry  unhysterical : — To  be  "  screamy,"  to  be  "  loud,"  to  "  advertise  one's 
self," — these  modern  expressions  for  vices  that  were  ancient  as  well  as  modem, 
render  the  exact  force  of  the  verse.  Such  the  servant  of  God  will  not  be  nor  do. 
That  God  is  with  Him,  holding  Him  fast  (ver.  6),  keeps  Him  calm  and  unhysterical ; 
that  He  is  but  God's  instrument  keeps  Him  humble  and  quiet;  and  that  Hjs  heart 
is  in  His  work  keeps  Him  from  advertising  Himself  at  its  expense.  {Prof.  O. 
A.  Smith,  D.D.)  Christ  unlike  the  prophets  of  Israel : — This  feature  of  the 
Servant's  activity  can  hardly  have  been  suggested  by  the  demeanour  of  the  prophets 
of  Israel;  and  for  that  reason  the  prophecy  is  all  the  more  wonderful  as  a  per- 
ception of  the  true  condition  of  spiritual  work.  It  reminds  us  of  the  "  still  small 
voice  "  in  which  Elijah  was  made  to  recognise  the  power  of  Jehovah.  {Prof.  J. 
Skinner,  D.D.) '  The  greatness  and  the  gentleness  of  Christ : — Jesus  Christ  has 
fulfilled  this  passage  both  in  the  spirit  and  in  the  letter.  I.  The  graijdeub  and 
CERTAINTY  OF  His  WOBK.  It  could  not  be  expressed  in  stronger  or  more  graphic 
words.  "  He  shall  bring  forth  judgment  or  righteousness  according  to  truth. 
He  shall  not  fail  nor  be  broken  till  He  have  established  judgment  or  righteousness 
in  the  earth,  and  the  isles,  or  far-off  lands,  shall  wait  for  His  law  or  instruction." 
This  is  the  Old  Testament  conception  of  the  Divine  work,  the  setting  up  of 
a  kingdom  of  righteousness  in  the  world.  In  the  New  Testament  it  is  called 
the  kingdom  of  heaven,  of  which  righteousness  is  still  the  great  characteristic. 
The  essence  of  the  aim  of  the  Gospel  of  Christ  may  be  summed  up,  therefore, 
in  two  words — to  win  men  over  to  be  right  and  to  do  right.  That  which  separates 
men  from  God  and  the  kingdom  of  heaven  is  some  kind  of  wrong  in  the  inward 
nature — that  which  arrays  itself  against  the  Divine  will,  which  is  the  Divine  law. 
The  self- will  which  tries,  but  tries  in  vain,  to  trample  down  the  Divine  will,  which 
endeavours  to  have  its  own  way  in  defiance  of  aU  right  and  justice;  the  insatiate 
thirst  of  the  passions  for  indulgence  which  must  be  obtained  at  whatever  cost 
to  honour  and  conscience,  and  the  readiness  to  sacrifice  truth  and  honesty  and 
purity  in  order  to  achieve  what  the  world  caUs  success, — these  things  are  the 
essence  of  all  unrighteousness  and  sin — the  cancerous  disease  of  our  spiritual 
nature,  which  Christ,  the  Great  Physician,  came  to  exterminate  and  heal.  In 
order  to  do  what  is  right  we  must  become,  first  of  all,  personally  right;  for  Christ 
traced  all  conduct  up  to  character.  "  A  good  tree  cannot  bring  forth  evil  fruit," 
&c.  He  came  to  build  up  a  society  of  such  men  and  women,  beginning  with 
a  small  band  of  immediate  personal  disciples,  whose  affection  to  Himself  should 
make  them  righteous,  who  should  receive  from  Him  the  truths,  the  impulses, 
and  principles  which  would  enable  them  to  carry  the  contagion  of  His  Spirit  to 
Greek,  and  Roman,  and  Jew,  and  make  the  cross  on  which  He  died  the  symbol  of 
all  goodness  and  all  righteousness.  II.  The  spirit  and  method  op  Christ's 
WORK.  "  He  shall  not  cry,"  &c.  1.  This  is  the  Divine  way  of  speaking  to  men, 
and  instructing  them  in  Divine  truth.  The  strong  wind  can  speak  to  the  seas 
and  mountains  and  forests;  the  earthquake  can  speak  to  Sodom  and  Gomorrah; 
the  fire  can  speak  to  the  raving  prophets  of  Baal;  but  when  He  speaks  to  His 
servant  He  whispers  in  that  stiU  small  voice  which  penetrates  where  the  thunder 
would  fail  to  be  heard,  to  the  deeps  of  Elijah's  spirit,  where  the  heart  and  con- 
science sit  enthroned  in  silence.  The  deepest  affections  ever  speak  thus.  The 
mother  speaks  to  her  child  in  the  softest,  most  subdued  accents  of  speech,  and 
those  accents  reach  farther  into  the  child's  heart  than  the  loudest,  harshest  words 
of  command  could  reach.  When  is  the  orator  at  the  height  of  his  greatest 
power?  Not  when  he  is  loudest;  not  when  he  thimders  forth  invective  and 
appeal  in  high-strung  passion;  but  when  the  strength  of  emotion  has  subdued 
him,  when  the  rich  pathos  of  his  feelings  makes  his  voice  tremulous  and  low; 
and  he  just  breathes  out  the  thought  which  you  will  never  forget.  This  was 
Christ's  method  of  instruction  during  His  earthly  ministry.  The  Sermon  on 
the  Mount  breathes  a  Divine  calm  throughout;  there  is  not  one  spasmodic  sentence 
in  it.    2.  And  He  did  not  break  the  bruised  reed,  nor  quench  the  smoking  flax. 


304  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xui. 

When  the  woman  who  had  been  a  sinner  ventured  after  Him  into  the  house  of 
Simon  the  Pharisee,  where  He  sat  at  meat,  and  began  to  wash  His  feet  with  her  tears 
and  to  wipe  them  with  the  hair  of  her  head.  He  accepted  the  service  without 
one  thought  of  spurning  her  from  His  presence,  because  it  was  the  service  of  a 
broken,  penitent  heart.  But  there  is  a  positive  as  well  as  a  negative  aspect  of 
this  truth.  He  will  not  merely  not  break  the  bruised  reed,  He  will  heal  and  restore 
it  to  soundness;  He  will  not  merely  not  quench  the  smoking  flax,  He  will  replenish 
the  exhausted  lamp  with  fresh  oU,  and  make  it  burn  brightly  again.  This  life 
is  hastening  to  its  close  with  us,  and  we  may  have  a  keen  consciousness  that  our 
souls  are  bruised  and  broken  by  sin,  and  we  dread  to  die.  What  can  we  do? 
We  can  be  assured  that  there  is  a  Saviour  who  sympathises  with  us,  and  who 
has  power  to  lift  the  load  from  our  conscience,  and  restore  the  breaking,  fearful 
heart;  a  Saviour  who  is  not  willing  that  you  should  die  as  you  are,  but  can  even 
now  pour  the  oil  of  hope  and  trust  into  the  lamp  of  your  Ufe.  Some  of  us  may 
have  been  bruised  and  almost  worn  out,  not  so  much  by  the  reproach  of  our 
sins,  as  by  the  experience  of  trouble  and  suffering.     (C.  Short,  M.A.) 

Vers.  3,  4.  A  bruised  reed  shall  He  not  break. — The  bruised  reed : — The 
reed,  or  "  calamus,"  is  a  plant  with  hollow  stem,  which  grew  principally  by  the 
side  of  lakes  or  rivers.  Those  who  have  been  in  Palestine  are  familiar  with  it 
in  the  tangled  thickets  which  still  line  the  shores  of  the  ancient  Merom  and  Gen- 
nesaret,  or,  above  all,  in  the  dense  copse  fringing  the  banks  of  the  Jordan.  The 
plant  might  well  be  taken  as  an  emblem  of  whatever  was  weak,  fragile,  brittle. 
The  foot  of  the  wild  beast  that  made  its  lair  in  the  jungle,  trampled  it  to  pieces. 
Its  slender  stalk  bent  or  snapped  under  the  weight  of  the  bird  that  sought  to 
make  it  a  perch.  The  wind  and  hail-storm  shivered  its  delicate  tubes,  or  laid 
them  prostrate  on  the  ground.  "  A  reed  shaken  by  the  wind  "  was  the  metaphor 
employed  by  One  whose  eyes,  in  haunts  most  loved  and  frequented  by  Him, 
had  ofttimes  gazed  on  this  significant  emblem  of  human  weakness  and  instability. 
Once  broken,  it  was  rendered  of  no  use.  Other  stems  which  had  been  bent  by 
the  hurricane  might,  by  careful  nursing  and  tending,  be  recovered;  but  the  reed, 
with  its  heavy  culm,  once  shattered,  became  worthless.  In  a  preceding  chapter 
(xxxvi.  6)  it  is  spoken  of  as  an  emblem  of  tottering,  fiagile  Egypt.  {J.  R.  Macduff, 
D.D.)  A  bruised  reed: — Say  some  an  instrument  was  meant,  and  there  was 
a  rift  in  it,  which  spoUed  the  music.  Jesus  Christ  said.  We  must  repair  this;  some> 
thing  must  be  done  with  this  reed;  it  was  meant  for  music,  and  we  must  look 
at  it  with  that  end  in  view.  He  does  not  take  it,  saying.  There  is  a  rift  in  the  lute, 
and  the  music  is  impossible;  rend  it  and  throw  it  away.  He  always  looks  to 
see  if  a  man  cannot  be  made  somewhat  better.  Or  "  a  bruised  reed  "  may  mean 
that  wild  beasts  in  rushing  through  to  the  water,  or  from  the  flood,  have  crushed 
the  growing  plants,  so  that  they  are  bent,  they  no  more  stand  upright ;  but  Jesus 
Christ  comes  to  heal  them  and  to  restore  them.  (J.  Parker,  D.D  )  The  bruised 
reed  and  the  smoking  flax : — God  has  His  strong  ones  in  Hia  Church — His  oaks 
of  Bashan  and  cedars  of  Lebanon;  noble  forest  trees,  spreading  far  and  wide 
their  branches  of  faith  and  love  and  holiness;  those  who  are  deeply  rooted  in 
the  truth,  able  to  wrestle  with  fierce  tempests  of  unbelief,  and  to  grapple  with 
temptations  in  their  sterner  forms.  But  He  has  His  weaklings  and  His  saplings 
also — those  that  require  to  be  tenderly  shielded  from  the  blast,  and  who  are  Uable, 
from  constitutional  temperament,  to  become  the  prey  of  doubts  and  fears,  to 
which  the  others  are  strangers.  Sensitive  in  times  of  trial,  irresolute  in  times 
of  difficulty  and  danger,  unstable  in  times  of  severe  temptation;  or  it  may  be 
in  perpetual  disquietude  and  alarm  about  their  spiritual  safety.  To  such,  the 
loving  ways  and  dealings  of  the  Saviour  are  unfolded.  (J.  R.  Macduff,  D.D.) 
Rudiments  of  religion  in  the  heathen  world  : — It  is  an  interesting  question  whether 
these  rudiments  of  religion  are  conceived  as  existing  in  the  heathen  world  or  in 
the  breasts  of  individual  Israelites.  The  former  view  is,  no  doubt,  that  to  which 
the  national  interpretation  of  the  servant  most  readily  accommodates  itself,  and 
is  also  most  in  keeping  with  the  scope  of  the  passage  as  a  whole.  But  in  later 
sections  a  mission  in  and  to  Israel  is  undoubtedly  assigned  to  the  servant,  and 
a  reference  to  that  here  cannot  be  pronounced  impossible.  {Prof.  J  Skinner,  D.D.) 
The  bruised  reed : — I.  Insignificance  escapes  not  Christ's  attention.  There 
is  no  insignificant  life,  nor  insignificant  incident  of  life.  All  is  fraught  with  the 
importance  of  endless  existence.  II.  Unworthiness  forfeits  not  Christ's 
REGARD.     Nothing  more  worthless  than  a  bruised  reed.     Yet  He  will  not  break 


CHAP.  XLii.]  ISAIAH.  305 

it.  As  there  is  no  trifle  that  escapes  His  notice,  so  there  is  no  tinworthiness  that 
transcends  His  gracious  regard.  Where  is  the  bruised  reed  that  the  Redeemer 
has  ever  broken?  Is  it  the  dying  thief?  Is  it  Mary  Magdalene?  Is  it  Saul  of 
Tarsus?  HI.  Unpeg fitableness  abates  not  Christ's  love.  Nothing  more 
unprofitable  than  a  bruised  reed.  The  heart  that  yields  no  large  retiurn  for  aU 
His  care  He  loves  and  blesses  still.  The  unprofitable  bruised  reed  He  wiU  not 
break.  (Homiletic  Review. )  God's  negatives  imply  strong  affirmations : — As 
that  negative  assertion  is  the  Hebrew  way  of  conveying  a  strong  affirmative,  it 
is  eqmvalent  to  saying  that  He  will  bind  up  the  broken  heart,  that  He  will  cement 
the  splintered  stem  of  the  hanging  bulrush,  endowing  it  with  new  life  and  strength 
and  vigour,  causing  it  to  "  spring  up  among  the  grass,  as  willows  by  the  water- 
courses" ;  that  He  will  pardon,  pity,  comfort,  relieve!  (<7.  R.  Macduff,  D.D.) 
Fragrance  from  the  bruised  soul : — In  the  case  of  some  aromatic  plants,  it  is  when 
bruised  they  give  forth  the  sweetest  fragrance.  So,  it  is  often  the  soul,  crushed 
with  a  sense  of  sin,  which  sends  forth  the  sweetest  aroma  of  humility,  gratitude, 
and  love.  "  Blessed  are  they  that  mourn,  for  they  shall  be  comforted."  {Ibid.) 
Bruised  reeds  : — It  is  quite  a  relief  to  come  across  words  of  such  gracious  import 
as  these,  and  to  learn  that  there  is  One  having  to  do  with  us,  while  immeasurably 
above  us,  in  whose  heart  pity  has  a  place,  in  whose  eyes  are  tears  as  they  look 
on  our  woes,  whose  touch  is  soft  while  strong,  whose  voice  has  no  harshness  in 
it  when  addressing  the  weak  and  failing — for  we  live  in  a  cold,  callous,  cruel  world, 
Btill  darkened  by  the  foulest  crimes,  where  thousands  are  handled  roughly  and 
are  driven  into  out-of-the-way  places  to  die,  unattended,  unhelped,  and  unblessed, 
except,  perhaps,  by  the  angels  of  God.  Read  history:  it  is  written  largely  in  letters 
of  blood.  Read  your  newspaper,  that  mirror  of  the  world's  daily  life,  and  weep 
over  fallen  human  nature  as  you  do  so.  Read  your  scientific  books,  and  you 
will  find  vivisection  preached  so  far  as  animals  are  concerned,  and  "  natural 
selection  "  and  the  "  survival  of  the  fittest "  so  far  as  the  race  is  concerned. 
"  Let  the  weak  perish,  let  the  afflicted  be  cut  off,"  says  a  pitiless  science — 
thus  following  the  ancient  Spartans,  who  killed  off  their  sickly  and  deformed 
offspring,  and  Plato,  who  favoured  infanticide.  These  people  would  deliberately 
and  in  cold  blood  break  the  bruised  reed  and  quench  the  smoking  flax.  Into 
such  a  world  as  this  Christ  comes,  comes  to  teach  us  that  God  is  love,  that  the 
strongest  Being  in  the  universe  is  the  gentlest,  that  all  life  is  precious,  that  even 
maimed  humanity  is  worth  saving,  that  the  man  who  has  been  smitten  by  a 
mighty  misfortune  is  to  have  the  tenderest  attention,  that  the  man  most  in  the 
mud  is  to  be  lifted  out,  so  that  his  powers  may  unfold  themselves  in  winsome  and 
tindecajdng  blossoms  by  the  river  of  life.  The  slender  bulrush,  with  its  sides 
crushed  and  dmted,  its  head  hanging  by  a  thread,  stands  for  that  large  class 
who  have  been  injured  by  evil  of  any  kmd,  and  to  all  these  Jesus  deals  out  an 
unwonted,  unheard  of,  restorative  tenderness.  I.  Some  abe  bbuised  by  ancbs- 
TEAL  sins.  Our  scientists  now  accept  and  emphasise  the  great  Mosaic  doctrine, 
"  The  sins  of  the  fathers  shall  be  visited  upon  the  children  unto  the  third  and 
fourth  generations  of  them  that  hate  Me.  Many  are  seriously  handicapped 
by  hereditary  taints.  "  The  great  men  of  the  world  are  the  forest  kings  of  the 
social  landscape;  the  rich  are  its  olives,  the  clever  are  its  orchids;  the  fashionable 
are  its  climbing  roses;  the  merry  are  its  purple  vines;  but  here  at  the  bottom, 
in  the  dirt,  are  the  bruised  reeds  of  humanity,  the  outcast,  the  forsaken,  the  ill- 
starred,  the  poverty-stricken,  the  weak,  the  wronged,  the  fallen."  To  which 
did  Jesus  give  His  best.  His  primary  attention?  He  won  for  Himself  the  name, 
"  A  friend  of  publicans  and  sinners."  When  His  disciples  queried  Him  as  to 
who  was  responsible  for  a  man's  blindness.  He  refused  to  be  drawn  into  a  discussion 
of  the  law  of  heredity  to  satisfy  their  Tinfeehng  curiosity.  To  Christ  the  blind 
man  was  something  more  than  a  scientific  or  theological  problem — he  was  a 
brother  whose  blindness  was  an  appeal  for  help,  and  He  helped  him  by  opening 
his  eyes.  11.  Some  ake  brtjised  by  peesonal  sin.  There  are  many  who  realise 
that  their  lives  are  knocked  .ut  of  their  proper  shape.  How  many  of  us  have 
robbed,  degraded,  and  damaged  ourselves !  God  meant  us  to  be  temples,  but 
we  have  desecrated  the  hallowed  shrine.  God  meant  us  to  be  kings,  but  we 
have  given  our  crowns  away.  God  meant  us  to  be  priests,  but  we  have  made 
ourselves  vile.  Gfod  meant  us  to  be  His  children,  but  we  have  wandered  away 
and  become  Satan's  serfs.  No  one  has  injured  us  half  as  much  as  we  have  injured 
ourselves.  What  a  contrast  is  Jesus  even  to  the  best  of  His  followers  in  the  treat- 
ment of  self- injured  men!  Someone  has  said,  "  How  surprising  it  seems  that 
VOL.  II. — 20 


306  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xui. 

we  find  in  Jesus  no  feeling  of  scorn  for  man."  Surprising?  There  was  not  a 
ehade  of  a  shadow  of  contempt  in  His  nature,  not  even  for  the  sorriest  sons  of 
Adam.  HI.  Some  aeb  brxhsed  by  the  sins  of  society.  Some  are  more  sinned 
against  than  sinning.  Society  must  be  indicted  as  a  great  sinner.  Full  often 
it  is  thoughtless,  careless,  cruel,  wicked.  It  has  a  don't-care  sort  of  mien.  It 
cares  nothing  for  others'  rights,  feelings,  happiness.  Its  maxim  is,  "  Every 
man  for  himself,  and  the  devil  take  the  hindmost."  Thus  the  reeds  are  trodden 
on,  and  there  is  small  wonder  that  they  have  hard  thoughts  of  man  and  God. 
Whatever  our  treatment  of  them,  our  Lord  metes  out  to  them  a  royal  generosity, 
a  most  delicate  consideration.  When  He  was  under  Calvary's  shadow  the  soldiers 
put  a  reed  into  His  right  hand — they  did  it  in  mockery,  but  they  knew  not  what 
they  did.  That  reed  was  a  sceptre,  the  symbol  of  the  reign  of  gentleness.  The 
bruised  reed  may  be  nothing  to  us — but  to  Him  who  knoweth  all  things  it  suggests 
music,  beauty,  usefulness.  (J.  Pearce.)  The  weak  Christian  comforted : — 
Nothing  is  more  common  than  for  the  inspired  writers  to  represent  spiritual 
and  Divine  things  by  an  allusion  to  those  which  are  natural.  Notice — I.  Some 
OF  THE  CHARACTERISTICS  OF  THE  believer's  WEAKNESS.  I.  He  has  knowledge, 
but  it  is  as  yet  imperfect.  2.  He  has  faith,  but  as  yet  it  is  comparatively  powerless. 
3.  He  has  hope,  but  it  is  faint  and  feeble.  4.  His  joys  are  few  and  transient.  But 
these  characteristics  of  the  Christian's  weakness  are  also  the  sources  of  his  sorrow. 
II.  Some  of  the  pledges  of  the  believer's  security.  "  He  will  not  break,"  &c. 
If  faith  be  genuine,  though  but  like  the  smallest  grain  of  seed.  He  owns  it;  if  hope 
be  legitimate,  though  feeble.  He  owns  it;  if  love  be  sincere,  though  languid.  He 
owns  it.  The  pledges  of  the  believer's  secvu-ity  are  many  and  great.  1.  Weak 
believers,  equally  with  the  strong,  stand  in  a  Divine  relation  to  God.  2.  They 
are,  equally  with  the  strong,  the  purchased  possession  of  the  Redeemer.  3.  The 
weak  believer  is,  equally  with  the  strong,  supplied  out  of  the  inexhaustible  store 
of  Divine  grace.  {S.  Bridge,  M.A.)  The  bruised  reed : — I.  Who  aee  set 
FORTH  UNDER  THE  FIGURE  OF  A  BRUISED  REED?  It  is  a  description  that  weU 
suits  all  believers,  without  exception.  Some  are  comparatively  stronger  than 
others.  How  is  this  where  all  are  so  weak?  Because  they  have  a  deeper,  more 
deeply  felt  experience  of  weakness.  They  live  more  by  faith,  lean  more  on  Jesus, 
are  brought  into  deeper  poverty  of  spirit,  receive  Him  more  fully.  Those  branches 
next  the  stem  are  always  the  strongest.  But  our  text  sets  forth  the  weak  be- 
liever, and  one  who  is  conscious  of  it.  It  is  not  only  a  reed,  but  a  bruised  reed- 
Perhaps  heavy  afflictions  wound  the  believer,  and  temporal  troubles  become 
strong  spiritual  temptations.  It  is  storm  upon  storm,  tempest  upon  tempest, 
and  the  poor  reed  not  only  bends  beneath  it,  but  is  bruised  beneath  it.  The 
world  is  unkind,  friends  are  unkind,  saints  are  imkind,  and  faith  being  weak, 
God  seems  unkind;  and  then  the  soul,  full  of  suspicion,  is  unkind  to  itself,  and 
suspects  its  own  grace.  What  a  bruising  is  this!  Perhaps  a  deep  sense  of  sin 
and  inward  corruption  is  added  to  this.  11.  Our  Lord's  conduct  to  such. 
He  will  not  break  this  bruised  reed.  1.  His  faithfulness  will  not  permit  it.  These 
are  of  those  whom  the  Father  has  entrusted  to  ffis  love.  2.  His  holiness  will 
not  permit  it.  Here  is  a  spark  of  His  own  kindling,  a  germ  of  His  own  planting, 
a  new  nature  of  His  own  creating,  a  child  of  God,  one  who  loves  Him — will  He 
bruise  such  a  one?  3.  His  tenderness  will  not  permit  it.  Will  a  kind  physician 
neglect  his  patient?  WiU  a  shepherd  forget  his  wandering  sheep?  Will  a  mother 
dash  her  sick  child  to  the  earth?  Conclusion — 1.  Beware  lest  you  make  your 
feebleness  an  excuse.  There  is  all  fulness  in  Christ.  2.  Beware  lest  you  increase 
your  feebleness.  Sin  enfeebles,  neglects  enfeeble,  the  world  enfeebles  ;  want  of 
peace  in  the  conscience  enfeebles  ;  living  on  anything  but  Christ  enfeebles.  3.  Ad- 
mire that  condescending  Saviour  who  can  stoop  to  this  bruised  reed.  4.  Admire 
the  compassion  of  the  Savioiu*.  6.  Still  more  admire  Him  who  has  supported, 
who  has  all  grace  to  help.  6  Be  contented  to  be  ever  weak  in  yourself.  (J.  H. 
Evans,  M.A.)        The  compassion  of  Christ : — I.   Inquire   why  the  persons 

SPOKEN  OF  MAY  BE  COMPARED  TO  THE  BRUISED  REED  AND  SMOKING  FLAX.       1.  Both 

these  objects  have  a  mean  appearance,  and  are  deemed  of  little  use:  and  low 
and  humble  Christians  are  much  the  same.  Especially  if  in  a  declining  state, 
they  bring  but  little  honour  to  their  profession,  and  often  afford  matter  for  reproach. 
2.  The  bruised  reed  has  some  strength,  and  the  smoking  flax  some  fire,  though 
both  in  a  small  degree;  so  the  Christian,  though  he  has  but  a  little  strength, 
like  the  church  at  Philadelphia,  yet  he  is  still  alive,  and  the  light  of  Israel  is  not 
quenched.     3.  Many  are  ready  to  break  the  bruised  reed  and  quench  the  smoking 


CHAP,  xui.]  ISAIAH.  SOT 

flax.  Great  also  are  the  oppositions  and  discouragements  which  weak  belieyera 
meet  with,  and  yet  they  are  still  preserved.  4.  The  bruised  reed  needs  to  be 
supported,  and  the  smolang  flax  to  be  enkindled:  so  does  the  Christian  need  to 
be  strengthened,  and  quickened  afresh  by  Divine  grace.  11.  NoTiOB  what  18 
IMPLIED  IN  Christ's  not  breaking  the  brthsed  reed,  nob  qubncheno  THa 
SMOKING  FLAX.  Much  morc  is  implied  than  is  expressed.  The  Lord  will  not  put 
the  weak  believer  to  those  trials  which  are  disproportioned  to  his  strength.  He 
wiU  not  suffer  him  to  be  tempted  above  what  he  is  able  to  bear;  but  will  with 
the  temptation  also  make  a  way  for  his  escape.  The  following  things  are  also 
implied.  1.  That  as  Christ  will  not  break  the  bruised  reed,  so  neither  will  He 
Buffer  others  to  do  it.  2.  Instead  of  breaking  the  bruised  reed.  He  will  bind  it  up, 
and  strengthen  it;  and  will  cherish  the  smoking  flax  till  it  break  forth  into  a 
flame.  He  who  notices  the  smallest  sins  to  punish  them,  will  also  notice  the 
weakest  efforts  of  grace  to  encourage  and  reward  them.  III.  An  improvement 
OF  THE  SUBJECT.  1.  Let  Weak  Christians  be  encom-aged  from  hence  to  commit 
themselves  to  Christ,  and  place  an  entire  confidence  in  His  faithfulness  and  com- 
passion. 2.  Let  us  imitate  this  part  of  our  Lord's  conduct,  and  carry  it  towards 
others  as  He  carries  it  towards  us.  3.  It  becomes  us  to  beware  that  we  do  not 
abuse  the  mercy  of  our  Saviour,  by  supposing  that  we  have  weak  grace,  when, 
indeed,  we  have  none  ;  for  it  is  real  and  not  counterfeit  piety  to  which  He  shows 
His  tender  regard.  Nor  yet  by  contenting  ourselves  with  weak  grace,  though  it 
is  true.  4.  If  weak  Christians  shall  not  be  neglected,  much  less  the  strong.  (5. 
Beddome,  M.A.)  The  source  of  Chrisfs  perfect  tenderness  to  sinners  is  none 
other  than  the  Divine  compassion.  It  was  the  love  and  pity  of  the  Word  made 
flesh.  1.  It  is  plain  that  this  gentle  reception  even  of  the  greatest  sinners  implies 
that,  where  there  is  so  much  as  a  spark  of  life  in  the  conscience,  there  is  possibility 
of  an  entire  conversion  to  God.  Where  there  is  room  to  hope  anjrfching,  there  is 
room  to  hope  all  things.  Such  is  the  mysterious  natiu-e  of  the  human  spirit, 
of  its  affections  and  will,  such  its  energies  and  intensity,  that  it  may  at  any  time 
be  so  renewed  by  the  Spirit  of  the  new  creation  as  to  expel,  with  the  most  perfect 
rejection,  all  the  powers,  qualities,  visions,  and  thoughts  of  evil.  2.  Another 
great  truth  implied  in  our  Lord's  conduct  to  sinners  is,  that  the  only  sure  way  of 
Fostering  the  beginning  of  repentance  is  to  receive  them  with  gentleness  and  com- 
passion.  On  those  in  whom  there  is  the  faintest  stirring  of  repentance  the  love 
of  Christ  falls  with  a  soft  but  penetrating  force.  To  receive  sinners  coldly,  or 
with  an  averted  eye,  an  estranged  heart,  and  a  hasty,  unsparing  tongue,  will 
seldom  fail  to  drive  them  into  defiance  or  self-abandonment.  A  sirmer  that 
is  out  of  hope  is  lost.  Hope  is  the  last  thing  left.  If  this  be  crushed  the  flax 
is  extinct.  Truth  told  without  love  is  perilous  in  the  measure  in  which  it  is 
true.  There  is  in  every  siimer  a  great  burden  of  misery,  soreness,  and  alarm; 
but  even  these,  instead  of  driving  him  to  confession,  make  him  shut  himself  up 
in  a  fevered  and  brooding  fear.  And  it  was  in  this  peculiar  wretchedness  M 
sin  that  the  gentleness  of  our  Lord  gave  them  courage  and  hope.  It  was  a  strange 
courage  that  came  upon  them;  a  boldness  without  trembling,  yet  an  awe  without 
alarm.  What  little  motions  of  good  were  in  them,  what  little  stirrings  of  conscience, 
what  faint  remainder  of  better  resolutions,  what  feeble  gleams  of  all  but  extin« 
guished  light, — all  seemed  to  revive,  and  to  turn  in  sympathy  towards  somo 
source  of  kindred  natiure,  and  to  stretch  itself  out  in  hope  to  something  long  desired, 
with  a  dim  unconscious  love.  It  is  an  affinity  of  the  spirit  working  in  penitents 
with  the  Spirit  of  Christ  that  made  them  draw  to  Him.  It  was  not  only  because 
of  His  infinite  compassion  as  God  that  Christ  so  dealt  with  sinners;  but  because, 
knowing  the  nature  of  man,  its  strange  depths  and  windings,  its  weakness  and 
fears.  He  knew  that  this  was  the  surest  way  of  winning  them  to  Himself.  {H.  E. 
Manning,  D.D.)  The  transforming  tenderness  of  Jesus: — He  uses  and  loves 
and  transfigures  broken  reeds.  They  become  pens  to  write  His  truth.  They 
become  instruments  of  sweet  music  to  sound  forth  His  praise.  They  become 
pillars  to  support  and  adorn  His  Temple.  They  become  swords  and  spears 
to  rout  His  enemies;  so  that,  as  Mr.  Lowell  sings,  "  the  bruised  reed  is  amply 
tough  to  pierce  the  shield  of  error  through."  And  He  loves  and  employs  and 
fans  into  bright  and  glowing  flame  dimly  burning  wicks.  They  are  changed 
into  lamps  that  shine,  into  beacon-fires  that  warn,  into  torches  that  hand  on 
His  message  to  the  generation  following,  into  lighthouse  rays  and  beams  that 
guide  storm-tossed  sailors  into  the  desired  haven.  {A.  Smellie,  M.A.)  Tht 
ong-euffering  of  Messiah  : — A  passage  setting  forth  the  gentleness  of  the  new 


308  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xlh. 

Prince  of  Righteousness  promised  to  Israel.     I.  Thb  analogies  of  His  for- 
BKABANCE.     1.  Few  of  nature's  forms  are  more  lovely  and  symmetrical  than 
the  tall  cane  of  the  reed  rising  by  the  marsh  or  river  edge.     One  of  the  elements 
of  our  pleasure  as  we  look  at  it,  io  derived  from  our  sense  of  its  marvellous  power 
of  resisting  the  pressure  of  the  wind  or  the  dashing  of  the  waves.     It  is  one  of 
the  triumphs  of  nature's  architecture.     Yet  let  but  a  rough  stroke  fall  suddenly 
upon  it,  and  all  its  glory  is  abased.     Every  passing  wind  only  aggravates  the 
injury.     Of  what  good  is  it  henceforth,  but  to  be  cut  down  and  cast  into  the  oven! 
Yet  this,  which  we  should  esteem  reasonable  in  the  husbandman,  is  precisely 
what  the  Messiah  does  not  do  with  respect  to  souls  that  have  been  similarly  in- 
jured.    2.  The  other  illustration  of  the  prophet  is  from  the  home  or  the  temple. 
The  oil-lamp  was  one  of  the  most  common  objects  there.     The  wick  fed  by  the 
oil  is  able  to  sustain  a  flame  which,  although  feeble,  is  clear,  and  sufficient  for 
the  small  chambers  of  the  poor.    The  oil,  however,  is  supposed  to  be  exhausted, 
and  the  wick  is  sending  forth  a  weak,  smoky,  disagreeable  light,  soon  to  subside 
into  darkness.     Would  it  not  be  better,  one  might  ask,  to  put  out  such  a  light 
altogether  than  to  endure  its  disagreeable  stench,  or,  all  unprepared,  find  ourselves 
plunged  in  darkness?     These  two  images  set  before  us  suggestions  of  what  would 
be  reasonable  actions  on  the  part  of  man,  when  considering  merely  human  ends. 
These  two  things  are — 1.  Types  of  spiritual  states.     2.  Suggestions  of  judicial 
action,     n.  The  xtltimate  aim  of  His  fobbeaeancb.     "  Until  He  brin^  forth 
judgment  unto  truth."     The  gentleness  of  Christ  without  some  such  obvious 
explanation  might  appear  moral  indifiference,  or  amiable  eccentricity,  or  insane 
belief  in  the  inherent  goodness  of  men.     This  aim  gives  it  an  entirely  new,  a  far 
nobler  aspect.     1.  To  every  man  is  given  an  opportunity  of  putting  himself  right 
with  God.     The  force  of  circumstances  wiU  be  coxmterbalanced  so  that  the  will 
and  affections  may  work  freely;  inequalities,  opposition,  &c.,  will  be  neutralised 
or  allowed  for  in  so  far  as  they  affect  conduct.    2.  Judgment  will  be  withheld 
until  the  career  of  man  is  complete.     Good  and  evil  alike  will  work  themselves 
out.     There  is  a  tragic  power  of  evolution  latent  in  aU  sin.     Righteousness,  too, 
is  as  a  seed.     3.  The  character  of  this  judgment,  therefore,  will  be  final  and  absolute. 
(St.  J.  A.  Frere,  M.A.)         "A  bruised  reed"  and  "  smoking  flax  "  : — The  two 
metaphors  are  not  altogether  parallel.     "  A  bruised  reed  "  has  suffered  an  injury 
which,  however,  is  neither  complete  nor  irreparable.     "  Smoking  flax,"  on  the 
other  hand — by  which,  of  course,  is  meant  flax  used  as  a  wick  in  an  old-fashioned 
oil  lamp — is  partially  lit.     In  the  one  a  process  has  been  begun  which,  if  continued, 
ends  in  destruction;  in  the  other  a  process  has  been  begun  which,  if  continued, 
ends  in  a  bright  flame.     So  the  one  metaphor  may  express  the  beginnings  of 
evil  which  may  still  be  averted,  and  the  other  the  beginnings  of  incipient  and 
iacomplete  good.     If  we  keep  that  distinction  in  mind,  the  words  of  our  text 
gain   wonderfully   in   comprehensiveness.     (A.    Madaren,    D.D.)        The    strong 
servant  of  Jehovah  "  .• — It  is  to  be  noticed  that  in  verse  4  we  have  an  echo  of 
these  metaphors.     The  word  translated   "  fail  "  is  the  same  as  that  rendered 
in  the  previous  verse,  "smoking,"  or  "dimly  burning";  and  the  word  "dis- 
couraged "  is  the  same  as  that  rendered  in  the  previous  verse,  "  bruised."     So 
then  this  "  servant  of  the  Lord,"  Who  is  not  to  break  the  bruised  reed,  nor  quench 
the  smoking  flax,  is  fitted  for  His  work  because  He  Himself  has  no  share  in  the 
evils  which  He  would  heal,  and  none  in  the  weaknesses  which  He  would  strengthen. 
His  perfect  manhood  knows  no  flaws  nor  bruises;  His  complete  goodness  is  capable 
of  and  needs  no  increase.     Neither  outward  force  nor  inward  weakness  can  hinder 
His  power  to  heal  and  bless;  therefore  His  work  can  never  cease  till  it  has  attained 
its  ultimate  purpose.     "  He  shall  not  fail  nor  be  discouraged,"  shall  neither  be 
broken  by  outward  violence,  nor  shall  the  flame  of  His  saving  energy  burn  faint 
until  He  hath  "  set  judgment  in  the  earth,"  and  crowned  His  purposes  with  com- 
plete success.     (Ibid.)        Christ  the  arrester  of  begun  evil,  arid  the  nourisher  of 
incipient  good : — We  have  here  set  before  us  three  significant  representations 
of  that  Servant  of  the  Lord,  which  may  well  commend  Him  to  our  confidence 
and  our  love.     I.  As  the  Restobeb  of  the  bbuise  that  it  may  not  be  broken. 
"  He  shall  not  break  the  bruised  reed."     It  is  "  bruised,"  but  the  bruise  is  not 
irreparable.     And  so  there  are  reeds  bruised   and  "  shaken   by  the  wind,"  but 
yet  not  broken.     And  the  tender  Christ   comes   with   His  gentle,  wise,  skilful 
siu-gery,  to  bind  these  up  and  to  make  them  strong  again.     To  whom  does  this 
text  apply?     1.  Li  a  very  solemn  sense  to  all  mankind.     In  all  the  dints  and 
marks  of  sin  are  plainly  seen.     Our  manhood  has  been  crushed  and  battered 


CHAP.  XLH.]  ISAIAH.  809 

out  of  its  right  shape,  and  has  received  awful  wounds  from  that  evil  that  has  found 
entrance  within  us.  But  there  emerges  from  the  metaphor  not  only  the  solemn 
thought  of  the  bruises  by  sin  that  all  men  bear,  but  the  other  blessed  one,  that 
there  is  no  man  so  bruised  as  that  he  is  broken.  And  Christ  looks  on  all  the 
tremendous  bulk  of  a  world's  sins  with  the  confidence  that  He  can  move  that 
mountain  and  cast  it  into  the  depths  of  the  sea.  2.  But  then  the  words  may 
be  taken  in  a  somewhat  narrow  sense,  applying  more  directly  to  a  class.  "  The 
broken  and  the  contrite  heart,"  bruised  and  pulverised  as  it  were  by  a  sense  of 
evil,  may  be  typified  for  us  by  this  bruised  reed.  And  then  there  emerges  the 
blessed  hope  that  such  a  heart,  wholesomely  removed  from  its  self-complacent 
fancy  of  soundness,  shall  certainly  be  healed  and  bound  up  by  His  tender  hand. 
Wheresoever  there  is  a  touch  of  penitence  there  is  present  a  restoring  Christ. 
3.  The  words  may  be  looked  at  from  yet  another  point  of  view,  as  representing 
the  merciful  dealing  of  the  Master  with  the  spirits  which  are  beaten  and  bruised. 
n.  As  THE  Fosterer  op  incipient  and  imperfect  good.  "  The  dimly  burning 
wick  He  shaU  not  quench."  Who  are  represented  by  this  "  smoking  flax  "?  1.  I 
am  not  contradicting  what  I  have  been  saying,  if  I  claim  for  this  second  metaphor 
as  wide  a  universality  as  the  former.  There  is  no  man  out  of  hell  but  has  in  him 
something  that  wants  but  to  be  brought  to  sovereign  power  in  his  life  in  order 
to  make  him  a  light  in  the  world.  You  have  got  consciences  at  the  least;  you 
have  convictions,  which  if  you  followed  them  out  would  make  Christians  of  you 
straight  away.  You  have  got  aspirations  after  good,  desires,  some  of  you,  after 
purity  and  nobleness  of  living,  which  only  need  to  be  raised  to  the  height  and 
the  dominance  in  your  lives  which  they  ought  to  possess,  in  order  to  revolutionise 
your  whole  course.  There  is  a  spark  in  every  man  which,  fanned  and  cared  for, 
will  change  him  from  darkness  into  light.  Fanned  and  cared  for  it  can  only  bo 
by  a  Divine  power  coming  down  upon  it  from  without.  2.  Then,  in  a  narrower 
way,  the  words  may  be  applied  to  a  class.  There  are  some  of  us  who  have  a 
little  spark,  as  we  believe,  of  a  Divine  Hfe,  the  faint  beginnings  of  a  Christian 
character.  They  say  that  where  there  is  smoke  there  is  fire.  There  is  a  deal 
more  smoke  than  fire  in  the  most  of  Christian  people  in  this  generation.  And 
if  it  were  not  for  such  thoughts  as  this  about  that  dear  Christ  that  will  not  lay 
a  hasty  hand  upon  some  little  tremulous  spark,  and  by  one  rash  movement  ex- 
tinguish it  for  ever,  there  would  be  but  little  hope  for  a  great  many  of  us.  Look 
at  His  life  on  earth;  think  how  He  bore  with  those  blundering,  foolish,  selfish 
disciples  of  BUs.  Remember  how,  when  a  man  came  to  Ham  with  a  very  imperfect 
goodness,  the  Evangelist  tells  us  that  Jesus,  beholding  him,  loved  him.  And 
take  out  of  these  blessed  stories  this  great  hope,  that  howsoever  small  men  "  despise 
the  day  of  small  things,"  the  Greatest  does  not.  How  do  you  make  "  smoking 
flax  "  burn?  You  give  it  oU,  you  give  it  air,  and  you  take  away  the  charred 
portions.  And  Christ  will  give  you,  in  your  feebleness,  the  oil  of  EQs  Spirit,  that 
you  may  burn  brightly  as  one  of  the  candlesticks  in  His  temple;  and  He  will 
let  air  in,  and  take  away  the  charred  portions  by  the  wise  discipline  of  sorrow 
and  trial  sometimes  in  order  that  the  smoking  flax  may  become  the  shining  light. 
The  reason  why  so  many  Christian  men's  Christian  light  is  so  fuliginous  and  dim 
is  just  that  they  keep  away  from  Jesus  Christ.  III.  As  exempt  from  HrniAN 
BViL  AND  WEAKNESS,  as  the  foimdation  of  His  restoring  and  fostering  work.  "  He 
shall  not  biu:n  dimly  nor  be  broken  till  He  hath  set  judgment  in  the  earth."  There 
are  no  bruises  in  tins  reed.  That  is  to  say,  Christ's  manhood  is  free  from  all  scars 
and  wounds  of  evil  or  of  sin.  There  is  no  dimness  in  this  light.  That  is  to  say, 
Christ's  character  is  perfect.  His  goodness  needs  no  increase.  There  is  no  trace 
of  effort  in  His  holiness,  no  growth  manifest  in  His  God-likeness,  from  the  beginning 
to  the  end.  There  is  no  outward  violence  that  can  be  brought  to  bear  upon 
Him  that  shall  stay  Him  in  His  purpose.  There  is  no  inward  failure  of  strength 
that  may  lead  iis  to  fear  that  His  work  shall  not  be  completed.  And  because 
of  all  these  things,  because  of  H!is  perfect  exemption  from  human  infirmity,  because 
in  Him  was  no  sin.  He  is  manifested  to  take  away  our  sins.  (Ibid.)  Tlie 
smoking  flax  shall  He  not  quench. — The  smoking  flax: — I.  A  state  of  qracb 
IS  SUPPOSED.  The  figure  is  that  of  a  lamp.  Such  are  believers  (Matt.  v.  16,  16). 
II.  The  feebleness  of  that  state.  '  Smoking  flax."  There  is  some  light, 
yet  but  little,  and  that  little  seems  all  but  ready  to  be  extinguished.  There 
is  something  of  the  light  of  God's  Word  in  the  soul,  a  real  spark  of  grace,  but 
it  seems  Uttle  more  than  this.  Some  warmth  of  affection,  but  it  acts  feebly. 
Many  causes  conspire  to  produce  this.     Some  have  but  the  first  spark.     All 


310  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xlii. 

things  seem  ready  to  put  it  out.  Strong  corruptions,  fleshly  passions,  vanities 
of  the  world,  evil  companions,  entire  inexperience  are  all  extinguishers.  Others 
have  little  light  in  the  school  of  self-knowledge — the  danger  of  temptation,  the 
evil  of  the  heart,  the  worth  of  Jesus,  the  character  of  God.  There  is  much  of 
the  smoke  of  vain  confidence,  fearlessness  of  consequences,  tampering  with  things 
dangerous,  and  this  very  smoke  obscures  the  light  still  more.  Some  are  in  great 
prosperity — the  wick  grows  tall  and  all  is  dim.  In  some,  the  light  is  obscured 
by  neglects  with  a  certain  degree  of  wilfulness  in  them.  In  some,  by  want  of 
deep  humbling  and  thorough  repentance  on  account  of  sin.  In  some,  by  ceaseless 
engagement,  that  scarcely  allows  any  real  dealing  with  God.  In  some,  the  constant, 
undeviating  habit  of  looking  at  themselves  rather  than  Christ,  living  more  by 
sense  than  faith.  In  short,  we  may  dim  the  light  by  whatever  grieves  the  Spirit. 
III.  The  condtjct  of  cub  Lord  with  eespect  to  it.  He  shall  not  quench  it.  He 
will  greatly  exceed  this.  He  will  tend  this  smoking  flax.  The  flax  is  His  own, 
the  light  His  own,  the  oil  His  own,  all  His  heart  is  shown  in  all  His  actings  here. 
He  will  dress  it.  True,  He  may  cut  down  the  wick — humble,  lower,  abase.  He 
will  increase  the  light.  "  He  giveth  more  grace."  He  will  perfect  it.  Conclusion — 
1.  Perhaps  there  are  some  whose  hopes  of  worldly  happiness  are  like  a  dying  taper, 
and,  alas!  they  have  little,  if  any  other,  hope.  Such  a  beam  was  in  the  heart 
of  poor  Manasseh.  Is  it  but  the  faintest,  the  feeblest,  yet  does  it  take  thee  poor 
and  needy  to  the  Saviour?  Will  He  cast  out?  Never !  2.  If  the  blessed  Saviour 
does  not  despise,  neither  should  we.     {J.  H.  Evans,  M.A.)        Smoking  flax: — 

I.  What  state  this  metaphor  represents.  1.  A  smoking  flax  represents 
a  state  in  which  there  is  a  Httle  good.  The  margin  is  "  dimly  burning  flax." 
It  is  burning;  but  it  is  burning  very  dimly.  There  is  a  spark  of  good  within 
the  heart.  2.  You  are  like  smoking  flax,  because  your  good  is  too  little  to  be 
of  much  use  to  anybody.  What  could  we  do  with  a  smoking  flax  if  we  had  it 
here  to-night,  and  the  gas  was  all  out?  3.  Smoking  flax,  then,  has  a  little  fire, 
but  it  is  so  little  that  it  is  of  small  service,  and,  what  is  worse,  it  is  so  little  that 
it  is  rather  unpleasant.  4.  Though  the  good  of  it  is  so  little  that  it  is  of  very 
little  use  to  other  people,  and  sometimes  is  very  obnoxious,  yet  there  is  enough 
good  in  you  to  be  dangerous  in  Satan's  esteem.  He  does  not  like  to  observe 
that  there  is  yet  a  httle  fire  in  you,  for  he  fears  that  it  may  become  a  flame. 

II.  When  are  souls  in  that  state?  1.  Some  are  in  that  state  when  they  are 
newly  saved — when  the  flax  has  just  been  lighted.  2.  Sometimes  a  candle  smokes, 
not  because  it  is  newly  lit,  but  because  it  is  almost  extinguished.  I  speak  to 
some  Christians  who  have  been  alight  with  the  fire  of  grace  for  many  years,  and 
yet  they  feel  as  if  they  were  near  the  dark  hour  of  extinction.  But  you  shall 
not  go  out.  The  Lord  will  keep  you  aUght  with  grace.  3.  Sometimes  the  wick 
smokes  when  worldliness  has  damped  it.  4.  At  times  a  wick  burns  low  because 
a  very  strong  wind  has  blown  upon  it.  Many  men  and  women  are  the  subjects 
of  very  fierce  temptations.  III.  What  does  Jesus  do  with  those  who  abb 
IN  this  state?  He  will  not  quench  the  smoking  flax.  What  a  world  of  mercy 
lies  in  that  word!  1.  He  will  not  quench  you  by  pronouncing  legal  judgment 
upon  you.  2.  He  will  not  quench  you  by  setting  up  a  high  experimental  standard. 
3.  He  will  not  judge  you  by  a  lofty  standard  of  knowledge.  The  Lord  has  some 
of  His  children  whose  heads  are  in  a  very  queer  state ;  and  if  He  first  puts  their 
hearts  right  He  afterwards  puts  their  heads  right.  4.  The  Lord  will  not  quench 
you  by  setting  up  a  standard  by  which  to  measure  your  graces.  It  is  not,  "  So 
much  faith,  and  you  are  saved.  So  httle  faith,  and  you  are  lost."  If  thou  hast 
faith  as  a  grain  of  mustard-seed  it  will  save  thee.  Come  along,  you  little  ones, — 
you  trembling  ones!  Jesus  will  not  quench  you.  He  will  blow  upon  you  with 
the  soft  breath  of  EUs  love  till  the  little  spark  will  rise  into  a  flame.  (C.  H. 
Spurgeon.) 

Ver.  4.  He  shall  not  fail  nor  be  discouraged. — The  hopefulness  of  Jesus  Christ: — 
Our  God  is  the  God  of  hope;  and  the  Bible  is  the  book  of  hope.  If  we  are  to  be 
true  servants  of  God  and  disciples  of  Jesus  Christ  we  must  be  partakers  of  this 
glowing  hopefulness.  To  be  discouraged  is  to  faU.  To  hope  is  to  be  strong. 
The  prayer  of  St.  Paul  for  the  Christians  in  Rome  we  need  often  offer  for  our- 
selves (xv.  13).  This  strong  hope  is  essential  to  the  successful  worker.  The 
good  soldier  of  Jesus  has  for  his  helmet  the  hope  of  salvation.  The  Spirit  of  God 
comes  to  impart  this  gift.  Hope  grows  strong  as  it  feeds  upon  the  promises. 
Of  every  one  of  us   this  word  should   be   true — "  He   shall   not   fail   nor   b« 


CHAP,  xui.]  ISAIAH.  811 

discouraged."  The  hope  of  the  world  is  in  Jesus  Christ.  It  is  well  to  begin 
a  Uttle,  farther  back,  at  xli.  28.  Man  cannot  find  within  himself  the  remedy  for 
the  ills  of  humanity.  But  when  all  is  black  and  hopeless,  there  is  another  "  Be- 
hold." The  rosy  morning  fills  the  sky,  "  Behold  My  servant  whom  I  uphold," 
&c.  The  hope  of  God  is  in  Him  whom  He  hath  appointed  the  Savioiu*  of  the 
world.  And  our  hope  is  in  beholding  Him.  Here  is  the  unfailing  spring  of  our 
hope.  "  He  shall  not  fail,  nor  be  discouraged."  Let  us  look  at  this  hope  of  our 
Saviour.  It  is  broad  based,  and  its  foimdation  is  deep.  The  tower  of  His  con- 
fidence stands  four-square  to  all  the  winds  of  heaven  and  all  the  blasts  of  hell. 
I.  It  is  the  hope  op  Okb  who  knows  the  needs  op  homanity.  There  is 
a  shallow  hope  that  thinks  it  can  heal  men's  wounds  by  hiding  them;  or  that 
they  can  banish  ill  by  giving  it  some  scientific  name  which  quite  satisfies  every- 
body. But  let  the  mind  go  on  to  think  of  the  sin  about  us — the  thousand  shapes 
of  ill  that  throng  and  crowd  each  life;  the  hidden  sins;  the  sins  of  our  great  cities. 
He  knows  it  all  as  none  else  can  ever  know  it — He  who  was  the  naked  conscience 
of  the  world,  and  upon  whom  was  laid  the  iniquity  of  us  all.  Yet  of  Him  it  is 
written:  "  He  shall  not  fail  nor  be  discouraged."  IE.  This  is  the  hope  op  One 
who  has  a  most  lofty  ideal.  There  is  a  shallow  hope  that  is  easily  able  to 
fulfil  itself  by  bringing  down  the  ideal  of  life  until  it  fits  the  case.  If  you  would 
have  men  what  they  should  be,  it  is  easily  done — bring  down  what  they  should 
be  to  the  level  of  what  they  are.  Love  may  aflEord  to  be  blind,  but  the  strength 
of  hope  is  in  its  eyes.  A  hope  that  cannot  see  what  is,  and  can  only  see  what  is 
not,  is  a  false  hope.  Hope,  true  hope,  must  take  the  measure  of  what  is,  and  the 
full  measure  of  what  should  be.  This  is  the  hope  of  Jesus  Christ.  III.  This 
is  the  hope  op  one  who  comes  into  contact  with  the  wobst  side  op  the 
worst  people,  a  policeman  said  to  me  one  day,  "  It  is  a  very  easy  thing  for 
you  to  have  faith  in  folks,  sir:  but  it  is  very  hard  for  me."  "  Why  so,  my  friend?  " 
I  asked.  "  Well,"  said  he,  "  you  see  the  best  of  folks  and  you  see  them  at  their 
best:  you  see  them  because  they  are  good.  But  I  see  folks  because  they  are 
bad.  And  when  you  see  nothing  but  badness  it  is  hard  to  have  any  faith  in  any 
goodness  anywhere."  I  sympathised  deeply  with  that  man  and  with  thousands 
who  are  in  like  evil  case.  But  this  triumphant  hope  of  Jesus  Christ  is  the  hope 
of  One  whose  life  and  work  is  in  relation  to  sin.  He  knows  the  force  of  adverse 
circumstances.  IV.  The  hope  op  Jesus  Christ  arises  prom  His  estimate 
OP  man's  worth.  Jesus  Christ  alone  has  made  man  worth  more  than  gain  or 
pleasure:  and  Jesus  Christ  alone  can  keep  man  so.  V.  The  hope  op  Jestjs 
Christ  is  seen  in  His  method  (vers.  2,  3).  Gentleness  is  the  token  of  assured 
power.  Bluster  is  commonly  the  mask  of  weakness  and  fear.  Coercion,  com- 
pulsion, are  the  methods  of  a  baffled  or  a  bewildered  authority.  Patient  hope- 
fulness, gentleness,  brotherliness — these  are  the  Divine  methods  of  uplifting  men. 
VI.  The  hopefulness  op  Jesus  Christ  is  booted  in  righteousness.  "  He 
shall  set  judgment  in  the  earth,  and  the  isles  shall  wait  for  His  law."  There  are 
those  who  have  sought  to  remedy  our  social  ills  by  pity  without  judgment  and 
without  law.  Their  gifts  have  pampered  the  transgressor  and  pauperised  the 
poor.  But  the  remedy  of  Jesus  Christ  is  in  "  a  new  heart  and  a  right  spirit." 
(M.  0.  Pearse.)  Is  Christianity  a  failure? — We  often  hear  it  said  that  Christi- 
anity is  a  failure.  As  if  foreseeing  this  state  of  mind,  two  thousand  five  hundred 
years  ago  the  prophet  sang  these  sweet  notes,  sajdng:  "  He  shall  not  fail  nor  be 
discouraged."  The  purpose  of  Christ  is  the  conquest  of  this  world,  and  in  carrying 
out  this  great  work  He  is  not  to  fail  or  be  discouraged  until  the  system  of  truth 
which  He  teaches  is  everywhere  understood;  until  the  principles  of  all  government 
shall  be  brought  into  harmony  with  His  Word,  and  men  everywhere  shall  under- 
stand and  practise  the  great  lessons  of  truth  and  holiness.  The  universality 
of  His  kingdom  is  expressed  in  the  phrase,  "  Till  He  hath  set  judgment  in  the 
earth  " — in  all  the  then  known  habitable  globe;  and,  looking  beyond  to  the 
unknown,  or  to  the  men  but  partly  known,  the  expression  is  added,  "  And 
the  isles  shall  wait  for  His  law  " — in  other  words,  the  progress  of  Christ's  kingdom 
should  be  continually  onward  imtil  its  principles  should  prevail  over  all  the  knbwn 
kingdoms  of  the  earth,  and  the  undiscovered  portions  of  it  also  should  receive  His 
law.  The  work  which  He  proposes  to  do  is  a  mighty  work;  and  the  phrase  repre- 
sents Him  as  waiting.  I.  I  am  not  stirprised,  however,  that  men  are  ready 
TO  SAY  THAT  THIS  PURPOSE  MUST  BE  A  FAILURE;  for — 1.  The  aim  is  SO  great,  the 
project  80  vast,  that  it  seems  to  man  impossible.  There  have  been  great  kingdoms 
set  up  on  this  earth  of  ours.     But  there  was  never  a  kingdom  which  reached  to 


312  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap  xm. 

its  utmost  bounds.  2.  Men  think  Christianity  must  be  a  failure  because  the 
agencies  seem  inadequate.  3.  Because  it  has  not  accomplished  its  work.  4.  They 
tell  us  that  Christianity  is  likely  to  be  a  failure  because,  they  say,  there  is  a  conflict 
between  science  and  religion.  II.  Now  let  us  look  at  this  subject.  It  is  one 
of  the  favoiirite  expressions  of  these  men  that  in  the  order  of  this  world  there 
shall  be  the  "  survival  of  the  fittest " — that  the  weaker  shall  pass  away,  and 
the  stronger  shall  remain.  Now,  if  we  contrast  Christianity  with  other  forma 
of  religion,  where  shall  we  find  its  failure?  We  may  say  to-day,  simply  as  a 
fact,  that  it  still  remains,  and,  surpassing  any  other  system  in  its  strength  and 
beauty,  we  shall  see  its  survival  over  all.  1.  Compare  it  with  Paganism  in  its 
palmiest  hours — the  days  of  the  philosophy  of  Greece  and  the  power  of  Rome, 
when  its  temples  shone  with  splendour,  when  its  poets  sang  with  grace,  when 
sculpture  and  architecture  gathered  around  it  their  forms  of  beauty;  when  it 
had  its  legends  of  mythology;  when  it  had  its  men  of  strength  and  power  to  be 
as  pillars  for  it.  Scepticism  then  existed.  But  all  the  scepticism  oi  Greece  or 
Rome  never  closed  one  temple,  never  dethroned  one  of  their  imaginary  deities. 
In  the  midst  of  scepticism  popular  faith  went  right  on,  and  the  temples  had  their 
devotees  and  worshippers.  Judaism  taught  the  knowledge  of  the  one  true  God, 
yet  it  made  no  advances  against  idolatry.  On  the  other  hand,  idolatry  brought 
its  terrible  fruits  into  the  midst  of  Judaism,  and  the  people  who  had  heard  the  voice 
of  the  living  God  turned  and  served  idols.  But  what  sceptical  philosophy  could 
not  do,  and  what  Judaism  could  not  do,  Christianity  has  accomplished'.  Men 
without  earthly  power,  men  persecuted,  men  in  prison,  men  reproached,  went 
telling  the  story  of  a  living  and  dying  and  ascended  Christ,  and  as  they  told  this 
story,  the  temples  became  deserted  and  the  idols  fell,  until  to-day  there  is  not  a 
god  worshipped  on  earth  that  was  worshipped  in  the  time  of  the  philosophy  and 
glory  of  Greece  and  Rome.  Christianity  is  making  inroads  everywhere.  Pagan- 
ism has  gone,  Brahmanism  is  going,  and  Confucianism  is  going  down.  Christianity 
is  just  raising  herself.  2.  But  you  tell  me  there  is  infidelity !  And  what  is 
infidelity?  A  negation — a  something  not  a  belief.  It  is  a  negation  of  system; 
it  has  no  system.  Where  are  its  temples?  Where  are  its  schools?  Where  are 
its  hospitals?  Where  were  they  ever?  What  did  it  ever  try  to  do  for  man  any- 
where, or  in  any  land,  as  an  organised  system?  There  have  been  men,  strong 
men,  learned  men,  wise  men,  who  have  been  infidel;  but  they  have  never  embodied 
their  creed  in  an  organisation ;  they  have  never  worked  together  powerfully  for 
the  elevation  of  the  race.  I  was  in  Berlin  with  the  Evangelical  Alhance.  I  went 
to  Potsdam  to  the  old  palace  of  Frederick.  There  we  were  shown  into  a  room 
where  some  of  us  held  our  consultations.  This  was  the  room  where  Voltaire 
studied  and  wrote  part  of  his  works,  where  he  and  Frederick  deemed  they  were 
about  to  overthrow  Christianity.  And  yet  in  that  very  hall  we  came  to  consult 
about  the  best  means  of  spreading  Christianity  over  the  world.  Voltaire  said 
he  lived  in  the  "  twilight  of  Christianity,"  and  so  he  did.  But  it  was  not,  as  he 
fancied,  a  twilight  deepening  into  darkness,  it  was  a  twilight  opening  up  into  the 
brighter  day;  and  the  Sun  of  Righteousness  shines  now  in  spiritual  beauty  over 
our  entire  world.  3.  But  they  tell  us  sometimes  that  the  discoveries  which  are 
being  made  are  unsettling  the  foundations  of  Christianity.  4.  They  tell  us  that 
Christianity  has  not  done  its  work  in  the  time  it  has  run.  I  admit  it.  But  what 
about  it?  These  men  want  time  for  making  this  earth.  They  say  it  took  millions 
of  years.  Won't  you  give  rne  as  much  time  to  cure  this  world  and  turn  sinners 
into  saints  as  you  want  to  turn  a  monkey  into  a  man?  They  demand  ages  for 
the  one,  but  are  not  willing  to  give  us  time  for  the  other.  The  times  are  full  of 
promise.  Christianity  is  growing  stronger.  (5p.  M.  Simpson,  D.D.)  The 
accomplishment  of  Christ's  purpose: — I.  The  puepose  op  Chbist.  II.  The  diffi- 
culties IN  THE  WAY.  III.  The  assured  victory  op  Christ.  (J.  Fleming,  B.D.) 
A  great  work  and  an  invincible  patience: — I.  The  Godlike  work  which  this 
great  servant  of  Jehovah  undertakes.  II.  The  Godlike  faith  and  patience 
with  which  He  prosecutes  it  to  its  accomplishment.  {J.  Kennedy,  D.D.) 
Christ's  vast  redemptive  undertaking  : — Here  is  a  servant  of  God,  before  whose  eye 
a  future  golden  age  is  not  a  shadowy  hope  or  vision,  but  a  clearly  defined  reahty; 
and  who  Himself  undertakes  to  bring  it  to  pass.  He  will  set  judgment  in  the  earth- 
Is  He  beside  Himself  ?  Is  He  befooled  by  a  benevolent  imagination  ?  Is  He  a 
visionary  dreamer,  without  knowledge  of  Himself  or  of  mankind  ?  If  ever  there 
was  a  sound  mind,  a  perfect  mind,  in  a  human  body,  it  was  that  of  Jesus  Christ — • 
His  very  enemies  being  judges.     And  yet,  with  full  purpose  of  soul,. and  with  a 


CHAP.  XLH.]  ISAIAH.  313 

clear  consciousness  of  the  difficulty  of  the  task,  He  undertakes  to  set  judgment  in 
the  earth.  How  vast  the  undertaking  is — in  its  breadth  covering  all  the  nations 
of  men,  in  its  depth  penetrating  to  the  thoughts  and  innermost  passions  of  the 
human  soul,  in  its  height  rising  to  the  claims  of  the  Eternal  God — may  be  learned 
from  the  prophet  who  ascribes  it  to  Him.  Isaiah  had  formed  no  superficial  estimate 
of  the  wrongness  of  the  world.  Men  were  wrong  utterly  in  their  relations  to  one 
another;  wrong  utterly  in  their  relation  to  God;  and  wrong  utterly  in  themselves. 
(Ibid.)  The  progress  of  Christianity  slow  but  sure  : — This  is  our  answer  to  those 
who  examine  us  concerning  this  matter.  1.  The  slowness  of  the  progress  of 
Christianity,  even  if  exaggerated  in  the  statement  of  it,  does  not  stagger  our  faith; 
for  we  see  in  it  God's  own  maimer  of  working.  2.  The  progress,  or  rather,  no 
progress,  of  the  world's  own  thinking  in  the  highest  regions  of  thought,  during  the 
period  of  the  existence  of  Christianity,  proves  the  world  to  be  as  dependent  on  the 
light  of  Christianity  as  it  was  eighteen  hundred  years  ago.  3.  While  Christianity 
is  as  needful  as  ever,  happily  we  have  evidence  that  it  is  as  mighty  for  good  as  ever. 
Nothing  has  yet  occurred  to  shake  our  faith  in  Christ;  and  while  our  faith  in  Him 
remains  unshaken,  we  shall  confide  in  the  prophetic  oracle  which  assures  us  that 
He  shall  set  judgment  in  the  earth.  (Ibid. )  Christ's  work  no  failure  : — Previous 
verses  at  the  close  of  chap.  xU.  indicate  the  utter  failure  of  the  hope  of  man  from 
man.  How  often  it  is  so  in  human  history;  man  fails  to  find  leadership  and  help 
in  man!  In  expounding  the  text,  I  shall  need  to  open  up  the  whole  passage. 
Follow  me,  therefore,  and  obey  the  first  word  of  the  chapter,  which  is,  "  Behold." 
1.  We  are  commanded  at  all  times  to  behold  the  Son  of  God.  But  specially  in 
cloudy  and  dark  days  ought  we  to  behold  Him.  When  after  having  looked,  and 
looked  long,  you  see  no  man  and  no  counsellor,  then  this  prfecept  has  an  emphatic 
force  about  it,  "  Behold  My  Servant,  whom  I  uphold,"  and,  when  all  other  saviours 
fail,  look  to  the  Saviour  whom  God  has  set  up.  2.  Our  great  comfort  is  that  the 
Lord  Jesus  Christ  is  always  to  be  beheld.  Behold  Him,  and  your  fears  and 
sorrows  will  fly  away.  The  text  leads  us  to  consider  what  is  the  work  which  Jesus 
Christ  has  undertaken,  in  which  He  will  not  fail  nor  be  discouraged.  He  has  come 
to  "  set  judgment  in  the  earth,"  and  "  the  isles  shall  wait  for  His  law."  The  earth 
is  to  be  delivered  from  misrule  and  sin,  and  men  are  to  be  submissive  to  His 
instruction  and  direction.  Whatever  He  has  undertaken,  He  will  perform; 
whatever  commission  He  has  received.  He  will  fulfil.  "  He  shall  not  fail  nor  be 
discouraged  "  till  all  His  work  is  done.  I  believe  in  the  final  perseverance  of  the 
Lord  Jesus  Christ.  I.  Let  this  tettth  be  considered  and  believed.  1.  It  is 
certainly  a  very  marvellous  enterprise  which  oiu:  Lord  Jesus  Christ  has  under- 
taken. The  salvation  of  a  single  soul  involves  a  miracle.  The  salvation  of 
myriads  upon  myriads  of  the  human  race:  What  shall  I  call  it  but  a  mountain  of 
marvels  ?  The  problem  staggers  us.  The  systems  of  evil  are  colossal.  The  hold 
of  evil  on  the  race  is  terrible.  Man  is  inveterately  a  sinner.  By  the  use  of  an 
accursed  logic  he  puts  darkness  for  light  and  light  for  darkness,  and  thus  stultifies 
his  conscience,  and  hardens  his  heart.  If,  perchance,  you  convince  his  judgment, 
you  have  not  won  his  affection,  you  have  not  carried  his  will,  you  have  not  subdued 
his  mind.  Nothing  but  Omnipotence  itself  can  save  a  single  soul.  What  must  be 
that  mighty  power  which  shall  cause  nations  to  run  unto  the  Lord !  2.  The  task  is 
rendered  the  more  severe  because  our  Lord  Jesus  at  this  present  works  largely  by  a 
Church,  which  is  a  poor  and  faulty  instrument  for  the  accomplishment  of  His 
purpose.  Let  this  battalion  and  the  other  waver  as  it  may.  He  who  holds  the 
banner  in  the  very  centre  of  the  fight  will  never  be  moved:  He  will  hold  the  field 
against  all  comers.  3.  Notice  who  He  is  that  hath  undertaken  all  this.  "  Behold 
My  Servant,  whom  I  uphold,  mine  elect,  in  whom  My  soul  delighteth."  He  who 
is  thus  spoken  of  will  not  fail  nor  be  discouraged  for  — (1)  He  is  God's  own  special 
Servant.  (2)  Then  God  says  of  Him,  "  My  Servant  whom  I  uphold."  If  God 
upholds  Him,  how  can  He  faU?  The  text  may  be  read,  *'  Behold  My  Servant  upon 
whom  I  lean,"  and  the  picture  is  of  a  great  Oriental  monarch  wlio  comes  forth 
leaning  upon  a  favourite  lord,  whom  he  honours  by  placing  him  in  that  position, 
indicating  thereby  that  he  trusts  his  affairs  with  him,  and  regards  him  as  his  right- 
hand  man,  a  very  pillar  of  the  State.  We  say  it  with  reverence,  God  the  Father 
leans  on  Jesus  the  Christ.  He  rests  His  honour  and  glory  with  the  person  of  the 
incarnate  God.  (3)  Then  the  Scripture  adds  this  very  significant  word,  "  Mine 
elect  in  whom  My  soul  delighteth."  The  chosen  of  God,  the  most  choice  one  that 
God  knows,  shall  He  prove  a  failure  ?  God  said  of  the  world,  that  it  was  very  good ; 
but  we  read  not  that  His  soul  delighted  in  it:  but,  see,  the  very  soul  of  the  God- 


314  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xm. 

head  is  moved  and  filled  with  delight  because  of  the  Saviour,  commissioned  to 
redeem.  (4)  Furthermore,  our  Lord  is  the  abiding-place  of  the  Holy  Spirit. 
"  I  have  put  My  Spirit  upon  Him."  He  who  is  owned,  honoured,  trusted,  sustained, 
loved,  and  anointed  of  God  cannot  but  be  successful.  (5)  The  success  of  Jesus  is 
guaranteed  by  the  decree  of  God.  It  is  written,  "  He  shall  bring  forth  judgment 
to  the  Gentiles."  Oh,  those  blessed  "  shalls  "  and  "  wills  "  !  4.  It  may  be  that 
at  times  we  fear  that  the  Gospel  is  not  prospering  nor  fulfilling  the  purpose  for 
which  God  hath  sent  it.  Possibly  this  may  arise  out  of  our  Lord's  way  of  working, 
which  is  so  different  from  what  our  minds  would  choose.  "  He  shall  not  cry,  nor 
lift  up,  nor  cause  His  voice  to  be  heard  in  the  street."  You  are  in  an  awful  hurry, 
are  you  not?  But  He  is  never  in  haste.  You  would  make  a  great  stir  and  noise, 
but  Jesus  will  not  thus  spread  the  Gospel.  You  would  go  out  and  fight  all  the 
enemies  of  truth,  and  set  clamour  against  clamour,  cry  against  cry;  but  "  He 
shall  not  strive."  You  would  shout,  and  rage,  and  rave;  but  He  shall  not  cry. 
You  would  advertise  to  the  ends  of  the  earth;  but  He  shall  not  cause  His  voice  to 
be  heard  in  the  street.  When  Mohammed  commenced  his  enterprise  he  announced 
that  Paradise  was  to  be  found  beneath  the  shadow  of  swords,  and  numbers  of  brave 
men  rushed  to  the  battle;  they  swept  everything  before  them,  and  stained 
continents  with  blood:  they  carried  the  name  of  Allah  and  Mohammed  over  Asia 
and  Northern  Africa,  and  seemed  intent  on  conquering  Europe:  and  yet  the  work 
done  wiU  not  endure.  The  prophet  and  his  caliphs  did  indeed  strive,  and  cry, 
and  cause  their  voices  to  be  heard  in  the  street:  but  Christ's  system  is  the  very 
reverse  of  that.  Behold  His  battle-axe  and  weapons  of  war!  Truth  Divinely 
strong,  with  no  human  force  at  the  back  of  it  but  that  of  holiness  and  love;  a 
Grospel  fuU  of  gentleness  and  mercy  to  men,  proclaimed  not  by  the  sUver  trumpets 
of  Mngs,  but  by  the  plain  voices  of  lowly  men.  The  ICingdom  comes  by  the  Holy 
Spirit  dropping  like  dew  on  human  hearts,  and  fertilising  them  with  a  Divine  life. 
6.  Note  well  the  spirit  in  which  He  works.  "  A  bruised  reed,"  &c.  You  cannot 
work  in  hot  haste  in  this  spirit.  Gentleness  makes  good  and  sure  speed,  but  it 
cannot  endure  rashness  and  heat.  We  know  reformers  who,  if  they  had  the  power, 
would  be  like  bulls  in  a  china-shop;  they  would  do  a  great  deal  in  a  very  short 
time.  But  the  world's  best  Friend  is  not  given  to  quench  and  bruise.  II.  Let 
THIS  TRUTH  BE  BELIEVED  AND  ENJOYED.  1.  Enjoy  it  by  recoUecting  that  Jesus 
has  finished  the  work  for  His  people.  2.  He  will  finish  the  work  in  His  believing 
people.  3.  He  will  finish  His  work  by  His  people.  If  you  have  the  Revised 
Version,  the  margin  will  give  you  some  rather  singular  information.  The  te2:t 
might  be  read  thus:  "  A  bruised  reed  shall  He  not  break,  and  the  smoking  flax 
shall  He  not  quench:  yet  He  shall  not  burn  dimly  nor  be  bruised."  Though  He 
deals  with  bruised  reeds  and  smoking  flaxes,  yet  He  Himself  is  not  crushed,  nor 
does  His  light  become  a  mere  glimmer.  4.  The  text  has  in  it  great  comfort  to 
those  of  you  who  are  as  yet  outside  of  the  Church  of  God.  Read  the  sixth  and 
seventh  verses — "  He  shall  not  fail  nor  be  discouraged,"  till  He  has  done,  what? — 
the  Divine  will,  and  this  is  a  part  of  it:  "  To  open  the  blind  eyes,  to  bring  out  the 
prisoners  from  the  prison,  and  them  that  sit  in  darkness  out  of  the  prison-house." 
Turn  your  sightless  eyeballs  this  way.  "  Ah!  "  saith  one,  "  but  I  am  worse  than 
that,  I  am  shut  up  in  prison."  Read  the  seventh  verse  again: — "  To  bring  out 
the  prisoners  from  the  prison."  "  Oh,  but,"  saith  one,  "  in  my  case  it  is  blind- 
ness and  slavery  united."  Listen,  then!  He  has  come  to  "  bring  them  that  sit 
in  darkness  out  of  the  prison-house."  (C.  H.  Spurgeon.)  The  constancy  and 
tenderness  of  Christ: — I.  The  obstacles  which  Jesus  Christ  meets  in  His  woek 
OF  KINDNESS  TO  MAN.  1.  We  may  advert  to  these  obstacles  as  they  are  general, 
as  they  attach  to  man  under  all  circumstances.  2.  But  let  us  advert  to  the 
obstacles  which  any  single  human  being  presents  to  Christ  when  He  comes  forth 
in  the  power  of  His  grace  to  seek  and  to  save !  Let  any  man  look  into  his  own 
heart,  let  him  advert  (1)  To  the  nature  and  bent  of  his  inclinations.  (2)  To  his 
indisposedness  to  receive  instruction.  (3)  To  the  use  which  he  makes  of  that  in- 
struction when  received ;  and  he  wiU  be  at  no  loss  to  discover  the  diflSculties  which 
lie  in  the  path  of  his  Deliverer.  II.  The  patience  with  which  He  encounters 
those  obstacles.  III.  The  victort  over  them  with  \vhich  His  efforts  will 
xtltimately  be  CROWNED.  (0.  T.  Noel,  31. A.)  The  setting  of  judgment  in  the 
earth : — I.  The  great  work  with  which  Christ,  as  the  Father's  Servant,  la 
HIRE  DECLARED  TO  BE  ENTRUSTED.  It  is  the  work  of  Setting  judgment  in  the 
earth,  so  that  the  isles  shall  wait  for  His  law.  As  the  Father's  Servant  in  the 
economy  of  redemption,  Christ  has  been  set  King  upon  the  holy  hill  of  Zion,  and 


CHAP.  XLii.]  ISAIAH.  315 

constituted  Head  over  all  things  for  the  Church  which  is  His  body.  1.  What  is  it 
to  set  judgment  in  the  earth?  By  "  judgment "  here  and  in  the  preceding  verses, 
we  are  evidently  to  understand  true  religion — the  faith  of  the  Gospel — Christianity 
in  its  widest  acceptation,  as  embodying  the  rule  of  Christ's  righteous  administration 
— the  grand  regulating  principles  of  all  His  administrative  acts.  And  so  to 
set  judgment  in  the  earth  means  to  establish  the  Christian  religion  throughout  the 
world.  The  term  "  law  "  in  the  latter  clause  of  the  text,  while  it  has  much  the 
same  meaning  as  judgment,  may  be  viewed  as  denoting,  in  particular,  God's 
written  Word,  considered  specially  as  a  rule  of  life  and  duty.  For  this  the  "  isles  " — 
— a  poetical  expression  for  the  distant  Gentile  nations — "  shall  wait."  That  is, 
either  they  shall  wait  with  a  vague  unconscious  longing  until  it  come  to  them,  they 
remaining  in  darkness  and  spiritual  death  till  its  blessed  life-giving  light  dawn 
upon  them ;  or,  the  meaning  more  probably  is,  when  judgment  is  being  set  in  the 
earth,  the  nations  shall  embrace  it  as  the  means  of  their  enlightenment  and  re- 
generation, and  shall  wait  on  Christ  as  their  King,  to  receive  and  submit  to 
His  law  as  the  supreme  rule  of  all  their  conduct.  So  in  Matthew  we  find 
this  clause  paraphrased  thus — "  In  His  name  shall  the  Gentiles  trust."  2.  That 
there  is  most  urgent  need  for  this  work  of  setting  judgment  in  the  earth,  and 
bringing  the  isles  to  wait  for  Christ's  law  being  done,  is  what  none  will  question 
who  believe  that  God  made  man  upright,  but  that  he  hath  sought  out  many 
inventions.  Men  individually  in  their  natural  condition,  and  the  nations  of 
the  earth  in  their  national  capacity,  are  in  a  state  of  open  determined  revolt 
against  the  Most  High.  But  has  nothing  been  done  in  the  way  of  fulfilling  this 
hope-inspiring  prediction  ?  Since  these  words  were  uttered,  not  a  little  has  been 
effected  in  this  direction.  Most  evident  it  is,  however,  that  as  yet  it  is  but  the 
day  of  small  things  in  this  work.  3.  And  truly  a  stupendous  task  this  is — a  task 
which  none  but  He  on  whose  shoulder  the  government  has  been  laid,  and  to  whom  it 
has  been  entrusted,  could  ever  hope  to  effect — the  task  of  setting  judgment  "  in 
the  earth  "  ;  not  in  one  land  or  over  one  continent  only,  but  in  every  land  and 
among  every  people  under  heaven,  whatever  their  condition  and  character.  4.  Not 
less  beneficent  in  its  character  is  this  work  than  stupendous  in  its  nature.  For 
it  involves  the  present  highest  well-being  of  men  as  individuals,  as  families,  as 
Churches,  and  as  nations,  as  well  as  the  future  eternal  welfare  of  untold  myriads 
of  precious  souls.  This  mighty,  beneficent,  God-glorifying  work  of  setting  judg- 
ment in  the  earth  includes — (1)  The  world-wide  diffusion  of  the  Word  of  God  and 
proclamation  of  the  Gospel  of  Christ,  and  the  needed  opening  up  of  the  way  for 
these.  (2)  The  believing  acceptance  of  the  saving  truths  of  the  Gospel  by  those 
who  hear  it.  (3)  As  the  result  of  the  universal  diffusion  of  the  Gospel,  accompanied 
by  the  working  of  God's  Spirit  upon  men's  minds  and  hearts,  there  must  come  a 
world-wide  profession  of  faith  in  Christ  and  subjection  to  His  authority,  along  with 
practical  godliness  in  the  daUy  life.  (4)  "  And  the  isles  shall  wait  for  His  law." 
These  words  clearly  teach  us  that  the  setting  of  judgment  in  the  earth  includes, 
or  will  issue  in,  the  universal  subjection  of  the  nations  to  the  law  of  Christ  as  the 
rule  of  their  conduct.  The  Statute-books  of  the  nations  will  be  purged,  and 
nothing  but  laws  fully  sanctioned  by,  and  consistent  with,  the  law  of  Christ  shall 
find  a  place  there.  Regulated  by  Christ's  law  in  all  their  national  transactions, 
the  nations  in  which  judgment  is  set,  will,  out  of  regard  to  the  honour  of  their 
Divine  Governor,  be  solicitous  to  choose  and  appoint  as  rulers  only  those  who 
possess  the  character  and  qualifications  which  God's  Word  prescribes.    IL  The 

MANNER  AND  SPIEIT  IN  WHICH  THIS  STUPENDOUS  WORK  IS  TO  BE  CARRIED  ON  AND 

THE  CERTAINTY  OF  ITS  ACCOMPLISHMENT.  "  He  shall  not  fail  uor  be  discouraged 
tiU  He  have  set  judgment  in  the  earth."  1.  How  is  all  this  to  be  brought  about? 
Not  miraculously,  but  through  human  instrumentality,  accompanied  by  the 
prospering  blessing  of  God's  Spirit.  As  to  the  spirit  in  which  this  work  was  to  be 
carried  on  by  Him  to  whom  it  was  entrusted,  we  learn  something  both  from  the 
text  and  the  preceding  context.  But  if  this  was  the  Messiah's  spirit,  as  it  is  His 
spirit  still,  it  was  not  because  He  lacked  strength  or  courage  to  assert  Himself 
against  His  enemies.  As  He  does  not  conquer  by  violence,  but  by  gentleness,  so 
He  shall  not  be  arrested  and  conquered  by  violent  opposition.  No  foe  that  comes 
against  Him,  and  no  weapon  formed  against  His  cause  and  kingdom,  shall  ever 
prosper.  2.  Notice  the  blessed  certainty  of  the  accomplishment  of  this  great  work, 
which  the  emphatic  form  of  expression  here  employed  holds  out  to  us.  "  He  shall 
not  fail  nor  be  discouraged."  And  why  shall  He  not  fail?  God  has  promised  it 
and  confirmed  His  promise  with  an  oath,  and  what  God  has  promised  and  sworn 


316  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xui. 

can  never  fail  of  accomplishment.  All  power  has  been  given  to  Christ  as  Mediator 
for  this  very  purpose.  And  He  makes  this  cheering  fact  the  foundation  on  which 
He  rests  the  great  commission  to  His  Church.  "  All  power  is  given  unto  Me — go 
ye  therefore  and  disciple  all  nations."  For  the  accomplishment  of  this  blessed 
work  on  earth  the  whole  Church  has  been  looking  and  longing,  praying  and  labour- 
ing, age  after  age,  ever  since  she  was  called  into  existence;  and  these  longing 
anticipations — these  fervent  prayers — these  earnest  labours,  the  result  of  super- 
natural influence,  shall  not  be  in  vain.  Conclusion — (1)  This  subject  shows  us 
what  is  the  grand  duty  of  the  Christian  Church  as  a  whole,  and  in  all  her  sections 
and  members;  it  is  just,  as  workers  together  with  Christ,  to  labour  zealously, 
unweariedly,  in  the  noble  enterprise  of  setting  judgment  in  the  earth.  (2)  In 
carrying  on  her  great  mission  in  the  world,  the  Church  in  aU  her  parts  and  members 
should  seek  to  be  brought  into  fuller  sympathy  with  her  living  Head  and  to  drink 
more  and  more  deeply  into  His  spirit.  (3)  Greater  encouragement  to  take  part 
in  the  on-carrying  of  this  great  work,  and  to  persevere  unweariedly  and  hopefully 
in  it,  in  the  face  of  all  discouragement  and  opposition,  we  could  not  have,  than 
what  is  here  given  us.  (4)  Is  it  so  that  Christ  shall  not  fail  nor  be  discouraged? 
And  are  we  enlisted  under  His  banner  and  leadership?  Then  surely  we  ought 
not  faint-heartedly  to  fail  or  be  discoirraged  in  holding  fast  the  truth  as  it  is  in 
Him,  and  in  exhibiting  a  testimony  in  its  behalf.  (5)  Nor  should  we  fail  or  be 
discouraged  in  holding  forth  the  Word  of  life  to  our  benighted  and  perishing 
fellow-men,  but  should  persevere  and  abound  yet  more  and  more,  in  our  missionary 
efforts  at  home  and  abroad.  (6)  He  who  as  Lord  of  aU  is  engaged  in  this  mighty 
work  of  setting  judgment  in  the  earth,  is  also  the  Advocate  with  the  Father, 
pleading  His  people's  cause,  and  securing  that  their  prayers  shall  be  heard. 
(Original  Secession  Magazine.)  The  Person  and  mission  of  our  Lord: — 
1.  Christianity  possesses  the  qualities  which  constitute  it  of  right  the  universal 
religion.  2.  Its  author  has  undertaken  to  make  it  the  universal  religion  in  fact. 
3.  He  will  be  ultimately  completely  successful,  as  prophecy  clearly  declares. 
L  Christianity  has  the  elements  of  tkttth  and  adaptation  in  such  per- 
fection AS  to  be  sufficient  for  all  races  and  all  times.  In  making  this 
claim  it  is  not  necessary  to  deny  whatever  of  good  may  exist  in  other  religions. 
If  we  contemplate  the  subject  philosophically,  judging  of  it  by  the  wants  of 
human  nature,  we  reach  the  inevitable  conclusion  that  it  is  fitted  to  be  the  universal 
religion.  But  we  are  here  led  to  inquire:  What  is  religion  in  its  essential  nature 
apart  from  all  the  forms  in  which  it  may  incarnate  itself?  The  universal  religion, 
call  it  by  what  name  you  will,  must  give  such  a  revelation  of  the  Author  and 
Ruler  of  all  things,  and  of  man's  relations  to  Him  here  and  hereafter,  as  to  render 
it  certain  that  man  can,  despite  sin  and  death,  attain  to  everlasting  blessedness. 
1.  Its  sufi&ciency  must  be  settled  by  practical  tests.  The  life  after  death  must  bo 
made  so  certain  as  to  be  the  chief  and  abiding  somrce  of  man's  present  happiness, 
and  motive  in  his  greatest  efforts  and  activities.  This  implies  forgiveness  of  sia 
and  victory  over  death,  and  also  consciousness  of  obedience  to  God.  This  soul- 
rest  from  bondage  to  the  fear  of  death  the  universal  religion  must  provide.  2.  It 
must  provide  for  responsible  man  at  every  stage  of  his  development — in  its  move- 
ments from  deepest  ignorance  to  the  highest  possible  attainments  of  which  he  is 
capable.  It  must  go  to  the  sheerest  idolater,  to  the  lowest  peasant,  to  him  who  is 
highest  in  authority ;  must  meet  the  wants  of  the  most  enlightened  sage.  It  must 
be  the  chief  stimulus  of  civilisation.  Science  cannot  overthrow  it,  civilisation 
cannot  dispense  with  it.  3.  It  must  meet  the  wants  of  every  race.  4.  This 
universal  religion  must  have  the  power  to  renew  itself  from  time  to  time,  to 
prevent  its  becoming  an  empty  form  —  a  dead  letter.  However  we  may 
account  for  it,  there  is  a  strange  power  in  Christianity  to  renew  itself  in 
great  reformations  and  revivals  —  to  renew  itself  in  individuals  and  in 
the    race.      II.  The    Author    of    Christianity    has    revealed    it    as   His 

PURPOSE   TO   push   ITS    CONQUESTS  UNTIL  IT   SUPERSEDES  ALL    OTHER   RELIGIONS. 

The  living  power  by  which  this  religion  renews  itself  as  perpetually  as  nature 
renews  the  face  of  the  earth  in  every  returning  spring,  the  Messiah  promised  to 
pour  out  upon  His  disciples  till  all  nations  are  instructed  in  His  principles,  and 
yield  a  hearty  obedience  to  Him.  The  true  conception  of  Christianity,  therefore, 
is  not  that  of  a  sage  who  proclaims  a  system,  and,  dying,  leaves  it  to  work  its 
own  way  in  a  hostfle  world;  but  rather  of  One  who  has  given  His  Ufe  to  seal  its 
truth,  and,  rising  from  the  dead,  comes  back  to  His  disciples  to  fill  them  with 
supernatural  energy,  that  under  His  personal  supervision  they  may  go  forward  to 


CHAP.  XLn.]  ISAIAH.  317 

its  complete  establishment.  Thus  the  best  test  of  the  true  Church  is  found  in  her 
members  working  along  the  line  of  this  universal  conquest.  The  Christian  con- 
quest is  distinguished  from  any  other  which  may  bear  a  possible  semblance  to  it, 
by  the  peculiar  and  subordinate  sphere  which  all  physical  power  in  governmental 
relations  must  sustain  to  it.  III.  In  ancient  times,  when  the  warrior  returned 
from  battle  with  his  trophies,  he  adorned  with  them  the  heathen  temples.  Under 
this  imagery  thb  holy  peophets  foretell  the  good  time  comino  when  aUi 
NATIONS  WILL  ADOBN  THB  TEMPLE  OF  Cheist  with  all  the  boundless  resom-ces 
of  agriculture,  commerce,  and  manufactures.  (G.  Graham.)  ChrisVa  final 
triumph  : — 1.  It  seems  not  unreasonable  to  think  that,  since  the  plan  of  redemption 
has  been  from  the  beginning  of  the  world  the  great  object  of  the  Divine  dispensa- 
tions, and  since  means  so  very  striking  and  unusual  have  been  employed  in  bringing 
it  forward,  it  will  surely  produce  effects,  even  in  this  world,  proportionable  to  the 
magnitude  of  the  preparation.  2.  But  it  will  be  said,  if  Christianity  for  so  many 
ages  has  made  little  progress  in  the  world,  and  if,  even  among  its  professing 
followers,  its  influence  is  far  from  being  productive  of  universal  holiness,  what 
reason  can  we  have  for  supposing  that  it  wlU  ever  be  otherwise?  3.  Observe  that 
the  corruptions  which  have  obscured  the  lustre  of  the  Gospel,  originally  owing  to 
the  mixtiu-e  of  human  speculations,  were  long  fostered  by  a  system  of  priestcraft, 
which,  being  once  detected,  is  the  less  likely  again  to  arise.  Under  that  system 
men  gradually  acquired  the  power  of  shutting  out  from  their  brethren  the  pure 
Bources  of  knowledge,  and  thus  innumerable  errors  and  prejudices  were  propagated, 
the  effects  of  which  have  not  wholly  disappeared  even  in  our  own  days.  But  the 
circumstances  of  the  world  are  now  so  much  improved,  that  it  does  not  seem 
possible  any  such  power  will  be  ever  again  acquired,  or  at  least  retained  for  any 
considerable  length  of  time.  And  further,  there  is  in  the  mind  of  man  so  strong  a 
thirst  for  knowledge,  that  some,  according  to  their  talents  and  opportunities, 
are  always  arising  to  search  after  it;  and  we  may  rest  assured  that  this  thirst 
for  knowledge,  aided  by  Christian  zeal,  will  extend  to  the  interesting  truths  of 
revelation,  as  well  as  to  the  various  branches  of  human  science.  4.  But  let  it 
be  granted  that  the  Gospel,  through  the  progress  of  inquiry,  shall  be  restored 
even  to  its  simplest  form,  and  its  excellence  and  truth  clearly  displayed;  still, 
what  reason  have  we  to  thank  that  men's  lives  will  be  universally  influenced  by  it, 
since  hitherto  that  has  been  so  far  from  being  the  case,  that,  on  the  contrary, 
infidehty  seems  to  have  kept  pace  with  the  increase  of  knowledge?  With 
respect  to  increasing  infidelity,  it  is  nothing  more  than  coight  naturally  be 
expected  when,  after  a  long  period  of  ignorance,  prejudice,  and  even  imposture, 
men  first  begin  to  inqiiire  and  discuss.  The  evil  is  only  temporary,  and  will  cease 
with  the  causes  which  lead  to  it.  Men  will  at  length  return  from  the  extremes 
into  which  they  run.  5.  With  respect  to  the  influence  which  pure  Christianity 
may  be  expected  to  have  on  its  votaries,  we  observe — (1)  That  a  difference  of 
circumstances  may  be  expected  to  produce  a  difference  of  effects.  (2)  The  more 
the  native  beauty  of  the  Gospel  appears,  men  will  be  the  more  likely  to  embrace  it 
with  sincerity,  and  for  its  own  sake.  (3)  When  Christianity  is  wholly  disencumbered 
of  the  tenets  and  observances  which  obstruct  its  reforming  power;  when  it  is 
universally  admitted  to  be  a  doctrine  according  to  godliness ;  when  the  illusions  by 
which  men  foster  their  negligence,  and  the  pleas  by  which  they  luU  asleep  their 
consciences,  are  all  given  up ;  when  the  truth  is  clearly  and  fully  understood,  that 
without  real,  heartfelt  holiness  nc  man  shall  see  God, — we  may  with  safety  con- 
clude that  then  the  moral  and  sanctifying  spirit  of  the  Gospel  wiU  acquire  an 
influence  far  beyond  anything  we  have  yet  seen.  6.  It  may  perhaps  be  said  that 
little  hope  can  be  entertained  of  so  favourable  a  change  on  the  hearts  and  lives  of 
men,  unless  human  nature  be  itself  changed;  since,  in  all  past  ages,  mankind  have 
been  imperiously  hurried  away  by  the  strength  of  their  passions.  But  it  is  equally 
certain  that  these  are  not  uncontrollable;  since,  though  not  wholly  subdued, 
for  that  would  be  hurtful,  they  have  been,  at  an  earUer  or  later  period  of  life, 
gradually  brought  under  subjection  by  multitudes  of  good  men  in  all  ages.  They 
are  inflamed,  besides,  by  example,  and  by  the  temptations  which  mankind  throw 
in  one  another's  way;  and  smrely  it  is  conceivable  that  these  are  circumstances 
which  may  not  only  gradually  cease  to  inflame,  but  may  come  at  length,  in  the 
progress  of  improvement,  rather  to  check  the  undue  indulgence  of  our  passions. 
Consider,  moreover,  the  power  of  habits  formed  before  the  heart  be  yet  hardened, 
or  the  feelings  blunted;  and  is  it  not  possible  that  to  the  instruction  of  the  young 
a  growing  attention  may  be  paid,  and  endeavours  be  more  earnestly  and  universally 


318  TEE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xui. 

employed  to  instil  into  them  from  their  tenderest  years  the  habits  of  piety  and 
virtue?  Were  this  supposition  realised,  it  alone,  independent  of  all  other  cir- 
cumstances, would  powerfully  contribute  to  that  universal  diffusion  of  the  influence 
of  Christianity  which  we  are  taught  to  expect.  7.  We  may  appeal  to  experience. 
We  know  what  the  Gospel  can  accomplish,  from  the  example  of  many  individuals. 
Should  it  be  admitted  that  the  eflfects  now  enumerated  may  very  naturally  arise 
at  length  within  the  limits  of  the  Christian  Church,  it  will  follow,  as  a  just  con- 
clusion, that  the  Gospel  may  then  be  expected  to  spread  over  all  lands.  8.  There 
is  a  further  consideration,  of  very  high  importance.  It  is,  that  by  means  of  prophecy, 
there  is  an  evidence  for  the  truth  of  the  Gospel  provided,  which  will  accumulate 
as  ages  advance.  9.  We  may  add  that,  the  world  being  wholly  imder  the  aflministra- 
tion  of  that  Divine  Being  who  watches  over  the  interests  of  Christianity,  the  ordinary 
course  of  human  events  will  doubtless  concur  with  the  progress  of  the  Gospel,  and 
both  tend  to  the  same  point.  10.  Practical  observations.  (1)  Next  to  heaven  itself, 
there  is  not  perhaps  a  more  elevating  subject  of  contemplation  than  the  state  of 
things  which  shall  take  place  during  the  Messiah's  reign  on  earth.  (2)  From  what 
has  been  said,  let  us  draw  a  confirmation  of  our  faith.  The  present  system  of 
things  wiU  not  be  dissolved  till  the  Gospel  have  wrought  out  its  final  triumph,  and 
be  preached  for  a  witness  to  all  nations.  (3)  Since  we  know  that  righteousness  and 
truth  are  finally  to  prevail,  let  it  encourage  us  to  promote  that  great  object.  (4)  The 
prophecies  of  Scripture  are  partly  given,  that  they  who  beUeve  may  possess  their 
souls  in  patience.  (T.  S.  Hardie,  D.D.)  The  want  of  the  world,  and  the  way  of 
supplying  it: — I.  Moral  rectitude  is  the  great  want  of  the  world.  We 
take  the  words  "  judgment "  and  "  law  "  as  expressing  the  same  generic  idea — • 
rectitude ;  that  is,  a  Tightness  in  man  in  all  the  powers  and  operations  of  his  soid, 
and  in  all  his  relations  to  God  and  the  universe.  This  rectitude  is  his  want  of  wants. 
The  want  of  it  involves  the  want  of  all  other  good.  1.  Rectitude  wiU  put  an  end 
to  all  the  painful  feehngs  which  afflict  the  individual  soul.  Conflict  of  passions — 
fear — jealousy — envy — ambition — remorse;  these,  and  kindred  feelings  which 
torment  the  individual  soul,  will  aU  disappear  when  rectitude  is  estabhshed.  2.  Rec- 
titude will  put  an  end  to  all  the  social  evils  which  afflict  the  state.  Monopoly — 
injustice — oppression — cupidity — the  source  of  poverty  and  feuds — would  all  go 
were  rectitude  established.  3.  Rectitude  would  put  an  end  to  all  religious  evils 
which  afflict  the  world.  Rectitude  is  the  panacea ;  it  wUl  heal  all  the  evils.  Well 
may  the  "  isles  wait  "  for  it.  Universal  conscience  is  crying  out  for  rectitude.  The 
fact  that  they  wait  for  it  implies — ( 1 )  That  they  have  a  deep  behef  in  its  existence. 
(2)  That  they  have  a  capacity  to  receive  it.     (3)  That  they  feel  its  necessity. 

II.  There  is  ▲  glorious  Being  engaged  to  establish  rectitude  in  the  world. 
"  He  shall  not  fail."  Who  is  He  ?  The  "  Servant,"  the  "  Elect "  of  Jehovah. 
Christ's  work  is  to  establish  rectitude.  He  died,  and  lives  again,  "  to  put  away 
sin."  I.  His  Hfe  gives  the  highest  expression  of  rectitude.  2.  His  death  gives  the 
highest  motives  to  rectitude.     3.  His  Spirit  supplies  the  highest  helps  to  rectitude. 

III.  This  work  of  establishing  rectitude  is  carried  on  with  envinciblh 
perseverance.  "  He  shall  not  fail,"  &c.  There  are  four  things  which  cause 
men  to  fail  and  be  discouraged  in  an  enterprise — 1.  The  want,  at  the  outset,  of  a 
full  appreciation  of  all  the  difficulties  that  would  arise  in  the  working  of  it  out  to 
completion.  But  Christ  saw  the  end  from  the  beginning.  All  the  arguments  of 
infidelity,  all  the  efforts  of  persecutors,  all  the  opposition  which  prejudice,  craft, 
and  depravity  would  ever  raise  in  any  age.  He  foresaw,  and  was  prepared  to  meet. 
2.  The  want  of  a  thorough  sympathy  with  the  undertaking.  Men  sometimes  begin 
a  work  from  certain  motives — gain  or  fame,  or  it  may  be  from  benevolence — 
but  with  no  hearty  sympathy;  and  the  consequence  is  that  their  little  interest  in  it 
gradually  decreases,  until  at  last  they  give  it  up  altogether;  they  "  fail  "  and  are 
"discouraged."  Will  Christ  never  "  fail  or  be  discouraged  "  on  this  aceount?  Never! 
His  whole  heart  is  in  it.  He  has  proved  His  interest  in  it  by  giving  His  hfe  to  promote 
it.  3.  The  want  of  a  thorough  acquiescence  of  the  conscience  in  the  imdertaking. 
Men  sometimes  begin  a  work,  and  they  find  that  it  is  not  such  that  their  conscience 
approves  of.  Though  it  may  be  lucrative — though  it  may  lead  them  to  fortune 
and  fame — yet  their  conscience  disapproves  it;  and  by  its  constant  rebukes  they 
are  forced  to  give  it  up.  But  Christ  will  never  "  fail  nor  be  discouraged  "  on  this 
account.  It  is  a  righteous  enterprise ;  it  is  f ullllhng  the  will  of  Heaven.  4.  The  want 
of  ti me  to  complete  the  undertaking.  Men  often  begin  a  work  to  which  they  at t  ach  vast 
importance,  and  which  meets  the  entire  sympathies  of  their  hearts  and  consciences, 
and  fail  in  its  accomphshment  for  the  want  of  time.     Death  comes  and  breaks  out 


CHAP,  xm.]  ISAIAH.  819 

purposes,  and  leaves  our  work  undone.  But  Clirisfc  will  never  "  fail  nor  be 
discouraged  "  on  this  account.  He  is  alive  to  live  for  ever.  Let  us  have  faith 
in  the  work  of  establishing  rectitude  in  the  world.  {Homilist.)  The  isles  shall 
wait  for  His  law. — Isles  or  coasts.  This  word,  denoting  properly  the  isles  and 
coasts  of  the  Mediterranean  Sea,  is  used  in  chaps,  xl.-lxvi.  representatively  of 
distant  regions  of  the  earth,  which  are,  moreover,  in  several  of  the  passages  personified 
by  the  prophet.  (Prof.  S.  B.  Driver,  D.D.)  Islands  have  not  been  formed  by 
chance;  they  are  part  of  the  wise  and  far-reaching  design  of  Him  who  "  weighed 
the  mountains  in  scales,"  and  holds  the  ocean  in  "  the  hollow  of  His  hands."  He 
made  for  a  special  purpose  those  little  fragments  of  the  earth,  and  shut  them  off 
from  the  gi'eat  continents  by  the  waters  of  the  sea,  and  placed  them  exactly  where 
they  are.  Many  islands  are  the  mountain- tops  of  old  submerged  lands;  and  what 
a  wonderful  change  took  place  in  the  old  climate  and  productions  in  consequence. 
Instead  of  snowy  and  stormy  wastes,  where  only  a  meagre  vegetation  struggled 
for  life,  there  sprang  up  a  lovely  paradise  of  calm  blue  skies  and  tropical  luxuriance. 
Many  islands  have  been  formed  by  volcanic  outbirrsts ;  and  it  is  amazing  what  a 
vast  number  of  islands  have  been  created  by  the  labours  of  soft,  tiny  creatures, 
hvmdreds  of  which  a  child's  tiny  hands  would  squash,  and  surrounded  with  coral 
reefs  which  have  stood  out  against  the  wildest  waves  of  the  ocean.  Islands  are 
of  the  most  beautiful  parts  of  the  world;  they  have  usually  milder  climates  than 
continents,  are  less  exposed  to  parching  droughts;  they  have  more  frequent  rain 
and  dew;  the  sunshine,  not  so  scorching,  is  tempered  by  sea  breezes  and  silvery 
clouds;  the  vegetation  also  is  of  a  softer  kind;  the  leaves  of  the  trees,  instead  of 
being  hard  and  dry  and  much  divided,  as  on  continental  areas,  are  broad  and  tender 
and  delicate.  Who  has  not  heard  of  the  summer  isles  where  the  breezes  are  fragrant 
with  spices,  and  birds  of  the  most  gorgeous  plumage  flit  through  the  groves  of 
graceful  palm  trees?  Lace-like  waterfalls  drip  languidly  from  rocks.  The  dreams 
of  the  most  ancient  nations  placed  the  heaven  of  bhss  in  fabled  isles,  where  they 
exaggerated  and  idealised  all  the  favomrable  conditions  in  the  loveliest  landscape 
with  which  they  were  familiar.  (H.  Macmillan,  D.D.)  The  Divine  separation 
of  mankind : — God  has  formed  islands  and  separated  them  from  the  great  lands, 
and  richly  furnished  them  for  human  habitation,  in  order  that  mankind  by  means 
of  them  might  be  broken  up  into  smaller  sections.  On  continents  human  beings 
have  always  been  apt  to  corrupt  each  other.  He  separated  mankind  into  distinct 
communities,  placed  them  in  different  scenes  and  circumstances,  and  effectually 
kept  them  apart  by  means  of  tractless  seas,  and  thus  the  passions  of  men  were 
confined  within  the  narrowest  limits,  and  rendered  comparatively  innocuous. 
By  this  method  of  separation  national  character  was  also  formed  and  educated  ; 
and  the  one  type  of  human  nature  at  the  beginning  developed  itself  into  every 
possible  modification  by  the  force  of  different  circumstances  and  experiences.  If 
there  were  no  individuaHty  among  nations  mankind  would  make  no  progress,  all 
human  societies  would  lose  the  mental  activity  wliich  distinguished  them.  For  such 
serious  and  gracious  purposes  God  separated  mankind  into  different  nations  and 
races,  and  placed  them  amid  varied  scenes  of  nature  and  circumstances  of  life. 
And  into  this  Divine  method  of  deaUng  with  mankind  the  existence  of  islands 
fitted  admirably  as  part  of  one  wise  and  gracious  scheme.  God  made  use  of 
islands  as  places  in  wliich  infant  races  might  receive  the  education  and  the  discipline 
which  should  afterwards  qualify  them  for  enlarged  intercourse  with  each  other 
when  the  sea  should  cease  to  be  an  estranging  barrier,  and  by  improved  methods 
of  communication  should  be  a  marriage-ring  uniting  nations.  It  was  on  islands 
chiefly  that  those  who  greatly  influenced  their  fellows  were  educated  imder  God's 
own  eye,  and  in  close  communion  with  heaven.  It  was  in  islands  chiefly  that 
those  great  events  began  which  ever  and  anon  raised  the  human  race  from  ignorance 
and  vice  to  nobler  aspirations  and  purer  ideals.  How  much  does  the  world  owe 
to  the  isles  of  Greece,  gilded  with  the  eternal  summer  of  human  memory,  where 
poetry  and  art  and  all  that  dignifies  and  blesses  human  fife  originated!  How 
much  does  the  world  owe  to  the  little  islands  of  Great  Britain  and  Ireland,  which 
have  colonised  the  largest  portions  of  the  globe,  wliich  have  been  the  bulwark 
of  political  freedom  and  the  channel  of  world-wide  enterprise,  and  to  whose  hospit- 
able shores  the  white  wake  of  every  ship  is  the  fittiag  avenue  of  approach!  (Ibid.) 
Islands  and  the  Oospel : — But  vast  as  has  been  the  influence  of  islands  in  connection 
with  the  civilisation  of  the  world,  they  have  had  stiU  greater  influence  in  coimection 
with  reUgion.  Islands  have  been  identified  from  the  beginning  with  the  progress 
of  Christ's  kingdom ;  and  there  is  not  in  all  history  a  more  romantic  chapter  than 


320  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xlu. 

that  which  records  the  part  which  islands  have  played  in  diffusing  the  knowledge 
of  Jesus  Christ  throughout  the  world.  The  men,  outside  the  apostolic  band,  who 
were  most  influential  in  the  spread  of  Christianity,  were  the  natives  of  islands. 
Nazan,  the  ancient  disciple,  as  he  is  called,  who  it  is  supposed  took  part  in  the 
first  preaching  of  the  Gospel  throughout  Galilee  by  the  seventy  disciples  whom 
Christ  sent  out  two  by  two,  and  whose  lavish  hospitality  and  great  zeal  in  the 
service  of  the  Church  drew  forth  the  love  and  admiration  of  all  the  brethren,  was 
a  native  of  the  island  of  Cyprus.  So  also  was  Barnabas,  to  whom,  after  Paul,  the 
early  Church  was  more  indebted  than  to  any  one  else.  It  was  to  the  birthplace 
of  this  remarkable  man  that  the  first  missionary  expedition  of  the  Christian  Church 
was  sent.  Several  years  before  the  mainland  of  Europe  received  the  Gospel,  Paul 
and  Barnabas  were  consecrated  by  the  Holy  Spirit  for  the  special  purpose  of 
evangelising  the  important  island  of  Cyprus,  which  was  the  bridge  of  commercial 
intercourse  between  the  Eastern  and  Western  worlds.  By  the  stepping-stones 
of  this  and  other  islands — of  the  Levant,  of  the  Grecian  Archipelago — Christianity 
proceeded  on  its  westward  march  from  the  land  where  it  was  nurtiired  on  the  lap 
of  Judaism  to  the  conquest  of  the  nations,  in  fulfilment  of  Christ's  own  command 
to  His  disciples,  "  Go  ye  into  all  the  world,  and  preach  the  Gospel  to  every  creature." 
After  the  time  of  the  apostles  the  early  missionaries  of  Christianity  to  Europe 
sought  refuge  in  the  islands  which  lie  off  the  coast  of  the  Mediterranean,  for  there 
they  could  have  the  best  security  from  the  troubles  of  those  rough  ages.  Near  the 
shore  of  Cannes,  in  the  south  of  France,  there  is  a  little  island  covered  with  ecclesiastic 
ruins  called  the  island  of  St.  Honore,  which  is  one  of  the  most  impressive  spots  in 
the  world.  It  was  by  that  island  that  the  Christianity  of  Palestine  and  Egypt  in 
the  fifth  century  came  to  Western  Europe  independent  of  Rome.  There  St. 
Patrick  was  educated,  who  brought  the  Gospel  to  Ireland ;  from  thence  St.  Columba 
brought  it  to  Scotland,  and  we  all  know  how  lona,  the  little  island  amid  the  clouds 
and  mists  of  the  wild  Atlantic,  formed  the  centre  which  drew  to  it,  and  from  whence 
were  dispersed,  all  the  spiritual  and  intellectual  forces  of  Christendom  during  its 
darkest  ages.  Besides  lona,  Lindisfame,  or  Holy  Isle,  off  the  coast  of  Northum- 
berland, afforded  retreat  to  St.  Cuthbert  and  to  his  followers,  from  whence  they 
preached  the  Gospel  to  the  rude  populations  of  the  mainland.  And  Malta  in  the 
Sliddle  Ages  preserved  the  fire  of  religion  burning  brightly  when  it  was  all  but 
extinguished  in  other  places,  and  by  the  Knights  Templars,  who  were  stirred  by 
a  wonderful  enthusiasm  in  the  cause  of  Christ.  It  was  to  the  East  Indies  that 
the  first  missions  of  the  Roman  Catholics  were  sent;  and  the  Island  of  Ceylon 
was  the  point  of  vantage  from  whence  South  India  was  taken  possession  of  for 
Christ.  St.  Francis  Xavier,  that  most  devoted  of  missionaries,  carried  the  Christian 
faith  to  the  island  of  Japan,  and  fevered  and  died  on  the  island  near  Canton,  from 
whence  he  attempted  to  attack  the  root  of  the  mighty  superstition  of  Buddhism 
in  the  jealously-guarded  land  of  China,  instead  of  merely  lopping  off  branches. 
And,  turning  to  other  parts  of  the  world.  Captain  Cook's  wonderful  discoveries 
among  the  South  Sea  Islands  created  profound  interest  in  the  new  types  of  humanity 
which  they  revealed,  and  led  to  the  formation  of  the  London  Missionary  Society. 
{Hid.)  Islands  sunk  in  savagery,  yet  Christianised : — It  may  be  said  that  the 
inhabitants  of  remote  islands,  on  account  of  their  isolation  from  great  centres 
of  civilisation,  have  lost  the  highest  capacities  of  the  race,  and  have  sunk  to  the 
lowest  depths  of  savagery.  Throughout  the  fair  paradises  of  Polynesia,  when 
first  discovered,  idolatry  prevailed  in  its  most  grovelling  form,  degrading  the  nations, 
and  tribal  wars  kept  the  people  in  a  state  of  constant  alarm;  cannibalism  cast  a 
haunting  shadow  over  many  a  lovely  island,  and  threatened  to  exterminate  the 
population.  Who  does  not  remember  the  brutal  murder  of  Captain  Cook  on  the 
scene  of  one  of  the  grandest  of  his  discoveries;  and  the  martyrdom  of  Williams 
and  Patterson  amid  circumstances  of  the  utmost  atrocity  towards  those  to  whom 
they  had  proved  the  truest  friends?  There  is  hardly  a  single  island  in  the  Pacific 
but  has  its  bloody  record  of  the  slaughter  of  these  devoted  men  who  first  came  to 
them  with  the  message  of  Divine  peace.  And  yet  nowhere  else  have  the  triumphs 
of  the  Cross  been  so  remarkable  as  on  the  islands  that  witnessed  these  barbarous 
acts.  The  simplicity  and  pliability  of  disposition  peculiar  to  insular  races  which 
have  made  them  the  easy  slaves  of  cruel  practices,  have  made  them,  on  the  other 
hand,  more  susceptible  to  the  power  of  Divine  grace.  They  were  not  hampered 
by  the  shackles  of  religious  organisations  which  had  grown  up  during  ages,  and 
which  had  extended  their  roots  so  far  and  deep  that  they  could  only  be  torn  up  at 
the  risk  of  destroying  the  whole  social  fabric  tnat  rested  upon  them.     They  had  no 


CHAP,  xm.]  ISAIAH.  321 

elaborate  caste  like  India,  no  gigantic  ritual  like  China,  becanse  of  the  almost 
insuperable  barriers  in  the  way.  They  were  far  less  self-sufficient  than  those 
who  inherited  the  ancient  religious  and  social  systems  of  the  great  continental 
areas ;  they  were,  like  children,  ready  to  be  attracted  by  any  novelty.  And  so  in 
spite  of  their  superstition  and  measureless  depravity,  like  the  publicans  and  sinners 
of  our  Lord's  time,  they  were  ready  to  receive  the  kingdom  of  heaven,  readier  to 
receive  the  kingdom  of  heaven  than  the  heathen  of  the  continental  lands  when 
in  God's  good  providence  that  kingdom  of  heaven  came  to  them.  The  Sandwich 
Islands,  where  Williams  was  martyred,  the  Fiji  Islands,  notorious  for  their  canni- 
balism, the  islands  of  New  Zealand,  the  abode  of  the  most  crafty  and  cruel  savages, 
all  were  brought  more  or  less  under  the  influence  of  Christ.  The  history  of  the 
spread  of  Christianity  in  Japan  and  Madagascar,  the  courage  and  fortitude  of  the 
converts  through  years  of  relentless  persecution,  and  the  calmness  with  which  they 
endured  tortures  from  which  death  was  a  merciful  relief,  form  one  of  the  most 
thrilling  chapters  in  the  history  of  Christian  missions.  {Ibid.)  Islands  the 
cradles  of  new  movements  : — Naturalists  tell  us  that  our  earth  from  time  to  time 
has  been  exhausted  by  bearing  countless  generations  of  plants  and  animals; 
and  has  only  recovered  its  fertilising  materials  under  the  baptism  of  the  great 
waters,  and  become  fit  for  bearing  new  life  when  the  sea  changed  its  bed.  Con- 
tinents are  losing  the  elements  which  are  necessary  for  building  up  the  bone  and 
brain  of  man  by  the  streams  and  rivers  that  carry  them  away  to  the  ocean;  and 
islands,  owing  to  the  way  in  which  they  have  been  produced  from  the  sea,  are  rich 
in  such  elements,  and  are  therefore  fitted  to  nourish  and  to  maintain  vigorous 
races.  This  is  one  reason  why  islands,  more  than  continents,  have  been  the 
cradles  of  new  movements  connected  with  the  progress  of  man;  and  it  may  be, 
reasoning  from  this  analogy,  that  if  we  in  this  old  island  impart  to  the  young  isles 
of  the  sea  the  knowledge  of  the  law  of  Christ  for  which  they  are  waiting,  newer 
and  more  vigorous  manifestations  and  developments  of  that  law  may  be  met  in 
those  islands  than  we  have  yet  seen;  Christianity  may  acquire  a  new  impulse 
from  the  fresh  force  and  enthusiasm  of  new  races,  and  the  things  that  have  been 
latent  in  it  may  blossom  and  bear  fruit  in  a  new  soil  for  the  good  of  the  world. 
It  may  be  that  the  isles  of  the  sea  that  now  wait  for  the  law  of  (Sirist,  shall  in  torn 
communicate  that  law  to  the  regions  from  which  they  originally  derived  it,  and 
which,  from  their  sloth  and  selfishness,  have  sunk  into  ignorance  and  darkness, 
just  as  the  candlestick  that  was  removed  from  places  once  bright  with  the  light  of 
the  truth  because  of  their  carelessness,  was  set  up  in  our  heathen  island  long  asto, 
(Ibid.) 

Vers.  5,  6.  Thus  saitli  God  the  Lord,  He  tliat  created  the  heavens. — The  onenest 

of  God  in  revelation  and  in  nature  : — The  first  of  the  two  verses  is  a  description  of  God; 
the  second  is  a  declaration  of  His  purposes.  What  is  the  declaration  which  is  intro- 
duced so  impressively?  It  is  often  an  idiom  of  prophetic  speech,  and  especially  of 
the  style  of  Isaiah,  when  a  declaration  is  to  be  made  respecting  the  work  of  redemp- 
tion, to  give  it  the  form  of  a  direct  address  to  the  Messiah,  and  to  declare  to  Him  the 
thing  which  God  was  about  to  perform.  Such  is  the  idiom  now  before  us.  "  I," 
that  is,  "  the  God  of  nature  "  who  had  just  been  described, — "  I,  the  Lord,  have 
called  Thee  in  righteousness  " — that  is,  "  I  who  created  the  heavens,  have  summoned 
Thee  as  the  Redeemer  of  men,  in  execution  of  My  righteous  purpose."  "  I  will  hold 
Thine  hand,  and  will  keep  Thee  " — that  is,  "  I,  the  Former  of  the  earth,  will  be  faithful 
imto  Thee."  "  I  will  give  Thee  for  a  covenant  of  the  people,  and  for  a  light  of  the 
Gentiles  " — that  is,  "  I,  the  Author  of  the  souls  of  men,  wfil  give  Thee  as  a  pledge 
of  My  love,  and  the  nations  shall  be  redeemed."  The  sentiment  is  that  the  God 
of  nature  is  the  God  also  of  redemption.  From  the  fact  that  the  Author  of  nature 
and  the  God  of  revelation  are  one,  we  may  infer — I.  That  religioits  investigation 
SHOULD  BE  chabactekised  BY  THE  SPIRIT  OP  DOCILE  INQUIRY.  If  there  be  One 
thing  which  more  than  another  vitiates  the  methods  by  which  men  form  their 
religious  opinions,  it  is  the  want  of  the  humility  of  inquirers  after  truth;  and  yet, 
if  there  be  one  thing  more  firmly  settled  than  another  in  the  methods  of  science,  it 
is  that  the  docUity  of  inquiry  after  truth  is  the  only  spirit  becoming  to  scientific  dis- 
covery. How  often  are  we  compelled  to  note  the  distinction,  that  in  religion  men  feel 
at  hberty  to  create  their  opinions;  while  in  natural  science,  and  in  all  that  domain  of 
truth  which  hes  outside  of  the  realm  of  conscience,  they  feel  bound  to  seek  for  their 
opinions.  In  the  one  case  we  assume  that  we  know,  in  the  other  we  consent  to  be 
taught,    n.  The  presumption  that  in  a  revealed  theology  will  be  found  a 

VOL  II. — 21 


322  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xlh. 

DEFINITB  AND  POSITIVE  SYSTEM  OP  TRUTH.  Side  by  side  with  Chxistian  dogmatism 
there  grows  up  a  Christianised  scepticism,  within  the  range  of  scriptural  thought. 
We  must  presume,  especially,  that  when  we  open  this  revelation  of  God  in  language, 
we  shall  come  upon  certain  verities  which  shall  be  patent,  on  the  face  of  the  record, 
to  unperverted  inquiry.  We  do  not  so  much  find  them  here,  as  that  they  find  us. 
They  are  verities  which  unbiassed  readers  in  all  ages  will  read  here,  and  will  believe; 
verities  which  infidelity  will  always  read  here;  and  verities  which  it  is  as  imphilo- 
Bophical  for  a  believer  in  the  inspiration  of  the  Bible  to  deny,  as  it  is  for  any  sane 
mind  to  refuse  credence  to  the  elementary  facts  of  geology,  or  of  anatomy.  More- 
over, we  must  presume  that  these  Scriptmres  contain  a  theology,  not  only  of  robust 
material,  and  of  graphic  outline,  but  of  such  firmness  of  construction  that  it  can  be 
positively  preached.  It  must  be  free  from  self-contradictions,  as  other  sciences  are, 
BO  that  an  athletic  faith  can  use  it.  And  we  must  look  for  a  theology  which,  when 
it  is  thus  preached,  shall  prove  itself  to  be  a  power  in  the  earth.  III.  The  cer- 
tainty THAT  THE  FACTS  OF  THESE  TWO  DEPARTMENTS  OF  God'S  WORKING  WILL  NEVER 
CONTRADICT  EACH  OTHER.  IV.  THAT  WE  SHOITLD  EXPECT  TO  FIND  THE  REVEALED 
GOVERNMENT  OF  GOD  TO  BE  A  SYSTEM  CHARACTERISED  BY  SACREDNESS  AND  UNI- 
FORMITY OF  LAW.  In  the  natural  world  we  find  no  such  thing  as  caprice.  Why, 
then,  should  we  not  expect  to  find  in  a  revelation  respecting  the  moral  world,  a 
similar  omnipresence  and  omnipotence  of  law?  It  would  be  instructive  to  pursue 
this  analogy  between  law  in  the  natural  world  and  law  in  God's  moral  government 
to  certain  other  results.  We  might  see — 1.  How  accordant  with  nature  it  is  that 
the  laws  of  religion  cannot  be  violated  with  impunity.  2.  How  natiu-al  it  is  that 
fatal  consequences  in  respect  of  religion  should  foUow  from  apparently  trifling 
disobedience  of  God's  commands.  3.  The  foundation  which  is  laid  in  the  natm-e  of 
things  for  that  law  of  God's  government  by  which  sin  often  reaches  over  from  the 
time  when  it  is  committed,  and  strikes  its  penalty  in  a  remote  experience  of  the 
sinner.  4.  We  might  infer  the  credibility  and  the  probabihty  that  the  sins  of  one 
brief  Ufe  on  earth  should  pass  on,  beyond  the  grave,  to  reap  their  reward  in  eternity. 
6.  The  naturalness  of  the  faith  that,  if  God  has  devised  any  remedial  scheme  to 
meet  the  emergency  of  sin,  it  must  be  one  that  shall  honour  delicately  and  rigidly 
the  sacredness  of  law.  V.  That  we  have  reason  to  expect  the  occurrence  op 
MYSTERIES  IN  A  REVEALED  THEOLOGY.  The  mysteries  of  theology  always  meet  us 
before  we  have  travelled  far  on  any  track  of  religious  inquiry.  But  this  is  no  anomaly 
pecuHar  to  religious  thought.  Science  in  the  world  of  matter  is  thwarted  in  all  its 
investigations,  sooner  or  later,  by  insolvable  mysteries.     VT.  A  confirmation  of 

OUR  FAITH  IN  the  CERTAINTY  OF  THIS  WORLD'S  CONVERSION  TO  CHRISTIANITY.       We 

are  too  often  unmindful  that  the  creation  of  this  world  and  the  redemption  of  this 
world  are,  in  a  truthful  sense,  parallel  acts  of  omnipotence.  It  is  as  certain  that  the 
one  wiU  occur  as  that  the  other  has  occurred;  for  the  revelation  of  that  which 
God  will  do  in  the  one  case  is  as  worthy  of  trust  as  the  history  of  that  which  He 
has  done  in  the  other.  This  luxuriance  of  metaphor  which  the  kingdom  of  nature 
yields  up  to  the  portraiture  of  the  kingdom  of  grace,  springs  from  no  fortuitous 
resemblances.  Our  God  is  one  God;  and  therefore  it  is  that  a  mind  inspired  to 
foresee  the  success  of  omnipotence  in  redemption,  carries  over  into  this  moral  king- 
dom its  conceptions  of  the  working  of  omnipotence  in  nature.  The  mountains, 
rivers,  seas,  flocks  of  Kedar,  sun,  moon,  in  which  God  has  wrought,  become,  not  only 
the  emblems,  but  the  pledges  of  the  mighty  works  which  He  wiU  do  for  man's 
recovery.  {A.  Phelps,  D.D.)  The  analogy  between  00(1' sworl-ing  in  revelation  and 
in  nature : — The  analogy  between  these  two  departments  of  God's  working  discloses 
some  striking  resemblances  of  method  in  the  details  of  His  work.  I.  A  resemblance 
between  the  Divine  methods  of  working  in  nature  and  in  grace  is  seen  in  the  law 
common  to  both  kingdoms,  that  great  results  ensue  from  feeble  beginnings.  2.  It 
is  also  a  law  of  the  two  kingdoms  of  God's  working,  that  results  are  often  for  a  long 
time  suppressed  from  human  view.  Kepler  said,  when  he  published  his  system  of 
astronomy,  that  the  world  had  waited  six  thousand  years  for  some  one  to  read  the 
heavens  aright.  The  coal  mines  of  Pennsylvania  and  the  quarries  of  Quincy 
were  forming  before  the  garden  of  Eden  existed.  Who  can  tell  us  why  the  western 
continent  lay  for  fifty-four  centuries  unknown  to  the  dominant  races  of  men?  Our 
God  is  one  God.  3.  It  is  furthermore  a  law  in  the  two  kingdoms  of  God's  working, 
that  results  often  come  to  human  view  suddenly  and  by  seeming  accident.  The 
kingdom  of  God  cometh  not  with  observation.  But  have  we  not  told  our  children 
of  the  falling  apple,  which  was  so  instructive  to  the  mind  of  Newton;  and  of  the 
invention  of  the  mariner's  compass  by  an  imknown  genius;  and  of  the  gold  mines 


CHAP.  XLH.]  ISAIAH.  323 

of  California,  which  a  labourer  accidentally  discovered  in  building  a  sawmill?  Our 
God  is  one  God.  4.  It  is  a  law  of  the  two  kingdoms  of  God's  working,  that  His  work 
proceeds  with  great  apparent  waste.  This  work  of  the  world's  conversion  is  a 
costly  labour.  But  God's  plans  have  this  evidence  of  their  greatness,  that  they  go 
on  with  that  which  to  us  appears  like  waste.  The  earth  every  year  produces  food 
sufficient  for  three  times  its  burden  of  inhabitants.  The  sun  wastes  two-thirds  of 
its  beams  on  trackless  waters  and  deserts.  The  stars  are  not  put  out,  like  your  street 
lamps,  when  the  traveller  has  no  further  need  of  them.  Poets  have  sung  of  flowers 
that  waste  their  sweetness.  God  works  on  a  generous  scale.  Even  of  suffering  Ho 
is  not  sparing  in  the  laws  of  His  providence.  How  much  of  apparently  useless 
suffering  is  endured  under  the  laws  of  disease!  What  a  waste  of  life  do  we 
eee  everywhere  in  the  death  of  the  young!  In  this  seeming  prodigality 
of  the  Divine  procedure,  we  see  evidence  that  God  has  plans  too  deep  for 
us  to  fathom.  And  these  plans  run  under  the  two  systems  of  nature  and  of  grace 
alike.     (Ibid.) 

Ver.  6.  I  the  Lord  have  called  thee  in  righteousness. — Go(Fs  covenant  with  man: 
— We  are  apt  to  understand  that  there  are  two  covenants,  respectively  called 
the  covenant  of  works  and  the  covenant  of  grace.  1.  Let  us  define  what  a  covenant 
is.  In  its  primary  sense  it  signifies  a  mutual  compact  or  agreement  between  two 
parties.  The  covenant  is  kept  on  the  one  side  by  those  conditions  being  ratified  in 
a  fuU  and  faithful  observance  of  them;  on  the  other  side  by  the  conferment  of  the 
benefit  upon  the  completion  of  the  conditions.  2.  When  viewing  God  and  man  as 
the  two  parties  between  whom  a  covenant  has  been  made,  we  perceive  that  there 
have  been  two  covenants  entered  into ;  in  each  the  benefit  offered  by  the  Father 
has  been  the  same,  viz.,  eternal  life,  but  the  terms  or  conditions  are  different. 
(1)  In  the  covenant  of  works,  the  condition  to  be  accepted  and  ratified  by  man 
was  single,  that  is,  obedience  to  the  moral  law  of  God,  which  law  contains  within 
its  sanctions  not  merely  an  obedience  to  any  positive  commands  or  imphed  wishes, 
but  an  inward  heart-observance  of  a  complete  hohness,  this  complete  holiness 
being  in  fact  itself  the  law,  and  any  deviation  whatever  from  the  prescription  of 
a  complete  hohness  being  an  infraction  of  the  law,  and  consequently  that  flaw 
in  the  covenanted  obedience  on  man's  part,  which  destroys  the  covenant  altogether, 
and  thus,  annulling  it,  renders  it  nugatory.  (2)  The  conditions  in  the  covenant 
of  grace  are  twofold,  repentance  and  faith,  obedience  to  the  law  constituting  no 
part  of  the  terms  on  which  God  wiU  confer  the  promised  boon,  though  according 
to  this.  He  wiU  regulate  the  degrees  of  glory  to  be  known  and  shared  in  and  through 
the  heavenly  immortaUty.  For  the  law  of  God  has  never  been  repealed,  and 
never  can  be;  neither  does  the  covenant  of  grace  at  aU  make  void  the  law,  naj', 
as  the  apostle  says,  "  it  establishes  it."  3.  An  ordinary  attention  to  the  constitu- 
tion of  these  two  covenants  will  show  us  that  there  is  between  God  and  man,  now 
(the  "  now  "  taking  in  the  position  and  history  of  man  from  the  fall,  to  the  finished 
and  ultimate  recovery  of  redemption)  but  this  one  covenant  of  grace.  Consider, 
and  this  partly  by  contrasting  the  two,  in  what  tliis  second  or  new  covenant  con- 
sists. (1)  It  agrees  with  the  first  in  this,  (a)  that  the  ultimate  object  is  the  same, 
viz.,  everlasting  hfe  for  man;  (6)  that  in  God's  part  of  the  contract  the  promise 
attached  to  it  is  the  same.  (2)  It  differs  from  the  other  in  these  respects.  That 
a  third  party  is  introduced— the  Mediator  Christ  Jesus,  the  Son  of  God.  That 
on  man's  part  the  conditions  are  different,  repentance  and  faith  being  in  the  stead 
of  obedience.  4.  See  the  vital  importance  of  understanding  the  truth  with  respect 
to  the  two  covenants.  There  are  not  two  covenants.  There  never  have  been 
two  co-existing  covenants.  When  man  broke  the  first,  it  was  at  an  end.  Morally 
spealcing,  it  could  not  be  re-instituted ;  because,  the  nature  of  man  having  become 
sinful,  and  this  sinfulness  a  necessary  entailment  on  aU  his  childi-en,  it  was  rendered 
impossible  for  man  to  keep  a  covenant  of  works.  And  a  covenant  broken  is  no 
longer  a  covenant.  God,  then,  in  His  mercy  and  love,  instituted  another  covenant, 
the  same  as  to  intent,  but  differing  in  its  conditions  for  man,  prescribing  conditions 
which  he  could  observe,  because  of  the  new  provision  made  in  the  Mediator  Christ 
Jesus,  by  whom  the  law  should  be  inviolably  kept,  and  so  a  justifying  righteousness 
procured,  and  by  whom  a  fuU,  perfect,  and  sufficient  sacrifice  should  be  made  in 
the  offering  of  His  own  spotless  body  for  the  sins  of  the  whole  world.  See  how 
this  strikes  at  the  root  of  all  man's  pride  and  self-dependence,  and  attempts  at 
working  out  a  self-righteousness  for  his  justification.  See,  too,  the  surpassing 
consideration  of  God  for  the  poor,condemned  helpless,  sinner.  See  also  the  wondrous 


324  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  ilii. 

force  of  our  text.  It  was  to  the  dearly-beloved  Son  that  God  said,  "  I,  the  Lord, 
have  called  Thee  in  righteousness,"  &c.  Because  on  Him  devolved  the  work 
of  rescue,  because  He  is  the  Mediator,  because  He  will  ensure  the  final  victory, 
because  in  Him  the  new  covenant  was  opened,  in  Him  established,  by  Him  main- 
tained. Himself  is  called  the  covenant.  To  reject  Him  is  to  reject  the  covenant ; 
to  look  anywhere  else  for  salvation,  to  attempt  any  other  way  to  God's  favour 
than  by  Him,  to  try  any  other  terms  than  those  of  His  Grospel,  is  to  reject  Him ; 
and  that  is  to  reject  the  covenant  of  Grod  and  to  enter  into  covenant  with  death. 
{R.  H.  Davies,  B.A.)  Ood'a  calling : — The  act  of  calling  here  impUes — 1.  Selec- 
tion. 2.  Designation-  3.  Providential  introduction  to  God's  service.  (J.  A. 
Alexander.)  Called  in  righteousness,  in  accordance  with  a  steadfast  and  con- 
sistent purpose.  {Prof.  J.  Skinner,  D.D.)  And  give  Thee  for  a  covenant 
of  the  people. — "  A  covenant  of  the  people,"  a  negotiator  between  God  and  the 
people.  (J.  A.  Alexander.)  Israel  a  Mediator: — Not  only  the  Messiah,  but  the 
Israel  of  God  was  sent  to  be  a  mediator  or  connecting  link  between  Jehovah  and 
the  nations.     {Hid.)        The  new  covenant  of  free  grace: — I.  Who   it  is   that 

SPEAKS  THIS  GEACI0T7S  LANQTJAQK.  The  Lord.  11.  ThK  PeRSON  TO  WHOM  THI3 
GRACIOUS  LANaUAGB  IS  DIEECTBD  AND   SPOKEN.      Christ.      HI.   WhAT  He  SPEAKS 

TTNTO  Christ  herb,  even  gracious  language  in  respect  of  us.  "  He  will  give  Him 
for  a  covenant."  IV.  Unto  whom  the  Father  gives  Christ  for  a  covenant. 
"  Unto  the  people,  and  unto  the  Gentiles  ";  that  is,  to  Jews  and  to  Gentiles,  to 
all  sorts  of  people.  V.  The  end  and  purpose  for  which  the  Father  gives 
Him  to  be  a  covenant  unto  the  people.  "  To  open  the  blind  eyes,  to  bring 
the  prisoners  out  of  prison."  {T.  Crisp,  D.D.)  Christ  a  covenant  to  open  blind 
eyes: — I.  What  it  is  fob  Christ  to  be  a  covenant,  or,  the  covenant. 
II.  What  it  is  for  Christ  to  be  given  to  be  a  covenant.  HE.  What  it  is  for 
Christ  to  be  a  covenant  to  open  the  blind  eyes.  IV.  To  whom  this  Christ 
IS  given  to  be  a  covenant.  (Ibid.)  "  A  covenant  of  the  people  "  .• — The  idea 
must  be  something  like  this:  the  Divine  ideal  represented  by  the  Servant  of  the 
Lord  becomes  the  basis  of  a  new  national  life,  inasmuch  as  it  expresses  that  for 
the  sake  of  which  Jehovah  enters  into  a  new  covenant  relation  with  His  people. 
{Prof.  J.  Skinner,  D.D.)  A  word  to  go  home  on: — The  saintly  Miss  Frances 
Ridley  Havergal  literally  lived  and  moved  in  the  Word  of  God.  It  was  her  con- 
stant solace,  delight,  and  inspiration.  It  is  related  of  her  that,  on  the  last  day 
of  her  life,  she  asked  a  friend  to  read  to  her  the  forty-second  chapter  of  Isaiah. 
When  the  friend  read  the  sixth  verse,  "  I  the  Lord  have  called  thee  in  righteousnesa 
and  will  hold  thine  hand,  and  will  keep  thee,"  Miss  Havergal  stopped  her.  "  Called 
— held — kept — used,"  she  whispered.  "  Well,  I  will  just  go  home  on  that."  And 
she  did  "  go  home  on  that,"  as  on  a  celestial  chariot,  and  the  home-going  was  a 
triumph,  with  an  abundant  entrance  into  the  city  of  God.     (Christian  Budget). 

Ver.  7.  To  open  the  blind  eyes. — Opening  blind  eyes : — What  a  grievous 
affliction  is  blindness!  It  was  no  frivolous  boon  which  Christ,  in  the  days  of 
His  sojoiu-n  on  earth,  thought  proper  to  confer,  when,  in  the  external  sense. 
He  opened  blind  eyes.  In  the  paragraph  of  which  the  text  is  a  part,  Jehovah 
is  describing  the  Messiah  in  His  spiritual  character  and  work  ;  and,  great  as 
the  marvel  of  removing  natural  blindness  was,  and  great  as  similar  miracles  were 
which  Christ  performed,  their  principal  value  consisted  in  their  being  symbols 
and  pledges  of  those  spiritual  operations  which  He  could  accomplish  on  the 
souls  of  men.  L  The  calajhty  of  spiritual  blindness  which  has  ovjeb- 
taken  our  race.  You  would  very  greatly  aggravate  the  evil  of  natural  blind- 
ness by  dilating  on  the  numerous  and  diversified  beauties  of  nature,  for  the  poor 
blind  man  sees  none  of  these  things!  But  how  much  greater  is  the  calamity 
by  which  the  soul  is  excluded  from  the  sight  of  the  glory  of  God!  There  is 
very  high  criminaUty  connected  with  the  origin  of  this  spiritual  blindness.  The 
Divine  displeasure  never  arises  without  a  cause,  or  beyond  the  cause.  What, 
then,  must  have  been  the  cause  which  led  to  such  a  fatal  condition?  The 
incontestable  and  melancholy  fact  is,  that  man  has  sinned!  As  there  was  high 
criminality  cormected  with  the  origin  of  this  blindness,  so  there  is  high  criminality 
connected  with  the  continuance  of  it.  If  men,  struck  with  this  blindness,  were 
to  humble  themselves  on  account  of  it,  it  would  be  some  alleviation  of  the  matter; 
but,  generally,  I  find  men  taking  advantage  of  their  darkness,  and  receding  further 
and  further  from  God;  and,  indeed,  many  of  them  seem  never  to  be  so  com- 
pletely happy  as  when  they  have  most  effectually  succeeded  in  banishing  all 


CHAP,  xui.]  ISAIAH.  S25 

thought  of  God.  This  spiritual  blindness  is  so  complete  that  it  leads  a  man 
to  pervert  the  very  instruments  which  God  has  appointed  for  its  removaL  Take 
an  observation  of  the  state  of  mankind  around  us,  and  see  whether  or  not  it 
sustains  this  description.  11.  The  great  ordina2TCB  of  Jehovah  fob  thi 
EBMOVAL  OF  THIS  CALAMITY.  See  what  light  Christ  has  thrown  on  the  character 
of  God!  Consider  the  light  which  He  has  thrown  on  the  providence  around 
us.  The  difficulties  of  the  virtuous,  and  the  shouting  success  of  the  villainous, 
almost  seemed,  to  conscientious  men,  to  indicate  very  bad  management  on  the 
part  of  God;  and  they  have  had  recourse  to  a  great  many  theories  to  explain  it. 
Christ  has  thrown  light  on  the  afflictions  which  happen  to  the  people  of  God.  And 
on  that  immortality  which  is  before  us.  And  on  the  spiritualities  which  are 
required  within  us.  HI.  The  geandeue  of  that  opeeation  of  the  Spieit 
BY  which  the  eemoval  op  this  spieittjal  blindness  is  effected.  {J.  E. 
Beaumont,  M.D.)  New  sight  causes  great  joy: — I  do  not  wonder  that,  when 
a  man  gets  this  light  into  his  soul,  he  should  be  overjoyed.  A  young  woman 
had  hved  to  the  age  of  eighteen  without  seeing  at  all.  Dr.  Boyle  watched  the 
performance  of  an  operation  upon  her,  and  he  has  described,  as  onJy  a  philosopher 
could  describe,  what  took  place.  For  some  time  they  were  afraid  she  would 
lose  her  reason,  so  overcome  was  she  by  the  innumerable  beauties  which  so  sud- 
denly burst  in  upon  her.  {Ibid.)  A  social  saviour: — This  is  the  land  of  man 
needed  in  aU  ages.  We  have  critics  enough,  we  have  judges  in  great  abundance, 
we  have  speculators  more  than  can  be  overtaken  by  statistical  genius;  we  want 
another  kind  of  man,  and  we  seek  for  him  no  better  description  than  that  which 
is  outlined  by  the  prophet.  We  want  moral  helpers,  social  saviours,  personal 
healers  and  comforters.  Shall  we  apply  these  words  to  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ  T 
They  will  fit  the  occasion  exactly.  In  Him  they  would  seem  to  secure  their 
amplest  and  completest  realisation.  {J.  Parker,  D.D.)  Christianity  opens 
eyes — never  closes  them.  (Ibid.)  Victor  Emmanuel,  emancipator : — We  gladly 
survey  the  effectual  operations  of  Jesus  the  Saviour,  the  true  Victor  Em- 
manuel, who  comes  to  set  men  free  from  the  bondage  of  their  sins.  I.  Consider 
who  it  is  that  sends  Jesus  Christ  to  accomplish  the  libeeatton  of  tse 
SONS  of  men,  because  much  wiU  depend  upon  the  Liberator's  credentials,  the 
authority  by  which  He  is  warranted,  and  the  power  by  which  He  is  backed.  We 
sing  for  joy  of  heart  as  we  see  that  the  Infinite  God  Himself  commissioned  the 
Lord  Jesus  to  be  the  DeUverer  of  men;  and  He  did  this — 1.  In  EQs  capacity 
as  Creator  (ver.  6).  2.  He  also  describes  Himself  as  the  life-giver  (ver.  5). 
3.  The  faithful  God.  "  I  the  Lord  have  called  Thee  in  righteousness  "  (ver.  6) — 
that  is  to  say,  the  God  who  sends  Christ  the  Saviour  is  not  one  who  plays  with 
words,  and  having  given  a  promise  to-day,  retracts  it  to-morrow.  4.  The  ever- 
blessed  sender  of  the  Lord  Jesus  is  omnipotent.  "  And  will  hold  thine  hand, 
and  will  keep  Thee."  By  which  is  meant  that  God  will  give  to  the  Mediator 
all  His  power.     Christ  is  the  power  of  God.     11.   The  sent  One  HiMSSiiF. 

1.  Jesus  is  a  chosen  one.     "  Mine  elect,  in  whom  My  soul  delighteth"  (ver.  1). 

2.  Jesus  is  anointed  to  this  work.  "  I  have  put  My  Spirit  upon  Him."  The 
Holy  Spirit  is  the  greatest  of  all  actors  in  the  world  of  mind.  He  it  is  who  can 
illuminate,  persuade,  and  control  the  spirits  of  men.  3.  The  Redeemer  is  spoken 
of  as  being  gentle  and  lowly  of  heart,  which  should  commend  Him  much  to  every 
lowly  and  contrite  spirit  (ver.  3).  4.  The  Christ  who  has  come  to  save  the  sons 
of  men  is  persevering  to  the  last  degree  (ver.  4).  LH.  The  work  itself.  The 
Messiah's  work  of  grace  is  divided  into  three  parts.  1.  To  open  the  blind  eyes. 
Man's  understanding  is  perverted  from  the  knowledge  of  God,  from  a  true  sense 
of  sin,  from  a  reahsation  of  Divine  justice,  from  a  right  estimate  of  salvation. 
The  understanding,  which  is  the  eye  of  the  soul,  is  darkened.  But  when  the 
anointed  Saviour  comes.  He  removes  the  scales  of  our  mental  ophthalmia,  and 
in  the  light  of  God  we  see  light.  2.  To  bring  out  the  prisoners  from  the  prison. 
Habits  of  sin,  Uke  iron  nets,  surround  the  sinner,  and  he  cannot  escape  their 
meshes.  Faith  in  the  Lord  Jesus  is  the  end  of  bondage  and  the  dawn  of  free- 
dom. 3.  Bringing  them  that  sit  in  darkness  out  of  the  prison-house.  Thia 
we  will  refer  to  those  who  are  truly  emancipated,  and  yet  by  reason  of  despondency 
sit  down  in  the  dark  dungeon.  IV.  What  is  the  design  of  God  in  all  thisT 
"  I  am  the  Lord:  that  is  My  name:  and  My  glory  wHl  I  not  give  to  another  " 
(ver.  8).  (C.  H.  Spurgeon.)  Stages  of  liberty: — Men  are  in  various  stages  of 
liberty.  We  are  not  all  equally  the  free  men  of  God.  There  are  men  even  now 
who  are  under  the  disadvantage  of  prejudice.     Even  to-day  superstition  lives — 


326  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xlh. 

chilling,  fear-exciting,  soul-depressing  superstition.      There  are  those  who  still 
live  in  the  letter  of  the  Word.     (J.  Parker,  D.D.) 

Ver.  8.  I  am  the  Lord :  that  is  My  name. — Names: — The  name  of  a  thing, 
])rovided  it  is  a  true  and  adequate  one,  denotes  the  essential  nature  of  that 
thing.  When  a  chemist  has  discovered  a  new  substance,  he  is,  of  course,  com- 
l)elled  to  invent  a  new  name  for  it;  and  he  seeks  a  term  that  will  indicate  its 
distinctive  properties.  When,  for  instance,  that  gas  which  illuminates  our 
streets  and  dwellings  was  first  discovered,  it  was  supposed  to  be  the  constituent 
matter  of  heat,  and  the  name  "  phlogiston  "  was  given  to  it — a  name  that  signifies 
inflammability.  But  when  Cavendish  afterwards  more  carefully  analysed  its 
nature  and  properties,  and  discovered  that  it  enters  very  largely  into  the  pro- 
duction of  water,  it  received  the  name  of  hydrogen.  In  each  of  these  instances 
the  term  was  intended  to  denote  the  intrinsic  nature  and  properties  of  the  thing. 
That  nomenclature  which  Adam  originated  at  the  express  command  of  God,  and 
which  the  pen  of  inspiration  has  recorded  as  a  fact,  though  it  has  not  specified 
it  in  detail,  must  have  been  pertinent  and  exhaustive.  The  names  were  the 
things,  the  natures,  themselves.  (O.  T.  Shedd,  D.D.)  Names: — Plato  (Cra- 
tylus,  390)  represents  Socrates  as  saying  that  "  the  right  imposition  of  names 
is  no  easy  matter,  and  belongs  not  to  any  and  every  body,  but  only  to  him  who 
has  an  insight  into  the  nature  of  things."  (Ibid.)  God's  name: — God  has 
a  name — not  given  to  Him  by  Adam,  or  any  finite  creature,  but  self-uttered 
and  self-imposed.  The  denomination  which  God  prefers  for  Himself,  the  name 
which  He  chooses  before  all  others  as  indicative  of  His  nature,  is  I  am,  or  its 
equivalent,  Jehovah.  Whenever  the  word  Jehovah  is  employed  in  the  Old  Testa- 
ment as  the  proper  name  of  God,  it  announces  the  same  doctrine  of  His  necessary 
existence  that  was  taught  to  Moses  when  he  was  commanded  to  say  to  His  people 
that  I  AM  had  sent  him  unto  them.  The  English  name  for  the  Deity,  our  word 
God,  indicates  that  He  is  "  good  " — making  prominent  a  moral  quality.  The 
Greek  and  Latin  world  employed  a  term  {debs,  deus)  that  lays  emphasis  upon 
that  characteristic  of  the  Deity  whereby  He  orders  and  governs  the  universe. 
(This  etymology  is  given  by  Herodotus,  ii.  52.)  According  to  the  Greek  and 
Roman  conception,  God  is  the  imperial  Being  who  arranges  and  rules.  But 
the  Hebrew,  divinely  instructed  upon  this  subject,  chose  a  term  which  refers 
not  to  any  particular  attribute  or  quality,  but  to  the  very  being  and  essence 
of  God,  and  teaches  the  world  that  God  must  be — that  He  not  only  exists,  but 
cannot  logically  be  conceived  of  as  non-existent.  {Ibid.)  The  glorification 
of  God: — The  text  leads  us  to  raise  the  question,  Wliat  is  it  to  glorify  God?  It 
is  implied  in  glorifying  God — I.  That  we  think  of  Him  and  recognise  His 
EXISTENCE.  The  duty  required  in  the  first  commandment,"  says  the  Larger 
Catechism,  "  is  to  worship  and  glorify  God,  by  thinking,  meditating  upon,  and 
remembering  Him."  No  higher  dishonour  can  be  done  to  any  being  than  to 
forget  and  ignore  him.  But  this  is  the  habitual  attitude  of  man's  mind  toward 
the  Everlasting  God.  It  does  not  relieve  the  matter  to  say  that  this  is  mere  passive 
forgetfulness,  and  that  there  is  no  deUberate  effort  to  do  dishonoiur  to  God.  This 
passive  forgetfulness  itself  is  the  highest  kind  of  indignity;  and  is  so  represented 
in  the  Scriptures.  "  The  wicked  shall  be  turned  into  hell,  and  all  the  nations 
that  forget  God.  Now  consider  this,  ye  that  forget  God,  lest  I  tear  you  in  pieces, 
and  there  be  none  to  deliver."  This  unthinking  forgetfulness  of  the  greatest 
and  most  glorious  Being  in  the  universe  betokens  an  utter  unconcern  towards 
Him.  Now,  whoever  would  glorify  God  must  begin  by  reversing  all  this.  No 
man  has  made  even  a  beginning  in  religion,  until  he  has  said,  reverently,  and 
feeling  the  truth  of  what  he  says:  "  Thou  art  Jehovah,  the  Great  I  am;  that 
is  Thy  name  and  Thy  nature;  and  Thy  glory  Thou  wilt  not  give  to  another, 
neither  Thy  praise  to  graven  images."  II.  That  we  think  of  Him  as  thh 
FiusT  Cause  and  last  end  of  all  things.  Here,  again,  we  can  arrive  at  the 
truth  by  the  way  of  contrast;  by  considering  what  is  the  common  course  of  man's 
thought  and  feeling.  Man  naturally  thinks  of  himself  as  the  chief  cause,  and 
the  final  end.  \.  Whoever  would  glorify  God  must  think  of  and  recognise  God 
as  the  First  Cause  of  all  things.  If  he  possesses  a  strong  intellect,  or  a  cultivated 
taste,  instead  of  attributing  them  to  his  own  diligence  in  self-discipline  and  self- 
cultivation,  he  must  trace  them  back  to  the  author  of  his  intellectual  constitu- 
tion, who  not  only  gave  him  all  his  original  endowments,  but  has  enabled  him 
to  be  diligent  in  the  use  and  discipline  of  them.     If  he  possess  great  wealth,  instead 


CHAP.  XLH.]  ISAIAH.  327 

of  saying  in  his  heart,  "  My  hand  and  brain  have  gotten  me  this,"  he  should 
acknowledge  the  Providence  that  has  favoured  his  plans  and  enterprises,  and 
without  which  his  enterprises,  Uke  those  of  many  men  around  him,  would  have 
gone  awry,  and  utterly  failed.  Whatever  be  the  earthly  good  which  anyone 
holds  in  his  possession,  its  ultimate  origin  and  authorship  must  be  carried  back 
to  the  First  Cause  of  all  things.  And  this,  too,  must  become  the  natural  and 
easy  action  of  the  mind  and  heart,  in  order  perfectly  to  glorify  God.  2.  It  is 
implied  in  glorifying  God,  that  we  recognise  Him  as  the  last  end  of  all  things. 
Every  being  and  thing  must  have  a  final  end — a  terminus.  The  mineral  kingdom 
is  made  for  the  vegetable  kingdom;  the  vegetable  kingdom  for  the  animal  king- 
dom; the  animal  kingdom  for  man;  and  all  of  them  together  are  made  for  God. 
Go  through  all  the  ranges  of  creation,  from  the  molecule  of  matter  to  the  seraphim, 
and  if  you  ask  for  the  final  pmrpose  of  its  creation,  the  reply  is,  the  glory  of  the 
Maker.  And  this  is  reasonable.  For  God  is  the  greatest  and  most  important,  if  we 
may  use  the  word  in  such  a  connection,  of  all  beings.  In  the  light  of  this  doctrine 
we  see — (1)  The  need  of  the  regeneration  of  the  human  soiil.  (2)  Why  the  iiidi- 
vidual  Christian  is  imperfectly  blessed  of  God.  His  service  is  imperfect.  There  is 
much  worship  of  self  in  connection  with  his  worship  of  God.  How  many  of  one 
prayers  are  vitiated  by  unbelief;  but  unbelief  is  a  species  of  dishonour  to  God. 
It  is  impossible,  in  this  condition  of  the  soul,  that  we  should  experience  the  per- 
fection of  religious  joy.  "  I  am  Jehovah,"  saith  God;  "  that  is  My  name,  and 
My  glory  will  I  not  give  to  another."  (3)  This  subject  discloses  the  reason  of 
languid  vitality  in  the  Church,  and  its  slow  growth  in  numbers  and  influence. 
The  Christian  life  is  in  low  tone,  because  the  Church  gives  glory  to  another 
than  God.  (Ibid.)  The  glorification  of  God: — It  is  an  objection  of  the 
sceptic,  that  this  perpetual  assertion  in  the  Scriptures  that  God  is  the  chief 
end  of  creation,  and  this  perpetual  demand  that  the  creature  glorify  Him,  is  only 
a  species  of  infinite  egotism;  that  in  making  the  whole  unlimited  universe  sub- 
servient to  Him  and  His  purposes,  the  Deity  is  only  exhibiting  selfishness  upon 
an  immense  scale.  But  this  objection  overlooks  the  fact  that  God  is  an  infinitely 
greater  and  higher  being  than  any  or  all  of  His  creatures;  and  that  from  the 
very  nature  of  the  case  the  less  must  be  subordinated  to  the  greater.  Is  it 
egotism,  when  man  employs  in  his  service  his  ox  or  his  ass  ?  Is  it  selfishness,  when 
the  rose  or  the  Uly  takes  up  into  its  own  fabric  and  tissue  the  inanimate  qualities 
of  matter,  and  converts  the  duU  and  colomrless  elements  of  the  clod  into  hues 
and  odours,  into  beauty  and  bloom?  There  would  be  egotism  in  the  procedure, 
if  man  were  of  no  higher  grade  of  existence  than  the  ox  or  the  ass.  There  would 
be  selfishness,  if  the  rose  and  the  Uly  were  upon  the  same  level  with  the  inanimate 
elements  of  matter.  But  the  greater  dignity  in  each  instance  justifies  the  use 
and  the  subordination.  And  so  it  is,  only  in  an  infinitely  greater  degree,  in  the 
case  when  the  whole  creation  is  subordinated  and  made  to  serve  and  glorify  the 
Creator.  The  distance  between  man  and  his  ox,  between  the  lily  and  the  particle 
of  moisture  which  it  imbibes,  is  appreciable.  It  is  not  infinite.  But  the  distance 
between  God  and  the  highest  of  His  archangels  is  beyond  computation.  {Ibid.) 
The  rights  of  God  maintained: — God  is  jealous  of  His  honour.  The  first  four 
commandments  of  the  decalogue  have  special  reference  to  His  rights,  and  are 
couched  in  the  most  forcible  and  impressive  terms.  But,  though  these  injunctions 
are  reasonable,  they  have  been  repeatedly  violated  by  all  the  nations  of  the  earth. 
This  declaration  was  made  in  cormection  with  the  mission  of  the  Messiah.  But 
the  text  is  of  vital  interest  to  ourselves.  It  is  not  the  idolater  only  that  dis- 
honours God;  but  every  impenitent  sinner,  and  every  unfaithful  follower  of 
Christ.  I.  The  import  op  God's  name.  "  Jehovah."  By  this  name  God 
revealed  Himself  to  Moses  "  (Ex.  vi.  3).  1.  It  means  the  Being  that  exists. 
2.  It  implies  that  He  is  the  Fountain  of  all  being.  3.  That  He  is  also  the  Pre- 
server of  aU  being.  And  the  subhmest  feature  in  His  providence  is  that  which 
was  exhibited  in  the  redemption  of  mankind.  The  name  Jehovah  leads  us  to 
this  point.  It  implies  that  God  is  the  Savioiur  of  the  world,  and  for  this  reason, 
above  all  others  (since,  for  a  sinful  world  there  could  have  been  no  preservation 
without  redemption),  the  great  Preserver  of  the  world.  That  this,  too,  is  the 
import  of  the  name,  is  evident  from  the  attributes  ascribed  to  God  in  connection 
with  it,  by  Moses:  "  Jehovah,  Jehovah  God,  merciful  and  gracious,  long-suffering, 
and  abimdant  in  goodness  and  truth."  In  Christ,  the  character  of  God  as  the 
merciful  I  am,  is  clearly  manifested  (John  i.  14.)  II.  The  qloey  which  belongs 
TO  Him.      The  term  "  glory  "  is  sometimes  used  in  reference  to  the  visible  symbol 


328  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLU8TBAT0B.  [chap.  xm. 

of  Jehovah's  presence — the  Shechinah;  at  other  times  it  denotes  the  manifestation 
of  His  power  and  wisdom  in  creation,  and  at  other  times  again  it  is  employed  in 
a  more  general  sense,  to  set  forth  the  attributes  and  perfections  of  His  character. 
But  in  the  text  the  word  is  equivalent  to  honour,  worship,  adoration,  or  whatever 
else  God  lays  claim  to  from  His  creatures'  hands,  and  hence  the  latter  clause  of 
the  passage  may  be  viewed,  though  with  an  intensity  of  meaning,  as  explanatory 
of  the  former.  "  My  glory  will  I  not  give  to  another,  neither  My  praise  to  graven 
images."  That  is,  that  which  belongs  to  Me  as  Jehovah,  I  delegate  to  no  one. 
What,  then,  is  the  glory  which  belongs  exclusively  to  God?  1.  His  is  the  glory 
of  the  creation  of  all  things.  He  is  the  Fountain  of  being.  2.  His  is  the  glory 
of  the  world's  redemption.  3.  His  is  the  glory  of  the  application  of  redemption 
to  the  case  of  each  individual  believer  in  Christ  Jesus.  4.  His  is  the  glory  of 
the  advancement  of  mankind  in  knowledge,  holiness,  and  peace.  III.  His  detbb- 
MiNATiON  TO  MAINTAIN  His  EIGHTS.  "  I  will  not  give  My  gloiy  to  another,  neither 
My  praise  to  graven  images."  In  this  impressive  declaration  God  speaks  to 
men  of  every  class,  of  every  country,  and  of  every  age.  This  declaration  may 
be  viewed  as  corrective  of — 1.  The  sin  of  idolatry.  2.  The  sin  of  pride.  3.  The 
sin  of  unbelief.  (Thornley  Smith.)  The  glory  of  God  incommunicable: — I.  Th> 
Divine  supremacy.  "  I  am  the  Lord,  that  is  My  name."  1.  This  assertion 
involves  the  idea  of  the  Divine  existence.  2.  The  assertion  suggests  the  idea 
that  He  stands  infinitely  distinguished  from  all  creatures  in  the  manner  or 
mode  of  His  existence.  3.  This  language  intimates  dominion.  He  is  related 
to  nature,  and  He  is  related  to  natiu-e  necessarily  and  intimately,  because  nature 
is  the  production  of  His  skill  and  power.  We  cannot  think  of  God  as  the  Creator, 
without  being  compelled  to  acknowledge  His  right  and  authority  to  legislate 
and  govern.  4.  This  phrase  is  applicable  to  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ.  We  have 
the  most  valid  of  all  testimony  in  connection  with  the  point,  namely,  the  express 
and  unqualified  assertion  of  the  Redeemer  Himself,  Before  Abraham  was,  I 
am."  Here  we  have  the  same  terms  employed,  and  employed  in  the  same  sense. 
II.  The  Divtne  purpose.  "  My  glory  will  I  not  give  to  another,  nor  My  praise 
to  graven  images."  L  He  will  not  give  His  glory  to  nature.  Nature  exists, 
but  only  exists  as  an  effect.  In  nature  there  is  no  originality.  2.  He  will  not 
give  His  "  praise  to  graven  images."  3.  He  will  not  give  His  glory  to  the  Church. 
(1)  He  does  not  give  His  glory  to  the  ministers  of  the  Church.  They  are  only 
the  stewards  of  the  mysteries  of  His  kingdom.  They  are  but  the  messengers 
of  the  Churches.  They  are  but  stars,  deriving  all  their  light  from  the  great  orb 
of  day.  (2)  God,  we  are  likewise  assured,  will  not  give  His  glory  to  ordinances. 
The  sacraments,  whatever  may  be  the  mystery  and  the  sacredness  associated 
with  them,  are  but  means.  Conclusion — 1.  Learn  from  this  subject  the  value 
of  the  Bible.  This  is  the  only  and  the  great  source  of  all  correct  information 
and  sound  theology  as  to  the  essence  and  moral  character  of  God.  2.  You  may 
gather  from  this  text  and  subject,  that  Deity  is  propitiated,  and  "  waits  to  be 

facious."     3.  You  may  fairly  infer  from  the  subject  that  such  as  have  the  great 
AM  for  their  Friend  are  placed  in  the  most  desirable  and  blessed  circumstances. 
{J.  Newton.) 

Ver.  9.  Behold,  the  former  tbiaga  are  come  to  pass. — The  philosophy  of  promise.' 
— One  may  observe,  in  reading  Scripture,  the  general  principle  that  Grod  usually 
gives  a  promise  of  that  which  He  means  to  bestow.  Before  Christ  came,  the 
Father  was  continually  speaking  of  His  coming.  Love  meets  man  as  a  heralding 
fragrance  before  the  actual  bestowal  of  blessing.  Why  are  covenant  blessings 
the  subject  of  promises?  I.  In  order  to  display  God's  grace.  1.  The  freenesa 
of  His  grace.  The  promise  to  which  the  text  specially  alludes  is  "  to  open  the 
blind  eyes,"  &c.  The  blind  referred  to  were  not  born  in  the  days  of  Isaiah.  God 
promises  before  we  know  our  need  or  seek  His  face.  There  are  many  conditional 
promises  in  Scripture;  but  all  God's  promises  rest  on  an  unconditioned  covenant 
of  grace  (Rom.  ix.  25).  2.  The  fulness  of  His  grace.  It  is  unmerited;  Christ 
died  for  the  ungodly.  3.  The  power  of  it.  He  will  open  the  blind  eyes,  &c.  God 
is  great  in  nature,  but  greater  in  grace.  II.  To  arouse  our  hopes.  Rehgious 
inquirers  should  find  the  promises  of  God  imspeakably  precious.  There  are 
promises  enough  in  the  Scriptures  to  stimulate  hope  in  all.  Christian  behevers 
even  need  to  be  told  of  what  God  will  do,  in  order  to  encourage  their  hope.  III.  To 
exercise  our  FAITH.  God  desires  to  exercise  our  confidence  in  Him.  IV.  To 
sxcj'^E  OUR  FBAYSS.     Prayer  is  sure  to  follow  hope  and  faith.     All  God's  promises 


CHAP,  xm.]  ISAIAH.  829 

which  are  not  fulfilled  axe  meant  to  stimulate  prayer.  V.  To  foster  ORATlTtTDB 
AND  ASStTRANCB  WHEN  THE  MERCY  HAS  BEEN  RECEIVED.  Man  is  made  glad  when 
he  sees  that  God's  Word  has  not  returned  to  Him  void;  then  comes  the  inference, 
if  He  has  done  all  this  for  me  in  the  past,  He  will  do  as  much  for  me  in  the  future. 
In  the  next  chapter  the  argument  is,  I  will  do,  because  I  have  done.  This  is  the 
firm  foundation  of  our  hope, — om:  past  experience  of  the  faithfulness  of  God;  and 
strong  faith  is  God's  due.  (C.  H.  Spurgeon.)  "  Former  things  "  and  "  new 
things  "  .• — '*  Former  things,"  i.e.  things  formerly  predicted.  These  predictions 
do  not  belong  to  the  present  prophet,  but  to  others.  The  "  new  things  "  are  the 
redemption  of  Israel  from  Babylon,  and,  through  it,  the  revelation  of  the  true 
Grod  to  all  nations.     {Prof.  A.  B.  Davidson,  D.I).) 

Ver.  10.  Sing  unto  the  Lord  a  new  song. — "  New  things  "  and  a  "  new  aong  "  .• — 
The  "  new  things  "  become  the  impulse  and  matter  of  "  a  new  song,"  such  as  was 
never  yet  heard  in  the  heathen  world.  (F.  Dditzsch,  D.D.)  Joy  among  the 
heathen  : — Reduced  to  ordinary  prose  style,  it  is  a  prediction  that  changes  are  to 
take  place  joyfully  affecting  the  condition  of  the  whole  world.     (J.  A,  Alexander.) 

Yet.  11.  Let  the  inhabitants  of  the  Rock  sing. — Christ  the  Christian's  Bock: — 
I.  Show  in  what  respect  Christ  may  be  compared  to  a  rock.  1.  Christ  is  a 
Rock,  in  regard  of  His  omnipotent  power.  2.  Christ  is  a  Rock,  in  regard  of  that 
ineffable  glojy  to  which  He  is  now  exalted.  Rocks  may  lie  low  and  deep  in  the 
ground,  but  rise  with  artless  grandeur  and  inimitable  beauty,  and  their  lofty  heads 
divide  the  clouds.  3.  Jesus  Christ  is  a  Rock  in  regard  of  His  faithfulness,  and  the 
unchangeable  nature  of  His  perfections.  Those  storms  and  tempests  which  spread 
d  solation,  and  bury  whole  islands  and  countries  in  ruins,  remove  not  the  rocks 
out  of  their  place.  But  Jesus  is  firmer  than  they.  4.  Christ  is  a  Rock,  in  regard 
of  His  majesty  and  beauty.  11.  Show  how  good  men  may  be  called  inhabitants 
of  the  Rock  1.  Because  that  is  their  dwelling-place.  2.  They  are  inhabitants  of 
the  Rock,  as  that  is  the  place  of  their  nativity.  AH  the  inhabitants  of  this  Rock 
are  bom  in  the  image  of  the  Son  of  God;  a  new  and  peculiar  race.  3.  They  may  be 
called  inhabitants  of  the  Rock,  as  they  are  a  people  who  dwell  on  high.  Their  souls 
and  all  their  nobler  powers  soar  above  the  mean  pursuits  of  this  world.  4.  They 
may  be  called  inhabitants  of  the  Reck,  as  they  are  to  abide  there  for  ever.  6.  They 
are  inhabitants  of  the  Rock,  as  all  their  suppUes  come  from  Christ.  From  this 
doctrine  we  may  learn — ( 1)  The  infinite  wisdom  of  God  in  laying  our  help  upon  Christ. 
(2)  That  the  figurative  expression  of  Christ,  under  the  notion  of  a  rock,  magnifieth 
the  power  of  God  on  which  our  faith  may  rest.  (3)  The  wickedness  and  folly  of 
all  who  oppose  the  Son  of  God.  (4)  The  folly  and  wickedness  of  those  who  btiild 
their  hopes  of  eternal  life  upon  any  other  foundation  than  Christ,  the  Rock.  (5)  The 
great  duty  of  all  who  hear  the  Gospel's  joyful  sound,  to  fly  to  Christ,  the  Rock. 
{J.  Johnston.)  Christ  the  Christian's  song : — I.  What  kind  of  a  song  it  is  which 
the  saints  are  called  to  sing.  It  is  a  song  on  redeeming  love.  1.  A  new  song. 
It  proceeds  from  a  new  heart,  which  is  animated  with  new  mercies.  2.  A  spiritual 
song.  It  is  unmingled  with  carnal  joy,  or  that  of  the  hypocrite,  which  is  short 
and  unfruitful  of  sohd  comfort.  It  is  from  above,  and  animates  all  the  powers 
of  the  souL  It  will  never  become  obsolete,  but  afford  endless  pleasure  to  the  re- 
deemed. 3.  A  song  of  distinction.  Every  heart  is  not  formed  for  such  exalted 
praise.  The  feeble  powers  of  nature,  unassisted  by  Divine  grace,  cannot  learn 
this  new  song.  4.  A  song  of  victory.  The  saints  of  God  are  clothed  in  white, 
an  authentic  emblem  of  their  faith  and  victory.  5.  A  song  upon  a  sacrifice.  6.  An 
everlasting  song.  Not  the  joy  of  the  hypocrite,  soon  kindled,  and  soon  extin- 
guished; the  powers  of  the  soul  are  enlarged,  and  rendered  fit  for  those  endless 
raptures  of  joy  and  praise.  II.  The  subject-matter  of  this  song.  1.  Jesus 
Christ  o\u:  Lord  manifested  in  human  nature.  2.  The  manifestation  of  Divine 
judgments.  When  the  Judge  of  all  the  earth  came  down,  and  dehvered  His  ancient 
Israel  from  Egyptian  bondage.  He  routed  Pharaoh  and  His  hosts,  by  such  signal 
judgments  as  spread  His  fame  far  and  wide:  "  His  name  was  great,  and  His  praise 
glorious  through  the  whole  earth."  Moses  and  Israel  sang,  "  The  Lord  hath 
triumphed  gloriously,  the  horse  and  his  rider  hath  He  thrown  into  the  sea."  When 
Rome,  as  ancient  Babylon,  fell  to  rise  no  more,  the  heavenly  Church  is  brought 
in  as  a  chorus,  to  praise  God  for  His  righteous  judgments  and  faithfulness.  This 
excellent  hymn  of  praise,  sung  by  the  \mited  voices  of  saints  and  angels,  strongly 
represents  to  all  Christians,  and  every  Church  on  earth,  what  grateful  sense  they 


330  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTBATOR.  [chap.  xm. 

ought  to  have  of  the  Divine  faithfulness  in  their  protection,  and  of  His  righteous 
judgments  in  punishing  the  persecutors  of  truth  and  religion.  3.  The  infinite 
worthiness  of  Christ  the  Lamb  of  God.  4.  The  behever's  union  to  the  Divine 
Redeemer.  6.  Communion  with  all  the  persons  of  Deity,  That  sincere  believers 
in  Christ  enjoy  such  a  communion,  is  most  obvious  from  the  sacred  Scriptures. 
{Ibid.)  Safety  in  the  rock^: — The  hare,  that  trusteth  to  the  swiftness  of  her  legs, 
is  at  length  overtaken  and  torn  to  pieces;  when  the  coney,  that  flieth  to  the  holes 
in  the  rocks,  doth  easily  avoid  the  dogs  that  pursue  her.     {J.  Trapp.) 

Ver.  13.  The  Lord  shall  go  forth  as  a  mighty  man. — Jehovah,  the  Warrior- 
Saviour: — The  Lord  stirs  Himself  up  to  bring  in  the  "  new  things."  {Prof.  A.  B. 
Davidson,  D.D.) 

Ver.  14.  I  have  long  time  holden  My  peace. — The  Divine  thought  and  pain: — 
Remember  it  is  God  who  speaks  these  words  of  Himself,  and  then  think  of  what 
they  mean  of  unshareable  thought  and  pain,  of  solitary  yearning  and  effort. 
But  from  the  pain  comes  forth  at  last  the  power  (ver.  15).  {Prof.  G.  A.  Smith, 
D.D.)  The  destruction  of  sinners  sudden  and  inevitable: — God  long  bears  with 
the  provocations  of  men,  and  therefore  they  imagine  He  pays  no  attention  to 
their  deeds ;  but  they  are  deceived ;  the  time  of  His  forbearance  is  limited.  I.  Thb 
FORBEARAJSfCE  OF  GoD.  "  I  have  long  time  holden  My  peace."  God,  unlike 
man,  is  neither  hasty,  impetuous,  nor  resentful.  Sinners  cannot  jusUy  complain 
that  God  does  not  afford  them  time  for  repentance;  God  has  long  borne  with 
the  ingratitude  and  perverseness  of  sinful  men;  their  crimes  are  numerous,  their 
provocations  great.  This  period  of  God's  forbearance  and  compassion  is  a 
season  of  grace  and  mercy.  II.  The  Divine  forbeaeakce  will  not  last  fob 
EVER.  It  will  surely  terminate,  and  then  commences  the  aw^ul,  though  long 
delayed,  hour  of  vengeance.  {8.  Ramsey,  M.A.)  I  ■will  destroy  and  devour 
at  once. — God  terrible  yet  gracious  (with  vers.  15,  16): — The  solemn  practical 
truth  of  the  text  is  that  God  can  do  the  most  terrible  things  and  the  most  gentle; 
that  power  belongeth  vmto  God  and  also  mercy.  Look  at  the  doctrine  of  the 
text — I.  In  relation  to  bad  men  who  pride  themselves  upon  their  success 
AND  their  strength.  The  doctrine  is  that  there  is  a  power  beyond  man's, 
and  that  nothing  is  held  safely  which  is  not  held  by  consent  of  that  Power.  The 
so-called  success  of  the  bad  man  has  yet  to  stand  the  strain  of  Divine  trial.  Though 
his  strength  be  as  a  mountain,  it  shall  be  wasted;  and  the  world  shall  see  how 
poorly  they  build  who  build  only  for  the  light  and  quietness  of  summer.  Re- 
member, we  are  not  stronger  than  our  weakest  point,  and  that  true  wisdom  binds 
us  to  watch  even  the  least  gate  that  is  insufficient  or  insecure.  II.  As  an  encour- 
agement TO  all  men  who  work  under  the  guidance  of  God.  God  declares 
Himself  gentle  to  those  who  truly  need  Him.  He  promises  nothing  to  the  self- 
sufficient;  He  promises  much  to  the  needy.  The  text  shows  the  principle  on 
which  Divine  help  is  given  to  men, — the  principle  of  conscious  need  and  of  willing- 
ness to  be  guided.  A  true  apprehension  of  this  doctrine  will  give  us  a  new  view 
of  daily  providences,  namely,  that  men  who  are  apparently  most  destitute  may 
in  reaUty  be  most  richly  enjoying  the  blessings  of  God.  Clearly,  we  are  not  to 
judge  human  hfe  by  outward  conditions.  Blindness  may  not  be  merely  so  much 
defect,  it  may  be  but  another  condition  of  happiness.  It  is  because  we  are  blind 
that  He  will  lead  us.  It  is  because  we  are  weak  that  He  will  carry  us.  It  is 
because  we  have  nothing  that  He  offers  to  give  us  all  things.  (J.  Parker,  D.D.) 
Ood's  terribleness  and  gentleness: — It  is  a  fearful  thing  to  fall  into  the  hands  of  the 
living  ( ^od.  It  is  betler  to  fall  into  the  hands  of  God  than  into  the  hands  of  men. 
Our  God  is  a  consuming  fire — God  is  love.  The  combination  of  great  power 
and  great  restraint,  and,  indeed,  the  combination  of  opposite  qualities  and  uses 
generally,  is  well  known  in  the  ordinary  arrangements  of  civilised  life  and  the 
daily  operation  of  the  laws  of  nature.  The  measure  of  greatness  is  the  measure 
of  terribleness.  What  is  constructiveness  but  the  beneficent  side  of  destructive- 
ness  ?  The  fire  that  warms  the  chamber  when  properly  regulated,  will,  if  abused, 
reduce  the  proudest  palaces  to  ashes.  The  river,  which  softens  and  refreshes 
the  landscape,  if  allowed  to  escape  its  banks,  may  devastate  the  most  fruitful 
fields.  The  engine,  which  is  swiftly  bearing  the  laughing  child  to  his  longed-for 
home,  will,  if  mismanaged,  occasion  the  most  terrible  havoc.  The  lightning, 
which  may  be  caught  and  utihsed  by  genius  and  skill,  can  bum  the  forest,  and 
strike  aimios  blind.     We  are  famihar  with  such  illustrations  of  united  opposites. 


CHAP,  xm.]  ISAIAH,  831 

and  oiir  knowledge  of  them  inspires  our  enterprise,  and  attempers  with  prudence 
the  noble  audacity  of  practical  science.  (Ibid.)  True  conceptions  of  Ood 
important  in  character -buUding: — God  is  not  to  be  described  in  parts;  He  is  to  be 
comprehended  in  the  unity  of  His  character.  A  child  describing  the  lightning 
might  say,  "  It  was  beautiful,  so  bright,  and  swifter  than  any  flying  bird,  and 
so  quiet  that  I  could  not  hear  it  as  it  passed  through  the  air  ";  this  would  be  true. 
A  tree  might  say,  "  It  was  awful,  it  tore  off  branches  that  had  been  growing  for 
a  hundred  years,  it  rent  me  in  twain  down  to  the  very  rooc,  and  no  summea  can 
ever  recover  me — I  am  left  here  to  die";  this  also  would  be  true.  So  with 
Almighty  God;  He  is  terrible  in  power,  making  nothing  of  aU  that  man  counts 
strong,  yet  He  will  not  break  the  bruised  reed  nor  quench  the  smoking  flax.  Men 
are  bound  to  be  as  common-sense  in  their  theology  as  they  are  in  the  ordinary 
works  of  Ufe,  and  in  building  character  they  are  to  be  at  least  as  forethoughtfuJ 
and  sagacious  as  in  building  their  houses  of  stone.  How  do  we  conduct  o\u: 
arrangements  in  building  a  house?  Suppose  that  it  were  possible  for  a  man 
never  to  have  seen  any  season  but  summer,  and  suppose  such  a  man  called  upon 
to  advise  in  the  erection  of  a  building:  you  can  imagine  his  procedure;  everything 
is  to  be  light,  because  he  never  heard  a  high  wind;  water-pipes  may  be  exposed, 
for  he  never  felt  the  severity  of  frost;  the  most  flimsy  roof  will  be  sufficient,  for 
he  knows  nothing  of  the  great  rains  of  winter  and  spring.  Tell  such  a  man  that 
the  winds  will  become  stormy,  that  the  rivers  will  be  chiUed  into  ice,  that  his 
windows  will  be  bhnded  with  snow,  and  that  floods  wUl  beat  upon  his  roof,  and 
if  he  is  a  wise  man  he  wiU  say,  "  I  must  not  build  for  one  season,  but  for  all  seasons; 
I  must  not  build  for  fine  days,  but  for  days  that  will  be  tempestuous;  I  must, 
as  far  as  possible,  prepare  for  the  most  inclement  and  trying  weather."  That 
is  simple  common  sense.  Why  be  less  sensible  in  building  a  character  than  in 
building  a  house?  We  bmld  our  bricks  for  severity  as  well  as  for  sunshine,  why 
build  our  characters  with  less  care?  If  in  summer  we  think  about  the  frost, 
why  not  in  prosperity  have  some  thought  for  adversity?  If  in  July  we  prepare 
for  December,  why  not  in  the  flattering  hour  of  exultation  think  of  the  judgment 
that  is  at  once  infallible  and  irresistible?  As  he  would  be  infinitely  foolish  who 
should  build  his  house  without  thinking  of  the  natural  forces  that  will  try  its. 
strength,  so  is  he  cursed  with  insanity  who  builds  his  character  without  thinking 
of  the  fixe  with  which  God  will  try  every  man's  work  of  what  sort  it  is.     (Ibid.) 

Ver.  16.  And  I  will  hring  the  blind  by  a  way  that  they  knew  not. — God  leading 
the  blind: — The  blind  are  they  whom  transgression  and  wickedness  have  robbed 
of  power  of  spiritual  insight.  The  unknown  ways  in  which  Jehovah  leads 
them  are  the  ways  of  redemption,  known  to  Him  alone  and  now  revealed  in  the 
fulness  of  times.  {F.  Delitzsch,  D.D.)  The  unknown  path: — God  would  lead 
Israel  by  a  way  that  had  not  yet  been  trodden;  He  would  redeem  her  from  Babylon, 
not  as  He  deUvered  her  from  Egypt  in  the  distant  past,  but  by  inclining  towards 
her  the  heart  of  her  captor.  I.  The  unkno^vn,  untrodden  path  before  us. 
1.  It  is  an  unknown  path  which  we  are  about  to  tread.  Let  the  child  or  even 
the  young  man  draw  an  outline  of  his  anticipated  career,  and  let  that  line  be 
compared  with  the  one  which  really  marks  his  course;  what  a  divergence  will 
there  be!  2.  It  is  an  untrodden  path.  As  the  second  great  Divine  deliverance 
of  Israel  differed  materially  from  the  first,  so  God's  dealings  with  individual  men 
differ  with  the  several  periods  of  their  life.  II.  The  guidance  of  our  God.  "  I 
wiU  bring."  "  I  will  lead."  There  are  two  ways  by  which  God  leads  His  people. 
1.  By  controlling  their  circumstances.  God  may  preserve  us  from  taking  the 
wrong  path  by  providentially  blocking  the  way  in  which  we  might  otherwise 
have  walked ;  or.  He  may  keep  us  from  a  false  movement,  or  induce  us  to  make 
the  true  one  by  bringiug  us  unto  the  fellowship  of  some  wise  friend  whose  timely 
counsel  either  dissuades  or  determines  us.  2.  By  influencing  their  minds.  He 
is  nearer  to  us  than  our  nearest  friends;  and  He  can  influence  us  more  powerfully 
than  the  wisest  and  strongest  of  our  teachers  or  guardians.  III.  His  disposition 
and  freedom  to  help  us.  1.  That  God  is  disposed  to  help  us,  we  need  not  doubt. 
(1)  His  sovereignty  over  Israel  would  account  for  all  His  watchfulness  over  that 
people ;  and  His  Fatherhood  of  every  human  spirit  wfll  certainly  ensure  His  Divine 
interest  in  each  one  of  His  children.  And  if  this  were  an  insufficient  bond  to 
constrain  such  condescending  notice,  we  have  but  to  remember  that  Jesus  Christ 
is  the  Divine  Saviour  and  Friend  of  every  one  of  His  people,  most  tenderly  imited 
to  each  of  them  by  the  strongest  ties.     The  Good  Shepherd  cares,  and  cares  much. 


332  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xui. 

for  every  sheep  of  His  flock.  (2)  Our  Lord's  intimation  of  the  Father's  care 
for  all  His  creatures,  and  His  own  o  fortiori  argument  therefrom  ("  Ye  are  of 
more  value  than  many  sparrows ")  is  convincing  proof  to  all  Christian  minds 
that  oxa  God  is  "  thinking  upon  "  us,  that  He  is  mindful  of  our  necessities,  and 
is  shaping  our  course  from  day  to  day.  2.  That  God  is  free  to  help  us,  we  may 
also  be  assiured.  Nothing  is  more  incredible  than  that  the  Father  of  spirits,  the 
Saviour  of  souls,  should,  by  the  established  order  of  nature  which  He  has  con- 
structed, have  to  cut  Himself  off  from  His  human  family  that,  however  earnestly 
they  cried  to  Him,  He  would  not  be  at  bberty  to  respond  to  them.  That  He 
should  not  weaken  our  sense  of  the  imperative  claims  of  duty  and  diligence  by 
too  obviously  and  constantly  interposing  on  our  behalf,  we  can  readily  understand. 
It  is  but  necessary  that  He  should  touch  some  link  in  the  chain  of  causes  which 
is  out  of  our  sight;  thus,  with  unseen  but  unfettered  hand.  He  works  on  our  behalf. 
IV.  Otjr  duty  and  ottb  comfort.  1.  Our  duty  is  threefold.  (1)  To  become 
His  children  indeed,  in  the  very  fullest  sense,  by  living  faith  in  Jesus  Christ.  (2)  To 
live  before  God  as  His  obedient  children,  that  our  service  and  submission  may 
win  His  Fatherly  delight  and  His  parental  longing  to  bless  us.  (3)  To  ask  for 
His  constant  guidance  in  daily  prayer.  2.  Our  comfort  is  great  indeed.  God 
will  be  our  guide.  He  will  be  our  vanguard,  and  be  our  rereward  (chap.  lii.  12). 
(The  Thinker.)  God  the  Guide  of  His  blind  people: — True  wisdom  will  confirm 
the  decision  of  Scripture,  not  only  as  to  spiritual  things  but  as  to  all  things,  when 
it  says,  "  If  any  man  thinketh  that  he  knoweth  anything,"  i.e.  if  he  regard  himself 
as  perfect  in  knowledge,  "he  knoweth  nothing  yet  as  he  ought  to  know."  If 
we  look  to  our  own  path  in  life,  we  find  ourselves  uninformed  concerning  that 
which  lies  before  us.  But  the  Word  of  God  does  not  more  explicitly  reveal  to 
us  our  ignorance  and  blindness,  than  it  offers  to  us  a  great  and  infallible  Guide. 
Let  our  minds  be  directed  to  the  inquiry,  whether  or  no  this  promise  is  verified 
in  the  experience  of  God's  people.  I.  In  answer  to  this  question  we  first  reply 
that  such  a  guidance  may  be  traced  in  the  dealings  of  God  with  His  children  by 
His  providence.  A  historian  of  the  Reformation  has  placed  in  the  forefront 
of  his  immortal  work  this  sentence  respecting  it:  "  This  history  takes  as  its  guiding- 
star  the  simple  and  pregnant  truth  that  God  is  in  history  "  (D'Aubigne).  And 
that  single  sentence  contains  a  world  of  important  truth.  The  recorded  history 
of  the  Jewish  nation  affords  a  beautiful  illustration  of  the  truth  that  God  is  active 
in  all  human  affairs.  And  had  God  inspired  another  prophet  to  write  the  history 
of  any  other  nation,  yea,  had  God  inspired  a  prophet  to  write  your  individual 
history,  or  my  own,  we  should  be  astonished  to  see  how  busy  the  hand  of  God 
had  been  in  its  every  stage  and  turn.  II.  God  leads  His  children  by  a  way  they 
know  not  in  the  dealings  of  His  grace,  e.g.,  the  woman  of  Samaria;  the 
assembly  which  stood  before  Peter  on  the  Day  of  Pentecost;  the  blaspheming, 
persecuting  Saul;  the  jailer  at  Phihppi.  God  is  characteristically  a  God  who 
is  found  of  them  that  sought  Him  not.  The  Divine  methods  for  leading  the 
behever  to  growth  in  grace  are  not  less  imexpected.  Even  on  the  behever's 
deathbed  is  often  and  gloriously  illustrated  the  teaching  of  our  text.  As  the  path 
by  which  God  leads  His  people  is,  in  its  beginning,  and  in  all  its  progress,  so  is 
it  in  its  termination,  one  which  they  know  not.  "  It  doth  not  yet  appear  what 
we  shall  be."  (W.  E.  Schenck.)  Divine  guidance: — 1.  In  Scriptiire  the  word 
"  blind  "  is  used  respecting  the  prejudiced  and  the  proud.  Their  minds  are 
perverted.  The  Pharisees  could  see  no  beauty  in  Christ,  no  excellence  in  Hjs 
teaching,  no  evidence  of  Divine  mission  in  His  works.  They  were  "  blind  leaders 
of  the  bUnd."  It  is  employed  also  to  denote  the  characteristic  dulness  and  stupidity 
of  the  Israelites,  as  a  people,  perpetually  lapsing  into  idolatry,  breaking  off  from 
God,  unable  to  see  the  blessedness  of  the  path  of  truth  and  righteousness.  2.  But 
there  is  still  another  meaning  that  is  important.  The  word  may  mean  simple 
ignorance.  It  may  describe  one  who  cannot  see  the  right  path  because  there  is 
a  mist  upon  it,  and  he  is  perplexed  on  account  of  this.  There  may  be  tenderness 
in  the  word  rather  than  anger;  gentle  purposes  of  love  implied  rather  than  con- 
demnation or  rebuke.  This  helps  us  to  understand  the  passage.  The  way  of 
providence  and  grace  in  the  darkness  and  perplexity  of  life  may  be  thus  graphically 
and  forcibly  expressed.  I.  We  have  the  frequent  mystery  of  God  in  providence 
and  grace.  We  know  not,  and  cannot  trace,  the  way  of  God.  The  material, 
the  vegetable,  the  animal,  worlds  are  full  of  what  is  inscrutable.  Thus  it  is 
with  the  course  of  individual  life.  We  pursue  our  jiath,  not  knowing  what 
may  arise.     We  go  forth  Hke  Abraham,      not  knowing  whither  we  go.  '     Yet 


CHAP,  xui.]  ISAIAH.  333 

there  is  an  eye  that  sees  all,  a  mind  that  directs  all,  a  hand  that  overrules  all. 
We  believe  that  every  man  lives  in  the  Divine  thought.  Each  has  his  separate 
course,  duties,  and  responsibilities,  from  which  he  can  no  more  escape  than  his 
shadow.  Every  one,  like  John,  is  called  to  fulfil  this  course.  And  Grod  knows 
all.  But  to  us,  Hfe  has  to  discover  itself  as  we  go  on,  and  often  passages  in  it, 
and  the  end,  look  strange  as  compared  with  the  beginning.  We  purpose  one 
thing  but  God  means  another,  e.g.  Joseph,  Elisha,  Amos,  Wm.  Carey,  &c. 
So  also  as  to  grace.  The  leadings  of  God  to  fulfil  His  purposes  are  leadings  of 
the  blind.  The  methods  He  takes  to  enlighten  the  mind  have  infinite  variety. 
While  vmconsciously  men  pursue  a  path  they  think  their  own,  lo!  it  leads  them 
within  the  circle  of  Divine  influences  which  they  never  anticipated.  Who  would 
have  thought  that  the  vehement  persecutor  who  stood  by  while  the  stones  crashed 
doTvn  on  Stephen,  before  he  entered  Damascus  on  his  fiu"ther  errand  of  malice, 
would  be  met  and  subdued  by  all-conquering  mercy?  Who  could  have  predicted 
that  Lydia,  of  Thyatira,  in  pursuit  of  her  business  at  Philippi,  would  find  her 
heart  opened  to  receive  the  truth,  and  be  led  to  rejoice  in  far  greater  riches  than 
the  most  prosperous  trade  could  bring?  What  a  stirprise  to  Philemon  that  his 
runaway  slave,  who  had  played  the  thief,  should  be  blessed  under  the  apostle's 
ministry  at  Rome !  Little  did  Francis  Xavier  think,  when  he  entered  the  college 
of  St.  Barbe  a  gay  and  haughty  youth,  that  one  whom  he  scorned  and  despised 
would  be  the  means  of  his  conversion,  and  that  the  text,  "  What  shall  it  profit 
a  man?"  so  frequently  repeated,  would  be  the  arrow  of  the  Almighty  to  his  soul. 
Little  did  West,  the  sceptical  lawyer,  think,  when  he  sat  down  to  tear  in  pieces, 
as  he  purposed,  the  arguments  that  prove  the  resurrection  of  Christ,  that  he  would 
end  in  owning  their  unanswerableness,  and  his  own  spirit  should  bow  before  God. 
As  little  did  another  conceive  that  in  attempting  to  hold  up  in  caricature  and 
contempt  the  apostle  Paul,  the  spiritual  power  and  greatness  he  beheld  should 
lead  him  to  become  a  disciple  too.  Passing  words,  casual  association,  incidental 
events,  have  had  wonderful  spiritual  resiilts.  Men  have  regretted  circumstances 
that  have  yet  been  made  instrumental  to  their  conversion.  A  young  man  has 
wept  to  lose  a  situation,  but  unwittingly  has  been  led  to  another,  where  Divine 
grace  has  made  him  a  "  new  creatm-e."  God  works  invisibly;  His  instrumentalities 
and  agencies  we  often  fail  to  recognise;  but  they  are  mighty  to  fulfil  the  counsels 
of  His  will,  and  thus  "  He  brings  the  blind  by  a  way  they  know  not."  II.  The 
KINDNESS  as  well  as  mystery  of  the  Divine  method  is  taught  us  in  this  passage. 
Probably,  at  some  time,  occasion  has  prompted  you  to  guide  for  a  few  steps  a 
blind  man.  He  has  wished  to  cross  the  road,  and  there  is  peril;  or,  groping  his 
way  along,  there  is  some  object  which,  unless  he  avoids  it,  will  cause  injury.  The 
human  tenderness  that  is  in  you  has  led  you  to  be  kind  and  true.  But  if  such 
a  spirit  animates  an  imperfect  man,  shall  we  not  take  the  Scripture  assurance 
that  the  spirit  of  kindness  characterises  the  infinite  God,  whose  name  is  announced 
as  Love?  1.  The  Divine  guidance  is  kind  because  it  is  wise.  Our  God  is  of  infinite 
counseL  He  knows  our  nature,  tendencies,  capacities,  impulses,  the  action  and 
influence  of  everything  upon  us.  There  are  mountain  passes,  we  are  told,  before 
traversing  which  the  guides  blindfold  the  travellers.  They  could  not  endure 
to  see  the  awful  precipices  on  either  side.  So  it  may  be  in  some  of  the  paths 
of  life  there  are  perils,  and  God's  guidance  is  an  enigma,  because  He  is  dealing 
with  us  thus.  2.  God's  guidance  is  kind  because  it  is  patient.  He  bears  with 
our  disobedience  and  ingratitude,  puts  up  with  our  manifold  affronts  and  defiance, 
suffers  long  with  oiu-  infirmities,  and  still  exerts  new  infiuences  that  His  gentleness 
may  prevail.  3.  God's  guidance  is  kind  because  it  is  supporting.  You  have 
sometimes  in  country  wafls  approached  a  hill.  It  has  seemed  to  rise  with  special 
steepness,  but  you  have  advanced,  and  strength  has  been  equal,  refreshing  air 
and  pleasant  scenery  have  cheered.  You  have  threaded  your  way  through  some 
intricate  route  towards  a  house  or  village,  and  thought  you  would  never  find 
it;  but  a  token  here  and  a  footstep  there  have  encouraged,  and  your  journey's 
end  has  been  gained.  So  up  life's  hills  of  difficulty  and  along  its  tortuous  paths, 
a  Divine  hand  leads  and  a  Divine  voice  cheers.  HI.  The  faithfulness  of  the 
Divine  guidance.  "Not  forsake."  You  have  sometimes  seen,  perhaps,  standing 
on  the  pavement  or  in  a  passage  some  little  crying  child.  A  careless  mother 
has  left  it  for  a  while,  little  thinking  of  distress  or  danger.  Every  sentiment 
of  pity  within  you  is  moved,  as  in  its  sobs  it  cannot  tell  either  its  name  or  home. 
You  may  be  reassured.  The  mother  will  return  soon.  But  if  it  were  indeed 
abandoned  to  cold  and  misery,  in  the  driving  storm  and  falling  snow,  no  heart 


334  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xm. 

so  hard  but  must  be  deeply  compassionate.  But  this  would  be  surpassed  by 
the  thought  of  a  Christian,  forsaken,  if  we  could  so  conceive.  A  child  of  God 
deserted,  with  promises  broken,  blessings  withdrawn,  hopes  disappointed,  cast 
off  in  caprice  and  weariness — the  woe  of  such  an  one  would  rise  to  the  very  height 
of  distress.  But  this  can  never  be.  He  has  pledged  His  word,  and  with  Moses 
we  should  exclaim,  "  What  would  become  of  Thy  great  name?  "  The  universe 
in  ruins  would  be  an  appalling  wreck.  But  this  could  be  nothing  compared 
with  the  wreck  of  the  Divine  character.  Dr.  Whewell  has  said.  The  whole 
earth  from  pole  to  pole,  from  centre  to  circumference,  is  employed  in  keeping 
a  snowdrop  in  the  position  best  suited  for  the  promotion  of  its  vegetable  health." 
Doth  God  provide  for  the  flower;  and  shall  He  not  guard  His  people?  {G.  Mac- 
michael,  B.A.)  The  way  in  which  God  leads  His  people: — Our  object  will  be 
to  show  that,  from  the  beginning  to  the  end  of  their  pilgrimage,  God  leads  His 
people  in  a  way,  which  previous  to  experience  they  know  not.  I.  The  true  nature 
of  CONVICTION  OF  SIN  is  a  thing  of  which  the  called  of  God  have  no  distinct  know- 
ledge, prior  to  experience.  There  is,  no  doubt,  a  great  diversity  in  the  exercises 
and  circumstances  of  souls  under  conviction.  Before  this  they  may  have  formed 
a  conception  of  the  feelings  of  a  convinced  sinner.  They  imagined  that  by  some 
flash,  like  lightning,  conviction  of  sin  would  be  effected.  Very  commonly  the 
awakened  person  strives  to  produce  conviction  of  the  kind  conceived,  by  bringing 
up  to  view  the  most  frightful  images.  But  if  the  convinced  sinner  could  realise 
aU  the  feelings  of  which  he  has  conceived,  and  for  which  he  longs  and  prays,  the 
end  of  conviction  would  not  be  at  all  answered;  for  the  end  of  conviction  is  to  lead 
the  sinner  out  of  himself;  to  destroy  all  self-confidence  and  self-complacency. 
But  if  he  could  experience  such  feelings  as  he  wishes,  he  would  think  well  of  him- 
self, as  being  in  the  frame  in  which  he  ought  to  be.  The  views  and  feelings  pro- 
duced by  the  conviction  of  the  Spirit,  lead  the  soul  to  despair — to  despair  of  ever 
saving  itself.  It  is  an  unexpected  thing,  of  which  the  blind  could  form  no  practical 
conception,  that  the  nearer  the  sinner  approaches  towards  deliverance,  the  further 
he  recedes  from  hope  and  comfort,  in  his  own  apprehension.  That  is  found  true, 
therefore,  in  spiritual  things,  which  has  been  noticed  in  natural  things;  that  the 
darkest  hour  is  that  which  immediately  precedes  the  dawning  of  the  day.  11.  Con- 
version also  turns  out  in  experience  to  be  a  very  different  thing  from  what  was 
anticipated.  Awakened  sinners,  having  heard  of  persons  being  translated  from 
darkness  to  "  the  marvellous  light "  of  the  Gospel,  and  having,  perhaps,  heard  or 
read  of  some  remarkable  conversions,  expect  to  be  brought  through  the  new 
birth  in  a  way  perfectly  similar  to  these  extraordinary  cases,  which,  however, 
are  very  imperfectly  understood.  They,  therefore,  endeavour  to  place  them- 
selves in  the  same  circumstances  as  those  in  which  others  were  when  they  found 
peace  with  God;  and  they  continue  to  look  and  wait  for  some  sudden  and  almost 
miraculous  change.  These  expectations  are  never  realised,  and  are  always 
erroneous;  for  when  this  blessed  change  actually  occurs,  the  light  is  commonly 
like  that  of  the  dawn;  obscure  at  first,  but  shining  more  and  more  to  the  perfect 
day;  and  instead  of  the  views  being  miraculous  or  strange,  they  appear  to  rise 
in  the  mind  like  other  thoughts  and  feelings.  The  only  marked  difference  is, 
not  in  the  manner  of  the  views,  but  in  the  spiritual  beauty  and  glory  of  the  objects 
contemplated.  The  soul,  under  the  leadings  of  the  Spirit,  is  often  brought  near 
to  Christ,  when  it  apprehended  He  was  far  off.  III.  God  leads  His  once  blind 
but  chosen  people  in  the  way  which  they  know  not,  as  it  relates  to  the  means 
AND  PROGRESS  OF  THEIR  SANCTIFICATION.  IV.  Another  thing  in  the  dispensations 
of  God  to  His  people  which,  prior  to  experience,  they  never  distinctly  understood, 
and  which  cannot  easily  be  explained,  is  His  leaving  them  for  a  season  to  back- 
slide; and  then  eboovering  them  by  the  exercise  of  the  same  sovereign  grace  which 
first  brought  them  into  the  path  of  life.     V.  Finally,  the  people  of  God  are  often 

CONDUCTED  THROUGH  THE  "  VALLEY  AND  SHADOW  OF  DEATH  "  in  an  unexpected 

manner.  (A.  Alexander,  D.D.)  The  blind  travellers: — The  experience  of 
the  Jews  and  the  experience  of  Christians  are  so  closely  analogous  that  the  one 
is  used  in  Scripture  as  a  type  of  the  other.  I.  The  condition  described.  1.  The 
blindness  of  the  traveller.  Is  the  figure  too  strong  to  describe  our  case?  You 
can  look  upon  the  past,  and  memory  will  throw  her  clear  light  on  salient  points 
of  the  journey.  But  when  you  turn  round  and  try  to  exi)lore  the  future,  you 
are  struck  blind,  you  can  see  nothing!  You  cannot  tell  how  long  the  journey 
is  going  to  be,  or  how  short;  what  heights,  what  depths,  you  may  have  to  cross, 
or  where  they  are.     2.  The  strangeness  of  the  way.     "  A  way  they  knew  not — 


CHAP,  xtn.]  ISAIAH.  335 

paths  they  have  not  known."  You  once  drew  out  a  map  of  the  course  you 
intended  to  pursue — will  you  lay  beside  it  the  map  of  the  course  you  have  pursued? 
What  a  difference  between  programme  and  performance!  And  so  it  will  be 
in  the  futiu-e — "  It  is  not  in  man  that  walketh  to  direct  his  steps."  3.  The 
obstacles  in  the  road.  My  text  teUs  of  "  crooked  things  "  and  "  crooked  places  " ; 
how  true  to  nature  and  experience!  II.  The  consolation  presented.  Re- 
member that  it  is  addressed  to  God's  own  people — in  other  words,  to  penitent 
sinners,  to  humble  believers.  1.  Here  is  a  promise  of  the  wisest  guidance.  Blind 
man,  you  don't  know  the  way — but  God  does !  2.  Here  is  a  promise  of  the  mightiest 
help.  "  I  will  make  darkness  light  before  them,  and  crooked  places  straight." 
3.  Here  is  a  promise  of  the  firmest  faithfulness.  III.  There  is  another  journey 
TO  BK  MADE.  This  is  the  joiu-ney  to  heaven  itself — that  more  glorious  Canaan 
than  any  that  the  Jews  sighed  for  in  their  captivity  in  Babylon.  But  it  is  "  the 
land  that  is  very  far  off  " — and  how  shall  we  find  the  way?  Now  this  is  not 
so  easy  as  some  would  have  us  suppose;  for  here,  too,  we  are  blind  travellers — 
and  the  way  is  strange — and  there  are  terrible  obstacles  in  the  road.  It  is  a 
mercy  when  we  discover  our  condition,  and  cease  trying  to  guide  ourselves;  and 
cry,  "  Lord,  we  are  blind — do  Thou  lead  us!  Lord,  save  us — or  we  perish!  " 
What  provision  has  been  made  for  us  in  the  mercy  of  God?  Christ — Who  is 
the  Way,  the  Truth,  and  the  Life !  Lay  hold  of  Christ,  blind  traveller !  and  never 
for  a  moment  relax  your  hold.  Here  is  guidance,  help,  faithfulness,  all-sufficient 
and  unchanging.  {F.  Tucker,  B.A.)  Outdance  for  the  blind: — I.  The  condition 
OF  spiritual  blindness.  By  the  fall  of  our  first  parent,  darkness  hath  come 
over  the  spirit  of  every  man  born  into  the  world.  In  heathen  nations  and  in 
heathen  days,  although  there  were  some  faint  and  feeble  aspirings  after  truth, 
in  the  main  men  were  in  the  depths  of  darkness.  This  is  not  merely  the  original 
condition  of  every  man,  but  is  in  part  the  condition  of  the  regenerate  also.  Yet 
there  are  things,  unto  which  man,  even  at  the  most  advanced  of  his  earthly  con- 
dition, cannot  attain.  It  is  not  hard  to  point  out  some  of  the  advantages  that 
result  from  this  state  of  concealment  in  which  God  keeps  His  people.  1.  It  tends 
to  their  humility.  2.  It  keeps  them  dependent.  3.  This  blindness  belongs  to 
the  very  nature  of  faith;  without  it,  faith  can  have  no  existence.  4.  Moreover, 
it  tends  to  the  comfort  of  God's  children.  If  all  were  laid  open,  then  sorrow 
and  sadness  would  come  before  their  time.  II.  The  promise  of  Divine  direc- 
tion. "  I  will  make  darkness  light  before  them,"  &c.  Mainly  God  delivers 
information  to  His  people  in  two  ways.  1.  He  gives  it  by  the  written  Word. 
2.  He  has  given  us  the  volume  of  providence  to  be  the  commentary  upon  the 
volume  of  revelation.  {S.  Robins,  M.A.)  Mysterious  providences: — I.  Show 
that  the  Lord's  ways  are  mysterious.  Of  this  we  have  many  instances 
in  His  works,  both  of  providence  and  grace.  1.  Take,  e.g.,  the  case  of  Moses. 
Or,  turn  from  the  leaders  to  the  people  who  were  led.  2.  But  to  turn  from  Scripture 
to  individual  experience.  How  mysterious  God's  dealings  with  each  one  of 
ourselves,  from  our  birth  to  the  present  day!  3.  If  we  turn  from  God's  works 
of  providence  without,  to  His  work  of  grace  within,  how  mysterious  indeed  are 
the  ways  of  oinr  God!     II.  Though  God's  ways  are  mysterious.  His  intentions 

AR.B    nevertheless    MERCIFUL.      III.     THROUGHOUT    THE    WHOLE    HiS    LOVE    IS 

ABIDING.  Conclusion — 1.  If  God's  ways  are  mysterious,  be  careful  to  avoid 
forming  rash  judgments  respecting  them;  beware  lest  you  speak  of  them  unad- 
visedly with  your  lips.  2.  StiU  further,  if  we  know  God's  intentions  to  be  merciful, 
how  safe  are  our  ways  in  His  hands!  3.  If  God's  love  be  abiding,  should  we  not 
lie  in  His  hands,  as  clay  in  the  hands  of  the  potter  ?  Should  we  not  seek  to  bring 
every  thought  unto  the  obedience  of  Christ?  Should  we  not  shelter  ourselves 
under  every  trial  in  Him  who  is  "  a  strong  tower  and  house  of  defence"  ?  (J. 
Lombard.)  The  spiritual  condition  of  man: — I.  The  subjects  of  Divine  grace. 
II.  The  operations  of  Divine  grace.  There  are  more  paths  than  one.  The 
path  of  repentance  is  followed  by  the  path  of  faith  in  Jesus — faith  in  the  truths 
of  the  Gospel — faith  in  the  promises  of  God.  There  is  another  "  path,"  which, 
by  nature,  is  "  not  known  " — the  path  of  obedience.  They  are  led  in  the  way  of 
holiness.  III.  The  effects  of  Divine  grace.  "  I  will  make  darkness  light 
before  them,  and  crooked  things  straight."  Who  can  make  darkness  light  before 
them  but  the  Fountain,  the  Author,  the  Source  of  light  and  life  and  being,  and 
all  the  blessings  connected  with  life?  (<S.  Drew,  M.A.)  Divine  leadings: — 
I.  The  special  dealings  of  the  Lord  with  His  people.  "  I  will  bring  the 
blind,"  &c.     II.   The  unalterable  decision  on  theib  behalf.     "  And  not 


336  TEE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xm. 

forsake  them."  (James  Wells.)  Darkness  made  light: — This  text  is  a  prophecy 
of  the  return  of  Israel  from  Babylon  after  their  captivity.  We  find  from  the 
history  of  Ezra  how  the  little  remnant  that  set  out  from  Babylon  was  brought 
safely  to  Jerusalem.  Their  way  from  Babylon  was  a  striking  picture  of  our  waj 
to  the  heavenly  home  that  is  promised  to  us.  I.  Mark  thb  ways  of  God  as 
MYSTERIOUS  WAYS;  that  is,  not  understood  by  the  light  of  nature,  or  of  intellect. 
1.  Grod's  children  by  nature  are  blind  (Eph.  ii.  3;  Psa.  xiii.  3).  2.  We  cannot 
understand  savingly  a  single  truth  of  God's  Word  by  our  own  hght,  inquiry, 
teaching,  application.  We  know  not  the  nature  of  sin,  nor  God  as  a  God  of 
pardon,  peace,  and  hope.  3.  We  continue  blind  imtU  each  step  is  unfolded  to 
our  view,  and  spiritual  apprehension  clears  our  way  (1  Cor.  ii.  9,  10).  4.  Blind 
also  to  the  way  God  is  really  dealing  with  His  children.  II.  View  God's  ways 
AS  MERCIFUL,  LEADINGS.  "  I  Will  make  darkness  hght  before  them."  "  All 
the  paths  of  the  Lord  are  mercy  and  truth"  All!  Some  clearly  in  sunshine. 
But  how  is  it  in  trial,  when  He  thwarts  instead  of  indulges  ?  There  may  be  times 
when  we  are  unable  to  see  what  is  the  next  step  to  take.  Watch  the  Lord's  time. 
Wait  at  the  throne  of  grace.  Don't  forget  that  trial  is  God's  appointed  mercy. 
There  is  mercy  in  the  end,  if  not  in  the  beginning.  By  our  not  seeing  our  way 
we  are  taught  to  hve  by  faith.  III.  The  wisdom  of  His  dealings.  "  I  wiU 
make  crooked  things  straight,"  &c.  Solomon  asks  (Eccles.  vii.  13)  who  can  make 
the  crooked  straight?  Why,  none  but  God.  Many  of  God's  ways  in  providence 
and  in  grace  seem  to  us  very  crooked,  but  we  must  trust,  and  judge  of  them  by 
the  end.  Job,  Joseph,  &c.  Judge  God  in  His  own  way  and  wait.  Out 
of  apparent  confusion  comes  real  order.  Apparent  severity  shows  itself  to  be 
real  kindness.  IV.  God's  dealings  abb  faithful.  "  These  things  wUl  I  do  .  .  . 
and  not  forsake  them."  Think  of  the  character  of  Him  who  makes  the  promise. 
(C.  Bridges.)  Theblind  befriended: — I.  To  whom  the  promisb  is  made.  II.  Thb 
PROMISE  that  is  made  TO  THEM.  "  I  will  bring,"  &c.  1.  God  Himself  will  be 
the  guide  of  His  people  when  they  feel  their  blindness.  To  lead  blind  men  is 
not  an  office  generally  sought;  it  is  not  supposed  to  be  attended  with  any  great 
honour;  but  it  is  a  very  kindly  office,  and  one  which  any  Christian  man  may  be 
right  glad  to  render  to  his  afflicted  friend.  But  only  think  of  God  ffimself  coming 
and  guiding  the  blind!  He  will  not  leave  you  to  stumble  and  grope  your  way, 
nor  will  He  bid  you  depend  upon  your  fellow-Christian,  who  is  as  blind  as  yourself, 
but  He  will  be  yoiu:  guide.  2.  Being  their  guide,  He  will  lead  them  in  ways 
they  never  went  before.  Of  course,  when  a  blind  man  knows  the  way,  he  can 
almost  go  without  the  guide.  3.  Although  the  way  by  which  we  go  be  a  way 
that  we  know  not,  we  shall  be  led  safely  in  it;  for  it  is  not  only  said,  "  I  will  lead 
them,"  but  "  I  wiU  bring  them,"  which  is  more.  You  may  lead  a  man,  but  he 
may  be  unable  to  follow  you.  HI.  What  shall  come  of  it?  "I  will  make 
darkness  light,"  &o.  1.  If  you  are  in  the  darkness  of  trouble,  trust  in  God  and 
the  trouble  will  vanish.  The  trouble  may  remain,  but  it  will  no  longer  distress 
you.  2.  There  is  a  crook  in  every  lot,  but  trust  in  God.  He  can  make  the  most 
crooked  thing  that  ever  did  happen  suddenly  turn  out  to  be  the  very  straightest 
thing  that  ever  occurred  for  our  welfare.  IV.  What  will  be  the  end  of  itT 
Your  life  will  be  strewn  with  mercies,  fulfilled  promises.  "  These  things  will 
I  do  unto  them  and  not  forsake  them."  {C.  H.  Spurgeon.)  The  blind  led: — 
I.  OuE  GLORIOUS  Leader.  "  I  will  bring  them,"  the  Lord  says,  "  I  will  lead 
them."  In  other  places  He  tells  us  He  has  prepared  a  kingdom  for  us;  here  He 
tells  us  He  wiU  conduct  us  to  it.  But  He  does  not  accompUsh  this  in  His  own 
person.  In  the  beginning  of  this  chapter.  He  introduces  His  dear  Son  to  us  as 
His  servant,  chosen  by  Him  to  bring  to  pass  all  His  merciful  designs  concerning 
us.  That  dear  Son  therefore  is  become  to  us  a  Leader  and  Guide.  "  Behold, 
I  have  given  Him,"  the  Lord  says  elsewhere  "  for  a  witness  to  the  people,  a  Leader 
and  Commander  to  the  people;  "  and  St.  Paul,  when  speaking  of  God  as  bringiog 
His  many  sons  unto  glory,  places  immediately  the  Lord  Jesus  at  their  head, 
calling  Him  "  the  Captain  of  their  salvation,"  at  once  their  Saviour,  their  Ruler, 
and  tneir  Guide.  Here  is  another  proof  then  that  Christ's  appointed  work  was 
not  ended  when  He  had  offered  Himself  for  our  sins.  That  was  the  beginning, 
rather  than  the  end,  of  it.  II.  Those  whom  the  Lord  IS  leading.  "  The 
blind."  III.  The  road  along  which  the  Lord  is  leading  us.  He  speaks 
of  it — 1.  As  new  to  us.     2.  As  dark  or  mysterious.     IV.  The  occasional  light 

AND  BELIEF  WHICH  THE  LORD  PROMISES  TO  HiS  PEOPLE  IN  THEIR  WAY.       "  I   will 

make  darkness  light  before  them,  and  crooked  things  straight."     It  is  useless 


CHAP.  XLii.]  ISAIAH.  337 

for  us  to  attempt  to  do  it.  Nor  must  we  look  to  our  fellow-men  to  do  it  for  us. 
Our  help  in  this  case,  as  in  every  other,  cometh  from  the  Lord.     V.  A  peomisb 

OP   PERMANENCY    AND    TJNCHANGEABLENESS   IN   JbHOVAH'S    LOVE   TO   THE   PEOPLB 

Hb  is  guiding.  "  These  things  will  I  do  unto  them,  and  not  forsake  them." 
The  Lord  speaks  here  like  one  who  has  fully  made  up  His  mind  to  do  what  He 
promises,  knows  He  can  do  it,  and  is  determined  He  will.  (C.  Bradley,  M.A.) 
Safe  walking  for  the  blind : — I.  The  persons  herb  spoken  of.     II.  The  way, 

THE  PATHS,  in  WHICH  THEY  ARE  FOUND.       III.   ThE    BLESSED    GuiDE  THEY  HAVE, 

AND  WHAT  He  does  FOR  THEM.  The  Eternal  God  trusts  them  not  to  cherubs 
nor  seraphs;  to  angels  nor  archangels;  to  ministers  nor  men;  He  trusts  them  not 
to  themselves,  but  He  is  Himself  their  guide.  It  was  He  that  brought  them 
out  of  darkness;  and  it  is  He  that  keeps  them  out  of  darkness.  (J.  H.  Evans, 
M.A.)  The  leader  of  the  blind: — The  sky  is  not  more  beautifully  bespangled 
with  stars  than  the  Bible  is  filled  with  promises.  How  completely  these  promises 
have  been  fulfilled  in  all  those  who  have  reached  Immanuel's  land!  But, 
Christians,  "  you  are  not  as  yet  come  to  the  rest  and  to  the  inheritance  which 
the  Lord  your  God  giveth  you;  "  but  thus  far  He  has  been  your  helper.  What 
He  has  done  for  you  is  only  a  pledge  of  what  He  will  do.  Let  us  survey  Him — 
I.  As  OUR  LEADER.  II.  As  ou^B  INTERPRETER.  "  I  will  make  darkness  light 
before  them,  and  crooked  things  straight."  This  is  clearly  distinguished  from 
the  former.  You  may  "  lead  the  blind  by  a  way  that  they  know  not,  and  in 
paths  that  they  have  not  known,"  while  you  may  not  explain  to  them,  but  only 
tell  them  to  depend  on  you  as  a  guide,  while  they  are  unconscious  of  anything 
except  progress.  But  it  is  not  so  with  God.  God  illumines  all  whom  He  guides. 
The  knowledge  He  gives  to  His  people  is  gradual;  and  we  may  observe  four 
instances  in  which  He  makes  "  darkness  light  before  them,  and  crooked  things 
straight."  1.  As  to  doctrine.  2.  As  to  experience.  In  regard  to  prayer  they 
are  sometimes  perplexed.  It  is  the  same  also  with  regard  to  joy.  ]VClne,  the 
ecclesiastical  historian,  said,  "  Had  I  been  as  destitute  of  comfort  some  years 
ago  as  I  am  now,  I  should  have  been  exceedingly  confounded;  but  I  have  learned 
not  to  live  on  Uvely  frames,  but  on  God's  own  word.  I  know  that  He  is  faithful 
who  hath  promised."  So,  also,  in  regard  to  assurance.  3.  With  regard  to  prac- 
tical duties.  4.  With  regard  to  some  of  His  providential  duties.  God's  way 
is  sometimes  in  the  sea,  and  His  footsteps  are  not  known.  But  sometimes  thJe 
darkness  is  dispelled  even  now.  III.  As  His  people's  unchangeable  friend. 
"  These  things  will  I  do  unto  them,  and  not  forsake  them."  They  deserve  to  be 
forsaken,  and  this  they  wiU  acknowledge  readily  enough.  They  may  think  them- 
selves forsaken,  and  we  have  instances  of  this  upon  record.  But  they  may  be 
forsaken.  God  Himself  speaks  of  this  in  His  Word.  But  observe  the  time : 
"  For  a  smaU  moment  have  I  forsaken  thee."  So  it  is  in  the  apprehension  of 
faith;  so  it  is  always  very  short  when  compared  with  eternity.  Then  observe 
the  maimer  of  His  forsaking  them,  for  however  we  may  explain  this,  it  must 
be  consistent  with  His  assurance  of  not  forsaking  :  "  These  things  wiU  I  do  unto 
them,  and  not  forsake  them."  There  are  three  ways  in  which  God  may  forsake 
His  people,  and  yet  the  promise  of  the  text  may  remain  substantially  the  same — 
1.  In  their  outward  condition.  He  can  reduce  them  in  their  circumstances, 
bereave  them  of  their  dearest  relations,  remove  their  possession  and  enjoyments, 
and  leave  them  bare  and  destitute.  But  aU  this  is  very  compatible  with  His 
presence.  2.  As  to  the  enjoyment  of  spiritual  comfort.  "  Thou  didst  hide  Thy 
face,  and  I  was  troubled."  But  when  these  spiritual  consolations  are  suspendedf, 
there  are  great  searchings  of  heart,  much  that  shows  the  Spirit  of  God  to  be  with 
them;  for  this  covild  not  come  from  nature.  3.  As  to  the  exercise  of  grace,  not  the 
existence  thereof.  Here  we  may  refer  to  good  Hezekiah.  God,  in  the  midst  of 
trouble  and  a  fearful  invasion,  left  him  for  a  while  to  see  what  was  in  his  heart, 
Peter  for  a  season  also  was  left  to  himself.  Jesus  said,  "  I  have  prayed  for  thee 
that  thy  faith  fail  not";  but  it  did  fail.  It  did  as  to  its  exercise,  not  as  to  its 
principle,  (PT.  Jay,  M.A.)  God  conceals  that  He  may  guide: — Away  in  the 
interior  of  China,  I  once  climbed  a  precipice  that  was  almost  perpendicular,  if 
indeed  it  did  not  overhang.  Steps  had  been  cut  out  for  the  feet  in  the  sandstone, 
and  stout  iron  chains  had  been  piimed  within  a  few  inches  of  the  steps  to  afford 
support  to  the  hands.  My  face  was  turned  towards  the  rock  as  I  went  up,  and 
I  never  thought  of  the  gulf  that  yawned  beneath.  When  I  came  to  descend, 
I  found  I  could  not  accomplish  it  with  my  face  turned  towards  empty  space  and 
my  eye  looking  down  into  the  dim  abyss,  and  with  no  sohd  object  in  the  field 
VOL.  II. — 2  2 


338  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xlh. 

of  view.  I  was  mastered  by  an  inveterate  dizziness,  and  should  have  dropped, 
but  for  the  timely  assistance  of  a  friend.  I  had  to  shut  out  the  thought  of  the 
terrible  abyss  by  turning  my  face  to  the  rock,  whilst  my  friend  preceded  me  in 
the  descent,  and  guided  my  feet  into  the  successive  stepping-places.  Many  of 
God's  mysteries  are  things  that  He  has  hidden  from  us  to  the  glory  of  His  pity 
and  gentleness.  He  has  to  guide  us  over  a  great  many  of  the  perilous  places 
of  life  in  blindness.  It  would  be  death  if  the  veil  were  taken  away.  He  has 
to  bring  us  down  a  great  many  fearsome  descents  with  our  face  to  the  dead  rock. 
If  we  could  take  in  the  whole  position  we  should  be  overwhelmed.  [T.  0.  Selby.) 
Providence  in  the  life  of  Cowper: — Of  all  the  writings  of  WiUiam  Cowper,  probably 
the  hymn,  "  God  moves  in  a  mysterious  way,"  is  best  known.  How  Cowper 
came  to  write  this  hymn  forms  one  of  the  most  remarkable  episodes  of  his  eventful 
life.  Cowper  had  one  of  his  fits  of  melancholy,  and  persuaded  himself,  so  his 
biographers  assert,  that  God  wanted  him  to  offer  himself  as  a  sacrifice.  He 
decided  to  carry  out  this  idea,  and,  hiring  a  post-chaise,  drove  to  the  river  Ouse. 
The  night  was  dark,  and  the  coachman  by  some  means  or  other  mistook  the 
way,  and  instead  of  arriving  at  the  exact  spot  where  Cowper  had  intended  to 
drown  himself,  the  poet  found  himself  at  his  own  door.  On  entering  the  house 
Cowper  sat  down  and  composed  his  most  famous  hymn.  {Christian  Budget.) 
God  blindfolds  that  He  may  lead  : — We  are  so  timid  and  tender  and  unschooled 
that  God  has  often  to  place  the  shadow  of  His  hand  across  our  vision,  just  as 
the  Alpine  guide  wiU  blindfold  a  nervous  traveller,  so  that  he  may  guide  him 
unharmed  across  some  terrific  chasm.  {T.  G.  Selby.)  Obedient  following: — 
A  traveller  in  South  Africa  was  anxious  to  go  to  a  certain  place  which  couJd 
only  be  reached  by  the  aid  of  a  Kafi&r  guide.  Into  his  hands  the  traveller  was 
compelled  to  commit  his  life,  and  he  says:  "  It  was  not  long  before  I  saw  that 
the  old  man  was  guiding  me  along  some  recognised  path  invisible  to  my  eyes, 
but  plainly  designed  to  carry  us  round  clumps  of  thorn  and  treacherous  stones. 
Not  a  landmark  could  I  see  to  indicate  the  turnings  of  the  route,  but  our  guide 
was  never  at  a  loss."  Only  by  implicit  obedience  did  the  traveller  reach  his  goal. 
{Christian.)  I  will  make  darkness  light  before  them. — Darkness,  light;  and 
crooked  things  straight  .• — I.  The  believer's  darkness  is  turned  into  light, 
AND  THE  CROOKS  OF  HIS  LOT  ARE  STRAIGHTENED.  1.  The  frequent  grim  darkness. 
(1)  Much  of  it  is  of  his  own  imagining.  Many  of  our  sorrows  are  purely  home- 
spun, and  some  minds  are  specially  fertile  in  self-torture.  (2)  Much  existing 
darkness  is  exaggerated.  (3)  Troubles  disappear  just  when  we  expect  them 
to  become  overwhelming.  (4)  When  the  trial  comes,  God  has  a  way  of  making 
His  people's  trials  cease  just  as  they  reach  their  culminating  point.  (5)  Every 
trial  was  foreseen,  and  has  been  forestalled.  (6)  However  severe  the  trial,  God 
has  promised  that  as  our  days  om*  strength  shall  be.  (7)  Especially  dwell  upon 
the  promise  that  the  Lord  will  make  your  darkness  light.  How  is  it  done  ?  Some- 
times by  the  sun  of  His  providence.  Often  by  the  moon  of  Christian  experience, 
which  shines  with  borrowed  light,  but  yet  with  sweet  and  tranquil  brightness. 
Frequently  by  a  sight  of  Jesus  going  before,  and  by  hearing  Him  say,  "  Follow 
Me;  fear  not;  for  in  all  your  afllictions  I  am  afilicted."  2.  The  crooks  of  the 
beUever's  lot.  (1)  One  may  lie  in  your  poverty.  (2)  Another  in  some  very  crooked 
calamity.  (3)  If  free  from  these,  he  has  at  least  a  crooked  self.  The  others 
would  matter  little  but  for  this.  It  may  be  you  have  crooked  temptations — 
temptations  to  profanity,  &c.  3.  God  will  make  all  the  crooked  things  straight. 
(1)  It  may  be  that  some  are  straight  now;  the  making  straight  is  only  to  make 
them  seem  so  to  us.  Our  crosses  are  our  best  estates.  (2)  God  can  bend  the 
crooked  straight,  and  what  will  not  bend  He  can  break.  The  crooked  character 
has  been  bent  straight;  the  judgment  of  God  has  taken  away  the  crook  out 
of  the  household,  so  that  the  righteous  might  have  peace.  If  He  do  not  this.  He 
will  give  power  to  overleap  the  difficulty  (2  Sam.  xxii.  30).  II.  Some  words 
TO  THE  SEEKER.  1.  Some  doctrines  are  dark  to  you.  God  makes  all  light  to 
faith.  2.  Perhaps  your  darkness  rises  from  deep  depression  of  mind.  Faith 
must  precede  its  dispersion.  3.  Your  crooked  natural  disposition  God  can  make 
straight.  Note — (1)  That  which  saves  is  not  what  is,  but  what  wiU  be.  (2)  It 
is  not  what  you  can  do,  but  what  God  can  do.  (3)  This  work  may  not  be  yours 
at  once,  but  it  shall  be  soon.  III.  Two  lessons  to  believers.  1.  If  God  will 
thus  make  all  your  darkness  light  and  all  your  crooked  things  straight,  do  not 
forestall  your  troubles.  2.  Always  beUeve  in  the  power  of  prayer.  {C.  H. 
Spurgeon, )        God  brings  safely  through : — "  How  shall  we   pass  through  this 


CHAP.  XLH.]  ISAIAH.  339 

trial,  dear?  "  asked  an  anxious  wife  of  her  Christian  husband  at  a  time  of  great 
perplexity.  "  Ask  me  six  months  hence,"  he  replied,  "  how  we  have  passed  through 
it,  and  I  will  tell  you." 

Vers.  18-20.  Hear,  ye  deaf. — Divine  expostulation: — Thus  the  Lord  expostu- 
lates  with  His  ancient  people,  and  thus  He  has  reason  to  expostulate  with  us. 
1.  We  are  deaf,  in  a  spiritual  sense,  when  we  do  not  attend  to  the  Divine  admoni- 
tions, or  give  earnest  heed  to  the  word  of  instruction;  and  we  are  blind,  in  the 
same  sense,  when  we  do  not  perceive  the  glory  of  the  Gospel,  and  the  force  and 
beauty  of  Divine  truth,  2.  Before  one  step  in  the  way  of  salvation  can  be  taken, 
this  hindrance  must  be  removed.  The  eyes  of  the  blind  must  be  opened,  and 
the  ears  of  the  deaf  must  be  imstopped.  Hence  there  is  a  call  to  the  deaf  to 
hear,  and  to  the  blind  to  look  that  they  may  see.  This  is  like  the  command  of 
our  Saviour  to  the  man  with  the  withered  hand,  to  stretch  it  forth,  and  implies 
that  this  deafness  and  blindness  was  their  fault,  as  well  as  their  misfortune.  In 
dependence  upon  His  promise  they  ought,  therefore,  to  stir  themselves  up  to  the 
discharge  of  their  duty.  3.  That  the  nations  who  have  not  the  light  of  the  Gospel 
should  want  spiritual  senses  is  no  wonder;  but  that  those  who  are,  by  profession, 
the  "  servants  "  of  God,  and  Has  "  messengers,"  or  those  to  whom  His  messengers 
are  sent,  and  perfectly  instructed,  should  be  blind  and  deaf,  is  much  to  be 
lamented.  4.  The  sincere  followers  of  Christ  whose  eyes  and  ears  He  has  opened 
to  attend  to  His  saving  instructions;  who  love  the  Gospel,  and  have  been  led  by 
it  to  repentance,  faith  and  newness  of  life;  who  do  not  habitually  neglect,  but 
rather  prize  the  ordinances  of  religion,  and  the  means  of  grace;  even  these  may 
be  charged  with  not  exercising,  as  they  ought,  the  spiritual  senses  which  God 
has  given  them.  (W.  Richardson.)  The  ear  and  the  eye  as  symbols: — With 
a  bold  freedom  do  the  writers  of  both  the  Old  and  New  Testaments  fasten  the 
attention  upon  the  sense  of  hearing.  Throughout,  the  ear  is  the  symbol  of  obedience. 
As  by  its  common  use  the  sense  is  the  medium  of  interpretation  of  sounds,  whether 
of  nature  or  of  the  articulate  expression  of  fellow-men,  so,  by  further  reference 
and  deeper  analogy,  it  stands  as  the  avenue  through  which  Divine  communications 
may  pass  to  the  soul, — it  may  be  in  a  still  small  voice.  One  might  suppose, 
considering  the  high  esteem  in  which  obedience  is  held  in  the  sacred  polity  of 
Israel,  considering  that  obedience  is  ever  regarded  in  the  Old  Testament  as  the 
test  of  national  and  individual  loyalty  to  Jehovah,  that  the  metaphor  of  the 
ear  would  occur  more  frequently  than  that  of  any  other  sense.  Yet  it  is  not  so. 
A  glance  at  any  serviceable  concordance  will  show  that  it  is  from  the  eyesight 
that  evangelist  and  apostle,  as  well  as  psalmist  and  prophet,  are  furnished 
with  their  most  telling  spiritual  illustrations.  The  reason  for  this  is  plain.  If 
the  sacred  penman  made  the  sense  of  hearing  his  object-lesson,  it  could  only 
be  one.  It  could  only  help  him  to  emphasise  the  single  conception  of  the  duty 
and  blessing  of  learning  to  obey.  With  the  eyesight  the  manifold  character 
of  the  teaching  answered  exactly  to  the  complex  faculties  of  the  organ  of  vision. 
A  concordance,  better  stUl  an  intimate  knowledge  of  Holy  Scripture,  suggests 
obedience  as  the  primary  lesson  of  the  Old  Testament.  The  metaphor  of  the 
"  ear  "  when  found  in  the  New  Testament  is  commonly  discovered  in  a  setting 
of  some  Old  Testament  passage.  Another  illustration  is  wanted,  correspondent 
to  the  greater  fulness  of  a  fresh  revelation;  and  this  illustration,  common  indeed 
to  both  covenants,  is  eyesight.  {B.  Whitefoord.)  Look,  ye  blind. — Eyesight: — 
Intelligence  and  candour,  receptiveness  and  perseverance,  faith,  hope  and  charity — 
such  are  some  amongst  the  many  lessons  inculcated  through  and  in  the  posses- 
sion of  sight.  {Ibid.)  The  open  eye: — The  spiritual  eye  is  not  the  victim 
of  accident  or  senility,  although  its  clearer  powers  of  vision  may  often  be  marred 
by  sin  and  hampered  by  indolence.  The  spiritual  eye  is  an  open  eye,  full  of 
meaning  and  purpose,  cleansed  by  the  tears  of  penitence,  lighted  up  by  faith 
and  love.  The  eye  is  open;  but  not  of  that  pitiful  kind  that  is  recognised  as 
vacant.  It  is  bright  with  significance,  clear  in  its  aim,  strenuous  and  persevering 
in  its  direction.  It  has  certain  characteristic  ranges  of  vision,  and  these,  so 
Scripture  and  experience  alike  teach,  are  threefold.  I.  It  looks  mwABD.  It 
contemplates  the  soul.  The  eye  first  marks  the  worst  within,  an  evil  so  general, 
80  potent,  that  the  main  feeling  is  one  of  despair.  It  may  now  see  the  best  that 
lies  also  within.  For  here,  in  the  human  heart,  it  perceives  the  work  of  the  Holy 
Spirit.  II.  It  looks  outwabd.  It  looks  upon  the  world — 1.  Of  nature.  2.  Of 
humanity.     HE.  It  looks  upwabd — Godward.     Nor  is  the  upward  look  of  the 


340  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xlh. 

soul  to  God  merely  a  passing  act  of  worship  (Psa.  xxv.  15),  but  the  very  foretaste 
of  His  favour  and  aid.  It  is  only  the  heart  which  is  pure  of  earthly  aims  and 
hopes  that  shall  at  last  reach  the  perfect  vision  of  God.     (Ibid.) 

Ver.  19.  Who  is  blind,  but  My  Servant? — The  Lord^s  Servant  Hind  and  deaf : — 

I.  Christ's  blutdness.     How  should  it  be  said  of  the  Servant  and  Messenger  of 

the  Lord  that  He  was  blind  as  none  other?     How  should  it  be  said  of  Him  whose 

eyes  are  as  a  flame  of  fire,  whose  look  struck  like  a  sword?     Are  not  all  things 

naked  and  open  to  the  eyes  of  Him  with  whom  we  have  to  do?     Yes.     1.  But  as 

the  older  expositors  have  pointed  out.  He  was  in  a  sense  blind.     They  dwelt  on 

the  fact  that  His  was  the  blindness  that  has  no  sense  of  difficulties.     It  is  told  of 

an  officer  attacking  an  almost  impregnable  fort  that  he  was  in  great  peril,  and  was 

recalled  by  his  chief.     To  disobey  the  recall  was  death  if  only  he  saw  it.     He  was 

blind  in  one  eye,  and  when  told  of  the  recall  he  turned  the  blind  eye  on  the  signal, 

and  asked  that  the  battle  should  continue.     This  is  the  blindness  of  Clirist  and 

His  faithful.     "  Who  art  thou,  0  great  mountain  ?  "     Christ  indeed  lifted  His 

eyes  to  the  hills,  but  not  to  these  lower  hiUs  that  block  the  way  and  close  us  in. 

He  lifted  Jlis  eyes  to  the  everlasting  mountains  towering  far  above  them,  on  whose 

summit  the  final  feast  of  triumph  is   to   be  spread.     Beyond  the  obstacles  and 

thwartings  that  marked  His  earthly  course  He  had  a  vision  of  the  patience  of  God. 

He  was  blind  to  difficulty,  even  as  His  apostle  was.     None  of  these  things  moved 

Him.     A  king  about  to  engage  an  army  five  times  as  large  as  bis  own,  prayed  to 

God  that  He  would  take  away  from  him  the  sense  of  numbers.    The  sense  of  numbers, 

in  the  earthly  manner,  Christ  never  possessed.     On  that  side  He  was  blind.     2.  But 

I  epeak  specially  of  His  blindness  to  much  in  life  that  we  consider  it  legitimate 

to  see.     He  was  blind  to  the  allurement  of  our  ordinary  ambitions.     The  desire 

for  money  never  seemed  to  touch  Him.     "  Lay  not  up  for  yourselves  treasures 

on  earth,"  said  He,  and  He  kept  His  own  precept.     There  is  something  suggestive 

in  His  request,  "  Show  Me  a  penny."     Evidently  He  did  not  possess  one,  and  when 

He  died  He  left  nothing  behind  Him  but  the  garment  for  \yhich  they  threw  dice 

beneath  the  tree.     Nor  had  He  anything  of  the  modern  feeling,  which  is  not  all 

a  sham,  that  those  who  can  open  new  channels  of  commerce  and  industry,  who 

can  promote  the  peaceable  intercourse  of  the  world,  are  serving  humanity.     He 

was  blind  also,  so  far  as  we  can  tell,  to  that  region  which  is  the  scene  of  the  chief 

triumphs  and  apostasies  of  the  heart — the  rich  and  volcanic  and  often  wasted 

region  of  passion.     I  think  that  Dora  Greenwell's  remark  is  true,  that  the  passion 

of  love  which  forms  the  staple  of  imaginative  literature  is  absolutely  unknown 

to  the  New  Testament.     Then,  let  us  think  of  the  immense  encroachment  on  human 

thought  and  interest  that  the  subject  of  recreation  has  made.     There  is  a  legitimate 

place  for  recreation,  but  it  did  not  enter  into  the  Lord's  thought.     His  one  way 

of  resting  was  to  go  into  a  desert  place,  or  to  ascend  a  mountain  and  pray.     Once 

more,  the  sphere  of  art  and  culture  He  seems  to  have  left  alone.     He,  the  poet  of 

the  universe,  was  not  interested  in  poetry.     He  glanced  at  the  Divine  glory  of 

the  lily,  and  said  that  it  surpassed  even  the  glory  of  Solomon.     But  of  the  treasures 

and  marvels  of  human  art  and  imagination  He  had  nothing  to  say,  and  apparently 

nothing  to  think.     II.  Christ's  deafness.     But  who  said,  "  The  Lord  Grod  hath 

opened  Mine  ears,  and  I  was  not  rebellious,  neither  tiu-ned  away  back     I  gave  My 

back  to  the  smiters,  and  My  cheeks  to  them  that  plucked  o£F  the  hair  "  ?     It  was 

He  who  heard  so  well  the  lightest  whisper  of  God.     "  I  dehght  to  do  Thy  will, 

0  my  God;  yea.  Thy  law  is  within  My  heart."     What  response  ever  came  so  quickly 

as  our  Lord's,  "  Lo,  I  come  "  ?     To  be  obedient  means  to  listen,  and  He  was  a 

listener  unto  death.     But  how  deaf  He  was  sometimes  ;  how  deaf  when  Satan 

tempted  Him  in  the  wilderness;  how  deaf  to  His  friends  when  they  sought  to  alter 

His  course;  how  deaf  to  Peter  when  he  said,  "  This  shall  not  be  unto  Thee  "  ;  how 

deaf  when  they  tried  to  make  Him  a  King  by  force;  how  deaf  in  the  judgment-hall 

when  they  asked  Him,  "Whence  art  Thou?     Hearest  Thou  not  how  many  things 

they  witness  against  Thee?  "     The  incarnate  Lord  stood  with  locked  lips  before 

Pilate,  and  answered  only  with  a  boding,  fateful  silence  to  questions  such  as  these. 

And  how  supremely  deaf  when  they  called  to  Him,  "  If  Thou  be  the  Son  of  God, 

come  down  from  the   Cross."     But   in   the   same  way  He  was  deaf,  not  only  to 

counsels  of  evil,  but  to  much  that  seemed  legitimate.     Here,  also,  it  appears  as  if 

many  pleasant  voices  that  spoke  to  Him  might  have  been  heeded  without  sin, 

and  to  His  happiness.     His  life  might  have  been  richer,  easier,  more  solaced,  but 

He  made  sharp  choices  and  stern  renunciations  and  swift  decisions,  and  so  the 


CHAP.  XLTi.]  ISAIAH,  341 

fulness  of  life  was  not  for  Him,  and  the  allurement  and  appeal  were  vain.  Remember, 
He  was  never  deaf  and  never  blind  when  a  soul  sought  Him.  ( W.  Robertson  Nicoll, 
IjL.D)  Faculty  should  be  used: — Christianity  makes  no  account  of  somnam- 
bulists in  the  daytime.  Christianity  expects  us  to  use  our  faculties.  The  Church 
is  to  be  the  most  sagacious  of  all  institutions.  The  Christian  is  to  be  the  moat 
statesmanlike  of  all  men.     {J.  Parker,  D.D.) 

Ver.  21.  The  Lord  is  well  pleased  for  His  righteousness*  sake. — The  broken  law 
magnified: — I.  The  great  and  globiotjs  party  herb  spoken  of.  "  The  Lord," 
or,  as  in  the  original,  "  Jehovah,"  the  righteous  Judge,  the  offended  Lord  and  Law- 
giver, to  whose  wrath  all  mankind  are  liable,  through  the  breach  of  the  first  covenant. 
IL  Something  asserted  concerninq  Him,  which  may  arrest  the  attention  of 
all  mankind,  and  fill  their  hearts  with  joy,  and  their  mouths  with  praises;  that  is, 
that  He  "  is  well  pleased."  m.  The  cause  and  ground  of  this  surprising 
DECLARATION.  It  is  "  for  His  righteousness'  sake  " ;  not  for  the  sake  of  any  atone- 
ment, or  satisfaction,  that  the  sinner  could  make,  for  no  man  can  by  any  means 
redeem  his  own  or  his  brother's  soul,  nor  give  unto  God  a  ransom  for  it.  The 
redemption  of  the  soul  is  precious,  and  ceaseth  for  ever  as  to  him;  but  it  is  "  for 
His  righteousness'  sake,"  who  finished  transgression,  and  made  an  end  of  sin. 
IV.  The  reason  why  the  Lord  Jehovah  sustains  the  righteousness  of  the 
SURETY  IN  the  ROOM  OF  THE  SINNER,  Or  why  He  is  SO  weU  pleased  for  His  righteous- 
ness' sake.  He  not  only  fulfilled  the  law,  both  in  its  precept  and  penalty,  but  He 
magnifies  it,  and  makes  it  honourable;  He  adds  a  new  lustre  unto  the  law, 
through  the  dignity  of  His  person  who  obeys  it.  {E.  Erskine. )  The  law  magnified 
and  made  honourahle : — Doctrine :  That  Christ,  as  our  glorious  Surety,  having 
magnified  the  law  and  made  it  honourable,  the  Lord  Jehovah  declares  Himself  to  be 
well  pleased  for  His  righteousness'  sake.  I  shall — L  Suggest  a  few  things  con- 
cerning THE  LAW,  AND  HOW  IT  WAS  DISPARAGED  BY  THE  SIN  OF  MAN.  1.  The  laW 
here  principally  intended  is  the  moral  law.  2.  The  moral  law  is  nothing  else  but 
a  transcript  of  the  original  holiness  of  Grod's  nature.  3.  The  law  being  a  copy  or 
emanation  of  God's  holiness,  it  must  be  dearer  to  Him  than  heaven  and  earth,  or 
the  whole  frame  of  nature.  4.  This  law  was  given  to  our  first  parents  under  the 
form  of  a  covenant;  a  promise  of  life  being  made  to  them,  upon  condition  of  their 
yielding  a  perfect  obedience;  and  a  threatening  of  death  added,  in  case  of  dis- 
obedience. 6.  Man  being  left  to  the  freedom  of  his  own  will,  through  the  flattering 
hisses  of  the  old  serpent,  "  did  break  the  law  of  God,"  and  so  forfeited  his  title  to 
life  by  virtue  of  that  covenant;  and  brought  himself,  and  all  his  posterity,  under 
the  penalty  of  death  temporal,  spiritual,  and  eternal.  6.  The  law  being  violated 
by  sin,  the  honour  of  the  law,  and  the  authority  of  God,  the  great  Lawgiver,  are, 
as  it  were,  laid  in  the  dust,  and  trampled  under  foot,  by  the  rebellious  sinner. 
7.  The  law  being  violated,  and  the  Lawgiver  affronted,  the  salvation  of  sinners  by 
the  law  becomes  utterly  impossible,  unless  the  honour  of  the  law,  and  of  the  great 
Lawgiver,  be  repaired  and  restored  somehow  or  other.  11.  Speak  of  the  glorious 
Person  who  undertakes  the  reparation  of  it  as  our  surety.  1.  He  is  His 
Father's  Servant  (ver.  1).  2.  His  Father's  Elect  (ver.  1;  Psa.  Ixxxix.  19). 
3.  His  Father's  Darling  or  Delight  (ver.  1).  4.  He  is  qualified  by  His  Father  for 
the  work  and  service  of  redemption,  by  the  anointing  of  the  eternal  Spirit  (ver.  1). 
6.  He  is  one  whose  commission  is  very  extensive;  for  we  are  told  that  He  shall 
"  bring  forth  judgment  to  the  Gentiles."  6.  He  was  to  be  a  meek  and  lowly  Saviour 
(ver.  2).  7.  He  was  to  be  very  tender  and  compassionate  towards  His  poor  people, 
particularly  the  weaklings  of  His  flock  (ver.  3).  8.  He  would  be  victorious  and 
successful  in  His  work  (vers.  3,  4).  9.  He  would  bear  His  Father's  commission, 
and  be  sustained  in  His  work  by  the  right  hand  of  His  power  (ver.  6).  10.  Ho 
is  the  free  gift  of  God  imto  a  lost  world.  "  And  give  thee  for  a  covenant  of  the 
people  "  (ver.  6).  11.  He  would  be  the  light  of  the  world,  and  particularly  a  light 
to  the  poor  Gentiles,  who  had  so  long  sat  in  the  regions  and  shadow  of  death  (vers. 
6,  7).  12.  He  would  loose  the  devil's  prisoners  (ver.  7).  m.  Inquire  what  may 
be  imported  in  the  expression  of  His  magnifying  the  law,  and  making  it 
honourable.  It  supposes — 1.  That  the  law  is  broken,  and  thereby  the  greatest 
indignity  done  to  it,  and  to  Him  who  gave  it.  2.  That  God,  the  great  Lawgiver, 
stands  upon  reparation.  3.  That  man,  who  has  broken  the  law,  is  utterly  incapable 
to  repair  its  honour,  or  to  satisfy  justice.  4.  That  God,  the  great  Lawgiver,  admits 
of  the  substitution  of  a  Surety  in  the  room  of  the  sinner.  5.  That  Christ,  as  our 
Surety,  actually  put  His  neck  under  the  yoke  of  the  Divine  law.     6.  That  the  holy 


342  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xlii. 

law  is  no  loser  by  Christ's  substitution  in  our  room;  it  has  all  that  it  demanded 
in  order  to  its  satisfaction.  7.  That  the  holy  law,  instead  of  being  a  loser,  gains 
an  additional  honour  and  glory  by  the  righteousness  of  the  Surety.     IV.  How  He 

MAGNIFIES   THE  LAW,   AND   WHAT  WAY  He  TAKES  TO  MAKE  IT  HONOTJEABLE.       The 

moral  law  comes  under  a  twofold  consideration :  it  may  be  considered  as  a  covenant, 
and  as  a  rule  of  life.  1.  As  a  covenant.  He  magnifies  it,  and  makes  it  honourable; 
and  this  He  did  by  fulfilling  all  its  demands?.  2.  Christ  magnifies  the  law  as  a  rule 
of  life,  and  this  He  doth  several  ways.  ( 1 )  By  writing  a  fair  copy  of  obedience  to 
it,  in  His  own  example,  for  the  imitation  of  all  His  followers.  (2)  By  explaining 
it  in  its  utmost  extent,  for  "  it  is  exceeding  broad."  (3)  By  establishing  the  obliga- 
tion of  it  as  a  rule  of  obedience  unto  all  His  followers  (Matt.  v.  17;  Rom.  iii.  31). 
(4)  By  writing  it  upon  the  heart  of  all  His  followers,  by  the  finger  of  His  eternal 
Spirit  (Jer.  xxxi.  33).  (5)  By  enforcing  obedience  to  the  law,  among  all  His 
followers,  by  stronger  motives  than  the  law  itself,  abstractly  considered,  could 
afford.  "  The  love  of  Christ  constraineth  us."  (6)  By  actuating  them  in  their 
obedience  to  the  law  by  His  own  Spirit  (Ezek.  xxxvi.  27).  V.  Give  the  reasons 
OF  the  doctrine.  Why  is  it  that  Christ  doth  magnify  the  law,  and  make  it  honour- 
able? 1.  From  the  regard  He  had  to  His  Father's  honour  and  authority,  affronted 
in  the  violation  of  the  law.  2.  Out  of  love  that  He  bore  to  our  salvation,  which 
could  not  be  accompUshed  without  the  penalty  of  the  law  had  been  endured,  and 
the  precept  of  it  obeyed.  3.  Because  He  was  ordained  of  God  from  eternity  for  His 
work  and  service;  He  was  set  up  for  it  by  the  decree  and  ordination  of  heaven, 
and  He  did  always  these  things  that  pleased  His  Father.  4.  Because  He  had  given 
Btis  engagement  in  the  council  of  peace.  5.  He  magnified  the  law  as  a  covenant, 
that  "  we  might  be  freed  from  it,"  in  its  covenant  form  and  curse  (Gal.  iv.  4; 
Rom.  vii.  4).  6.  He  magnified  the  law,  and  made  it  honourable,  as  a  covenant, 
that  we  may  obey  it  as  a  rule,  and  serve  the  Lord  without  fear  of  the  curse  and 
condemnation,  "  in  hoUness  and  righteousness  all  the  days  of  our  lives."  7.  To 
procure  and  confirm  His  own  right  of  government  as  Mediator  (Rom.  xiv.  9). 
8.  That  He  might  still  the  enemy  and  the  avenger,  and  outshoot  the  devil  in  his 
own  bow.  VI.  Make  some  application.  1.  See  hence  the  excellency  of  the  law 
of  God,  and  the  sacred  regard  that  God  bears  unto  it.  2.  See  hence  the  evil  of  sin, 
and  why  Christ  came  to  fiiiish  transgression,  and  make  an  end  of  it.  3.  See  hence 
the  dreadful  situation  of  every  sinner  that  is  out  of  Christ,  destitute  of  His  right- 
eousness. 4.  See  hence  the  wonderful  love  of  God  to  lost  sinners,  in  sending  His 
own  Son  to  magnify  the  law,  after  we  had  broken  it;  and  at  the  same  time  it  dis- 
covers the  grace  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  who,  though  He  be  supreme  Judge, 
Bang,  and  Lawgiver,  yet  was  willing  to  be  made  "  under  the  law,"  and  to  obey  it 
as  a  subject,  that  we  might  be  delivered  from  law- vengeance,  and  have  the  right- 
eousness of  it  fulfilled  in  us  through  Him.  5.  See  hence  the  ignorance  and  error 
of  those  who  are  prejudiced  against  the  doctrine  of  Justification  by  faith,  as  if  it 
were  prejudicial  to  the  holy  law,  or  did  any  way  derogate  from  its  honour  and 
authority.  6.  See  hence  the  error  of  those  who  assert  that  a  justified  believer 
is  still  liable  to  the  curse  or  penal  sanction  of  the  law.  7.  See  the  error  and  folly 
of  those  who  go  about  to  "  establish  their  own  righteousness  "  as  the  ground  of 
their  justification  and  acceptance,  and  "  refuse  to  submit  unto  the  righteousness 
of  God."  8.  This  doctrine  lets  us  see  the  error  of  those  who,  though  they  will  not 
absolutely  reject  the  righteousness  of  Christ,  yet  will  adventure  to  mingle  some- 
thing of  their  own  with  it.  9.  See  the  error  of  those  who  deny  Christ's  active 
obedience  to  the  law  to  be  any  part  of  our  justifying  righteousness.  10.  See  hence 
how  little  reason  even  believers,  who  are  justified  before  God,  have  to  be  proud 
of  what  they  are  come  to.  {Ibid.)  He  will  magnify  the  law,  and  make  it 
honourable. — The  law  magnified  in  man's  redemption: — 1.  With  respect  to  "  law." 
It  is  a  word  used  in  Scripture  in  two  ways;  and  matters  very  important  are  said 
about  it,  both  as  it  is  a  universal  thing,  and  as  it  is  a  particular  thing.  ( 1 )  By  law 
as  it  is  a  universal  thing,  I  mean  the  moral  law,  which  cannot  but  exist  wherever 
there  is  an  intelligent  creature  upon  earth.  We  cannot  conceive  of  any  creature 
existing  anywhere  having  intelligence  and  moral  feeling,  of  whom  it  is  not  the 
duty  to  love  God  with  all  the  heart,  and  to  love  other  beings  as  himself;  and  in 
that  one  thing  we  have  the  elements  and  rudiments  of  all  possible  morals.  The 
law  is  more  than  advice — it  has  authority,  and  therefore  has  sanctions  associated 
with  it.  We  cannot  conceive  of  any  moral  creatures  who  are  not  under  it, — either 
in  the  perfection  of  their  obedience  and  enjoying  the  blessedness  which  waits  upoa 
it,  ot  as  the  viotims  of  it  and  having  administered  to  them  its  penalty,  or  (if  there 


CHAP,  xm.]  ISAIAH.  343 

be  such  a  thing)  in  an  intermediate  state,  in  which  they  are  convicted  as  trans- 
gressors, and  yet  have  the  opportunity  of  escaping  the  penalty.  And  this  last  is 
altogether  supernatural;  the  other  two  are  what  we  call  natural.  (2)  What  I 
mean  by  law  as  a  limited  thing  is  the  ceremonial  institutions  which  were  given 
to  a  particular  part  of  mankind  and  for  a  particular  time.  These  have  not 
their  basis  in  the  nature  of  things.  They  rest  simply  upon  the  Divine 
authority.  As  such  they  have  an  importance  affixed  to  them  in  the  reasonings 
and  representations  of  Divine  truth.  2.  To  "  magnify  the  law  and  make  it 
honourable  "  cannot  mean  that  Messiah  was  to  produce  any  change  in  it, — 
that  what  He  did  was  to  perfect  the  law  itself.  As  to  the  moral  law,  there 
it  is,  necessarily  resulting  from  the  Divine  perfections  and  government,  a 
glorious  and  subHme  thing,  as  incapable  of  improvement  as  the  perfections  of 
God;  as  changeless  and  permanent  as  God.  So  with  respect  to  the  ceremonial 
law,  Christ  did  not  in  fact  do  anything  to  it  in  the  way  of  enlarging  it.  3.  Another 
idea  might  be  dwelt  upon:  that  we  cannot  suppose  that  this  means  that  there  was 
to  be  any  change  effected  in  the  conceptions  of  God  about  the  law, — that  the  work 
of  Christ  was  intended  to  affect  the  Divine  mind  in  relation  to  the  perceptions 
that  it  had  of  law.  There,  in  the  Divine  intellect,  lay  the  law  in  all  its  perfections 
and  splendour;  and  we  caimot  conceive  that  the  Divine  mind  needed  any  change 
in  its  conceptions  of  law,  or  that  the  law  could  be  magnified  and  made  more  glorious 
in  its  estimation.  We  cannot  conceive  that  God  could  have  a  more  distinct  per- 
ception with  respect  to  it  at  one  time  than  at  another.  And  so  with  respect  to  the 
ceremonial  law.  It  was  a  thing  that  resulted  from  the  Divine  mind,  and  in  the 
Divine  mind  there  were  reasons  for  every  appointment  which  He  made.  4.  So 
that  we  are  led,  by  these  simple  and  natural  steps,  to  this  idea:  that  this  "  magni- 
fjnng  the  law  and  making  it  honourable  "  must  signify  the  manner  in  which  created 
minds  were  to  be  affected  by  it.  Something  (whatever  it  might  be)  was  to  be 
done  by  which  there  should  be  a  certain  impression  with  respect  to  law  produced 
upon  the  minds  of  the  intelligent  universe.  Something  might  be  done  that  should 
(so  to  speak)  give  body  and  substance  and  visibility  to  God's  own  conceptions 
about  His  law.  These  might  be  made  manifest  to  the  universe.  God's  creatures 
might  come  to  understand  how  He  looked  at  it — the  reverence  and  respect  (if  we 
may  so  speak)  that  He  had  for  it.  And  that  is  what  I  think  it  means.  That  is 
what  I  think  was  done.  And  for  this  there  was  a  necessity.  And  the  Scripture 
teaches  this  in  the  plainest  way,  and  puts  it  before  us  again  and  again.  6.  If  sin 
had  never  entered  into  the  universe,  God's  law  would  always  have  been  a  sublime 
thing  in  the  estimation  of  that  universe.  And  if,  when  sin  was  admitted  into  the 
universe,  permitted  to  enter,  the  penalties  and  sanctions  of  the  law  were  carried 
out  fully  and  literally,  then  law  would  always  have  been  magnified;  it  would  then 
ftlso  have  been  always  a  great  and  glorious  thing.  But  if  there  is  to  be  the  fact, 
that  there  are  violaters  of  the  law,  those  that  on  just  principles  are  exposed  to  the 
penalty,  and  yet  there  is  to  be,  along  with  that,  another  fact — that  they  escape, 
that  they  are  treated  as  if  they  were  actually  righteous  and  enter  into  the  full  enjoy- 
ment of  the  results  of  perfect  obedience,  then  law  so  far  seems  to  go  for  nothing. 
Therefore  there  was  this  necessity.  It  is  required  that  something  shall  be  done 
the  moral  effect  of  which  upon  the  minds  of  God's  rational  creatures,  who  are  all 
under  His  government  and  are  all  ruled  by  Him,  shall  be  equivalent  to  the  impres- 
sion which  would  have  been  produced  by  the  literal  carrying  out  of  the  principles 
of  law  itself.  And  that  is  just  the  thing  which  the  work  of  Christ  does.  And  by 
the  effecting  of  that  thing  it  is  that  this  prophetic  declaration  is  realised.  6.  The 
conclusion  of  the  matter,  then,  is — the  maimer  in  which  this  is  done.  (1)  We 
might  dilate  upon  the  manner  in  which  the  scope  of  Christ's  teaching  always 
maintained  the  authority  of  the  law.  (2)  We  might  speak  with  respect  to  His  own 
personal  character.  (3)  But  all  these  are  but  preliminary  and  preparatory  to  that 
one  great  act  which  I  deem  to  be  the  consummation  of  Messiah's  work;  in  which 
the  law  was  honoured  and  magnified  by  His  propitiatory  sacrifice;  in  which,  in  a 
certain  sense.  He  stood  forth  bearing  the  penalty  of  the  moral  law,  and  in  another 
sense  manifesting  the  substance  and  casting  a  glory  upon  the  ceremonial.  "  It 
became  "  God  thus  to  act.  As  "  the  children  were  partakers  of  flesh  and  blood," 
the  Son  of  God  took  part  of  the  same;  that  being  manifested  in  our  natiu-e,  and 
having  thus  a  body  prepared  for  Him,  He  might  present  Himself  as  the  Lamb  of 
God,  without  spot  or  wrinkle  or  any  such  thmg,"  and  that  He  might  accomphsh 
the  great  redemption  act,  which  consisted  in  substitution,  in  the  sacrifice  upon  the 
Cross  for  the  sins  of  the  world.     There  was  a  substitution  in  two  senses;   a 


344  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xm. 

substitution  of  person,  and  a  substitution  of  suffering.  (4)  The  law  is  "  magnified 
and  made  honourable "  by  Christ,  inasmuch  as  His  people  are  redeemed  unto 
obedience.  The  Gospel  as  it  is  revealed  here  is  a  thing  distinct  from  law,  yet  is 
not  contrary  to  it,  but  consistent  with  it,  illustrative  of  it,  sustaining  it, 
beautifying  it,  magnifying  it.     (T.  Binney.) 

Vers.  23-25.  Who  among  you  will  give  ear  to  this  ? — National  calamities : 
—  I.  The  true  cause  of  national  CALAinTiES  is  here  pointed  out  — 
SEN.  The  public  distresses  of  the  men  of  Judah  and  Israel  did  not  proceed 
from  fate  or  fortune,  but  from  the  Supreme  Lord  of  the  universe,  who,  as 
the  just  punishment  of  their  atrocious  wickedness,  deUvered  them  into  the  hands 
of  them  who  spoiled  and  deprived  them  of  their  possessions.  Their  most  powerful 
enemies  could  not  have  treated  them  in  the  manner  here  described  haa  not  He 
who  rules  in  the  kingdoms  of  men  given  them  as  a  prey  on  account  of  their  aggra- 
vated and  multiplied  transgressions.  Though  the  various  events,  prosperous 
and  adverse,  that  happen  to  nations  and  individuals  are  brought  about  by  the 
intervention  of  means  and  instruments,  the  hand  of  the  Almighty  ought  never 
to  be  overlooked,  but  humbly  acknowledged.  "  Is  there  any  evil  in  the  city, 
and  the  Lord  hath  not  done  it?  "  Afihctions  are  necessary  to  the  government 
of  the  world  in  its  present  state ;  they  check  the  progress  of  wickedness,  and  show 
the  dreadful  consequences  of  incurring  the  wrath  of  the  Almighty.  II.  Thh 
JUST  consequence  of  transgression  is  here  described.  "  Therefore,  because 
they  would  not  walk  in  all  His  ways,"  &c.  The  deplorable  state  of  the  Jewish 
nation  at  the  time  this  prophecy  was  deUvered,  and  in  succeeding  periods, 
is  here  graphically  described.  An  awful  instance  of  the  Divine  judgments! 
III.  The  only  method  to  escape  Divine  judgment  is  here  suggested.  The 
prophet  directs  his  discourse  to  the  hypocritical  and  disobedient,  who  were  averse 
to  admit  light  into  their  minds,  to  admit  conviction  of  their  sin  and  danger.  They 
were  neither  affected  by  the  calamities  which  they  felt,  nor  feared  those  with 
which  they  were  threatened,  though  the  storm  was  gathering  thick  around  them. 
Of  such  people  the  Jewish  nation  were  mostly  composed  at  the  time  of  the  pro- 
phecy; and  the  prophet  inquires,  "  Who  among  you  will  give  ear  to  this,  and 
hearken  for  the  time  to  come?  "     {T.  Lewis.) 

Ver.  25.  It  hath  set  Mm  on  fire  round  about. — Playing  with  fire: — Because 
of  their  unfaithfulness,  God  gave  up  His  people  to  divers  judgments,  and 
yet  the  prophet  has  to  deplore  that  Israel  failed  to  recognise  the  hand  of 
God  in  their  tribulation;  they  would  not  understand  and  repent;  although  they 
were  burned,  yet  they  laid  it  not  to  heart.  Consider — I.  The  destbuctiveness 
OF  sin.  "  It  hath  set  him  on  JSre  round  about."  It  was  the  purpose  of  God 
that  Israel  should  dwell  in  safety  in  a  rich  and  pleasant  land.  But  the  chosen 
people  sinned  against  God,  so  He  gave  Jacob  for  a  si^oil  and  Israel  to  the  robbers. 
Sometimes  the  plague  wasted  the  land,  sometimes  the  great  army  of  locusts  and 
caterpillars,  at  other  times  the  land  was  devastated  by  fire  and  sword.  In  the 
text  we  behold  invading  armies  overrunning  the  country,  leaving  it  a  smoking 
ruin.  So  sin  has  spoiled  the  world.  Our  nation,  that  might  be  so  entirely  rich 
and  happy,  is  plagued  with  miseries;  houses  which  might  be  paradises  are  hells; 
hearts  which  might  be  watered  gardens  are  full  of  blackness.  And  there  is 
nothing  arbitrary  in  this  retribution  (chap.  i.  31).  The  idolater  is  as  tow,  and 
his  work  is  the  spark  which  ignites  the  blaze  of  destruction.  Oh,  hesitate!  you 
cannot  break  the  law  but  it  is  as  fire  among  the  dry  stubble,  bringing  with  it  an 
inevitable  train  of  disasters  and  miseries.  11.  The  infatuation  of  sinners. 
"  Yet  he  knew  it  not."  "  Yet  he  laid  it  not  to  heart."  The  proverb  says,  "  The 
burnt  chUd  dreads  the  fiire."  This  is  equally  true  of  men  in  their  business  life. 
Let  a  man  speculate  in  some  concern  or  other  that  turns  out  badly,  people  say, 
"  Ah!  he  has  burnt  his  fingers."  Now,  when  a  man  has  done  that,  beware  how 
you  approach  him  with  your  rosy  prospectuses.  He  will  show  you  his  bUsters, 
and  send  you  away  with  scant  courtesy.  As  the  Orientals  say,  "  He  who  has 
suffered  from  a  firebrand  is  afraid  of  a  firefly."  A  victim  is  afraid  of  anything 
that  bears  the  most  distant  likeness  to  that  from  which  he  suffered.  This  is 
rational.  But  men  are  not  thus  cautious  in  regard  to  the  moral  life.  Thera 
they  blind  themselves,  harden  themselves,  and  when  God's  judgments  are  let 
loose  upon  them  they  will  not  see,  when  they  are  burned  they  will  not  lay  it  to 
heart.     What  a  striking  illustration  of  this  we  have  in  Pharaoh!     The  history 


CHAP,  xun.]  ISAIAH.  345 

of  Israel  is  an  illustration,  on  a  larger  scale,  of  the  same  blindness  and  insen- 
sibility.  How  many  times  did  their  idolatry  bring  them  into  trouble!  And 
yet  they  would  not  hear,  they  would  not  see,  until  wrath  came  upon  them  to 
the  uttermost  in  the  captivity  of  Babylon,  in  their  overthrow  by  the  Romans. 
How  often  do  we  oiurselves  fail  to  take  to  heart  God's  sharp  yet  gracious  warnings ! 
How  is  it  that,  whilst  we  dread  the  fire  which  burns  the  skin,  we  do  not  fear 
the  fire  which  scars  the  soul?  1,  The  fire  which  bm^ns  sears.  The  action  of 
sin  destroys  sensibility,  so  do  neglected  judgments  (Jer.  vi.  15).  Let  us  lay  to 
heart  the  first  sense  of  shame,  the  first  warning,  the  first  rebuke !  When  a  choice 
ornament  is  unhappily  sHghtly  fractured  there  is  great  and  sincere  distress;  but 
the  next  accident  is  taken  lightly,  and  only  provokes  the  merry  rejoinder,  "  Oh, 
it  was  cracked!  "  When  a  thing  is  stained  or  fractured,  a  spot  or  crack  more  or 
less  after  that  seems  of  no  great  consequence.  2.  The  fire  which  burns  seduces. 
If  men  once  begin  to  lack  sincerity,  to  disregard  the  still,  small  whisper  of  conscience, 
to  trifle  with  the  fine  health  of  the  pure  and  faithful  soul,  sin,  despite  all  its  implied 
agony,  soon  acquires  an  indescribable  fascination — we  suffer  through  it,  and 
yet  we  cling  to  it.  Illustration,  the  moth  and  the  flame.  So  men  are  fascinated 
by  the  flame  which  consumes  them.  In  the  whole  mystery  of  iniquity  is  nothing 
more  mysterious  than  the  way  in  which  sin  seems  to  master  the  reason  of  men, 
and  to  allvu-e  and  charm  them  to  ruin.  So  Israel  was  fascinated  by  idolatry; 
dreadfully  plagued  as  they  were  for  their  lapses,  they  could  not  resist  the  glamomr. 
So  it  is  with  men  once  committed  to  the  hypnotic  power  of  evU — they  Unger  on 
the  verge  of  death.  3.  The  fire  which  burns  spares.  Strange  reason  this,  but 
it  is  a  reason.  There  was  an  element  of  mercy  in  the  judgments  of  Israel,  and 
this  very  mercy  was  misconstrued  and  turned  into  lasciviousness  (chap.  i.  5,  7). 
Children  playing  with  fire  are  sometimes  only  slightly  injured,  and  then  they 
make  light  of  it,  and  repeat  their  trifling;  and  perhaps  in  the  end  they  pay  very 
dearly  indeed.  So  it  was  with  the  Jews.  They  lost  a  bit  of  territory;  they 
were  compelled  to  pay  tribute;  some  of  them  fell  by  the  sword,  or  were  carried 
into  captivity;  they  were  afflicted  in  measure,  and  they  presumed.  So  it  is 
still  (Eccles.  viii.  11).  The  law  of  retribution  is  ever  working  in  human  life; 
ever  and  anon  it  drops  blazing  warnings  at  our  feet;  and  be  sure  the  day  of  the 
Lord  will  come,  when  He  will  arise  and  judge  the  earth  in  righteousness,  when 
wrath  to  the  uttermost  will  come  upon  the  obstinately  disobedient.  God's 
"  sparing  mercies  "  appeal  to  you  to  sin  no  more.     {W.  L.  Watkinson.) 


CHAPTER  XLin. 


Vbbs.  1-4.    But  110^7  thus    saith   the   Lord   that   created   thee,    0   Jacob. 

— The  true  relation  of  Israel  to  Jehovah : — The  main,  subject  of  this  chapter  is 
the  true  relation  of  Israel  to  Jehovah,  and  its  application  in  the  way  both  of 
warning  and  encouragement.  The  doctrine  taught  is  that  their  segregation 
from  the  rest  of  men,  as  a  pecuhar  people,  was  an  act  of  sovereignty,  independent 
of  all  merit  in  themselves,  and  not  even  intended  for  their  benefit  exclusively,  but 
for  the  accompHshment  of  God's  gracious  piurposes  respecting  men  in  general. 
The  inferences  drawn  from  the  fact  are,  that  Israel  would  certainly  escape  the 
dangers  which  environed  him,  however  imminent ;  and,  on  the  other  hand,  that 
he  must  suffer  for  his  unfaithfulness  to  God.  In  illustration  of  these  truths 
the  prophet  introduces  several  historical  allusions  and  specific  prophecies,  the 
most  striking  of  the  former  having  respect  to  the  exodus  from  Egypt,  and  of 
the  latter  to  the  fall  of  Babylon.  It  is  important  to  the  just  interpretation  of 
the  chapter  that  these  parts  of  it  should  be  seen  in  their  true  hght  and  propor- 
tion as  incidental  illustrations,  not  as  the  main  subject  of  the  prophecy,  which, 
as  already  stated,  is  the  general  relation  between  God  and  TTia  ancient  people, 
and  His  mode  of  dealing  with  them,  not  at  one  time,  but  at  aJl  times.  (J.  A. 
Alexander.)  The  right  of  the  Creator: — 1.  In  reviewing  Providence,  men  do 
not  go  far  enough  back.  The  Lord  Himself  always  takes  a  great  sweep  of  time. 
Here  is  an  instance  in  point.  "  But  now,  thus  saith  the  Lord  that  created  thee, 
.  .  .  and  He  that  formed  thee."  No  argument  is  built  upon  what  happened 
an  hour  ago.  Thus  God  will  have  us  go  back  to  creation  day,  to  formation  time, 
and  take  in  all  the  childhood,  all  the  youthhood,  all  the  manhood,  all  the  education 


346  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xun. 

and  strife  and  discipline,  all  the  attrition  and  all  the  harmony,  all  the  week-days 
and  all  the  Sabbath-days;  and  He  would  bid  us  watch  the  mystery  of  time,  until 
it  comes  out  in  blossoming  and  fruitfulness  and  benediction.  We  should  have 
no  pain  if  we  had  the  right  line  of  review  and  pursued  it,  and  comprehended  it, 
in  its  continuity  and  entirety.  There  are  many  creations.  God  is  always  creat- 
ing life,  and  always  forming  it.  There  is  an  individual  existence;  there  is  a 
national  organisation;  there  are  birthdays  of  empires  and  birthdays  of  reform. 
2.  The  Church  must  recognise  its  period  of  creation  and  formation.  Jacob 
was  not  always  a  people;  Israel  was  not  always  a  significant  name,  a  symbol  in 
language;  and  individuals  are  gathered  together  into  societies,  and  they  are 
charged  with  the  administration  of  the  kingdom  of  Christ,  and  as  such  they  must 
go  back  and  remember  their  Creator,  and  adore  their  Maker,  and  serve  their 
Saviour,  and  renew  their  inspiration  where  it  was  originated.  3.  Right  relations 
to  God  on  the  part  of  man  should  be  realised.  This  appeal  rises  into  climax,  into 
convincing  and  triumphant  words.  I  have  "  created  thee  "  ;  that  is  the  basal 
line — "  formed  thee,"  given  thee  shape  and  relation  ;  "  redeemed  thee,"  paid 
for  thee;  "  called  thee  by  thy  name,"  like  a  friend  or  child:  "  thou  art  Aline." 
Yet  all  this  is  in  the  Old  Testament!  Do  we  not  fly  from  the  Old  Testament 
into  the  New,  that  we  may  have  some  sight  of  the  tenderness  of  God  ?  There 
is  no  need  for  such  flight.  There  are  tenderer  words  about  God  in  the  Old  Testa- 
ment than  there  are  in  the  New.  4.  This  relation  carries  everything  else  along 
with  it.  After  this  there  can  be  nothing  but  detail.  "  When  thou  passest,"  &c. 
(ver.  2).  {J.  Parker,  D.D.)  Guarantees: — Absolute  ownership.  He  who  speaks 
is  our  Creator.  He  claims  our  attention  also  because  He  Imows  us.  Fear  is 
the  apprehension  of  danger,  both  natural  and  moral.  With  regard  to  natural 
fear,  some  are  more  timid  than  others.  But  this  is  no  index  to  the  moral  state 
of  the  heart.  Nerves  which  are  strong  do  not  constitute  faith ;  nerves  which  are 
weak  do  not  indicate  distrust  in  God.  To  remove  the  distrust  which  Israel  felt, 
three  guarantees  are  offered — I.  Redemption.  "  For  I  have  redeemed  thee." 
From  whence  came  the  idea  of  redemption?  (Lev.  xxv.  25-34.)  This  is  the  figure 
used  in  the  text  and  elsewhere  to  show  that  God  has  taken  away  the  moral  dis- 
abilities under  which  we  had  fallen  through  sin.  The  principle  is  not  without 
analogy.  When  the  golden  grain  is  enslaved  in  the  earth,  the  ray  of  light,  the 
drop  of  water,  and  the  warm  breeze  come  to  redeem  their  brother.  1.  The  right 
to  redeem  was  vested  in  the  next  of  kin,  hence  the  necessity  for  the  incarnation 
of  the  Son  of  God.  The  transaction  was  confined  to  the  family  of  the  brother 
who  had  waxen  "  poor."  No  portion  of  the  inheritance  must  ultimately  go  out 
of  the  family,  for  even  if  no  one  of  the  next  of  kin  was  able  to  redeem  it,  in  the 
year  of  Jubilee  a  full  restoration  was  made.  Not  only  the  inheritance  must  have 
remained  in  the  family,  but  the  redemption  of  it  was  restricted  to  the  family, 
that  it  might  ever  appear  of  value  to  the  members  of  the  family  as  a  sacred  trust 
from  God.  This  is  the  very  estimate  of  human  life  which  the  Incarnation  conveys: 
to  redeem  that  lifei  the  redeemer  must  be  one  of  the  family.  But  the  necessity 
appears,  because  the  family  of  man  must  be  impressed  with  the  value  of  the 
inheritance  which  God  hath  given.  The  life  of  Jesus  brings  home  to  us  the  facts 
that  human  life  is  infinitely  valuable,  and  that  God  has  His  hold  upon  it,  although 
mortgaged  to  another.  "  All  souls  are  Mine."  "  I  know  that  my  Redeemer 
livetn."  2.  To  free  the  possession  the  ransom  must  be  paid.  The  sovereignty 
of  the  gift  did  not  free  the  inheritance  from  encumbrances  contracted  by  the 
possessor.  Justice  demanded  the  redemption  price.  In  the  interest  of  rectitude 
and  the  influence  of  the  moral  law,  Christ  "  gave  Himself  for  us,  that  He  might 
redeem  us  from  all  iniquity,"  &c.  As  to  the  nature  of  the  ransom,  St.  Peter  says, 
"  Forasmuch  as  ye  know  that  ye  were  not  redeemed  with  corruptible  things 
as  silver  and  gold,  from  your  vain  conversation  received  by  tradition  from  jour 
fathers,  but  with  the  precious  blood  of  Christ."  II.  Called.  "  And  called  thee 
by  thy  name."  The  reference  here  is  either  to  a  legal  form  of  calling  out  the 
name  of  the  mortgagor,  with  the  declaration  that  henceforth  his  possession  was 
free;  or  to  the  trumpet  of  the  Jubilee,  which  was  a  direct  call  to  every  debtor 
to  resume  his  liberty.  1.  Personal  salvation.  When  we  are  accosted  by  name 
the  whole  being  is  involved,  with  every  interest  concerned.  God  calls  the  sinner 
to  repentance.  2.  Personal  realisation.  The  brother  who  had  waxen  poor 
knew  ne  was  free,  because  his  name  had  been  called  that  he  might  be  assured  of 
his  freedom.  The  deed  was  handed  over  to  him  re-conveying  the  property 
into  his  name.     Faith  leads  to  the  realising  of  forgiveness  and  peace.     III.  Rbdt- 


CHAP.  XLHi.]  ISAIAH.  347 

STATED.  "  Thou  art  Mine."  The  idea  is  that  by  grace  man  is  brought  back 
to  the  peace  and  service  of  God.  1.  The  claim  is  iiniversal.  Wherever  the  new 
heart  is.  God  claims  it  for  His  own.  2.  The  claim  is  absolute.  We  are  no  longer 
our  own,  but,  having  been  bought  with  a  price,  we  glorify  God  in  body  and  mind. 
3.  We  are  now  on  trial,  but  there  will  be  a  final  recognition.  "  They  shall  be 
Mine,"  &c.  [T.  Davies,  M.A.)  The  Divine  responsibiliti/ : — 1.  Responsibility 
is  not  a  word  that  can  be  limited  to  man.  It  must  belong  to  those  higher  orders  of 
created  intelligence  kno\vn  to  us  as  angels  of  various  degrees.  It  must  belong  to 
the  Eternal  One  Himself.  It  must  be  that  He  holds  Himself  responsible  for  the 
creation  and  its  consequences.  If  responsibility  belongs  to  the  creature  made 
in  the  image  of  God,  it  is  inherited  responsibihty;  it  comes  down  from  Him  who 
made  him.  2.  Let  us  approach  the  subject  cautiously.  God's  revelation  of 
Himself  is  intended  to  be  a  light  to  the  mind  and  a  joy  to  the  heart.  Everyone 
who  knows  anything  of  Scripture  knows  how  gradual  has  been  the  revelation 
of  God  to  the  human  race.  Not  till  we  reach  the  time  of  David  do  we  get  the 
word  father  as  appUed  to  Deity,  and  then  only  in  a  figm-ative  sort  of  way.  Isaiah 
prophesies  that  one  of  the  signs  of  the  Christian  dispensation  shall  be  that  the 
name  of  God  as  revealed  in  Christ  shall  be  "  the  Everlasting  Father."  Men  had 
known  Deity  as  the  Self-Existent  God — the  source  of  hfe.  They  had  thought  of 
Him  as  the  God  of  providence,  the  Great  Provider,  who  had  them  in  His  hands, 
and  would  care  for  them,  and  that  is  about  the  utmost  practical  view  attained 
to  in  the  Old  Testament.  In  that  wonderful  book  of  Job,  the  epitomised  life 
of  the  human  race,  we  have  the  thought  of  an  unreahsed  Redeemer, — but  "  My 
Father  and  your  Father,  My  God  and  your  God  "  is  new  Testament  language, 
and  post-resurrection  speech  at  that.  3.  This  speech  leads  us  to  the  thought 
of  the  Divine  responsibility.  It  is  not  our  invention  but  God's  revelation  that, 
like  as  a  father  pitieth  his  children,  so  the  Lord  pitieth  them  that  fear  Him.  We 
have  a  right,  then,  to  say  that  at  least  the  same  measmre  of  responsibihty  which 
belongs  to  a  father  for  the  nourishment,  education,  and  development  of  his  child 
belongs  to  the  great  Eternal  Father  for  us  all.  We  are  not  responsible  for  the 
laws  which  work  in  our  own  constitutions,  for  we  did  not  create  those  laws.  We 
are  not  responsible  for  anything  which  is  out  of  our  own  power.  I  am  not 
responsible  for  the  original  tendency  to  sinfulness  which  was  in  my  nature  when 
born  into  this  world.  Nor  am  I  responsible  for  being  born;  nor  for  being  born 
where  I  was  born;  nor  for  having  just  those  parents  which  were  mine  ;  nor  for 
being  just  so  high  and  just  so  heavy;  nor  for  having  the  temperament  and  dis- 
position with  which  I  was  born.  4.  I  suppose  that  in  the  generations  behind  ua 
there  have  lived  people  who  verily  persuaded  themselves  that  they  were 
responsible  for  the  sin  of  Adam,  that  they  were  doomed  because  an  ancestor 
of  generations  ago  was  a  wilful  sinner.  Every  man  inherits  tendencies  from 
past  generations.  When  the  first  of  men  wilfully  disobeyed  God,  he  started  in 
himself  a  tendency  which,  if  not  resisted,  would  become  a  habit  of  wrong-doing — 
and  that  habit  would  be  propagated  into  the  next  generation,  and  into  the  next, 
and  so  on.  And  that  is  what  is  meant  by  original  sin — the  tendency  created 
by  generations  past  to  wrong — stamping  its  impress  upon  mind  and  heart,  yea, 
upon  the  physical  organism.  It  is  so  in  the  animal  world.  In  the  past,  dogs  have 
been  trained  to  fold  sheep,  and  the  instruction  has  become  a  habit,  and  the  habit 
has  created  a  tendency  in  the  next  generation  to  do  the  same  thing,  and  has 
become  fixed — a  second  nature,  as  we  say.  And  this  law  runs  through  all  creation, 
even  into  the  vegetable  world.  Now,  He  who  made  man  is  responsible  for  the 
original  law  by  which  tendencies  to  good  and  evil  can  be  propagated  from  sire 
to  son.  The  law  is  not  evil;  it  is  good.  But  good  laws  are  often  used  for  bad 
purposes.  From  a  reservoir  of  piure  water  pipes  are  laid  to  every  house  in  the 
city.  Those  pipes  were  laid  for  the  conveyance  of  pm-e,  wholesome  water  for  the 
benefit  of  a  large  population.  That  was  the  original  design  and  intention.  But 
suppose  that  city  should  be  besieged  by  a  barbarian  army — suppose  the  army 
should  surround  the  reservoir  and  poison  the  waters,  the  very  pipes  which  were 
laid  for  the  conveyance  of  hfe  would  be  conduits  for  the  conveyance  of  death. 
But  that  was  not  their  original  design.  And  so  oiu*  guilt  does  not  extend  to 
Deity.  He  is  responsible  for  the  beneficent  law,  not  for  the  sin  which  has  been 
transmitted  along  it.  The  very  idea  of  intelligence  involves  freedom.  Either 
there  must  be  freedom,  or  there  can  be  no  intelhgence  and  no  morality.  5.  We 
cannot  conceive  of  an  omniscient  God,  without  admitting  that  He  must  have 
foreseen  that  the  creature  He  made  would  abuse  His  Uberty.      Does  the  Divine 


348  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xun. 

responsibility  extend  to  making  such  provision  as  would  prevent  it?  Clearly 
not.  We  cannot  conceive  how  it  could  be  made,  and  yet  leave  man  a  free  moral 
agent,  not  a  machine.  The  Divine  responsibility  extends  to  the  providing  a 
means  whereby  not  simply  to  develop  an  innocent  man,  but  to  save  a  guilty  man 
from  the  spiritual  consequences  of  his  sin.  From  all  the  consequences  he  cannot 
be  saved ;  from  the  fatal  consequences  he  can.  That  God  did  anticipate  the  fall 
from  innocence  of  His  creature,  and  provide  for  meeting  man  in  a  fallen  condition, 
is  evident  from  one  single  expression,  "  the  Lamb  slain  before  the  foundation 
of  the  world."  Redemption  was  no  afterthought.  For  our  own  convenience, 
it  may  be  necessary  at  times  to  speak  of  justice,  and  at  other  times  of  mercy. 
But  justice  and  mercy  in  God  are  never  represented  as  in  antagonism.  They 
ever  go  hand-in-hand,  like  light  and  heat  in  the  sunbeams.  When  God  opened 
the  eyes  of  the  great  apostle  he  saw  this  truth,  that  "  where  sin  abounded,  grace 
did  much  more  abound,"  or,  as  it  is  more  correctly,  "  superabounded,"  abounded 
over  and  above.  In  this  dispensation  of  things  a  lost  man  has  not  simply  to 
reject  God  as  a  Creator,  but  God  as  a  Redeemer — God  in  Christ — the  God  who 
has  done  all  and  everything  possible  to  be  done  to  nuUify  the  fatal  results  of 
sin.  6.  You  remember  the  complimentary  word  uttered  respecting  Abraham: 
*'  I  know  him  that  he  will  command  his  children  "  ;  and  in  every  father  there  ia 
lodged  the  right  to  command — the  duty  to  command.  That  weak  tenderness  which 
permits  disobedience  to  go  unrebuked  and  unpunished,  is  not  Divine  tenderness.  It 
is  the  frailty  of  human  irresoluteness.  IThere  is  nothing  of  that  in  God.  (iJ. 
Thomas,  D.D.)  Divine  consolation : — The  vision  of  Isaiah  contains  a  representa- 
tion of  the  present  and  future  state  of  Israel  and  Judah.  And  because  some  of 
hifl  expressions  might  be  interpreted  as  if  all  the  twelve  tribes  should  be  utterly  cast 
away,  he  frequently  intersperses  such  consolations  as  this,  to  assiire  the  people 
that  if  they  were  duly  corrected  and  reformed  by  their  captivity,  God  would 
bring  them  out  of  it,  and  raise  them  up  again  to  be  His  Church  and  people.  I.  To 
confirm  them  in  the  belief  of  such  a  restoration,  He  puts  them  in  mind  of  several 
AEGX7MENTS  AND  EEASONS  to  expect  it.  1.  He  tells  them  that  upon  their  repent- 
ance God  had  promised  them  such  a  restoration.  2.  Isaiah  calls  upon  the  people 
to  consider  that  this  promise  of  salvation  is  made  to  them  by  that  God  "  who 
created  Jacob  and  formed  Israel."  This,  indeed,  is  a  common  topic  of  con- 
solation to  every  pious  man,  that  He  who  created  him  will  have  mercy  on  him, 
and  is  able,  in  all  circumstances,  to  make  good  His  promises,  and  preserve  the 
work  of  His  own  hands.  But  it  was  very  proper  for  this  people,  above  aU  others, 
to  make  such  inferences,  because  they  had  been  in  a  pecuUar  manner  created 
and  formed  of  God.  3.  They  might  conclude  this  from  former  redemptions 
which  God  had  wrought  for  them.  "  Fear  not,  for  I  have  redeemed  thee."  4.  A 
fourth  ground  of  Israel's  hope  for  God's  futiure  mercies,  were  the  gracious  appella- 
tions which  He  had  bestowed  upon  them.  "  I  have  called  thee  by  thy  name; 
thou  art  Mine."  He  had  changed  their  father  Jacob's  name  to  Israel.  He  had 
named  them  His  "  holy  nation,"  His  "  peculiar  people."  5.  A  further  argument 
to  Israel  to  trust  in  God,  were  the  deliverances  which  He  had  vouchsafed  to  some 
of  them.  "  When  thou  goest  (or  hast  gone)  through  the  waters,  they  have  not 
overflowed  thee;  and  through  the  fire,  it  hath  not  kindled  upon  thee."  II.  The 
words  are  certainly  a  common  topic  of  consolation  to  all  the  faithful 
SERVANTS  OF  GoD.  So  that,  to  find  our  own  blessing  in  them,  and  to  understand 
them  as  the  voice  of  our  own  merciful  Father,  we  have  nothing  else  to  do  but 
to  approve  ourselves  His  obedient  children;  for  He  is  no  respecter  of  persons. 
1.  As  God  promised  His  people  a  restoration  from  their  captivity,  upon  their 
true  repentance  and  return  to  their  duty,  so  will  He  rescue  us  from  the  slavery 
of  sin  and  Satan,  if  we  do  in  good  earnest  feel  the  oppression  and  misery  of  it,  and 
would  much  rather  be  employed  in  doing  God's  will,  and  keeping  His  command- 
ments. 2.  Was  it  an  argument  to  Israel  to  trust  in  God,  because  He  had  created 
them  and  formed  them  in  so  special  a  manner  as  is  before  represented?  The 
like  consideration  is  equally  comfortable  to  every  member  of  the  Church  of  Chi-ist. 
For  in  Him  we  are  born  again.  3.  All  the  redemptions  which  God  vouchsafed 
to  Israel  are  proofs  to  us  of  His  infinite  power  and  goodness,  and  figures  of  greater 
things  which  He  will  do  for  us.  4.  If  God's  gracious  appellations  of  Israel  assured 
them  of  His  special  regard  for  them,  no  less  ground  of  rejoicing  have  we  in  the 
like  assurance  of  His  favour  towards  us.  5.  In  cases  of  extreme  danger,  particu- 
larly in  perils  of  fire  and  water,  God  has  shown  Himself  the  same  in  the  Christian 
fs  He  was  of  old  in  the  Jewish  Church,  a  sufficient  Helper  to  deliver  out  of  such 


CHAP.  xLin.]  ISAIAH.  849 

troubles.  (W.  Reading,  M.A.)  The  goodness  of  God  to  Israel: — In  the  latter 
part  of  the  preceding  chapter  we  read  of  the  sins,  not  of  the  obedience  of  IsraeL 
After  this,  what  might  have  been  expected  but  that  He  would  punish  them  still 
more  severely,  if  not  abandon  them  as  incorrigible?  In  the  text,  however.  He 
promises  to  magnify  His  mercy  in  doing  them  good.  Consider — I.  Thb  chab- 
ACTER  OF  THB  PEOPLE  HERB  SPOKEN  OF.  It  may  be  inferred  from  the  names 
given  to  them  in  the  text.  They  are  addressed  by  the  convertible  names  of 
Jacob,"  and  "  Israel."  His  name  Jacob  was  changed  because  he  had  wrestled 
with  God  for  His  blessing  till  he  succeeded  in  obtaining  it.  Hence,  then,  we 
may  learn  the  character  of  His  spiritual  children — they  wrestle  with  God  in 
prayer  for  His  blessing  tiU  they  prevail.  But  this  general  description  of  them 
includes  several  particulars.  Consider — 1,  What  they  do.  They  pray.  And 
does  not  this  at  once  distinguish  them  from  thousands  around  themT  2.  To 
whom  are  their  prayers  addressed?  To  the  true  God,  who  is  also  their  own  God 
— the  God  of  Israel.  This  also  separates  them  from  an  immense  number  of  the 
human  race;  for  how  many,  alas,  are  there  in  the  world  who  are  totally  mistaken 
as  to  the  proper  object  of  worship!  3.  They  pray  to  Him  alone.  There  are 
not  a  few  in  the  world  who  unite  the  worship  of  Jehovah  with  that  of  their  own 
idols.  4.  But  what  does  Israel  pray  for?  For  God's  blessing.  This  implies  that 
they  feel  their  need  of  it,  and,  by  consequence,  that  they  differ  essentially  from 
all  persons  of  a  self-righteous  and  self-sufficient  spirit.  5.  How  do  they  pray? 
In  faith.  They  pray  also  fervently.  They  are  not  like  many,  cold,  formal,  and 
lifeless  in  prayer.  They  persevere,  too,  tiU  they  prevail.  But  were  they  always 
Buch  characters?  No;  there  was  a  time  when  they  were  as  prayerless  as  others. 
Who,  then,  has  made  them  to  differ?  God  alone.  II.  What  He  has  eonh 
FOR  THEM  IN  TIME  PAST;  Or  what  are  the  steps  which  He  has  taken  to  make  them 
what  they  are.  These  steps  are  three — 1.  He  has  created  them.  "  Thus  saith 
the  Lord  that  created  thee,  0  Jacob,"  &c.  They  are  subjects  of  a  creation  to 
which  all  others  are  entire  strangers.  What  renders  this  creation  necessary  is 
the  corruption  of  our  nature,  which  is  total,  since  the  Fall.     It  is  a  creation  of 

food  substituted  for  evil,  a  heart  of  flesh  for  a  heart  of  stone,  Hght  for  darkness, 
oliness  for  sin,  faith  for  sense,  hfe  for  death,  happiness  for  misery.  Every  real 
Christian  is  the  subject  of  it.  It  is  effected  by  the  operation  of  the  Holy  Ghost. 
To  God,  therefore,  belongs  the  whole  glory  of  it.  2.  He  has  redeemed  them. 
*'  Fear  not;  for  I  have  redeemed  thee."  3.  He  has  called  them  by  their  names. 
"I  have  called  thee  by  thy  name."  And  what  does  this  imply?  (1)  That  they 
are  made  partakers  of  "  the  heavenly  calling,"  "  the  high  calling  of  God  in  Christ 
Jesus."  (2)  That  God  well  knows  His  people.  (3)  We  know  that  when  a  man 
of  superior  rank  and  dignity  calls  an  inferior  by  his  name,  he  is  considered  to 
treat  him  with  uncommon  marks  of  kindness  and  familiarity,  and  to  confer  upon 
him  a  peculiar  honour.  Such  kindness  and  honom*,  then,  does  God  bestow  upon 
His  people.  He  is  not  ashamed  to  be  called  their  God,  and  to  allow  each  of 
them,  like  Abraham,  to  be  called  the  friend  of  God.  4.  This,  then,  is  what  the 
Lord  has  done  for  Israel  His  people;  and  He  therefore  calls  them  His,  saying, 
"Thou  art  Mine."  Has  He  not  the  most  indisputable  title  to  their  persons  and 
services?  III.  What  He  promises  to  do  for  them  in  time  to  comb.  "  When 
thou  passest  through  the  waters,  I  will  be  with  thee,"  &c.  1.  To  pass  through 
fire  and  water  appears  to  have  been  a  proverbial  expression  for  passing  through 
various  kinds  of  dangers,  trials,  and  afflictions.  2.  But  why  does  God  suffer 
His  people  to  be  thus  afflicted?  Because  they  are  children  whom  He  loves. 
3.  And  do  their  tribulations  answer  the  ends  which  He  has  in  view?  Yes ; 
there  is  not  one  of  His  afflicted  ones  who  has  not  had  cause  to  say,  sooner  or 
later,  "  It  is  good  for  me  that  I  have  been  afflicted."  4.  We  are  not,  however, 
to  suppose  that  afflictions  of  themselves  ever  bear  these  blessed  fruits.  Unblest 
and  unsanctified,  they  have  rather  a  contrary  tendency,  and  produce  very  different 
effects.  And  were  it  not  for  the  presence  of  God  with  His  people,  in  the  water 
and  the  fire,  they  would  be  injured  and  destroyed  by  them.  But  they  need 
not  fear;  for  faithful  is  He  that  hath  promised.  6.  Need  I  remind  you  how 
this  promise  has  been  verified,  or  how  the  presence  of  God  has  been  with  His 
people  in  every  age  of  the  Church?  (1)  Look,  first,  at  Israel  after  the  flesh. 
See  their  afflictions  in  Egypt,  and  know  their  sorrows.  Behold  the  bush  bmming 
with  fire,  and  yet  not  consumed.  God  is  in  the  midst  of  it.  Follow  them  in 
their  passage  out  of  that  house  of  bondage.  God  is  with  them  in  a  pillar  of  cloud 
by  day,  and  in  a  pillar  of  fire  by  night.     Observe  them  again  during  their  captivitj 


350  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xliu. 

in  Babylon.  Shadrach,  Meshach,  and  Abednego,  the  servants  of  the  Most  High 
God,  walked  in  the  midst  of  the  fire,  and  had  no  hurt.  They  had  a  fourth  in 
their  company,  whom  even  Nebuchadnezzar  could  not  help  saying  was  like  the 
Son  of  God.  (2)  Look,  next,  into  New  Testament  times,  and  even  to  later  ages, 
and  you  will  find  additional  evidence  of  the  blessed  truth  before  us.  (D.  Itees.) 
The  exliortation  and  promises  of  God  to  the  afflicted: — I.  The  afflictions  to  which 
THE  PEOPLE  OF  GoD  ARE  LIABLE.  1.  The  text  intimates  that  they  may  be  great. 
"Waters";  "rivers";  calamities  which  seem  as  deep  and  overwhelming  as 
sweeping  torrents,  and  as  likely  to  destroy  them.  2.  Their  troubles  may  be 
diversified.  They  may  be  in  "  the  waters  "  to-day  and  may  have  deliverance, 
but  to-morrow  they  may  be  called  on  to  walk  through  "  the  fire  "  and  "  the 
flame "  ;  to  endure  trials  which  are  unexpected  and  strange,  different  in  their 
nature  from  any  they  have  yet  experienced,  and  far  more  severe  and  bitter. 
3.  The  text  implies  also  that  these  afflictions  are  certain.  It  speaks  of  them 
as  things  of  course.  II.  How  seasonable  and  encouraging  is  the  exhorta- 
tion. 1.  There  is  a  fear  of  afflictions  which  is  a  natural,  and  by  no  means  a 
sinful,  feeling;  a  fear  which  leads  us  to  avoid  them,  if  the  will  of  God  will  allow 
us  to  avoid  them,  and  if  not,  to  receive  them  with  much  thoughtfulness  and 
prayer ;  to  be  aware  of  the  dangers  with  which  they  are  invariably  accompanied, 
and  of  our  utter  inability  in  ourselves  to  escape  or  overcome  them.  2.  But 
there  is  a  fear  of  another  kind.  It  springs  from  unbelief,  and  is  the  cause  of  mur- 
muring, despondency,  and  wretchedness.  It  is  a  fear  which  tempts  us  to  choose 
sin  rather  than  affliction;  which  prevents  us  from  praising  God  under  our  trials, 
and  from  trusting  to  Him  to  bring  us  out  of  them.  Such  a  fear  is  as  dishonour- 
able to  God  as  it  is  disquieting  to  ourselves,  and  He  who  values  nothing  so  highly 
as  His  own  honour  and  our  happiness  commands  us  to  lay  it  aside.  It  might 
have  been  siipposed  that  such  an  exhortation  from  such  a  Being  would 
have  been  sufficient  of  itself  to  dispel  the  fears  of  those  to  whom  it  is 
addressed;  but  a  compassionate  God  does  not  leave  it  to  its  own  unaided 
authority.  III.  He  supports  and  strengthens  it  by  two  most  gracious 
promises.  1.  He  promises  us  His  own  presence  with  us  in  our  trials. 
"  When  thou  passest  through  the  waters,  I  will  be  with  thee."  His 
people  are  the  objects  of  His  special  attention.  (1)  We  are  not,  however, 
to  infer  that  the  afflicted  Christian  is  always  aware  of  the  companion  with  whom 
he  is  walking.  He  often  imagines  himself  left  alone  in  his  trials.  (2)  Neither  are 
we  to  suppose  that  all  the  afflicted  servants  of  the  Lord  have  the  same  mani- 
festations of  His  presence.  Some  do  not  need  them  so  much  as  others.  They 
have  not  the  same  temptations  to  withstand,  nor  the  same  burdens  to  bear,  nor 
the  same  duties  to  perform.  They  are  surrounded  with  more  outward  comforts, 
and  consequently  they  less  need  those  which  are  inward.  Some  also  do  not 
desire  or  seek  the  light  of  their  Father's  countenance  so  earnestly  as  their  brethren. 
They  lean  more  on  earthly  friends  and  succours.  He  who  is  infinitely  wise,  always 
suits  the  nature  and  measure  of  His  gracious  manifestations  to  the  necessities 
and,  in  one  sense,  to  the  characters  of  His  people.  He  gives  them  what  they 
need,  and  what  they  desire  and  seek.  2.  There  is  the  promise  of  preservation 
under  all  our  calamities.  What  does  preservation  imply?  It  implies  that  our 
trials  shall  not  injure  us.  Rivers  are  likely  to  overflow,  and  flames  likely  to 
burn,  those  who  pass  through  them.  Affliction  is  Ukely  to  injure,  and  would 
inevitably  ruin  us,  if  God  were  not  near.  It  tempts  us  to  rebel  against  the  Divine 
providence  and  to  distrust  the  Divine  goodness;  to  be  thankless,  impatient,  and 
repining.  The  mind,  already  weakened,  perhaps,  and  bewildered  by  the  pressure 
of  adversity,  is  easily  led  to  apprehend  still  greater  troubles,  and  faints  at  the 

{rospect.  This,  too,  is  the  season  when  our  great  adversary  is  most  to  be  dreaded, 
t  is  in  the  night  that  the  wild  beasts  of  the  forest  roar  after  their  prey;  and 
it  is  in  the  darkness  of  spiritual  or  temporal  adversity  that  Satan  directs  against 
us  his  most  violent  assaults.  The  fact  is  that  our  spiritual  interests  are  much 
more  endangered  by  tribulation  than  our  worldly  prosperity.  It  is  the  soul 
which  is  most  exposed,  and  which  most  needs  preservation;  and  preservation  is 
here  promised  to  it.  The  Christian  often  enters  the  furnace  cold-hearted,  earthly- 
minded,  and  comfortless;  he  comes  out  of  it  peaceful,  confiding,  burning  with 
love  for  his  delivering  God,  and  thirsting  after  the  enjoyment  of  His  presence. 
IV.  The  Lord  vouchsafes  to  add  to  His  precious  promises  several  reasons  or 
AEGUMKNT3  TO  ASSURE  US  OF  THEIR  FULFILMENT.  I.  The  first  is  drawn  from 
the  relation  in  which  He  stands  to  us  as  our  Creator.     "  Thus  saith  the  Lord 


CHAP.    TTTTTT.]  ISAIAH.  361 

that  created  thee,  0  Jacob,  and  He  that  formed  thee,  0  Israel."  This  language 
refers  to  our  spiritual  as  well  as  to  our  natural  existence.  Here,  then,  is  a  solid 
ground  of  confidence.  The  Father  of  our  spirits  must  be  well  acquainted  with 
their  infirmities  and  weakness.  "  He  knoweth  our  frame,  and  remembereth  that 
we  are  dust."  Neither  will  He  ever  forsake  the  work  of  His  own  hands.  2.  The 
Almighty  draws  another  argument  to  enforce  His  exhortation,  from  the  property 
which  He  has  in  His  people,  and  the  manner  in  which  He  acquired  it.  "  Fear 
not,"  He  says,  "  for  I  have  redeemed  thee,"  &c.  We  are  His  by  creation,  but 
He  has  also  made  us  His  by  redemption.  And  what  a  mighty  price  did  He  pay 
for  us!  WiU  He  then  abandon  that  which  He  so  much  values,  which  cost  Him 
so  dear?  3.  There  is  yet  another  reason  assigned  why  we  should  cast  away  fear 
in  the  hour  of  tribulation — the  covenant  God  has  formed  with  His  people  ensures 
the  fulfilment  of  His  promises.  "  I  am  the  Lord  thy  God,"  He  says,  "  the  Holy 
One  of  Israel,  thy  Savioiu* "  ;  thus  implying  that  He  has  entered  into  some 
engagement  with  His  Israel;  that  He  considers  Hamself  bound  to  be  with  them 
in  their  troubles  and  distresses;  that  His  own  veracity,  His  own  faithfulness, 
are  at  stake,  and  would  be  sacrificed  if  Israel  were  forsaken  or  injiu-ed.  He 
thus  connects  His  own  honour  with  their  safety.  Lessons — 1.  How  rich  in  con- 
solation is  the  Word  of  God!  2.  How  essential  to  our  happiness  is  a  knowledge 
of  our  interest  in  the  Divine  promises ! — to  appropriate  them  to  ourselves,  and 
rejoice  in  them.  3.  How  full  of  confidence  and  praise  ought  they  to  be,  who 
live  in  the  enjoyment  of  the  Divine  presence  in  trouble!  4.  How  blind  to  their 
own  interest  are  they  who  reject  the  Gospel  of  Christ !  (C.  Bradley,  M.A.)  Love 
abounding,  love  complaining,  love  abiding  (with  vers.  22-24;  chap.  xliv.  21-23): — 
(1)  Notice  that  these  three  texts  are  very  much  alike  in  this  respect — that  they  are 
each  addressed  to  God's  people  under  the  names  of  Jacob  and  Israel.  (2)  These 
texts  are  like  each  other,  again,  from  their  overflowing  with  love.  I  do  not  know 
where  the  Lord's  love  is  best  seen,  when  He  declares  it  and  tells  of  what  He  has 
done  and  is  doing  for  His  people,  or  when  He  laments  over  their  want  of  love 
in  return,  or  when  He  promises  to  blot  out  their  past  sin,  and  invites  them  to 
return  to  Him  and  enjoy  His  restoring  grace.  I.  We  have  in  our  first  text,  lovb 
ABOUNDING.  I.  Notice  the  time  when  that  love  is  declared.  The  first  verse 
begins,  "  But  now,  thus  saith  the  Lord."  When  was  that?  It  was  the  very 
time  when  He  was  angry  with  the  nation  by  reason  of  their  great  sins  (chap, 
xlii.  25).  It  was  a  time,  then,  of  special  sin.  and  of  amazing  hardness  of  heart. 
When  a  man  begins  to  burn,  he  generally  feels  and  cries  out;  he  must  be  far 
gone  in  deadly  apathy  when  he  is  touched  with  fire  and  yet  lays  it  not  to  heart. 
It  was  a  time  of  love  with  God,  though  a  time  of  carelessness  with  His  people. 
2.  The  Lord  shows  His  abounding  love  by  the  sweetness  of  His  consolations. 
"  But  now,  thus  saith  the  Lord  that  created  thee,  0  Jacob,  and  He  that  formed 
thee,  0  Israel,  Fear  not."  "  Fear  not  "  is  a  little  word  measiured  by  space  and 
letters;  but  it  is  an  abyss  of  consolation  if  we  remember  who  it  is  that  saith  it, 
and  what  a  wide  sweep  the  comfort  takes.  Fear  hath  torment,  and  the  Lord  would 
cast  it  out.  You  that  are  the  people  of  God  may  be  smarting,  and  crying,  and 
sighing.  But,  oh  the  love  of  God  to  you.  He  hears  your  cries,  and  His  com- 
passions are  moved  towards  you !  Nothing  touches  Him  like  the  groans 
of  His  children.  There  is  a  wonderful  intensity  of  affection  in  this  passage, 
spoken,  as  it  is,  by  the  great  God  to  His  people  while  they  are  under  the  rod 
which  they  so  richly  deserve.  3.  The  fulness  of  God's  love  is  to  be  seen  in  the 
way  in  which  He  dwells  with  evident  satisfaction  upon  His  past  dealings  with 
His  people.  When  we  love  some  favomred  one,  we  like  to  think  of  all  our  love 
passages  in  years  gone  by;  and  the  Lord  so  loves  His  people,  that,  even  when 
they  are  under  His  chastening  hand,  He  still  delights  to  remember  His  former 
loving-Mndnesses.  We  may  forget  the  wonders  of  His  grace,  but  He  doth  not 
forget.  He  "  created,"  "  redeemed,"  "  called."  He  dwells  upon  His  posses- 
sion of  His  people.  "  Thou  art  Mine."  4.  If  you  desire  to  see  the  overflowings 
of  God's  love  in  another  form,  notice  in  the  next  verse  how  He  declares  what 
He  means  to  do.  "  When  thou  passest  through  the  wato -^,  I  will  be  with  thee," 
&c.  His  love  casts  its  eye  upon  your  future.  He  loves  you  too  well  to  make 
your  way  to  heaven  free  from  adversity  and  tribulation,  for  these  things  work 
your  lasting  good.  But  He  does  promise  you  that  the  deepest  waters  shall  not 
overflow  you,  and  the  fiercest  torrents  shall  not  drown  you,  for  this  one  all-suffi- 
cient reason,  that  He  will  be  with  you.  5.  The  overflowings  of  Divine  love  are 
Been  in  the  Lord's  avowing  Himself  still  to  be  His  people's  God:  "  I  am  Jehovah 


352  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xun. 

thy  God,  the  Holy  One  of  Israel,  thy  Saviour."  6.  Though  one  would  think 
He  might  have  come  to  a  close  here,  the  Lord  adds  His  valuation  of  His  people  i 
this  was  so  high  that  He  says,  "  I  gave  Egypt  for  thy  ransom,  Ethiopia  and  Seba 
for  thee."  Pharaoh  and  his  firstborn  were  nobodies  as  compared  with  Jacob's 
seed.  Further  on  in  history,  after  Isaiah's  day,  the  Lord  moved  Cyrus  to  set 
Israel  free  from  Babylon,  and  then  gave  to  the  son  of  Cyrus  a  rich  return  for 
liberating  the  Jews;  for  He  made  Him  conqueror  of  Egypt  and  of  Ethiopia  and 
of  Seba.  God  will  give  more  than  the  whole  world  to  save  His  Church,  seeing 
He  gave  His  only  begotten  Son.  7.  Then  the  Lord  adds  another  note  of  great 
love.  He  says  that  He  has  thought  so  much  of  His  people  that  He  regarded  them 
as  honourable.  "  Since  thou  wast  precious  in  My  sight,"  &c.  He  publishes 
His  love,  not  only  by  His  deeds,  but  by  express  words.  What  a  wealth  of  grace 
is  here !  8.  Such  is  the  Lord's  love,  that  even  in  the  time  when  they  were  not 
acting  as  they  should,  but  grieving  Him,  He  stands  to  His  love  of  them,  and 
sets  the  same  value  on  them  as  before:  "  Since  thou  wast  precious  in  My  sight, 
thou  hast  been  honourable,  and  I  have  loved  thee:  therefore  will  I  give  men 
for  thee,  and  people  for  thy  life."  As  if  He  said,  "  What  I  have  done  I  will  do 
again.  My  love  is  unalterable."  EC.  Our  second  text  is  in  the  minor  key,  it  is 
LOVE  LAMENTING.  "  But  thou  hast  not  called  upon  Me,  O  Jacob  "  (ver.  22). 
Observe  the  contrast;  for  it  runs  aU  through,  and  may  be  seen  in  every  sentence: 
I  have  called  thee  by  thy  name;  but  thou  hast  not  called  upon  Me,  0  Jacob. 
I  have  called  thee  Mine;  but  thou  hast  been  weary  of  Me.  I  have  redeemed 
thee  with  a  matchless  price;  but  thou  hast  bought  Me  no  sweet  cane  with  money. 
I.  Israel  rendered  little  worship  to  God.  May  not  the  Lord  of  infinite  mercy 
justly  say  to  some  of  us,  "  But  thou  hast  not  called  upon  Me,  0  Jacob  "  ?  2.  There 
has  been  little  fellowship;  for  the  Lord  goes  on  to  say,  "  Thou  hast  been  weary 
of  Me,  0  Israel."  Are  we  tired  of  our  God  ?  If  not,  how  is  it  that  we  do  not 
walk  with  Him  from  day  to  day?  3.  We  are  moved  by  this  passage  to  confess 
how  little  of  spirituality  has  been  found  in  the  worship  which  we  have  rendered. 
"  Thou  hast  not  honoured  Me  with  thy  sacrifices."  When  we  have  come  to 
worship,  in  public  and  in  private,  we  have  not  honoured  the  Lord  by  being  intense 
therein.  The  heart  has  been  cold,  the  mind  wandering.  4.  Again,  the  Lord 
mentions  that  His  people  have  brought  Him  little  sacrifice  :  "  Thou  hast  not 
brought  Me  the  small  cattle,"  &c.  What  small  returns  have  we  made!  In  the 
religion  of  Christ  there  is  no  taxation;  everything  is  of  love.  5.  Once  more, 
it  is  said  that  we  have  been  very  slack  in  our  consideration  of  oiur  God.  The 
Lord  says,  "  I  have  not  caused  thee  to  serve  with  an  offering,  nor  wearied  thee 
with  incense;  but  thou  hast  made  Me  to  serve  with  thy  sins;  thou  hast  wearied 
Me  with  thine  iniquities."  The  Lord  is  thoughtful  of  us,  but  we  are  not  thought- 
ful towards  Him.  If  the  Lord  did  not  love  us  very  much  He  would  not  care 
so  much  about  our  love  towards  Himself.  It  is  the  plaint  of  love.  The  Lord 
does  not  need  our  sweet  canes  nor  our  money.  But  when  He  chides  us  for  with- 
holding our  love-tokens,  it  is  because  He  values  our  love,  and  is  grieved  when 
it  grows  cold.  III.  Our  third  text  exhibits  love  abiding.  1.  Notice,  in  chap, 
xliv.  21,  how  the  Lord  still  calls  His  ^people  by  the  same  name:  "  Remember 
these,  O  Jacob  and  Israel."  Still  are  the  names  of  His  elect  like  music  in  the 
ears  of  God.  One  would  have  feared  that  He  would  have  dropped  the  "  Israel," 
that  honourable  name,  which  came  of  prevailing  prayer,  since  they  had  not  called 
upon  Him.  Why  call  him  a  prevailing  prince  who  had  grown  weary  of  his 
God?  But  no,  He  harps  upon  the  double  title:  He  loves  to  think  of  His  beloved 
as  what  they  were,  and  what  His  grace  made  them.  0  heir  of  heaven,  God  loves 
you  still!  2.  Notice  how  the  Lord  claims  His  servants:  "  Thou  art  My  servant: 
I  have  formed  thee;  thou  art  My  servant."  He  has  not  discharged  us,  though  He 
has  had  cause  enough  for  so  doing.  This  should  bind  us  to  Him.  This  should 
quicken  our  pace  in  His  service.  3.  Then  notice  how  the  Lord  assures  us  in 
+he  next  line  :  "  O  Israel,  thou  shalt  not  be  forgotten  of  Me."  God  cannot  forget 
His  chosen.  You  that  have  Bibles  with  margins  will  find  that  it  is  also  wTitten 
there,  "  0  Israel,  forget  not  Me."  The  Lord  longs  to  be  remembered  by  us. 
Did  not  our  loving  Lord  institute  the  Sacred  Supper  to  prevent  our  forgetting 
Him?  4.  Notice  with  delight  the  triumph  of  love,  how  still  He  pardons  :  "  I 
have  blotted  out,  as  a  thick  cloud,"  &c.  6.  See  how  our  text  closes  with  the 
Lord's  own  precept  to  be  glad  :  "  Sing,  0  ye  heavens;  for  the  Lord  hath  done 
it,"  &c.  (xliv.  23).  Out  of  all  dejection  arise!  There  is  more  cause  for  gladness 
than  for  sorrow.    What  you  have  done  should  cause  distress  of  heart;  but  what 


CHAP,  xmi.]  ISAIAH.  353 

the  Lord  has  done  is  cause  for  rapture.  {C.  H.  Spurgeon.)  Four  contrasts 
(with  vers.  22-25): — There  are  many  lights  in  which  we  can  see  sin;  and  our 
perception  of  sin  very  much  depends  upon  the  light  in  which  we  look  at  it.  Sin 
is  very  terrible  by  the  blaze  of  Sinai.  It  is  an  awful  thing  to  see  sin  by  the  light 
of  your  dying  day.  More  terrible  still  will  it  be  to  see  it  by  the  light  of  the  judg- 
ment day.  But  of  all  the  lights  that  ever  fall  upon  sin,  that  which  makes  it 
"  hke  itself  appear  "  is  that  which  falls  upon  it  when  it  is  set  in  the  light  of  God's 
countenance.  To  see  sin  by  the  Hght  of  God's  love,  to  read  its  awful  character 
by  the  light  of  the  Cross,  is  the  way  to  see  sin.  I  am  going  to  speak  mainly  con- 
cerning God's  own  people,  and  I  want  to  set  their  sins  in  the  light  of  God's  love 
to  them.  My  object  will  be  to  set  before  you  the  contrast  between  God's  action 
towards  His  people  and  His  people's  usual  action  towards  Him.  I.  The  first 
contrast  lies  in  the  call.  1.  "  I  have  redeemed  thee,  I  have  called  thee  by 
thy  name"  (ver.  1).  (1)  God  called  us  out  of  nothing.  "Thus  saith  the  Lord 
that  created  thee,  0  Jacob  "  (ver.  1).  Our  creation  is  entirely  due  to  God.  An 
ungodly  man  can  hardly  bless  God  for  having  made  him,  fot  his  end  may  be 
terrible.  Blessed  be  God  for  our  being,  because  it  is  followed  by  our  well-being  ! 
Blessed  be  God  for  our  first  birth,  because  we  have  also  experienced  a  second 
birth.  (2)  Our  Lord  has  done  more  than  make  us,  for  He  has  educated  us;  He 
has  continued  the  fashioning  of  us.  "  He  that  formed  thee,  0  Israel."  Israel 
is  the  "  formed  "  Jacob;  by  God's  grace,  Jacob  grows  into  Israel.  Let  us  think 
of  all  the  sweet  experiences  of  God's  forming  and  fashioning  touch  that  we  have 
had.  Sometimes,  it  has  been  a  rough  stroke  that  was  necessary  for  the  moulding 
of  our  clay;  only  by  aflBdction  could  we  be  made  to  assume  the  shape  and  pattern 
that  the  Lord  had  determined  for  us.  At  other  times,  it  has  been  the  touch  of 
very  soft  fingers.  "  Thy  gentleness  hath  made  me  great."  (3)  Think  what 
wonderful  dealings  He  has  had,  next,  in  consohng  us,  for  the  Lord  goes  on  to 
Bay,  "  Fear  not."  Oh,  how  often  He  has  cheered  us  up  when  our  spirit  was 
sinking!  (4)  That  is  not  all,  for  the  Lord  has  also  called  us,  and  conversed  with 
us,  in  the  matter  of  redemption.  "  I  have  redeemed  thee."  (5)  The  Lord  has 
given  a  special  nomination.  "  I  have  called  thee  by  thy  name."  (6)  Then 
comes  this  blessed  appropriation:  "  Thou  art  Mine."  This  is  the  way  that 
God  talks  to  us.  2.  Turn  to  the  other  side  of  the  question,  the  neglected  call 
on  our  part.  "  Thou  hast  not  called  upon  Me,  0  Jacob  "  (ver.  22).  That  may 
not  mean  that  there  has  been  hteraUy  no  calling  upon  God  on  thy  side,  but  it 
does  mean  that  there  has  been  too  little  of  it.  Let  us  put  this  matter  to  the 
test.  (1)  What  about  our  prayers?  There  is  much  less  prayer  than  there  ought 
to  be.  (2)  True  as  this  is  of  our  prayers,  it  is  still  more  true  of  our  praises. 
(3)  There  are  many,  with  whom  God  has  dealt  well,  who  do  not  venture  to  caU  upon 
Him  for  special  help  in  His  service.  They  keep  plodding  along  the  old  roads, 
and  mostly  in  the  old  ruts;  but  they  do  not  dare  to  invoke  the  aid  of  the  Lord 
for  some  novel  form  of  service,  some  fresh  enterprise  upon  which  they  can  strike 
out  for  God.  (4)  Sometimes  in  our  trouble,  we  do  not  call  upon  God  as  we  should. 
II.  Let  us  consider  another  contrast  which  is  equally  striking — that  is,  upon  the 
matter  of  the  converse  between  the  Lord  and  His  people.  1.  Notice,  first, 
God's  side  of  it.  "  When  thou  passest  through  the  waters,  I  will  be  with  thee," 
&c.  (ver.  2).  Notice  how  God  is  with  His  people  in  strange  places.  Wherever  they 
are.  He  will  not  leave  them;  He  wiU  go  right  through  the  waters  with  them. 
God  also  keeps  close  to  His  people  in  dangerous  places,  fatal  places  as  they  seem. 
2.  Now  listen  to  your  side  of  this  matter  of  converse  with  God.  "  But  thou 
hast  been  weary  of  Me,  O  Israel  "  (ver.  22).  (1)  Has  it  not  been  so  with  regard 
to  private  prayer?  (2)  With  your  reading  of  the  Scriptures?  (3)  Hearing  the 
Word?  (4)  Are  there  not  some  also  whom  God  loves  who  get  weary  of  their 
work?  ni.  Notice  the  contrast  in  the  sacbifice.  1.  "  I  gave  Egypt  for  thy 
ransom,"  &c.  (ver.  3).  (1)  Here  is  God  giving  up  everybody  else  for  the  sake 
of  His  people.  Egypt,  Ethiopia,  and  Seba  were  great  nations,  but  God  did  not 
choose  the  greatest.  "  Not  many  wise  men  after  the  flesh,  not  many  mighty, 
not  many  noble  are  called,"  &c.  (2)  We  may  see  another  meaning  in  these  words, 
for  God  has  given  for  us  His  choicest  gift.  Christ  is  infinitely  more  precious 
than  Egypt,  and  Ethiopia,  and  Seba,  though  they  were  lands  of  great  abundance 
of  wealth.  2.  Now  look  at  the  other  side.  "  Thou  hast  not  brought  Me  the 
small  cattle  of  thy  burnt  oflPerings  "  (ver.  23).  I  wonder  how  little  some  people 
really  do  give  to  God!  I  beheve,  in  some  cases,  not  as  much  as  it  costs  them 
for  the  blacking  of  their  boots.  Then  the  Lord  adds,  "  Thou  hast  bought  Me 
VOL.  II. — 23 


354  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  xliil 

no  sweet  cane  with  money."  Not  even  the  smallest  offering  ha.3  been  given  to 
the  Most  High  by  some  who  profess  to  have  been  redeemed  by  the  precious  blood 
of  Christ.  How  little  is  given  by  the  most  generous  of  us !  IV.  I  close  with  one 
more  contrast,  which  refers  to  the  honour  given  by  God,  and  the  honour  given 
to  God.  1.  God  gives  great  honour  to  those  whom  He  saves  (ver.  4).  I  have 
known  persons  who,  before  their  conversion,  were  unclean  in  their  lives,  and 
when  they  have  been  converted,  they  have  joined  a  Christian  Church,  and  in 
the  society  of  God's  people  they  have  become  honourable.  They  have  been 
taken  into  the  fellowship  of  the  saints  just  as  if  there  had  never  been  a  fault  in 
their  lives ;  nobody  has  mentioned  the  past  to  them,  it  has  been  forgotten.  This 
is  the  highest  honour  that  God  can  put  upon  us,  that  He  fixes  His  love  upon  us. 
"  Thou  hast  been  honourable,  and  I  have  loved  thee."  2.  Have  you  honoured 
God?  He  says,  "  Neither  hast  thou  honoured  Me  with  thy  sacrifices."  Have 
you  honoured  God  by  your  lives  ?  By  yoiir  confidence  in  Him  ?  By  your  patience  ? 
By  defending  His  truth  when  it  has  been  assailed?  By  speaking  to  poor  sinners 
about  Him  ?  Are  you  trying  every  day  to  honour  Him  ?  {Ibid. )  "  Fear  not "  .• — 
I.  A  CHAEGE  GIVEN.  "  Fear  not."  A  godly  fear  the  believer  may  have  ;  but 
the  cowardice  of  the  world,  which  is  loud  to  boast,  and  slow  to  act,  and  quick 
to  doubt,  he  must  never  know.  It  becomes  neither  the  dignity  of  his  calling, 
nor  the  faithfulness  of  his  God.  11.  A  reason  assigned.  "  Thou  art  iline." 
These  words  were  spoken  to  Israel  after  the  flesh,  and  to  them  they  still  remain 
a  covenant  of  peace,  sure  and  steadfast  for  ever;  yet  as  the  relations  named — 
Creator,  Redeemer,  Saviour — are  not  peculiar  to  them,  but  are  enjoyed  in  the 
same  degree  by  every  believing  heart,  we  may  take  to  ourselves  a  share  in  this 
animating  promise.  The  certainty  of  the  believer's  hope  does  not  depend  on 
our  holding  God,  but  on  God's  holding  us;  not  on  our  faithfulness  to  Him,  but 
on  His  faithfulness  to  us.  III.  A  protection  promised.  This  does  not  consist 
in  any  absence  of  trial  and  danger;  the  expressions  rather  imply  their  presence, 
many  in  number  and  various  in  kind.  The  protection  promised  consists  in  the 
constant  presence  with  the  soul  of  its  unseen  but  Almighty  Saviour.  (E.  Oarhett.) 
I  have  called  thee  by  thy  name. — Named  and  claimed: — I.  The  person. 
"I — thee — thou — Mine."  How  this  sentence  tingles  with  personality!  If  one 
person  can  call  another  person,  those  two  persons  are  alike.  Those  two  persons 
have  a  common  life  interest.  Personality  in  God  is  substantially  similar  to  per- 
'sonality  in  man.  II.  The  name.  Would  it  be  an  untrue  fancy  to  suppose 
that  we  each  have  a  name  before  God  ?  When  you  look  at  your  little  sleeping 
child  to-night,  you  will,  perhaps,  not  only  think  of  the  name  that  everybody 
knows  him  by,  but  you  ^vill  murmur  over  him  some  little  special  name  that  you 
have  given  him — you  hardly  know  how,  but  that  gives  to  you  the  very  sense 
of  the  essence  of  the  true  life  sleeping  there.  Remember  that  something  just 
like  that  is  in  the  heart  of  your  God's  feeling  for  you.  Science  generaMses,  love  par- 
ticularises. Then,  with  this  loving  name,  comes  possession.  There  is  a  strange, 
yearning  intensity  in  that  language,  "  Thou  art  Mine."  The  mystery  and  rapture 
of  hfe  are  in  that  strange  sense  of  possession  which  comes  through  love,  as  though 
the  loved  one  had  become  a  part  of  ourselves  to  be  dissevered  from  us  nevermore. 
"  Thou  art  Mine,"  says  our  God — Mine  to  carry,  to  nurture,  to  protect — My 
very  own,  never  to  part  from  Me  for  evermore.  III.  The  call  of  the  name. 
It  would  be  very  much  to  know  that  God  even  thought  of  us  by  our  name  in 
this  personal  and  special  way;  but  the  text  asserts  that  this  power  of  God  finds 
expression;  that  life  is  filled  not  only  with  a  thought  of  us  on  the  part  of  God, 
but  with  an  expression  of  that  thought;  so  that  there  is  something  vocalised, 
something  articulate  in  life,  which  comes  to  us,  if  we  can  really  understand  that 
it  is  God  calling  us  by  this  name  we  have.  1.  The  very  first  awakening  feeling 
in  childhood  is  a  personal  call.  When  you  first  really  prayed  as  a  little 
child  and  thought  what  you  were  doing,  what  a  sense  of  individuality  there  was. 
You  were  yourself  then,  and  nobody  else.  It  was  God  speaking  to  you,  and 
calling  you  by  your  name.  2.  Then  another  period  which  comes,  usually  a 
little  later,  when  God's  call  is  addressed  to  us,  is  in  our  first  assumption  of  re- 
sponsibility. I  think  some  of  the  most  solitary  times  a  man  ever  has  are  when 
he  has  just  assumed  a  serious  responsibility.  Now,  in  that  soUtude,  if  a  man 
listens,  he  can  hear  his  God  calling  to  him,  speaking  his  name  right  then  and 
there.  How  tenderly,  how  warmly,  how  encouragingly!  And  the  reason  is, 
because  God  loves  the  thing  that  that  responsibility  will  give  you.  He  loves 
the  thing  that  will  make  for  you,  and  that  is  character ;  that  is  manhood.     3.  Then, 


CHAP.  XLin.]  ISAIAH.  36£ 

again,  in  a  moment  of  danger,  a  man  may  hear  God  calling  his  name  ;  because 
danger,  like  duty,  particularises.  Supposing  we  see  a  man  in  danger  ;  we  ask, 
Who  is  he?  What  is  his  name?  And  if  the  man  does  not  reaUse  the  peril  he 
is  in,  you  caU  to  him  by  the  name  that  will  cut  through  the  air,  and  strike  on 
his  ear,  and  arouse  his  individual  attention.  Suppose  moral  danger  comes  and 
God  sees  the  danger  coming,  and  He  calls  out  to  you  by  that  name  He  knows 
you  by.  If  you  could  hear  that  call,  would  it  not  cause  you  to  repel  the  evil? 
as  though  the  Voice  said,  "  I  remember  you;  you  are  Mine.  Yowc  name  is  known 
to  Me.  I  am  your  heavenly  Friend,  and  I  call  on  you  now  to  do  your  duty,  to 
repel  the  evil."  4.  He  speaks  our  name  when  we  are  in  trouble.  5.  There 
are  certain  other  experiences  of  life  darker  than  duty  or  danger  or  sorrow.  We 
name  them  by  that  strong,  common  monosyllable,  sin.  These  moral  experiences 
that  cut  into  the  soul  within  us — sin,  the  sting  and  stab  of  remorse,  repentance, 
reformation — all  are  experiences  of  an  arena  in  which  God  calls  a  man  by  his 
name.  (A.  J.  Lyman,  D.D.)  God's  claim  on  the  sovl : — What  a  drama,  what 
a  tragedy,  life  is  !  The  world  goes  by,  and,  pointing  to  you,  exclaims  :  "  That 
man  is  mine.  He  has  been  forty  years  in  my  service.  He  has  sold  his  soul 
to  me.  He  is  mine."  "  Not  so,"  replies  the  heavenly  Voice;  "  He  is  Mne.  I 
knew  him  as  a  child.  I  have  never  lost  sight  of  him."  Pleasure  comes  by,  and 
claims  you  and  says:  "He  is  mine,  that  young  man."  Dissipation  comes 
by,  and  points  to  you  with  fascinating  smile,  and  says  :  "  That  young  man  is 
mine.  Let  his  mother  give  him  up.  Let  the  angels  forget  him.  He  has  taken 
my  cup  in  his  hand  ;  he  has  drunk  of  my  poison.  He  is  mine."  "  No,"  the 
heavenly  Voice  answers  :  "  Not  yet ;  not  yet.  I  know  him,  and  love  him.  I 
suffered  to  save  him,  and  he  is  Mine.  Mine  by  right  of  love,  and  Mine  by  right 
of  pain."  That  is  the  drama,  that  is  the  tragedy,  that  is  going  on!  {Ibid.) 
Israel  called  by  name  : — To  call  by  name  includes  the  ideas  of  specific  designation, 
pubMc  announcement,  and  solemn  consecration  to  a  certain  work.  {J.  A.  Alex- 
ander.) "  Thou  art  Mine"  : — Thi-ee  little  words,  three  httle  syllables  ;  a  child's 
motto  ;  words  that  might  be  printed  by  a  little  hand  and  sent  as  a  message  of 
love  ;  words  that  might  be  engraved  on  a  signet  ring:  yet  words  the  whole  meaning 
of  which  the  firmament  has  not  space  enough  to  hold  the  entire  development. 
(J.  Parker,  D.D.) 

Ver.  2.  When  thou  passest  through  the  waters. — Through  water  and  fire.- — 
I.  Notice  the  frank  and  matter-of-course  way  in  which  your  afflictions  and 
TRIALS  are  mentioned.  "  The  waters,"  "  the  rivers,"  "  the  fire,"  "  the  flame  "  ;  it 
takes  it  for  granted  that  you  wiU  meet  with  some  or  all  of  them  before  you  have 
finished  your  course,  and  they  are  mentioned  in  a  way,  too,  that  will  not  suffer 
you  to  think  lightly  of  them.  "  Waters,"  many  of  them,  and  may  be  deep; 
"  rivers,"  rushing  calamities  that  threaten  to  carry  you  away;  "  fire  and  flame!  " 
hard  words  these,  and  I  gather  that  your  tribulations,  Jacob,  are  great,  various, 
and  sure.  II.  But  the  words,  "  When  thou  passest," — "  And  when  thou  walkest," 
clearly  intimate  that  "  Jacob  "  is  travelling,  moving  from  one  point  to  another. 
We  may  be  quite  sure  that  the  "  waters,"  "  rivers,"  "  fire,"  "  flame  "  we  read  of 
here  have  reference  only  to  such  of  them  as  are  met  with  on  Jacob's  proper  track. 
If  these  perilous  possibiUties  do  not  confront  him  on  the  way  of  duty;  and  if  he 
makes  a  voluntary  circumbendibus,  to  serve  only  his  own  pleasure,  so  that  he 
confronts  them;  then,  such  waters  and  such  fires  are  very  Ukely  to  destroy  him. 
Lot  goes  and  settles  down  in  Sodom;  he  had  no  more  business  there  than  has 
flour  in  a  soot-bag;  and  the  fire  burnt  him.  The  waters  overflowed  Jonah  to  some 
purpose ;  but  that  was  because  he  went  where  he  liked,  and  not  where  he  ought. 
III.  Not  only  shall  Jacob  be  safe  in  the  flood,  and  brought  through  the  fire; 
not  only  shall  both  flood  and  fire  become  vanquished  perils  living  only  in  the  victor's 
memory,  but  the  passing  through  them  shall  do  good  to  Jacob!  He  shall 
be  a  nobler  soul  for  being  tossed  by  waves;  he  shall  be  a  purer  being  for  being 
tried  by  fire,  and  hke  the  finely  tempered  steel  which  was  first  in  the  red-hot  furnace, 
and  was  then  plunged  into  the  ice-cold  cistern,  and  so  became  the  keen,  invincible 
blade:  so  the  trial,  afflictions,  testings  of  the  Christian  do  mould  and  temper  and 
shape  and  brighten  Jacob's  character,  and  ennoble  after  the  Christly  pattern  his 
moral  manhood,  which  is  the  glory  of  his  immortal  soul !  Note  two  things  to  be  re- 
membered in  the  day  of  the  flood  and  fire.  1.  Thy  God  has  promised  to  be  ever 
at  thy  side.  2.  This  gracious  God,  who  controls  the  waters  and  restrains  the  fires 
and  conducts  His  people  through  them  both,  reveals  Himself  here  as  "  the  Lord 


356  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xlui. 

that  created  thee,  0  Jacob;  and  He  that  formed  thee,  0  Israel."     He  made  thee, 
O  Jacob;  then  He  knows  thee,  knows  thy  frame;  remembereth  that  thou  art 
(Just, — will  not  put  upon  thee  more  than  thou  canst  bear,  neither  will  He  forsake 
the  work  of  His  hands.     He  raised  us  from  the  ruins  of  the  fall,  made  us  temples 
for  Himself  to  dwell  in.     Then  He  will  never  suffer  the  structures  He  has  erected 
at  so  much  care  and  cost  to  be  thrown  down  by  violence,  swept  away  by  turbulent 
waters,  or  devoured  by  the  ruthless  flame.      '  Thou  art  mine!  "  He  says.     It  ia 
the  language  of  complacency  and  delight.     Thou  art  mine!     My  property!  My 
charge!  My  joy!  My  jewel!  And  I  will  guard  My  own!     Surely  with  such  a  text 
as  this  to  fall  back  upon,  0  thou  redeemed  one,  thou  wilt  not  doubt  or  fear.     (J.  J. 
Wray.)        Divine  convoy : — I.  The  pathway  that  the  people  of  God  tread. 
Through  waters,  rivers,  fires,  and  flames.     "  It  is  through  much  tribulation  wo 
must  enter  into  the  kingdom."     1.  If  I  look  at  the  temporalities  first,  the  wilderness 
through  which  we  pass  is  full  of  troubles.     Thorns  and  thistles  has  it  brought 
forth  ever  since  the  curse  was  pronounced  upon  it;  and  you  can  scarcely  look  into 
a  circle  of  your  acquaintance  without  finning  sicknesses,  sorrows,  losses,  cares, 
broils,  contentions,  all  the  fruits  of  sin,  constantly  presented  to  your  view.     Is 
not  this,  then,  a  tribulated  path?    2.  Mark,  among  the  tribulations,  the  rigour  of 
a  fiery  law.     3.  In  this  unceasing  warfare  "  the  flesh  lusteth  against  the  spirit, 
and  the  spirit  against  the  flesh."     4.  Look  at  the  grand  adversary  of  soiils,  and  his 
fiery  temptations.     That  is  another  fire  to  pass  through — Satan's  suggestions. 
n.  The   ttpholding   power.     "  I   will   be   with   thee."     Good  company   at  all 
events.     Was  He  not  with  aU  the  worthies  recorded  in  the  Old  Testament  Scriptures, 
in  their  sharp  conflicts,  giving  them  all  the  victory?     There  are  two  views  that 
may  be  taken  of  this  precious  promise.     There  is  such  a  thing  as  God  being  with 
His  people,  and  they  not  knowing  it;  and  there  is  such  a  thing  as  their  sensible 
enjoyment  of  it.     There  are  two  things  to  be  considered.     The  immutable  faith- 
fulness of  God  has  bound  Him  never  to  desert  the  objects  of  His  love.     But  there 
have  been  many  instances  in  which  people  have  been  groping  in  the  dark;  it  has 
been  a  long  while  before  they  could  find  Him;  and  in  many  instances  they  have 
been  ready  to  say,  "  My  prayer  is  shut  out  "  ;  and  led  to  exclaim,  "  Hath  God  in 
anger  shut  up  His  tender  mercies  ?    Will  His  compassion  fail  ?  "    III.  The  XERinNUS. 
Heavenly  rest — not  a  wave  of  trouble  shall  roll  across  this  peaceful  breast.     {J. 
Irons.)         God's  presence  in  crisis  moments : — It  is  surprising  to  note  how  the  facts 
of  this  people's  history  have  impressed  themselves  upon  the  language  and  thought 
of  Christendom.     I.  That  spiritual  experience  is  the  same  in  all  ages. 
These  words  were  written  by  the  prophet  of  the  Exile,  who  could  speak  of  himself 
and  his  comrades  as  passing  through  the  waters.     He  shows  in  this  way  that  he 
realises  that  the  exiles  are  one  in  experience  with  their  ancestors  who  passed  through 
the  waters  of  the  Red  Sea  and  the  Jordan.     Though  their  circumstances  were 
different,  the  variation  in  outward  detail  was  insignificant.     The  same  parts  of 
their  nature  were  tested,  and  the  same  virtues  were  disciplined.     Thus  this  prophet 
becomes  the  link  between  us,  who  are  the  disciples  of  Christ,  and  the  Israelites 
who  crossed  the  Jordan,     n.  That  in  every  life  there  are  a  few  brief  but 
intense  trials.     There  was  the  long  and  weary  strain  of  desert  life  to  be  constantly 
borne.     The  passage  of  the  sea  and  the  river  came  but  twice,  and  theri  lasted  but 
a  few  hours,  though  the  agony  for  the  time  was  intense.     They  entered  the  sea 
in  a  night  of  awful  storm,  because  the  terror  of  their  enemies  was  upon  them. 
They  entered  the  river  in  broad  daylight  in  utter  trust  of  God,  knowing  that  only 
thus  could  the  enjoyment  of  Canaan's  goodly  land  be  theirs.     One  was  a  struggle 
of  fear,  the  other  the  yielding  of  all  to  God  in  simple  faith.     In  the  Christian  life 
peace  only  comes  after  this  second  struggle.     HI.  That  life  before  and  after 
such  a  crisis  is  wholly  different.     The  Red  Sea  was  the  boundary  line  between 
bondage  and  freedom;  the  Jordan  between  wandering  and  rest,  between  hope 
and  possession.     It  seems  as  though  such  struggles  were  the  birth-throes  of  a  new 
life.     To  pass  on  to  a  higher  plane  such  struggle  must  be  encountered.     It  was  such 
a  trial  as  God  called  upon  Job  to  pass  through.     IV.  That  one  such  crisis  is 
death.     In  the  life  of  Christ  it  would  appear  that  the  temptation  connected  with 
His  baptism  was  His  Red  Sea,  just  as  St.  Paul  tells  us  that  the  sea  was  Israel's 
baptism:  "  They  were  all  baptized  into  Moses  in  the  cloud  and  in  the  sea."     We 
know  that  this  temptation  was  one  of  the  crises  of  our  Saviour's  life.     Then  the 
devil  leaveth  Him  for  a  season,  not  to  return  with  like  power  until  he  meets  Him 
again  at  Gethsemane.     This  was  Christ's  Jordan.     Not  imtil  this  was  passed  wai 
His  sorrow  vanquished  or  His  labour  "  finished."     When  Christian  reached  this 


CHAP,  xun.]  ISAIAH.  867 

river  he  was  dazed  and  despondent,  and  began  to  look  this  way  and  that  to  see 
if  he  could  not  escape  the  river.  Truly,  death  is  the  last  and  not  the  least  enemy. 
V.  That  huivlan  feiendship  can  avail  but  little  heee.  Friends  may  say,  I 
am  with  you  "  in  sympathy;  but  they  can  render  no  help.  Viewing  the  struggle, 
they  may  long  to  share  it,  but  here  they  must  leave  their  friends  in  the  hands  of 
God.  VI.  That  God  is  with  its  in  all  such  crisis  moments.  Hopeful's  com- 
forting words  did  Christian  little  good.  But  he  heard  a  voice  say,  When  thoa 
passest  through  the  waters,  I  will  be  with  thee;  and  through  the  rivers,  they  shall 
not  overflow  thee."  Indeed,  that  is  His  name,  Immanuel,  God  with  us.  And 
Christ  has  said,  "  Lo,  I  am  with  you  alway,  even  unto  the  end."  If  God  has  brought 
us  through  the  sea,  if  He  has  commenced  the  good  work  within  us,  He  will  bring 
us  through  the  Jordan,  and  thus  complete  what  He  has  begun.  In  virtue  of  such 
a  precious  promise  we  need  have  no  fear.  (R.  C.  Ford,  M.A.)  The  floods  and 
the  flames : — I.  Contemplate  the  scenes  through  which  the  people  of  God 
ARE  called  to  PASS.  No  metaphor  is  more  frequent  in  the  Bible  than  that  by 
which  sudden  calamities  are  represented  by  a  deluge  of  waters  {Psa.  xlii.  7,  brix.  1, 2). 
1.  AU  must  pass  through — (1)  The  waters  of  temptation  (James  i.  12).  (2)  The 
waters  of  affliction,  in  circumstances,  person,  mind,  family.  (3)  The  river  of 
death.  "  How  wilt  thou  do  in  the  swellings  of  Jordan?  "  2.  We  are  all  familiar 
with  affliction  \mder  the  image  of  fire  (Psa.  Ixvi.  12;  1  Cor.  iiL  13;  Isa.  xlviiL  10; 
1  Pet.  iv.  12).  It  is  the  tendency  of  fire  to — (1)  Consume  (MaL  iv.  1).  Affliction, 
like  a  fire,  will  tend  to  consume  our  corruptions,  whilst  we  ourselves  remain  un- 
injured. (2)  Melt.  All  metals  can  be  melted,  and  receive  whatever  stamp  the 
artificer  may  impress.  (3)  Try.  Place  any  substance  in  the  fire,  and  its  nature 
and  properties  are  made  manifest.  Thus  Abraham  was  tried;  Job  (xxiii.  10) ; 
Israel  (Deut.  viii.  2) ;  Hezekiah.  (4)  Purify  and  refine  (Isa.  L  25;  MaL  iii.  2,  3). 
n.  Consider  the  promises  made  to  the  people  of  God  when  passinq  through 
THESE  scenes.  1.  The  Divine  presence.  We  naturally  look  for  sympathy  in  the  day 
of  trouble  (Job  vi.  14).  Sometimes  friends  who  are  with  us  in  sunshine  forsake 
us  in  storm  (Job  xix.  21;  Acts  xxviii.  15,  with  2  Tim.  iv.  16).  But  God  will  never 
forsake  us.  2.  Divine  protection.  "  The  rivers  shall  not  overflow,"  &c.  (Josh, 
i.  9;  Acts  xxui.  11;  Deut.  xxxiii.  25).  3.  Divine  deliverance.  We  are  not  always 
to  be  fording  rivers,  struggling  with  floods,  or  walking  through  fires.  We  are  to 
leave  them  all  behind.  The  rest  of  Canaan  compensated  for  aU  the  toils  of  the 
wilderness  (Rom.  viii.  18).  (Clergyman's  Magazine.)  The  godly  in  trovble:^ 
1.  The  godly  have  the  best  company  in  the  worst  places  in  which  their  lot  is  cast. 
"  When  thou  passest  through  the  waters,  I  will  be  with  thee."  2.  The  godly  have 
special  help  in  their  times  of  deepest  trouble.  "  And  through  the  rivers,  they  shall 
not  overflow  thee."  3.  The  godly  are  the  subjects  of  miracles  of  mercy  in  seasons 
of  greatest  distress.  "  When  thou  walkest  through  the  fire,  thou  shalt  not  be 
burned."  (C.  H.  Spurgeon.)  God's  people  not  exempt  from  trouble: — If  God 
has  a  favoured  people  whom  He  has  chosen,  upon  whom  Btis  distinguishing  grace 
has  lighted  to  make  them  great  and  honomrable,  you  would  suppose  that  the  verse 
would  run  thus:  "  Thou  shalt  not  go  through  the  waters,  for  I  will  be  with  thee 
to  keep  thee  out  of  them;  neither  shalt  thou  pass  through  the  rivers,  for  I  have 
bridged  them  on  thy  behalf.  Thou  shalt  never  go  through  the  fire,  and  therefore 
thou  shalt  not  be  burned;  neither  shall  there  be  any  fear  that  the  flame  shall  kindle 
upon  thee,  for  it  shall  not  come  near  thee."  There  is  no  such  word  of  promise; 
it  would  be  contrary  to  the  whole  tenor  of  the  covenant,  which  ever  speaks  of  a 
rod,  and  of  the  chosen  passing  under  it.  {Ibid.)  Light  on  the  billow^t 
crest : — There  is  a  story  of  a  shipwTeck  which  teUs  how  the  crew  and  passengers 
had  to  leave  the  broken  vessel  and  take  to  the  boats.  The  sea  was  rough,  and 
great  care  in  rowing  and  steering  was  necessary,  in  order  to  guard  the  heavily 
laden  boats,  not  from  the  ordinary  waves,  which  they  rode  over  easily,  but  from 
the  great  cross  seas.  Night  was  approaching,  and  the  hearts  of  all  sank  as  they 
asked  what  they  should  do  in  the  darkness  when  they  would  no  longer  be  able  to 
see  these  terrible  waves.  To  their  great  joy,  however,  when  it  grew  dark,  they 
discovered  that  they  were  in  phosphorescent  waters,  and  that  each  dangerous 
wave  roUed  up  crested  with  Hght  which  made  it  as  clearly  visible  as  if  it  were  mid- 
day. So  it  is  that  Ufe's  dreaded  experiences  when  we  meet  them  carry  in  themselves 
the  light  which  takes  away  the  peril  and  the  terror.  (J.  R,  MiUer,  D.D.)  Com- 
fort found  in  God : — During  the  sixteen  weeks  in  which  Sir  Bartle  Frere  was  dying, 
though  he  was  nearly  always  in  great  pain,  not  one  murmur  escaped  Him.  Just 
at  the  end  he  said,  "  I  have  looked  down  into  the  great  abyss,  but  God  has  never 


358  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  XLin. 

left  me  through  it  all."  "  Name  that  Name  when  I  am  in  pain,"  he  once  said 
to  his  wife  ;  "  it  calls  me  back."  {Quiver.)  A  heartening  presence: — An  exceed- 
ingly nervous  man  was  once  sentenced  to  twenty-four  hours'  imprisonment  in  the 
dimgeon  of  an  old  prison.  Full  of  fear  he  sank  to  the  floor.  His  brain  throbbed 
as  with  fever,  and  mocking  voices  seemed  to  sound.  He  felt  terror  would  drive 
him  mad.  Suddenly,  overhead,  he  heard  the  prison  chaplain's  voice  calling  his 
name.  "  Are  you  there?  "  he  gasped.  "  Yes,  and  I  am  going  to  stay  till  you  come 
out."  "  God  bless  you,"  he  said  ;  "  I  do  not  mind  it  at  all  now,  with  you  there." 
"  When  thou  passest  through  the  waters,  I  will  be  with  thee."  (J.  R.  Miller,  D.D.) 
Triumphant  dying: — In  her  last  days  Mrs.  Booth,  of  the  Salvation  Army,  sent 
this  message  to  her  friends, — it  is  a  triumphant  death-song:  "  The  waters  are 
rising,  but  so  am  I.  I  am  not  going  under,  but  over.  Do  not  be  concerned  about 
your  djdng.  Only  go  on  living  well,  and  the  dying  will  be  all  right."  When 
thou  walkest  through  the  fire. — Fire.' — Walking  through  the  fire  here  is  put  for 
the  severest  form  of  trouble.  You  have,  in  the  commencement  of  the  verse,  trouble 
described  as  passing  through  the  water.  This  represents  the  overwhelming  influence 
of  trial,  in  which  the  soul  is  sometimes  so  covered  that  it  becomes  like  a  man  sink- 
ing in  the  waves.  "  When  thou  goest  through  the  rivers," — those  mountain  torrents 
which  with  terrific  force  are  often  sufficient  to  carry  a  man  away.  This  expresses 
the  force  of  trouble,  the  power  with  which  it  sometimes  lifts  a  man  from  the  foothold 
of  his  stability,  and  carries  him  before  it.  "  When  thou  passest  through  the  rivers, 
they  shall  not  overflow  thee."  But  going  through  the  fire  expresses  not  so  much 
the  overwhelming  character  and  the  upsetting  power  of  trouble  as  the  actual  con- 
suming and  destructive  power  of  trouble  and  temptation.  The  metaphor  is  more 
vivid,  not  to  say  more  terrific,  than  that  which  is  employed  in  the  first  sentence, 
and  yet,  vivid  and  awful  though  it  be,  it  is  certainly  not  too  strong  a  figure  to  be 
used  as  the  emblem  of  the  temptations  and  afflictions  through  which  the  Church 
and  people  of  God  have  been  called  to  pass.  I.  This  tebkible  pathway.  The 
sacramental  host  of  God's  elect  has  never  had  an  easy  road  along  which  to  journey. 
I  see  the  fields  on  fire,  the  prairie  is  in  a  blaze,  the  very  heavens  are  like  a  furnace, 
and  the  clouds  seem  rather  to  be  made  of  fire  than  water.  Across  that  prairie 
lies  the  pathway  to  heaven,  beneath  that  blazing  sky  the  whole  Church  of  God 
must  make  its  perpetual  journey.  It  started  at  the  first  in  fire,  and  its  very  glory  at 
the  last  shall  take  place  in  the  midst  of  the  fiery  passing  away  of  aU  things.  When 
first  there  was  a  Church  of  God  on  earth,  in  the  person  of  Abel,  it  was  persecuted. 
Since  that  day,  what  tongue  can  tell  the  sufferings  of  the  people  of  God!  It  hath 
fared  well  with  the  Church  when  she  hath  been  persecuted,  and  her  pathway  hath 
been  through  fire.  Her  feet  are  shod  with  iron  and  brass.  She  ought  not  to  tread 
on  paths  strewn  with  flowers ;  it  is  her  proper  place  to  suffer.  II.  There  is  an 
AWFUL  DANGER.  The  promisc  of  the  text  is  based  on  a  prophecy  that  follows  it. 
The  chapter  tells  us  how  God  taught  His  people  by  terrible  things  in  the  past, 
and  how  He  hath  terrible  lessons  to  teach  them  in  the  future.  The  Church  has 
had  very  painful  experience  that  persecution  is  a  fire  which  does  burn.  How 
many  ministers  of  Christ,  when  the  day  of  tribulation  came,  forsook  their  flocks 
and  fled.  Again:  I  see  iniquity  raging  on  every  side.  Its  flames  are  fanned  by 
every  wind  of  fashion.  And  fresh  victims  are  being  constantly  drawn  in.  It 
spreads  to  every  class.  Not  the  palace  nor  the  hovel  is  safe.  We  may  give  the 
alarm  to  you,  young  man,  who  are  in  the  midst  of  ribald  companions.  I  may  cry 
"  fire!  "  to  you  who  are  compelled  to  live  in  a  house  where  you  are  perpetually 
tempted  to  evil.  I  may  cry  fire!  "  to  you  who  are  marked  each  day,  and  have 
to  bear  the  sneer  of  the  ungodly, — "  fire!  "  to  you  who  are  losing  your  property 
and  suffering  in  the  flesh,  for  many  have  perished  thereby.  We  ought  not  to  look 
upon  our  dangers  with  contempt;  they  are  dangers,  they  are  trials.  We  ought 
to  look  upon  oiur  temptations  as  fires.  III.  Here  is  a  double  insurance.  It 
strikes  me  that  in  the  second  clause  we  have  the  higher  gradation  of  a  climax. 
"  Thou  shalt  not  be  burned,"  to  the  destruction  of  thy  life,  nor  even  scorched  to 

five  thee  the  most  superficial  injury,  for  "  the  flames  shall  not  kindle  upon  thee." 
ust  as  when  the  three  holy  children  came  out  of  the  fiery  furnace  it  is  said,  "  Upon 
their  bodies  the  fire  had  no  power,  nor  was  a  hair  of  their  head  singed;  neither 
were  their  coats  changed,  nor  had  the  smell  of  fire  passed  on  them  "  ;  so  the  text 
seems  to  me  to  teach  that  the  Christian  Church  under  all  its  trials  has  not  been 
consumed;  but  more  than  that — it  has  not  lost  anything  by  its  trials.  Upon 
the  entire  Church,  at  the  last,  there  shall  not  be  even  the  smell  of  fire.  (C.  H, 
Spurgeon.)         Fire  harmful  and  harmless: — When  Jehovah  was  angry  the  fira 


CHAP.  xLin.]  ISAIAH.  359 

burned  Israel  (chap.  xlii.  25),  but  now  with  Jehovah  on  its  side  it  is  invulnerable 
in  the  severest  trials.     {Prof.  J.  Skinner,  D.D.) 

Ver.  3.  For  I  am  the  Lord  thy  God. — Jehovah's  valuation  of  His  peofle : — I.  Thb 
Lord's  declaration  of  His  own  Name.  "  I  am  Jehovah  thy  God,  the  Holy  One 
of  Israel,  thy  Saviour."  He  gives  His  name  thus  to  distinguish  Himself  from  false 
gods.  He  also  sets  forth  His  name  at  large,  for  the  comfort  of  His  people.  There 
is  something  in  every  name  of  God  which  may  breed  faith  in  our  souls.  I  think 
He  also  does  it  to  excite  our  wonder  and  gratitude.  Let  us  devoutly  think  of  each 
of  these  names  separately.  1.  "  Jehovah,  thy  God."  Jehovah,  the  glorious  I  am, 
signifies  self-existence.  He  borrows  nothing  from  others;  indeed,  all  live  by  His 
permit  and  power.  He  is  as  complete  without  His  creatures  as  with  them.  Jehovah, 
again,  is  a  name  of  immutabihty.  "  I  am  that  I  am  "  was  His  name  to  Moses. 
Furthermore,  Jehovah  means  sovereignty.  "  Jehovah  reigneth,  let  the  people 
tremble."  2,  The  Holy  One  of  Israel,  thy  Saviour."  What  a  New  Testament 
combination  this  is — "The  Holy  One,  thy  Saviour"!  It  reminds  us  of  the 
words  — "  Just,  and  the  justifier  of  him  that  believeth."  Here  we  have 
one  so  holy  as  to  be  separate  from  sinners  and  yet  the  Saviom-  of  sinners.  Since 
"  the  Holy  One  of  Israel "  is  om-  Saviour,  we  are  confident  that  He  will  save  us 
from  all  sin.  The  glorious  Lbrd,  who  here  styles  Himself  "  Jehovah  thy  God, 
the  Holy  One  of  Israel,  thy  Saviour,"  the  Creator  of  all  things,  and  their  Preserver, 
is  come  very  near  to  you.  In  the  next  verse  He  saith,  "  Since  thou  wast  precious 
in  My  sight  thou  hast  been  honourable,  and  I  have  loved  thee."  Mark,  "  I  have 
loved  thee."  It  is  not  enough  that  He  thinks  kindly,  and  deals  tenderly;  but 
He  loves!  Remember  also  that  this  Holy  Lord  is  working  upon  you  still,  that 
you  may, reflect  His  glory.  "  I  have  created  him  for  My  glory,  I  have  formed  him; 
yea,  I  have  made  him  "  (ver.  7).  He  has  begun  our  new  creation.  He  is  carrying 
it  on,  and  He  is  completing  it.  II.  The  Lord's  estimate  of  His  people.  What- 
ever we  may  think  of  the  Israel  of  God,  the  Lord  thinks  more  of  it  than  words  can 
express.  "  I  gave  Egypt  for  thy  ransom,  Ethiopia  and  Seba  for  thee."  When 
the  Lord  chose  a  nation  to  be  the  depository  of  His  sacred  oracles.  He  might  have 
selected  Egypt  if  He  had  willed  to  do  so.  Egypt  was  in  the  known  world  the  oldest 
nation.  Egypt  contained  the  wisest  and  most  civihsed  people  of  early  times. 
Its  very  ruins  are  the  wonder  of  the  ages.  Its  records  show  an  extraordinary 
progress  in  literature,  architecture,  and  the  arts  and  sciences.  Egypt  was  also 
the  most  powerful  of  empires  in  the  olden  times.  Before  the  banners  of  Assyria 
and  Babylon  and  Medo-Persia  came  to  the  front,  the  dragon  of  Egypt  was  a  mighty 
ensign.  Yet  the  Lord  did  not  choose  the  sons  of  Ham,  but  passed  by  Egypt, 
Ethiopia,  and  Seba.  The  Lord  chose  the  seed  of  Abraham,  and  the  family  of 
Jacob:  He  multiplied  them,  and  instructed  them,  and  made  them  to  be  His  own 
peculiar  people.  In  the  course  of  history  the  claims  of  various  countries  came 
into  collision  with  those  of  Israel,  and  Egypt  proudly  oppressed  Israel.  What 
did  God  do  ?  Did  He  hesitate  as  to  which  of  the  two  peoples  should  be  preserved  ? 
No;  the  Lord  brought  out  Israel,  and  turned  His  artiUery  upon  Egypt.  Li  the  days 
of  King  Asa,  the  Ethiopians  came  up  against  Judah  to  the  number  of  a  miUion  of 
men;  but  "  they  were  destroyed  before  the  Lord,  and  before  His  host ":  thus  was 
Ethiopia  given  for  Israel.  Cambyses  conquered  Egypt,  and  destroyed  many  of  its 
cities,  and  never  since  has  there  been  a  native  prince  sitting  upon  the  throne  of 
Pharaoh.  God  gave  to  the  I^ng  of  Persia,  Egypt  and  the  neighbouring  cities  as  the 
ransom  price  of  His  people.  Thus  the  Lord  did  of  old  on  the  behaK  of  His  Uteral 
Israel,  and  what  does  this  fact  say  to  us?  It  means  this — God's  chosen  are  im- 
measurably precious  in  His  sight.  They  are  the  centre  of  God's  design.  God's 
intent  was  to  produce  a  race  that  should  be  honourable  in  His  sight,  and  weU-beloved 
of  His  soul.  This  design  would  be  costly,  even  to  Jehovah  Himself.  To  carry  out 
this  purpose,  men,  having  fallen,  must  be  redeemed  by  blood.  To  carry  out  His 
Divine  resolve  He  spared  not  His  own  Son,  but  freely  dehvered  Him  up  for  us  all. 
But  even  then  men  could  not  be  saved  mdess  the  Holy  Ghost  should  condescend  to 
come  and  live  in  their  bodies.  Henceforth  everything  shall  be  sacrificed  for  us. 
God  will  give  all  that  He  has  to  save  His  beloved  ones.  He  will  make  the  whole  o 
nature  and  providence  subservient  to  the  complete  salvation  of  His  chosen.  Kings 
ehaU  be  born  and  buried;  empires  shall  rise  and  faU;  republics  and  systems  shall 
come  and  go;  and  all  shall  be  the  scaffold  for  the  building  of  the  house  of  God, 
which  is  His  Church.  It  is  God's  grandest,  highest  purpose  to  gather  together  in 
one  the  whole  company  of  His  redeemed  in  Christ  Jesus  their  Lord,  and  to  make 


360  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xun. 

them  like  their  Head.  m.  The  outcome  of  this.  1.  If  it  be  so,  that  the  gloiiotis 
God  has  really  and  of  a  truth  loved  us,  His  people,  and  valued  us  at  a  mighty  price, 
then  see  how  secure  His  people  are!  2.  Note,  next,  the  honour  which  God  puts 
upon  them.  God  has  put  us  poor  sinners  among  His_  honourables.  I  know  one 
who,  in  her  unconverted  state,  had  fallen  into  sad  sin,  and  the  remembrance  thereof 
was  painful;  but  the  Lord  removed  the  shame  by  laying  home  to  her  soul  these 
gracious  words,  "  Since  thou  wast  precious  in  My  sight,  thou  hast  been  honourable." 
3.  The  certainty  of  the  Lord's  gathering  together  all  His  people.  "  I  will  bring  thy 
seed,"  &c.  (vers.  5-7).  If  God  has  determined  to  glorify  Himself  by  us  and  in  us, 
let  us  be  in  accord  with  Him.  What  love  we  ought  to  bear  to  God!  (C  H. 
Spurgeon.)  I  gave  Egypt  for  thy  rajisom. — God's  redemption  of  Israel: — An 
amplification  of  the  phrase,  "  I  have  redeemed  thee  "  (ver.  1).  {J.  A.  Alexander.) 
Egypt,  Ethiopia,  Seba : — "  I  give  Egypt  as  thy  ransom."  The  meaning  appears 
to  be  that  Cyrus  will  be  compensated  for  the  emancipation  of  Israel  by  the  conquest 
of  these  African  nations  which  did  not  belong  to  the  Babylonian  Empire.  As  a 
matter  of  fact,  the  conquest  of  Egypt  was  effected  by  Cambyses,  the  son  and 
successor  of  Cyrus,  although  it  is  said  to  have  been  contemplated  by  Cyrus  himself 
(Herod,  i.  153),  and  it  is  actually  (though  wrongly)  attributed  to  him  by  Xenophon. 
(Prof  J.  Skinner,  D.D.)  Seba  (Gen.  x.  7j  Psa.  Ixxii.  10;  chap.  xlv.  14)  was, 
according  to  Josephus,  Meroe,  the  northern  province  of  Ethiopia,  lying  between 
the  Blue  and  the  White  Nile.     {Ibid.) 

Ver.  4.  Since  thou  wast  precious  in  My  sight. — Precious,  Tionourable,  loved: — 
"  Because  thou  art  precious  in  My  sight,  art  honourable,  and  I  love  thee" — three 
co-ordinate  clauses.  {Prof.  J.  Skinner,  D.D.)  Precious  ! — I.  PRECiotrs  in  God's 
SIGHT  IS  MAN.  This  is  a  new  view  of  hfe — not  man's  natural  feeling.  Precious  as 
to  the  farmer  land  is  which  has  the  possibility  of  development  with  digging  and 
draining,  and  so  on, — precious  as  satisfying  not  the  mere  craving  for  usefulness,  but 
the  love  of  a  great  heart.  II.  When  able  to  kecognise  this  peeciousness  nr 
God's  sight  we  become  honotirable.  Before  we  could  recognise  it  we  must  be 
grafted  into  Christ  by  a  true  and  living  faith.  This  faith,  then,  makes  us  honourable. 
The  honour  of  a  Christian  is  in — 1.  Righteous  living.  2.  Zeal  for  the  Christian  cause. 
The  honoiu-  of  Christ  was  to  have  "  the  heathen  for  His  heritage."  Entering  into 
this,  the  honour  of  Christians  is  to  win  souls ;  and  their  "  crown  of  joy  "  in  seeing  many 
turning  from  following  idols  to  the  Uving  God.  3.  Having  a  conscience  void  of 
offence  towards  God  and  man.     III.  The  seal  of  God's  love  is  the  greatest 

COMFORT  to  the  CHRISTIAN  HEART.      IV.  "  I  WILL  GIVE  MEN  FOR  THEE,"  &C.      Nation 

after  nation  went  down  into  the  darkness  before  the  conquering  sword  of  Israel. 
God's  pity,  great  as  it  is,  spared  not!  So  we  have  seen  men  who  have  lived;  and 
when  that  tender,  all-forgiving  time  came — when  death  laid  his  icy  fingers  upon 
his  prey,  conscience  would  not  allow  us  to  settle  with  the  thought  that  in  the  great 
future  all  was  well  with  them.  If  we  cannot  enter  into  God's  inscrutable  purposes 
in  this  respect  we  may  at  least  feel  that  these  pass  into  the  arms  of  death  '  for  us," 
— i.e.,  in  the  sense  of  being  warnings  to  us.  {H.  Rose  Rae.)  Precious,  honour- 
able, beloved : — I.  Believer,  the  first  wonderful  adjective  of  the  text  is  applicable  to 
thee;  thou  art  "  precious."  Notice  how  that  preciousness  is  enhanced  beyond  the 
superlativeT degree  by  the  next  words,  "  precious  in  My  sight."  There  are  mock 
jewels  now  made  which  are  so  exactly  like  rubies,  emeralds,  and  diamonds  that  even 
those  who  are  connoisseurs  of  precious  stones  are  deceived,  and  yet  these  imitations 
are  not  precious.  They  are  not  precious  in  the  sight  of  the  lapidary,  who  is  able  to 
put  them  to  severer  tests,  for  with  him  these  mimicries  are  soon  proved  to  be  of  Uttle 
value.  The  degree  of  preciousness  depends  much  upon  the  person  who  forms  the 
judgment;  and  what  estimate  can  be  so  accurate  as  that  of  God  the  infallible  f 
What  judgment  can  be  so  severely  exacting  as  that  of  God  the  infinitely  holy?     This 

Ereciousness  cannot  arise  from  anything  essentially  and  intrinsically  precious  in  us 
y  nature,  for  we  confess  freely  that  we  are  even  as  others  in  our  natural  estate. 
The  quarry  out  of  which  we  were  hewn  was  no  quarry  of  precious  things,  and  the 
pit  out  of  which  we  have  been  digged  was  no  pit  in  which  rare  stones  were  glittering  : 
we  were  taken  from  common  clay,  and  out  of  the  ordinary  ruin  of  mankind;  yet 
God  saith  we  are  precious,  and  the  fact  of  our  former  degradation  and  fallen  estate 
cannot  gainsay  the  Divine  declaration.  How  is  this  ?  It  springs  out  of  four  con- 
siderations— 1.  We  are  precious  in  the  sight  of  God  because  of  the  memories  which 
duster  round  each  one  of  us.  You  are  to  God  most  precious,  as  the  token  and 
memorial  of  the  death  of  the  Well-beloved.     2.  Things  become  precious  sometimes 


CHAP.   XLHT.]  ISAIAH,  S61 

on  account  of  the  workmanship  exercised  upon  them.  Many  an  article  has  been 
in  itself  intrinsically  of  small  account,  but  so  much  art  has  been  exercised  upon  it^ 
BO  much  real  work  thrown  into  it,  that  the  value  has  been  increased  indefinitely. 
Now,  the  Christian  is  precious  to  God  on  account  of  the  workmanship  that  has  been 
spent  upon  him.  In  divers  ways  the  Great  Worker  has  wrought  mightily  in  us,  and 
continued  perseveringly  to  piu-sue  His  purpose.  3.  Certain  articles  are  precious 
because  of  their  peculiar  fashion.  This  was  the  case  with  the  Portland  vase,  which 
to  any  common  observer  seemed  to  be  of  very  small  value,  but  because  of  the 
extreme  beauty  of  the  design,  the  greatest  potter  of  the  age  was  ready  to  pay  his 
thousands  to  possess  it.  We  are  precious  in  God's  sight,  too,  because  of  our  fashion 
and  form.  We  are  to  be  made  like  unto  Christ.  4.  Things  are  precious  often 
because  of  their  relationship.  The  most  precious  thing  a  mother  hath  is  her  dear 
babe.  Precious,  therefore,  in  the  sight  of  the  Lord  are  His  saints,  because  they 
are  bom  in  His  household,  by  regeneration  made  to  be  His  sons  and  daughters. 
n.  Every  child  of  God  is  "  honoubable."  Every  Christian  is,  in  God's  sight,  right 
honourable  and  excellent  because  the  Lord  in  His  discriminating  grace  has  made 
him  precious.  1.  Every  Christian  is  honourably  bom.  2.  The  Christian,  moreover, 
is  honourable  in  rank.  God  has  been  pleased  to  take  us  from  the  dunghill  to  set  us 
among  princes.  3.  Right  honourable  in  their  service  are  the  saints.  I  know  of  no 
service  that  can  be  more  distinguished  than  the  doing  of  good.  Methinks  the  very 
angels  before  the  throne  might  envy  us  poor  men  who  are  permitted  to  talk  of 
Christ,  even  though  it  be  to  little  children.  4.  Christians  are  honourable  also  in 
privilege.  It  was  accounted  an  eminent  honour  when  a  nobleman  had  the  right  to 
go  in  to  his  king  whenever  he  willed  to  proffer  a  request.  Approach  to  the  royal 
throne  was  always,  among  Orientals,  considered  to  be  the  highest  token  of  regard. 
You  are  especially  honomred,  0  ye  saints,  for  ye  are  "  a  people  near  unto  Him." 
6.  And  every  child  of  God  who  is  what  he  should  be  becomes  through  grace  honour- 
able by  his  achievements,  and  this  is  in  some  respects  the  highest  form  of  honour, 
to  be  honoured  for  what  you  have  been  enabled  to  do,  to  wear  a  coat  of  arms  which 
you  have  fairly  won  in  battle,  and  hatchments  that  are  not  merely  attributed  to 
you  by  the  heraldic  pencil,  but  which  are  due  to  you  because  of  your  victorious  feats 
of  arms.  To  conquer  sin,  this  is  no  small  achievement;  to  keep  down  through  a 
long  life  the  corruptions  of  the  flesh,  to  contend  against  the  world  and  the  devil, 
these  are  no  deeds  of  carpet  knights.  And  what  an  achievement  it  will  be  when 
Satan  shall  be  bruised  beneath  our  feet,  as  he  shall  be  shortly.  III.  The  last  of 
these  notable  words  is  "  beloved."  "  I  have  loved  thee."  God  hath  loved  thee 
eternally.  He  has  loved  thee  actively  and  effectually,  given  H!is  Only-Begotten 
for  thee — an  unspeakable  gift;  given  thee  everything  in  Him — a  boundless  dower 
of  love.  He  has  loved  thee  pre-eminently,  better  than  the  angels,  for  unto  which  of 
them  has  He  ever  said,  "  Thou  wast  honoiu-able,  and  I  have  loved  thee  "  ?  He  has 
loved  thee  unchangeably.  He  has  loved  thee  immeasurably.  These  three  things 
being  put  together,  I  want  you,  practically,  as  they  are  your  own  by  faith,  to  make 
use  of  them  in  other  senses.  "  Since  thou  wast  precious  in  My  sight,  thou  hast  been 
honourable,  and  I  have  loved  thee."  1.  My  Saviour,  dost  thou  say  that?  Why, 
those  words  Thou  dost  put  into  my  mouth  to  give  back  to  Thee.     Thou  also  art 

Erecious  in  my  sight.  Is  He  not  so — precious  beyond  compare?  Therefore  is  He 
onourable  in  our  esteem.  WiU  you  not  honour  H!im?  Shall  it  not  be  the  con- 
tinual strife  of  your  soul  to  get  Him  renown?  "  Thou  hast  been  honourable,  and  I 
have  loved  thee."  You  have  loved  Him,  but,  oh,  how  little !  Look  not  back,  then, 
except  with  penitence,  but  henceforth  say:  "  Lord,  Thou  hast  been  honourable,  I 
will  love  Thee.  Forgivethepast,  kindle  in  my  soul  a  fresh  flame  of  grace."  2.  When 
you  have  so  used  those  words  turn  them  in  another  direction.  Apply  them  next  to 
every  child  of  God.  Let  us  never  think  of  the  children  of  God  in  any  other  way 
than  as  honouring  them.  Some  of  them  are  very  poor,  many  of  them  illiterate, 
some  of  them  not  altogether  in  temper,  action,  or  creed  what  we  might  desire  them 
to  be;  but  if  they  be  bought  with  the  blood  of  Christ  they  are  honourable.  The 
Lord  declares  them  so,  and  let  us  not  treat  them  dishonomrably.  3.  You  might 
use  these  words  in  reference  to  unconverted  men  and  women.  There  is  a  certain 
sense  in  which  they  are  apphcable  to  all  of  woman  born,  for  they  possess  immortal 
souls.  If  that  be  the  case,  how  honourable  aU  men  become  as  objects  of  oxir  zeal! 
"  Honour  all  men."  (C.  H.  Spurgeon.)  The  value  and  rank  of  the  believer: — One 
of  the  worst  mistakes  we  coifld  make  would  be  to  judge  our  condition  before  Grod  by 
our  outward  circumstances.  Know  ye  not  that  the  ungodly  have  their  portion  in 
this  life  ?    As  for  the  people  of  God,  they  are  often  in  great  trials.     I.  The  Losd 


362  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  XLin. 

COUNTS  His  people  to  be  precious.  A  child  of  God  is  often  far  other  than  precious 
in  the  sight  of  others.  "  The  precious  sons  of  Zion,  comparable  to  fine  gold,  how 
are  they  esteemed  as  earthen  pitchers,  the  work  of  the  hands  of  the  potter!  "  Child 
of  God!  thou  art  precious  in  God's  sight,  and  that  is  infinitely  more  than  being 
precious  to  princes.  You  live  in  a  httle  room  alone,  and  few  know  you,  and  those 
who  do  know  you  do  not  think  much  of  you ;  but  the  Lord  says,  "  Thou  art  precious 
in  My  sight."  How  can  this  be?  Read  the  first  verse.  "  But  now  thus  saith  the 
Lord  that  created  thee,  0  Jacob,  and  He  that  formed  thee,  0  Israel."  I.  It  is  clear 
that  we  are  precious  to  God  because  we  are  His  creation.  The  first  creation  was 
maxred  upon  the  wheel  by  sin;  it  became  a  thing  without  honour,  and  came  under 
the  curse.  But  he  that  beUeves  in  Jesus  has  been  created  anew  by  the  work  of  the 
Holy  Ghost.  God  has  in  a  very  special  sense  created  him.  2.  He  has  gone  beyond 
mere  creation :  having  first  created  the  clay,  He  has  formed  it.  We  are  not  half  made 
or  ill  made  in  regeneration;  we  are  formed  as  well  as  created.  The  Lord  who  has 
given  us  spiritual  existence  is  daily  giving  us  fashion  and  completeness.  3.  But  what 
next  does  He  say?  "  I  have  redeemed  thee."  We  have  been  bought  with  precious 
blood.  4.  Another  blessing  of  grace  is  mentioned  in  the  chapter,  and  that  is  that  God 
has  called  us.  "  I  have  called  thee  by  thy  name;  thou  art  Mine."  He  called  us, 
and  we  answered  the  call.  5.  We  have  been  ever  since  kept  by  His  rich  grace  and 
preserved,  and  this  also  has  endeared  us  to  the  Lord.  Do  you  not  think  that  if  you 
are  precious  in  Christ's  sight,  then  everything  that  has  to  do  with  Him  ought  to  be 
precious  to  you?  Remember  what  Augustine  said:  he  declared  that  he  loved 
every  man  that  had  "  aliquid  Christi  " — any  thing  of  Christ — about  him.  Think 
once  more.  H  you  are  precious  in  God's  sight,  do  not  despise  yourself  so  as  to  fall 
into  the  foUies  and  vanities  which  please  other  men.  Nobihty  has  its  obhgations. 
U.  Being  precious.  He  adds  another  epithet.  "  Since  thou  wast  precious  in  My 
sight,  THOU  HAST  BEEN  HONOURABLE."  How  many  of  God's  people  were  the 
reverse  of  honourable  before  they  knew  the  Lord !  Many  a  dishonourable  thing 
they  thought,  and  said,  and  did,  and  it  is  the  dishonourable  Ufe  that  makes  the  dis- 
honourable man.  Let  a  poor  child  of  God  tell  out  how  he  believes  that  he  is  honour- 
able. 1.  We  are  honourable  by  birth.  Some  are  proud  because  they  have  been 
born  of  fathers  who  have  been  made  baronets,  or  elevated  to  the  peerage  in  years 
gone  by;  thus  by  bkth  they  are  honourable.  Descended  from  the  King  of  kings, 
each  saint  has  a  hneage  before  which  the  pedigrees  of  princes  grow  stale  and  mean. 
2.  Next,  we  become  honom-able  by  our  possessions.  Men  pay  honour  to  those  who  are 
immensely  rich.  "  All  things  are  yours."  What  an  estate  is  that  which  belongs  to 
every  heir  of  heaven,  for  we  are  "  heirs  of  God,  and  joint-heirs  mth  Christ ";  and 
thus  we  become  indeed  honourable.  3.  And  the  child  of  God  becomes  honourable 
in  rank.  A  child  of  God  is  a  prince  of  the  Divine  Hne.  4.  We  then  become  ennobled 
by  our  relationship.  Jesus  is  "  the  first-born  among  many  brethren  ";  and  we  as  the 
younger  brethren  are  all  honourable.  5.  We  are  honoiu-able  by  calhng,  for  He 
"  hath  made  us  kings  and  priests  unto  our  God  ";  and  these  among  men  are  the 
most  noteworthy  of  all  calUngs.  6.  By  Divine  grace  we  have  become  honourable 
by  character,  for  the  Lord  has  sanctified  His  people.  7.  Theirs  is  an  honour- 
able life ;  they  live  for  an  honourable  purpose ;  they  are  quickened  by  an  honoiu-able 
spirit;  they  are  wending  their  way  through  an  honourable  destiny  on  earth  to  glory 
and  honour  and  immortahty  and  Ufe  eternal.  The  lesson  to  be  learned  from  it  is, 
do  not  let  any  child  of  God  be  bashful,  shamefaced,  and  cowardly  in  the  presence  of 
men  of  the  world.  HI.  "  Since  thou  wast  precious  in  My  sight,  thou  hast  been 
honourable,  and  I  have  loved  thee."  The  Lord  has  not  only  told  you  of  His  love 
in  the  secret  of  your  soul,  but  He  has  pubhcly  acted  love  to  you.  If  God  loves  us  so, 
shall  we  not  love  Him?  {Ibid.)  The  chUd  of  Ood  should  live  a  dignified  life:— 
Lions  will  not  be  found  stealing  little  bits  of  meat  like  cats,  or  feeding  on  carrion 
like  dogs.  It  is  not  for  eagles  to  hawk  for  flies ;  and  it  is  not  for  children  of  God  to 
stoop  below  the  glorious  level  of  their  new  birth.  {Ibid.)  A  great  date: — Date 
your  birthdays  from  your  regeneration ;  bury  the  old  nature,  and  live  in  the  new. 
(J.  Parker,  D.D.)  Therefore  will  I  give  men  for  thee. — Peoples  sacrificed  for  the 
Jews: — "  Mankind  for  thee,  and  peoples  for  thy  life."  All  the  world  for  this  little 
people  ?  It  is  inteUigible  only  because  this  little  people  are  to  be  for  all  the  world. 
"  Ye  are  My  witnesses  that  I  am  God."  "  I  will  also  give  thee  for  a  light  to  nations, 
to  be  My  salvation  to  the  ends  of  the  earth."     {Prof.  0.  A.  Smith,  D.D.) 

Vers.  6,  6.  I  will  bring  thy  seed  from  the  east. — Obligations  of  Christians  to 
kibour  for  (Ae  conversion  of  the  Jews  : — This  prophecy  looks  far  beyond  the  deliver- 


CHAP.  XLin.]  ISAIAH.  363 

ance  of  the  Jews  from  their  former  captivity.  It  evidently  points  to  that  great 
and  glorious  deliverance  which  still  awaits  them.  A  deliverance  that  will  eclipse 
and  infinitelv  outshine  their  former  deliverances  from  Egypt  and  from  Babylon. 
Apply  the  passage  to  the  recall  and  conversion  of  the  Jews.  I.  Otje  obligations, 
A3  Christians,  to  engage  in  this  work.  1.  Gratitude  for  the  inestimable 
benefits  which  we  have  derived  from  them  (Rom.  iii.  1,  2,  ix.  4,  5).  2.  As  a 
reparation  of  the  cruel  wrongs  and  injuries  which  we  have  inflicted  upon  them. 
Every  Christian  country  is  deep  in  this  guilt,  and  every  Christian  country  requires 
a  national  expiation  of  it.  3.  From  an  ardent  desire  to  promote  the  glory  of 
God.  II.  Our  encottragement  to  proceed  and  persevere  in  it.  To  some, 
the  attempt  to  convert  the  Jews  may  appear  visionary;  to  others,  inexpedient; 
but  they  who  are  acquainted  with  their  Bibles  must  know  that  it  is  not  hopeless. 
We  are  encouraged  to  attempt  this  work — 1.  From  the  testimony  of  prophecy. 

2.  From  the  very  great  attention  which  has  already  been  excited  among  the  Jews. 

3.  From  the  present  signs  of  the  times.     III.  The  gloriotjs  consbquences  that 

WILL  RESULT  FROM  THE   CONVERSION   OF  THE  JbWS.       1.   To  the  WOrld.      It   will 

be  the  commencement  of  a  new  and  blessed  era  to  all  nations.  2.  To  the  Church 
of  God.  The  conversion  of  the  Jews  shall  be  the  means  of  bringing  in  the  whole 
fulness  of  the  Gentiles.  (1)  To  God's  covenant  with  Abraham  and  with  his  seed 
you  owe  all  that  you  are,  and  all  that  you  hope  to  be.  (2)  When  Christ  sent 
forth  His  apostles  to  preach  the  Gospel  of  the  kingdom.  He  particularly  charged 
them  to  "  begin  at  Jerusalem."     {Earl  Oibbee,  D.D.) 

Ver.  6.  I  ■will  say  to  the  north,  Give  up.  —  A  dovble  challenge  : — My  inten- 
tion is  rather  to  utiHse  than  to  expoiind  the  text.  I.  The  first  counsel  is — 
Give  ttp.  1.  With  some  of  you  it  is  imperative  that  you  give  up  your  prejudices. 
So  have  you  mis-estimated  true  religion,  that  you  have  been  accustomed  to 
denounce  it  as  cant,  and  to  declaim  the  professors  of  it  as  hypocrites.  Give  up 
this  blind  bias,  and  give  the  Gospel  a  fair  hearing.  Should  it  turn  out  to  be  an 
imposture,  you  will  at  least  be  the  better  able  to  expose  its  fictions,  after  having 
studied  its  facts;  but  should  it  happen  to  be  genuine  and  true,  how  ill  will  it 
be  for  you  if  you  continue  to  despise  it!  2.  Give  up  in  like  manner  your  self- 
righteousness.  3.  Give  up  yom:  sins.  You  cannot  be  saved  from  their  consequence 
if  you  cling  to  their  company.  4.  Give  up  delays.  5.  I  might  well  say  to  some, 
give  up  quibbling.  You  have  never  yet  come  to  the  point  with  your  own  con- 
science. You  have  always  been  so  deft  at  finding  out  knots  and  raising  questions. 
What  is  the  good  of  it?  If  you  are  never  saved  till  you  get  every  problem  solved, 
you  will  never  be  saved  at  all.  If  a  vessel  were  breaking  in  pieces  on  yonder 
shore,  and  the  rocket  apparatus  had  fired  a  rope  into  the  middle  of  the  vessel, 
would  you  not  think  the  crew  to  be  insane  if  they  said  to  one  another,  "  We  do 
not  understand  how  it  is  that  the  rocket  apparatus  manages  this"  ?  Oh,  but 
they  just  twist  the  rope  round  the  mast,  get  a  holdfast,  and  begin  to  swing  them- 
selves ashore.  6.  Give  up,  you  troubled  ones;  give  up  despondency;  give  up  th& 
thought  that  there  is  no  hope;  give  up  the  suspicion  that  Jesus  cannot  forgive. 
II.  Keep  not  back.  1.  Keep  not  back  from  attending  the  means  of  grace.  2.  When 
you  do  attend  the  house  of  the  Lord,  keep  not  back  from  a  simple  obedience  of 
the  Gospel.  3.  When  you  have  looked  to  Christ,  keep  not  back  from  the  mercy- 
seat.  You  will  begin  to  pray,  perhaps,  and  find  yourself  stammering  and  trembling,, 
but  keep  not  back.  Your  old  sins  will  half  choke  you  in  the  recollection  of  them, 
but  keep  not  back.  If  anybody  saw  you  trying  to  pray  they  would  say,  "  What 
you,  you  old  wretch,  you  trying  to  pray!  "  Oh!  but  keep  not  back.  'Tis  mercy 
calls  you;  come  and  pray.  4.  When  you  have  really  trusted  in  Christ,  and  have 
learned  to  pray,  then  keep  not  back  from  coming  forward  and  making  a  profession 
of  your  faith  in  Jesus.  Be  prompt,  if  you  would  be  precise  in  serving  the  Lord. 
"  I  made  haste,"  said  David,  "  and  delayed  not  to  keep  Thy  commandments." 
6.  To  those  who  are  saved,  and  have  avowed  their  conversion,  let  me  say.  Keep 
not  back  from  the  Lord's  service.  (C.  H.  Spurgeon.)  Bring  My  sons  from 
far. — The  Church  encouraged  and  exhorted: — These  words  were  spoken  with 
the  view  of  encouraging  the  Church:  "  Fear  not;  for  I  am  with  thee  :  I  will  bring 
thy  seed  from  the  east,"  &c.  The  Lord  loves  His  Church,  and  He  loves  to  see 
her  full  of  courage  and  confidence.  He  intends  that  His  cause  and  kingdom 
shall  prosper  in  the  world.  God  has  leisure.  I.  The  Lord  has  children  far 
away.  "  Bring  My  sons  from  far,  and  My  daughters  from  the  ends  of  the  earth." 
L  Some  are  far  away  in  the  matter  of  locality.     They  are  not  dwelling  wher    the 


364  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  xltii. 

Gospel  is  preached;  some  of  them  are  where  roads  have  not  as  yet  been  made, 
and  the  commerce  of  civilisation  has  not  come.  2.  He  also  has  many  sons  and 
daughters  who  are  far  off  in  a  worse  sense  than  this ;  they  are  far  off  as  to  character, 
as  opposed  to  God  as  darkness  is  to  light.  3.  There  are  some  who  are  far  off  in 
another  sense;  it  is  not  so  much  character  that  puts  them  far  off  from  God,  as 
their  not  being  in  the  way  of  hearing  the  Gospel.  The  kingdom  of  God  has  come 
nigh  to  most  of  you.  But  there  are  great  numbers  of  persons,  even  in  our  own 
land,  who  are  not  in  the  way  of  hearing  the  Gospel.  It  happens,  sometimes, 
that  the  more  unlikely  ones  are  the  first  to  be  converted.  4.  The  Lord  Jesus 
Christ  saves  by  His  grace  some  who  are  far  off  in  their  own  apprehension.  It 
is  not  really  true  that  they  have  been  more  sinful  than  others,  but  they  think 
they  have.  So  you  see  that  the  Lord  has  children  who  are  far  off  from  Him  in 
several  senses.  What  does  a  father  or  a  mother  do  when  the  son  is  a  long  way  off? 
Why,  they  like  to  hear  all  they  can  about  him;  especially,  they  love  to  hear 
from  him, — to  get  a  letter  or  a  message  from  their  boy  himself.  Well,  now,  our 
Heavenly  Father  watches  over  all  His  poor  wandering  children.     II.  The  Lckd 

IS    BRINGING    HOME    SOME    OF   THESE    FAR-OFF   ONES.       In    OUr   text    He   givCS    this 

command,  "  Bring  My  sons  from  far."  To  whom  is  this  command  spoken? 
I  think  we  shall  be  right  if  we  say  that  it  is  spoken  much  in  the  same  way  in  which 
the  Lord  said,  "  Let  there  be  light,"  "  and  there  was  light."  His  fiat  did  the 
deed.  So  God  says,  "  Bring  My  sons  from  far,"  and  therefore  we  may  be  sure 
that  they  will  be  brought  to  Him.  1.  Providence  obeys  this  command.  Every- 
thing that  happens  in  the  mysterious  movements  of  Providence  is  operating 
for  the  bringing  in  of  His  chosen.  The  world  is  all  scaffolding;  the  Church  of 
Christ  is  the  true  building.  The  like  is  true  on  a  small  scale.  All  manner  of 
afflictions  that  come  to  men  are  sent  to  touch  their  conscience,  and  to  bring  them 
back  to  God.  2.  This  seems  to  me  to  be  a  charge  given  to  all  God's  people,  as 
well  as  to  providence,  "  '  Bring  My  sons  from  far.'  You  know  Me;  you  love 
Me;  so,  look  after  My  wandering  children."  3.  But  this  command  would  be  of  no 
force  unless  my  text  were  a  fiat.  In  consistency  with  this  command,  the  Holy 
Spirit  goes  forth,  in  ways  known  to  Himself,  and  He  brings  God's  sons  from 
far,  and  His  daughters  from  the  ends  of  the  earth.  IIL  This  is  said  for  the 
ENCOURAGEMENT  OF  God's  Church.  1.  This  Command  has  a  very  intimate  con 
nection  with  Christ's  Church.  Our  text  says,  "  Bring  My  sons  and  My  daughters  "  ; 
but  the  5th  verse  says,  "  I  will  bring  thy  seed."  Then,  saved  souls  are  the  seed 
of  the  Church  as  well  as  the  sons  and  daughters  of  God.  God  puts  a  wonderful 
honoiir  upon  human  instrumentaUty.  2.  The  Church  of  Christ  has  a  further 
interest  in  these  far-off  sons  and  daughters  from  the  fact  that  not  only  are  they 
her  seed,  but  they  are  coming  home  to  her.  They  will  help  to  strengthen  the 
true  Church  of  God.  3.  These  far-off  ones,  who  are  being  brought  home,  will 
greatly  help  us  when  they  do  come.  Read  the  7th  verse:  "  Even  every  one 
that  is  called  by  My  name:  for  I  have  created  him  for  My  glory."  That  is  the 
kind  of  converts  that  we  want,  those  who  are  created  for  God's  glory.  "  But," 
say  some  of  the  older  friends,  "  these  young  converts  are  so  imprudent."  Bless 
them !  The  Lord  increase  their  imprudence,  for  that  is  one  of  the  grandest  things 
in  the  world  when  it  is  sanctified.  It  was  most  imprudent,  on  the  part  of  the 
Apostle  Paul,  to  go  into  those  cities  where  he  was  stoned,  and  dragged  out,  and 
left  for  dead.  It  was  most  imprudent  of  him  to  lose  aU  his  reputation  and  his 
standing  among  men  simply  that  he  might  preach  Jesus  Christ  and  Him  crucified. 
"  But,  sir,"  say  the  objectors,  "  these  young  people,  who  are  coming  into  the 
Church,  do  not  know  much."  For  the  matter  of  that,  we  do  not  know  much  either, 
so  we  cannot  keep  them  out  on  that  ground.  "  But  they  have  zeal  without 
knowledge."  Yes,  and  it  is  quite  possible  to  have  knowledge  without  zeal.  Both 
of  those  things  are  bad  when  alone;  but  if  you  have  the  knowledge,  and  they 
bring  the  zeal,  you  have  only  to  trade  with  them  a  little  in  the  way  of  barter 
to  your  mutual  benefit.     (C  H.  Spurgeon.) 

Ver.  7.  I  have  created  Tiiin  for  My  glory. — The  glory  of  Ood  the  end  of  man'* 
creation  and  redemption: — What  am  I?  For  what  purpose  was  I  created?  Am 
I  answering  the  great  end  of  my  existence? — are  questions  which  should  be  fre- 
quently proposed  by  every  rational  being.     I.   The  great  end  of  Jehovah 

IN    THE    creation    OF    MAN    WAS    THE    MANIFESTATION    OF    HiS    OWN    GLORY.       By 

the  glory  of  God  we  understand  the  display  of  His  Divine  perfections.     II.  In 

rrHE   SCHEME   OF  HUMAN   REDEMPTION   THE   GLOEY   OF   GoD   IS   AGAIN   STRIKINOLT 


CHAP,  xini.]  ISAIAH.  365 

MANIFESTED.  The  glory  of  God  appears — 1.  In  their  redemption.  2.  In  the 
application  of  its  blessings  by  the  Holy  Ghost — in  the  spiritual  renovation  of 
man.  3.  In  the  endeared  relation  into  which  those  who  have  been  thus  redeemed 
and  sanctified  are  admitted.  They  are  made  the  "  sons  and  daughters  of  the 
Lord  Almighty";  and  their  disposition  and  character  correspond  with  their 
distinguished  privileges.  HI.  The  glory  of  God  is  the  great  end  which 
ALL  THE  PEOPLE  OF  GoD  ARE  TO  SEEK  TO  PROMOTE.  1.  By  an  increased  acquaint- 
ance with  the  Divine  perfections,  as  they  are  manifested  in  the  work  of  creation 
and  redemption,  and  as  they  are  revealed  in  the  Sacred  Scriptures,  and  in  the 
person  and  character  of  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ.  2.  By  a  cordial  reception  of  all 
that  God  has  revealed  and  promised.  3.  By  cheerful  obedience  to  His  commands. 
4.  By  active  efforts  in  the  service  of  God,  and  by  an  entire  consecration  of  all 
we  have  to  Him.     (Essex  Remembrancer.) 

Ver.  10.  Ye  are  My  witnesses. — What  is  a  witness? — One  who  testifies — who 
gives  evidence,  unfolds,  clears  up,  makes  plain,  and  helps  men  to  right  decisions  in 
cases  of  disputed  claims,  or  where  personal  integrity  is  assaUed.  There  are  cases  on 
record  where  such  men  have  been  thanked  in  complimentary  terms  by  the  judge, 
for  the  clear,  firm,  straightforward  way  in  which  they  have  given  evidence;  and  it 
has  been  seen  that  but  for  that  witness's  knowledge  of  the  facts  of  the  case,  and  the 
fearless  manner  in  which  he  told  the  whole  truth,  as  far  as  he  knew,  and  nothing 
but  the  truth,  there  would  have  been  a  miscarriage  of  justice.  And  so,  on  the  other 
hand,  record  is  suppKed  of  the  false  swearing  of  witnesses,  whereby  the  innocent  have 
been  condemned  and  the  guilty  have  triumphed.  Nay  more,  where  the  witness 
has  been  full  of  nervous  fear,  confusion,  and  hesitancy,  and  has  given  his  evidence 
in  such  a  feeble,  hmping,  contradictory  manner  that  his  whole  testimony  has  been 
discredited,  and  he  has  vitally  injured  the  cause  he  professed  to  serve,  so  that  hia 
friends  sincerely  wished  he  had  been  at  the  Antipodes  at  the  time  instead  of  in  the 
witness-box.  A  good  witness  is  of  immense  value  and  importance.  The  term 
"  witness  "  is  a  strong  one,  one  of  the  strongest,  and  throbs  with  Ufe  and  energy. 
Standing  out  for  the  truth;  avowing,  declaring  firmly;  una  wed  by  fear,  unmoved 
by  flattery;  inflexible  to  all  blandishments;  above  all  price;  whom  money  cannot 
buy,  and  sophistry  cannot  disturb ;  who  will  tell  the  truth  at  any  cost — these  are 
some  of  the  qualities  of  a  good  witness.  {J.  Higgins.)  Witnesses: — The  term 
"  witnesses  "  is  very  large  and  full,  and  covers  the  entire  ground  of  evidences.  All 
things  in  heaven  and  earth  are  full  of  voices  bearing  witness  for  the  living  God.  The 
whole  universe,  human  history,  governments,  philosophy,  science,  art,  and  institu- 
tions, are  witnessing  for  God.  But  God  selects  and  addresses  one  class  in  the  text. 
"  Ye,"  men  of  Israel,  "  are  My  witnesses."  These  words  suggest  the  high  honour, 
as  well  as  the  great  responsibility,  of  a  Christian  profession.  I.  For  whom  do  tott 
WITNESS?  God.  1.  A  primary  qualification  of  a  true  witness  is,  an  intelligent  faith 
in  God.  You  are  called  upon  to  give  evidence  on  behalf  of  another,  but  you  know 
Uttle  of  him,  only  by  repute  and  inference,  and  your  knowledge  of  the  case  in  dispute 
is  mainly  circumstantial;  then,  you  cannot  give  your  evidence  in  that  clear,  ready, 
candid,  and  telling  manner  that  a  friend  can  who  knows  the  man  personally  and 
closely,  and  who  has  the  highest  regard  for  his  integrity  and  uprightness,  and  who 
is  weU  acquainted  also  with  the  whole  case  down  to  its  very  minutiae,  and  who  has 
a  clear,  settled  conviction  that  justice  and  right,  to  the  fullest  extent,  are  on  the 
side  of  his  friend.  Such  a  man  speaks  from  knowledge,  as  well  as  conviction;  he 
testifies  what  he  knows,  and  speaks  what  he  has  seen;  and  when  the  case  is  heard 
you  feel  that  your  witnessing,  compared  with  his,  is  but  as  the  drops  to  the  ocean. 
So  it  is  with  the  man  who  has  only  an  intellectual,  as  compared  with  the  man  who 
has  a  practical  knowledge  of  God;  the  latter  can  testify  from  personal  acquaintance 
as  weU  as  imbounded  faith.  2.  Not  only  is  faith  needed  to  make  you  a  successful 
witness,  but  your  courage  will  be  tested  in  this  daily  testifying.  You  are  placed  in 
a  world  whose  temper  and  principles  are  hostile  to  sacred  things,  and  while  you 
witness  for  God,  your  whole  life  will  be  a  constant  testifjdng  against  the  world's 
customs,  and  an  open  conflict  with  what  it  accounts  its  best  possessions ;  and  if  you 
will  be  a  faithful  and  true  witness  you  will  often  find  yourself  going  right  in  the 
teeth  of  its  tastes,  affections,  and  lusts,  and  you  will  discover  that  the  days  of  idol- 
atry and  martyrdom  are  not  yet  past,  and  that  if  you  will  faithfully  give  your 
evidence  for  the  pure  and  true,  you  will  need  a  hero's  courage  and  a  martyr's  faith. 
You  shall  have  your  hours  of  rest  and  sweet  communings  that  you  may  grow  strong 
to  do  and  suffer  the  Father's  will,  but  the  law  of  the  kingdom  is  that  you  must 


36G  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xlhi. 

gather  in  order  that  you  may  scatter.  The  very  things  of  which  you  are  witnesses 
will  show  you  what  you  may  expect  from  men,  and  what  they  will  demand  from  you 
in  courage  and  faith.  For  what  do  you  witness?  God — His  nature  and  claims; 
the  Bible — its  inspiration  and  authenticity;  Christ — His  atoning  sacrifice  for  sin, 
&c.  Will  such  testimonies  as  these  win  you  thanks  and  praise  from  your  fellows, 
or  will  they  scatter  roses  along  your  path?  3.  See  the  dignity  of  this  witnessing. 
"My  witnesses,  saith  the  Lord."  (1)  You  are  God's  witnesses  by  Divine  choice 
and  appointment.  (2)  By  solemn  obhgation.  Obligation  is  placed  upon  us  by  the 
very  name  we  bear  to  go  out  and  invite  others  to  the  feast.  Having  found  the  pearl 
of  great  price,  shall  we  hoard  it  up  and  not  tell  others  where  a  like  precious  gem  may 
be  found  without  impairing  our  own  riches  ?  "  Freely  ye  have  received,  freely  give." 
(3)  By  pledge  and  covenant.  Have  we  not  engaged  to  be  His  followers  and  to  do 
His  bidding?  11.  The  manneb  of  this  witnessing.  How  do  men  witness  for 
God?  1.  By  the  living  voice.  2.  By  the  eloquence  of  a  holy  life.  This  I  take  to  be 
the  most  powerful  testimony,  and  touches  the  greatest  number  of  agents.  3.  By 
active  service  in  His  cause;  and  by  His  cause  I  mean  all  and  everything  that  in  any 
way  touches  the  true  interests  of  the  great  human  family.  Then,  how  wide  the 
field  of  labour  and  service,  and  how  loud  the  call  to  the  strong,  the  hardy,  the  daring. 
Witness  for  God,  young  men,  by  deeds  of  noble  chivalry;  emulate  your  sires. 
Witness  for  God,  ye  strong  men  in  Israel,  who  stand  to-day  in  the  meridian  of  life,  by 
faithfully  devoting  all  the  energy  and  force  and  fire  of  your  being  to  His  blessed 
service.  Witness  for  God,  ye  fathers  and  mothers,  as  you  sit  in  the  pensive  shades 
of  evening,  by  recounting  His  faithfulness  to  you  throughout  your  day;  the  recital 
will  inspire  higher  hopes  of  nobler  conquests  in  the  younger  soldiers  of  the  Cross. 
4.  By  patient  resignation  when  called  to  suffer  for  the  truth.  The  prophets,  the 
apostles,  the  reformers,  the  Huguenots,  the  Covenanters,  the  men  of  the  May- 
flower, and  some  in  our  own  country  have  stood  bravely,  and  endured  their 
sufferings  nobly  when  the  fierce  tide  of  persecution  set  in  against  them.  [Ibid.) 
Witnesses  for  Christ: — I.  To  be  witness  for  Christ  is  a  special  duty  of  all 
Christians.  1.  That  is  an  unwarranted  limitation  which  practically  relegates  oral 
witness-bearing  to  the  ministry.  The  text  was  spoken  to  all  Israel  (ver.  2). 
2.  Christ  and  the  Word  of  God  claim  the  testimony  of  His  people,  humble  and  great; 
and  the  duty  has  been  recognised  and  performed.  (1)  The  case  of  the  apostles 
(Acts  i.  8,  22).  The  apostles'  acceptance  and  discharge  of  this  duty  (Acts  ii.  32, 
iii.  15,  iv.  20,  33).  In  after  years,  when  writing  their  epistles,  they  were  still  claiming 
to  be  witnesses  (1  Pet.  v.  1;  1  John  i.  2).  (2)  The  case  of  Paul.  He  was  ordained 
to  be  a  witness  (Acts  xxii.  15).  He,  therefore,  made  such  witness-bearing  the  work 
of  his  life  (Acts  xxvi.  22).  (3)  The  case  of  John  the  Baptist  (John  i.  7,  15,  32, 
V.  33).  This  witness-bearing  is  the  duty,  not  only  of  the  great,  but  also  of  the 
humble.  (4)  The  woman  of  Samaria  (John  iv.  39).  (5)  The  case  of  the  fierce 
demoniac  (Mark  v.  19).  (6)  The  command  to  every  one  (Rev.  xxii.  17).  3.  A 
query.  Have  you  been  witnessing  for  the  Lord?  II.  Effective  wiTNESS-BEARiNa. 
1.  It  is  essential  for  a  witness  to  have  some  definite  knowledge  or  experience,  and  to 
tell  it.  (1)  Previous,  therefore,  to  testifying  for  Christ,  there  must  be  an  experi- 
mental Imowledge  of  His  salvation.  (2)  A  witness  must  not  only  have  an  experi- 
ence; he  must  teU  it.  He  must  tell  it  with  the  purpose  of  convincing  others  by  his 
testimony.  This  is  not  a  difficult  duty  which  can  be  performed  only  by  the  learned 
or  the  great  or  the  wealthy,  but  one  within  the  ability  of  every  Christian,  even  the 
humblest.  (Acts  iv.  13.)  How  easy  it  is  to  tell  the  things  which  have  happened 
to  us !  How  do  men  seem  to  delight  in  telling  their  experiences !  Shall  he  alone, 
who  is  commanded  to  tell  what  "  great  things  the  Lord  hath  done  for  him,"  say  "  I 
can't,"  or  "  I  won't,"  or  "  I  am  ashamed  "?  2.  The  value  of  such  testimony  to  a 
fact.  ( 1 )  Naturally  great  and  conclusive — more  convincing  than  an  argument,  and 
the  onlj'  way  to  reach  many  minds.  (2)  Yet  altogether  dependent  upon  the  char- 
acter of  the  witness.  In  the  courts  the  question  is.  Is  the  witness  of  a  truthful 
character?  Much  more  must  the  value  of  a  Christian's  testimony  depend  upon  his 
posses.sing  a  consistent,  Cliristian  character.  3.  The  help  afforded  by  the  Holy 
Gho.st  for  effective  witness-bearing.  (1)  He  gives  courage  and  boldness  in  testifying. 
(2)  He  gives  power  and  effectiveness.  (3)  He  gives  corroborating  testimony  (John 
XV.  20,  27).  III.  The  hitmility  and  the  honour  of  a  ^\^TNESS- bearer  for  thb 
Lord.  I.  How  humble  an  appointment  must  this  have  seemed  to  the  disciples 
who,  full  of  anticipations  of  the  estabUshment  by  Christ  of  an  earthly  kingdom 
transcending  in  its  glory  the  kingdom  of  Solomon,  were  questioning  which  "  should 
be  greatest."     Not  to  be  a  governor,  or  a  judge,  or  treasurer,  but  simply  a  witnessi 


CHAP.  XMU.]  ISAIAH.  367 

Is  this  a  position  too  humble  for  you?  Do  you  look  down  upon  it?  2.  Yet  what 
glory  and  honour  belong  to  it!  Into  what  company  does  it  introduce  us  !  Of 
Christ,  the  faithful  and  true  witness;  of  the  Holy  Spirit,  who  shall  testify  of  Christ; 
of  the  apostles,  who  were  witnesses;  and  the  martjTS.  And  in  eternity  shall  those 
who  confess  Him  here  be  confessed  of  Him.  Those  who  suffer  with  Him  for  their 
testimony  shall  also  reign  with  Him  in  His  glory.  {W.  P.  Swartz.)  Ood^t 
witnesses : — I.  Some  of  thb  questions  tjpon  which  Cheistians  are  called  to 
GIVE  EVIDENCE  IN  FAvoxni  OF  THEIR  GoD.  These  questions  are  the  most  weighty 
which  can  be  discussed.  1.  One  of  the  first  is  this,  Is  there  such  a  thing  now-a-days 
as  a  distinct  interposition  of  God  on  behalf  of  man,  in  answer  to  believing  prayer? 
The  world  ridicules  the  idea.  Suppose  I  call  Mr.  George  Miiller,  of  Bristol.  He 
would  say,  "  Look  at  those  three  orphan  houses,  containing  no  less  than  one 
thousand  one  hundred  and  fifty  orphan  children,  who  are  entirely  supported  by 
funds  sent  to  me  in  answer  to  prayer.  Look,"  says  he,  "  at  this  fact,  that  when 
the  water  was  dried  up  in  Bristol,  and  the  waterworks  were  not  able  to  serve  suffi- 
cient to  the  people,  I,  with  my  more  than  a  thousand  children  dependent  upon 
me,  never  asked  any  man  for  a  drop  of  water,  but  went  on  my  knees  before  God, 
and  a  farmer,  who  was  neither  directly  nor  indirectly  asked  by  me,  called  at  my 
door  the  next  hoiu:  and  offered  to  bring  us  water;  and  when  he  ceased  because  his 
BuppUes  were  dried  up,  instead  of  telling  anybody,  I  went  to  my  God  and  told  Him 
all  about  it,  and  another  friend  offered  to  let  me  fetch  water  from  his  brook." 
Miiller  is  no  sohtary  specimen;  we  can  each  of  us  tell  of  like  events  in  our  own 
history.  2.  There  is  a  question,  also,  as  to  the  ultimate  results  of  present  affiction. 
The  world  holds  as  a  theory,  that  if  there  be  a  God,  He  is  very  often  exceedingly 
unkind;  that  He  is  severe  to  the  best  of  men,  and  that  some  men  are  the  victims 
of  a  cruel  fate;  that  they  are  greatly  to  be  pitied,  because  they  have  to  suffer  much 
without  compensating  profit.  Now,  the  Christian  holds,  first  of  aU,  that  the  woes 
of  sinners  are  punishments,  and  are  very  different  from  the  chastening  sorrows  of 
beUevers.  Of  these  last  he  beheves  that  all  things  work  together  for  good  to  them 
that  love  God.  What  is  your  testimony  with  regard  to  this  as  a  matter  of  experi- 
ence? How  have  you  found  it?  I  must  speak  for  myself,  and  say,  "  Before  I  was 
afflicted  I  went  astray,  but  now  have  I  kept  Thy  word."  "  It  is  good  for  me  that  I 
have  been  afflicted."  All  of  you,  who  have  soimded  the  deeps  of  soul-trouble,  and 
have  enjoyed  the  presence  of  Jesus,  can  distinctly  testify  the  same.  3.  A  third 
point  very  much  in  dispute  is  as  to  the  joyfulness  of  a  true  beUever's  life.  The 
world's  theory  is,  that  we  are  a  very  miserable  set  of  people  who  take  to  rehgion 
from  the  necessity  of  a  naturally  melancholy  disposition.  What  is  your  testimony. 
Christian?  Well,  we  can  say  if  we  be  melancholy,  joyous  people  must  be  very  joy- 
ful indeed.  I  saw  a  Baptist  minister  this  week  who  was  "  passing  rich  on  forty 
pounds  a  year  " ;  owing  no  man  anything.  I  told  him  I  hoped  he  would  not  die  with 
the  secret,  for  I  should  like  to  learn  the  art  of  keeping  house  on  forty  pounds  a  year. 
But  he  said  to  me,  when  I  smiled  at  his  salary,  '  You  see  before  you  the  happiest 
man  out  of  heaven  " ;  and  I  know  I  did  too,  for  his  face  showed  that  he  meant  what 
he  said.  True  godliness  is  our  natural  element  now  that  we  have  a  new  nature 
given  us  by  the  Spirit  of  God.  4.  Another  point  in  dispute  refers  to  the  moral 
tendencies  of  Christianity.  There  is  a  growing  behef  that  the  preaching  of  the 
doctrine  of  free  grace  has  a  tendency  to  make  men  think  little  of  sin,  and  that 
especially  the  free  invitations  of  the  Gospel  to  the  very  vilest  of  sinners,  and  the 
declaration  that  whoso  beheveth  in  Jesus  shall  be  saved,  has  a  tendency  to  make 
men  indulge  in  the  worst  of  crimes.  Our  testimony  is,  and  we  speak  positively 
here,  that  there  can  be  nothing  which  exerts  so  sanctifying  an  influence  upon  the 
heart  of  man,  as  the  doctrine  of  the  love  of  God  in  Christ  Jesus.  And  if  ye  seek 
proofs,  look  around.  When  do  you  hate  sin  most  ?  At  the  foot  of  the  Cross.  When 
do  you  love  hoUness  best  ?  Is  it  not  when  you  feel  that  God  has  blotted  out  your 
sins  hke  a  cloud ?  No  truth  can  so  subdue  the  human  mind  as  the  majesty  of  infinite 
love.  5.  Again,  it  has  been  whispered — nay,  it  has  been  boasted — that  the  Christian 
rehgion  has  reached  its  prime,  and  though  it  had  an  influence  upon  the  world  at  one 
time,  it  is  now  going  down,  and  we  want  something  a  little  more  juvenile  and 
vigorous  to  stir  the  world  and  produce  noble  deeds.  Now  is  the  time  for  true 
behevers  to  vindicate  the  manUness  and  force  of  their  faith.  It  is  not  true  that 
Christianity  has  lost  its  power;  and  we  must  make  this  clear  as  noonday.  The 
Gospel  can  nourish  heroes  as  of  old;  it  could  furnish  martyrs  to-morrow,  if 
martyrs  were  required  to  garnish  Smithfield.  There  are  still  a  host  of  facts  to 
prove  that  the  gospel  has  not  lost  its  power  over  the  minds  of  men.     6.  It  is  our 


368  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xun. 

daily  business  to  be  witnesses  for  God  on  another  question,  as  to  whether  or  no  faith 
in  the  blood  of  Jesus  Christ  really  can  give  calm  and  peace  to  the  mind.     Our 
hallowed  peace  must  be  proof  of  that.     7.  The  last  testimony  we  shall  probably 
bear  will  answer  the  question,  whether  Christ  can  help  a  man  to  die  well  or  not. 
We  will  prove  that  when  the  time  comes;  but  how  many  there  have  been  among  us 
whose  names  we  venerate,  who  have  died  rejoicing  in  the  love  of  Jesus.     II.  SoMB 
SUGGESTIONS  AS  TO  THE  MODE  OF  WITNESSING.     1.  You  must  witness  if  you  be  a 
Christian,     You  may  try  to  shirk  it  if  you  will,  but  you  must  witness,  for  you  are 
sub  posna:  that  is  to  say,  you  will  suffer  for  it  if  you  do  not.     2.  Every  witness 
is   required  to  speak  the  truth,   the  whole  truth,  and  nothing  but  the  truth. 
Speak  the  truth,  but  let  your  hfe  be  true  as  well  as  your  words.     Live  so  that 
you  need  not  be  afraid  to  have  the  shutters  taken  down,  that  men  may  look 
right  through  your  actions.     Tell  out  for  God  all  the  truth  as  it  is  in  Jesus, 
and  let  your  Hfe  proclaim  the  whole  teaching  of  truth.     Let  it  be  nothing  but 
the  truth.     I  am  afraid  many  Christians   tell  a   great   deal  which  is  not  true; 
their  Hfe  is  contrary  to  their  words;  and  though  they  speak  truth  with  their 
lips,  they  speak  falsehoods   with  their   hands.      Suppose,   for  instance,  I  draw 
a  miserable  face,  and  say,  "  God's  people  are  a  blessed  people,"  nobody  believes 
me;  and  if  I  say,  "  Yes,  religion  has  a  sanctifying  influence  upon  its  professors 
and  possessors,"  and  put  my  hand  into  my  neighbour's  pocket  in  any  sort  of 
way,  who  wiU  believe  my  testmony?     I  may  have  spoken  the  truth,  but  I  am  also 
speaking  something  that  is  not  the  truth,  and  I  am  thus  rendering  my  witness  of 
very  small  effect.     3.  When  the  witness  is  before  the  court,  his  direct  evidence  is 
always  the  best.     Many  professing  Christians  only  give  witness  of  what  they  have 
read  in  books ;  they  have  no  vital,  experimental  acquaintance  with  the  things  of  God. 
Second-hand  Christianity  is  one  of  the  worst  things  in  the  world.    4.  A  witness  must 
take  care  not  to  damage  his  own  case.    How  many  professed  witnesses  for  God  make 
very  telling  witnesses  the  other  way.     5.  Every  witness  must  expect  to  be  cross- 
examined.     "  He  that  is  first  in  his  own  cause,"  says  Solomon,  "  seemeth  just;  but 
his  neighbour  cometh  and  searcheth  him."     You  know  how  a  counsel  takes  a  man 
and  turns  him  inside  out,  and  though  he  was  one  colour  before,  he  looks  quite  an- 
other directly  afterwards.     Now  you,  as  God's  witnesses,  wih  be  cross-examined. 
Watch,  therefore,  carefully  watch.     Temptation  will  be  put  in  your  way:  the  devil 
will  cross-examine  you.     You  say  you  love  God;  he  will  set  carnal  joys  before  you, 
and  see  whether  you  cannot  be  decoyed  from  your  love  to  God.    You  said,  you  trusted 
in  your  heavenly  Father;  Providence  will  cross-examine  you.     A  trial  will  dash 
upon  you.     How  now?     Can  you  trust  Him?    You  said,  reUgion  was  a  joyous 
thing;  a  crushing  misfortune  will  befall  you.     How  now?    Can  you  rejoice  when 
the  fig-tree  does  not  blossom,  and  the  flocks  are  cut  off,  and  the  cattle  are  dead  ?     By 
this  species  of  examination  true  men  will  be  made  manifest,  but  the  deceiver  will  be 
detected.    What  cross-examinations  did  the  martyrs  go  through!     What  fiery 
questions  had  they  to  answer  1    HL  Theee  is  anothee  witness  beside  yox:.     "  Ye 
are  My  witnesses,  and  My  Servant  whom  I  have  chosen."    Who  is  that?    Why,  the 
Messiah,  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ.     Witnesses  for  God  are  not  soUtary.     When  they 
seem  alone,  there  is  One  with  them  whom  Nebuchadnezzar  saw  in  the  fiery  furnace 
with  the  three  holy  children.     "  The  fourth  is  like  unto  the  Son  of  God."     "  Fear 
not,"  Christ  may  well  lay  to  all  H!is  faithful  witnesses,  "  I  am  with  you,  the  faithful 
and  true  Witness."     Let  us  remark,  concerning  Christ's  hfe,  that  He  witnessed  the 
truth,  the  whole  truth,  and  nothing  but  the  truth.     Would  you  see  God's  truth? 
Observe  how  Jesus  Christ,  in  all  Hia  actions,  with  a  sacred  simphcity,  with  a  trans- 
parent sincerity,  writes  His  heart  out  in  His  every  act.     What  testimony  you  have 
to  God's  holiness  in  the  hfe  of  Christ!     In  Him  was  no  sin.     What  witness-bearing, 
too,  there  is  in  the  life  of  Christ  to  Divine  justice!     Above  all,  read  Christ's  witness 
to  God's  love.     The  entire  circumference  of  Divine  excellence  is  contained  in  the  life 
of  Christ.     You  are  to  be  witnesses  for  Christ,  and  Christ  is  to  be  a  witness  %vith  you. 
If  you  want  to  know  how  to  discharge  your  duty,  look  at  Him.     (C.  H.  Spurgeon.) 
The  church  a  testimony  for  God  to  the  world  .-—I.  It  has  ever  been  a  repositoey  op 
THE  sacred  documents — the  sacred  records  of  the  existence  of  prophecies  long  before 
the  events  to  which  they  relate,  of  which  they  can  bring  satisfactory  evidence. 
II.  Christians  by  habitually  meeting  together  for  Divine  worshtp,  for 

THE  administration  OF  THE  ORDINANCES   OF  THE  ChURCH  AND  THE  PREACHING  OF 

THE  Gospel,  are  perpetuaUy  presenting  a  witness  for  God.  III.  The  individual 
Christian  is  a  living  epistle."  {T.  Binney,  D.D.)  The  Christian's  silent 
testimony  for  Qod : — The  individual  behever,  by  mingling  with  the  world  day  by  day 


CHAP,  xuii.]  ISAIAH.  369 

— without  ever  speaking  a  word  about  religion,  it  may  be — by  what  he  is,  and  by 
what  he  does,  is  bearing  witness  for  God.  By  the  hohness  that  marks  the  man's 
life,  others  may  learn  something  of  the  holiness  of  the  God  whom  he  serves;  by  hia 
integrity,  by  his  high  appreciation  of  the  great  principles  of  eternal  justice,  he  may 
learn  something  of  the  justice  of  God;  by  the  benevolence  of  the  man,  by  the  mode 
and  kind  of  that  benevolence,  by  his  yearning  anxiety  over  the  souls  of  men  and  the 
moral  misery  of  the  species,  by  the  devotion  of  his  abihties  to  the  removal  of  these, 
by  his  benevolent  attachment  to  those  great  institutions  which  are  intended  to 
diffuse  the  knowledge  of  God's  Word,  men  may  learn  something  of  that  God  who 
would  have  all  men  to  be  saved  and  to  come  to  the  knowledge  of  the  truth ;  by  hia 
superiority  to  worldly  motives  and  things,  ajid  mere  sensual  gratifications,  by  hia 
living  above  the  world,  by  enjoying  a  blessedness  and  placidity  which  worldly  men 
can  never  penetrate,  they  may  learn  something  of  the  spirituality  of  God,  and  the 
blessedness  which  Grod  can  communicate  to  those  whom  He  makes  His  own.  {Ibid. ) 
"  Ye  are  My  witnesses  1 " — The  special  fimction  of  witness-bearing  is  not  confined 
to  the  Jewish  people;  but,  by  the  express  words  of  the  Lord,  it  is  shared  by  the 
Chiu-ch.  The  Church  and  the  Holy  Spirit  together  bear  joint  witness  to  the  death, 
resurrection,  and  eternal  life  of  the  Divine  man.  This  is  also  the  function  of  the 
individual  beUever:  not  to  argue  and  dispute,  not  to  demonstrate  and  prove,  not 
to  perform  the  part  of  the  advocate;  but  to  hve  in  direct  contact  with  things  which 
the  Holy  Ghost  reveals  to  the  pure  and  childlike  nature.  And  then  to  come  forth 
attesting  that  these  things  are  so.  Just  as  mathematical  axioms  have  no  need  to 
be  argued,  but  simply  to  be  stated,  and  the  statement  is  sufficient  to  establish  them, 
because  of  the  affinity  between  them  and  the  construction  of  the  human  mind;  so 
it  is  sufficient  to  bear  witness  to  truth,  amid  systems  of  falsehood  and  error.  And 
directly  it  is  uttered,  there  is  an  assent  in  the  conscience  illumined  by  the  Holy 
Spirit,  which  rises  up  and  declares  it  to  be  the  very  truth  of  God.  There  are  three 
points  on  which  the  Christian  soul  is  called  to  give  witness.  I.  Let  us  witness  to 
A  LOVE  THAT  NEVER  TIRES.     At  the  close  of  the  previous  chapter  we  have  a  terrible 

Eicture  of  Israel  as  a  people  robbed  and  spoiled,  snared  in  holes,  and  hid  in  prison- 
ouses;  upon  whom  God  was  pouring  the  fury  of  His  anger.  Then  most  imex- 
pectedly  God  turns  to  them,  and  says,  "  Fear  not!  thou  art  Sline;  thou  hast  been 
precious  in  My  sight,  and  honourable  and  beloved."  1.  "Thou  art  Mine."  Our 
deepest  emotions  express  themselves  in  the  simplest  words.  2.  "  Precious." 
Preciousness  is  due  to  hardships  undergone,  purchase  money  and  time  expended, 
or  pains  of  workmanship ;  and  each  of  these  three  conditions  has  been  marvellously 
exemplified  in  the  dealings  of  thy  God.  3.  "  Honourable."  Demean  thyself  as  one 
whom  God  dehghts  to  honour.  It  ill  becomes  princes  of  the  blood-royal  to  he  in 
the  gutter.  4.  "  Beloved."  In  the  darkest  hours  of  hfe,  when  thy  feet  have  almost 
gone  from  under  thee,  and  no  smi,  or  moon,  or  stars  appear,  never  doubt  that  God's 
love  is  not  less  tenacious  than  that  which  suggested  the  epitaph  on  Kingsley's 
tomb,  "  We  love;  we  have  loved;  we  will  love."  To  know  all  this,  and  to  bear 
witness  to  it;  to  attest  it  in  the  teeth  of  adverse  circumstances,  of  bitter  taunts,  and 
of  utter  desolation;  to  persist  in  the  affirmation  amid  the  cross-questioning  of  a 
cynical  age;  never  to  falter,  never  to  hsten  to  the  suggestion  of  doubt;  never  to 
allow  the  expression  of  the  face  to  suggest  that  God  is  hard  in  His  dealings — this  is 
the  mission  of  the  behever.  II.  Let  us  witness  to  a  purpose  that  never  falters. 
God  does  not  say,  "Think  of  what  was  done  yesterday";  He  goes  back  on  the 
purposes  of  eternity;  the  deeds  of  Bethlehem  and  Calvary;  the  everlasting  cove- 
nant; the  whole  trend  of  His  deaUngs  with  us.  Is  it  hkely  that  a  purpose  reaching 
back  into  the  blue  azure  of  the  past  wiU  be  hghtly  dropped  ?  It  is  om-  duty  to  bear 
witness  to  the  far-reach  of  a  purpose  that  moves  in  a  slowly-ascending  spu-al  to  its 
end.  III.  Let  us  witness  to  a  deliverance  that  never  disappoints.  We 
might  have  expected  the  verse  would  run,  "  Thou  shalt  never  pass  through  the 
waters,  or  through  the  river ;  thou  shalt  never  have  to  walk  through  the  fire !  "  But  so 
far  from  this,  it  seems  taken  as  a  matter  of  course  that  there  will  be  the  waters  and 
the  fire;  the  overflowing  floods  of  sorrow;  the  biting  flame  of  sarcasm  and  hate. 
God's  people  are  not  saved  from  trial,  but  in  it.  We  must  bear  our  testimony  to 
this  also,  that  we  may  clear  the  character  of  God  from  the  aspersions  of  the  ungodly. 
(F.  B.  Meyer,  B.A. )  Witnesses  to  God : — The  most  High  has  many  witnesses  to 
Himself.  EQs  works.  "  That  Thy  name  ie  great.  Thy  wondrous  works  declare." 
Especially  the  heavens.  They  "  declare  the  glory  of  God."  His  providential  care 
of  men.  "  He  left  not  Himself  without  witness,  in  that  He  did  good,"  &c.  The 
moral  nature  of  men.    "  Their  conscience  also  bearing  witness,"  &c.    But  His  people 

VOL.  II. — 24 


370  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  xliii. 

are  God's  conscious,  voluntary,  grateful,  affectionate,  and  effective  witnesses. 
I.  Thb  substance  and  matter  of  que  witness.  To  what  are  we  to  testify  ?  1,  To 
man's  spiritual  nature  and  destiny.  Witness  abounds  to  man's  bodily  wants,  in 
the  arrangements  for  their  supply;  to  his  social  nature,  in  the  institutions  of  civil- 
ised life;  to  his  intellectual  being,  in  books,  schools,  and  colleges;  to  his  artistic 
faculties,  in  pictuure-galleries,  museums,  &c. ;  and  alas !  to  his  evil  nature  and  habits, 
in  the  courts  of  law,  the  police  and  mihtary  forces,  &c.  It  is  the  office  of  the  Church 
in  this  world  to  testify  that  man  has  a  nature  capable  of  knowing,  loving,  and 
serving  his  heavenly  Father.  2.  To  God's  being  and  character.  3.  To  the  G^ospel 
of  Christ.  "  Ye  shall  be  witnesses  unto  Me,"  said  the  Lord  Jesus  to  His  disciples, 
before  His  ascension.  To  Christ's  person,  character,  and  doctrine.  His  people  are 
bound  to  testify.  They  whom  the  Lord  first  commissioned,  "  with  great  power 
gave  witness  to  the  resurrection  of  Christ."  It  is  the  privilege  of  Christians  to  tell 
of  the  provision  made  in  Jesus  for  the  restoration  of  men  to  the  Divine  favour  and 
image.  11.  The  mode  of  cub  witness.  How  are  God's  people  to  bear  the  witness 
required?  1.  By  speech.  2.  By  the  silent  testimony  of  the  life.  An  unworldly 
and  self-denying  life,  a  gentle  and  compassionate  spirit; — these  are  effective  methods 
of  witnessing  to  a  selfish  and  sinful  world.     III.  The  chabacter  op  oxtb.  witness. 

1.  Christians  are  competent  witnesses,  having  a  personal  and  experimental  know- 
ledge of  that  to  which  they  testify.  2.  They  are  truthful  witnesses.  Their  power 
lies  in  their  testifying  to  facts,  not  to  fables,  fictions,  fancies.  3.  They  are  consistent 
witnesses;  there  is  no  swerving  from  their  evidence;  and  there  is  an  instructive 
harmony  between  their  testimony  and  the  principles  of  their  life.  4.  They  are  bold 
and  fearless  witnesses.  Religion  is  sometimes  imfashionable  or  unpopular.  IV.  Thb 
SPHERE  OF  OUR  WITNESS.  To  whom  is  this  testimony  to  be  borne?  1.  Chris- 
tians are  called  to  be  witnesses  to  one  another;  for  mutual  edification.  2.  To 
nominal,  but  erring  and  lukewarm  disciples,  who  need  the  powerful  witness  of  a 
living  Church.  3.  To  the  unbelieving  world.  Here  is  the  vast  sphere  of  the 
Church's  labour.  Practical  lessons — 1.  Consider  the  high  honour  of  the  Christian's 
calling.  2.  Remember  the  responsibility  attaching  to  this  office.  "  Freely  ye  have 
received,  freely  give."  3.  Let  hearers  of  the  Word  receive  and  act  upon  the  witness 
that  is  borne.  What  heavier  condemnation  can  there  be  than  that  of  those  to  whom 
it  must  be  said, — "Ye  receive  not  our  witness!"  (J.  Radford  Thomson,  M.A.) 
God's  witnesses  (with  Acts  v.  32,  "We  are  witnesses"): — I.  The  witness  borne  by 
THE  Jews  is  one  of  the  most  marvellous  of  miracles.  1.  They  stood  out 
in  the  presence  of  the  whole  world;  selected,  chosen,  taught,  disciplined,  separate. 

2.  They  were  the  recipients  of  the  traditions  of  God.  To  them  was  entrusted  the 
sacred  law,  the  symbolical  representation  of  God's  attributes,  purposes,  and  good- 
ness. 3.  They  were  the  mediums  of  prophecy.  Through  them  the  Divine  Will  was 
heard  speaking  in  accents  of  warning,  mercy,  and  love.  II.  The  Gentile  Church 
was  appointed  to  develop,  carry  on,  and  complete  the  work  begun  by  the 
Jews.  The  work  entrusted  to  them  is  of  infinite  importance.  1.  The  Church  is 
God's  candlestick  in  the  midst  of  our  evil  and  dark  world.  It  bestows  the  radiance 
of  everlasting  light  on  all  around.  2.  The  Church  is  God's  sun,  that  warms  the  dead 
and  cold  hearts  of  men  into  life.  National  fife  would  freeze  into  eternal  death  were 
it  not  for  this  agency.  3.  The  Church  is  the  salt  of  the  earth,  keeping  it  from  moral 
putrefaction.  Society  would  rot  without  this  antiseptic  influence.  (HomUist.) 
Anthropomorphism: — Granting  that  there  is  a  Divine  Being  of  whom  we  can  at 
best  know  exceedingly  little,  we  have  nothing  to  draw  upon  for  our  conceptions  of 
Hjm  but  the  best  and  highest  of  the  phenomena  of  the  universe  within  reach  of  our 
observation;  and  we  have  no  language  in  which  to  express  our  conceptions  but  that 
which  is  more  or  less  anthropomorphic.  And  it  is  not  only  necessary  to  do  this  in 
order  to  satisfy  our  natural  aspirations,  but  it  is  eminently  becoming  so  to  do.  For 
it  accords  best  with  the  demands  of  reason,  and  also  with  our  instincts  of  piety 
and  reverence.  Anthropomorphic  conceptions  of  God  are  not  therefore  necessarily 
false  because  they  are  anthropomorphic;  nor  are  they  necessarily  false  because 
they  are  very  inadequate.  They  may  be  true  as  far  as  they  go,  and  may  be  trusted 
provisionally  till  more  light  and  wider  experience  enable  us  to  reUnquish  them 
for  truer  conceptions.  It  is  very  important  to  this  argument  to  keep  continually 
before  our  minds  the  fact  of  man's   superiority  and   supremacy  over  the  whole 

Eortion  of  the  universe  within  human  ken.  With  all  its  grandeur  and  glory  and 
enignant  power,  we  put  the  sun  lower  in  the  scale  of  being  than  the  poor,  frail 
man  who  owes  his  life  and  all  its  blessings  to  its  heat  and  Lght.  And  why  is  this, 
if  not  because  we  have  found  no  trace  in  the  sun  of  consciousness  or  intellect;  still 


CHAP,  sxm.]  ISAIAH.  371 

less  of  affection  and  moral  sense?  1.  Man's  superiority  over  other  animals  is 
admitted  to  consist  chiefly  in  the  comparatively  enormous  preponderance  of  his 
reasoning  faculties — which  have  at  length  given  rise  to  articulate  language,  to 
literature  and  to  abstract  reasoning,  to  say  nothing  of  the  infinite  variety  and 
number  of  skilful  inventions.  2.  Man  is  also  distinguished  from  the  lower  animals 
by  the  possession  of  a  moral  sense,  which  means  not  a  mere  category  of  things 
which  he  may,  and  of  things  which  he  may  not,  do,  but  a  sense  that  he  is  bound 
to  do  what  is  beUeved  to  be  right  and  because  it  is  right,  even  though  he  may  not 
personally  benefit  by  it.  3.  Man  is  distinguished  by  the  capacity  for  an  altogether 
nobler  affection  than  that  usually  manifested  by  the  other  animals.  It  is  true, 
they  share  with  us  the  possession  of  sexual  and  parental  and  sometimes  of  social 
love,  and  under  the  influence  of  domestication  are  capable  of  the  purest  and  most 
devoted  friendships,  both  for  man  and  for  their  fellow-creatures;  but  man  is  capable 
of  the  highest  known  form  and  degree  of  love,  and  has  manifested  heroic  devotion 
for  his  feUow-man  such  as  no  animals  have  ever  shown.  4.  Man  is  by  nature 
rehgious,  and  though  he  himself  is  the  noblest  being  on  earth,  yet  he  persists  in 
believing  in  some  One  infinitely  higher  than  himself,  to  whom,  in  some  yet  un- 
definable  way,  he  and  all  creatures  owe  their  being,  on  whose  bounty  all  things 
depend,  whose  will  it  is  the  main  duty  of  fife  to  discover  and  obey,  and 
who  is  conscious  of  our  heart's  reverence  and  love.  That  man  pictvu-es 
to  himself  a  God  proves  one  of  two  things;  either  that  he  is,  in  this  particular, 
inferior  or  superior  to  the  other  animals.  If  there  be  a  God,  corresponding 
however  imperfectly  with  man's  ideal,  then  it  is  a  mark  of  superiority 
to  have  imagined  one;  but  if  there  be  no  God,  it  is  a  mark  of  inferiority  to  have 
made  such  a  frightful  departme  from  the  truth,  to  have  committed  such  a  blunder. 
So  long  as  external  nature  was  regarded  as  superior,  it  was  natural  and  rational 
for  man  to  conceive  of  the  forms  or  forces  of  nature  as  deities.  But  when  the 
superiority  of  man  dawned  upon  the  human  mind,  by  reason  of  its  own  progress 
in  knowledge  and  goodness,  then  the  symbols  of  deity  were  no  longer  to  be  drawn 
from  the  outer  world,  but  from  man  himself,  his  reason,  his  conscience,  and  his 
heart.  Why?  Because  these  were  the  highest  forms  of  existence  known  to  him. 
So  it  must  be  Anthropomorphism  or  Atheism.  Make  what  provision  he  will  mentally, 
make  what  concessions  to  his  own  conscious  infirmity,  make  what  margin  of  error 
for  inevitable  ignorance,  his  God  must  be  hke  himself.  So  far  like  as  to  think, 
and  to  know  and  to  be  capable  of  communion  and  affection  with  those  who  seek 
His  face.  Only  let  us  beware  of  rushing  into  the  opposite  error  of  supposing  that 
the  most  perfect  man  that  evre  hved  is  good  enough  or  great  enough  to  be  a  perfect 
representation  of  God,  who  is  as  far  above  the  "  brightest  and  best  of  the  sons 
of  the  morning "  as  the  heavens  are  higher  than  the  earth.  There  are  grave 
diflSculties  in  the  moral  government  of  the  world;  in  fact,  if  this  world  be  the  end 
of  existence  for  many  living  creatures,  men  included,  there  would  be  much  to 
shock  our  moral  sense  and  lead  us  to  impute  either  imbecility  or  criminal  injustice 
to  the  Author  and  Governor  of  the  world.  Now,  we  have  two  means  of  surmounting 
these  difficulties,  but  only  through  Anthropomorphism.  (1)  There  is  the  con- 
science which  behevers  in  God  regard  as  having  a  Divine  authority — not  to  lay 
down  specific  rules  for  conduct,  but  to  give  supreme  sanction  to  the  claims  of 
duty  when  perceived.  We  naturally  attribute  conscience,  or  a  reverence  for  the 
right,  to  the  Author  and  Lord  of  our  consciences;  and  this  is  absolutely  essential 
to  our  conception  of  God.  This  is  one  help  to  us  in  facing  the  moral  difficulties 
of  the  world.  It  gives  us  time.  It  enables  us  to  say,  "  Shall  not  the  Judge  of  all 
the  earth  do  right?  "  (2)  The  other  help  is  that  man  in  his  best  estate  perceives 
the  superiority  of  goodness  over  happiness,  knows  also  by  experience  how  many 
of  the  noblest  blessings  come  to  us  disguised  as  pain  and  trouble  and  even  sin; 
moreover,  he  knows  full  well  that  he  would  never,  if  he  could  help  it,  inflict  any 
pain  or  injury  upon  any  creature  but  for  its  own  ultimate  good,  whUe  he  would 
put  himself  to  the  greatest  pain  in  inflicting  it  upon  others  if  he  saw  no  other  way 
of  securing  that  final  good.  Now,  piety  and  reverence  enable  us  to  project  this 
goodness  of  heart  into  the  ideal  world,  and  to  attribute  to  God  the  same  inflexible 
devotion  to  the  well-being  of  His  creatures,  and  to  be  assured  that  God  has  resources 
of  which  we  know  nothmg,  whereby  the  inequaHties  and  injustice  of  the  present 
order  wiU  one  day  be  fully  justified  by  the  end  achieved.  And  when  confronted 
by  the  reproach  of  Anthropomorphism,  our  only  reply  can  be,  "  Do  you  think  Grod 
can  possibly  be  below  the  highest  moral  standard  of  His  creatm-es  ?  "  "As  the 
heavens  are  higher  than  the  earth,  so  are  His  ways  higher  than  our  ways  tind  His 


372  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  xt.ttt. 

thoughts  than  our  thoughts."     (C.  Voysey,  M.A.)         Witnesses  for  Ood  • — "  Ye," 
men  of  Judah,  people  of  Israel,  "  are  My  witnesses  " — witnesses  that  I  am,  and 
witnesses  of  what  I  am.     The  nations  round  about  you  worship  idols.     All  the 
world  hath  corrupted  itself,  and  gone  astray,  and  worships  and  serves  the  creatures 
more  than  the  Creator.     For  more  than  a  thousand  years  ye  have  been  My  witnesses. 
Such  is  the  force  and  import  of  our  text.     But  Gfod  has  other  witnesses  likewise. 
"  The  invisible  things  of  Him,  even  His  eternal  power  and  Godhead,  are  clearly 
seen,   being  revealed  by  the   things  which  He  hath  made."     We  call  on  you, 
young  Englishmen  and  Englishwomen,  for  your  own  soids'  sake,  for  yoiu:  country's 
sake,  and  for  the  world's  sake,  to  become  witnesses  for  God.     In  order  to  which 
these  three   things  are  necessary — I.  The  knowledge  of  God.     If  you  would 
know  Ham  you  must  study  the  Book  in  which  He  is  revealed,     tl.  Strong  faith 
IN  God  and  in  His  Christ.    Moses  could  not  have  witnessed  for  God  as  he  did, 
nor  could  Paul,  nor  Peter,  without  such  faith.     The  morals  and  practices  and 
spirit  of  our  age  render  a  deep  and  abiding  faith  essential  to  a  stable  and  successful 
witnessing  for  God.     Now,  such  faith  you  cannot  have  by  merely  wishing  to  have 
it,  or  by  sighing  after  it.     It  is  born  of  hght,  and  nursed  in  Ught.     To  be  of  the 
highest,  truest,  strongest  order,  it  must  be  both  of  the  intellect  and  of  the  heart. 
III.  A  whole-hearted  decision  fob  God.     "  Be  a  whole  man  in  everything," 
said  Joseph  John  Gurney  to  his  son, — "  a  whole  man  in  the  playground  and  a 
whole  man  in  the  schoolroom."     We  must  be  whole  men  in  our  witnessing  for 
God,  not  two-minded  but  one-minded,  the  conscience  not  divided  from  the  will, 
and  the  will  not  divided  from  the  conscience ;  the  hps  not  divided  from  the  heart, 
nor  the  heart  from  the  lips,  nor   the   hands  from  either.     Vacillation  and  half- 
heartedness  will  make  our  testimony  of  none  effect.     There  need  be  no  roughness 
or  ruggedness  of  character  in  order  to  all  this;  Jesus  was  very  gentle.     The  Christian, 
full    of  faith   and   of   the   Holy    Ghost,    cannot    be   hid.    (J.    Kennedy,    D.D.) 
Witnesses  for  Ood: — I.  To  His  truth.     They  know  His  truth;  they  have  felt  His 
truth;  they  maintain  His  truth  against  all  opposition.     His  Word  is  truth,  as 
Jesus  Himself  declared ;  and  all  God's  people,  in  all  ages,  are  witnesses  to  His  truth. 
It   is   a  remarkable   fact,   but  it  cannot   be  denied,  that  wherever  the  truth  of 
Scripture  hath  taken  hold  of  a  man's  heart,  in  whatever  part  of  the  world  he  may 
live,  he  entertains  concerning  the  Scripture  the  very  same  opinion  that  his  brother 
or  sister  does  in  another  part  of  the  world.     We  all  set  to  oujt  seal,  as  we  read  this 
Book,  that  God  is  certainly  true.     11.  To  the  power  of  His  grace.     You,  as 
witnesses,  say,  "  Come  and  hear,  all  ye  that  fear  God,  and  I  will  tell  you  what  He  hath 
done  for  mysoul."  III.  To  the  exercise  of  Hjs  gracious  providence.   ( W.  Curling, 
M.A.)        Ood's  witnesses  summoned  to  testify  to  the  world: — There  is  one  important 
respect  in  which  all  objects  in  the  universe,  from  the  atom  to  the  archangel,  unite — 
all  are"  witnesses  "  for  God.     The  visible  reveals  the  Invisible.     I.  The  Church  of 
God  is  specially  designed  to  be  His  witness  to  the  world.     The  Jewish 
Church  was  designed  for  this ;  a  local  stationary  witness.     Look  at  its  geographical 
position;  it  was  central.     Judaea  was  situated  at  the  top  of  the  Mediterranean, 
and,  like  the  sim  in  the  centre  of  the  solar  system,  it  was  always  in  the  sight?  of  the 
nations.     Zion,  like  the  Pharos  of  the  world,  was  always  flinging  its  light  over 
the  gross  darkness  of  heathenism.     When  the  fulness  of  time  was  come  the  Chris- 
tian Church  was  set  up  for  the  purpose  of  Christ  its  Founder.     Jehovah  said,  "  I 
have  given  him  for  a  witness  to  the  people."     He  was  the  image  of  the  invisible 
God.      He  selected  men — His  disciples — for  the  same  purpose  to  be  witnesses 
for  God.    II.  The  Church  in  every  age  has  prospered  or  declined  in  pro- 
portion AS  it  has  fulfilled  this  mission.  1.      The  period  of  its  first  and  greatest 
activity  was  the  season  of  its  greatest  prosperity.     The  banners  of  the  Cross  flloated 
over  the  altars  of  idolatry,  and  caused  it  to  triumph  in  every  place.     2.  The  cessation 
of  its  activity  was  the  cessation  of  its  prosperity.     Witness  the  dark  ages  under 
the   influence   of  'a   corrupt   Christianity,  a  Christianity   heathenised   by  Rome. 
3.  Every  return  of  the  Church  to  its  missionary  activity  has  been  Divinely  blessed. 
III.  Its  motives  and  its  responsibility  for  fulfillino  its  mission  are  greater 
Kow  THAN  EVER.     The  first  witnesses  for  Christ  required  no  higher  motive  for  duty 
than  the  command  of  the  risen  Lord.     He  gave  the  command,  and  they  went  forth. 
But  whilst  there  is  the  same  necessity  for  witnessing  now  as  then,  the  wants  of  the 
world  are  more  vu-gent.     The  map  of  the  world  in  the  days  of  the  disciples  was 
only  as  a  map  of  a  province  compared  to  that  which  lies  open  to  us.     Look  at  it. 
What  a  fearful  expanse  of  darkness  aroimd,  and  that  darkness  how  dense !     What 
hideous  enormities  does  it  conceal!     By  a  very  shght  eflort  of  the  imagination 


CHAP,  xun.]  ISAIAH.  373 

we  can  cause  the  hosts  of  evil  to  pass  before  us.  First  come  the  Jews  out  of  all 
nations  under  heaven,  each  one  with  a  "  veU  over  his  heart,"  and  stained  with 
the  blood  of  the  Just  One.  Next,  nominal  Christians  by  myriads.  Then  comea 
the  crescent  of  impostiu:e,  followed  by  Turkey  and  Persia.  This  reminds  us  of 
another  inducement,  the  testimony  of  the  Gospel  is  Divinely  adapted  to  them. 
Each  member  of  the  Church  should  feel  a  solemn  impression  that  he  is  a  witness 
for  Grod.  In  connection  with  this  there  should  be  a  heart-unity  between  all  witnesses, 
and  a  spirit  of  self-sacrificing  liberality.  (J.  Harris,  D.D.)  The  witness  of  con- 
sistency : — "  Early  in  this  year,"  says  a  Canon  of  our  Church,  a  recent  traveller  in 
India,  "  I  stood  by  the  side  of  one  of  our  missionaries  while  he  preached  to  a  crowd  of 
natives  in  one  of  the  largest  cities  in  our  Indian  Empire.  I  shall  never  forget  the  rapt 
attention  with  which  he  was  listened  to  up  to  a  certain  point.  But  all  at  once  the  eyes 
that  had  been  so  keenly  fixed  upon  him  were  withdrawn,  and  the  men  exchanged 
Bcomful  smiles  and  murmiirs,  and  shook  their  heads  in  doubt,  and  I  inquired  the 
cause  of  this  sudden  change  of  demeanour,  and  was  told  that  the  preacher  had 
been  describing  the  visible  fruits  of  conversion  to  God.  He  had  described  the 
Christian  as  temperate,  chaste,  forgiving  and  forbearing,  pure  in  heart  and  in  Ufe. 
But  this  was  too  much  for  his  hearers.  They  saw  Christians  day  by  day,  and  their 
observations  gave  the  he  to  it,  and  they  turned  away  from  the  preaching  of  the 
Word."  A  native  of  high  character  and  education  in  another  city  said  to  the 
same  clergyman,  "  Let  Christians  only  practise  one-tenth  of  what  they  profess 
and  India  would  soon  be  converted.  What  we  want  from  you  is  not  more  Chris- 
tianity, but  more  Christians."  {Church  of  England  Pvlpit.)  Practical  witnessing 
for  Ood: — William  Ewart  Gladstone,  while  at  Eton,  attended  a  dinner  at  which 
an  indecent  toast  was  proposed.  When  all  the  others  rose  to  drink  it  he  turned 
his  glass  upside-down,  and  remained  seated,  burying  his  face  in  his  hands.  Keith 
Falconer  kept  hung  on  the  wall  of  his  room  at  Harrow  a  roll  of  texts  which  told 
every  one  quietly,  yet  distinctly,  on  whose  side  he  was.  {Sunday  School  Chronicle.) 
Ood^s  witnesses  often  inconsistent: — The  world  not  only  does  not  believe  us,  but 
does  not  beheve  that  we  omrselves  believe  what  we  say.  I  remember  a  very  striking 
circumstance  which  a  neighbouring  minister  mentioned  to  me  in  proof  of  this. 
There  was  in  the  town  in  which  he  preached  a  determined  and  avowed  infidel, 
believing  in  neither  Christianity  nor  God.  He  saw  this  man  one  Sunday  evening 
in  the  place  of  worship.  He  was  preaching  on  some  of  the  great  verities  of  the 
faith,  and  the  duties  resulting  therefrom.  As  he  was  the  next  morning  passing 
the  door  of  the  man,  he  was  standing  at  it.  He  said:  "I  saw  you  at  worship  last 
night,  and  was  rather  surprised  to  see  you  there,  because  you  doa't  believe  what 
I  Wfis  saying"  "No,"  says  he;  "nor  you  either."  "Indeed!"  "No.  Why, 
if  I  were  to  believe  the  things  you  affirm  to  be  true,  which  you  set  forth,  and  which 
are  written  in  your  books,  I  should  not  know  how  to  contain  myself;  I  should  feel 
their  importance  so  much  that  I  should  exhibit  them  wherever  I  went;  I  should 
not  know  how  to  hold  in  the  enthusiasm  which  they  would  excite.  But  I  don't 
believe  them,  nor  do  you,  or  you  woiild  be  very  different  people  from  what  you 
are."  {T.  Binney. )  The  value  of  personal  testimony  : — Many  years  ago  now,  before 
the  Australian  goldfields  were  opened,  a  party  of  experts  were  sent  up  the  country 
to  explore  the  district  and  report  on  the  probabihty  of  gold  being  found  there. 
They  made  their  siurvey,  sent  in  their  report,  gave  it  as  their  opinion  that  gold 
would  be  found,  that  there  were  "  auriferous  steata,"  &c.,  but  somehow  or  other 
no  one  was  greatly  interested.  Nobody  disputed  their  conclusions,  and  nobody 
acted  on  them.  But  some  time  after,  one  market  day,  some  shepherd  lads  came 
down  to  Melboimtte  from  the  bush  with  some  lumps  of  yellow  ore  in  their  pockets. 
"  Why,"  said  those  to  whom  they  showed  it,  "  that's  gold!  Where  did  you  get 
it?  "  "  Oh!  "  said  they,  "  we  got  it  up  country;  there's  plenty  of  it  up  our  way." 
Next  morning  there  was  a  stampede — everyone  that  could  raise  a  cart  was  off  to 
the  diggings.  Now,  my  brother,  you  may  not  be  able  to  preach,  but  does  your 
life  show  that  you  have  got  the  nuggets?    {E.  W.  Moore.) 

Ver.  11.  I,  even  I,  am  the  Lord. — Royal  proclamation: — I.  The  object  oi"  otjr 
WORSHIP.  The  heavenly  majesty  asserted  by  Himself.  "  I  am  the  Lord."  A  self- 
existent  Being,  contrasted  with  idols — dwelling  in  His  own  eternity,  independent, 
everlastingly  immutable,  the  eternal  Jehovah.  Mark  how  this  glorious  self- 
existent  Being  is  subject  to  none,  exists  in  Himself,  the  source  of  all  being,  and 
subject  to  no  other  beings.  Shall  we,  for  a  moment,  trifle  in  the  presence  of  such 
a  being?     If  I  look  a  Uttle  further  at  this  glorious  self -existing  Being,  as  revealed 


374  TEE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xun. 


in  His  Word,  I  find  Him  manifesting  Himself  as  sanctity  itself  inherent.  Therefore, 
again  and  again.  He  says  to  Israel  of  old,  "  I  will  be  sanctified  before  all  people  " ;  and 
again,  "  Sanctify  the  Lord  God  in  your  hearts."  Moreover,  this  glorious  self-existent 
Being,  this  source  of  aU  being,  and  subject  to  none  either  in  heaven  or  in  earth, 
has  made  Himself  known  in  the  attribute  of  holiness  by  solemn  oath.  "  I  have 
sworn  by  My  holiness  that  I  will  not  lie  unto  David."  Moreover,  if  we  pause  to 
think  of  His  glorious  attributes,  all  of  them  are  expressly  supernatural,  transcend- 
ently  glorious,  and  Divine.  Advance  a  step  farther,  to  notice  the  veneration 
and  adoration  to  be  given  to  this  glorious  Being  in  His  Trinity  of  Persons.  The 
glorious  self-existent  Being  is  sovereign  over  all  worlds.  II.  The  EXCLUSrvB 
CLAIM  TO  THE  PREROGATIVE  OF  BErNG  A  Saviour.  "  Bcsidcs  Me  there  is  no  Saviour." 
Some  men  make  a  Saviour  of  their  priest.  Some  of  their  alms  and  their  doings. 
Some  will  make  a  part  Saviour  of  Christ,  and  a  part  saviour  of  their  own  doings 
and  repentings  and  believings,  and  they  lose  both,  and  must  be  despised  as 
neutralists.  But  "  Beside  Me,"  the  Eternal  God  the  Lord,  "  there  is  no  Saviour." 
It  was  the  Father's  purpose  of  love  that  ordained  salvation.  Then,  Christ,  as  a 
Saviour,  received  salvation  to  centre  entirely  in  Himself.  This  salvation  is  by 
the  Holy  Ghost.  Mark  the  imity  of  all  the  Divine  Persons  in  this  salvation,  which 
is  exclusive.  There  is  po  other  Saviour,  consequently  no  salvation  but  in  our 
covenant  God-     (J.  Irons.) 

Ver.  13.  I  will  work,  and  who  shall  let  it  ? — Salvation  through  judgment : — The 
words  (ver.  13)  intimate  that  the  salvation  foretold  comes  in  the  way  of  judgment. 
Jehovah  will  effectually  intervene;  and  when  He  does  this,  who  can  turn  it  back, 
80  that  it  shall  not  be  done?  (F.  Dditzsch,  D.D.)  A  great  work: — I.  Thb 
Worker  and  the  work  to  be  done.  The  worker  is  God  Himself.  He  "  worketh 
ail  things  after  the  counsel  of  His  own  will."  And  the  work  which  He  hath  purposed 
with  regard  to  the  salvation  of  His  people  is  to  gather  together  ia  one  the  children 
of  God  which  are  scattered  abroad.  There  are,  however,  subordinate  workers 
whom  God  employs  for  this  purpose — ministers  of  the  Gospel,  whose  chief  work 
lies  in  the  endeavour  to  win  souls  to  Christ,  who  are  called  labourers  together 
with  God — workers  together  with  Him;  and  it  is  theirs  to  preach  the  Word,  the 
substance  of  which  Word  is  Christ — to  invite  sinners  to  Christ  by  showing  His 
excellency  and  dignity  as  the  Son  of  God,  His  tenderness  and  sympathy  as  the 
Son  of  man — by  showing  to  sinners  the  perfection  of  His  redeeming  work.  But 
as  ministers  are  fellow-workers  together  with  God  by  virtue  of  their  office,  so 
may  private  Christians  be.  II.  The  field  of  work.  God's  field  of  labour 
is  everywhere.  His  object  is  to  gather  His  people  together  who  are  still  lying 
in  darkness  and  sin.  For  this  glorious  end  He  employs  various  means.  His 
means  are  directed  particularly  to  individuals.  III.  The  centre  in  whom  thb 
work  is  complete.  This,  in  one  word,  is  Christ.  It  is  the  simple  knowledge 
of  a  dependence  upon  Christ's  person  by  which  God  works  out  His  purpose  of 
salvation.  But  I  should  not  be  preaching  to  you  the  whole  counsel  of  God  if  I 
omitted  to  put  before  you  also  the  side  of  your  responsibility.     (J.  W.  Reeve,  M.A.) 

Ver.  19.  Behold,  I  will  do  a  new  thing. — The  future  better  than  the  -past: — 
How  dear  to  the  heart  of  the  Israelites  was  the  remembrance  of  the  nation's 
deliverance  from  Egypt  and  their  journey  to  the  Land  of  Promise!  To  tliose 
great  events  the  religious  teachers  of  the  people  continually  turned  for  illustrations 
and  proofs  of  God's  greatness  and  power  and  goodness  and  love.  From  this  well 
used  and  familiar  store  of  imagery  the  figurative  expressions  of  the  text  are  derived. 
Dropping  the  figures  out  of  sight  for  a  moment,  we  may  say  this  is  a  gracious  pro- 
mise of  suitable  help  and  supply,  even  under  circumstances  most  difficult  and 
precarious.  It  is  intended  as  an  encouragement  to  repentance  and  to  renewed 
consecration  to  God.  It  is  the  old  message  that  God  will  give  to  all  who  look  to 
Him  everything  that  is  requisite  for  spiritual  progress  and  success.  In  presence 
of  every  untried  enterprise;  on  the  threshold  of  every  unknown  experience;  in  the 
hearing  of  every  Divine  call,  this  promise  floats  as  a  banner  before  the  soldier's 
eye,  and  rings  as  the  sound  of  a  trumpet  rings  upon  the  soldier's  heart.  (T. 
Stephenson.)  ''A  new  thing" :— I.  This  messenger  of  God  proclaims,  and  he 
may  be  regarded  as  in  this  respect  representing  all  God's  messengers  of  grace  to 
the  world,  "  Look  not  on  the  former  things  " — hsten  not  now,  in  these  moments  of 
penitence  and  prayer,  to  those  threatening  voices  which  tell  of  an  inexorable  law 
of  repetition,  of  the  relentless  working  out  of  a  foregone  conclusion  and  appointed 


CHAP,  xuoi.]  ISAIAH.  375 

destiny — old  things  may  pass  away,  all  things  may  become  new.  "  Behold,  I  will 
do  a  new  thing!  "  2.  This  "  new  thing,"  in  the  instance  before  us,  is  compared 
with  the  opening  of  a  path  in  the  wilderness,  and  the  supply  of  rivers  of  waters  in 
the  desert.  The  pathless  wilderness  of  the  future  is  before  us — no  foot  has  trodden 
it, — it  is  beset  by  unknown  difficulties  and  unseen  perils;  but  even  their  God  will 
make  a  way,  a  road  upon  which  His  people  shall  travel  in  security  and  with  unerring 
certainty  to  their  appointed  destination.  And  although  the  heat  of  the  sym.  may 
beat  fiercely  down  upon  that  path,  drying  up  every  particle  of  moisture  and  con- 
suming all  pleasant  vegetation,  so  that  it  may  seem  most  unlikely  that  life  can 
be  sustained  in  the  journey  across  such  an  arid  waste,  God  can  and  will  provide 
all  that  is  needed;  and  rivers  of  water,  an  abundant  and  continuous  supply,  shall 
be  found  there.  Preparation  and  guidance!  These  are  the  ideas  involved  in  the 
promise  to  make  a  path.  Difficulty,  peril,  privation!  These  are  the  thoughts 
which  associate  themselves  with  the  desert  and  the  wilderness.  {Ibid.)  The 
new  thing  : — This  doing  a  new  thing  is  the  very  achievement  which  many  voices 
of  high  authority  are  assuring  us,  just  now,  is  impossible  with  God-  The  power 
that  carries  on  the  universe,  they  tell  us,  never  does  a  "  new  thing."  What  seems 
to  us  the  new  is  only  the  old  reveaUng  itself  in  an  unexpected  way.  Continuity 
is  the  law  that  governs  all  things.  It  is  the  language  of  those  whose  symbol  of 
deity  is  an  interrogation  mark,  or  the  sign  for  an  unknown  quantity,  or  a  fetter, 
as  they  may  happen  to  prefer.  It  is  a  phase  of  thought  by  no  means  modem, 
although  sometimes  imagined  to  be  such.  It  never  fovmd  more  telling  expression 
anywhere  than  at  the  lips  of  one  who  flourished  a  thousand  years  before  Christ, 
more  or  less,  and  who  put  it  thus:  "  The  thing  that  hath  been,  it  is  that  which 
shall  be ;  and  that  which  is  done  is  that  which  shall  be  done,  and  there  is  no  new 
thing  under  the  sun.  Is  there  anything  whereof  it  may  be  said.  See,  this  is  new?  " 
I  suggest  that  we  take  up  the  ancient  challenge.  I  wHl  mention  some  of  the  ways 
in  which  Christ  may  be  said  to  have  broken  in  upon  the  monotony  and  uniformity 
of  human  life  and  thought  with  something  new.  He  brought  us — I.  A  new  ukb- 
NESS  OF  God.  II.  The  truth  about  the  foeqiveness  op  sins.  m.  A  new 
HOPE.     {W.  R.  Huntington,  D.D.) 

Ver.  20.  The  beast  of  the  field  shall  honour  Me. — Hope  respecting  the  profanest 
persons : — I  have  sometimes  laid  hold  of  this  text,  and  have  been  comforted  by 
it  concerning  the  conversion  of  the  very  worst  of  men.  Some  people  say,  "  What 
is  the  good  of  going  among  blasphemers  and  profane  persons  with  the  Word  of 
God?  "  Well,  if  the  beast  of  the  field,  and  the  dragons,  and  the  owls  shall  honour 
Him,  we  need  never  think  of  leaving  any  of  the  sons  of  men  to  perish.  It  is  not 
what  they  are,  but  what  God  is,  that  should  give  us  confidence  concerning  them. 
{C.  H.  Spurgeon.) 

Ver  21.  This  people  have  I  formed  for  Myself. — The  altering  of  GocTs  purpose- 
It  is  the  burden  of  the  Book  of  Deuteronomy  that  God  chose  the  seed  of  Abraham 
to  be  a  pecuhar  nation  unto  Himself  above  all  peoples  on  the  face  of  the  earth. 
Those  two  words  "  people  "  and  "  inheritance  "  are  perpetually  hnked  together 
in  the  Bible.  Jehovah's  design  is  clearly  declared  in  the  significant  passage — 
"  They  shall  show  forth  My  praise."  By  a  long  process  of  careful  training  it  was 
His  intention  so  to  form  the  people  that  their  history  should  turn  men's  thoughts 
to  the  glory  and  beauty  of  His  own  nature,  and  eUcit  perpetual  adoration  and 
praise.  On  three  separate  occasions  they  thwarted  Jehovah.  They  came  nigh 
imto  cursing  instead  of  praising.  They  gave  men  false  conceptions  of  His  character. 
And  on  three  separate  occasions  they  had  to  learn  the  temporary  suspension  and 
postponement  of  His  purpose.  1.  In  the  wUdemess  they  murmured  against 
Him,  and  were  sent  back  to  wander  in  the  waste  for  forty  years.  2.  After  nine- 
teen kings  had  ruled  from  David's  throne,  they  were  exiled  to  Babylon  for  seventy 
years.  3.  Since  the  rejection  of  the  Beloved  Son,  they  have  been  driven  into  all 
the  world  to  be  a  by-word  and  a  proverb.  For  years  God's  purpose  has  been  under 
arrest.  It  shall,  no  doubt,  be  ultimately  fulfilled.  This  change  of  purpose  on  the 
part  of  God  has  been  the  opening  of  the  door  for  us;  and  the  words  which  were 
originally-  addressed  to  Israel  are  now  applicable  to  ourselves.  By  the  lips  of  the 
apostles  Paul  and  Peter  we  are  told  that  Jesus  gave  Himself  for  us,  to  redeem  us 
and  to  purify  us  imto  Himself,  a  people  for  His  own  possession;  so  that  we  are  an 
elect  race,  a  royal  priesthood,  a  holy  nation,  a  people  for  God's  own  possession, 
that  we  may  show  forth  the  praises  of  Him  who  called  us  out  of  darkness  into  His 


376  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xun. 


marvellous  light.     We  are  what  we  are,  that  we  may  show  forth  God's  praises  ;  but 
if  we  fail  to  reahse  His  ideal,  for  us,  too,  there  will  be  the  inevitable  postponement 
of  His  purpose.     I.  The  fttrposb  of  God.     "  That  they  should  show  forth  My 
praise."     We  may  promote  God's  praise  by  suffering,  as  much  as  by  active  service. 
In  every  life  there  are  three  regions.     That  of  the  light,  where  duty  is  clearly  defined ; 
that  of  the  dark,  where  wrong  is  no  less  clearly  marked;  and  a  great  borderland 
of  twilight,  where  there  is  no  certainty,  where  dividing  lines  are  not  distinct,  and 
where  each  man  must  be  fully  persuaded  for  himself.     It  is  here,  however,  that 
the  temper  of  the  soul  is  tested.     II.  The  possible  thwarting  of  His  PtTRPOSE. 
"  Ye  shall  know  the  revoking  of  My  promise  "  (Numb.  xiv.  34,  R.V.,  marg.).    There 
is  nothing  more  terrible  in  the  history  of  a  soul  than  to  frustrate  the  Divine  ideal 
in  its  creation  and  redemption,  and  to  prevent  God  deriving  from  us  that  for  which 
He  saved  us.      1.   Prayerlessness  (ver.  22).      Nothing  is  a   surer  gauge   of   our 
spiritual  state  than  our  prayers.     2.  Neglect  of  little  things  (ver.  23).     The  people 
were  probably  careful  of  the  larger  matters  of  Jewish  ritual,  but  neglectful  of  the 
smaller  details.     None  of  us  goes  wrong  at  first  in  the  breach  of  the  great  obliga- 
tions of  the  law.     3.  Lack  of  sweetness.     "  Thou  hast  bought  Me  no  sweet  cane  " 
(ver.  24).     It  is  possible  to  do  right  things  from  a  hard  sense  of  legalism,  in  which 
the  sweetness  and  lovableness  of  true  religion  are  painfully  wanting.     IMany  are  the 
instances  of  this  change  of  purpose.     David  substituted  for  Saul;  Solomon  for 
Adonijah;  the  Church  for  the  Hebrew  people;  Western  for  Eastern  Christianity; 
the  Moravians  and  LoUards  for  the  established  Churches  of  their  time.     III.  Ths 
fulfilment  of  God's  purpose  through  our  pain.     God's  purpose  cannot  be 
ultimately  set  aside.     So  with  Israel,  and  with  each  of  us.     But  the  cost,  how 
enormous!     (F.  B.  Meyer  B.A.)        The  chief  end  of  man: — 1.  God,  who  made  all 
the  lower  creatures  for  some  special  use,  assuredly  did  not  make  man,  and  endow 
him  with  those  noble  powers,  without  a  grand  distinctive  design  or  end  worthy 
of  Himself  and  them.     2.  This  end  cannot  possibly  be  anything  bounded  by  his 
transitory  life.     3.  The  end  for  which  chiefly  we  were  made  must  needs  be  that 
which  the  Scriptures  tell  of  :  "  This  people  have  I  formed  for  Myself;  they  shall 
show  forth  My  praise," — even  to  know  the  ever-blessed  God;  to  serve  God;  to 
honour,  love  God;  to  enjoy  God;  and  to  be  everlastingly  blessed  in  the  knowledge, 
service,  and  enjoyment  of  Him.     (1)  This  end  is  a  very  high  and  noble  one.     (2)  A 
most  reasonable  and  righteous  end.     (3)  A  necessary  and  indispensable  end, — as 
it  is  the  end  which  God  actually  made  us  for ;  it  is  altogether  indispensable  that 
we  follow  and  fulfil  it,  tmless  we  are  to  live  in  a  terrible  conflict  with  our  Maker, 
and  so  inevitably  perish.     For  if  God  made  us  to  serve  and  honour  Him,  and  we 
do  it  not,  then,  to  put  it  at  the  very  lowest,  we  are  useless  and  unprofitable  on  God's 
earth;  and  we  are  accustomed  to  cast  away  from  us  things  useless  for  the  thing 
they  were  designed  for.     But  then,  most  things  of  this  world  which  are  useless 
do  not  on  that  account  require  to  be  positively  hurtful.     But  it  is  otherwise  with 
us.     If  God  made  us  to  serve  and  honour  Him,  and  we  pay  no  regard  to  this  end, 
then,  necessarily,  we  dishonour  God.     If  we  serve  not  God,  we  must  serve  the 
devil.     If  we  serve  not  the  true  God,  we  must  serve  false  gods, — creatures  of  all 
kinds,  to  which  we  give  the  regard,  affection,  trust  that  are  due  to  God,  and  so 
unavoidably  fall  under  the  sentence  of  the  law  of  His  moral  government,  "  The 
soul  that  sinneth,  it  shall  die."     But  this  volume  has  not  come  to  us  only  to  tell 
the  end  or  use  we  were  made  for,  but  to  tell  also  how  we  may  fulfil  it — ay,  how  we 
now,  after  having  failed  to  live  for  the  end,  may  yet  know  and  serve  and  love 
and  everlastingly  enjoy  God.     The  whole  Bible  may,  as  to  this  vital  matter,  be 
summed  up  in  one  grand  word — Christ.     (C.  J.  Brovm,  D.D.)        The  delight  of 
God  in  forming  a  people  for  Himself: — In  the  good  work  of  forming  a  people  for 
Himself,  God  has  been  engaged  from  the  beginning.     The  subjects  of  it  have  been 
more  numerous  in  some  periods  than  in  others;  but  in  every  age  He  has  created 
a  seed  to  serve  Him.     And  in  future  times— when  He  who  sits  on  the^  throne  shall 
"  make  all  things  new  " — this  people  shall  aboimd  in  number,  and  "  flourish  like 
grass  of  the  earth."     And  what  a  thought  is  this,  that  in  us,  if  we  be  indeed  new 
creatures,  God  delights.     I.  The  first  ground  of  the  Divine  satisfaction  in  this 
people  which  I  mention  arises  from  the  nature  of  the  work  performed,  the 
character  of  the  effect  produced.     The  effect  produced  by  the  forming  power  of 
God  is— a  people  on  whose  immortal  spirits  His   image  is  impressed,  the  chief 
features  of  which  are — knowledge,  righteousness,  and  holiness,— a  people  enlightened 
and  guided  by  heavenly  truth,  sanctified  and  regulated  by  Divine  love,— a  people 
assimilated  to  God  in  understanding  and  heart,  in  purpose,  in  action,  in  blessedness. 


CHAP.  TLin.]  ISAIAH.  877 

K  a  person  be  not  tlie  partaker  of  a  Divine  nature,  the  most  amiable  and  eminent 
qualities  which  he  may  possess  can  ultimately  contribute  only  to  increase  his 
capacities  and  his  means  of  doing  evil,  and  to  render  him  pre-eminent  in  disgrace 
and  in  misery.  11.  In  forming  a  people  for  Himself,  God  gives  an  illusteious 
DISPLAY  OF  His  glory.  In  no  work  has  He  communicated  so  much  of  Himself, 
has  He  given  so  luminous  and  extensive  a  display  of  His  glory,  as  in  that  which 
we  are  now  contemplating,  viewed  in  its  manifold  relations.  Advert  to  His 
sovereignty  and  His  power,  both  which  the  text  obviously  suggests.  HI.  God 
delights  in  forming  a  people  for  Himself,  because  He  thus  gloeities  Hts  Son. 
He  bears  testimony  to  the  dignity  of  His  person,  to  the  worth  of  His  sacrifice,  to 
the  efiBcacy  of  His  mediation.  IV.  God  forms  a  people  foe  Himself,  that 
THEY  may  show  FORTH  His  PRAISE;  and  for  this  reason  also  He  delights  in  them. 
He  creates  them  anew  in  Christ,  not  merely  that  He  may  display  His  perfections 
in  the  production  of  so  excellent  an  effect,  but  that  they  may  contemplate  and 
adore  the  excellencies  which  He  thus  manifests;  not  merely  that  they  may  be  a 
mirror  to  reflect  the  splendour  of  His  glory  to  others,  but  that  they  themselves 
may  utter  abundantly  its  praises.  They  praise  Him  with  their  hearts.  They 
praise  Him  with  their  lips,  by  formal  acts  of  devotion;  by  the  celebration  of  His 
ordinances;  by  the  public  confession  of  His  name;  by  commending  His  service  to 
others;  by  ordering  their  speech  in  His  fear,  and  to  the  use  of  edifying.  And  they 
praise  Him  with  their  lives,  by  avoiding  what  He  forbids,  by  doing  what  He  re- 
quires, by  submitting  to  what  He  inflicts;  and  thus  do  homage  to  His  authority, 
wisdom,  and  love.  V.  God  rejoiceth  over  this  people,  because  He  delights  nr 
THEIR  HAPPINESS.  (J.  Stark.)  Showing  forth  God's  praise: — It  has  been  said 
that  the  word  translated  "  praise  "  is  from  the  same  root  as  "  Hallel "  in  "  Hallelujah," 
and  that  it  means,  first,  a  clear  and  shining  light;  next,  a  sweet  flute-hke  sound: 
from  which  we  learn  that  the  people  of  God  are  to  reflect  His  glory  imtil  it  shines 
from  their  lives,  attracting  others  to  it;  and  that  they  are  to  speak  His  praise  in 
resonant  and  harmonious  sounds  that  shall  arrest  and  attract  the  hstening  ear. 
(F.  B.  Meyer,  B.A.) 

Ver.  22.  But  thou  hast  not  called  upon  Me,  0  Jacob. — Insincerity  in  religion: 
— It  is  a  common  observation  that  there  is  very  little  sincerity  in  the  world.  We 
are  now  concerned  with  insincerity  of  a  deeper  and  more  serious  character, — 
insincerity  in  religion.  I  propose  to  offer  some  remarks  which  may  serve  to  detect 
a  mere  formal  profession  of  religion.  The  subject  on  which  I  shall  chiefly  remark 
is  the  habit  and  enjoyment  of  secret  prayer.     I.  Many  have  contintted  fob 

AWHILE   IN   HABITS    OF   SECRET   PRAYER,    AND    YET   ARE    ONLY   FORMAL  PROFESSORS. 

n.  Mere  formal  professors  aftee  awhile  leave  off  prayer  in  a  geeat 
DEGEEE.  m.  It  is  evident  that  these  formal  worshippers  are  utterly  deceived 
in  thinking  they  are  converted:  this  weariness  in  peayeb  shows  the  change 
was  not  eeal.  How  are  we  to  distinguish  the  feelings  of  a  mere  formalist  from 
the  presence  of  God's  renovating  Spirit?  1.  They  have  not  the  spirit  of  prayer. 
Theirs  is  not  prayer  suggested,  inspired  by  God's  Holy  Spirit.  2.  Mere  professors, 
being  deficient  in  secret  prayer,  soon  fall  back  again  into  their  former  sins  and 
worldliness.  3.  It  is  utterly  impossible  for  you  to  be  saved  so  long  as  you  Uve  in 
neglect  of  prayer.  ( 1 )  To  neglect  prayer  is  utterly  inconsistent  with  the  love  of 
God,  which  is  the  element  of  true  religion.  (2)  Contrary  to  the  fear  of  God.  This 
is  expressed  by  the  opponents  of  Job.  "  Yea,  thou  castest  off  fear,  and  restrainest 
prayer  before  Grod."  (3)  Utterly  at  variance  with  that  holiness  without  which 
no  man  shall  see  God.  (4)  Allowed  negligence  of  prayer  cannot  be  reconciled 
with  the  hope  of  dwelling  with  God  for  ever.  We  offer  four  motives  for  holy  per- 
severance in  prayer.  1.  It  is  wholly  necessary  for  your  salvation.  "  If  any  man 
draw  back.  My  soul  hath  no  pleasure  in  him."  2.  Take  heed  to  yourselves,  and 
be  exceedingly  watchful,  that  you  may  persevere  in  this  duty,  and  maintain  the 
spirit  of  vigorous  piety.  Let  us  never  seek  to  shelter  ourselves  under  mere  doctrines, 
such  as,  true  saints  shall  persevere.  3.  To  urge  you  to  perseverance  in  the  duty 
of  secret  prayer,  think  how  much  you  need  the  help  of  the  Spirit  of  God.  4.  The 
fourth  motive  for  perseverance  in  fervent  prayer  is,  the  great  advantages  that 
result  from  it.  {W.  B.  Mackenzie,  B.A.)  A  fast  sermon  .• — There  are  two  distinct 
charges — 1.  A  neglect  of  prayer.  2.  Growing  weary  of  God.  The  point  is  this: 
people  are  at  a  dangerous  pass  when  they  begin  to  neglect  prayer.  Eliphaz  layeth 
it  as  a  heavy  charge  upon  Job  (chap.  xv.  4)  :  "  Surely  thou  restrainest  prayer  before 
God."    When  conscience  is  clamorous,  wants  pressing,  and  yet  men  cannot  find 


378  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  XLin. 

the  heart  to  go  to  God,  it  is  a  sad  case.  So  the  heathen  are  described  to  be  the 
families  that  call  not  upon  His  name  (Jer.  x.  25)  ;  that  is,  that  do  not  acknowledge 
and  worship  Him.  "  The  workers  of  iniquity,"  of  what  rehgion  soever  they 
profess  themselves  to  be,  "  they  call  not  upon  the  Lord  "  (Psa.  xiv.  4).  The  evil 
of  this  will  ajipear  if  we  consider — I.  Why  the  duty  was  appointed.  1.  It  is  a 
notable  part  of  God's  worship,  or  a  serious  calling  to  mind  His  presence  and  attributes. 
To  withdraw  from  prayer  is  to  withdraw  from  God;  and  to  be  unwilling  to  pray 
is  to  be  unwilUng  to  draw  nigh  to  God,  or  to  have  any  serious  thoughts  of  His  being 
and  attributes.  2.  It  is  a  profession  of  our  dependence.  3.  It  is  a  duty  wherein 
the  mysteries  of  our  most  holy  faith  are  reduced  to  practice.  There  are  two  great 
mysteries  in  the  Christian  religion — the  doctrine  of  the  Trinity,  and  the  mediation 
of  the  Son  of  God.  4.  One  special  end  of  prayer  is  to  nourish  communion  and 
familiarity  between  God  and  us;  for  it  is  the  converse  of  a  loving  soul  with  God, 
between  whom  there  is  a  mutual  complacency.  5.  Prayer  is  required  to  preserve 
in  us  a  sense  of  our  duty,  and  to  keep  the  heart  in  better  frame.  6.  To  engage 
our  affections  to  heavenly  things.  7.  To  be  a  means  of  comfort  and  spiritual  refresh- 
ing. The  soul  is  disbxurdened  of  trouble  by  this  kind  of  utterance.  II.  The  causes 
WHY  MEN  NEGLECT  IT.  1.  Atheism  is  at  the  root.  When  men  neglect  prayer, 
either  they  believe  there  is  no  God  or  no  providence.  2.  Security.  3.  Coldness 
in  religion  and  weariness  of  God.  4.  Want  of  peace  breeds  loathness  and  backward- 
ness, as  David  hung  off  (Psa.  xxxii.  3)  till  he  had  recovered  his  peace.  5.  Want 
of  spiritual  strength.  He  that  hath  lame  joints  cannot  delight  in  exercise  which 
is  a  pleasure  to  them  that  are  strong.  [T.  Manton,  D.D.)  Thou  hast  been 
weary  of  Me,  0  Israel. — Weary  of  God: — Marvellous  words!  We  are  not  surprised 
to  find  God  saying  to  us,  "  Thou  hast  wearied  Me  "  ;  but  it  is  astonishing  that 
God,  to  His  own  people,  should  complain,  "  Thou  hast  been  weary  of  Me."  We 
are  not  astonished  that  the  creature  wearies  of  the  creature,  man  of  man,  saint 
of  saint.  This  is  in  the  very  natm-e  of  things;  it  arises  from  the  hmitation  of  the 
creature's  powers  and  resources :  no  creature  can  be  to  another  what  every  creature 
wants.  God  in  Christ  alone  can  slake  the  thirst  and  meet  the  hunger  of  our  needy 
souls,  and  it  is  worse  than  useless  for  men  to  try  to  take  the  place  of  God  in  their 
ministrations  and  relations  to  each  other.  And  that  God  should  stoop  to  say  this 
is  also  marvellous.  Many  of  you  would  be  too  proud  to  make  this  acknowledgment 
if  you  were  placed  in  a  similar  position  with  respect  to  your  fellow-creatures;  but 
here  is  God  reasoning  with  those  whose  hearts  have  wandered  from  Him,  and  saying, 
with  aU  the  fideUty  of  a  father,  and  the  pleading  tenderness  of  a  mother,  "  Thou 
hast  been  weary  of  Me,  O  Israel."  Many  a  parent  may  learn  of  God  even  in  such 
matters  as  rebuke  and  chastisement.  The  power  of  rebuke  is  very  intimately 
connected  with  the  spirit  in  which  it  is  administered;  you  may  so  rebuke  a  fault 
in  a  chUd  as,  by  the  very  rebuking,  to  attach  the  child  more  strongly  to  yourself; 
or  you  may  so  rebuke  as  to  increase  the  distance  between  your  child  and  yourself, 
and  at  the  same  time  to  confirm  him  in  his  fault.  Listen  to  God's  rebukes,  and 
be  "  followers  of  God,  as  dear  chUdren."  The  form  in  which  this  being  weary  of 
God  showed  itself  was  partly  the  restraint  of  prayer.  "  Thou  hast  not  caUed  upon 
Me,  0  Jacob;  but  thou  hast  been  weary  of  Me,  O  Israel."  It  is  very  likely  that 
the  form  of  prayer  was  kept  up;  yet  God  says,  "  Thou  hast  not  called  upon  Me." 
The  day  was  when  they  had  called  upon  God  first,  and  upon  God  last.  But  now 
they  restrained  prayer,  and  they  tried  to  carry  their  burdens  by  the  independent 
strength  (and  their  strength  was  weakness)  of  their  own  shoulders;  or  they  tried 
to  bear  their  sorrows  with  the  sympathy  and  assistance  which  their  fellow-creatures 
and  their  fellow-saints  could  administer.  God  noticed  this  conduct  of  His  people, 
and  He  rebuked  it.  And  not  only  in  the  restraint  of  prayer  was  this  weariness 
manifested,  but  also  in  the  neglect  of  sacrifice;  in  indifference  towards  the  ordin- 
ances of  God,  and  carelessness  in  the  worship  of  God;  in  disregard  to  the  will  of 
God;  and  also  in  fretful  discontent  under  the  dispensations  of  God  (Mai.  i.,  ii.). 
The  prophet  here  represents  Israel  as  sent  into  captivity,  and  God  as  justifying 
His  procedure  on  the  ground  of  Israel's  own  spirit  and  conduct.  It  is  a  fault  common 
to  God's  saints.  I.  The  natxjbe  of  this  evil.  We  have  already  indicated  it, 
but  we  may  put  it  in  another  light.  We  may  show  it,  for  example,  in  contrast. 
"  This  people,"  God  says,  "  have  I  formed  for  myself;  they  shall  show  forth  My 
praise.'  He  made  us  in  His  own  image,  that  we  might  reflect  Himself,  and  in 
the  sight  of  which  we  might  rejoice.  And  He  made  us  in  His  own  image,  that  we 
might  reflect  Him  to  each  other  and  to  other  people;  while,  for  the  same  object 
He  redeems  us.    God,  in  redeeming  us,  forms  us  for  Himself,  that  we  should  lov« 


OHAP.  XLni.]  ISAIAH.  379 

Him ;  that  we  should  trust  Him ;  that  we  should  honour  Him,  and  that  we  should 
try  to  please  and  glorify  Him.  And  we  realise  the  work  which  our  blessed  Saviour 
has  wrought  for  us,  and  which  the  Spirit  of  God  is  now  working  within  us,  when 
we  are  able  to  say,  "  I  will  rejoice  in  the  God  of  my  salvation."  Now,  what  is  it 
to  be  weary  of  God?  It  is  to  desire  to  break  the  connection  that  exists  between 
us  and  God.  It  is  to  be  impatient  of  continued  cormection  with  Him ;  to  be  tired 
of  calling  upon  Him;  tired  of  thinking  of  Him;  tired  of  trusting  Him;  tired  of 
waiting  for  Him;  tired  of  serving  Him.  I  know  not  a  better  illustration  than 
that  which  is  supplied  by  the  first  part  of  the  parable  of  the  Prodigal  Son.  II.  Its 
MAiOFESTATiONS  AND  DEVELOPMENT.  1.  This  weariuess  is  first  shown  by  formahty 
in  Divine  worship.  2.  It  then  shows  itself  in  the  outward  neglect  of  Divine  re- 
quirements. Declension  begins  in  the  heart,  and  shows  itself  first  in  formahty, 
and  then  the  steps  between  formahty  and  the  outward  neglect  of  Divine  require- 
ments are  not  very  many.  3.  Then  follows,  not  looking  to  God  for  aid  and  succour. 
The  man  depends  more  upon  himself  than  he  ought  to  depend,  or  he  looks  more 
to  his  fellow-creatures  than  he  had  been  accustomed  to  look.  III.  What  is  the 
OCCASION  OF  THE  MANIFESTATION  OF  THIS  WEARINESS?  You  will  generally  find 
one  of  the  following  things — disappointed  hope,  the  endurance  of  affliction,  or  the 
prosperity  of  the  wicked.  IV.  Its  causes.  You  must  be  aware  of  the  distinction 
between  an  occasion  and  a  cause.  God's  dispensations  towards  Pharaoh,  as  we 
are  told,  hardened  his  heart.  They  were  the  occasions  of  this,  but  the  cause  was 
not  in  God;  neither  was  the  cause  in  the  dispensation  of  God — the  cause  was  in 
Pharaoh.  Unless  Pharaoh  had  possessed  a  hardened  heart,  those  dispensations 
of  Divine  providence,  instead  of  increasing  this  obduracy,  would  have  produced 
a  totally  different  state  of  soul.  The  same  dispensations  have  done  it,  as  in  the 
case  of  Nineveh;  when  Nineveh  was  threatened,  Nineveh  repented.  The  cause 
is  to  be  found  either  in  the  absence  of  love  or  in  the  feebleness  of  love.  V.  The 
BITTER  FRUITS  of  this  wearincss.  God  sees  it;  and  He  cannot  see  it  without  feeling 
it.  God  is  angry,  and  He  corrects;  and  He  corrects  so  as  to  make  the  chastisement 
answer  to  the  sin.  The  man  has,  to  a  certain  extent,  withdrawn  from  God,  and 
God  withdraws  from  the  man.  He  deprives  the  man  of  whatever  influences  are 
still  tending  to  promote  his  peace  and  joy  and  rest.  And,  of  coiu-se,  if  the  heart  be 
ahve,  if  it  be  a  quickened  heart,  this  state  is  one  of  great  misery,  until  the  soul 
is  restored  to  God.  Where  there  is  not  life,  you  find  that  the  case  gets  worse  and 
worse,  and  that  very  frequently  men  fall  from  this  weariness  into  scepticism,  and 
into  atheism.  VI.  The  means  of  prevention.  Ejecting  the  first  hard  thoughts 
of  God;  not  yielding  for  a  moment  to  indolence  in  the  service  of  God;  compre- 
hension (so  far  as  we  can  comprehend)  of  the  principles,  and  of  the  general  plan 
of  the  Divine  Government,  so  as  not  to  be  expecting  here  that  which  God  has  given 
us  no  reason  to  hope  for  here;  following  Christ  implicitly  in  the  conduct  of  the 
spirit  towards  God ;  and  cherishing  most  sacredly  the  influences  of  the  Holy  Spirit. 
VII.  When  you  have  fallen  into  this  evil  state,  what  is  the  cure?  1.  Full  con- 
fession of  the  weariness.  Be  willing  to  speak  of  it  as  God  speaks  of  it;  to  see  it 
as  God  sees  it;  and  to  condemn  it  as  God  condemns  it.  Call  it  weariness  of  yoiu- 
merciful  Father — weariness  of  your  best  and  kindest  friend.  2.  Admission  of  the 
Divine  goodness  in  the  correction  by  which  you  are  made  sensible  of  yo\ir  weariness. 
3.  Return  to  a  careful  observance  of  God's  ordinances  and  precepts,  the  obtaining 
of  pardon,  and  the  assurance  of  forgiveness.  While  you  are  in  doubt  about  pardon 
with  reference  to  this  sin,  you  will  find  yourselves  keeping  at  a  distance  from  God. 
This  subject  is  suitable  for  self-examination.  Are  there  any  signs  of  this  weariness 
of  God  in  you?  (S.  Martin.)  Weary  of  God: — To  be  weary  of  God  is  to  be 
weary  of  His  worship  and  service.  It  is  as  sad  a  character  as  can  be  given,  either 
of  persons  or  of  a  people,  to  say  that  they  are  weary  of  God.  1.  The  nature  of 
the  sin.  Weariness  in  the  body  noteth  a  deficiency  of  strength,  no  more  mind 
to  work;  in  the  soul,  a  falhng  from  God,  and  we  have  no  mind  to  His  service,  which 
is  either  partial  or  total.  1.  Partial.  When  the  heart  is  more  ahenated  from  God 
than  before,  and  all  our  respects  to  Him  grow  burdensome  and  grievous,  and  the 
heart  begins  to  repine  at  everything  we  do  for  Him  (Mai.  i.  13;  Amos  viii.  5). 
2.  Total.  When  not  only  the  power  of  reUgion  is  abated,  but  the  very  profession 
of  it  is  cast  off.  II.  It  is  incident  sometimes  to  persons  considered  in  their 
single  capacity;  sometimes  to  a  people  considered  in  their  community. 
1.  To  persons  considered  apart,  and  in  their  single  capacity.  (1)  Partly  out  of 
natural  adverseness  to  God.  (2)  Partly  because  of  the  fickleness  of  man.  2.  It 
is  incident  to  a  people  considered  in  their  community.     (1)  The  Church  of  God 


880  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR  [chap.  xlih. 

in  general.  (2)  In  every  nation.  Usually  religion  is  changed  in  a  nation  upon 
two  grounds— (a)  Change  of  persons.  When  good  old  zealous  men  are  gone  the 
stage  is  shifted,  and  there  cometh  on  a  new  scene  of  acts  and  actors;  one  generation 
passeth,  and  another  cometh.  (b)  Change  of  interests.  When  it  is  for  their  own 
mterest  to  own  God,  men  think  they  can  never  bind  themselves  fast  enough  to  Him; 
bnt  when  the  posture  of  interest  is  changed,  God  is  laid  aside,  they  grow  weary 
of  God;  they  deal  treacherously  with  the  Lord,  and  walk  wiUingly  after  the  com- 
mandment (Hosea  v.  7,  11).  III.  The  causes  why  a  peopi^  qeow  wbabt  of 
God.  Besides  those  general  causes,  these  may  be  added — 1.  Want  of  love  to  God. 
2.  We  are  too  much  led  by  sense;  and  if  we  have  not  present  satisfaction,  we  soon 
grow  weary  of  religion.  3.  It  argueth  too  much  love  of  the  world,  which  by  long 
importunity  prevaileth  with  us  to  forsake  God,  and  grow  dead  and  cold  in  religion 
(2  Tim.  iv.  10).  4.  It  comes  from  indulgence  to  the  ease  of  the  flesh.  As  bodily 
weariness  is  most  incident  to  the  lazy,  so  is  spiritual  weariness  to  those  who  do 
not  rouse  up  themselves.  5.  Impatience  of  troubles,  and  the  manifold  discourage- 
ments we  meet  with  in  the  way  to  heaven.  IV.  The  effects.  1.  Boldness  in 
Binning.     2.  More  coldness  in  duties  of  worship.     Either  it  is  omitted  or  performed 

Sjrfunctorily,  and  in  a  careless,  stupid  manner.  3.  Less  care  and  study  to  please 
od.  V.  What  a  sad  state  of  soui,  it  is  appeareth— 1.  By  the  heinousness 
of  the  sin.  (1)  It  is  a  horrible  contempt  of  God,  after  trial,  to  fall  off  from  God 
and  return  to  our  carnal  pleasures  and  satisfactions  again.  (2)  It  is  a  very  sense- 
less and  unreasonable  sin.  God  never  gave  you  cause  or  occasion  to  grow  weary 
of  Him.  He  challengeth  Israel:  "  O  My  people,  what  have  I  done  imto  thee? 
and  wherein  have  I  wearied  thee?  testify  against  Me  "  (Micah  vi  3).  (3)  There 
is  much  ingratitude  in  it.  He  hath  given  much  cause  to  the  contrary.  2.  The 
terribleness  of  the  judgment.  (1)  On  nations.  (2)  On  Churches  (Rev.  ii.  5). 
(3)  For  particvdar  persons,  it  layeth  them  open  to  God's  severe  correction  (Hosea 
V.  15).  (4)  For  total  defection.  There  is  dreadful  vengeance  appointed  for  them 
that  prefer  the  creature  before  God.     {T.  Manton,  D.D.) 

Vers.  23,  24.  Thou  hast  not  brought  Me  the  small  cattle. — Failure  in 
religious  details : — May  we  not  ask  whether  some  emphasis  may  not  be  laid  upon 
the  designation  "  the  small  cattle"  ?  Do  not  many  men  fail  in  religious  details? 
They  are  emphatic  in  their  stupendous  word-creed,  but  they  do  not  bless  some 
little  child  on  the  road  to  church,  or  bring  some  wandering  soul  to  the  Church 
home.  We  do  certain  great  or  conspicuous  things,  and  we  forget  the  small  cattle, 
the  little  offerings  and  tributes.  Every  omission  is  noticed  (ver.  24).  Does  God 
care  for  our  sweet  cane?  Does  He  like  to  see  us  spending  a  trifle  upon  some 
cane  stick  that  we  may  take  it  and  offer  it  as  if  it  were  a  flower?  He  hath  no 
need  of  any  service  of  the  kind;  yet  it  pleases  Him  that  we  should  with  some 
small  piece  of  money  buy  sweet  cane.  Observe  how  He  notes  the  omissions! 
This  might  be  the  very  voice  of  Christ,  who  said  to  Simon  the  Pharisee,  "  I  entered 
into  thine  house,  thou  gavest  Me  no  water  for  My  feet ;  but  she  hath  washed  My 
feet  with  tears,  and  wiped  them  with  the  hairs  of  her  head.  Thou  gavest  Me 
no  kiss:  but  this  woman  since  the  time  I  came  in  hath  not  ceased  to  kiss  My  feet. 
My  head  with  oil  thou  didst  not  anoint:  but  this  woman  hath  anointed  My  feet 
with  ointment."  What  an  eye  is  the  eye  of  Omniscience!  It  notices  every  slip 
and  flaw  and  omission.  That  would,  indeed,  be  a  miserable  declaration  to  make 
if  it  stood  alone;  but  it  only  leads  to  the  fuller  declaration  that  it  notices  every 
cup  of  cold  water,  every  widow's  gift,  every  child's  service.  God  is  not  unrighteous 
to  forget  your  work  of  faith  and  labour  of  love.  (J.  Parl.cr,  D.D.)  God  and 
His  people  :  a  contrast : — In  one  of  those  antithetical  clauses,  or  "  balances  of 
words,"  so  frequent  in  Isaiah,  He  thus  contrasts  His  own  and  His  people's  doings 
(ver.  23)  :  "  I  have  not  burdened  thee  in  exacting  oblations;  I  have  not  wearied 
thee  in  demanding  incense."  ..."  But  thou  hast  burdened  Me  with  thy  sins; 
thou  hast  wearied  Me  with  thine  iniquities  "  (ver.  24).     {J.  R.  Macduff,  D.D.) 

Ver.  24.  Thou  hast  bought  Me  no  sweet  cane.  —  Divine  reproach.' — I.  The 
OEOUND  ON  WHICH  ISRAEL  IS  REPROACHED.  Sweet  cane,  or  calamus,  is  an  aromatic 
reed  which  was  an  exotic  in  Palestine,  and  is  chiefly  to  be  found  in  India.  The 
demand  for  sweet  cane  was  great,  because  it  formed  an  ingredient  of  the  incense 
in  most  countries  where  incense  was  used.  It  was  one  of  the  things  which  could 
not  be  obtained  by  barter.  The  charge  is,  "  You  do  not  neglect  the  offices  of 
religion,  but  you  perform  them  carelessly;  you  do  not  withhold  your  offerings. 


CHAP,  xxra.]  ISAIAH.  381 

but  you  do  not  offer  of  your  best."  Bad  is  the  best  that  man  has  to  offer  to  God; 
but  less  than  our  best  God  will  not  accept.  11.  When  did  the  King  eteenal, 
IMMORTAL,  INVISIBLE,  SERVE?  When  was  Grod,  the  Omnipotent,  wearied  with 
our  iniquities?  When  did  the  Judge  of  the  earth  blot  out  our  sins?  We, 
enlightened  by  the  Gospel,  can  give  an  answer  which  Israel  of  old  could  not. 
We  answer,  "  When  the  Word  was  made  flesh,  and  dwelt  among  us."  He  came 
to  serve,  and  when  we  think  of  Him,  the  God-man,  serving  under  the  law,  is 
it  possible  for  us  to  ask,  in  the  spirit  of  the  slave.  How  little  can  I  render  unto 
the  Lord  for  all  His  benefits? — what  is  the  least  that  He  demands,  the  minimum 
of  duty  ?  The  great  principle  is  this,  that  we  never  offer  unto  the  Lord  what  costs 
us  nothing,  or  what  involves  no  thought  or  trouble.  He  will  not  accept  the 
refuse  at  our  hands.  And  this  principle  we  are  to  carry  out  in  all  that  relates 
to  our  moral  conduct  and  religious  life.  It  is  applicable  to  our  private  devotions 
as  well  as  to  our  public  services.  It  is  implied  in  our  Lord's  injunction,  "  Seek 
ye  first  the  kingdom  of  God,"  &c.     (W.  F.  Hook,  D.D.) 

Ver.  25.  I,  even  I,  am  He  that  blotteth  out  thy  transgressions. — Pardoning 
mercy  made  radiant: — As  in  olden  times  jewellers  were  wont  to  set  their  most 
precious  gems  in  casings  of  a  very  inferior  nature — and  that  wisely,  in  order 
that  the  intrinsic  lustre  of  the  jewel  might  shine  forth  more  brilliant  from  the 
contrast — so  doth  the  Word  of  God  delight  to  place  the  long-suffering  mercy 
of  our  God  in  the  settings  of  man's  iniquity  and  ingratitude,  in  order  that  the 
most  lustrous  jewel  in  God's  all-radiant  diadem — even  mercy — might  glitter 
the  more  brilliantly  from  its  immediate  contact  with  the  black  foil  spots  of  man's 
Bin.  [F.  F.  Goold,  M.A.)  Forgiveness : — I.  The  recipients  of  mercy.  Look 
at  the  22nd  verse,  and  you  will  see — 1.  That  they  were  prayerless  people.  2.  They 
were  despisers  of  religion.  "  Thou  hast  been  weary  of  Me,  0  Israel."  3.  Thank- 
less people.  "  Thou  hast  not  brought  Me  the  small  cattle  of  thy  burnt-offerings." 
4.  A  useless  people.  "  Neither  hast  thou  filled  Me  with  the  fat,"  &c.  5.  There 
are  some  who  may  be  termed  sanctuary  sinners — sinners  in  Zion,  and  these  are 
the  worst  of  sinners.  6.  We  have  here  men  who  had  wearied  God  :  "  Thou  hast 
made  Me  to  serve  with  thy  sins,  thou  hast  wearied  Me  with  thine  iniquities." 
n.  The  deed  of  mercy.  It  is  a  deed  of  forgiveness.  1.  A  Divine  forgiveness. 
"I,  even  I,  am  He."  Divine  pardon  is  the  only  forgiveness  possible;  for  no 
one  can  remit  sin  but  God  only.  2.  Surprising  forgiveness;  for  the  text  speaks 
as  if  God  Himself  were  surprised  that  such  sins  should  be  remitted:  "  I,  even  I "  ; 
it  is  so  surprising  that  it  is  repeated  in  this  way,  lest  any  of  us  should  doubt  it. 
3.  A  present  forgiveness.  4.  A  complete  forgiveness.  The  bond  is  destroyed, 
and  He  will  not  demand  payment  again,  m.  The  reason  for  mercy.  Says 
one  poor  sinner,  "  Why  should  God  forgive  me?  I  am  svire  there  is  no  reason 
why  He  should,  for  I  have  never  done  anything  to  deserve  His  mercy."  Hear 
what  God  says,  "  I  am  not  about  to  forgive  you  for  your  own  sake,  but  for  My 
own  sake."     "  But,  Lord,  I  shall  not  be  thankful  enough."     "  I  am  not  about  to 

Jardon  you  because  of  your  gratitude,  but  for  My  name's  sake."  "  But,  Lord,  if 
am  taken  into  Thy  Church,  I  can  do  very  Uttle  for  Thy  cause  in  future  years,  for 
I  have  spent  my  best  days  in  the  devil's  service ;  surely  the  impure  dregs  of  my 
life  cannot  be  sweet  to  Thee,  0  God."  "  I  will  not  engage  to  forgive  you  for  your 
sake,  but  for  My  own;  I  do  not  want  you,"  says  God  ;  "  I  can  do  as  well  without 
you  as  with  you.  I  forgive  you,  therefore,  for  My  own  sake."  Is  there  no  hope 
for  a  guilty  sinner  here?  IV.  The  promise  of  mercy.  "  I  will  not  remember  thy 
sins."  Is  it  possible  for  God  to  forget?  Not  as  to  the  absolute  fact  of  the  com- 
mittal of  the  deed,  but  there  are  senses  in  which  the  expression  is  entirely  accurate. 
L  He  will  not  exact  punishment  for  them  when  we  come  before  His  judgment 
bar  at  last.  The  Christian  will  have  many  accusers.  The  devil  will  come  and  say, 
"  That  man  is  a  great  sinner."  Let  all  the  demons  of  the  pit  clamour  in  God's 
ear,  and  let  them  vehemently  shout  out  a  list  of  our  sins,  we  may  stand  boldly 
forth  at  that  great  day  and  sing,  "  Who  shall  lay  anything  to  the  charge  of  God's 
elect?  "  The  judge  does  not  remember  it,  and  who  then  shall  punish?  2.  "  I 
will  not  remember  thy  sins  to  suspect  thee."  There  is  a  father,  and  he  has  had  a 
wayward  son,  who  went  away  that  he  might  live  a  life  of  profligacy;  but  after  a 
while  he  comes  home  again  in  a  state  of  penitence.  The  father  says, '  I  will  forgive 
thee."  But  he  says  next  day  to  his  younger  son,  "  There  is  business  to  be  done  at 
a  distant  town  to-morrow,  and  here  is  the  money  for  you  to  do  it  with."  He  does 
not  trust  the  returned  prodigal  with  it.     "  I  have  trusted  him  before  with  money," 


382  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xlih. 

says  the  father  to  himself,  "  and  he  robbed  me,  and  it  makes  me  afraid  to  trust 
liim  again;  "  but  our  heavenly  Father  says,  "  I  will  not  remember  thy  sins."     He 
not  only  forgives  the  past,  but  trusts  His  people  with  precious  talents.     3.  He 
will  not  remember  in  His  distribution  of  the  recompense  of  the  reward.      The 
earthly  parent  will  kindly  pass  over  the  faults  of  the  prodigal;  but  you  know, 
when  that  father  comes  to  die,  and  is  about  to  make  his  will,  the  lawyer  sitting 
by  his  side,  he  says,  "  I  shall  give  so  much  to  William,  who  always  behaved  well, 
and  my  other  son  he  shall  have   so-and-so,  and  my  daughter,  she  shall  have 
so  much;  but  there  is  that  prodigal,  I  spent  a  large  sum  upon  him  when  he  was 
young,  but  he  wasted  what  he  received,  and  though  I  have  taken  him  again  into 
favour,  and  for  the  present  he  is  going  on  well,  still  I  think  I  must  make  a  little 
difference  between  him  and  the  others;  I  think  it  would  not  be  fair — though  I 
have  forgiven  him — to  treat  him  precisely  as  the  rest."     And  so  the  lawyer  puts 
him  down  for  a  few  hundred  pounds,  while  the  others,  perhaps,  get  their  thousands. 
But  God  will  not  remember  your  sins  like  that;  He  gives  all  an  inheritance.     He 
will  give  heaven  to  the  chief  of  sinners  as  well  as  the  chief  of  saints.     (C.  H. 
Spurgeon.)        Sin  forgiven  and  forgotten : — Free  grace  blots  out  our  transgressions 
— I.  From  God's  book.     II.  With  God's  hand.     III.  Fob  God's  sakb.     IV.  From 
God's  memory.     {H.  G.  Guinness.)        Evangelical  religion: — Because  of  texts 
like  this,  the  early  Church  called  Isaiah  the  Evangelical  Prophet.     What  does 
"  Evangelical "  mean?   A  "  good  angel,"  a  "  good  messenger,"  bringing  good  tidings 
of  great  joy.     All  who  bring  the  good  tidings  from  God  to  sinners  are  evangelical 
preachers.     All  the  Bible  prophets  were  evangelical,  else  they  would  not  have 
been  there.     Moses  himself  was  evangelical;  even  law  in  the  Old  Testament 
has  evangelical  issues,  and  Moses  was  a  schoolmaster  to  lead  us  to  Christ.     I.  Thb 
NAME  which  God  gives  Himself.     "  I,  even  I,  am  He."     You  do  not  find  this 
style  save  in  the  Bible.     This  was  God's  maimer   of   speech.     Baal  could  not 
say  this,  nor  the  gods  of  Egypt.     God  speaks  to  you  as  a  man  amongst  men: 
"  I  have  something  to  say  to  you."     When  He  singles  you  out,  that  is  often  the 
beginning  of   personal  religion.     God  speaks  to  you  and  me  personally;   there 
is  none  save  Jesus  Christ  between  God  and  myself.     Whatever  your  name  is, 
put  it  into  this  text,  and  lift  up  your  soul  in  every  sentence,  making  them  petitions. 
Israel  had  grown  weary  of  God,  and  had  got  broken  and  scattered.     Are  there 
not  those  who  are  weary  of  Sabbath  services,  and  wish  Monday  had  come  to 
get  back  to  business?     They  love  entertainments  and  social  gaieties;  but  tire  of 
Sabbath  preaching.     Another  of  Israel's  sins  is  found  in  the  context,  "  Thou 
hast  bought  Me  no  sweet  cane  with  money."     Did  God  indeed  care  for  sweet 
cane?     If  you  go  back  to  chapter  iii.  you  will  find  a  list  of  the  ornaments  and 
dresses,  and  what  they  spent  their  money  upon.     Read  this  and  digest  it.     Bring 
your  bank  books  and  drink  books  and  tobacco  books  ;  compare  them  with  what 
you  have  contributed  to  the  upholding  of  evangelical  religion.     Take  your  sins 
to  God,  and  He  will  blot  them  out.     II.  "  For  Mine  own  sake."     Not  for  thy 
sake;  that  rather  takes  a  man  down.     It  is  aU  owing  to  grace.     I  quite  agree 
to  the  terms.     Pardon  my  preachings,  my  sermons,  and  take  me  in  a  pauper. 
How  does  that  suit  your  views? — it  suits  me.     In  the  New  Testament  we  have 
it  put  for  Jesus'  sake;  it  is  the  same  thing  at  bottom.     III.  "  Will  not  remembbb 
THY  sins."     How  God  forgets,  I  cannot  tell.     Isaiah  says  our  sins  will  never 
again  come  tip  to  mind,  but  I  cannot  imagine  how  I  can  forget  my  own  sins. 
Some  men  say  they  have  forgiven  you;  your  offence  is  dead.     It's  all  past;  but 
you  see  from  the  man's  eyes  that  it  isn't  past,  and  other  people  know  about  it. 
Take  some  examples  of  Jesus'  way  of  forgiveness.     You  might  have  said,  had 
you  not  known,  that  the  first  to  'meet  Him  after  His  resurrection  would  have 
been  the  Virgin,  or  the  women  of  substance  who  ministered  unto  Him.     But 
it  was  the  Magdalene  that  was  the  first  to  gaze  on  His  resurrection  form!     This 
was  just  like  Himself.     And  if  Judas  had  not  fallen  utterly,  and  gone  to  his  own 
place,  might  he  not  have  been  chosen  to  preach  the  great  coronation  sermon 
of  Jesus?     Peter,  the  next  great  sinner,  was  chosen.     Look  how  Jesus  did:  He 
gets  the  best  service  out  of  sinners,  such  as  I.     {A.  Whyte,  D.D.)        Forgiveness : 
— There  is  one  thing  that  God   always  does  with  sin.     He  removes  it   out  of 
His    presence.      God    caimot    dwell    with    sin.      When    He    casts    away    the 
guilty  soul  into  an  unapproachable  distance,  and  when  He  pardons  a  penitent 
soul.  He  is  doing  the  same  thing  in  both  cases — removing  sin.     I.  The  Author 
op  POBGivKNESS.     The  expression,  "  I,  even  I,"  is  not  a  very  unfrequent  one 
in  Scripture;  but  wherever  it  occurs — whether  in  reference  to  justice  or  mercy— 


CHAP,  xun.]  ISAIAH.  383 

it  is  the  mark  of  the  Almighty,  at  that  moment  taking  to  Himself,  in  some  special 
degree,  some  sovereign  prerogative.  Here,  the  magnificent  repetition  of  that 
Name,  first  given  in  the  bush,  was  evidently  intended  to  show  one  characteristic 
feature  of  God's  love.  He  forgives  like  a  sovereign.  All  His  attributes  are 
brought  to  bear  upon  our  peace.  II.  Thb  nature  of  foeoiveness.  1.  As  to 
time.  The  verb  runs  in  the  present  tense — "  blotteth  out."  2.  As  to  degree. 
You  could  not  read — Satan  could  not  read — a  trace  where  God's  obliterating 
hand  has  once  passed.  3.  As  to  continuance.  The  present  swells  out  into  the 
future.  "  WiU  not  remember  "  III.  The  eeason  OF  forgiveness.  {J.  Vaughan, 
M.A.)  Forgiveness: — In  the  foregoing  verses  we  have  a  heavy  accusation 
drawn  up  against  the  Jews.  But  no  severity  follows  hereupon;  but,  "  I,  even  I, 
am  He  that  blotteth  out  thy  transgressions  for  Mine  own  sake,  and  will  not 
remember  thy  sins."  The  like  parallel  place  we  have  concerning  Ephraim 
(Isa.  Ivii.  17,  18).  Here  is  the  prerogative  of  free  grace:  to  infer  pardon  where 
the  guilty  themselves  can  infer  only  their  own  execution.  It  is  the  guise  of  mercy, 
to  make  strange  and  abrupt  inferences  from  sin  to  pardon.  I.  Here  is  the  Person 
that  gives  out  the  pardon,  i.e.,  God.  God  seems  more  to  triumph  in  the  glory  of 
His  pardoning  grace  and  mercy  than  He  doth  in  any  other  of  His  attributes.  "  I, 
even  I,  am  He."  Such  a  stately  preface  must  needs  usher  in  somewhat  wherein 
God's  honour  is  much  advanced.  II.  As  for  the  pardon  itself;  that  is  expressed  in 
two  things:  "  blotteth  out  "  ;  "  will  not  remember."  1.  Blotting  out  implies — 
(1)  That  our  transgressions  are  written  down.  Written  they  are  in  a  twofold 
book — God's  remembrance;  our  own  conscience.  (2)  A  legal  discharge  of  the  debt. 
A  book  that  is  once  blotted  and  crossed  stands  void  in  law.  "  I  wiU  not  remember 
thy  sins."  III.  The  imptilsive  cause,  that  moves  God's  hand,  as  it  were,  to  blot 
out  our  transgressions.  "  For  Mine  own  sake."  1.  That  is,  because  it  is  My 
pleasure.  2.  Because  of  that  great  honour  and  glory  that  will  accrue  to  My  great 
name  by  it.  (E.  Hopkins,  D.D.)  Remission  of  sin: — 1.  Remission  of  sin  is 
no  act  of  ours,  but  an  act  of  God's  only.  2.  Remission  of  sin  makes  sin  to  be  as 
if  it  had  never  been  committed.  3.  Upon  remission  of  sin  God  no  longer  accounts 
of  us  as  sinners,  but  as  just  and  righteous.  4.  Pardoning  grace  can  as  easily 
triumph  in  the  remitting  of  great  and  many  sins  as  of  few  and  small  sins.  [Ibid.) 
The  forgiveness  of  sins : — That  article  in  the  Creed,  "  I  believe  in  the  forgiveness 
of  sins,"  is  too  little  thought  of.  Men  flippantly  declare  that  they  believe  in  it 
when  they  are  not  conscious  of  any  great  sin  of  their  own;  but  when  his  trans- 
gression is  made  apparent  to  a  man,  and  his  iniquity  comes  home  to  him,  it  is 
quite  another  matter.  No  stocks  can  hold  a  man  so  fast  as  his  own  guilty  fears. 
With  the  desponding,  I  shall  try  to  deal.  I.  There  is  forgiveness.  1.  This 
appears  in  the  treatment  of  sinners  by  God,  inasmuch  as  He  spares  their  forfeited 
lives.  2.  Why  did  God  institute  the  ceremonial  law,  if  there  were  no  ways  of 
pardoning  transgression?  The  evident  design  of  the  whole  Mosaic  economy  was 
to  reveal  to  man  the  existence  of  mercy  in  the  heart  of  God,  and  the  effectual 
operation  of  that  mercy  in  washing  away  sin.  3.  If  there  is  no  forgiveness  of 
sin,  why  has  the  Lord  given  to  sinful  men  exhortations  to  repent?  4.  There 
must  be  pardons  in  the  hand  of  God,  or  why  the  institution  of  religious  worship 
among  us  to  this  day?  5.  Why  did  Christ  institute  the  Christian  ministry,  and 
send  forth  His  servants  to  proclaim  His  Gospel?  6.  Why  are  we  taught  in  that 
blessed  model  of  prayer  which  our  Saviour  has  left  us  to  say,  "  Forgive  us  our 
trespasses,  as  we  forgive  them  that  trespass  against  us  "  ?  It  is  evident  that  God 
means  us  to  give  a  true  absolution  to  all  who  have  offended  us.  But  then.  He 
has  linked  with  that  forgiveness  our  prayer  for  mercy,  teaching  us  to  ask  that 
He  would  forgive  us  as  we  forgive  them.  If,  then,  our  forgiveness  is  real,  so 
is  His.  7.  God  has  actually  forgiven  multitudes  of  siimers.  II.  This  forgive- 
ness IS  tantamount  to  forgetting  sin.  He  wishes  us  to  know  that  His  pardon 
is  so  true  and  deep  that  it  amounts  to  an  absolute  oblivion,  a  total  forgetting 
of  all  the  wrong-doing  of  the  pardoned  ones.  1.  To  speak  popularly,  a  man  lays 
up  a  thing  in  his  mind;  but  when  sin  is  forgiven  it  is  not  laid  up  in  God's  mind. 
2.  In  remembering,  men  also  consider  and  meditate  on  things;  but  the  Lord  will 
not  think  over  the  sins  of  His  people.  3.  Sometimes  you  have  almost  forgotten 
a  thing,  but  an  event  happens  which  recalls  it  so  vividly  that  it  seems  as  if  it 
were  perpetrated  but  yesterday.  God  wiU  not  recall  the  sin  of  the  pardoned. 
4.  This  not  remembering  means  that  God  will  never  seek  any  further  atonement. 
Under  the  old  law  there  was  remembrance  of  sins  made  every  year  on  the  day 
of  atonement;  but  now  the  blessed  One  hath  entered  once  for  all  within  the  veil^ 


384  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xun. 


and  hath  put  away  sin  for  ever  by  the  sacrifice  of  Himself,  so  that  there  remaineth 
no  more  sacrifice  for  sin.     5.  When  it  is  said  that  God  forgets  our  sins,  it  signifies 
that  He  will  never  punish  us  for  them ;  next,  that  He  will  never  upbraid  us  with 
them.     6.  What  does  it  mean  but  this — that  He  will  not  treat  us  any  the 
less  generously  on  account  of  our  having  been  great  sinners?     Look  how  the 
Lord  takes  some  of  the  biggest  sinners,  and  uses  them  for  His  glory,     m.  FoB- 
GIVENBSS  IS  TO  BB  HAD.     How?     Through  the  atoning  blooi     Come  for  it  in 
God's   appointed   way.     "  Repent."     "  Believe   on    the   Lord   Jesus    Christ." 
{C.  H.  Spurgeon.)        The  forgiveness  of  sins: — L  Thb  speakbb.     Whose  voice 
thus  proclaims  obliteration  of  transgressions?     A  silver  trumpet  thus  introduces 
the  word:  "  Thus  saith  the  Lord,  your  Redeemer,  the  Holy  One  of  Israel."     "  I 
am  the  Lord,  your  Holy  One,  the  Creator  of  Israel,  your  King."     Jehovah  speaks 
from  His  high  throne.     If  other  lips  had  thus  addressed  offenders,  the  word  might 
have  been  empty,  vain,  and  even  worse:   it   might   have  relieved   no  doubts, 
healed  no  wounds,  diffused  no  peace.     Sin  is  terrible,  because  it  is  an  offence 
against  God.     "  Who  can  forgive  sins  but  God  alone  ?  "     "  To  the  Lord  our  God," 
and  to  the  Lord  our  God  alone, "  belong  mercies  and  forgivenesses."    IL  The  bepb- 
TiTiOK.    "  I,  even  I,  am  He."   The  Person  who  forgives  twice  shows  Himself.    This 
reduplication  cannot  be  without  strong  cause,  for  there  are  no  superfluous  words 
from  Divine  lips.     It  is  at  once  apparent  that  our  God,  in  the  riches  of  His  grace, 
desires  thus  to  awaken  attention,  to  rivet  thought,  to  banish  apprehension,  to 
deepen  confidence,  to  inscribe  the  truth  deeper  on  the  heart.     Hence  the  timidity 
of  doubt  assumes  the  aspect  of  impiety:  incredulity  becomes  insult.     This  impor- 
tant view  is  powerfully  established  by  the  context.     The  preceding  verses  exhibit 
Jehovah  arrayed  in  robes  of  majesty.     As  Creator  He  claims  service  from  the 
creatures  of  His  hands;  He  demands  the  due  revenue  of  adoration:  "  This  people 
have  I  formed  for  Myself  :  they  shall  show  forth  My  praise."     The  scene  then 
changes  ;   and  He  confronts  them  with  appalling  charges.     In  these,  as  in  a 
mirror,  the  vileness  of  the  human  heart  is  seen.     Worship  is  not  rendered ;  prayer  is 
withheld;   communion  is   shunned.     The   charge  is   unanswerable.     Wliat  can 
the  issue  be  ?    Will  patience  cease  to  forbear  ?    Will  indignation  blaze  ?    The 
sentence  follows.     "  I,  even  I,   am  He,"   &c.     What  exquisite   pathos:   what 
marvellous  grace!     How  Godlike:  how  unlike  the  utterance  of  man !     III.  Thus 
the  focal  lustre  of  the  word  is  reached — the  completeness  of  forgiveness. 
God  ordains  forgiveness  absolute,  unrestricted,  unfenced  by  boundaries,  uncon- 
fined  by  barriers.     "  He  blotteth  out."     It  is  true  that  the  word  has  different 
shades  of  meaning,  according  to  its  context;  but  its  main  purport  is  neither 
vague  nor  obscure.     It  generally  places  sins   in   the   most  formidable  light  as 
recorded  debts.     It  displays  them  as  written  in  the  pages  of  a  book  of  reckoning, 
rigidly,  exactly, — without  extenuation;  and  then  leads  to  the  fact  that  they  are 
completely  erased, — expunged.     Not  merely  crossed,  for  then  they  might  be  read 
again,  and  subsequent  demand  be  made ;  but  so  eradicated  tnat  no  trace  can  be 
discerned.     But  the  vexing  thought  may  intrude,  that  memory  will  continually 
recall  his  many  and  mighty  sins.     He  tremulously  may  reason.  If  I  cannot  forget, 
will  not  God  remember  too  ?     Amid  all  tokens  of  Divine  love,  will  not  my  mind 
revert  to  former  scenes,  and  be  downcast  ?     I  shall  see,  or  think  I  see,  amid 
heaven's  smiles,  a  reminder  of  my  sinful  course  on  earth.     Let  such  thought  be 
cast  into  oblivion's  lowest  depths.     It  is  unscriptural :  it  is  derogatory  to  the 
glorious  Gospel  of  free  grace.     Mark  how  the  word  contradicts  it:  "I  will  not 
remember  thy  sins"  (Jer.  xxxi.  34).     Let  none  say,  How  can  this  be  ?     Let  it 
not  be  objected,  such  mental  process  is  contrary  to  all  experience:  it  is  aUen  to  the 
properties  of  retentive  thought.     Let  it  be  remembered  that  we  are  now  dealing 
with  God:  His  ways  are  not  our  ways.     IV.  The  moving  cause.     Man  reaps 
eternal  benefit;  but  the  spring  from  which  the  blessing  flows  is  high  in  heaven. 
Man  and  man's  deeds  are  universal  provocation:  in  him  there  is  no  moving  merit. 
If  God  did  not  originate  forgiveness  for  the  glory  of  His  name,  no  sin  could  have 
been  blotted  out.     But  God's  glory  is  His  final  end;  therefore  He  blots  out  trans- 
gressions "  for  His  own  sake."     Thus  heaven  shall  re-echo  with  His  praise,  and 
eternity  prolong  the  grateful  hallelujah.     (H.  Law,  M.A.)        Free  pardon:— 
The  remarkable  point  is  not  merely  that  the  absolution  contained  in  the  text  is 
preceded  and  succeeded  by  verses  of  accusation,  but  that  it  breaks  in  upon  the 
connection,  and  cleaves  the  sense  right  in  the  middle.     The  king's  messenger  of 
mercy  rides  through  the  ranks  of  the  men-at-arms  in  hot  haste,  sounding  his  silver 
bugle  as  he  clears  his  way;  he  cannot  linger,  his  message  is  too  precious  to  be 


CHAP.  XLin.]  ISAIAH.  385 

made  to  tarry.  We  may  conclude  that  men  know  and  prize  Divine  mercy  mos<" 
when  they  most  feel  the  weight  of  their  sins.  I.  The  nature  of  the  pardon 
WHICH  IS  HERB  SO  GRACIOUSLY  ANNOUNCED.  1.  It  is  a  pardon  from  God  Himself, 
from  Him  who  is  offended.  This  is  the  more  delightful  because  we  know  that  only 
He  could  forgive.  Inasmuch  as  the  pardon  comes  from  God,  He  alone  it  is  who 
knows  the  full  extent  of  sin.  2.  The  reason  why  it  is  given.  "  For  Mine  own 
sake."  The  entire  motive  of  God  for  forgiving  sin  lies  within  Himself.  No  man 
has  his  sins  forgiven  because  they  are  little,  for  the  smallest  sin  will  ruin  the  soul, 
and  every  sin  is  great.  Each  sin  has  the  essence  of  rebellion  in  it,  and  rebelUon 
is  a  great  evil  before  God.  Again,  no  man's  sin  is  forgiven  on  the  ground  that  his 
repentance  is  meritorious.  By  God's  grace,  forgiven  men  are  made  to  do  better; 
but  it  is  not  the  foresight  of  any  betterness  on  their  part  which  leads  God  to  the 
forgiveness.  That  cannot  be  a  motive,  for  if  they  do  better  their  improvement 
is  His  work  in  them.  The  only  motive  which  God  has  for  pardoning  sinners  is  one 
which  lies  within  Himself:  "  for  Mine  own  sake."  And  what  is  that  motive? 
The  Lord  knows  all  His  motive,  and  it  is  not  for  us  to  measure  it;  but  is  it  not 
first,  that  He  may  indulge  His  mercy  ?  Mercy  is  the  last  exercised,  but  the  most 
pleasing  to  Himself,  of  all  His  attributes.  He  has  this  motive,  too,  which  is 
within  Himself,  that  He  may  glorify  His  Son,  who  is  one  with  Himself.  What 
a  comfort  this  is;  for  if,  when  looking  into  my  soul,  I  cannot  see  any  reason  why 
God  should  save  me,  I  need  not  look  there,  since  the  motive  lies  yonder,  in  His  own 
gracious  bosom.  3.  It  is  noteworthy  in  this  glorious  text  how  complete  and 
universal  the  pardon  is.  The  Lord  makes  a  clean  sweep  of  the  whole  dreadful 
heap  of  our  sins.  Our  sins  of  omission  are  all  gone.  Those  are  the  sins  which  ruin 
men.  At  the  last  great  day  the  Judge  will  say,  "  I  was  an  hungred,  and  ye  gave 
Me  no  meat,"  &c.  Those  on  the  left  hand  were  not  condemned  for  what  they 
did  do,  but  for  what  they  did  not  do.  Then  He  mentions  actual  sins.  "  Thou 
hast  made  Me  to  serve  with  thy  sins  ";  but  He  blots  them  out,  transgressions  and 
sins,  both  forms  of  evil.  This  is  the  very  joy  and  glory  of  Gospel  absolution. 
The  believer  knows  that  his  sins  are  not  in  the  process  of  being  pardoned,  but  are 
actually  pardoned  at  this  moment.  The  pardon  is  noteworthy  on  account  of  its 
being  most  effectual  It  is  described  as  blotting  out.  Blotting  out  is  a  very 
thorough  way  of  settling  a  thing.  If  an  account  has  been  standing  in  the  ledger 
a  long  time,  and  the  pen  is  drawn  through  it,  it  remains  no  longer.  And  then  mark 
the  wonderful  expression,  "  I  will  not  remember  thy  sins."  Can  God  forget  ? 
Forgetting  with  God  cannot  be  an  infirmity,  as  it  is  with  us.  We  forget  because 
our  memory  fails,  but  God  forgets  in  the  blessed  sense  that  He  remembers  rather 
the  merit  of  His  Son  than  our  sins.  II.  The  effect  of  this  pardon  wherever 
IT  comes  with  power  to  the  soul.  Timid  persons  have  thought  that  the  free 
pardon  of  sin  would  lead  men  to  indulge  in  it.  No  doubt  some  are  base  enough  to 
pervert  it  to  that  use,  but  there  was  never  a  soul  that  did  really  receive  pardon 
from  God  who  could  find  in  that  pardon  any  excuse  for  sin  or  any  hcence  to  con- 
tinue longer  in  it;  for  all  God's  people  argue  thus:  "  Shall  we  sin  that  grace  may 
abound  ?  God  forbid.  How  shall  we  that  are  dead  to  sin  live  any  longer  therein  ? 
At  first,  mercy  fills  us  with  surprise;  then,  with  holy  regret.  We  feel,  What,  and 
is  this  the  God  I  have  been  standing  out  against  so  long?  It  next  creates  in  us 
fervent  love.  (C.  H.  Spurgeon.)  Subdued  by  forgiveness  : — Many  years  ago  in 
Russia  a  regiment  of  troops  mutinied.  They  were  at  some  distance  from  the 
capital,  and  were  so  furious  that  they  murdered  their  officers,  and  resolved  never 
-^  iubmit  to  discipline ;  but  the  emperor,  who  was  an  exceedingly  wise  and  saga- 
cious man,  no  sooner  heard  of  it  than,  aU  alone  and  unattended,  he  went  into  the 
barracks  when  the  men  were  drawn  up,  and  addressing  them  sternly,  he  said  to 
them,  "  Soldiers,  you  have  committed  such  offences  against  the  law  that  every  one 
of  you  deserves  to  be  put  to  death.  There  is  no  hope  of  any  mercy  for  one  of  you 
unless  you  lay  down  your  arms  immediately,  and  surrender  at  discretion  to  me, 
your  emperor."  And  they  did  it  there  and  then,  though  the  heads  of  their  officers 
were  lying  at  their  feet.  They  threw  down  their  arms  and  surrendered,  and  he 
said  at  once,  "  Men,  I  pardon  you;  you  will  be  the  bravest  troops  I  ever  had." 
And  they  were,  too.  That  is  just  what  God  says  to  the  sinner.  (Ibid.)  The 
surprise  of  God's  mercy  :-^li  you  have  a  dog  at  the  table,  and  you  throw  him  a 
scrap  of  meat,  he  swallows  it  directly;  but  if  you  were  to  set  the  whole  joint  down 
on  the  floor  before  him,  he  would  turn  away.  He  would  feel  that  you  could  not 
mean  to  give  a  fine  joint  of  meat  to  a  dog.  He  would  not  think  of  touching  it ;  at 
least,  few  dogs  would.  And  it  seemed  to  me  as  if  the  Lord  could  not  have  meant 
VOL.  II. — 25 


386  TEE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xLin. 

all  the  wonders  of  His  love  for  such  a  dog  as  I  was.  I  was  ready  to  turn  away 
from  it  through  the  greatness  of  it.  But  then  I  recollected  that  it  would  not  do 
for  God  to  be  giving  Uttle  mercy.  He  was  too  great  a  God  to  spend  all  His  power 
in  pardoning  little  sinners  and  granting  little  favours;  and  I  came  back  to  this — 
that  if  His  grace  was  not  too  big  for  Him  to  give,  I  would  not  be  such  a  fool 
as  to  refuse  it  because  of  its  greatness.     {Ibid. ) 

Ver.  26.  Put  Me  In  remembrance. — "  Put  Me  in  remembrance "  .• — I.  Takb 
SOME  GENERAL  NOTICE  OP  THE  COMMAND  HERE  GIVEN.  This  Command,  "  Put  Me 
in  remembrance,"  by  no  means  supposes  that  God  is  unmindful  of  any  promise,  or 
ignorant  of  any  case.  1.  It  is  His  pleasure  to  see  a  sinner  reduced  so  low  as  to  have 
nothing  to  rest  upon,  nothing  to  plead  but  the  promise.  2.  God  will  bring  the 
sinner  to  such  a  frame  as  will  render  the  blessing  of  pardon  sweet  when  it  comes. 
3.  The  expression  in  the  text  evidences  the  strict  connection  which  there  is  between 
the  means  and  the  end.  It  is  grace  which  appears  in  the  promises,  and  it  is  grace 
which  convinces  the  soul  of  its  need  of  those  blessings  that  are  contained  in  them. 
If  you  are  led  to  see  that  these  promises  contain  all  your  salvation  and  all  your 
desire,  and  that  all  is  dispensed  freely,  this  will  draw  out  the  heart  in  prayer  and 
BuppUcation.  Prayer  opens  a  communication  between  God  and  the  soul.  "  I 
will  pardon ";  "I  will  not  remember  thy  sin  " — that  is  the  promise.  "  Put  Me  in 
remembrance  "  is  the  command.  It  is  the  privilege  of  a  sin-burdened  soul  to 
remind  God  of  His  covenant  engagements,  to  lay  the  promises  of  His  grace  before 
Him,  to  plead  the  merit  of  the  Redeemer's  sacrifice,  to  set  the  creature's  misery 
and  God's  mercy  in  opposition  to  each  other,  to  compare  our  poverty  with  that 
fulness  of  grace  which  the  Gospel  reveals.  Instead  of  waiting  for  qualifications 
in  order  to  obtain  mercy,  we  are  to  rest  the  whole  weight  of  our  argument  upon 
the  grace  which  shines  in  the  promise,  and  which  will  be  greatly  honoured  in  the 
actual  pardon  of  our  guilty  souls.  II.  Observe  what  it  is  which  an  awakened 
SOTIL  hath  to  remind  God  of.  1.  The  soul  reminds  God  of  His  grace,  and  argues 
from  the  freeness  of  it.  2.  The  firmness  of  His  promises.  3.  The  concern  of  God's 
glory  in  the  pardon  and  salvation  of  sinners.     III.  Open  the  nature  of  the 

DECLARATION  AVHICH  HE  MAKES  BEFORE  THE  THRONE  OF  MERCY.      "  Declare  thoU, 

that  thou  mayest  be  justified."  Declaration  in  law  is  showing  cause  why  judgment 
should  not  be  executed.  There  must  be  a  declaration  of  an  adequate  righteousness 
in  order  to  our  justification  before  God.  Our  guilt  would  sink  us  into  the  lowest 
depths  of  misery  if  God  did  not  admit  our  plea  through  Jesus.  We  must  also 
declare  om-  hearty  approbation  of  God's  method  of  dispensing  these  His  favours. 
Inferences — 1.  We  see  the  reason  why  God  will  have  the  promises  of  His  grace  to 
be  pleaded  before  the  Throne;  it  is  not  to  help  His  memory,  but  to  exercise  and 
encourage  our  faith.  2.  How  greatly  are  they  to  be  pitied,  who  can  remember 
any  thing  but  that  which  it  concerns  them  above  all  to  attend  to.  3.  Have  any 
of  you  pleaded  the  promises,  cried  for  mercy  and  grace,  and  yet  seemed  to  find  no 
help?  Be  not  discouraged,  though  the  Lord  wait,  yet  tarry  for  Him,  He  waiteth 
that  He  may  be  more  abundantly  gracious.  4.  Consider  what  glories  are  reserved 
for  that  future  world,  when  all  the  promises  shall  be  completely  fulfilled.  {J.  King, 
B.A.)  A  great  controversy : — These  words  foUow  immediately  on  that  beautiful 
declaration — "  I,  even  I,  am  He,"  &c.  We  shall  find  that  our  text  has  great 
bignificance  when  taken  in  connection  with  this  most  gracious  saying.  1.  We 
cannot  but  remark  on  the  apparent  strangeness,  that  there  should  be  any  appeal 
to  reason  or  argument,  where  the  matter  involved  is  undoubtedly  the  great 
doctrine  of  atonement.  Though  there  is  no  express  statement  of  this  doctrine, 
no  one  acquainted  with  the  appointed  mode  of  salvation,  which  has  been  the  same 
in  every  dispensation,  will  question  that  the  work  of  the  ]\Iediator  is  tacitly  under- 
stood  whensoever  there  is  a  promise  of  the  forgiveness  of  sin.  If  this  be  implied, 
how  strange  that  God  should  no  sooner  have  referred  to  the  scheme  of  our  redemp- 
tion than  He  invites  us  to  reason  with  Himself.  Undoubtedly  the  scheme  of  our 
redemption  is  such  as  could  never  have  been  imagined,  and  such  even  as,  when 
revealed,  it  rather  becomes  us  reverently  to  receive  than  curiously  to  investigate. 
But,  nevertheless,  it  is  quite  possible  to  err  on  the  other  side — to  be  as  much 
afraid  of  allowing  reason  to  intermeddle  with  the  plan  of  redemption.  There 
is  all  the  difference  between  the  being  able  to  discover  this  plan  and  the  being  able, 
when  discovered,  to  determine  its  excellence  and  fitness.  2.  We  should  hold  it  ta 
be  as  great  a  falsehood  as  could  be  alleged  against  the  Gospel  were  it  to  be  said, 
that  it  does  not  commend  itself  to  man  as  exactly  what  he  needs;  so  that,  if  he 


CHAP,  tttttt]  ISAIAH.  387 

receive  it,  he  must  receive  it  on  the  strength  of  external  testimony,  and  not  at  all 
on  his  consciousness  of  its  meeting  his  necessities.  3.  The  text,  following  on  a 
promise  that  sin  shall  be  blotted  out,  may  be  said  to  invite  us  to  a  debate,  and  to 
propose,  as  the  topic  of  debate,  the  salvation  of  sinners  through  the  atonement 
made  by  Christ.  It  is  God  Himself  who  offers  to  plead  on  the  other  side,  if  we  take 
that  of  the  strangeness  of  the  Gospel,  its  inexpUcable  character  as  addressed  to 
beings  so  circumstanced  as  ourselves.  How  shall  the  argument  be  carried  on, 
or  by  whom  shall  the  discussion  be  opened?  We  will  not  attempt  to  give  the 
precise  pleading  on  both  sides,  but  rather  sum  up  the  facts  and  statements  of  the 
controversy.  We  suppose  man  aware  of  his  lost  condition  by  nature,  and  pene- 
trated with  such  a  sense  of  the  attributes  of  God  as  forbids  his  expecting  that  sin 
may  go  unpunished  under  such  a  government  as  the  Divine.  And  if  a  man  in  this 
state  were  made  acquainted  with  the  Gospel  of  Christ,  he  would  want  nothing  but 
evidence  of  the  truth  of  this  Gospel;  he  would  find  an  additional  evidence  in  the 
exactness  with  which  it  met  his  ascertained  wants.  There  is  therefore  nothing 
to  shrink  from  in  the  challenge  of  the  text.  A  forgiveness,  based  on  a  propitiation, 
and  followed  by  sanctification,  is  what  God  propounds  as  His  scheme  of  redemption ; 
and  such  a  scheme  He  invites  us  to  discuss  with  Him  in  person.  What,  then, 
have  you  to  say?  You  lie  under  condemnation:  how  can  you  be  pardoned  when 
you  have  punishment  to  endure?  The  scheme  lays  the  punishment  on  another. 
You  are  of  a  depraved  nature,  inclined  to  evil,  and  therefore  unfit  for  communion 
with  your  Maker :  how  can  such  as  you  enter  the  kingdom  of  heaven?  The  scheme 
provides  for  your  thorough  regeneration.  If  all  the  difficulties  which  reason  can 
find  in  the  way  of  redemption  lie  either  in  the  necessities  of  man  or  the  attributes 
of  God,  and  if  the  scheme  of  redemption  through  Christ  meet  the  first  and  yield 
the  second,  so  that  even  reason  herself  can  perceive  that  it  satisfies  every  human 
want  and  compromises  no  Divine  perfection,  why  should  we  not  allow  that, 
reason  herself  being  judge,  the  Gospel  is  in  every  respect  precisely  such  a  com- 
munication as  is  suited  to  the  case?  4.  We  have  hitherto  confined  our  attention 
to  the  fact  that  it  is  to  an  argument,  or  discussion,  that  we  are  invited  by  God, 
when  He  is  about  to  lay  before  us,  in  a  most  simple  but  comprehensive  form. 
His  great  scheme  of  delivering  us  through  a  propitiation  for  sin.  But  the  con- 
cluding words  of  our  text — "  Declare  thou,  that  thou  mayest  be  justified  " — 
seem  to  allow  you,  if  you  choose,  to  bring  forward  any  excuse  which  you  may  have 
for  not  closing  with  the  gracious  proffer  of  salvation  through  Christ.  We  may, 
however,  take  another,  and  perhaps  equally  just  view  of  the  controversy  which 
is  indicated,  though  not  laid  open  by  our  text.  The  verses  which  follow — "  Thy 
first  father  hath  sinned,"  &c.,  would  seem  to  imply  that  the  Jews  miu-mured  at 
God's  dealings  with  them;  for  God  is  evidently  vindicating  Himself.  Come  aU  of 
you  who  think  that  you  are  in  any  way  hardly  dealt  with  by  God,  approach  and 
plead  your  cause;  it  is  the  Almighty  Himself  who  saith — "  Declare  thou,  that  thou 
maj'est  be  justified."  You  need  not  therefore  hesitate  to  utter  plainly  all  you 
think,  and  to  make  statement  of  your  grievances.  You  urge,  it  may  be,  that  your 
lot  is  one  of  trial  and  affliction;  that  troubles  are  multiplied  beyond  your  power 
of  endurance,  temptations  beyond  jonr  power  of  resistance ;  that,  born  as  you  are 
with  corrupt  tendencies,  placed  in  a  scene  where  there  is  everything  to  incite  you  to 
sin,  you  are  summoned  to  duties  which  are  manifestly  too  arduous,  and  threatened 
in  the  event  of  failure  with  punishments  which  are  as  manifestly  excessive  and 
severe.  Well,  keep  nothing  back;  be  as  minute  as  you  will  in  exposing  the  harsh- 
ness of  God's  dealings,  whether  individually  with  yourselves  or  generally  with 
mankind;  and  then,  having  pleaded  your  own  cause,  listen  to  what  the  Almighty 
mW  say ;  it  is  He  Himself  who  hath  invited  you  into  controversy,  and  therefore 
when  you  have  urged  aU  your  grievances,  be  silent  that  God  may  be  heard  in  reply. 
And  I  know  what  you  expect  to  hear:  you  expect  a  defence  as  elaborate  as  the 
charge.  But  when  you  are  hearkening  for  the  copious  apology  and  acute  con- 
tradiction, lo,  there  is  heard  nothing  but  the  beautiful  promise — "  I,  even  I,  am  He 
that  blotteth  out  thy  transgressions  for  Mine  own  sake,  and  will  not  remember 
thy  sins."  If  you  have  anything  to  say  after  such  a  promise,  say  it;  make  what 
you  can  of  your  case.  So  that  the  promise  is  to  be  taken  as  a  sufficient  answer  to 
all  that  can  be  urged.  But  what  has  such  a  promise  to  do  with  the  matter  ?  How 
does  it  end  the  controversy  ?  '  Do  ye  ask  ?  Or  rather,  does  not  this  simple  but  most 
gracious  announcement  of  arrangements  for  the  complete  rescue  of  humankind 
from  all  their  misery  and  all  their  guilt  make  you  feel  ashamed  of  having  urged 
any  complaint,  and  aware  that  in  place  of  murmurs  you  ought  to  utter  only  praises ' 


388  TEE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  XLin. 

6.  We  wish  to  impress  upon  you  one  great  lesson — that  it  is  your  business  to 
obey  God's  commands  rather  than  to  explain  God's  dealings.  {H.  Mdvill,  B.D.) 
A  loving  entreaty  : — Understand  my  text,  however  paradoxical  it  may  seem,  as 
being  a  genuine  invitation  on  the  part  of  a  gracious  God  to  the  most  provoking 
of  men.  I.  Our  text  appears  as  A  humbling  challenge.  God  had  punished  Israel 
on  account  of  sin.  Israel  was  not  penitent,  but  in  self-righteousness  judged  that 
the  Lord  was  harsh  and  severe.  "  Come,  then,"  says  God,  "  come  and  plead 
your  suit  with  Me.  Put  Me  in  remembrance  of  any  virtues  on  your  part  wluch  I 
may  be  supposed  to  have  overlooked.  If  I  have  misjudged  you,  if  you  have  not 
really  been  neglectful  of  My  service  and  worship,  let  the  matter  be  rectified.  If 
really  you  have  a  righteousness  of  your  own,  put  Me  in  remembrance  of  it."  1.  On 
looking  back  we  find  that  the  Lord  had  charged  His  people  with  neglect  of  prayer. 
"  But  thou  hast  not  called  upon  Me,  0  Jacob."  This  is  the  charge  which  we  are 
compelled  to  bring  against  all  unconverted  men  and  women.  Perhaps  you  offer 
a  form  of  prayer ;  but  that  is  nothing  if  your  heart  goes  not  with  the  words.  This 
is  rather  to  mock  God  than  truly  to  caU  upon  Him.  But  come  now;  if  there  be 
any  mistake  in  this  charge,  disprove  it!  2.  Next,  the  Lord  charged  it  upon  Israel 
that  they  had  not  delighted  in  Him.  "Thou  hast  been  weary  of  Me,  0  Israel." 
Can  you  deny  this?  If  you  can,  you  are  invited  to  state  your  innocence  before 
the  Lord.  3.  The  Lord  had  also  said  that  these  people  did  not  honour  Him. 
"  Thou  hast  not  brought  Me  the  small  cattle  of  thy  burnt  oflferings;  neither  hast 
thou  honoured  Me  with  thy  sacrifices."  It  may  be  you  have  presented  no  tokens 
of  love  to  the  Lord  at  all ;  or,  on  the  other  hand,  you  may  have  brought  sacrifices, 
but  you  have  not  honoured  God  by  them.  You  have  given  that  you  might  be 
known  to  give,  or  because  others  did  so,  but  not  with  the  view  of  honouring  God. 
Yet  if  it  be  so,  if  any  unconverted  man  can  say  that  whether  he  eats  or  drinks,  or 
whatsoever  he  does,  he  seeks  to  do  all  to  the  glory  of  God,  this  ought  to  be  known. 
It  would  be  a  new  thing  under  the  sun.  In  truth,  it  would  prove  that  the  man 
was  converted,  and  had  been  renewed  in  the  spirit  of  his  mind  by  the  grace  of 
God.  But  it  is  not  so.  4.  Moreover,  the  Lord  charged  Israel  that  they  did  not 
love  Him.  "  Thou  hast  bought  Me  no  sweet  cane  with  money,  neither  hast 
thou  filled  Me  with  the  fat  of  thy  sacrifices."  No  token  of  love  had  been  presented, 
but  they  had  made  the  Lord  to  serve  with  their  sins.  The  purchase  of  calamus 
with  money  had  not  come  into  their  thoughts.  They  could  not  afford  it,  they 
said;  but  when  they  were  worshipping  their  false  gods  they  could  find  money 
enough — "  They  lavish  gold  out  of  the  bag,  and  weigh  silver  in  the  balance." 
So  there  are  men  who  cannot  afford  to  give  anything  to  the  cause  of  God  or  Christian 
charity,  but  for  their  sinful  pleasures  they  can  waste  their  substance.  He  challenges 
thee  to  plead  thine  innocence  if  thou  canst.  Darest  thou  take  up  the  glove? 
6.  The  Lord  again  challenges  them  upon  the  charge  that  they  had  not  obeyed 
Him.  "  Thou  hast  made  Me  to  serve  with  thy  sins  " — thou  hast  made  Me  a  very 
slave  with  thy  waywardness.  "  Thou  hast  wearied  Me  with  thine  iniquities," — 
God's  patience  was  tried  to  the  utmost  with  their  wanton  wickedness.  Is  not  this 
charge  sadly  true  of  many?  If  it  be  not  so,  you  are  now  challenged  to  vindicate 
your  characters.  Do  not  set  up  a  lying  defence,  but  speak  the  truth.  6.  The 
challenge  before  us  is  occupied  not  only  with  the  ways  of  man,  but  with  the  ways 
of  God;  for  the  Lord  here  asserts  of  Himself,  "  I  have  not  caused  thee  to  serve 
with  an  offering,  nor  wearied  thee  with  incense."  That  is  to  say,  God  is  no  hard 
taskmaster.  The  commandments  of  God  are  essential  justice ;  you  could  not  im- 
prove upon  them;  no  law  could  be  more  for  our  benefit  than  that  which  He  has 
given  us.  If  God  has  treated  you  like  slaves,  then  say  so,  and  state  your  grievance 
in  solemn  converse  with  God.  When  God  forbids  us  anything,  it  is  because  He 
knows  it  would  be  for  our  harm;  and  when  God  commands  us  to  do  anything, 
it  is  because  He  knows  that  it  is  for  our  soul's  eternal  good.  II.  I  hope  you  will 
be  able  to  follow  me  while  our  penitence  suggests  an  amended  version.  Let  us 
take  the  text  as  our  consciousness  of  guilt  desires  to  read  it.  There  are  certain 
things  which  God  in  great  love  invites  us  to  bring  before  His  memory.  If  you 
cannot  take  up  His  challenge,  and  prove  your  personal  righteousness,  let  the 
charges  stand,  with  your  silence  as  an  assent  to  them;  and  now  plead  with  Him, 
and  pat  Him  in  remembrance  of  matters  which  may  serve  your  turn,  and  lead  to 
your  forgiveness.  1.  Put  the  Lord  in  remembrance  of  that  glorious  act  of  amnesty 
and  oblivion  which  in  sovereign  grace  He  has  proclaimed  to  the  sons  of  men  in  the 

Preceding  verse.    That  done,  proceed  to  put  the  Lord  in  remembrance  of  your  sins. 
Lake  an  open  unreserved  acknowledgment  unto  the  Lord.     Confess  this  also,  that 


CHAP.  XLUi.]  ISAIAH,  389 

you  have  continued  by  your  sins  to  go  away  from  Him  who  invites  you  to  return, 
and  promises  you  a  welcome  reception.  2.  When  you  have  done  this,  if  your 
spirit  is  much  depressed,  and  your  heart  is  driven  to  despair  by  a  sense  of  your 
guilt,  then  put  the  Lord  in  remembrance  of  the  extraordinary  reason  which  He 
gives  for  pardoning  sin:  "  I,  even  I,  am  He  that  blotteth  out  thy  transgressions 
for  Mine  own  sake."  Say  unto  Him  thus:  "  Lord,  there  is  no  reason  in  me  why 
Thou  shouldest  spare  me,  but  do  it  for  Thine  own  sake — for  Thy  love's  sake,  for 
Thy  mercy's  sake."  3.  When  you  have  gone  as  far  as  that  in  putting  God  in 
remembrance,  I  would  advise  you  to  plead  the  Lord's  purpose  and  intent  revealed 
in  verse  21:  "  This  people  have  I  formed  for  Myself;  they  shall  shew  forth  My 
praise."  Say,  "  Lord,  I  am  Thy  poor  creature.  Thou  hast  made  me;  even  my 
very  body  is  fearfully  and  wonderfully  made;  and  the  mysterious  thing  which 
dwells  within  me  which  I  call  my  soul,  is  also  the  creature  of  Thy  power.  Hast 
Thou  not  made  me  for  Thyself  ?  Wilt  Thou  not  have  a  desire  to  the  work  of  Thine 
own  hands  ?  Lord,  come  and  bless  me !  Sinner  as  I  am,  and  utterly  undeserving, 
yet  I  am  Thy  creature;  do  not  fling  me  upon  the  dunghill.  If  Thou  wilt  forgive 
me,  Lord,  might  I  not  praise  Thee?  "  4.  If  that  does  not  ease  you,  go  a  little 
further  back  in  the  chapter  till  you  come  to  verse  19:  "  Behold,  I  will  do  a  new 
thing,"  &c.  Plead  that  pubUshed  declaration!  Say,  "Lord,  Thou  hast  said 
'  I  will  do  a  new  thing ' :  it  will  indeed  be  a  new  thing  if  I  am  saved.  I  am  driven 
to  such  self- abhorrence,  that  if  ever  I  am  saved  I  shall  be  a  leading  wonder  among 
Thy  miracles  of  grace."  It  may  be  you  can  say — "  Lord,  I  have  been  sighing 
and  crying  and  groaning  now  by  the  month  together,  and  I  can  find  no  peace. 
Oh,  if  Thou  wilt  but  put  a  new  song  into  my  mouth,  the  dragons  and  the  owls 
that  saw  me  in  my  gloom  shall  open  their  eyes  and  be  astonished,  and  honour  the 
Lord  God  of  Israel!  "  I  know  some  who  might  say,  "  Lord,  it  will  fill  all  the 
workshop  with  wonder  if  I  shall  rejoice  in  Jesus.  All  my  friends  and  companions 
will  wonder  that  I  should  become  happy  and  holy  through  sovereign  grace." 
III.  Our  text  affords  us  some  practical  suggestions.  If  the  Lord  says,  "  Put 
Me  in  remembrance,"  then — 1.  It  is  very  clear  that  we  ought  to  remember  these 
things  ourselves.  Oh,  you  that  are  not  saved,  remember  the  years  in  which  you 
have  lived  without  prayer!  What  a  wonder  that  you  have  been  permitted  to 
live  at  all!  Remember,  next,  for  your  humbling,  how  weary  you  have  been  of 
God.  Some  I  would  urge  to  remember  long  years  of  neglect  of  God's  service, 
with  all  their  niggardliness  to  the  cause  of  God,  all  their  want  of  love  to  God,  all 
the  many  times  in  which  they  have  hardened  their  hearts,  stopped  their  ears, 
and  refused  the  warnings  and  invitations  of  their  Saviour.  2.  It  is  time  that  we 
should  now  begin  our  pleading  with  God.     {C.  H.  Spurgeon.) 

Ver.  27.  Tliy  first  father  hath  sinned. — Israel's  sin  : — Its  history  from  the 
first  is  a  tissue  of  sins.  "  Thy  first  father  sinned,  and  thy  mediators  have  fallen 
away  from  Me."  By  the  first  father,  Hitzig,  Knobel,  and  others  understand 
Adam  ;  but  Adam  is  the  progenitor  of  mankind,  not  of  Israel  specially,  and  Adam's 
guilt  is  mankind's  guilt,  not  Israel's.  Either  Abraham  is  meant  (Hofmann,  Stier, 
Hahn,  and  others),  or  Jacob-Israel  (Ewald,  Cheyne,  von  Orelli),  who  has  more 
to  do  with  the  sinful  nature  of  the  nation  springing  from  him  than  Abraham 
(cf.  Deut.  xxvi.  5).  The  interpreters  and  mediators  generally  (2  Chron.  xxxii.  31; 
Job  xxxiii.  23)  are  the  prophets  and  priests,  standing  between  Jehovah  and  Israel, 
and  mediating  the  intercourse  of  both  in  word  and  act;  even  these  for  the  most 
part  have  proved  unfaithful  to  God,  falling  a  prey  to  ungodly  magic  and  false 
worship.  Thus  Israel's  sin  was  as  ancient  as  its  origin ;  and  the  apostasy  has 
broken  out  even  among  those  who,  by  reason  of  their  ofiices,  should  be  the  best 
and  holiest.  (F.  Delitzsch,  D.D.)  Thy  first  father : — To  the  unreflecting  upon 
human  nature  it  has  not  occurred  that  mankind  might  have  been  introduced  to 
our  world  by  other  means  than  by  being  "  bom  of  a  woman."  Every  human 
being  might  have  been  a  distinct  creation.  But  the  constitution  given  to  the 
vegetable  and  to  the  animal  kingdoms  was  given  also  to  man  ;  and  as  herbs  and 
animals  contain  the  seed  of  their  own  kind,  and  are  propagated  of  each  other,  so 
man  was  made  to  be  "  fruitful,  to  multiply,  and  to  replenish  the  earth."  Among 
other  reasons  for  this  constitution  was  the  intention  of  securing  (through  the 
intimate  and  peculiar  relationships  it  involves)  a  powerful  influence  of  man  upon 
man.  Judging  by  the  conjugal,  paternal,  and  filial  relationships,  it  is  evident 
that  God  intended  men  to  exert  a  considerable  amount  and  a  high  kind  of  influence 
upon  each  other.     But  while  the  domestic  bonds  are  the  chief  channels  through 


390  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xliv. 


which  human  influence  is  transmitted,  there  are  other  sources  of  power.  Extra- 
ordinary talent,  pecuhar  circumstances,  great  earnestness;  and  remarkable  labours 
raise  men  to  the  guidance  and  control  of  their  fellows.  The  position  of  the  first 
man  was  in  many  respects  singular.  All  other  of  the  human  kind  have  been  born 
of  each  other.  Even  Eve  was  made  out  of  man.  Adam  alone  was  created. 
Excepting  Eve  and  Adam,  every  other  human  being  has  commenced  existence 
an  infant,  and  living,  has  passed  from  infancy  through  childhood  and  youth  to 
manhood.  And  Adam  was  the  first  of  human  kind.  Adam,  moreover,  according 
to  the  constitution  given  him,  and  by  the  fact  of  his  creation,  was  the  natural 
father  of  the  human  race.  We  shall  treat  the  subject  by  discussing  two  questions. 
I.  Was  Adam  to  the  human  family  more  than  theib  natural  parent  ? 
According  to  the  historical  and  doctrinal  statements  of  the  Scriptures,  Adam 
did  sustain  another  and  a  more  important  relationship.  II.  Admitting  that 
Adam  was  more  than  the  first  parent  of  the  human  family,  what  was  he 
BESIDE?  And  what  did  this  relationship  involve?  As  the  first  parent  of 
the  human  race,  and  according  to  laws  with  which  we  are  all  familiar,  Adam 
would  exert  a  serious  influence  upon  his  whole  posterity.  But  Adam  was  more 
than  the  first  parent.  He  is  called  by  the  apostle  Paul,  "  the  figure  of  him  that 
was  to  come  " — literally,  the  type.  Paul  declared  that  Adam  in  his  connection 
with  mankind  was  the  form,  or  the  ensample,  or  the  pattern  of  what  Jesus  Christ 
was  to  be  to  redeemed  men ;  so  that  as  Jesus  Christ  is  the  public  representative 
and  head  of  the  saved  of  mankind,  so  Adam  was  the  representative  of  the  human 
race.  What  did  the  placing  of  Adam  in  this  position  involve  ?  1 .  By  this  arrange- 
ment the  whole  race  is  tried  or  proved  by  one  man.  2.  It  pleased  God  to  suspend 
upon  the  trial  of  one  man  the  Ufe  and  the  death  of  the  human  race.  Adam's  guilt 
must  ever  be  his  own — that  cannot  be  another's.  Adam's  punishment  must  rest 
on  his  own  head — that  cannot  be  transferred  to  his  posterity.  But  the  results  of 
Adam's  conduct  his  posterity  were  to  share.  Awfully  responsible  was  Adam'8 
position!  God's  reasons  for  the  order  of  things  are  to  us  unsearchable.  We 
may  consider  that  the  trial  of  a  race  in  one  man  was  more  simple  than  the  proba- 
tion of  every  individual — we  may  see  how  (God  foreknowing  the  apostasy  of  human 
nature)  this  mode  of  government  admitted  the  immediate  introduction  of  another 
and  of  a  remedial  dispensation — still,  God's  ways  in  this  dispensation  are  past 
finding  out.  The  fact  is  declared  ;  and  the  reason  of  this  arrangement  we  must 
resolve  into  the  sovereignty  of  God.  One  serious  lesson  fail  not  to  learn — the 
extent  of  parental  responsibility.  Moral  and  intellectual  and  physical  quaUties 
are  doubtless  transmissible.  Weakness  and  disease  of  body  and  evil  dispositions 
of  soul  are  conveyed  from  parent  to  child.  Sow  not,  therefore,  to  the  flesh.  (5. 
Martin.) 

Ver.  28.  Therefore  I  have  profaned  the  princes  of  the  sanctuary. — Holy 
•princes  : — "  Then  I,  profaned  holy  princes,  and  gave  up  Jacob  to  the  ban,  and 
Israel  to  revilings."  "  Holy  princes"  are  the  hierarchs  (1  Chron.  xxiv.  6),  the 
highest  spiritual  authorities  in  distinction  from  the  secular.  Their  profanation 
consisted  in  their  being  ruthlessly  dragged  into  a  foreign  land,  where  their  official 
work  ceased  of  necessity.  So  the  heads  of  religion  fared,  and  the  whole  nation, 
bearing  the  honourable  names  of  Jacob  and  Israel,  fell  victim  to  the  cursing  and 
reviUngs  of  heathen  nations.     {F.  Delilzsch,  D.D.) 


CHAPTER  XLIV. 


Vers.  1-5.  Yet  now  hear,  0  Jacob,  My  servant. — Why  are  the  people,  of  Ood 
called  by  the  name  of  Jacob  ? — Have  you  never  wondered  why  the  people  of  God 
should  be  called  by  the  name  of  the  third  of  the  ancient  patriarchs  in  preference 
to  th  first  two?  We  often,  indeed,  find  them  called  the  seed  of  Abraham,  and 
we  should  easily  understand  what  was  meant  if  we  read  of  the  children  of  Isaac: 
but,  as  far  as  I  remember,  they  are  nowhere  called  simply  Abraham  or  Isaac,  whereas 
it  is  perfectly  common  to  hear  them  called  Jacob  or  Israel,  the  name  of  the  third 

Eatriarch  being  directly  transferred  to  his  descendants.     Not  only  so:  this  usage 
as  passed  over  into  the  New  Testament,  and  we  still  sometimes  cadi  the  whole 


CHAP.  XLiv.]  ISAIAH.  391 

body  of  living  Christians  the  Israel  of  God.  This  is  a  somewhat  surprising  circum- 
stance; for  of  the  three  patriarchs  the  third  is  certainly  not  the  favourite.  Why, 
then,  is  it  that  the  name  of  the  third  patriarch  is  attached  to  God's  people,  as  if 
he  were  more  directly  their  progenitor  than  the  other  two?  Is  it  because  they 
are  liker  him  than  they  are  to  Abraham  or  Isaac?  Is  the  average  Christian  an 
imperfect,  stumbling  mortal,  a  compound  of  obvious  vices  and  struggling  virt'^es, 
as  Jacob  was?  It  would  be  harsh  to  say  so.  But  we  may  come  nearer  the  mark 
if  we  put  this  suggestion  in  a  different  form.  Jacob  was  the  progressive  character 
among  the  patriarchs.  His  beginnings  were  ignoble,  and  the  vices  of  his  nature 
long  clave  to  him;  yet  by  degiees  he  surmounted  them:  he  lived  down  the  evil 
which  was  in  him;  and  his  end  was  that  of  one  who,  after  many  defeats,  had  at 
last  obtained  the  victory.  Abraham  is  a  much  grander  figure  than  Jacob,  but 
he  has  far  less  history.  He  may  almost  be  said  to  be  perfect  from  the  first.  If 
in  him  there  was  a  slow  development  from  small  beginnings,  we  have  no  record 
of  it.  Isaac,  again,  was,  as  far  as  the  records  inform  us,  a  back-going  rather  than 
a  progressive  character.  The  opening  scenes  of  his  history  are  beautiful  and  noble; 
but  his  character  lacked  back-bone,  and  we  see  him  sinking  into  physical  grossness 
and  moral  flaccidity.  Jacob's  life,  on  the  contrary,  in  spite  of  great  defects  to 
begin  with  and  many  faults  by  the  way,  was  a  developing  and  ascending  one.  This 
is  shown  by  the  names  he  bore:  he  was  first  Jacob  and  then  Israel.  And  it  may 
be  to  recommend  such  a  life  of  progress  that  his  names  are  given  to  God's  people. 
(J.  Stalker,  D.D.)  Biography  in  three  words : — I.  Jacob.  1.  This  was  the  name 
of  the  natural  man.  After  he  had  received  his  new  name  the  very  mention  of  the 
old  one  must  have  reminded  him  of  the  evil  time  when  he  was  an  unbrotherly 
brother  and  an  unfihal  son.  It  is  true  that,  while  he  was  still  Jacob,  he  went 
through  the  experience  of  Bethel,  where  he  saw  the  vision  of  the  ladder  reaching 
up  to  heaven.  This  is  usually  regarded  as  his  conversion,  but,  if  it  was,  he  was 
afterwards  a  backsUder,  for  his  subsequent  hfe  in  Padan-aram  was  far  more  guided 
by  selfish  cleverness  than  by  the  law  of  God.  The  name  Jacob,  in  short,  was  a 
memorial  of  a  youth  of  sin  and  of  a  manhood  of  worldliness.  But  is  it  not,  thus 
understood,  an  appropriate  name  for  the  people  of  God?  Is  there  not  for  them 
also  a  bad  past  to  remember  ?  It  is  well  sometimes  to  go  back  to  what  we  were, 
because  the  old  habits  may  still  spring  up  and  trouble  us;  though  we  may  now 
have  received  a  new  name,  the  old  Jacob  is  ia  us  still.  Above  all,  we  ought  to  go 
back  on  that  old  time,  because  it  helps  to  magnify  the  grace  which  brought  us 
out  of  it.  2.  But  there  is  another  idea  inseparably  connected  with  the  name  of 
Jacob:  it  is  that  of  Divine  choice.  In  our  text  this  is  very  prominent — "  Israel, 
whom  I  have  chosen,"  "  Jesurun,  whom  I  have  chosen."  It  is,  indeed,  coimected 
with  the  other  two  names  here,  because  these  indicate  that  to  which  he  was  chosen. 
But  he  was  the  choice  of  God,  in  preference  to  Esau,  whUe  he  was  still  Jacob.  As 
He  chose  Jacob,  while  he  was  still  Jacob,  so  He  loved  us  while  we  were  yet  sinners. 
II.  ISEAEL.  1.  The  patriarch  received  a  new  name  because  he  had  become  a  new 
man.  God  does  not  trifle  with  such  things.  A  change  of  name  among  us  may 
be  a  mere  freak  of  caprice  ;  but  when  God  deliberately  changed  a  man's  name, 
it  was  an  outward  monument  of  an  inward  change.  If  it  did  not  mean  that  the 
natural  man,  which  the  name  Jacob  designated,  was  entirely  exterminated,  it 
meant  that  it  was  so  far  overcome  that  the  complexion  of  the  life  would  hence- 
forth be  different.  The  reign  of  selfishness  and  worldliness  was  over,  and  a  new 
spirit  had  entered  in  and  taken  possession.  If  we  ask  how  this  came  about,  it  may 
have  been  a  slower  and  more  complex  process  than  we  have  any  record  of;  for 
what  appears  a  sudden  spiritual  change  is  often  only  the  culmination  of  movements 
going  on  for  a  long  time  before.  But  what  we  are  permitted  to  see  clearly  in  the 
records  of  the  patriarch's  life  is  the  midnight  scene  on  the  bank  of  the  Jabbok. 
It  is  far  away,  and  it  is  evidently  concealed  under  forms  of  speech  which  are  now 
alien  to  us;  but  this  at  least  is  evident,  that  the  patriarch  was  that  night,  if  a 
homely  phrase  may  be  allowed,  at  cross  grips  with  God.  That  night  God  was  not 
to  him  vague  and  far-off,  but  intensely  real  and  very  near;  and  Jacob  had  trans- 
actions with  Him  face  to  face — ay,  hand  to  hand.  Is  not  this  what  the  religion 
of  many  people  lacks?  To  a  certain  extent  they  are  reUgious.  Yet  somehow 
it  never  comes  to  close  quarters  between  them  and  God.  What  they  need  is  Christ, 
the  reconciler.  2.  But  the  new  name  of  Israel  denoted  more  than  this.  It  was 
expressly  said  to  him,  as  he  received  it,  "  As  a  prince  hast  thou  had  power  with 
God  and  hast  prevailed,"  and  this  was  what  the  name  meant — the  possession  of 
power  with  God.    Evidently  a  great  crisis  had  come  in  Jacob's  experience,  in 


392  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xliv. 

which  his  will  came  into  collision  with  the  will  Divine.  But  what  an  unequal 
struggle !  The  mysterious  man  had  only  to  touch  Jacob  in  the  seat  of  his  strength, 
and  it  yielded  in  a  moment ;  the  sinew  shrank,  and  he  could  struggle  no  more. 
Yet  in  the  moment  when  he  appeared  to  be  thoroughly  beaten,  it  turned  out  that 
he  had  gained  the  victory  and  won  the  blessing.  This  is  not  so  mysterious  as  it 
looks.  It  is  repeated  in  every  great  spiritual  crisis.  It  is  through  such  experiences 
that  men  and  women  enter  into  the  secret  of  the  Lord,  become  mighty  in  prayer, 
are  endowed  with  spiritual  power,  and  if  they  do  not  receive  new  names  on  earth, 
yet  obtain  a  stamp  and  a  signature  of  character  leaving  no  doubt  that  they  have 
new  names  in  heaven.  III.  Jeshtjbun.  There  is  no  evidence  that  this  name 
belonged  to  the  third  patriarch,  though  it  may  have  done  so.  But  there  can  be 
little  doubt  that,  standing  where  it  does,  alongside  of  the  other  two,  it  was  meant, 
like  them,  for  a  symbol  of  character.  The  root  from  which  it  appears  to  be  derived 
means  straight  or  upright,  and  this  is  its  most  probable  meaning.  This  was  pre- 
cisely the  development  of  character  which  the  third  patriarch  needed,  after  he  had 
received  the  new  name  of  Israel.  What  happened  the  very  next  morning  after 
the  great  midnight  scene  on  which  we  have  been  looking  ?  He  went  forth  to  meet 
his  brother  Esau;  and  this  is  the  account  of  how  he  behaved:  "Jacob  lifted  up 
his  eyes  and  looked,  and  behold  Esau  came,  and  with  him  four  hundred  men ;  .  .  . 
and  he  bowed  himself  to  the  ground  seven  times,  until  he  came  near  to  his  brother." 
Bowed  himseK — to  the  ground — seven  times!  This  to  his  own  brother!  What 
was  he  bowing  for?  Why  could  he  not  stand  up  straight  on  his  feet  and  look  his 
brother  in  the  face?  Read  the  whole  account  of  the  preparations  and  dispositions 
which  he  elaborated  before  meeting  Esau,  and  of  the  sly,  suspicious  way  in  which 
he  met  and  managed  his  rough  but  generous  brother,  and  you  will  feel  inclined  to 
sneer:  Is  this  the  man  who  was  called  last  night  a  prince  who  had  power  with  God? 
There  is  far  too  much  bowing  and  becking,  twisting  and  turning.  This  man  is  not 
straight;  he  is  not  upright.  It  seems  to  me  that  sometimes  in  people  who  have 
had  their  Bethels  and  Mahanaims  and  Peniels,  and  can  speak  to  you  about  experi- 
ences of  struggle  and  emptying,  and  of  being  filled  with  the  Holy  Spirit,  there  is  a 
defect  of  a  similar  kind.  Although  they  have  had  dealings  with  God,  and  feel 
themselves  on  a  footing  of  reconciliation  with  Him,  they  are  not  right  in  their 
dealings  with  men.  There  are  few  things  which  so  injure  the  cause  of  religion 
in  the  world  as  these  defects  of  men  of  God.  On  the  contrary,  how  noble  and 
God-honouring  a  sight  it  is  when  one  who  is  a  prince  with  God  is  acknowledged 
on  earth  also  to  be  a  princely  man;  and  when  one  who  has  power  with  God  has 
at  the  same  time  influence  with  men  through  his  manliness,  uprightness,  and 
charity.  Oiu:  text  is  a  message  of  hope.  It  speaks  of  the  possibihties  of  spiritual 
transformation  and  development.  (Ibid.)  Jacob,  Israel,  Jeshurun: — I  take 
these  three  names  in  their  order  as  teaching  us — I.  The  path  of  transformation. 
Every  "  Jacob  "  may  become  a  "  righteous  one  "  if  he  will  tread  Jacob's  road. 
We  start  with  that  first  name  of  natiure  which,  according  to  Esau's  bitter  etymology 
of  it,  meant  "  a  supplanter," — not  without  some  suggestions  of  craft  and  treachery 
in  it.  It  is  descriptive  of  the  natural  disposition  of  the  patriarch,  which  was  by  no 
means  attractive.  All  through  his  earUer  career  he  does  not  look  Uke  the  stuff 
of  which  heroes  and  saints  are  made.  But  in  the  mid- path  of  his  life  there  came 
that  hour  of  deep  dejection  and  helplessness  when,  driven  out  of  all  dependence 
on  self,  and  feeling  round  in  his  agony  for  something  to  lay  hold  upon,  there  came 
into  this  nightly  sohtude  a  vision  of  God.  In  conscious  weakness,  and  in  the  con- 
fidence of  self-despair,  he  wrestled  with  the  mysterious  Visitant  in  the  only  fashion 
in  which  He  can  be  wrestled  with.  "He  wept  and  made  supplication  to  Him," 
as  one  of  the  prophets  puts  it,  and  so  he  bore  away  the  threefold  gift-blessing  from 
those  mighty  lips  whose  blessing  is  the  communication,  and  not  only  the  invocation 
of  the  mercy,  a  deeper  knowledge  of  that  Divine  and  mysterious  Name,  and  for  him- 
self a  new  name.  That  new  name  imphed  a  new  direction  given  to  his  character. 
Hitherto  he  had  wrestled  with  men  whom  he  would  supplant,  for  his  own  advantage, 
by  craft  and  subtlety;  henceforward  he  strove  with  God  for  higher  blessings,  which, 
in  striving,  he  won.  All  the  rest  of  his  fife  was  on  a  loftier  plane.  That  is  the 
outline  of  the  only  way  in  which,  from  out  of  the  evil  and  the  sinfulness  of  our 
natural  disposition,  any  of  us  can  be  raised  to  the  loftiness  and  purity  of  a  righteous 
life.  There  must  be  a  Peniel  between  the  two  halves  of  the  character  if  there  is  to 
be  transformation.  How  different  that  path  is  from  the  road  which  men  are  apt  to 
take  in  working  out  their  own  self -improvement !  How  many  forms  of  religion,  and 
how  many  toiling  souls  in  effect  just  reverse  the  process,  and  say  practically — first 


CHAP,  xuv.]  ISAIAH.  393 

make  yourselves  righteous,  and  then  you  will  get  communion  with  Grod.  That  ifl 
an  endless  and  a  hopeless  task!  This  sequence,  too,  may  very  fairly  be  used  to 
teach  us  the  lesson  that  there  is  no  kind  of  character  so  debased  but  that  it  may 
partake  of  the  piurifying  and  ennobling  influence.  11.  The  lav?  for  the  Ckristiait 
LIFB.  There  are  some  religious  people  that  seem  to  think  that  it  is  enough  if  only  they 
can  say:  "  Well !  I  have  been  to  Jesus  Christ,  and  I  have  got  my  past  sins  forgiven; 
I  have  been  on  the  mountain  and  have  held  communion  with  God.  Now,  the  order 
of  these  names  here  points  the  lesson  that  the  apex  of  the  pyramid,  the  goal  of  the 
whole  course,  is — righteousness.  God  does  not  teU  us  His  name  merely  in  order 
that  we  may  know  His  name,  but  in  order  that,  knowing  it,  we  may  be  smitten  with 
the  love  of  it,  and  so  may  come  into  the  likeness  of  it.  Take,  then,  these  three  names 
of  my  text  as  preaching,  in  antique  guise,  the  same  lesson  that  the  very  Apostle  of 
affectionate  contemplation  uttered  with  such  earnestness:  "  Little  children!  let  no 
man  deceive  you.  He  that  doeth  righteousness  is  righteous,  even  as  He  is  righteous." 
m.  The  MEEUufUL  jxtdgment  which  God  makes  of  the  character  of  them  that 
LOVE  Him.  Jeshunm  means  "  the  righteous  one."  How  far  beneath  the  ideal  of 
the  name  these  Jewish  people  fell  we  all  know,  and  yet  the  name  is  applied  to  them. 
Although  the  realisation  of  the  ideal  has  been  so  imperfect,  the  ideal  is  not  destroyed. 
And  so  we  Christian  people  find  that  the  New  Testament  caUs  us  "  saints."  All 
wrong-doing  is  inconsistent  with  Christianity,  but  it  is  not  for  us  to  say  that  any 
wrong-doing  is  incompatible  with  it;  and  therefore  for  ourselves  there  is  hope, 
and  for  our  estimate  of  one  another  there  is  the  lesson  of  charity,  and  for  all  Christian 
people  there  is  a  lesson — live  up  to  your  name.  Noblesse  oblige  !  Fulfil  your  ideal. 
Be  what  God  calls  you,  and  "  press  toward  the  mark  for  the  prize."     IV.  Thk 

UNION  BETWEEN  THE  FOXTNDEB  OF  THE  NATION  AND  THE  NATION.      The  name  of  the 

patriarch  passes  to  his  descendants,  the  nation  is  called  after  him  that  begat  it.  In 
some  sense  it  prolongs  his  life  and  spirit  and  character  upon  the  earth.  That  is  the 
old-world  way  of  looking  at  the  solidarity  of  a  nation.  There  is  a  New  Testament 
fact  that  goes  even  deeper  than  that.  The  names  which  Christ  bears  are  given  to 
Christ's  followers.  Is  He  a  King,  is  He  a  Priest?  He  makes  us  kings  and  priests. 
Is  He  anointed  the  Messiah?  God  "  hath  anointed  us  in  Him."  Is  He  the  Light  of 
the  world?  "  Ye  are  the  light  of  the  world."  His  life  passeth  into  all  that  love 
Him  in  the  measure  of  their  trust  and  love.  (A.  Maclaren,  D.D.)  The  Church 
comforted  and  revived: — I.  An  address  most  gracious  and  comforting.  "Yet 
now  hear,  0  Jacob,  My  servant;  and  Israel,  whom  I  have  chosen,"  &c.  The 
persons  to  whom  these  words  were  spoken  are  represented — 1.  As  the  servants  of 
God.  How  great  the  honour  to  be  acknowledged  as  a  servant  of  the  King  of  kings ! 
2.  As  the  people  of  His  special  choice.  3.  As  the  objects  of  His  wonderful  inter- 
positions. The  words,  "  Thus  saith  the  Lord  that  made  thee,  and  formed  thee  from 
the  womb,"  refer  to  them  in  their  national  character.  The  relationship  He  sustained 
to  them,  and  the  great  things  He  had  done  for  them,  are  employed  as  arguments  to 
inspire  them  with  confidence,  and  lead  them  to  be  of  good  courage.  11.  A  promisb 
eminently  cheering.  "  For  I  win  pour  water  upon  him  that  is  thirsty,"  &c.  They 
are  evidently  spiritual  blessings  which  are  here  promised,  of  which  water  is  frequently 
employed  as  an  emblem.  In  this  passage  we  are  reminded  of  the  following  partic- 
ulars. 1.  Their  nature.  In  some  places  the  cleansing  property  of  water  is  in- 
tended. At  other  times  its  quality  of  quenching  the  thirst  is  set  forth.  But  it  is 
to  be  understood  here  in  connection  with  its  refreshing  and  fertilising  influences. 
2.  Their  value.  We  have  but  a  faint  conception  of  the  importance  of  water,  on 
accoimt  of  its  being  so  common  with  us.  But,  in  those  countries  where  it  is  scarce, 
its  worth  is  very  differently  estimated.  3.  Their  seasonableness.  When  the  soil 
is  parched  through  long-continued  drought,  how  welcome  are  the  genial  showers. 
And  to  the  dry  and  barren  soul,  how  cheering  are  the  waters  of  life  and  salvation! 
4.  Their  abundance.  "  I  will  pour  water  upon  him  that  is  thirsty,  and  floods  upon 
the  dry  ground."  Nor  are  they  ample  in  quantity  alone,  but  in  their  range  they 
are  most  extensive.  Besides  embracing  the  people  of  God  themselves,  they  also 
embrace  their  offspring.  HE.  A  result  truly  refreshing.  "  One  shall  say,  I 
am  the  Lord's;  and  another  shall  call  himself  by  the  name  of  Jacob;  and  another 
shall  subscribe  with  his  hand  unto  the  Lord,  and  surname  himself  by  the  name  of 
Israel."  We  have  here — 1.  An  important  principle  indicated.  It  is  that  God's  own 
people  must  be  first  revived  before  large  accessions  can  be  expected  to  the  Church 
from  without.  2.  The  blessed  truth  declared.  {Anon.)  A  promise  for  us,  and 
for  our  children  : — "  Yet."  What  an  ominous  word  as  to  the  past !  What  a  cheering 
word  as  to  the  future !     "  Yet."     What  black  words  are  those  which  come  before  it ! 


394  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xliv. 

God's  people  were  represented  as  being  in  a  sadly  backsliding  state.  Consequently 
Grod  gave  them  up  to  the  curse  and  the  reproach.  It  may  be  that  such  is  our  case, 
though  we  be  God's  people.  "  Yet,"  says  the  text — though  you  have  fallen  into 
this  state,  do  not  despair;  I  love  you;  you  are  My  chosen;  yet  will  I  return  unto 
you  in  favour.  Come  then,  if  we  have  wandered  never  so  far,  let  this  word  sound 
like  the  shepherd's  call  to  bring  us  back.     I.  The  Lord  comforts  His  people  by 

THE  REMEMBRANCE    OF   WHAT    HE  HAS    DONE    FOR    THEM.      Taking  the  text  aS  OUt 

guide,  let  us  notice — 1.  The  grace  we  have  experienced  in  its  practical  effect.     To 
make  us  God's  servants — "  Yet  now  hear,  0  Jacob,  My  servant."     We  may  be  un- 
faithful servants:  we  certainly  are  unprofitable  ones,  but,  if  not  awfully  deceived, 
we  are  His  true  servants.     We  were  once  the  servants  of  sin  and  the  slaves  of  our 
own  passions,  but  He  who  made  us  free  has  now  taken  us  into  His  own  family 
and  taught  us  obedience  to  His  will.     2.  This  grace  is  peculiar,  discriminating  and 
distinguishing.     "  My  chosen."     3.  Reflect  again  upon  the  ennobling  influence  of 
grace.     The  people  are  first  called  Jacob,  but  only  in  the  next  line  they  are  styled 
Israel.     You  and  I  were  but  of  the  common  order.     If  we  had  boasted  of  any- 
thing we  should  have  been  called  Jacobs,  supplanters,  boasting  beyond  our  line; 
but  as  Jacob  at  the  brook  Jabbok  wrestled  with  the  angel  and  prevailed,  and  gained 
the  august  title  of   prince — prevaihng  prince — even   so  has  grace  ennobled  us! 
4.  The  text  conducts  us  onward  to  notice  the  creating  and  sustaining  energy  of  that 
grace.     "  Thus  saith  the  Lord  that  made  thee,  and  formed  thee  from  the  womb." 
Men  might  as  well  claim  the  honour  of  creation  or  resurrection  as  boast  of  commencing 
their  own  spiritual  life.     5.  This  grace  has  the  characteristic  of  intense  affection  in 
it.     God  gives  to  His  people  the  title  of  Jeshurun,  which  means  "  the  righteous 
people,"  according  to  some  translators,  but  most  interpreters  are  agreed  that  it  is 
an  affectionate  title  which  God  gives  to  His  people.     Perhaps  it  may  be  considered 
to  be  a  diminutive  of  Israel.     Just  as  fathers  and  mothers,  when  they  have  great 
affection  for  their  children,  will  frequently  give  them  an  endearing  name — shorten 
their  usual  name,  or  call  them  by  a  familiar  title  only  used  in  the  family — so,  in 
calling  Israel  Jeshurun,  the  Lord  setteth  forth  His  near  and  dear  love.     God's  grace 
to  us  is  not  merely  the  mercy  of  the  good  Samaritan  towards  a  poor  stranger  whom 
he  finds  wounded  by  the  way,  but  it  is  the  love  of  a  mother  to  her  sick  child;  the 
fondness  of  a  husband  towards  a  weeping  wife;  the  tenderness  of  the  head  towards 
the  wounded  members.     II.  We  are  encouraged  by  the  promise  of  what  God 
WILL  DO.     "  Fear  not;  I  will  help  thee."     You  cannot  pray  as  you  desire — "  I  will 
help  thee."     You  feel  unable  to  overcome  sin — "  I  will  help  thee."     You  are  en- 
gaged in  service  too  heavy  for  you — "  I  will  help  thee."     Then  comes  a  promise, 
fuller  in  words  and  as  rich  in  grace,  "  I  will  pour  water  on  him  that  is  thirsty."     You 
shall  be  refreshed ;  your  desires  shall  be  gratified.     Water  quickens  sleeping  veget- 
able Ufe:  yom:  Hfe  shall  be  quickened  by  fresh  grace.     Water  swells  the  buds  and 
makes  the  fruits  ripe:  you  shall  have  fructifying  grace;  you  shall  be  made  fruitful 
in  the  ways  of  God.     Whatever  good  quality  there  is  in  Divine  grace,  you  shall  enjoy 
it  to  the  full.     You  shall  be,  as  it  were,  drenched  with  it.     III.  As  a  very  great 
comfort  to  His  mourning  people,  the  Lord  now  promses  a  blessing  upon 
their  CHILDREN.     They  must  get  the  blessing  for  themselves  first.     "  I  will  pour 
water  upon  him  that  is  thirsty,  and  floods  upon  the  dry  ground," — that  is  fu-st;  and 
then  afterwards — "  I  wiU  pour  My  Spirit  upon  thy  seed."     We  must  not  expect  to 
see  our  children  blessed  unless  we  ourselves  grow  in  grace.     It  is  often  the  incon- 
sistency of  parents  which  is  the  outward  obstacle  to  the  conversion  of  their  children. 
But  now,  if  we  have  had  faith  to  receive  much  grace  from  God,  here  comes  a  blessed 
promise  for  our  children — "  I  will  pour  My  Spirit  upon  thy  seed,"  in  which  observe — 
1.  The  need.     To  give  a  new  heart  and  a  right  spirit  is  the  work  of  the  Holy  Spirit, 
and  of  the  Holy  Spirit  alone.     2.  The  source  of  the  mercy  which  God  will  give.     "  My 
Spirit."    3.  The  plenty  of  grace  which  God  gives.    "  Pour  "  :  not  a  little  of  it — but 
abundance.    4.  The  blessedness  of  all  this.     "  And  My  blessing  upon  thine  offspring." 
What  a  blessing  it  is  to  have  our  offspring  saved!     What  a  blessing  to  have  our 
children  enlisted  in  Christ's  army!     5.  Notice  the  vigour  with  which  these  children 
shall  grow.     "  They  shall  spring  up  as  among  the  grass,  as  willows  by  the  water 
courses."     Close  by  the  water's  edge  the  grass  grows  very  green,  and  the  willow  is 
a  well-known  tree  for  speedily  shooting  forth  its  branches.     Our  farmers  lop  their 
willows  often,  but  they  very  soon  sprout  again.     The  willow  grows  fast,  and  so  do 
young  Christians.     6.  The  manifestation  of  this   in   pubhc.     Not  only  are  our 
children  to  have  the  Spirit  of  Gtod  in  their  inward  parts,  but  they  are  to  make  a  pro- 
fession of  it.     One  shall  say,  "  I  am  the  Lord's," — ne  shall  come  out  boldly  and  avow 


CHAP.  XMV.]  ISAIAH.  395 

himself  on  the  Lord's  side ;  and  another  shall  so  ally  himself  to  God's  Church  that 
he  "  shall  call  himself  by  the  name  of  Jacob  "  ;  and  then  another  who  can  hardly 
speak  quite  so  positively,  but  who  means  it  quite  as  sincerely,  "  shall  subscribe 
with  his  hand  unto  the  Lord  "  ;  and  a  fourth  "  shall  surname  himself  by  the  name  of 
Israel."  {C.  H.  Spurgeon)  The  Spirit  promised  to  the  seed  of  Jacob : — The  text 
contains  one  of  those  interesting  passages  in  which  the  Holy  Spirit  is  promised  in 
the  Old  Testament.  Consider — I.  The  people  to  whom  the  pkomisk  is  made. 
II.  Thb  promise  itself,  in.  The  effects  attending  its  fulfilment,  (Z).  Bees.) 
Jesurun,  or  Jeshurun,  is  supposed  to  be  derived  from  a  word  which  hterally  means 
"  straight  "  or  "  even."  The  symbohc  meaning  is  therefore  upright  or  "  righteous." 
St.  Jerome  renders  it  "  most  upright."  In  the  Septuagint  it  is  translated  "  most 
beloved,"  a  term  of  endearment.  A  Grerman  commentator  gives  it  the  quaint  and 
familiar  rendering  of  "  gentleman,"  or  "  one  of  gentlemanly  or  honourable  mind  " 
(DeUtzsch), — a  noble  epithet  alike  for  the  individual  or  the  nation.  Taking  it  in 
connection  with  the  only  other  two  places  in  Scripture  where  the  word  is  used, 
Isaiah,  in  employing  it  here,  has  probably  reference  to  the  primitive  virtues  which 
characterised  the  patriarchal  ages — the  faith  and  purity  and  rectitude  of  the  old 
founders  of  the  nation  — those  to  whom  Israel  pointed  with  something  of  the  same 
pride  and  glory  as  we  do  to  our  covenanting  forefathers.  (Deut.  xxxiii.  5,  26-29.) 
{J.  R.  Macduff,  D.D.) 

Vers.  3-5.  For  I  will  pour  water  upon  him  that  is  thirsty. — Ood^a 
Spirit  as  water  and  floods : — The  double  figure  is  expressive  of  copiousness,  abund- 
ance, variety  (both  the  "  water  "  and  the  "  floods  "),  the  rain  from  heaven  and 
the  mountain  torrents  to  refresh  the  parched  land.  (j.  R.  Macduff,  D.D.)  The 
Holy  Spirit  for  both  Jews  and  Gentiles : — If  these  expressions  are  intended  to  signify 
different  classes  of  people,  the  former  may  denote,  in  a  figiu-ative  sense,  the  Jews, 
who  had  not  yet  received  the  Holy  Spirit  in  that  plentiful  measure  which  they 
earnestly  desired,  and,  unsatisfied  with  present  enjoyments,  were  ardently  longing 
for  further  communications  of  Divine  grace,  and  the  salvation  of  the  Lord.  The 
latter  may  signify  the  Gentiles,  who  had  not  been  favoured  with  Divine  ordinances 
and  Divine  influences,  whose  condition  had  been  exhibited  in  preceding  passages 
of  these  prophecies  as  uncultivated  and  barren,  resembling  a  wilderness.  (R. 
Maccvlloch.)  Revival: — A  work  of  revival  almost  always  begins  with  the 
children  of  God.  God  pours  water  first  on  "  him  that  is  thirsty,"  and  then  on 
"  the  dry  ground."  (R.  M.  M'Cheyne.)  The  influences  of  the  Holy  Spirit: — 
I.  The  Holy  Spirit  is  a  distinct  agent  in  the  scheme  of  redemption. 
n.  The  promise  of  thb  Divine  Spirit  to  secure  the  grand  purposes 
OF  redemption  forms  a  prominent  and  interesting  part  of  revelation. 
in.  Every  person  who  believes  the  Gospel  receives  the  Divine  in- 
flu:encb  which  it  promises.  IV.  The  happiness  and  usefulness  o» 
believers  require  them  to  seek  a  most  copious  effusion  of  thb  in- 
fluences of  thb  Spirit.  The  Spirit  promotes  the  happiness  of  believers— 
1.  By  gradually  advancing  their  sanctification.  2.  By  making  them  increasingly 
the  objects  of  Divine  complacency.  3.  By  preserving  them  from  temptation^ 
and  habitually  disposing  them  to  seek  communion  with  God.      V.  Every  bk- 

LIEVER  HAS  REASON  TO  EXPECT  THAT  THB  INFLUENCES  OF  THE  HOLY  SpIRIT  WnX 
BB  MOST  COPIOUSLY  IMPARTED  TO  HIM.  VI.  ThERB  IS  AN  APPOINTED  ORDER 
OF  MEANS  WITH  WHICH  THB  BESTOWMENT  OF  DiVINB  INFLUENCE  IS  CON- 
NECTED, and  in  the  constant  observance  of  which  its  most  copious  effusion  should 
be  sought.      VII.  If  wb  have  not  the  influences  of  the  Holy  Spirit,  or 

IF  WE    DO   NOT   POSSESS   THEM  IN    AN    EMINENT    DEGREE,    WB   ARE    NOT   MERELY 

UNFORTUNATE  BUT  GUILTY.  {L.  FoTstcr.)  Water  an  emblem  of  the  Holif 
Spirit : — 1.  Water  is  a  blessing  universally  necessary.  2.  A  blessing  universally 
diffused.  3.  An  abundant  blessing.  4.  A  cheap  blessing.  (Z).  Rees.)  TJie 
Spirit  acts  through  believers  : — The  Spirit  must  first  show  forth  His  virtue  in  us 
according  to  our  faith  before  He  can  act  upon  oiu*  neighbours.  He  must  be 
a  Spirit  of  revealing  truth  in  us  before  He  can  go  forth  from  us  to  illuminate  the 
world.  He  must  be  a  Spirit  of  conviction  in  us,  making  us  mindful  of  our 
errancies,  before  He  can  lead  the  world  to  penitence.  He  must  be  a  Spirit  of 
assurance  in  us  before  He  can  chase  the  fears  and  dry  the  tears  of  a  mourning 
world.  He  must  be  a  Spirit  of  holy,  tender,  undefiled  charity  in  us  before  He 
can  assimilate  the  world  to  Christ's  great  law  of  love.  And  all  these  things  the 
Spirit  becomes  to  us  through  faith.     Some  districts  are  riverless,  not  because 


396  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [cny?.  XLiv. 

the  rain  never  falls,  but  because  the  soil  for  a  great  depth  down  is  so  porous  that 
the  rainfall  passes  through  it  like  a  sieve.  The  district  that  cradles  rivers  must 
hvre  a  soil  and  underlying  foundation  that  Vfdll  hold  the  rain  like  a  sponge.  And 
the  graces  and  virtues  present  in  the  character  whose  root-principle  is  unfeigned 
faith  hold  the  benign  influences  of  the  Spirit  as  in  hidden  fountains  and  store- 
houses, so  that  the  world  may  be  blessed  by  the  steadfast  outflow.  {T.  O.  Sdby.) 
The  essential  diffusiveness  of  spiritual  religion : — These  words  remind  us  of  the 
essential  diffusiveness  of  the  religion  which  has  faith  for  its  ruling  principle  and 
the  presence  of  the  Holy  Ghost  for  its  daily  heritage.  The  scale  according  to 
which  we  receive  the  Spirit  must  not  be  that  of  our  own  personal  necessities  only 
or  the  demands  of  the  passing  opportunity.  As  the  Spirit  dwelt  in  Christ  with 
inexhaustible  spontaneity  for  the  sake  of  the  larger  humanity  He  had  come  to 
bless,  as  weU  as  for  Himself,  so  must  it  be  with  us.  However  narrow  the  visible 
measurements  of  our  life,  if  we  receive  the  fulness  of  the  Spirit  we  shall  touch 
the  entire  world  through  those  subtle  and  expansive  forces  wluch  brood  within  us. 
We  are  sometimes  humbled  because  our  sphere  of  action  seems  so  cramped  and 
circumscribed.  We  long  for  wider  fields.  We  should  like  to  be  the  instruments 
of  Divine  activities  which  will  affect  continents  and  live  through  centuries.  But 
into  what  a  little  space  our  aspiring  natures  seem  to  be  shut  up!  There  are 
Christians,  excellent  in  character  and  rich  in  mental  gifts,  whose  influence  seems 
to  go  no  further  than  the  home,  the  shop,  the  office,  a  select  coterie  of  friends. 
If  the  Spirit  is  in  us,  however,  these  mystic  rivers  will  flow  forth,  and  for  the 
honour  of  Him  whose  name  we  trust  the  Spirit  will  see  to  it  that  our  opportunities 
are  imperial  in  their  magnitude.  We  shall  affect  for  good  the  fortunes  of  many 
lands,  and  our  destiny  shall  be  large  and  resplendent  as  our  best  aspirations. 
In  ninety-nine  cases  out  of  a  hundred  we  will  not  let  our  influence  take  wings 
and  pass  through  its  appointed  realms  and  latitudes.  The  panting  springs 
can  nnd  no  outlet,  and  the  Spirit  is  restrained  because  those  are  so  narrow  who 
give  to  Him  an  earthly  home.  Our  religious  toleration,  for  instance,  we  carry 
to  an  extent  that  is  simply  sinful.  We  see  men  in  process  of  being  ruined,  and, 
forsooth,  we  do  not  wish  to  interfere  with  their  *'  religious  convictions,"  as  we 
call  them, — just  as  if  any  man's  convictions  were  worthy  of  respect  when  they  do 
not  keep  him  from  sin !  We  think  of  ourselves  as  wells  to  which  our  neighbours 
may  come  if  they  wish;  but  the  mm-muring  streams  are  forced  back  into  the 
fountain-head,  and  wells  become  little  better  than  cesspools.  There  must  be  an 
on  ward- pushing  force  in  our  religious  life.  {Ibid.)  Vitalising  power  in  Spirit- 
filled  men: — There  are  souls  around  us  so  arid,  scorched,  and  desolate  that  it 
seems  almost  impossible  to  educe  within  them  a  single  grace  or  morality.  Races 
are  to  be  found — at  least  such  is  the  testimony  of  the  white  men  who  are  anxious 
to  supplant  them — which  lack  the  rudimentary  aptitudes  for  virtue,  humanity, 
religion.  They  have  received  a  prodigious  endowment  of  appetite,  passion, 
blood-thirstiness  from  the  beast-world  below  them  ;  but  the  spirit-world  above 
them  seems  to  have  failed  to  filter  down  into  their  lives  a  single  principle  of  light, 
truth,  tenderness.  Even  these  may  be  vitalised  with  a  new  ethic  and  fitted 
for  a  higher  destiny  than  that  of  the  dust-heap.  But  it  must  be  by  the  Spirit 
in  Christ's  disciples.  The  trader  who  is  a  nominal  Christian  and  a  practical 
savage  goes  into  their  borders,  and  is  an  emissary  of  swift  and  complete  destruc- 
tion. They  are  touched  by  European  commerce,  and  deteriorate  and  die  off 
in  swarms.  They  are  forced  into  contact  with  Western  civilisation,  and  they 
resent  its  restraints  and  perish  from  the  lands  of  their  forefathers.  All  these 
secondary  influences  are  but  as  rivers  of  poison  flowing  through  their  borders, 
and  a  strange  fate  compels  them  to  drink  what  they  know  to  be  the  cup  of  death. 
The  streams  which  can  make  this  human  desert,  without  a  hint  of  verdure  and 
land-marked  with  whitened  bones,  into  a  paradise,  and  keep  it  shaded  with  foliage, 
glorious  with  fruit,  thick-set  with  holy  homes  and  song-filled  temnles,  must  go 
out  from  the  souls  of  men  and  women  who  have  received  the  Holy  Gnost.  {Ibid.) 
Encouragement  for  parents  and  children : — In  its  relation  to  the  Jews,  there  was 
a  partial  and  very  interesting  fulfilment  of  this  promise  on  the  day  of  Pentecost, 
in  the  remarkable  effusion  of  the  Holy  Spirit  which  then  took  place,  and  the 
blessed  effects  by  which  this  was  followed :  but  there  is  a  still  more  striking  and 
illustrious  accomplishment  to  be  realised,  when,  as  the  result  of  Divine  influ- 
ence, the  Jews,  as  a  nation  and  people,  shall  be  brought  back  to  God,  and  become 
incorporated  with  the  Gentiles  in  that  "  one  fold,^'  of  which  Christ  shall  be 
•oknowledged  the  true  and  only  Shepherd.     Afl  a  promise  pertaining  to  Gospel 


CHAP,  xuv.]  ISAIAH.  397 

times,  it  is  one  in  which  we  have  a  clear  and  direct  interest.  As  to  the 
particular  design  of  the  promise,  the  very  terms  in  which  it  is  expressed  show 
that  it  is  intended  to  refer,  not  perhaps  exclusively,  but  still  most  emphatically, 
to  the  children  and  posterity  of  those  who  have  themselves  loved  and  feared  God. 
Consider  the  promise, — I.  In  its  applicatiox  to  Christian  parents.  It  should 
be  regarded — 1.  As  an  encouragement  to  the  faithful  exercise  of  parental  discipline 
and  instruction.     2.  As  a  warrant  for  believing  application  at  the  throne  of  grace. 

3.  As  a  satisfactory  ground  for  hope  and  encouragement,  even  under  the  most 
unpromising  appearances.  II.  In  its  application  to  the  descendants,  and 
MORE  ESPECIAT.T.Y  THE  CHILDREN  OF  PIOUS  PARENTS.  1.  This  promise  affords  you 
no  secm-ity,  apart  from  your  personal  acceptance  of  Christ  and  submission  to 
His  authority.  2.  This  promise  supplies  you  with  the  richest  encouragement 
in  seeking  your  salvation  and  an  interest  in  the  Divine  favour.  3.  This  promise 
should  encourage  the  pious  descendants  of  godly  ancestors  to  aim  at  more  than 
ordinary  eminence  in  their  personal  devotedness  to  God.  The  imagery  of  the 
text  seems  to  imply  that  a  special  decision  and  fixedness  of  purpose  may  be  ex- 
pected: "  One  shall  say,  I  am  the  Lord's,"  &c.  It  indicates,  too,  great  vigour 
and  rapidity  of  growth  :    they  shall  grow  "  as  willows  by  the  water-courses." 

4.  This  promise  will  leave  you  doubly  without  excuse,  and  greatly  aggravate 
yoiir  guilt,  if  you  persist  in  neglecting  salvation.  How  pleasing  to  perceive  that 
while  the  promise  applies  more  especially  to  the  posterity  of  believers,  it  does 
not  exclude  others !  Not  only  will  God  give  His  Spirit  and  impart  His  blessing 
to  the  seed  and  offspring  of  His  people,  but  He  will  pour  water  upon  every  one 
who  is  thirsty  and  floods  upon  the  dry  ground.  (Essex  Remembrancer. )  The 
Church  and  the  children : — These  "  exceeding  great  and  precious  promises  "  are 
"  unto  us  and  our  children."  I.  God's  promise  of  blessing  upon  the  Church. 
1.  Its  import.  Refers  to  the  effusion  of  the  Spirit.  2.  Its  participants.  God's 
ancient  people — in  a  sadly  backsliding  state.  How  deeply  they  needed  the  effu- 
sion of  the  Spirit!  Two  facts  prove  this  to  be  our  great  want.  (1)  The  low  and 
languid  piety  of  many.  (2)  The  comparatively  small  success  of  the  various 
agencies  for  the  conversion  of  souls.  3.  Its  abundance.  God  gives  what  He 
promises  only  in  answer  to  prayer.  His  promise  cannot  fail.  "I  will."  II.  God's 
PROMISE  OP  blessing  UPON  THE  CHILDREN  OF  THE  Church.  1.  Our  children 
need  the  Holy  Spirit.  Religion  is  not  hereditary.  No  natural  goodness  can 
supersede  His  work.  Spiritual  life  is  not  natural  life  carried  up  to  its  highest  point 
of  attainment.  2.  God  promises  to  give  the  Spirit  as  abundantly  to  them  as  to  us. 
Same  terms  used.  And  having  received  the  Spirit,  they  are  to  grow  in  grace 
vigorously  (ver.  4).  The  manifestation  of  this  in  public  (ver.  5).  (A.  Tucker.) 
Revival: — Foremost  among  the  judgments  which  followed  Israel's  idolatries 
was  the  visitation  of  drought.  Dwelling,  as  we  do,  under  milder  skies,  and 
in  a  sea-girt  isle,  we  enjoy  copious  supplies  of  fertilising  rain.  Yet,  even  in  our 
own  land,  a  sensible  reduction  of  the  rainfall  in  spring  is  foUowed  by  empty 
shocks  in  August.  But  in  the  sunny  climes  of  Syria,  if  the  half-yearly  gift  of 
rain  failed,  the  effect  was  disastrous  in  the  extreme.  In  the  footsteps  of  famine 
marched  dark-robed  pestilence,  and  grim  Death  with  his  scythe  of  keenest  edge. 
Nor  was  this  all.  Towns  and  hamlets,  stripped  of  strong  men,  became  an  easy 
prey  to  the  marauder.  Successful  raids  paved  the  way  for  desolating  war;  and 
defeat,  oppression,  national  ruin,  came  in  swift  procession.  Hence,  impiety  must 
have  grown  bold  indeed,  if  the  Hebrews  did  not  earnestly  ask  for  the  "  early 
and  the  latter  rain."  Now  if  drought  is  so  injurious  in  the  fields  of  nature,  is 
it  not  equally  injiirious  in  the  Church?  I.  A  state  of  barrenness  described. 
The  ground  is  said  to  be  "  dry  " — that  is,  in  a  parched  and  impenetrable  con- 
dition. This  is  not  its  normal  state  :  this  is  deadly  to  vegetable  growth.  For 
some  reason  the  land  has  been  deprived  of  dew  and  rain.  No  seed,  however 
big  with  latent  life,  can  break  its  rigid  shell  ;  much  less  spring  up  or  prosper. 
With  such  homely  imagery  as  this  the  prophet  leads  our  thoughts  from  the  outer 
world  to  the  inner.  There  is  a  sense  of  need  expressed.  Here  is  a  marked  im- 
provement. The  soul  is  athirst;  the  insensibihty  is  gone.  The  rigid  hardness 
of  winter  is  at  an  end.  II.  A  generous  gift  provided.  A  promise  from  God 
is  as  good  as  its  performance.  1.  The  Source  of  the  supply.  It  must  come  from 
above.  The  great  foUy  to  which  all  men  are  prone,  is  to  seek  the  supply  of  their 
wants  apart  from  God.  2.  The  suitableness  of  the  means.  What  can  be  more 
suitable  than  showers  of  rain  for  a  thirsty  soil  ?  Yet  equally  suitable  is  every  gift  of 
God  to  satisfy  the  wants  of  dependent  man!     3.  The  copiousness  of  the  gift.     If 


308  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xliV, 

showers  will  not  suffice,  there  shall  bo  floods.  4.  The  range  of  the  promise.  It 
eball  not  terminate  with  ourselves:  it  shall  extend  to  our  children — ay,  to  oar 
cuJdren's  children!  m.  Abundant  fertility  foresbkn.  There  shall  be  a 
revival  of  life  in  the  Church,  as  in  the  parched  fields  after  a  copious  shower — as  in 
nature,  at  the  advent  of  spring.  1.  Multiplicity  of  conversions  is  here  predicted- 
"  They  shall  spring  up  as  amongst  the  grass."  2.  Rapidity  of  growth  shall  be 
another  feature  of  this  era.  3.  Constancy  of  verdure  will  be  enjoyed.  They 
shall  be  "  as  willows  by  the  water-courses."  In  the  arid  deserts  of  the  East 
you  will  find  here  and  there — conspicuous  for  their  rarity — bright  spots  of  luxuriant 
herbage,  fruitful  palms,  fragrant  flowers,  in  the  midst  of  scorclung  sand.  The 
secret  is  here, — that  far  down  beneath  the  surface,  a  foimt  bubbles  from  the 
riven  rock,  which,  watering  the  roots  of  trees  and  grass,  produces  beauty,  shade, 
and  fruit.  So  have  we  seen  a  man,  placed  in  a  very  desert  of  privation — exposed 
to  a  scorching  sun  of  trial  —  yet  retaining  all  the  freshness  of  his  piety,  and 
yielding  fruits  of  wisdom,  patience,  hope.  For  the  roots  of  his  faith  were  nour- 
ished from  a  secret  spring.  (Dicker son  Davies,  M.A.)  A  revival  promise: — 
I.  The  great  covenant  blessing  of  the  Chtjrch.  The  gift  of  the  Holy  Ghost. 
Whatever  metaphor  is  used  this  is  the  meaning  of  it.  1.  This  blessing  has  been 
already  given.  We  must  never  underrate  the  importance  of  the  ascension  of 
our  Lord,  and  the  gift  of  the  Spirit  which  followed  thereupon.  He  is  permanently 
resident  in  the  midst  of  the  Church.  2.  This  blessing  is  the  subject  of  a  promise. 
A  promise  of  God  is  the  essence  of  truth,  the  soul  of  certainty,  the  voice  of  faith- 
fulness, and  the  substance  of  blessing.  What  a  right  royal  promise  it  is!  We 
hear  the  double  "  I  wiE,  I  will."  3.  This  gift  is  a  most  needful  blessing.  4.  While 
we  need  the  Spirit  of  God,  His  working  is  most  effectual  to  supply  all  our  needs  when 
He  does  come  upon  us.  In  the  East,  you  can  generally  tell  where  there  is  a  stream 
or  a  river  by  the  line  of  emerald  which  marks  it.  If  you  stood  on  a  hiU,  you 
could  see  certain  lines  of  green,  made  up  of  grass,  reeds,  rushes,  and  occasional 
trees,  which  have  sprung  up  along  the  water-courses.  Nothing  is  required  to 
make  the  land  fertile  but  to  water  it.  Even  thus  let  the  Spirit  of  God  come 
upon  any  Church,  and  it  is  all  that  it  needs  to  make  it  living  and  fruitful.  5.  The 
promise  is  liberal  and  unstinted.  "  Pour  floods."  I  have  seen  in  Italy  the  fields 
watered  by  the  processes  of  irrigation:  there  are  trenches  made  to  run  along 
the  garden,  and  smaller  gutters  to  carry  the  lesser  streams  to  each  bed,  so  that 
each  plant  gets  its  share  of  water;  but  the  husbandman  has  to  be  very  careful, 
for  he  has  but  little  water  in  his  tank,  and  only  an  allotted  share  of  the  public 
reservoir.  No  plant  must  have  too  much;  no  plot  of  ground  must  be  drenched. 
How  different  is  this  from  the  methods  oi  the  Lord!  He  pours  the  water;  He 
deluges  the  land.  6.  This  covenant  blessing  is  peculiarly  promised  to  a  certain 
class  of  persons  who  are  especially  dear  to  us.  "  I  will  pour  My  Spirit  upon 
thy  seed,"  &c.  11.  The  glorious  result  of  this  covenant  blessing.  1.  The 
upspringing  of  spiritual  Ufe.  Wherever  the  Spirit  of  God  comes,  there  will  be 
life  in  the  Church  and  in  the  ministry;  life  in  prayer,  in  effort,  in  holiness,  in 
brotherly  love.  2.  The  next  effect  will  be  seen  in  the  calling  out  of  numerous 
converts  by  the  Holy  Spirit.  "  They  shall  spring  up  as  among  the  grass,  and 
as  willows  by  the  water-courses."  Who  can  count  the  blades  of  grass  ?  The 
converts  called  out  by  the  Spirit  of  God  are  vigorous  and  lively.  The  grass  in  the 
East  springs  up  without  any  sowing,  cultivating,  or  any  other  attention :  it  comes 
up  of  itself  from  the  fruitful  soil.  There  is  the  water,  and  there  is  the  grass.  So 
where  the  Spirit  of  God  is  with  a  Church  there  are  sure  to  be  conversions,  it 
cannot  be  otherwise.  3.  These  conversions  will  come  from  all  quarters.  One 
shall  say,  another  shall  call,  another  shall  subscribe.  One  comes  from  the  wealthy, 
another  from  the  poor,  a  third  from  nobody  knows  where.  They  shall  come 
from  all  trades  and  occupations,  from  all  churches  and  denominations.  4.  These 
converted  people  shall  be  led  to  avow  their  faith.  They  shall  not,  like  Nicodemus, 
come  to  Jesus  by  night.  III.  The  conduct  suitable  if  we  obtain  this  bless- 
ing. 1.  We  must  confess  how  dry,  how  wilderness-like  we  are.  2.  Let  us  culti- 
vate prayer.  3.  We  must  put  forth  our  own  personal  effort.  (C.  H.  Spurgeon.) 
Overflowing  in  usejvlness  to  others : — Egypt  has  the  river  Xile  all  the  year  round, 
but  as  a  fertilising  power  the  Nile  is  practically  useless  till  it  is  in  flood  and  over- 
flowing its  banks.  Then  it  bestows  the  needed  blessing  upon  every  foot  of  land 
it  touches.  It  is  when  we  are  filled  with  the  Spirit  to  the  point  of  overflowing 
that  we  become  a  power  for  good  to  others.  [T.  Waugh,.)  Revived  Churches  : — • 
If  you  go  down  to  some  of  our  Thames  bridges,  you  will  find  the  barges  stuck 


0HA7.  xuv.]  ISAIAH.  <  899 

fast  in  the  mud,  and  you  cannot  stir  them.  It  would  be  a  very  difficult  thing 
to  provide  machinery  with  which  to  move  them;  all  the  king's  horses  and  all 
the  king's  men  could  not  do  it.  But  wait  till  the  tide  comes  in;  now  every  black, 
heavy  old  barge  "  walks  the  waters  like  a  thing  of  life."  Everything  that  can 
float  is  movable  as  soon  as  the  silver  flood  has  returned.  So,  many  of  our  Churches 
lie  in  the  mud.  Everything  seems  motionless,  powerless;  but  when  the  Spirit  of 
God  comes  in  like  a  flood,  all  is  altered.  (C.  H.  Spurgeon.)  I  will  pour 
My  Spirit  upon  thy  seed. — God's  covenant  with  Christian  parents  (with  Acts 
ii.  39): — Has  God  given  to  us  any  sure  grounds  to  expect  the  conversion  of  the 
children  of  His  people  ?  Note — I.  The  relatiokship  of  the  childben  to  thb 
PARENTS,  as  it  is  laid  down  in  Scripture.  It  is  plain  that  when  God  becomes 
our  God,  He  becomes  the  God  of  our  children.  II.  Christian  NtrRTURE  furnishes 
U8  with  another  reason  for  expecting  the  salvation  of  our  children.  "  Train  up 
a  child,"  &c.  III.  We  may  found  our  hopes  upon  God's  faithfulness  as  a 
PRAYER-HEARING  GoD.  Let  US  not  despair  if  the  answer  to  prayer  be  long  delayed. 
The  Rev.  Mr.  Grimshaw,  rector  of  Haworth,  had  but  one  son,  and  he  did  not 
follow  his  father's  footsteps.  After  his  father's  death,  he  was  heard  to  say,  in 
his  maudlin  drunkenness,  when  riding,  "  This  horse  once  carried  a  saint;  now 
it  carries  a  devil."  Yet,  hopeless  as  this  case  seemed,  he  became  a  true  penitent, 
and  one  of  his  deathbed  sayings  was,  "  How  astonished  my  father  will  be  to  see 
me  in  heaven!  "  {Evangelical  Advocate.)  Christian  home  environment : — There 
have  been  few  of  the  great  teachers  of  Christendom  who  have  not  derived  their 
deepest  convictions  from  the  impressions  made  by  their  earliest  domestic  en- 
vironment. (J.  Stalker,  D.D.)  The  value  of  young  life: — The  nation  of  the 
future  rests  upon  the  cradles  of  to-day.  The  young  life  in  any  institution  is 
that  which  repairs  its  defects,  enlarges  its  usefulness,  and  stimulates  its  charities. 
The  young  life,  in  any  family,  is  the  influence  which  suns  the  path  of  age,  invigorates 
exertion,  and  quickens  the  growth  of  the  virtues.  Where  would  the  valour 
and  vigour  of  the  country  be  if  deprived  of  the  support  of  young  Ufe?  Disraeli 
says  that  almost  everything  that  is  great  has  been  done  by  youth;  and  the  history 
of  heroes  is  the  history  of  youth.  In  the  vegetable  world  the  mission  and  influ- 
ence of  the  young  life  is  not  less  plain  than  powerful.  According  to  Louis  Figuier, 
the  bud  must  be  considered  as  a  fundamental  element  in  the  plant,  which,  without 
it,  would  soon  perish.  It  is  the  bud  which  year  by  year  repairs  the  losses,  supplies 
the  flowers,  the  leaves,  the  branches  which  have  disappeared.  Through  its  means 
the  plant  increases  in  growth.  Through  it  its  existence  is  prolonged.  The  bud 
is  the  true  renovator  of  the  vegetable  world.  Therefore  these  buds  are  everywhere 
— on  the  roots,  the  leaves,  and  sometimes  even  on  the  flowers,  for  Nature  never 
loses  sight  of  the  phenomena  essential  to  organic  Ufe — namely,  the  production  of 
new  beings.  {Scientific  Illustrations  and  Symbols.)  Child-piety: — A  Christian 
gentleman's  little  son,  just  before  he  died,  said  to  his  father:  "  When  I  get  to 
heaven,  I  shall  go  up  to  Jesus  and  say,  '  Jesus,  I  know  You ;  my  papa  told  me 
about  You.'"  {T.  Champness.)  A  Christian  childhood: — Rev.  F.  B.  Meyer 
was  asked:  "  How  did  you  find  Christ?  "  This  is  his  written  reply:  "  I  do  not 
remember  when  first  I  became  a  Christian.  The  love  of  God  came  over  me  as 
the  dawn  over  a  summer  sky;  and  it  was  only  in  after  years  that  I  realised  what 
God  had  done  for  me  in  those  early  days.  My  mother  and  father  were  godly 
people.  They  expected  me  to  be  a  Christian,  and  at  my  mother's  knee  I  said  my 
morning  and  evening  prayers.  It  is  to  their  prayer  and  faith  and  unremitting 
care  that  I  owe  everything."  God's  Messing  on  the  offspring  of  His  people  :— 
Speaking  of  the  way  in  which  his  mother  received  hm  when  he  informed  her 
that  he  had  decided  to  leave  the  railway  office  and  become  a  minister,  the  Rev. 
John  M'NeiU  said:  "  Taking  my  face  between  her  hands,  she  drew  it  close  to  her 
own  and  said,  '  John,  I  meant  you  for  that  before  I  ever  saw  youir  face.'  I  knew 
then,  what  I  had  never  guessed  before,  that  I  owe  my  conversion  and  my  ministry  to 
my  mother's  prayer."      (Presbyterian.) 

Ver.  4.  And  they  shall  spring  up  as  among  the  grass. — Springing  up  as 
grass: — R.V.,  more  accurately,  omits  "as";  but  the  text  is  unquestionably 
corrupt.  There  is  no  doubt  that  the  LXX.  preserves  the  true  reading:  "  spring  up 
as  grass  among  the  waters."  {Prof.  J.  Skinner,  D.D.)  As  willows  by  the 
water-conrses. — The  willow,  Heb.  'arab,  a  tree  growing  on  the  banks  of  streams 
in  Palestine,  Egypt,  and  Babylon  (Lev.  xxiii.  40;  Job  xL  22;  Ps.  cxxxvii.  2). 
It  grows  to  a  considerable  size,  and  was  found  generally  in  groves.     It  has,  indeed. 


400  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xliv. 

been  pointed  out  that  the  tree  now  called  'arab  by  the  Arabs  is  not  a  willow 
but  a  species  of  poplar  [Popvliis  Euphratica).  As,  however,  this  tree  is  confined 
to  hot  countries  like  those  on  the  lower  Euphrates,  it  seems  more  likely  that  the 
name  was  originally  that  of  the  willow,  and  that  it  was  subsequently  transferred 
to  the  poplar.  The  Arabic  translation  of  the  Bible  renders  the  Heb.  'arab  by 
eaphsaph,  which  means  "  willow,"  or,  according  to  the  Talmud,  a  species  of  the 
willow  growing  by  brooks.  (.7.  Maepheraon,  M.A.)  Willows  (Heb.  *ardbim) 
are  mentioned  five  times  in  the  Bible,  always  associated  with  rivers  or  water- 
courses. The  willow  {Salix)  is  represented  in  Palestine  by  several  species,  though 
it  is  by  no  means  a  conspicuous  tree  in  any  part  of  the  country.  The  weight 
of  authority  is  decidedly  in  favour  of  the  willow,  which  though  not  a  conspicuous 
tree  would  oe  doubtless  associated  in  the  minds  of  the  inhabitants  with  pleasurable 
feelings,  as  testifying  to  the  presence  of  the  much-prized  water.  ( W.  Houghton, 
M.A.)  The  "  willow  "  : — Branches  of  the  garab,  which  R.  Kiepert  brought 
with  him,  according  to  Wetzstein's  indication  of  the  place,  and  which  0.  Kersten, 
the  secretary  of  the  Imperial  German  Consulate,  sent  to  the  Royal  Herbarium 
atlBerlin,  show  that  the  garab  is  the  Oriental  poplar,  Populua  Euphratica  (Olivier), 
whose  undergrowth  may  easily  on  superficial  observation  be  confounded  with 
willow  bushes;  but  it  is  distinguished  from  the  willow  by  its  leaves,  which, 
although  small,  are  almost  quite  smooth-edged,  and  not  saw-like.  {F.  Dditzsch, 
D.D.)  The  growth  of  the  willow  : — In  the  Duke  of  Bedford's  willow  garden 
was  a  willow  which  grew  in  twenty  years  to  the  height  of  between  60  and  70  feet. 
Four  feet  from  the  ground  it  was  7  feet  in  circumference.  A  small  cutting  grew 
to  the  height  of  25  feet  in  four  years.  Fuller  says:  "  In  the  isle  of  Ely,  where 
willows  floiirish,  there  is  a  proverb  to  this  effect.  The  profit  by  willows  will  buy 
the  owner  a  horse,  before  that  by  other  trees  will  pay  for  the  saddle."  Willows 
by  the  water-courses : — Every  year  we  welcome  the  opening  buds  of  the  willow 
with  their  silky  down,  as  among  the  first  indications  of  approaching  spring.  The 
children  delight  to  pluck  off  the  shooting  twigs,  in  their  rambles  in  the  meadows 
in  search  of  early  flowers.  They  call  them  palm  branches,  though  they  have 
little  in  common  with  the  palm  save  that  willow  branches  as  well  as  palm  branches 
were  carried  in  the  hand  of  the  Jews  on  their  great  festival.  There  are  many 
varieties  of  the  willow,  distributed  over  all  parts  of  the  globe,  but  they  are  most 
common  in  the  temperate  and  sub-tropical  regions,  where  they  form  a  pleasing 
feature  in  the  landscape,  especially  in  the  vicinity  of  ponds  and  rivers.  The 
Jewish  exiles  in  the  watered  plains  of  Babylon  were  painfully  familiar  with  the 
willows,  for  on  their  branches  they  hung  their  silent  harps  and  wept  as  they  thought 
of  far-away  Zion  (Ps.  cxxxvii.).  Yet  the  prophet  who  came  to  his  countrymen 
with  the  cheering  promise  of  Divine  pardon  and  speedy  restoration  to  their  native 
land,  found  in  these  same  willows  a  beautiful  illustration  of  the  happy  change 
that  would  be  produced  and  the  blessings  that  would  speedily  follow  their  restora- 
tion to  Divine  favour  and  Fatherland.  1.  The  rapid  and  luxuriant  growth  of 
the  willow  is  suggestive.  A  mere  stake  driven  into  the  ground  in  the  vicinity 
of  water  where  there  is  plenty  of  moisture  will  take  root  and  bud  into  leaf  and 
branch  in  a  remarkably  short  space  of  time.  We  are  familiar  with  the  immense 
crop  of  long  and  slender  twigs  that  shoot  up  in  the  summer  months  and  are  yearly 
cut  for  basket-making  in  the  osier  beds  by  the  banks  of  our  rivers.  A  well- watered 
Boil  seems  to  be  the  one  thing  necessary  to  ensure  the  life  and  growth  of  the  willow. 
In  the  winter  the  poUards  stand  out  in  the  landscape,  gaunt  and  desolate,  like 
old  and  rotten  sign-posts,  and  the  osier  beds  look  like  a  muddled  mass  of  chopped 
root  stumps.  But  in  summer  there  is  a  perfect  transformation  from  apparent 
death  into  new  hfe,  with  graceful  and  luxuriant  growth  and  greenness.  Now, 
it  is  winter  with  men  when  they  live  apart  from  God  and  strangers  to  the  blessings 
and  comforts  of  the  Gospel.  But  as  soon  as  men  are  brought  under  the  gracious 
influence  of  the  Gospel  of  Christ,  and  come  into  touch  \^ith  the  "  river  of  the 
water  of  hfe,"  all  things  are  changed  in  them  and  for  them.  And  the  beauty 
and  the  joy  for  us  is  that  so  much  of  this  change  comes  quickly.  Certainly, 
for  some  of  the  choicest  experiences  of  the  Divine  life  the  Christian  has  to  wait. 
But  very  many  of  the  comforts  and  beauties  of  the  Gospel  come  to  the  Christian 
speedily.  2.  The  willow  is  capable  of  service.  The  wood  of  the  willow  is  not 
to  be  compared  to  that  of  the  oak  and  the  other  slow-growing  forest  trees.  And 
yet  there  is  a  special  power  and  service  in  the  willow  which  make  its  cultivation 
important  and  of  commercial  value.  Indeed,  no  growth  in  nature  is  without 
this  capacity  for  service  when  it  falls  into  the  hands  of  those  who  know  how  to  ufl« 


CHAP.  xiJ'».]  ISAIAH.  40i 

it.  You  know  what  power  may  be  found  in  the  delicate  pore  of  such  grassea 
as  the  flax  and  hemp  when  it  is  properly  prepared  and  spun  into  cordage.  And 
the  slender  twigs  of  the  willow,  though  so  rapid  in  their  growth,  are  yet  so  tough 
and  flexible  that  they  are  extensively  used  in  basket- making,  which  is,  perhaps, 
the  oldest  industry  in  the  world.  The  wood  of  the  larger  kinds  of  willow  also 
is  so  tough  and  durable  as  well  as  flexible  that  the  ancients  employed  it  in  the 
making  of  shields  for  the  soldier  and  warships  for  the  sailor.  While  the  steamer 
has  largely  superseded  the  saihng  boat,  the  paddle- blades  of  steamers  are  still 
made  of  willow-wood,  and  if  shields  have  been  superseded,  the  cricket  fields  of 
the  world  still  make  a  large  demand  upon  the  willow  for  the  best  bats.  Even 
more  surprising  is  it  to  find  that  the  most  suitable  charcoal  for  making  gunpowder 
is  procured  from  the  willow-wood,  so  that  even  the  slender  willow,  the  whip  and 
plaything  of  the  child,  can  become  a  powerful  force  in  war.  And  as  soon  as  men 
come  under  the  influence  of  the  Gospel  of  Christ  they  become  serviceable  as  they 
never  were  before.  Even  the  youngest  Christians  are  powers  for  good  in  many 
ways  in  all  our  Churches.  While  there  are  some  things  for  which  we  need  the 
firmness,  wisdom,  and  experience  of  years,  we  have  almost  endless  capacity  and 
readiness  for  service  in  the  young  Christians.     (J.  Menzies.) 

Ver.  6.  One  shall  say,  I  am  the  Lord's. — A  public  profession  of  religion  :—' 
Those  who  become  the  subjects  of  special  grace  will  choose  to  join  the  Church, 
and  enter  into  covenant  to  walk  in  all  the  commandments  and  ordinances  of 
the  Lord.  I.  Describe  the  subjects  of  special  gkace.  II.  What  is  implied 
IN  theib  PBOFESsrsa  BELiGiON.  III.  Why  the  subjects  of  special  grach 
choose  to  join  the  Church  and  enter  into  covenant  with  God.  1.  They  love 
the  commands  of  God.  2.  They  love  the  ordinances  of  God.  3.  Their  hearts 
are  imited  to  Christians.  4.  They  desire  to  promote  the  cause  and  interest  of 
God  in  the  world.  5.  They  desire  to  grow  in  grace.  6.  They  are  so  sensible  of 
the  deceitfulness  of  their  own  hearts,  and  their  proneness  to  forget  and  forsake 
God,  that  they  desire  to  bind  themselves,  by  covenant  vows  and  obhgations,  to 
be  steadfast  and  unmovable  in  His  service.  Those  who  have  sincerely  made  a 
pubhc  profession  of  religion  must  rejoice  to  see  any  who  appear  to  be  the  subjects 
of  special  grace,  make  a  public  profession  of  religion.  Improvement — 1.  If 
those  who  have  become  the  subjects  of  special  grace  desire  to  make  a  public  pro- 
fession of  religion,  and  to  enter  into  covenant  with  God,  then  none  who  have 
really  become  subjects  of  special  grace  have  any  just  excuse  for  neglecting  to 
jofD  the  Church,  and  neglecting  to  bind  themselves  to  love  and  obey  God  for  ever. 
2.  If  the  subjects  of  special  grace  always  desire  to  profess  religion  and  partake 
of  Divine  ordinances,  then  so  long  as  they  neglect  their  duty  they  must  necessarily 
feel  unhappy.  3.  While  the  subjects  of  special  grace  neglect  to  join  the  Church, 
they  live  in  a  very  sinful  manner.  They  greatly  injure  both  themselves  and 
religion.  4.  It  appears  from  what  has  been  said  that  some  who  have  long  enter- 
tained a  hope  of  being  the  subjects  of  special  grace,  must  soon  give  up  their  hope 
if  they  continue  to  neglect  joining  the  Church.  5.  It  highly  concerns  those  who 
have  entered  into  covenant  with  God,  to  be  steadfast  in  His  covenant,  and  per- 
severe in  universal  obedience.  (N.  Emmons,  D.D.)  Converts,  and  their  con- 
fession of  faith : — This  is  to  take  place  after  the  Lord  has  poured  out  His 
Spirit  upon  His  people,  and  upon  their  offspring.  The  mainspring  of  everything 
good  and  gracious  is  the  Holy  Spirit.  When  the  Spirit  of  God  comes,  converts 
come  too.  If  they  do  not  come  by  the  Spirit  of  God,  they  are  not  worth  having. 
Converts  will  come  forward  to  confess  their  faith.  L  This  confession  of  faith 
is  personal.  "  One  shall  say,  I  am  the  Lord's,"  &c.  It  is  not  a  joint  confession, 
but  an  individual  one.  It  is  "one"  and  "another"  and  "another."  1.  All 
confession  of  Christ  must  be  personal;  anything  else  is  unreal  and  worthless. 
All  religion  that  is  true  is  personal.  2.  This  personal  confession  needs  to  be  care- 
fully attended  to  when  there  are  many  coming  forward.  3.  This  individual 
confession  of  your  faith  in  Christ  is  incumbent  upon  you  very  specially  when  there 
are  few  coming  forward.  I  should  say  to  myself,  "  If  there  is  nobody  in  this 
village  confessing  Christ,  then  it  is  all  the  more  urgent  upon  me  that  I  should  confess 
Him.  If  there  are  few  added  to  the  Church,  then  I  will  go  that  the  Church  may 
not  be  discouraged  in  its  Christian  efforts."  I  Hke  to  have  around  me  those 
who  feel,  "  It  is  no  consideration  with  me  whether  there  are  many  or  few;  I  have 
to  act  as  before  God  on  my  own  account.  If  there  be  few  who  do  right,  that  is 
all  the  more  reason  why  I  should  do  it."     IL   This  confession  is  vajubd. 

VOL.  II. — 26 


402  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR  [chap.  xliv. 

1.  One  person  speaks  out  for  himself:  "  One  shall  say,  I  am  the  Lord's."  That  is  a 
fine  speech.  If  you,  from  your  very  soul,  can  say  this  in  any  company,  and  not 
be  ashamed  to  say  it  before  men,  angels,  or  devils,  God  has  taught  you  a  noble 
piece  of  eloquence.  2.  The  next  person  mentioned  in  our  text  confessed  his 
faith  in  a  different  way,  for  he  called  himself  by  the  name  of  Jacob;  that  is  to 
say,  he  took  up  his  position  with  the  people  of  God  under  their  lowliest  title. 
"  There,"  said  he,  "  I  am  prepared  to  suffer  affliction  with  the  people  of  God, 
to  be  reproached  when  they  are  reproached,  to  be  shunned  when  they  are  shunned, 
to  be  ridiculed  when  they  are  ridiculed.  I  belong  to  Jacob.  He  is  an  extra- 
ordinary person,  cut  off  from  the  rest  of  the  world  to  be  the  Lord's,  and  I  go  with 
him."  3.  But  here  is  a  third  person,  who  makes  his  confession  in  a  still  different 
way:  "  Another  shall  subscribe  with  his  hand  unto  the  Lord,  and  surname  him- 
self by  the  name  of  Israel."  I  do  not  know  this  person;  sometimes,  I  think 
that  he  is  a  friend  of  mine,  who  is  afraid  to  speak,  but  who  likes  to  write.  "  I  could 
not,"  says  one,  "speak  my  confession  of  faith,  but  I  could  joyfully  sit  down  and 
write  it."  Yes,  you  are  timid,  and  trembling,  and  slow  of  speech.  Do  not  con- 
demn yourself  for  that.  Still,  I  am  not  sure  that  this  is  the  person  mentioned 
in  the  text.  I  seem  to  fancy  that  it  is  a  stronger  body,  a  man  who  is  not  content 
with  saying  it,  but  who  writes  it  down  in  black  and  white,  "  I  am  the  Lord's." 
That  which  is  written  remains;  so  he  puts  it  down.  This  person  who  thus  sub- 
scribed, or  wrote  with  his  hand,  iinto  the  Lord,  also  went  the  whole  way  towards 
God  and  EUs  people  at  their  best,  for  it  is  added  that  he  surnamed  himself  by 
the  name  of  Israel.  There  are  some  who  give  themselves  up  to  the  Church  of 
God  in  a  very  complete  and  unreserved  manner,  resolving  that  all  the  privileges 
they  can  enjoy  they  will  have,  all  the  holiness  they  can  ever  attain  to  they  will 
gain,  and  all  the  consecration  that  lies  within  the  region  of  possibility  they  will  strive 
after  and  secure.  III.  These  confessions  op  faith  are  all  geaciotjs.  (C.  H. 
Spurgeon.)  "  I  am  the  Lord's  "  .• — 1.  "  I  am  His  "  follows  "  My  Beloved  ia 
mine."  You  must  have  Christ  before  you  say  that  you  belong  to  Christ.  2.  This 
is  a  very  practical  confession.  If  I  am  the  Lord's,  then  I  must  not  give  myself 
up  to  be  the  slave  of  another.  3.  It  will  also  be  a  high  incentive  to  duty  to  say 
truly,  "  I  am  the  Lord's."  I  must  live  for  Ham.  4.  This  confession  has  a  sweet, 
comiorting  aspect.  5.  This  is  my  hope  of  safety  and  perfection.  (Ibid.) 
Another  shall  subscribe  with  his  hand  unto  the  Lord. — Subscribing  with 
the  hand  : — In  the  day  when  the  prophet  Isaiah  wrote  his  book,  it  was  a  custom 
for  people  to  draw  on  their  hand  the  name,  likeness,  or  symbol  of  the  person 
they  loved  or  the  master  they  served.  It  was  often  painted  on  the  hand  of  a 
woman  with  an  ink  which  could  be  rubbed  off  only  with  much  trouble;  but  men 
punctured  their  skin  with  a  needle,  dropping  in  the  ink  at  the  same  time,  as  ia 
now  frequently  done  by  sailors;  and  occasionally  the  name  or  symbol  was  branded 
on  their  skin  with  a  hot  iron.  In  this  way,  a  man  would  write  on  his  hand,  or 
on  some  other  portion  of  his  body,  the  name  or  likeness  of  the  god  he  worshipped ; 
the  soldier  would  bear  the  name  of  his  commander;  the  slave  would  have  the 
name  of  his  master;  and  we  are  informed  that,  in  a  subsequent  age,  the  early 
Christians  printed  upon  their  hand  or  arm,  and  sometimes  upon  their  breast, 
the  name  of  Jesus  and  a  likeness  of  the  cross.  Having  this  custom  in  mind, 
the  prophet,  writing  as  though  God  were  speaking  through  him  to  His  weary 
people, — as,  no  doubt,  was  the  case, — says,  "  Can  a  woman  forget  her  sucking 
child,  that  she  should  not  have  compassion  on  her  own  son  ?  yea,  she  may  forget, 
yet  will  I  not  forget  thee.  Behold,  I  have  graven  thee  upon  the  palms  of  My  hands  " 
(chap.  xlix.  16).  Had  oiu:  text  in  English  been  written  more  in  harmony  with 
the  original  language,  it  would  have  read  thus — "  Another  shall  subscribe,  or 
write,  upon  his  hand,  I  belong  to  Jehovah!"  {W.  Birch.)  Tattooing: — 
There  are  constant  allusions  to  this  in  the  classics.  We  know  that  devout  wor- 
shippers dedicated  themselves  to  the  god  they  worshipped,  and  were  stamped 
with  a  secret  mark.  Paul  alludes  to  this  when  he  says,  '  Henceforth  let  no  man 
trouble  me,  for  I  bear  in  my  body  the  marks  of  the  Lord  Jesus  "  ;  as  much  as 
to  say,  "  I  am  Christ's:  I  have  had  His  name  branded  upon  me."  When  he 
suffered  from  being  scourged  and  beaten  with  rods,  he  called  it  bearing  the  marks 
of  the  Lord  Jesus,  and  did  as  good  as  say,  "  Flog  away,  you  will  only  engrave 
His  name  into  my  flesh,  for  I  am  Christ's."  Now  it  would  be  a  very  superstitious 
and  foolish  thing  for  any  man  to  be  tattooed  with  the  name  of  the  Lord,  or  with 
a  cross;  but  all  that  such  an  act  meant  in  those  who  did  it  of  old  we  ought  to 
mean,  namely,  that  we  are  for  ever,  and  beyond  recall,  the  property  of  Jesus. 


CHAP.  luv.]  ISAIAH.  403 

(C.  H.  Spurgeon.)  Subscribers  : — My  object  is  to  persuade  you  to  eubscribe 
your  life  to  the  Lord.  You  may  answer,  "  Wbo  is  the  Lord?  "  I  reply — 1.  He 
is  the  Creator.  2.  He  is  the  Father  of  your  spirit.  3.  If  so.  He  is  impressionable. 
He  is  grieved  because  of  sin.  Is  not  the  Saviour's  broken  heart  a  manifestation 
of  the  heart  of  our  Heavenly  Father?  4.  He  is  your  true  Friend.  5.  I  call  on 
you  to  subscribe  your  life  unto  the  Lord,  because  of  your  everlasting  welfare. 
{W.  Birch.) 

Yer.  6.  TIius  saith  the  Lord,  the  Zing  of  Israel — "7  am  the  First,  and  I  am  the  Last'*: 

— This  affirmation  of  God's  existence  appears  more  comprehensive  than  the  similar 
one,  made  by  Him  to  Moses,  "  I  am  that  I  am."  It  is  true,  when  we  say  that  He  is  by 
His  own  absolute  will  and  power,  we  assert  by  implication  all  that  belongs  necessarily 
to  the  essence  and  character  of  the  Almighty.  We  assert  His  eternity;  for  He 
who  so  exists  could  have  had  no  beginning,  and  can  have  no  end:  we  assert  His 
creation  of  all  other  beings,  and  His  sovereignty  over  them;  for  He  who  alone  is 
from  eternity,  must  have  given  existence  to  aU  things  that  are  besides  Himself; 
and,  as  the  Author  of  all,  in  and  for  whom  all  exist,  must  be  the  sovereign  Ruler 
and  Disposer  of  all.  Nevertheless  the  ampler  form  of  expression,  "  I  am  the  First 
and  I  am  the  Last,"  impl3ang  comparison  with  and  precedency  to  all  other  existences, 
would  seem  to  convey  to  the  mind  more  distinct  notions  of  the  eternity,  the  omni- 
potence, the  creative  will  and  beneficence,  of  that  infinite  Being  "  who  is  above 
aU,  and  before  all,  and  in  all."  {E.  Cattermole,  B.D.)  The  First  and  the  Last : — 
Bitter  was  the  sorrow  of  the  prophet  who  spoke  these  words  when  he  saw  his 
people  turn  away  from  Jehovah.  Israel  had  been  enlightened  by  the  purest 
lights.  Alone  of  all  the  nations  of  the  ancient  world,  it  possessed  the  knowledge 
of  the  One  living  and  holy  God.  Yet  these  truths  are  forgotten;  these  privileges 
are  rejected;  this  God  is  denied.  Obedient  to  the  idolatrous  inspirations  of  the 
Semitic  races  whose  vitiated  blood  runs  through  their  veins,  the  Israelites  turn 
towards  Moloch,  Baal,  Astarte.  Then  the  prophet  argues,  struggles,  waxes 
indignant,  implores;  he  shows  the  inanity  of  that  idolatrous  worship  and  the 
infamy  of  those  hideous  rites;  he  reminds  Israel  of  the  greatness  of  their  origin 
and  of  their  destiny;  he  caUs  up  before  their  eyes  the  sacred  figure  of  Jehovah; 
he  tells  his  people,  in  the  words  which  the  Almighty  Himself  has  put  into  his  mouth, 
"  Thus  saith  the  Lord,  the  King  of  Israel,  and  His  redeemer  the  Lord  of  Hosts; 
I  am  the  First,  andJ  am  the  Last;  and  beside  Me  there  is  no  God."  This  history 
is  our  own.  A  light  more  resplendent  far  than  that  which  illumined  Israel  hath 
shone  upon  the  Christian  nations.  What  has  aU  this  availed  us,  and  whither  are 
marching  the  rising  generations?  Doubtless,  the  stone  and  wooden  idols  of  the 
past  cannot  be  set  up  again.  But  this  gloomy  fatality  before  which  men  would 
compel  us  to  abdicate  our  reason,  is  it  not  an  idol  too?  I.  "I  am  thb  FmsT." 
L  We  find  in  this  the  affirmation  of  the  fundamental  doctrine  of  the  supreme  God, 
the  Creator  of  all  things.  To-day  men  would  teach  us  another  Genesis  of  the 
world:  the  old  doctrines  of  Epicurus  are  once  more  becoming  ciurent;  we  hear 
of  eternal  matter,  of  millions  and  millions  of  atoms  which,  by  whirling  about 
continually  in  space,  have  imconsciously  and  spontaneously  invested  themselves 
with  a  motion  in  accordance  with  the  mathematical  laws  which  they  had  them- 
selves called  into  existence.  We  are  told  that  out  of  a  mechanical  combination 
suddenly  issued  a  living  cell,  and  that,  millions  of  centuries  aiding,  this  life  has 
become  vegetative,  then  animal,  then  conscious,  intellectual,  and  finally  moral; 
we  are  asked  to  acknowledge  this  ascending  progression  of  matter  which,  from  the 
inert  molecule  it  was  in  the  first  instance,  has  become  sensitive  protoplasm,  then 
has  been  transformed  into  the  plant,  which  in  its  turn  has  become  endowed  with 
motion,  then  advancing  one  step  further  has  turned  into  the  hideous  animal, 
creeping  in  the  mire  of  the  primitive  marshes,  to  rise  up  at  length  in  its  conquered 
majesty  and  call  itself  Plato,  Aristotle,  Jesus  Christ.  And  having  thus  accounted 
for  the  formation  of  things,  men  look  with  scornful  pity  upon  those  who  stiU  have 
recourse  to  the  intervention  of  an  all-creating  God ;  their  idea  of  the  Divine  Being 
may  be  expressed  in  the  words  of  the  learned  Laplace  to  Napoleon  the  First:  "  I 
have  had  no  need  of  this  hypothesis."  In  presence  of  this  seK-styled  scientific 
Genesis,  it  is  not  only  my  faith  which  revolts,  but  my  reason  repeats,  with  the 
enth\isiasm  of  a  conviction  firmer  than  ever,  "  I  believe  in  God  the  Father  Almighty, 
Maker  of  heaven  and  earth  ";  for  if  there  is  in  my  reason  an  immovable  principle, 
it  is  indeed  this:  that  no  effect  can  exist  without  a  cause,  that  all  which  is  in  the 
effect  must  also  be  in  the  cause  ;  that,  consequently,  matter  can  never  have  brought 


404  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xliv. 

forth  intelligence,  chaos  can  never  have  given  birth  to  harmony,  for  in  nowiss 
can  the  lesser  ever  have  produced  the  greater.  2  This  reminds  us,  further,  that 
as  God  is  the  supreme  Cause,  He  must  also  be  the  supreme  End  of  all  that  exists, 
the  centre  of  the  thoughts  and  affections  of  all  the  beings  He  has  created.  All 
things,  says  St.  Paul,  are  by  Him  and  for  Him.  Every  being  has  a  destination, 
and  the  noblest  destination  of  all  beings  is  that  which  the  Scriptures  call  the 
glory  of  God.  You  know  what  this  ideal  has  become,  and  what  sin  has  made  of  it. 
3.  This  means,  further,  that  God  is  at  the  basis  of  all  that  is  done  to  raise  and  save 
humanity,  to  bring  it  back  to  the  true  life  which  it  has  lost  by  separating  itself 
from  Him.  God  is  at  work  in  the  midst  of  mankind.  It  is  in  a  region  higher 
than  that  of  science  that  we  must  seek  the  hidden  soxirces  of  the  river  of  life  which 
brings  regeneration,  consolation,  and  eternal  hope  to  the  world.  Whence  come 
they  then?  They  gush  from  the  depths  of  the  religious  revelation  which  the 
God  whom  we  serve  has  given  to  mankind.  God  the  Creator  is  also  God  the 
Redeemer,  and,  in  order  of  grace  as  in  that  of  nature,  He  may  truly  say:  "  I  am 
the  First."  What  has  been  accomplished  in  the  world  must  also  be  accomplished 
in  each  individual  being,  and  the  redemption  of  humanity  is  nothing  if  it  is  not 
worked  out  in  the  innermost  soul  of  those  who  are  to  reap  its  fruits.  II.  "  I  AM 
THE  Last."  By  this  we  must  imderstand — 1.  That  God  never  abdicates,  and  that 
He  shall  ever  remain  the  Supreme  Master,  when  all  the  lords  of  a  day  shall  have 
passed  away  after  having  made  a  little  noise  in  the  world.  2.  That  Grod 
remains  the  Supreme  Judge,  and  that,  consequently,  the  hour  of  justice  shall 
certainly  strike.  3.  That  God  is  the  Supreme  Refuge  of  every  soul  that 
calls  upon  Him,  the  only  one  which  remains  standing  when  all  others  have 
disappeared.  (E.  Bersier,  D.D.)  Biblical  monotheism : — As  to  this,  the  sublimest 
utterance  of  Scripture,  we  offer  three  preliminary  remarks — 1.  It  is  supported  by 
the  structure  and  order  of  nature.  So  far  as  the  universe  has  come  within  the 
sweep  of  scientific  observation  and  research,  it  appears  as  one  complete  whole. 
All  its  parts  are  beautifully  harmonised ;  all  its  forces  are  nicely  balanced.  2.  It 
is  in  direct  antagonism  to  certain  prevalent  opinions.  It  is  opposed  to  atheism, 
which  declares  there  is  no  God;  to  fetichism,  the  worship  of  any  material  object 
that  a  capricious  superstition  may  select ;  to  polytheism,  which  holds  the  plurality 
of  gods;  and  to  pantheism,  which  regards  nature  as  identical  with  Deity,  and 
thus  destroys  a  Divine  personality.  3.  It  is  accepted  as  a  fundamental  truth  in 
all  evangelical  churches.  But  o\ir  object  is  to  consider  the  practical  uses  of 
Biblical  monotheism.  I.  It  reveals  the  gbeatness  of  the  Creator.  Survey 
this  wondrous  universe.  Gaze  upon  the  vast,  and  examine  the  minute  in  the 
clearest  and  broadest  light  of  modern  science,  and  what  do  you  see — wisdom? 
Yes,  manifold  wisdom.  Goodness?  Yes,  like  an  overflowing  tide,  overflowing 
all.  Power?  In  rearing  the  stupendous  fabrics,  building  up  the  mountains, 
pouring  out  the  oceans,  stretching  out  the  heavens.  Do  you  see  wealth  in  all 
this?  If  you  attach  value  to  one  acre  of  earth,  what  is  the  value  of  the  globe? 
If  there  be  but  one  God,  how  great  must  He  be !  11.  It  reveals  the  definitb- 
NESS  OF  MORAL  OBLIGATION.  Deep  in  the  souls  of  all  men  is  the  sense  of  duty. 
My  definition  of  virtue  is  this — '  following  a  right  rule  from  a  right  motive." 
What  is  the  rule  ?  Clearly,  if  there  be  but  one  God,  the  will  of  that  one  God  must 
be  the  rule.  What  is  the  motive?  Clearly,  if  there  be  but  one  God,  supreme 
love  to  that  one  God.  Were  there  a  plurality  of  gods  there  would  be  a  difficulty 
to  find  out  what  virtue  is;  we  should  have  to  determine  whose  will  to  obey — the 
will  of  each,  or  some,  or  all.  And  we  should  also  have  to  find  out  who  of  all  the 
gods  we  should  love  the  most.  HI.  It  reveals  the  fitness  of  relioion  to  the 
constitution  of  the  SOUL.  1.  The  human  heart  has  a  centralising  tendency. 
Deep  in  our  emotional  nature  is  a  craving  for  some  one  object  on  which  to  place 
entire  confidence,  and  centre  the  deepest  love.  ,2.  The  moral  character  of  the 
soul  depends  upon  its  central  object.  By  a  law  of  our  nature  we  become  like  that 
we  most  love.  He  who  loves  God  becomes  a  partaker  of  the  Divine  nature.  3.  The 
soul's  happiness  is  determined  by  the  character  of  the  object  most  loved.  All 
experience  shows  that  most  of  our  happiness  and  misery  comes  out  of  our  supreme 
love.  All,  in  every  age,  who  have  loved  the  one  God  supremely  have  felt  with 
the  psalmist  who  said,  "Whom  have  I  in  heaven  but  Thee?"  IV.  It  reveals 
the  human  brotherhood  of  souls.  "  To  us,"  says  Paul,  "  there  is  but  one 
God,  the  Father  of  all  things,  and  we  in  Him."  V.  It  reveals  the  wonderful 
in  mediation.  "  God  so  loved  the  world  that  He  gave  His  only-begotten  Son," 
&c.     Here  is  love  passing  knowledge.     1.  What  a  disparity  between  Him  who 


CHAP,  xLiv.]  ISAIAH.  405 

loves  and  them  who  are  loved !  What  a  disparity  in  natures !  God,  the  Almighty, 
the  All-wise,  the  Eternal.  Man,  the  feeble,  llic  ignorant,  and  the  dying.  What 
a  disparity  in  character!  God,  the  Essence  and  Fountain  of  all  holiness.  Man, 
vile  and  polluted  with  sin.  2.  What  a  manifestation  of  the  greatness  of  Hi>  love. 
Is  this  one  God  our  one  God?    Have  we  no  idols?     (D.  Thomas,  D.D.) 

Ver.  8.  Fear  ye  not. — Christian  courage: — Boldness  for  God,  and  boldness 
in  dealing  with  God,  should  form  part  of  the  Christian  character;  and  the  Word 
of  Grod  encourages  this  Christian  boldness.  We  are  repeatedly  exhorted  to  "  fear 
not,"  to  "be  of  good  courage."  I.  Why  abb  we  to  bxpbct  that  the  people 
OP  God  would  be  likely  to  fbab?  1.  They  have  always  been  a  persecuted 
people.  2.  Many  a  man,  before  he  is  decided  for  God,  finds  out  that,  if  he 
makes  up  his  mind  to  enter  into  the  service  of  the  Lord,  his  worldly  interest  is 
nearly  sure  to  suffer,  3.  Others,  again,  know  their  personal  interest  for  their 
worldly  circumstances.  They  know,  for  instance,  their  birth,  their  wealth,  their 
talent.  Then  perhaps  they  are  called  of  God  to  think  seriously  about  their  eternal 
state;  and  the  result  is,  that  they  feel  in  their  own  minds,  "  If  I  forsake  all  thia 
outward  display  of  means,  and  show  that  I  do  not  value  it  as  I  have  hitherto  done, 
my  influence  amongst  others  will  very  greatly  suffer."  4.  There  is  many  a  man, 
if  he  would  serve  the  Lord,  must  make  a  sacrifice  of  many  of  his  personal  and 
worldly  comforts.  6,  Then,  take  the  case  of  doctrines.  There  are  many  who 
imbibe  from  their  earliest  days  the  idea  that  religion  is  gloomy,  that  God  is  an 
object  of  terror,  that  death  must  be  misery;  they  five  in  no  thought  of  the  Lord's 
coming  again  in  joy  and  happiness,  and  heaven  itself,  with  its  dehghts  and  its 
pleasures,  is  never  really  considered.  Now,  all  these  things  frequently  produce 
fear  in  our  minds.  11.  The  season  why  wb  shotjld  not  feab.  The  reason  is, 
that  the  Lord  thus  argues  with  us:  "  Have  not  I  told  thee  from  that  time,  and 
have  declared  it  ?  "  That  is,  God  challenges  man  to  deny  this  fact,  that  He 
knows  the  end  from  the  beginning,  and  has  proved  that  He  Imows  it  by  foretelling 
the  end  from  the  beginning.  This  is  the  manner  in  which  God  argues  in  other 
passages  (chap.  xlii.  9).  God  knows  the  end;  God  foresees  the  means,  and  foreseeing 
the  means  He  exercises  control  over  those  means — everything  that  happens 
therefore,  great  or  small,  is  under  the  control  of  God,  who  "  orders  all  things  after 
the  counsel  of  His  own  will,"  and  consequently  we  have  nothing  to  fear, 
because  we  are  in  His  hands  who  "  doeth  all  things  well,"  This  is  the  maimer  in 
which  we  find  the  argument  used  in  chapter  li,  12.  III.  Having  thus  stated  the 
Christian's  duty  as  well  as  his  privilege — not  to  fear;  and  having  seen  what  the 
reason  is,  that  God  has  foretold  all  things,  and  therefore  decreed  and  settled  all 
things  from  the  beginning.  He  then  challenges  Hjs  people  in  these  words — 
"  Ye  are  even  My  witnesses,"  and  therefore  urges  upon  them,  by  the  strongest 
possible  personal  appeal,  to  bear  testimony  to  the  fact  that  the  Lord  He  is  God, 
and  our  God  too,  for  ever  and  for  ever,     (M.  ViUiers,  M.A.) 

Vers.  9-20.  They  that  make  a  graven  image. — The  vanity  of  graven  imaget  :— 
Substituting  homely  prose  for  glowing  poetry  we  may,  after  a  fashion,  reduce  the 
prophet's  thought  to  propositions  like  the  following — 1.  Neither  the  idol  nor  its 
god  knows  anything,  while  Jehovah  knows  all.  2.  Neither  the  idol  nor  its  god 
can  do  aught,  while  Jehovah  is  almighty.  3.  Neither  the  idol  nor  its  god  is  aught, 
while  Jehovah  is  the  living  God,  God  of  the  entire  universe,  and  a  God  of  love, — in 
a  word,  the  perfect  Personality.  4,  The  worship  of  idols  or  their  gods  is  degrading, 
while  that  of  Jehovah  exalts  and  saves  the  soul.  {W.  8.  Ayres.)  The  idolater » 
J  oily : — With  a  dash  of  pimgent  satire,  Isaiah  shows  what  a  silly  man  he  is.  We 
have  here  the  whole  process  of  god-manufacture.  The  poor  devotee  selects  a 
cedar,  or  a  cypress,  or  an  oak,  which  probably  his  own  hands  planted  many  years 
ago;  and,  having  hewn  it  down,  sets  to  work  with  line,  and  plane,  and  chisel,  to 
fashion  it  into  the  resemblance  of  a  human  being.  This  being  done,  he  places  it 
in  a  shrine  or  temple,  and  falls  down  before  it,  and  worships  il.  What  becomes 
of  the  rest  of  the  tree  ?  Oh,  with  it  he  makes  a  blazing  fire  to  warm  himself,  or  to 
bake  his  bread !  So  that  it  is  quite  a  chance  which  portion  of  the  wood  becomes 
a  god,  and  which  portion  turns  to  ashes  on  the  hearth;  the  same  tree  suffices  to 
cook  food  for  his  hungry  body,  and  to  provide  an  object  of  adoration  for  his  hungry 
soul.  The  man  is  an  utter  fool,  only  to  be  ridiculed  and  laughed  at;  and  the 
prophet  holds  him  up  to  the  derision  of  all  sensible  men,  as  one  whose  head  is 
surely  turned,  or  who  has  fairly  lost  his  wits,     («/.  T.  Davidson,  D.D.) 


406  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xuv. 

Ver.  14.  He  planteth  an  ash. — The  planter  and  the  rain : — The  civilised  and 
cultivated  tree  is  the  joint  product  of  human  care  and  the  earth's  fertility.  Let 
us  study  the  picture  and  see  how  true  it  is  to  what  the  world  contains.  1.  W« 
may  ask  ourselves  how  it  is  that  any  institution  or  established  form  of  human 
living  comes  to  be  prevalent  and  dominant.  A  strong  idea,  of  freedom,  of  justice, 
of  mercy,  enters  into  some  strong  man's  soul.  It  makes  itself  completely  his. 
Then  it  will  not  be  satisfied  with  him;  it  grows  restless  within  him,  and  demands 
the  world.  Then  he  takes  it  out  some  day  and  plants  it.  With  some  vigorous, 
incisive  word  or  deed  he  thrusts  his  live  and  fiery  idea  down  deep  into  the  fruitful 
soil  of  human  life.  Then  human  life  takes  up  his  idea  and  nourishes  it.  Wonder- 
fully all  the  forces  gather  around  it  and  give  it  their  vitality.  History  bears 
witness  that  it  has  all  been  living  by  the  power  of  that  idea  unknown,  unguessed; 
philosophy  says  that  in  it  lies  the  key  of  her  hard  problems;  economy  discovers 
that  by  it  life  may  be  made  more  thrifty  and  complete;  poetry  shows  its  nobleness; 
affection  wreaths  it  with  love;  aU  the  essential  hopes  and  fears  and  needs  of 
human  nature  come  flocking  to  it;  until  at  last  you  can  no  more  conceive  of  human 
life  without  that  idea  than  you  can  think  with  complacency  of  the  landscape  with- 
out the  great  tree  which  is  as  thoroughly  a  part  of  it  as  is  the  very  ground  itself. 
A  free  Church,  a  just  coiu't,  a  popular  government — this  is  the  way  in  which  every 
institution  comes  to  be.  Here  is  the  relation  of  the  world's  few  great  creative  men 
to  the  great  mass  and  body  of  its  Ufe.  Helpless  Eiu-ope  without  Martin  Luther. 
Helpless  also  Martin  Luther  without  Europe.  Here  is  the  mutual  need  of  great 
souls  and  the  great  world.  2.  We  have  another  illustration,  even  more  striking, 
close  at  oiu-  hand,  in  the  way  in  which  character  grows  up  in  our  personal  nature. 
Where  do  our  characters  come  from  ?  It  is  easy  sometimes  to  represent  them  aa 
the  result  of  strong  influence  which  other  men  have  had  over  us.  It  is  easy  at 
other  times  to  think  of  them  as  if  they  made  themselves,  shaping  themselves  by 
mere  internal  fermentation  into  the  result  we  see.  But  neither  account  teUs  the 
story  by  itself.  When  we  question  ourselves,  not  about  character  in  general,  but 
about  special  points  and  qualities  of  character,  then  we  are  sure  that  it  was  by 
some  outer  influence  made  our  own,  some  seed  of  motive  or  example  set  into  our 
lives  and  then  taken  possession  of  by  those  lives  and  filled  with  their  vitality, 
developed  into  their  own  type  and  kind  of  vice  or  virtue — it  was  thus  that  this, 
which  is  now  so  intimate  that  we  call  it  not  merely  ours  but  ourselves,  came  into 
being.  This  is  the  reason  of  the  perpetual  identity  along  with  the  perpetual 
variety  of  goodness  and  badness.  We  are  all  good  and  bad  alike;  and  yet  every 
man  is  good  and  bad  in  a  way  all  his  own — in  a  way  in  which  no  other  man  has 
ever  been  bad  or  good  since  the  world  began, — just  as  all  ash-trees  are  alike  because 
they  have  all  been  planted  from  the  same  nurseries;  and  yet  every  ash- tree  is 
different  from  every  other  because  it  has  grown  in  its  own  soil  and  fed  on  its  own 
rain:  the  society  and  the  individuality  of  moral  life.  3.  The  truth  has  its 
clearest  illustration,  it  may  be,  in  the  way  in  which  God  has  sent  into  the  world 
the  Gospel  of  His  Son.  Most  sharp  and  clear  and  definite  stands  out  in  history  the 
life  and  death  of  Jesus  Christ.  It  was  the  entrance  of  a  new,  Divine-force  into  the 
world.  But  what  has  been  the  story  of  that  force  once  introduced  ?  It  has  been 
subjected  to  the  infiuences  which  have  created  the  ordinary  currents  of  human 
life.  The  characters  and  thoughts  of  men  have  told  upon  it.  The  Gospel  has 
shared  in  the  fortunes  of  the  Christian  world.  It  has  followed  in  the  track  of 
conquering  armies ;  it  has  been  beaten  back  and  hindered  by  the  tempests  of  revolu- 
tion and  misrule;  it  has  been  tossed  upon  the  waves  of  philosophical  speculation; 
it  has  been  made  the  plaything  or  the  tool  of  politics;  it  has  taken  possession 
of  countries  and  centuries  only  by  taking  possession  of  men  through  the  natiural 
affections  of  their  human  hearts;  it  has  worked  through  institutions  which  it 
only  helped  to  create.  While  it  has  helped  to  make  the  world,  it  has  also  at  every 
moment  been  made  by  the  world  into  something  different  from  its  own  pure  self. 
If  you  try  to  take  either  half  of  the  truth  by  itself  you  get  into  the  midst  of  puzzle 
and  mistake.  Think  of  the  Gospel  simply  as  an  intrusion  of  Divine  force  kept 
apart  from  any  mixture  with  the  influences  of  the  world,  and  it  is  impossible  to 
understand  the  forms  in  which  it  has  been  allowed  to  present  itself.  Its  weak- 
nesses and  its  strength  are  alike  unintelligible.  Think  of  it  as  a  mere  development 
of  human  life,  and  you  cannot  conceive  how  it  came  to  exist  at  all.  But  consider 
it  in  its  completeness.  Remember  that  it  is  a  Divine  force  working  through  human 
conditions ;  let  it  be  all  one  long  incarnation,  God  manifest  in  the  flesh — and  then 
you  see  at  once  why  it  is  so  weak  and  why  it  is  so  strong;  why  it  has  not  occupied 


CHAP.  xLiv.]  ISAIAH.  407 

the  world  with  one  lightning  flash  of  power,  and  why  it  must  at  last,  however 
slowly,  accomplish  its  complete  salvation.  4.  Every  Christian  is  a  little  Christen- 
dom; and  the  method  of  the  entrance  of  the  Gospel  into  the  great  world  is  repeated 
in  the  way  in  which  the  Gospel  enters  into  every  soul,  which  then  it  occupies  and 
changes.  Again,  there  is  the  special  act  of  the  implanting  of  the  new  life,  and  then 
there  is  the  intrusting  of  the  new-implanted  life  to  the  nature  and  its  circumstances. 
The  man  was  born  again !  Since  then,  long  years  have  come  and  gone.  What 
have  they  seen?  The  rain  has  nourished  it — that  long- sown  seed!  Nothing  has 
happened  since  which  has  not  touched  that  seed  and  helped  or  hindered  its 
maturity.  Still  remember,  it  is  His  rain.  The  influences  into  whose  influence 
the  seed  was  given  still  were  God's.  He  took  the  child,  and  gave  the  friend,  and 
sent  you  on  the  journey,  and  shaped  the  nature  which  Isestowed  on  the  Christian 
life  its  distinctive  character.  5.  May  we  not  say  that  the  principle  itself  includes 
the  whole  truth  of  the  supernatural,  and  its  relation  to  the  natural?  IPhillipa 
Brooks,  D.D.) 

Ver.  16.  He  bumeth  part  thereof  In  the  fire. — Which  is  to  far  better  pur- 
pose than  the  other  part  made  into  an  idol.  {J.  Trapp.)  Aha,  I  am 
warm. — Cold: — This  is  an  expression  of  that  natural  joy  which  will  escape 
from  one  in  some  way  or  other,  when  from  a  comfortless  apartment,  or  from 
a  frosty  street,  or  from  some  wintry  office  of  obligation,  he  sees  the  shining 
of  his  own  hearth.  If  it  could  be  introduced  thus  with  an  exclamation  in 
the  land  of  Judea,  that  mild  land,  it  should  certainly  be  repeated  in  this  stern  climate 
with  a  deep  feeling  of  relief  and  thankfulness.  The  household  gods  of  ancient  Italy 
were  set  up  about  the  fireplace  of  each  dwelling,  as  about  a  sacred  spot,  deserving 
to  be  surrounded  with  the  images  of  a  divine  protection;  and  even  now,  all  over  the 
world,  altar  and  hearth  are  but  another  phrase  for  home.  "  Who,"  asks  the 
psalmist,  "  can  stand  before  His  cold?  "  God  sends  it;  and  He  has  filled  the  earth 
with  materials,  and  the  mind  of  man  with  resources,  to  repel  and  overcome  it.  He 
is  the  same  Sovereign  Wisdom  and  Goodness  in  this  as  in  every  other  part  of  Hi  a 
works.  And  yet  we  must  confess  that  it  is  one  of  His  unwelcome  ministers ;  but, 
like  all  the  rest  of  what  we  account  so  in  the  natural  world,  subservient  to  high 
purposes  in  the  holy  providence  of  the  Lord.  Let  us  turn  to  the  various  instru- 
mentality by  which  its  vigour  is  mitigated  and  its  power  for  mischief  broken.  "  I 
am  warm,"  says  the  speaker  in  the  text.  So  would  the  ground  say  if  it  had  a 
tongue,  while  it  lies  sheltered  imder  the  fleecy  garments  of  dazzling  whiteness,  which 
the  very  cold  has  woven  for  it  out  of  the  dark  mists.  "  I  am  warm,"  say  the  beast 
and  the  bird  of  the  frozen  zone,  as  the  one  lies  close  in  his  furry  coat  or  the  locks  of 
his  long  hair,  and  the  other  is  not  afraid  to  cleave  the  inexorable  sky  with  his  breast 
of  down.  "  I  am  warm,"  repeat  the  animals  who  are  natives  of  our  own  temperate 
circle,  as  they  take  shelter  in  the  hollow  retreats  which  their  industry  has  contrived, 
or  make  their  way  towards  the  more  genial  countries  whither  their  instincts  direct 
them.  "  I  am  warm,"  say  the  lake  and  the  stream,  while  they  are  armed  with  the 
polished  breast-plate  which  has  been  forged  for  them,  not  among  furnaces  of  glow- 
ing heat,  but  in  the  "magazines  of  the  hail."  "I  am  warm,"  says  man;  he  who 
commands  the  inferior  creatures,  he  who  makes  a  path  for  himself  even  over  the 
deep,  he  who  compels  into  his  bond-service  the  substances  and  the  elements  of  the 
world.  He  cuts  down  the  trees,  and  makes  them  do  him  a  kinder  office  by  their 
blaze  than  they  had  done  before  by  their  shadow.  And  better  than  this;  he  opens 
the  dark  treasures  with  which  a  gracious  providence  has  stored  the  lower  parts  of 
the  earth,  and  he  finds  them  more  precious  than  the  "  vein  for  the  silver,"  than 
"  the  place  of  sapphires  and  dust  of  gold."  What  are  the  feelings  which  the  con- 
sideration of  the  cold  and  all  its  alleviating  circumstances  should  impress  upon  the 
mind  ?  1.  Thankfulness  towards  God.  There  is  no  small  danger  of  losing  sight  of  the 
Almighty  Benefactor  in  partaking  of  His  benefits.  There  is  no  small  danger  of  even 
turning  those  very  benefits  into  a  sort  of  idols  that  we  substitute  in  His  place.  This 
was  precisely  and  literally  the  case  with  the  person  whom  the  prophet  describes  as 
speaking  in  the  text.  You  are  like  him,  who  transform  your  interest  into  your 
rehgion;  making  a  show  of  worship,  when  you  are  thinking  only  how  to  be  warmed 
and  fed.  You,  too,  are  like  him  who  shape  your  faith  and  your  convenience  out  of 
the  same  material;  making  the  concerns  of  the  soul  but  part  and  parcel  with 
common  necessities.  We  are  all  like  him,  so  far  as  we  turn  our  comforts  into  our 
divinities.  2.  Sympathy  with  His  suffering  creatures.  {N.  L.  FrotkingJiam.) 
The  wisdom  of  God  in  the  freezing  of  water: — I  cannot  omit  calling  your  attention  to 


403  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xliv. 

a  remarkable  fact  in  the  freezing  of  water,  which  has  nothing  to  surpass  it  in  the 
surprising  wisdom  of  its  ordination,  even  if  it  has  any  perfect  parallel  in  the  whole 
economy  of  nature.  We  know  it  to  be  a  general  law  of  material  substances,  that 
they  expand  with  the  heat  and  contract  with  the  cold.  The  particles  of  water  are 
subjected  to  this  rule,  like  all  other  particles  of  matter.  But  if  this  were  allowed  to 
hold  on  throughout,  giving  way  to  no  exception,  do  but  reflect  what  would  be  the 
consequences.  The  drops  at  the  surface,  as  they  were  successively  congealed, 
would  sink.  The  process  of  freezing  would  begin  at  the  bottom.  Layer  after  layer 
would  thus  be  deposited,  which  no  returning  sims  could  penetrate  to  dissolve;  and 
the  most  that  the  summer  could  do  would  be  to  wet  the  face  of  the  flinty  mass.  The 
water-courses  would  be  for  ever  stopped  in  their  glad  and  wholesome  flow;  and  many 
a  broad  river  would  scarcely  float  a  boat  upon  its  plashy  shallows.  And  now  what 
has  been  done  to  avert  such  a  calamity?  A  new  law  has  been  instituted,  in  direct 
contravention  of  the  old,  to  meet  the  exigency  of  the  case.  The  water,  precisely  at 
the  moment  of  congelation,  breaks  away  into  the  line  of  an  opposite  decree.  It  ex- 
pands and  grows  lighter.  It  refuses  to  descend.  It  rests  fixed  upon  the  top,  aa 
ornament  and  a  defence.  I  know  not  how  others  may  be  affected  by  a  view  like 
this ;  but  it  seems  to  me  to  call  for  an  adoring  acknowledgment  of  that  aU-pervading 
design  which  thus  supplies  the  wants  of  its  creation  by  a  special  departure  from  its 
own  method,  as  invariable  in  its  action  as  the  method  itself.     {Ibid.) 

Ver.  17.  And  the  residue  thereof  he  maketh  a  god. — Residual  religion: — The 
scene  is  one  which  we  may  describe  as  very  childish  indeed.  It  belongs  to  the  very 
earliest  stage  one  might  imagine  of  the  thought  of  worship.  The  man  who  evidently 
lives  under  conditions  by  no  means  of  the  highest  civilisation  feels  himself  exposed 
to  the  natural  inclemency  of  the  weather,  and  to  the  pangs  of  hunger.  He  selects  a 
tree,  and  because  he  needs  food  he  hveaAiS  up  the  tree  and  kindles  a  fire  and  prepares 
his  food.  He  then  rejoices  in  the  warmth  of  the  fire  that  he  has  kindled,  and  he  has 
satisfied  two  of  the  simple  wants  of  nature.  He  has  been  hungry,  and  he  has  pro- 
vided himself  food.  He  is  cold,  and  he  has  provided  himself  with  w£irmth.  But 
there  is  yet  another  instinct  in  his  nature  which  demands  satisfaction.  He  is  con- 
scious that  he  is  a  weak  creature  in  the  midst  of  a  strange  and  wonderful  world- 
Mysterious  powers  that  he  cannot  fathom  seem  to  float  about  his  life,  and  to  inter- 
pose their  forces  often  to  the  derangement  of  his  plans.  And  therefore,  when  he 
has  satisfied  those  two  simple  physical  wants,  he  takes  the  residue  of  the  tree  that  he 
has  cut  down,  and  he  makes  it  into  a  god.  Thus  it  is  that  he  satisfies  three  imperious 
desires  and  needs  of  his  nature.  Is  it  wholly  untrue  to  say  that  there  are  many  men 
who  live  after  this  fashion,  that  when  they  have  supplied  their  own  wants,  when 
their  body  has  been  amply  fed,  when  the  conditions  of  their  life  have  been  cared  for 
so  that  they  are  wcU  provided  with  the  warming  comforts  of  life,  then,  out  of 
the  residue  of  their  time,  out  of  the  residue  of  their  money,  out  of  the  residue 
of  their  thought,  they  will,  perchance,  consecrate  something  to  God  ?  {Bp.  W.  B. 
Carpenter,  D.D.)  Materials  and  principles  of  life: — There  is  one  very  common 
delusion  which,  if  we  will  watch  ourselves,  we  shall  find  that  we  are  all  of  us  more  or 
less  liable  to.  We  confuse  the  materials  of  life  with  the  principles  which  ought  to 
govern  life.  The  materials  of  life  in  this  poor  man's  case  were  very  simple  indeed. 
He  is  a  man  who  can  cut  down  a  tree  of  the  forest  to  make  himself  a  habitation,  and 
from  the  wood  all  round  about  him  gathers  what  may  be  called  the  material  of  life, 
whether  for  the  house  or  for  the  cooking  of  food,  and  these  materials  of  life  are  such 
that  you  and  I,  looking  back  upon  them  from  our  refined  and  elevated  position, 
say  that  they  are  very  simple  and  very  crude  indeed;  but  he  manipulates  these 
materials  after  a  certain  principle.  Given  that  we  have  different  materials  to  deal 
with,  and  that  ours  is  not  the  life  of  the  forest  and  the  dependence  upon  the  forest, 
but  that  ours  is  the  life  of  modern  civilisation,  with  our  railways  and  our  telegraphs 
and  our  newspapers  daily,  with  our  opportunities  of  enjoyment  in  abundance, 
and  with  means  of  information  in  the  multiplied  books  which  are  issued  daily 
from  the  press.  With  all  these  things  which  constitute  the  material  of  our  life,  and 
with  our  occupations  governed  and  guided  by  the  principles  of  modern  civilisation, 
it  is  possible  that  we  may  say — and  we  shall  say  truly — that  the  materials  of  life 
which  we  possess  are  far  superior  to  the  rude  materials  which  belonged  to  that  poor 
man's  life.  But  is  the  difference  between  one  man  and  another  to  "be  judged  by  the 
materials  which  a  man  uses,  or  by  the  principles  which  he  appUes  in  the  use  of  those 
materials?  (Ibid.)  Religion  the  all-comprising  principle  of  life: — Is  religion  to 
be  looked  upon  as  a  thing  that  you  can  separate  ?     Or  are  you  going  to  regard  religion 


CHAP.  XLiv.]  ISAIAH.  409 

as  a  principle  which  is  applicable  to  life,  and  applicable  at  every  hour  and  in  every 
place,  and  all  through  life?  Was  that  old  rhyme  right  that  told  us  that  the  twenty- 
four  hours  of  the  day  should  be  divided  into  eight  hours  for  work,  and  eight  for  rest, 
and  eight  which  are  given  to  God;  or  was  not  that  coiToction  right  of  the  man  who  said, 
"  eight  for  toil,  and  eight  for  rest,  and  all  for  God  "  ?     Gounod  had  painted  on  his 

fiano  the  head  of  the  Christ,  as  if  he  would  say,  "  Wherever  I  look  before  I  compose, 
look  upon  the  head  of  the  crucified  Lord,  and  I  know  that  the  spirit  of  that  Lord 
passes  into  me;  and  when  I  begin  to  compose  my  melodies,  the  music  of  His  life 
penetrates  my  soul,  and  gives  me  the  inspiration."  We  should  look  into  the  face  of 
God,  understand  the  character  of  God,  understand  that  He  claims  every  human 
being  as  His  son,  and  understand,  therefore,  that  there  is  no  bondage  here,  but  that 
there  is  the  freedom  of  the  son,  and  the  love  of  the  son's  heart,  and  the  desire  of  the 
son's  heart  to  advance  the  kingdom  and  the  family  of  God.     {Ibid.) 

Ver.  20.  He  feedeth  on  ashes. — Earth  used  as  food: — One  of  the  most  extra- 
ordinary examples  of  depraved  or  perverted  appetite  is  the  use  of  earth 
for  food.  This  propensity  is  not  an  occasional  freak,  but  a  common  custom, 
and  is  found  among  so  large  a  number  and  variety  of  tribes  that  it  may  be 
regarded  as  co-e<stensive  with  the  human  race.  Prom  time  immemorial  the 
Chinese  have  be'In  in  the  habit  of  using  various  kinds  of  edible  earth  as  substitutes 
for  bread  in  times  of  scarcity;  and  their  imperial  annals  have  always  religiously 
noticed  the  discovery  of  such  bread-stones,  or  stone-meal,  as  they  are  called. 
On  the  western  coast  of  Africa  a  yellowish  kind  of  earth,  called  "  caouac,"  ia 
so  highly  relished,  and  so  constantly  consumed  by  the  negroes,  that  it  has  become 
to  them  a  necessary  of  life.  In  the  island  of  Java,  and  in  various  parts  of  the 
hill-country  of  India,  a  reddish  earth  is  baked  into  cakes  and  sold  in  the  village 
markets  for  food;  while  on  the  banks  of  the  Orinoco,  in  South  America,  Hum- 
boldt mentions  that  the  native  Indians  find  a  species  of  unctuous  clay,  which 
they  knead  into  balls,  and  store  up  in  heaps  in  their  huts  as  a  provision  for  the 
winter  or  rainy  season.  They  are  not  compelled  by  famine  to  have  recourse 
to  this  clay;  for  even  when  fish,  game,  and  fruit  are  plentifiil  they  stiU  eat  it 
after  their  food  as  a  luxury.  This  practice  of  eating  earth  is  not  confined  solely 
to  the  inhabitants  of  the  Tropics.  In  the  north  of  Norway  and  in  Swedish 
Lapland  a  kind  of  white  powdery  earth,  called  mountain-meal,  found  under 
beds  of  decayed  moss,  is  consumed  in  immense  quantities  every  year.  It  ia 
mixed  by  the  people  with  their  bread  in  times  of  scarcity;  and  even  in  Germany 
it  has  been  frequently  used  as  a  means  of  allaying  hunger.  All  these  examples  of 
the  use  of  earth  as  food  are  so  contrary  to  our  experience  that  they  might  seem 
incredible  were  it  not  that  they  are  thoroughly  authenticated.  Such  an  un- 
natural custom  must,  in  the  long  run,  prove  injurious  to  the  constitution  of  those 
who  indulge  in  it,  although  it  is  wonderful  how  long  it  can  be  carried  on  by  some 
individuals  apparently  with  impunity.  {H.  Macmillan,  LL.D.)  Feeding  on 
ashes : — In  the  spiritual  world  there  are  many  who  feed  upon  ashes.  The  prophet 
is  speaking  of  the  idolater.  I.  Who  is  the  idolater — who  is  the  "  he  "  that 
is  said  to  feed  on  ashes  ?  The  prophet  had  a  definite  audience  before  him.  He 
was  prophesying  to  the  children  of  Israel.  Notwithstanding  the  purity  and 
sublimity  of  their  own  monotheistic  creed,  and  the  awful  threatenings  and  sanc- 
tions with  which  it  was  guarded,  we  can  trace  throughout  their  entire  history, 
as  a  marked  feature  of  their  character,  a  propensity  to  blend  a  theoretical  belief 
in  the  true  God  with  an  accommodating  reverence  to  the  idols  of  the  heathen 
Pantheon.  Except  when  under  the  immediate  spell  of  some  special  revelation  of 
Jehovah,  they  craved  for  some  visible  shape  or  outward  sign  of  the  divinity — a 
craving  which  was  satisfied  for  a  time  by  the  erection  of  the  tabernacle  and  temple, 
and  the  establishment  of  the  worship  connected  with  them,  but  which  soon  over- 
leaped barriers  thus  imposed  upon  it,  and  sought  for  novel  sensations  in  the 
tabernacle  of  Moloch  and  in  the  star  of  the  god  Remphan — figures  which  they  made 
to  worship  them.  The  very  priests  and  Levites,  who  were  most  concerned  in 
keeping  the  worship  of  Jehovah  pure,  were  the  leaders  of  the  various  national 
apostasies.  Isaiah  deeply  deplored  this  national  fickleness  and  spiritual  incon- 
stancy. In  the  passage  under  consideration  he  seeks  to  overwhelm  it  with 
contempt.  Were  Isaiah  addressing  us  in  these  days  his  ideas  would  be  the  same, 
though  the  form  in  which  he  would  present  them  would  be  different.  Material 
idolatry,  in  its  literal  import,  has  passed  away  among  civilised  nations.  But 
the  essence  of  the  temptation  remains  the  same.     Human  society  is  changed. 


410  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xxiv. 

but  human  nature  is  unchanged.  The  impulse  which  led  to  idolatry  is  therefore 
as  strong  at  the  present  day  as  it  was  in  the  time  of  Isaiah;  and  images  are  set 
up  and  worshipped  now  as  fantastic  as  any  pagan  fetich  or  joss.  The  New  Testa- 
ment form  of  the  Second  Commandment,  "  Be  not  conformed  to  this  world," 
requires  to  be  frequently  and  urgently  enforced.  If  I  were  to  sum  up  all  spiritual 
idolatry  in  these  days  in  one  form,  I  should  call  it  worldliness,  for  everything 
else  is  but  a  phase  of  this.  And  this  worldly  conformity  leads  speedily,  in  most 
instances,  to  a  low  moral  standard,  and  to  a  weak  and  corrupt  form  of  religion, 
and  produces  the  same  humiliating  results  which  flowed  from  the  idolatry  of 
ancient  times.  II.  What  is  idolatky?  It  is  a  perverted  spiritual  appetite. 
In  certain  diseased  states  of  the  brain  there  is  an  unnatural  craving  for  the  most 
extraordinary  and  unwholesome  substances.  Men  and  women  under  such 
morbid  influences  have  been  known  to  eat  cinders  and  sand  with  apparent  relish, 
and  even  to  prefer  them  to  the  richest  dainties.  In  such  cases  it  is  not  the  appetite 
that  is  at  fault.  The  controlling  power  of  the  brain,  which  chooses  the  proper  food, 
is  impaired,  and  this  healthy  appetite  is  set  to  work  upon  substances  which 
are  altogether  unsuitable.  In  like  manner  idolatry  arises  from  a  natural  craving 
of  the  soul,  which  was  made  for  God,  for  His  worship  and  enjoyment.  It  finds 
that  it  must  go  out  of  itself  for  the  blessedness  it  needs.  This  spiritual  appetite 
is  a  God-given  instinct  of  our  nature.  It  is  the  soul  seeking  its  highest  good- 
It  is  healthy  and  natural.  But  when,  under  the  guidance  and  power  of  a  deceived 
heart,  it  seeks  its  gratification  in  earthly  things  to  the  exclusion  altogether  of  God, 
it  affords  a  most  melancholy  example  of  a  perverted  spiritual  appetite.  III.  What 
ABE  THE  EFFECTS  OF  IDOLATEY?  How  docs  idolatry  affect  the  man  guilty  of 
it?  There  is  a  very  striking  and  beautiful  relation  between  the  food  of  man  and 
his  digestive  organs.  He  is  omnivorous.  He  is  the  ruler  of  the  world,  and  there- 
fore the  varied  life  of  the  world  must  throb  in  his  veins.  But  all  the  varied  food 
which  she  presents  to  him  must  be  organic  food.  "  Phosphorus  literally  flames 
in  the  brain,  that  thoughts  may  breathe  and  words  may  burn  ;  lime  gives  solidity 
to  the  bones  ;  the  alkaline  salts  promote  the  oxidation  and  removal  of  the  effete 
materials  of  the  body.  Common  minerals — iron,  sulphur,  soda,  potash,  and 
others — circulate  in  the  blood,  or  are  garnered  in  the  various  tissues.  But  all 
these  inorganic  materials  are  furnished,  not  from  the  earth  directly,  but  in  the  food ; 
the  various  vegetable  and  animal  products  containing  them  in  varying  quantities." 
Such  being  the  law  of  man's  nutrition,  it  will  be  seen  at  once  that  if  he  feeds 
directly  upon  ashes,  he  is  feeding  upon  substances  that  are  altogether  incongruous, 
and  unfitted  to  nourish  him.  His  organs  cannot  digest  or  assimilate  ashes.  And 
is  not  the  analogy  between  spiritual  and  natural  things  here  very  clear?  If 
man's  spiritual  appetite  can  feed  only  on  God,  then  if  man  seeks  his  portion  only 
in  the  things  of  the  world,  what  can  you  expect  but  spiritual  indigestion  and 
misery?  It  is  true,  indeed,  that  just  as  the  body  requires  inorganic  elements — 
salt,  lime,  and  iron — as  well  as  organic,  for  its  proper  nourishment,  so  man  requires 
the  things  of  the  world  as  well  as  the  things  of  faith  for  his  spiritual  welfare.  But 
then  we  are  to  seek  these  temporal  things,  not  directly  from  the  world,  but 
through  the  channel  of  communion  with  God.  There  are  natures  that,  by  a 
long  course  of  feeding  upon  ashes,  have  become  accustomed  to  this  unnatural 
diet.  Like  the  clay-eaters  of  South  America,  their  digestive  organs  become 
assimilated  to  their  food,  and  they  are  put  to  little  inconvenience  by  it.  We 
meet  with  persons  who  are  satisfied  with  their  portion  in  this  world,  who  mind 
earthly  things,  and  are  contented  with  the  nourishment  for  their  souls  which 
they  find  in  them.  But  are  such  persons  the  truly  great  and  noble  ones  of  our 
race?  How  can  an  infinite  hunger  be  appeased  by  a  finite  good ?  The  soul  wants 
organised  food;  food  that  has  spiritual  life  in  it;  food  that  is  redolent  of  the 
sunshine  and  permeated  with  the  light  of  heaven;  food  that  has  drunk  in  all 
the  impalpable  virtues  and  forces  of  the  things  unseen  and  eternal;  food  that 
can  gather  up  in  itself  these  vitalising  influences,  and  transfer  them  to  us  to  glow 
within  our  veins  and  animate  our  nerves;  and,  instead  of  that,  we  get  ashes  out  of 
which  all  the  glow  and  the  virtue  have  departed.  Our  sin  will  become  our  punish- 
ment; our  idols  our  scourges.  I  have  remarked  that  there  are  some  who  are 
satisfied  with  their  worldly  portion — who,  though  feeding  upon  clay,  are  not 
put  to  inconvenience  by  it.  Such  individuals,  in  the  midst  of  their  contentment, 
are  in  reality,  if  they  only  knew  it,  more  to  be  pitied  than  those  whose  truer 
instincts  are  tortured  by  the  unsuitable  food  by  whach  they  endeavour  to  appease 
their  spiritual  cravings.     [Ihid.)        Feeding  on  ashes: — I.  The   vatn  objects 


CHAP.  XLiv.]  ISAIAH.  411 

TO  WHICH  MAN  DIRECTS  HIS  ENERGIES.  "  He  feedeth  on  ashes."  11.  The  reason 
OF  THIS  PERVERTED  CHOICE.  "  A  deceived  heart  hath  turned  him  aside."  Sin, 
in  its  very  nature,  has  a  tendency  to  harden  the  heart.  When  it  first  begins  to 
make  advances,  there  is  resistance  offered  to  it.  Conscience  speaks,  expostulates, 
reproaches;  but  sin  gets  the  mastery.  Conscience  becomes  by  degrees  blunted; 
the  heart  at  length  gets  callous,  that  it  cannot  feel ;  the  eye  is  altogether  darkened, 
that  it  cannot  see;  the  ear  heavy,  that  it  cannot  hear  the  instruction  of  wisdom. 
Thus  the  heart  is  in  due  time  thoroughly  deceived.  It  rejoices  in  evil,  instead  of 
in  good  ;  it  has  an  exclusive  appetite  for  the  bitter  instead  of  the  sweet.  But 
there  is  a  diseased  state  of  the  heart  where  the  fatal  results  do  not  appear  so  mani- 
fest to  the  eye  of  man.  When  the  world  is  keenly  loved  and  followed,  when  self 
is  worshipped,  when  God  is  not  supreme  in  the  affection,  the  root  must  be  looked 
for  in  the  heart.  The  heart  is  deceived.  How  dangerous  is  this  state  of  heart! 
How  much  does  it  need  of  watchfulness  in  the  case  of  every  one  of  us,  so  that  we 
may  not  be  ensnared  by  it.  III.  The  danger  of  this  state,  and  the  diffi- 
ciTLTy  OP  ITS  REMEDY.  "  He  Cannot  deliver  himself."  When  the  heart  has 
been  once  beguiled  by  the  deceitfulness  of  sin,  and  its  affections  have  been  riveted 
and  firmly  fixed  upon  earthly  things,  it  is  not  in  man  to  deliver  himself.  God, 
indeed,  has  provided  means  whereby  those  who  have  banished  themselves  from  Him 
may  be  brought  home  to  His  fold.  In  Him  there  resides  power  to  cut  asunder 
the  chain,  however  firmly  it  may  bind  us  down  to  the  earth.  IV.  Some  practicaIj 
QUESTIONS  FOR  OUR  EXAMINATION.  "  Is  there  not  a  lie  in  my  right  hand?  " 
(jET.  J.  Hastings,  M.A.)  The  deceived  heart: — I  propose  to  show — I.  What 
THE  SOUL  PROPERLY  REQUIRES.  We  Cannot  find  food  for  the  body  in  ourselves; 
we  have  to  look  for  it  in  the  animal  or  vegetable  world.  Our  spiritual  part — 
our  intellect,  conscience,  affections — is  every  whit  as  dependent  on  extraneous 
supplies  as  our  bodies  are.  II.  How  perilously  far  some  are  from  giving 
TO  THEIE  souls  WHAT  THEY  REQUIRE.  You  See  this  magnificent  provision;  it 
is  spread  before  your  eyes.  But  the  question  is,  are  you  feeding  on  it  ?  Feeding 
implies  taking  it  to  yourself,  appropriating  it,  masticating  it  with  pleasure,  re- 
ceiving it  into  your  digestion.  It  then  becomes  a  part  of  you,  and  goes  into  your 
bones,  your  blood,  your  flesh,  your  marrow.  We  admit  that  you  come  to  the 
feast,  that  you  admire  it,  and  that  you  intend  to  eat;  but  we  cannot  admit  that 
you  are  feeding  on  it  thus  far.  We  cannot  say  you  have  the  Word  of  God  dwelling 
in  you  richly  in  all  wisdom.  (J.  Bolton,  B.A.)  A  perverted  appetite: — Two 
lessons  were  learnt  by  Israel  in  captivity — the  all-sufficiency  of  God,  and  the 
absurdity  of  idols.  It  is  on  the  latter  of  these  that  we  are  now  to  dwell.  Why 
do  men  act  with  such  inconceivable  folly?  The  prophet  knows  nothing  of  the 
modern  theory  that  men  do  not  worship  the  stone  or  wood,  but  accept  the  effigy 
as  a  help  to  fixedness  of  thought  and  prayer;  he  would  affirm  that  with  the  mass 
of  men  this  is  a  fiction,  and  that  the  worship  of  the  devotee  stops  short  with  what 
he  can  see  and  touch.  The  cause  of  idolatry  lies  deeper.  "  He  feedeth  on  ashes; 
a  deceived  heart  hath  turned  him  aside,"  &c.  I.  There  is  a  hunger  for  the 
Divine  in  man.  1.  It  is  universal.  2.  It  is  significant.  We  can  tell  some- 
thing of  the  composition  of  the  human  body  by  the  materials  which  it  needs 
for  its  sustenance.  Similarly  the  true  dignity  of  man  betrays  itself  in  the  hunger 
which  perpetually  preys  upon  him.  If  man  is  only  matter,  if  thought  is  only 
the  movement  of  the  grey  matter  of  the  brain,  if  there  is  no  spirit  and  no  beyond, 
how  is  it  that  the  material  world  cannot  supply  the  supreme  good  ?  3.  It  is  inevit- 
able. The  fimctions  Which  food  performs  in  om:  system  are  threefold.  It  is 
needed  to  replace  the  perpetual  waste  which  is  always  wearing  down  the  natural 
tissues;  to  maintain  the  temperature  at  some  98°;  and  to  provide  materials 
for  growth.  And  each  of  these  has  a  spiritual  analogy.  We  need  God,  for  the 
same  three  reasons  as  the  body  needs  food.  (1)  To  replace  the  perpetual  waste 
of  our  spiritual  forces.  (2)  For  warmth  and  heat.  (3)  For  growth.  II.  This 
appetite  may  be  PERVERTED.  "  He  feedeth  on  ashes."  Men  tamper  with 
their  natural  appetite.  But  there  is  a  close  similarity  in  their  treatment  with 
that  wonderful  yearning  after  the  unseen  and  eternal  which  is  part  of  the  very 
constitution  of  our  being — a  hunger  after  the  ideal  Food,  the  ideal  Beauty,  the 
ideal  Truth,  which  may  be  resisted  and  ignored,  but  still  claims  satisfaction; 
and  if  it  does  not  get  it  in  God,  it  will  seek  it  in  the  ashes  of  idolatry.  Men  worship 
idols  yet.  The  man  of  the  world  worships  money,  rank,  high  office.  The  child 
of  fashion  worships  in  the  temple  of  human  opinion,  and  feeds  on  the  ashes  of 
human  applause  an  appetite  which  was  meant  to  satisfy  itself  on  the  "  Well  done !  " 


412  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xliv. 

of  the  Almighty.  The  student  who  questions  or  denies  the  Being  of  God,  wor- 
ships in  the  temple  of  learning;  and  feeds  with  the  ashes  of  human  opinion  an 
appetite  which  was  intended  to  be  nourished  by  eternal  truth.  And  in  every 
case  these  substitutes  for  God,  with  which  men  try  to  satisfy  themselves,  are  as 
incapable  of  satisfying  the  heart,  as  ashes  of  supporting  the  physical  life.  III.  The 
TBUE  BREAD.  1.  It  is  the  gift  of  God.  "  My  Father  giveth  the  true  Bread 
from  heaven."  God  who  made  thee  hunger  for  bread,  made  bread  to  grow  for 
its  appeasement.  Other  vegetables  have  their  peculiar  habitat.  But  the  com- 
plant  will  make  its  home  in  every  land,  and  grow  on  every  soil.  He  has  also  pro- 
vided beauty  for  our  taste,  truth  for  our  thought,  love  for  our  heart;  and  has 
gathered  all  these  and  much  more  into  His  one  Gift,  Jesus  Christ.  2.  Nature 
yields  her  provision  to  man  through  death.  So  it  is  through  death  that  Jesus 
has  become  the  Food  of  men.  We  must  assimilate  our  fooi  We  must  receive 
Jesus  into  our  hearts  by  an  act  of  spiritual  apprehension.  {F.  B.  Meyer,  B.A.) 
Feeding  on  ashes : — I  shall  speak  of  three  classes  of  young  men  who  are  "  feeding 
on  ashes."  I.  Those  who  are  giving  themselves  up  to  sensual  pleasure.  There 
is  no  one  on  earth  who  has  so  much  right  to  the  pleasures  of  the  world  as  the 
believer.  I  do  not  believe  in  asceticism.  I  do  not  believe  in  pious  melancholy. 
But  this  innocent  hilarity,  which  leaves  no  ill  results  behind,  is  good  and  healthful, 
and  a  very  different  thing  from  the  emmaddening  gaieties  of  the  world.  II.  I 
have  a  word  to  say  to  you  who  are  setting  up  another  idol  for  your  worship.  It 
is  neither  Venus  nor  Bacchus,  but  it  is  Plutus;  it  is  worldly  substakcb;  it 
is  money.  There  is  no  sin  in  desiring  to  be  rich,  if  your  money  comes  to  you 
honourably,  and  goes  from  you  usefully.  But  what  is  all  that,  if  that  is  all? 
Can  you  feed  the  immortal  soul  within  you  with  bank  cheques  and  good  invest- 
ments? Will  all  the  gold  in  the  Bank  of  England  appease  the  hunger  of  your 
deathless  spirit?  No!  But  many  seem  to  think  it  will.  Such  men  are  the 
most  hopeless  cases  to  deal  with.  I  should  be  more  sanguine  of  bringing  to  the 
feet  of  Jesus  a  poor  bloated  debauchee,  than  of  doing  any  good  to  one  of  these 
hardened,  wizened,  shrivelled-up  money-scrapers,  who  for  twenty,  thirty,  or 
forty  years  have  no  other  thought  but  this — to  lay  up  gain.  III.  There  is  a 
third  class  of  men  who  are  daily  "  feeding  on  ashes,"  because  "  a  deceived  heart 
has  turned  them  aside."  They  have  got  hold  of  a  lot  of  infidel  literature,  and 
they  are  stuffing  their  souls  with  as  weak  and  poisonous  rubbish  as  it  is  possible  to 
meet  with.  With  the  prophet,  I  invite  you  to  something  more  palatable  and 
nourishing;  I  bid  you  to  a  feast  of  "  milk  and  honey  ";  "  hearken  diligently  unto 
me,  and  eat  ye  that  which  is  good,  and  let  your  soul  delight  itself  in  fatness." 
{J.  T.  Davidson,  D.D.)  Feeding  on  ashes: — Many  to-day  feed  on  the  kind 
of  ashes  Isaiah  has  in  mind.  1.  False  conceptions  of  God.  2.  False  concep- 
tions of  Christ.  3.  False  conceptions  of  religion.  4.  False  conceptions  of  the 
Church.  5.  False  conceptions  of  morality,  life,  and  happiness.  Application — 
1.  Upon  the  true  or  false  conception  of  God  and  His  relations  to  men  conduct 
depends.  The  Christian's  conception  of  God  is  revealed  in  the  incarnation, 
life,  and  atonement  of  His  Son.  He  only  is  a  true  Christian  who  obeys  Christ's 
words,  imitates  His  life,  and  becomes  conformed  to  His  image.  He  must  be 
our  ideal.  2.  Again,  we  ask  how  comes  it  that  men  thus  feed  on  ashes?  '*  A 
deceived  heart  hath  turned  him  aside."  {J.  B.  Nies,  Ph.D.)  Feeding  on 
ashes : — To-day  we  are  told  by  a  hundred  voices  that  all  religion  begins  at  the 
bottom,  and  slowly  struggles  up  to  the  top.  Isaiah  says  the  very  opposite.  The 
pure  form  is  the  primitive;  the  secondary  form  is  the  gross,  which  is  a  corrup- 
tion. They  tell  us,  too,  that  all  religion  pursues  a  process  of  evolution,  and 
gradually  clears  itself  of  its  more  imperfect  and  carnal  elements.  Isaiah  says 
He  cannot  deliver  his  soul,"  and  no  religion  ever  worked  itself  up,  unless  under 
the  impulse  of  a  revelation  from  without.  That  is  Isaiah's  philosophy  of  idolatry, 
and  I  expect  it  will  be  accepted  as  the  true  one  some  day.  I.  A  life  that  sub- 
stantially ignores  God  is  empty  op  all  true  satisfaction.  "  He  feedeth 
on  ashes."  Very  little  imagination  will  reahse  the  force  of  that  picture.  The 
gritty  cinders  will  irritate  the  lips  and  tongue,  will  dry  up  the  moisture  of  the 
mouth,  will  interfere  with  the  breathing;  and  there  will  be  no  nourishment  in 
a  sackful  of  them.  The  vmderlying  truth  is  this — God  only  is  the  food  of  a  man's 
Boul.  You  pick  up  the  skeleton  of  a  bird  upon  a  moor;  and  if  you  know  any- 
thing about  osteology,  you  will  see  in  the  very  make  of  its  breast- bone  and  its 
wing-bones  the  declaration  that  its  destiny  is  to  soar  into  the  blue.  And  writt€n 
on  you,  as  distinctly  as  flight  on  the  bird,  or  swimming  on  the  fish,  is  this,  that 


CHAP,  xuv]  ISAIAH.  413 

you  axe  meant,  by  your  very  make,  to  soar  up  into  the  heights  of  the  glory  of 
God,  and  to  plimge  deep  into  the  abysses  of  His  infinite  love  and  wisdom.  What 
does  your  heart  want?  A  perfect,  changeless,  all-powerful  love.  And  what 
does  your  mind  want?  Reliable,  guiding,  inexhaustible  yet  accessible  truth. 
And  what  does  your  will  want?  Commandments  which  have  an  authoritative 
ring  in  their  very  utterance,  and  which  will  serve  for  infallible  guides  for  your 
lives.  And  what  do  our  weak,  sinful  natures  want?  Something  that  shall  free 
our  consciences,  and  deUver  us  from  the  biurden  of  our  transgressions,  and  calm 
oupr  fears,  and  quicken  and  warrant  our  lofty  hopes.  And  what  do  men  whose 
nature  is  to  live  for  ever  want  but  something  that  shall  go  with  them  through 
all  changes  of  condition?  We  want  a  person  to  be  everything  to  us.  No  accu- 
mulation of  things  will  satisfy  a  man.  God  has  not  so  blundered  in  making  the 
world  that  He  has  surrounded  us  with  things  that  are  all  Ues,  but  He  has  so  made 
it  that  whosoever  flies  in  the  face  of  the  gracious  commandment  which  is  also 
an  invitation,  "  Seek  ye  first  the  kingdom  of  God  and  His  righteousness,"  has 
not  only  no  security  that  the  "  other  things  "  shall  be  "  added  unto  "  him,  but 
has  the  certainty  that  though  they  were  added  to  him,  in  degree  beyond  his 
dreams  and  highest  hopes,  they  would  avail  nothing  to  satisfy  the  hunger  of 
his  heart.  11.  A  life  which  thus  ignores  God  is  tbagically  tjnawabe  of 
ITS  OWN  EMPTINESS.  "  A  deceived  heart  hath  turned  him  aside."  That  explains 
how  the  man  comes  to  fancy  that  ashes  are  food.  His  whole  nature  is  perverted, 
his  vision  distorted,  his  power  of  judgment  marred.  That  explains,  too,  why  men 
persist  in  this  feeding  on  ashes  after  all  experience.  You  will  see  a  dog  chasing 
a  sparrow.  It  has  chased  hundreds  before  and  never  caught  one.  Yet,  when 
the  creature  rises  from  the  ground,  away  it  goes  after  it  once  more,  with  eager 
yelp  and  rush,  to  meet  the  old  experience.  That  is  like  what  a  great  many  of 
you  are  doing,  and  you  have  not  the  same  excuse  that  the  dog  has.  And  that 
deceived  heart,  stronger  than  experience,  is  also  stronger  than  conscience.  How 
is  it  that  this  hallucination  that  you  have  fed  full  and  been  satisfied,  when  all 
the  while  your  hunger  has  not  been  appeased,  can  continue  to  act  on  us?  For 
the  very  plain  reason  that  every  one  of  us  has  in  himself  a  higher  and  a  lower 
self,  a  set  of  desires  of  the  grosser,  more  earthly,  and,  using  the  word  in  its  proper 
sense,  worldly  sort — that  is  to  say,  directed  towards  material  things,  and  a  higher 
set  which  look  right  up  to  God  if  they  are  allowed  fair  play.  And  of  these 
two  sets — which  really  are  one  at  bottom,  if  a  man  would  only  see  it — the  lower 
gets  the  upper  hand,  and  suppresses  the  higher  and  the  nobler.  And  so  in  many 
a  man  and  woman  the  longing  for  God  is  crushed  out  by  the  gross  dehghts  of 
sense.  III.  A  life  thus  ignoring  God  needs  a  power  from  without  to 
SET  IT  FREE.  "  He  Cannot  deliver  his  soul."  There  is  nothing  more  awful  in 
life  than  the  influence  of  habit.  There  is  something  more  wanted  than  yourselves 
to  break  this  chain.  It  is  the  Christ  who  is  "  the  Bread  of  God  that  came  down 
from  heaven";  who  can  deliver  any  soul  from  the  most  obstinate  and  long- 
continued  grovelling  amongst  the  transitory  things  of  this  limited  world,  and 
the  superficial  dehghts  of  sense  and  gratified  bodily  life;  who  can  bring  the  for- 
giveness which  is  essential,  the  deliverance  from  the  power  of  evil  which  is  not  less 
essential,  and  who  can  fiU  our  hearts  with  Himself,  the  food  of  the  world.  {A.  Mac- 
laren,  D.D.)  The  deceived  heart : — I.  There  are  many  people  who  abb 
ENTIRELY  DECEIVED  IN  THEIR  RELIGION.     1.   The  idolater.     2.  The  Romanist. 

3.  Freethinkers.     4.  False  professors.     11.  Although  there  are  many  persons 

THUS  DECEIVED  IN  RELIGION,  WE  ARE  NOT  TO  SUPPOSE  THAT  ANY  OF  THEM  ARE 
really  CONTENTED  IN  HEART  WITH  THEIR  RELIGION.  III.  It  IS  A  STRANGE  THING 
THAT  ALL  THESE  PEOPLE  SEEM  VERY  WELL  CONTENTED  WITH  THEIR  FALSE  RELIGIONS. 
IV.  I  WANT  TO  SPEAK  TO  THOSE  WHO  ARE  PROFESSORS  OF  RELIGION  BUT  WHO  DO  NOT 

POSSESS  IT.  (C.  H.  Spurgeon.)  The  deceitfvlness  of  the  heart  in  embracing  false 
confidences  : — The  heart  discovers  its  deceitfulness — I.  By  its  strong  propensity 

TO  RECEIVE  ANY  EBEOB  MORE  READILY  THAN  TRUTH.  II.  BT  ITS  EXTREME  RELUC- 
TANCE TO  THE  ONLY  WAY  OF  SALVATION,  AND  BY  ITS  VIOLENT  PROPENSITY  TO  EVERY 

LYING  REFUGE.  More  particularly  we  observe — 1.  That  multitudes  betake  them- 
selves to  the  general  mercy  of  God-  2.  The  heart  often  disposes  one  to  look  into 
itself  for  something  good.     3.  Others  foimd  their  hope  on  resolutions  of  reformation. 

4.  Partial  and  outward  reformation  is  the  confidence  of  many.  5.  Many  confide 
in  a  bare  profession  of  religion  and  observation  of  the  form  of  duties.  6.  Others 
deceive  themselves  into  a  reliance  on  their  Church  privileges.  7.  Some  confide 
in  their  gifts,  or  in  their  usefulness  by  means  of  them.     8.  Some  may  trust  to  a 


414  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xliv. 

work  of  the  law,  as  if  it  were  in  itself  saving.  9.  This  principle  of  deceit  is  dis- 
covered by  the  sinner's  endeavours  to  obtain  justification  by  moral  duties. 
10.  Many  trust  to  their  sincerity  in  religion.  But  what  is  this  sincerity  in  which 
you  make  your  boast  before  God?  Do  you  not  confide  in  it  as  the  ground  of  your 
justification?  If  so,  it  must  be  the  sincerity  of  a  person  who  is  not  yet  justified; 
that  is,  of  one  still  under  the  curse  of  the  law.  11.  Another  false  confidence, 
which  many  fly  to,  is  the  observance  of  superstitious  rites.  12.  Some  may  rest  on 
their  sufferings  in  the  cause  of  Christ.  13.  Others  may  depend  on  a  notional  faith. 
Some  are  persuaded  of  the  truth  of  the  Gospel.  But  they  prove  that  their  faith  ia 
not  Divine,  because  it  is  unfruitful.  14.  The  deceitfukiess  of  the  heart  operates 
in  others,  by  making  them  rest  upon  supposed  attainments  in  holiness.  There 
is  a  question  the  solution  of  which  materially  affects  every  one  of  us  before  God. 
If  false  professors  may  have  so  eminent  attainments,  and  so  remarkable  a  resem- 
blance to  true  holiness,  how  may  we  distinguish  between  such  attainments  as 
are  the  fruit  of  the  Spirit's  saving  work  and  those  which  only  flow  from  natural 
affections  or  from  a  common  operation?  (1)  These  attainments,  which  are 
saving,  have  always  a  humbling  tendency.  (2)  Saving  attainments  are  consistent 
with  a  godly  jealousy.  (3)  The  fruit  of  solid  Christian  attainments  is  thank- 
fulness to  God.  (4)  The  Christian  disclaims  all  his  attainments  with  respect 
to  justification.  (5)  Saving  attainments  leave  a  lasting  impression  on  the  heart. 
(6)  The  real  believer  loses  not  his  confidence  in  God,  even  under  severe  afflic- 
tions. (7)  The  real  Christian  does  not  wish  to  stop  short  in  his  attainments. 
(8)  The  believer  is  equal,  or  at  least  consistent,  in  his  attainments.  While  he 
makes  progress  in  duty,  in  the  exercise  of  grace,  iu  liveliness  and  spirituality 
of  affections,  he  at  the  same  time  advances  in  the  mortification  of  sin.  (9)  AU 
true  Christians  have  a  real  love  to  holiness.  {J.  Jamieson,  31. A.)  Perverted 
spiritual  appetites : — Drunkenness  is  a  perverted  spiritual  appetite,  a  seeking 
in  the  creature  what  God  alone  can  give,  the  longing  of  the  soul  for  higher  and 
purer  happiness  than  the  hard  round  of  daily  life  and  the  weary  sorrowful  circle 
of  the  world  can  give.  So,  too,  covetousness,  if  analysed  in  the  same  way,  will 
be  found  to  be  a  perverted  spiritual  appetite,  a  misdirected  worship.  Covetous- 
ness is  identified  in  Scripture  with  idolatry:  "  Covetousness  which  is  idolatry," 
Bays  St.  Paul.  "  No  covetous  man,  who  is  an  idolater,  hath  an  inheritance  in 
the  kingdom  of  God."  The  love  of  money,  as  it  has  been  well  said,  is  the  love 
of  God  run  wild,  the  diseased  action  of  a  spiritual  appetite,  the  aberration  of  a 
nature  that  was  made  for  God.  Wealth  is  the  mystic  shadow  of  God,  which 
the  soul  is  unconsciously  groping  after  and  craving  for.  It  presents  some  faint 
features  of  resemblance  to  Him.  It  seems  omnipotent,  able  to  do  all  things; 
omnipresent,  showing  signs  of  itself  everywhere;  beneficent,  supplying  our  present 
wants,  providing  for  our  future,  procuring  for  us  an  endless  variety  of  blessings, 
and  giving  us  almost  all  that  our  hearts  can  desire.  And  because  it  presents 
these  superficial  resemblances  to  God,  it  becomes  a  religion  to  many,  a  worship 
loud  in  praise  and  aspiration  as  any  that  ever  filled  a  church.  And  so  is  it  with 
every  form  of  idolatry  of  which  man  in  these  enlightened  days  can  be  guilty. 
It  is  the  soul,  in  its  restless  pursuit  of  happiness,  mistaking  the  true  object  of 
which  it  is  in  quest.  {H.  Macmillan,  LL.D. )  Arsenical  poisoning : — The  peasant 
women  of  Styria  are  in  the  habit  of  constantly  eating  a  certain  quantity  of  arsenic, 
in  order  to  enhance  their  personal  charms.  It  imparts  a  beautiful  bloom  to  the 
complexion,  and  gives  a  full  and  rounded  appearance  to  the  face  and  body.  For 
years  they  persevere  in  this  dangerous  practice  ;  but  if  they  intermit  it  for  a 
single  day,  they  experience  all  the  symptoms  of  arsenical  poisoning.  The  com- 
plexion fades,  the  features  become  worn  and  haggard,  and  the  body  loses  its 
plumpness  and  becomes  angular  and  emaciated.  Having  once  begun,  therefore, 
to  use  this  cosmetic,  they  must  in  self-defence  go  on,  constantly  increasing  the 
dose  in  order  to  keep  up  the  effect.  At  last  the  constitution  is  undermined;  the 
limit  of  safety  is  overpassed;  and  the  victim  of  fooHsh  vanity  perishes  miserably 
in  the  very  prime  of  life.  And  is  it  not  so  with  those  who  feed  upon  the  poison 
of  the  world's  idolatries?  They  may  seem  to  thrive  upon  this  insidious  and 
dangerous  diet,  but  all  the  time  it  is  permanently  impairing  their  spiritual  health, 
and  rendering  them  unfit  for  spiritual  communion.  The  more  they  indulge  in 
it,  the  more  they  must  surrender  themselves  to  it;  and  the  jaded  appetite  is 
stimulated  on  to  greater  excesses,  until  at  last  every  fingering  vestige  oi  spiritual 
vitaUty  is  destroyed,  and  the  soul  becomes  a  loathsome  moral  wreck,  poisoned 
by  its  own  food.     {H.  Macmillan,  LL.D.)        Unsuitable  food: — There  is  such  a 


CHAP,  xuv.]  ISAIAH.  415 

thing  as  a  wasting  of  the  body  from  insufficient  nutrition,  even  when  the  appetite 
is  satisfied  and  the  stomach  content.  A  strange  plant,  called  the  nardoo,  with 
clover-like  leaves,  closely  alUed  to  the  fern  tribe,  grows  in  the  deserts  of  Central 
Australia.  A  melancholy  interest  is  connected  with  it,  owing  to  the  fact  that 
its  seeds  formed  for  several  months  almost  the  sole  food  of  the  party  of  explorers 
who  a  few  years  ago  crossed  the  continent.  This  nardoo  satisfied  their  hunger; 
it  produced  a  pleasant  feeling  of  comfort  and  repletion.  The  natives  were  accus- 
tomed to  eat  it  in  the  absence  of  their  usual  roots  and  fruits,  not  only  without 
injury,  but  apparently  with  positive  benefit  to  their  health.  And  yet,  day  after 
day,  Burke  and  Wills  became  weaker  and  more  emaciated  upon  this  diet.  Their 
flesh  wasted  from  their  bones,  their  strength  was  reduced  to  an  infant's  feebleness, 
and  they  could  only  crawl  painfully  a  mile  or  two  in  a  day.  At  last,  when  nearing 
the  bourne  of  their  hopes,  the  explorers  perished  one  by  one  of  starvation;  a 
solitary  survivor  being  found  in  the  last  extremity  under  a  tree,  where  he  had  laid 
him  down  to  die,  by  a  party  sent  out  in  search  of  the  missing  expedition.  When 
aiialysed,  the  nardoo  bread  was  ascertained  to  be  destitute  of  certain  nutritious 
elements  indispensable  to  the  support  of  a  European,  though  an  Australian  savage 
might  for  a  while  find  it  beneficial  as  an  alternative.  And  thus  it  happened 
that  these  poor  unfortunate  Englishmen  perished  of  starvation,  even  while  feeding 
fully  day  by  day  upon  food  that  seemed  to  satisfy  their  hunger.  Now,  is  it  not 
precisely  so  in  the  experience  of  those  who  are  seeking  and  finding  their  portion 
in  earthly  things  ?  They  are  contented  with  it,  and  yet  their  hunger  is  in  reality 
tmappeased.  Their  desires  are  crowned,  and  yet  they  are  actually  perishing  of 
want.  God  gives  them  their  request,  but  sends  leanness  to  their  souls.  Is 
it  not  far  more  dreadful  to  perish  by  slow  degrees  of  this  spiritual  atrophy,  under 
the  delusive  belief  that  all  is  well,  and  therefore  seeking  no  change  of  food,  than 
to  be  tortured  by  the  indigestion  of  feeding  on  ashes,  if  by  this  misery  the  poor 
victim  can  be  urged  to  seek  for  food  convenient  for  him?  {Ihid.)  "  He  feedeth 
on  ashes": — Is  not  the  very  term  most  significant  ?  What  are  ashes?  They  are 
the  last  solid  products  of  matter  that  has  been  used  up — the  relics  that  remain 
after  all  that  is  useful  and  nutritious  has  been  consumed.  You  burn  a  piece 
of  wood  or  a  handful  of  corn,  and  its  grosser  particles  faU  to  the  ground,  while 
all  its  ethereal  parts — its  carbon  and  hydrogen — mount  to  the  skies  and  disappear. 
It  is  a  sad  thing  to  gaze  upon  the  ashes  of  the  commonest  fire;  for  in  them  there 
is  an  image  of  utter  death  and  ruin — of  something  that  has  been  bright  and 
beautiful,  and  is  now  but  dull,  cold,  barren  dust.  Arid  what  are  earthly,  created 
things,  upon  which  so  many  are  feeding  the  hunger  of  their  immortal  souls,  but 
ashes?  They  were  once  bright  and  beautiful.  God's  blessing  was  upon  them, 
and  they  were  very  good.  But  sin  has  consumed  all  their  goodness  and  beauty,  has 
burned  up  all  in  them  that  was  capable  of  ministering  to  the  spiritual  wants  of 
men,  and  left  nothing  behind  but  dust  and  ashes.  We  can  apply  this  truth  to 
all  the  world,  so  far  as  it  is  made  the  portion  of  the  soul.  In  a  moral  sense,  the 
whole  world,  which  was  once  capable  of  ministering  to  man's  spiritual  wants, 
is  now  a  mere  heap  of  cinders.  Its  beauty  has  gone  with  its  goodness,  and  its 
sufficing  power  with  its  holiness.  It  has  become  spiritually  oxidised  by  combina- 
tion with  the  all-devom-ing  element  of  sin.  The  man  that  loves  the  world  now 
feeds  on  ashes;  not  upon  earth,  for  there  is  a  degree  of  nourishment  in  soil,  owing 
to  the  remains  of  former  life,  and  the  worm  and  the  plant  feed  upon  it;  not  upon 
clay,  for  the  clay  which  the  American-Indians  eat  is  found  to  consist  of  micro- 
scopic plants  with  silicious  envelopes,  called  diatoms,  containing  a  small  portion 
of  organic  matter  sufficient  to  sustain  existence  ; — no,  but  on  dry,  white,  dusty 
ashes,  utterly  destitute  of  any  nutritious  element  whatever,  upon  which  no  crea- 
ture can  live,  and  upon  which  almost  no  plant  can  grow — the  refuse  of  everything 
that  is  good.  {Ibid. )  Unsuitable  food : — Some  time  ago,  I  read  in  the  papers 
of  a  little  boy  who  for  months  had  been  gathering  up  prune-stones,  being  fond 
of  the  kernel ;  so,  wishing  to  prepare  for  himself  a  great  treat,  he  laid  up  quite 
a  large  store  :  at  last  came  the  day  of  anticipated  enjoyment;  he  ate  them  all, 
and,  after  hours  of  agony,  died!  So  I  have  seen  men  who  have  given  up  their 
whole  life  to  one  aim,  to  amass  wealth;  preparing  a  banquet  of  enjoyment  for 
the  evening  of  their  days ;  and,  when  they  sat  down  to  the  feast,  lo !  on  the  table 
only  ashes,  ashes!  {J.  T.  Davidson,  D.D.)  A  deceived  heart  hath  turned 
him  aside. — The  self-deception  of  most  who  affect  to  be  infidels: — 1.  Consider 
seriously,  what  was  the  real  origin  of  your  unbelief.  A  father's  house  forsaken,  and 
a  father's  instructions  soon  to  be  forgotten,  you  entered  on  the  world.     Passions 


416  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xliv. 

rose  within  you.  Companions  encouraged  them;  religion  checked  them.  Your 
belief  became  irksome  to  your  indulgence;  and  your  faith  descended  to  doubts. 
It  was  natural  and  necessary  that  it  should  do  so,  if  you  meant  to  continue  in 
your  sins.  2.  You  have  had  times,  no  doubt,  when  you  thought  your  course 
somewhat  wrong;  and,  partly  sated  with  such  enjoyments,  had  some  idea  of 
turning  from  them.  What,  then,  was  the  obstacle?  Was  it  the  difficulty  which 
you  had  in  accounting  for  the  truth  of  revelation?  Was  it  not  the  voice  of  pleasure 
whispering,  Will  you  then  renounce  the  joys  which  were  once  so  dear  to  youT 
Here  was  the  fatal  obstacle.  Not  in  the  difficulties  of  revelation,  but  in  the 
timidity  and  weakness  of  the  heart.  3.  If  this  be  not  true,  go  one  step  farther. 
Many  have  met  with  calamity;   a  death  unexpected  among  your  friends,  some 

great  and  sudden  change  of  fortune,  which  showed  you  the  uncertainty  of  human 
appiness.  In  these  cases,  what  was  your  resource?  Did  you  go  to  the  tables, 
whither  before  you  had  gone  for  pleasure?  Was  it  in  the  society  of  those  who 
"  make  a  mock  at  sin  "  that  you  expected  the  gleam  of  comfort  in  the  hour  of 
sorrow?  Your  heart  will  own  that,  when  you  were  in  heaviness,  you  could  think 
upon  God.  But  religion's  truth  all  the  time  remained  the  same.  If,  therefore, 
you  doubted  on  it  under  the  former  situation,  why  not  under  the  latter?  Your 
heart  deceived  you.  You  did  not  disbelieve.  You  wished  to  do  so;  and  passion 
blinded  you.  Affliction  removed  the  veil  from  your  heart.  4.  But,  living  as 
we  do  in  an  age  of  boasted  light,  this  reasoning  wiU  probably  be  considered  aa 
carried  too  far;  and  it  will  be  urged  by  many  a  young  man,  that,  although  the 
passions  may  have  had  some  influence  in  biassing  his  opinions,  yet  his  doubts  of 
the  Gospel  have  arisen,  in  some  measure,  from  his  judgment.  Let  us,  then, 
meet  him  on  this  ground.  We  expect,  therefore,  from  you  some  striking  argu- 
ment that  is  to  set  aside  at  once  the  authority  of  ages  and  destroy  the  best  hopea 
and  resources  of  the  human  heart.  And  what  do  we  find?  A  few  common- 
place phrases  and  objections — doubts,  not  created  by  yourselves,  but  only  received 
from  others,  and  kept  up  by  you,  to  preserve  a  kind  of  watchword  of  a  party 
against  believers.  6.  But  if  you  have  not  searched  very  deeply  into  these  things 
yourself,  they  with  whom  you  are  in  the  habit  of  associating  are  adequate  to 
give  you  sufficient  religious  instruction,  and  you  have  taken,  you  say,  your  creed 
chiefly  from  them.  Let  us,  then,  repair  a  moment  to  them.  You  profess  your- 
selves general  believers  in  a  God,  and  possessed  of  some  amiable  virtues.  How 
often  in  the  assemblies  of  your  friends  and  instructors  is  the  name  of  God  men- 
tioned without  irreverence?  How  seldom  have  you  heard  rigid  virtue  made  the 
subject  of  discussion  except  to  be  ridiculed?  Have  you  often  heard  beauty 
and  innocence  mentioned  without  some  sentiment  of  an  abandoned  passion  T 
(G.  Mathew,  M.A.) 

Vers.  21,  22.  Remember  these,  0  Jacob  and  Israel. — Ood^a  Israel  not 
forgotten  : — This  verse,  standing  in  connection  with  the  following,  is  a  call  to 
Jacob  and  Israel  to  return  to  the  Lord.  Many  are  the  arguments  used  to  induce 
them  to  do  so.  1.  "  Remember  these  "  idolaters,  their  follies,  their  wickednesses, 
their  wretched  and  miserable  condition,  and  forget  not  that  you  were  guilty 
once  as  they  are.  It  is  well  to  retrace  our  past  history,  often  to  do  it,  to  be  re- 
minded of  what  we  once  were  in  the  days  of  our  unregeneracy.  2.  Miserable 
and  sad  as  your  present  condition  is,  yet  '  I  know  thee  by  name;  thou  art  Mine, 
return  unto  Me.  Thou  art  still  "  Jacob,"  still  "  Israel,"  still  "  My  servant." 
Is  there  one  who  has  been  departing  from  the  living  God?  Can  anything  be 
more  touching  than  this  call  to  thee  ?  Surely  it  is  like  the  look  which  Jesus  gave 
Peter  when  he  went  out  and  wept  bitterly.  3.  "  I  have  formed  thee,"  formed 
thee  with  new  and  spiritual  workmanship,  formed  thee  a  vessel  to  honour,  formed 
thee  for  My  glory.  4.  "  Thou  shalt  not  be  forgotten  of  Me."  Thou  hast  for- 
gotten Me,  the  mighty  cost  at  which  I  redeemed  thee.  Thou  hast  forgotten 
the  way  by  which  I  led  thee  in  the  wilderness,  the  miracles  I  wrought  for  thee, 
the  manna  with  which  I  fed  thee,  the  rock  of  which  I  made  thee  drink,  the  de- 
liverances out  of  the  hands  of  thine  enemies;  thou  hast  forgotten  thy  high  calUng, 
thy  holy  profession,  thy  truest  happiness;  but  "  thou  shalt  not  be  forgotten  of 
Me."  I.  The  true  Israel  sometimes  think  themselves  forgotten  op  God. 
Their  utter  insignificance  and  the  deep  consciousness  of  it  lead  to  this.  Some- 
times dark  and  mysterious  providences  lead  to  this.  Sometimes  apparent  delays 
in  answers  to  prayer.  What  is  the  consequence?  We  loathe  ourselves;  instead 
of  advancing  we  seem  retrograding;  instead  of  mounting  we  seem  to  be  sinking. 


CHAP,  xuv.]  J8AIAH.  417 

Here,  too,  sense  takes  too  often  the  seat  of  judgment,  and  not  only  decides  on 
what  God  is  doing,  but  sometimes  on  God  Himself;  and  is  ready  to  cry  out,  "  My 
God  hath  forgotten  me."  There  are  seasons  too,  under  a  sense  of  unutterable 
vileness,  when  the  soul  responds  to  the  solemn  appeal  (Isa.  xliii.  22-24),  "  Thou 
hast  not  called  upon  Me,  O  Jacob;  but  thou  hast  been  weary  of  Me,  0  Israel,"  &c. 
There  are  times  when  a  man  seems  as  if  he  stood  alone  among  his  fellow-men, 
as  if  he  were  the  very  chief  of  sinners.  I  will  mention  one  more  case — when 
we  have  by  some  wilfulness  in  disobedience  grieved  the  Holy  Spirit.  II.  Th« 
PEOPLE  OF  God  never  abb  fokgotten  by  Him.  Tender  are  the  ties  that  bind 
us  to  one  another;  the  tenderest,  the  closest,  the  most  indestructible  of  all  ties, 
friends,  brothers,  relations,  parents,  even  a  mother.  It  is  the  instance  selected 
(chap.  xlix.  15).  There  is  no  tie  like  this  by  which  Jehovah  binds  Himself  to 
His  people.  The  ties  that  bind  man  to  man,  in  their  piurest  actings,  are  but 
the  ties  of  human  nature  in  its  feebleness,  its  fickleness,     m.  The  manifold 

PROOFS   THAT    GOD    HAS    CONDESCENDED    TO   GIVE,  THAT  HiS  ISRAELS  SHALL  NOT 

BE  FORGOTTEN.  We  too  easily  forget  that  the  true  basis  of  faith  is  the  veracity 
of  God.  The  believer  too  often  acts,  thinks,  speaks,  as  if  he  did  not  believe 
God,  though  he  mean  not  so.  Were  Jehovah  to  forget,  He  would  violate  eveiy 
perfection  of  His  nature.  He  sees  all  His  in  His  Son;  and  when  He  forgets 
His  Son,  then  and  not  till  then  will  He  forget  His  Israel.  When  Jesus  forgets 
to  intercede,  when  Jesus  intercedes  in  vain,  when  God  Himself  changes,  then 
will  He  forget.  Look  up  then,  ye  Jacobs,  ye  Israels  of  God;  let  the  past  en- 
courage you.  What  do  thy  reasonings  say?  What  do  thy  humblings  say? 
What  thy  upholdings  in  deep  and  heavy  trouble ?  Thy  special  interpositions? 
Thy  perseverance  in  the  ways  of  God?  (J.  H.  Evans,  M.A.)  Gracious 
mercy  : — In  the  midst  of  idolaters  this  chapter  speaks  of  a  people  who  worship, 
love,  serve  God.  Here  is — I.  An  invitation,  "  Return  unto  Me."  This  im- 
plies previous  distance,  wandering,  unworthiness.  "  Return."  1.  How?  The 
sinner  says,  I  am  bound,  sin  holds  me  chained,  justly.  God  answers,  I 
have  redeemed  thee,  paid  thy  ransom,  broken  thy  chains.  2.  To  whom? 
*'  Unto  Me."  The  sinner  says,  I  am  polluted,  defiled.  God  answers,  I 
have  blotted  out  thy  sins.  Thou  hast  cleansing  in  the  precious  blood.  3.  In 
what  way?  Not  towards  Me.  Many  are  satisfied  with  appearance.  But  unto — 
into  My  very  presence — to  walk,  dwell,  commune  with  Me.  All  trace  of  former 
guilt  gone.  II.  A  Privilege.  "  Thou  art  My  servant."  1.  They  serve  Ham. 
He  fits  them  for  this.  "  I  have  formed  thee,"  fitted  by  indwelling  of  the  Spirit, 
giving  new  tastes,  desires,  &c.  We  are  not  made  servants  by  serving;  we  are 
made  servants  that  we  may  serve.  2.  They  serve  acceptably,  cheerfully,  continu- 
ally, purely.  None  are  Christians  who  do  not  serve.  Notice  the  repetition  in 
text,  also  verses  1,  2.  God  dwells  lovingly  on  it.  3.  They  serve  in  hope.  God's 
servants  have  a  gracious  promise — "  Thou  shalt  not  be  forgotten  of  Me."  Others 
may  forget,  be  removed,  but  God  never.  We  may  be  in  trouble,  persecution, 
danger,  weariness,  death,  never  forgotten.  III.  A  caution.  "  Remember 
these."  God's  people  rejoice,  but  with  trembling:  walk  surely,  but  not  securely 
(1  Cor.  X.  12).  Remember  these  " — the  world,  careless,  backsliders,  self-seekers, 
heathens.  *'  Remember  these " — 1.  That  you  may  be  humbled  (Tit.  iii.  3). 
2.  That  you  may  honour  God  before  them  (Matt.  v.  16).  3.  That  you  may 
do  them  good  (Gal.  vi.  1).  Are  your  sins  blotted  out?  lif  so,  serve  God;  "  re- 
member these."  If  not,  return.  {Homilist.)  0  Israel,  thou  shalt  not  be 
forgotten  of  Me. — God'a  remembrance  of  Israel : — I.  If  we  turn  to  some 
of  the  evidences  of  this  statement,  we  may  first  look  to  the  history  of  Israel, 
and  to  that  of  ourselves  in  a  providential  aspect.  1.  As  regards  the 
Israelites  in  their  national  and  personal  relations.  2.  But  the  special  evidence 
of  the  text  lies  in  the  heart  of  Christian  experience.  3.  The  evidence  of 
this  Divine  declaration  may  be  further  shown  by  a  reference  to  the  works 
of  creation.  II.  Consider  some  of  the  reasons  which  may  be  assigned  for  this 
Divine  utterance.  1.  One  reason  is  to  be  found  in  the  fact  of  man's  redemption. 
2.  Another  in  the  graciousness,  in  the  love  and  mercy  of  the  Divine  purposes 
with  regard  to  ourselves.  (IF.  D.  Horwood.)  "Forget  thee,  I  will  not"  ^ — 
I.  The  title  which  the  Lord  gives  to  His  people.  "  My  servant."  1.  Notice 
what  a  practical  title  it  is.  It  has  to  do  with  action  and  service;  it  has  to  do 
with  the  heart,  but  also  with  the  hand,  with  the  inner  and  with  the  outer  life. 
There  is  no  true  Christian  but  the  practical  Christian.  A  servant  is  not  always 
at  work;  but  a  servant  is  always  a  servant,  and  ever  ready  for  work.     2.  It  is 

VOL.  II. — 27 


418  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xliv. 

a  personal  title — "  Thou."  3.  It  is  an  exclusive  title — "  My  servant.  These 
other  people  are  servants  of  Baal  or  Ashtaroth;  but  thou  art  My  servant."  When 
a  man  has  a  servant,  he  expects  him  to  serve  him,  and  not  to  be  in  the  employ 
of  other  people.  God's  servants  must  serve  God;  not  idols,  not  the  world,  not 
self,  not  sin,  not  Satan.  4.  It  is  an  honourable  title.  It  must  be  so,  for  God 
uses  the  title  in  this  verse  twice  over.  "  Thou  art  My  servant:  I  have  formed 
thee;  thou  art  My  servant."  To  serve  God,  is  truly  to  reign.  5.  This  is  a  title 
of  acceptance.  As  God  says,  twice  over,  "  Thou  art  My  servant,"  He  means, 
"  I  accept  thee  as  My  servant;  I  own  thee  as  such."  One  reason  why  we  are 
God's  servants  is  that  He  has  forgiven  us  our  trespasses  (ver.  22).  II.  The  peomisb 
WHICH  He  makes  to  tjs.  "  Thou  shalt  not  be  forgotten  of  Me."  Men  forget 
us.  And  they  turn  against  us.  Those  for  whom  you  do  the  most  are  often  those 
who  will  be  most  unkind,  and  most  bitter  against  you.  But  God  says,  "  Thou 
shalt  not  be  forgotten  of  Me."  What  does  this  promise  mean?  1.  That  God 
will  never  cease  to  love  His  servants.  2.  That  the  Lord  wiU  never  cease  to  think 
of  His  servants.  The  thoughts  of  God  are  wonderful.  He  can  think  of  every 
individual  saint  as  much  as  if  there  were  no  other  saint  in  the  universe.     III.  Somb 

EEASONS  WHICH  ASSXTRE  US  THAT  GoD  WILL  NOT  POBGET  THOSE  WHO  ARE  TRULY 

His  SERVANTS.  1.  The  very  best  reason  is  that  He  says  he  will  not  forget  us. 
2.  God  cannot  forget  us,  since  He  has  made  us.  The  former  part  of  the  verse 
says,  "  Thou  art  My  servant:  I  have  formed  thee."  With  His  own  fingers  He 
has  made  us  into  vessels  of  mercy,  so  He  cannot  forget  us.  3.  He  has  blessed 
us;  He  has  blessed  us  so  much  already  that  He  cannot  forget  us  now.  4.  He  has 
loved  us  so  long  already.  Was  there  ever  a  time  when  the  redeemed  of  the  Lord 
were  not  written  on  the  heart  of  Christ?  He  loved  you  before  the  first  star  began 
to  dart  its  golden  arrows  through  the  darkness  of  space.  Rest  you  then  secure; 
love  so  ancient  wiU  never  die  out.  5.  We  have  cost  Him  so  much.  6.  He  is  too 
good  a  Lord  to  cast  us  off.  He  is  a  wretch  of  a  man  who  casts  off  an  old  servant 
simply  because  he  is  old.  The  Lord  does  not  turn  His  old  servants  adrift;  but 
says,  "  Even  to  your  old  age,  I  am  He;  and  even  to  hoar  hairs  will  I  carry  you." 
(C.  H.  Spurgeon.) 

Ver.  22.  I  have  blotted  out,  as  a  thick  cloud,  thy  transgressions. — Sin  blotted 
out: — The  meaning  of  the  verse  may  be — He  who  offered  his  sacrifice  aright,  was  as 
sure  that  the  sin  for  which  he  offered  it  was  blotted  out,  as  that  the  smoke  of  th< 
sacrifice  was  dispersed  by  the  wind,  and  was  no  longer  discernible.  (E.  Thompson, 
D.D.)  Blotting  out  sin:  a  classical  side-light: — "This  decree  made  the  danger 
then  hanging  over  the  city,  pass  away  like  a  cloud."  (Demosthenes.)  Clouds 
and  sins: — Clouds  do  good;  but  transgressions  and  sins  never  do  good.  They  do 
no  good  to  the  body,  no  good  to  the  soul,  no  good  to  the  spirit,  no  good  to  our  present 
condition,  or  to  our  future  circumstances;  and,  in  this  respect,  clouds  are  unlike 
sins.  Yet  there  are  points  of  resemblance  between  clouds  and  sins.  Clouds  veil 
the  sun ;  and  sins  hide  the  loving  face  of  God.  Clouds  hide  the  lofty  firmament ;  and 
sins  conceal  heaven.  Clouds  contract  the  prospect;  and  sins  prevent  the  sight  of 
all  coming  good.  Clouds  drop  down  in  rain;  and  sins  fall  in  punishment.  Clouds 
are  beyond  our  control;  and  sins  committed  are  entirely  out  of  our  power.  Clouds 
are  dispersible  only  by  God;  and  sins  God  alone  can  drive  away.  This  is  the  point 
of  the  analogy  instituted  in  our  text.  {S.  Martin.)  Not  a  doud  to  he  seen: — 
I.  The  divineness  or  forgiveness.  "  I  have  blotted  out,"  &c.  "  I,  even  I." 
All  sin  is  against  God.  TVTien  you  sin  against  each  other  3'ou  sin  against  God.  And 
all  punishment  is  in  God's  hands;  and  the  dispensation  of  pardon  is  His  prerogative. 
Blessed  be  God  for  keeping  it  within  His  own  power !  Pardon  is  dispensed  faith- 
fully and  wisely,  for  God  is  light.  Pardon  is  dispensed  graciously,  for  God  is  love. 
And  pardon  is  given  according  to  the  Divine  promise  and  covenant,  for  "  God  is 
faithful  and  just  to  forgive  us  our  sins."  II.  The  completeness  of  pardon.  In 
the  country  which  Isaiah  knew,  the  clouds  were  entirely  blotted  out  during  four 
months  of  the  year;  so  that  it  was  an  extraordinary  thing  from  May 'to  September, 
to  see  a  cloud :  and  the  clearness  of  the  atmosphere  enabled  the  prophet  to  appreciate 
this  illustration  to  an  extent  impossible  to  us,  who  are  so  often  under  a  leaden  sky. 
Stni,  even  here,  we  do  know  what  it  is  to  stand  under  a  blue  sky.  In  the  morning, 
or  in  the  evening,  or  late  at  night,  we  know  what  it  is  to  stand  under  the  cloudless 
heavens,  and  to  say,  "  There  is  not  a  cloud  to  be  seen."  And  when  God  pardons  a 
man  there  is  not  a  sin  to  be  seen.  The  sins  of  childhood,  and  youth,  and  maturity — 
the  sins  of  every  year,  and  day,  and  hour — are  blotted  out.     The  sins  of  the  body. 


CHAP.  SUV.]  ISAIAH.  419 

and  the  sins  of  the  soul — the  sins  of  the  tongue,  and  of  the  hand,  and  of  every  member 
of  the  body — the  sins  of  the  thought,  and  of  the  imagination,  and  of  desire,  and  of 
affection,  and  of  voKtion,  are  all  blotted  out.  The  sins  of  the  heart,  and  the  sins  of 
the  home,  the  sins  of  the  place  of  business,  and  the  sins  of  the  Church,  and  the  sins 
committed  against  brothers  and  sisters,  and  kindred  of  every  degree — against 
husband,  and  wife,  and  children,  and  neighbours,  and  friends,  and  the  country, — 
sins  against  the  Saviour,  and  against  the  Holy  Spirit,  and  against  ova  Father  in 
Heaven  are  blotted  out.  Sins  wilfiil,  sins  careless,  sins  repeated,  sins  aggravated, 
are  all  blotted  out.  Not  some  sins,  but  all  sins.  The  least  are  not  overlooked ;  the 
worst  are  not  reserved.  Pardon  is  not  the  mitigation  of  punishment — it  is  not  the 
passing  by  of  some  transgressions  and  the  bringing  forward  of  others — but  an  entire 
remission  of  future  punishment.  Sin  is  not  behind  following  us;  sin  is  not 
before  preventing  us;  sin  is  not  above  falling  upon  us;  sin  is  not  on  either  hand 
hemming  us  in.  Pardoned  by  God,  our  sins  are  gone ;  actually  gone  for  ever. 
III.  The  ASStTRANCE  WHICH  God  gives  the  pabdoned  that  they  are  forgiven. 
God  might  forgive  without  telling  us  now  that  He  has  pardoned  us.  He  might 
reserve  the  communication  of  this  fact  until  the  last  great  day.  But  He  would  have 
the  forgiven  know  that  they  are  pardoned.  Now  what  profit  is  there  in  this? 
Knowledge  of  pardon  is  a  particular  knowledge  of  God.  A  man  who  is  pardoned 
sees  God  in  the  dispensation  of  Divine  forgiveness,  as  God  is  not  to  be  seen  else- 
where, or  in  any  other  dispensation.  It  is  one  thing  to  see  God  in  the  general  pro- 
vision He  has  made  for  the  supply  of  our  wants,  and  quite  another  thing  for  us  to  see 
God  applying  that  provision  to  ourselves.  A  kno\dedge  of  pardon  is  a  source  of 
joy  and  peace.  It  is,  moreover,  a  power  awakening  love.  You  remember  the  case 
of  the  woman  who  oame  to  Christ,  upon  the  occasion  of  the  great  banquet  given 
to  Ham  by  one  of  the  chief  of  the  Pharisees.  Then,  the  knowledge  of  pardon  is  a 
motive  to  the  pursuit  of  holiness.     IV.  The  knowledge  of  pardon  ENCotrRAGES 

us  TO  BEING  OTHERS  TO  GoD.       V.  WhO  ARE  THE  ASSURED?       1.  ThoSe  who  COnfeSS 

to  Him  their  sins.  2.  The  confession  is  to  be  accompanied  by  the  forsaking  of  sin. 
3.  There  is  no  forsaking  sin,  without  turning  to  God.  (Ihid.)  What  man  can  and 
cannot  do: — Man  may  divert  the  course  of  a  river,  and  fill  up  the  former  bed;  thus 
blotting  out  in  certain  places  the  river.  Man  may  pare  down  portions  of  the  hills; 
thus  blotting  out  the  hills.  Man  may  raise  the  valley;  thus  blotting  out  the  valley. 
Man  may  drain  the  lake,  and  sow  it  with  seed,  and  raise  crops  upon  the  soil  of  the 
lake's  bed;  thus  blotting  out  the  lake.  Man  may,  to  a  small  extent,  alter  the 
boundaries  of  the  ocean;  thus  blotting  out  in  some  places  even  the  sea.  Man  may 
tunnel  the  earth  and  make  a  highway  where  foot  never  trod.  But  man  can  neither 
bring  clouds  into  the  firmament,  nor  send  them  away.  Moreover  a  man  may  blot 
out  ignorance  by  teaching,  and  foUy  by  instruction,  and  some  bad  habits  by  good 
training,  and  animal  wants  by  the  supply  of  temporal  necessities,  and  captivity  by 
release,  and  disease  by  healing;  but  no  man  can  forgive  sins.  The  dispensation  of 
pardon  is  too  precious,  and  too  important,  to  be  entrusted  to  men  or  to  angels. 
{Ibid.)  Pardon  not  entrusted  to  men  or  angels: — A  man,  if  he  were  entrusted  with 
the  dispensation  of  forgiveness,  might  be  sleeping,  or  journeying,  or  sick,  or  in 
various  ways  out  of  reach.  A  man  might  be  angry,  or  morose,  or  occupied,  or 
miloving,  when  the  penitent  was  calling  for  forgiveness.  And  an  angel  might  take 
a  hypocrite  for  a  true  penitent,  or  a  contrite  one  for  a  hypocrite;  or  he  might 
hesitate  to  forgive  some  chief  of  sinners.  God  keeps  the  dispensation  of  forgiveness 
in  His  own  kind  hand.  (Ibid.)  Sin  and  forgiveness: — There  is,  at  first  sight,  a 
little  obscurity  in  this  expression.  Is  the  cloud  intended  to  represent  the  sin,  or  is 
it  the  obsciu'ity  with  which  the  sin  is  to  be  obUterated?  Does  the  text  liken  trans- 
gressions to  a  cloud  which  is  to  be  driven  away,  or  the  transgression  to  be  covered 
and  blotted  out  as  if  by  a  cloud?  There  is  a  difference  in  opim'on  with  regard  to 
the  matter.  But  thare  is  no  reason  for  not  taking  the  words  literally  as  they  stand, 
and  looking  upon  sin  as  likened  to  a  cloud.  I.  The  figure  under  which  sin  is 
REPRESENTED.  "A  cloud  ";  "a  thick  cloud."  It  affords  an  apt  illustration  of 
human  evil.  1.  Clouds  obscure  the  beauty  of  the  earth.  Sin  obscvires  the  prospects 
of  the  soul  and  shuts  out  the  glories  of  the  heavenly  horizon !  It  blurs  the  outline 
of  truth,  it  disturbs  our  views  of  life,  of  our  fellow-creatures,  of  our  own  actions  and 
the  actions  and  motives  of  others,  of  the  providence  and  dealings  of  God,  of  the  true 
import  of  existence,  of  the  future  and  the  past.  What  is  evil  seems  good;  what  is 
good  seems  evil;  what  is  real  seems  false ;  and  what  is  false  appears  true.  2.  Clouds 
intercept  the  light  of  heaven.  And  what  hides  the  full  brightness  of  the  face  of  God, 
who  is  the  source  of  all  spiritual  light  and  warmth  and  joy,  but  sin?     "  Youi 


420  TEE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xxiv. 

iniquities  have  separated  between  Me  and  you."  Our  sins  have  kept  the  revelation 
of  full  light  and  the  manifestation  of  fullest  love  from  vivifying  and  rejoicing  our 
hearts.  Not  that  even  sin  entirely  obscures  Grod's  mercy  and  love.  The  darkest 
cloud  cannot  altogether  hide  the  light  of  day.  The  sun's  rays  are  so  powerful  that 
they  penetrate  even  through  the  thickest  mists.  But  what  a  contrast  is  the  feeble 
light  of  a  November  day  to  that  of  the  genial  sunbeam  in  June !  So  not  even  sin 
can  entirely  hide  the  Divine  influence  of  the  love  of  God  or  prevent  it  from  warming 
the  earth.  But  how  different  is  its  manifestation  to  what  it  was  amid  the  glories 
of  Paradise!  3.  Clouds  cause  inconvenience  and  discomfort.  The  traveller  amid 
the  mountain  mists,  with  his  garments  soddened  and  weighted  with  the  moisture, 
his  breathing  laboured  and  his  movements  hampered,  is  a  fitting  representative  of 
the  Christian  joumejang  heavenwards  amid  the  many  hindrances  which  check  his 
progress  through  the  uncongenial  atmosphere  of  this  sinful  world,  saturated  with  the 
essence,  as  it  were,  of  iniquity.  4.  Clouds  are  about  us  everywhere.  (1)  They  over- 
shadow every  portion  of  the  globe.  Not  in  the  same  intensity,  not  always  in  the 
same  place,  not  similar  in  appearance  and  density.  (2)  Does  not  sin,  like  the  clouds, 
everywhere  compass  the  spiritual  world?  It  varies,  indeed-  Some  countries  are 
more  enlightened,  and  the  clouds  not  being  so  dense,  more  is  seen  and  felt  of  the 
light  and  warmth  of  the  Sun  of  Righteousness.  But  there  are  other  countries 
where  mental  and  spiritual  clouds  dominate  in  various  degrees  of  density,  till  we 
arrive  at  those  places  where  the  savage  reigns  supreme  and  no  ray  of  the  light  of 
heaven  ever  penetrates.  (3)  Are  not  the  clouds  a  fitting  image  of  sin  in  their 
deceptive  beauty?  There  are  occasions  when  evil  shines  resplendent  with  the 
borrowed  glory  of  heaven.  How  many  noble  characters  have,  in  the  virtues 
reflected  from  Christianity,  attracted  for  a  time  the  admiration  and  rapture  of  an 
astonished  and  delighted  world !  For  a  time !  For  as  soon  as  the  reflection  from 
above,  which  imparted  glory  to  their  characters,  was  gone,  they  sank  again  into 
their  native  nature  of  darkness  and  gloom.  And  observe  how  much  the  reflection 
of  Divine  truth  and  heavenly  law  beautifies  this  world  of  ours,  with  all  its  sin !  The 
philanthropy  towards  those  who  are  weak  and  suffering,  the  courtesy  towards  the 
feeble,  the  hospitals  which  are  provided,  the  many  means  which  are  adopted  for 
exalting  the  race:  all  these  are  the  glints  of  heavenly  sunshine  reflected  upon  the 
clouds  of  sin.  (4)  We  also  see  that  the  clouds  resemble  sin  because  of  their  unreality. 
There  is  nothing  on  which  a  man  can  trust  or  lean  or  hope.  They  are  unsubstantial, 
empty,  fraU.  (5)  They  also  are  changing,  fleeting,  driven  away  by  aU  kinds  and  by 
every  breath  of  wind ;  never  the  same,  unstable,  assuming  aU  sorts  of  guises  in  the 
presence  of  the  light.  11.  The  pROsnsE  which  is  here  bestowed.  Although  the 
statement  is  put  in  the  past — "  I  have  blotted  out  " — yet  it  is  really  a  future  and  a 
conditional  declaration.  The  early  part  of  this  chapter  is  a  description  of  awful 
impenitence  and  apostasy.  In  purpose,  in  intention,  this  is  forgiven,  but  it  is  not 
a  forgiveness  independent  of  reformation.  We  have  seen  the  sky  when  the  summer 
sun  has  driven  away  the  clouds.  It  is  deep,  unfathomable,  ethereal,  blue.  The 
sun's  glory  is  undimmed.  The  whole  of  nature  rejoices  with  imspeakable  joy.  The 
heart  rebounds  with  lightness.  Not  a  speck  on  the  surface  of  the  heaven  casts  a 
shadow  on  the  earth.  Such  is  the  idea  of  a  world  without  sin.  All  brightness  and 
no  clouds,  aU  joy  without  a  sorrow  to  dim  its  glory.  And  this  is  the  spiritual  gist  of 
the  promise  which  the  great  God  has  made  to  His  believing  people.  It  is  an  assurance 
so  certain  that  it  is  spoken  of  as  having  actually  taken  place.  And  how  wUl  God 
blot  out  the  sins  of  His  people?  By  the  same  means  as  physically  disperse  the 
clouds  of  earth.  1.  By  the  tempests  of  wrath.  The  tempest  of  God's  wrath,  as  it 
fell  upon  the  head  of  Christ,  sent  a  current  of  electric  justice  through  the  load  of  sin 
and  rendered  it  possible  for  its  power  to  be  removed.  2.  By  the  glorious  shining  of 
rays  of  warmth  and  light.  It  is  the  warmth  of  God's  infinite,  eternal  love  that  shall 
disperse  the  last  trace  of  sin.  That  love  shining  from  His  throne  shall  drive  all  the 
consequences  of  evil  from  the  heart,  from  the  life.  And  with  the  clouds  of  sin  shall 
go  all  other  clouds — the  clouds  of  suffering,  of  sorrow,  of  death.  And  when  sin  is 
driven  away,  that  love  shall  shine  in  unceasing  glory.  It  wiU  not  be  Umited  to  time, 
or  place,  or  season,  or  circumstance.  It  will  not  come  in  diminished  or  lessened 
degrees,  but  it  will  be  perfect,  pure,  and  complete.  Still,  this  is  but  a  figure — an 
incomplete  one,  too — one  which  has  its  deficiencies.  But  God  Himself  gave  it  out. 
(.7.  J.  S.  Bird,  B.A.)  Forgiveness:  its  blessings  and  its  duties: — I.  An  isipoktant 
DBCLABATiON.  "  I  have  blotted  out,"  &c.  II.  A  cobrespondinq  duty.  "  Return 
unto  Me."  III.  An  ALL-coNSTaAiNiNQ  motive.  "I  have  redeemed  thee."  {8. 
Bridge,  M.A.)        Sin  and  grace: — L  Thbbb  is  bbcoonissd  the  bxistbncb  of  sin. 


CHAP.  XLiv.]  ISAIAH.  421 

n.  Theeb  is  affirmed  the  existence  of  mercy.  (W.  M.  Punshon,  LL.D.) 
Invitation: — The  features  of  the  Divine  character,  and  the  blessings  of  salvation, 
which  are  to  be  manifested  in  God's  dealings  with  Israel  in  the  latter  days,  are  the 
very  same  as  are  now  manifested  in  God's  dealings  with  all  believers.  We  may 
consider  the  text,  then,  as  an  exhibition  of  God's  mercy,  in  which  we  are  ourselves 
interested.  I.  With  reference  to  His  mercy.  1 .  The  SJrst  words  of  the  text  denote 
an  act  of  God's  gracious  forgiveness.  "  I  have  blotted  out  thy  transgressions  and 
thy  sins."  In  the  New  Testament  scriptures,  this  expression  "  blotting  out "  is 
connected  with  the  atonement  (Col.  ii.  14).  2.  The  language  of  pardoning  mercy 
goes  still  farther.  "  As  a  thick  cloud."  How  is  a  thick  cloud  blotted  out?  When 
a  debt  is  blotted  out  from  a  debt  book,  the  blot  remains.  It  is  true  there  is  no 
evidence  against  the  sinner;  the  charge  against  him  is  at  an  end;  but  the  remains 
of  what  was  a  debt  are  to  be  seen,  and  the  very  act  of  cancelling  it  shows  that  there 
was  a  debt.  But  when  a  cloud  is  blotted  out,  it  is  different.  How  is  that  cloud 
blotted  out?  Either  by  the  wind  dispersing  it,  or  by  the  sun  breaking  through  it 
and  dispersing  it;  and  when  this  is  done,  we  say  either  that  the  storm  is  "  blown 
over,"  or  that  there  is  now  a  clear  sky,  and  all  that  we  can  see,  if  we  see  anything, 
with  regard  to  the  threatening  cloud,  is  now  composed  of  those  beautiful  hues  whicn 
are  lighted  up  by  the  shining  of  a  bright  sun  in  a  clear  sky.  Well,  then,  when  God 
says  that  He  will  "  blot  out  as  a  thick  cloud  our  transgressions,  and  as  a  cloud  our 
sin,"  we  are  to  understand  that  He  undertakes  to  remove  all  traces  of  our  trans- 
gressions and  all  remains  of  guilt  from  the  conscience,  so  that  the  sinner  thus 
pardoned  may  look  up  to  God  as  a  Father  full  of  grace  and  love,  and  may  approach 
Him  with  holy  boldness,  and  without  any  particle  of  fear.  Observe,  then,  what 
full  forgiveness  God  assures  us  of  in  this  language.  "  Thick  clouds,"  as  well  as 
ordinary  "  clouds," — two  expressions  which  must  be  taken  in  a  figurative  meaning, 
as  including  all  kinds  of  sin — what  we  call  "  greater  and  lesser  sins  "  aUke — are  what 
the  Lord  declares  His  purpose  to  do  away  with,  and  completely  to  remove  from 
being  a  ground  of  fear  to  those  who  approach  Him  in  the  name  of  His  dear  Son. 
3.  Now,  inasmuch  as  no  one  can  disperse  a  thick  cloud  but  the  God  who  can  send  EDs 
bright  sun  to  shine  through  it,  so  none  but  that  God  who  proclaims  Himself  a  pardon- 
ing God  and  Saviour  can  say,  so  that  the  conscience  of  the  sinner  shall  respond,  "  I 
have  blotted  out  as  a  thick  cloud  thy  transgressions,  and  as  a  cloud  thy  sins."  And 
this  is  the  forgiveness  in  which  God  delights — full,  complete,  and  such  as  only  He 
Himself  can  bestow,  n.  But  in  order  that  this  mercy  may  be  ours,  and  that 
we  may  rejoice  in  it,  it  is  needful  that  we  should  rightly  respond  to  that 
intimation  of  God's  grace.  "  I  have  blotted  out  thy  transgressions.  Return  unto 
Me."  1.  It  is  the  Redeemer  who  calls,  because  it  says,  "  Return,  for  I  have  redeemed 
thee."  2.  How  different  to  our  natural  expectation  is  this !  The  Redeemer  crying 
after  the  sinner,  instead  of  the  sinner  crying  after  the  Redeemer.  3.  Then  observe 
how  the  language  before  us  manifests  the  deep  concern  of  God  our  Saviour.  "  Re- 
turn to  Me."  He  would  not  speak  in  language  Mke  this,  if  it  were  not  a  matter  of 
immense  moment  to  the  sinner  to  return.  4.  There  is  another  suggestion:  for  what 
pm-pose  is  this  call  of  entreaty  made  ?  Not  that  the  sinner  may  receive  punishment. 
God  calls  thee,  0  careless  one,  not  to  be  frowned  upon,  but  smiled  upon.  5.  Then, 
after  all  this  intimation  of  grace  on  the  part  of  God,  there  can  be  no  hope  of  lasting 
peace  or  a  future  glory,  except  as  we  return.  HE.  Notice  the  love  in  the  assur- 
ance that  He  gives  about  redemption.  "  Return,  for  I  have  redeemed  thee." 
What  return  do  you  make  to  the  call  of  ffim  who  assures  of  mercy  and  redempfion, 
and  who  graciously  says.  Return?  (TF.  Cadman,  M.A.)  The  cloud  of  sin  and  its 
dispersion: — I.  A  wonderful  teaching  as  to  the  inmost  natutie  of  sin.  I  refer 
especially  to  the  two  words  for  sin  which  are  employed  here.  That  translated  trans- 
gression literally  means  "  treachery "  or  "  rebellion,"  and  that  translated  sin 
missing  a  mark."  All  iniquity  is  stamped  with  this  damning  characteristic,  it 
is  rebellion  against  a  loving  wiU,  an  infinite  King,  a  tender  Father.  And  all  iniquity 
has  this,  by  the  merciful  irony  of  Providence,  associated  with  it,  that  it  is  a  blunder 
as  well  as  a  crime.  II.  The  permanent  record  of  sin.  "  I  have  blotted  out." 
That  points,  of  course,  to  something  that  has  been  written,  and  which  it  promises 
shall  be  erased.  It  may  be,  perhaps,  the  idea  rather  of  a  stain  which  is  covered 
and  removed,  but  that  I  think  less  probable  than  the  other  one,  that  the  evil  is 
written  down  somewhere.  A  book  written ;  a  permanent  record  of  my  evil  doing. 
Where  is  it  written?  Where,  rather,  is  it  not  written?  Written  on  character, 
written  to  a  vefy  large  extent  even  on  circumstances,  written  above  all  in  the  calm, 
perfect  memory  of  the  all-judging  God.     The  book  is  written  by  oxu'selyes,  moment 


4S2  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  xliv, 

by  moment,  and  day  by  day.  We  write  it  with  invisible  ink,  and  it  only  needs  to 
be  held  to  the  fire  to  flash  up  into  legibility.  III.  The  darkenino  power  of  sin. 
"  I  have  blotted  out  as  a  thick  cloud."  When  the  cloud  draws  its  veil  over  the 
heavens,  the  sunshine  and  the  blue  are  shut  out  from  a  man's  eye,  and  all  the 
flowerets  close;  and  when  the  heaven  is  veiled  the  birds  cease  to  sing.  So,  like  a 
misty  veil  drawn  across  the  face  of  the  heavens  are  man's  sins.  Our  only  way  of 
knowing  God  is  by  sympathy,  by  conformity.  IV.  The  removal  of  the  sin.  "  I 
have  blotted  out  as  a  thick  cloud  thy  transgressions,  and  as  a  cloud  thy  sins."  The 
erasure  implies  the  making  a  clean  sheet  of  the  blurred  page;  the  cancelling  of  the 
whole  long  formidable  column  of  figures  that  expresses  the  debt.  The  blotting  out 
as  a  cloud  implies  the  disappearing  of  the  misty  vapour,  as  some  thin  fleecy  film  will 
do  in  the  dry  Eastern  heavens,  melting  away  as  a  man  looks.  So  God,  in  His 
marvellous  patience,  shining  on  the  upper  side,  as  it  were,  of  all  the  mists  that  wrap 
and  darken  our  souls,  thins  these  away  by  the  process  of  self-communication,  until 
they  gather  themselves  up,  routed  and  broken,  and  disappear,  floating  in  thin 
fragments  beneath  the  visual  horizon.  It  is  to  no  purpose  to  ask  whether  that  means 
pardon  or  cleansing.  It  means  both.  Isaiah  could  proclaim:  "  I  have  blotted  out 
thy  transgressions,"  because  Isaiah  could  also  proclaim:  "  The  chastisement  of  our 
peace  was  upon  Him,  and  with  His  stripes  we  are  healed."  Now,  mark  this,  that 
this  removal  of  sin,  in  all  its  aspects  and  powers,  is  regarded  in  my  text  as  a  past 
accomplished  fact.  It  is  not  set  forth  as  contingent  upon  the  man's  return,  but  a3 
the  reason  for  his  return.  "  I  have  redeemed  thee,  therefore  come  back  to  Me," 
not  "  Come  back  to  Me  that  I  may  redeem  thee."  You  have  to  take  yoxrr  portion 
of  the  great  blessing  by  the  simple  act  and  exercise  of  faith  in  Jesus  Christ.  Then 
it  becomes  yours.  (A.  Madaren,  D.D.)  Sin  aa  dovds: — It  is  by  no  means  an  un- 
common circumstance  to  find  in  the  Bible  the  very  same  natural  object  employed 
as  a  symbol  of  very  different  and  even  opposite  things.  Thus,  the  lion  is  used  as 
the  emblem  both  of  Christ  and  of  the  Prince  of  Darkness;  fire  is  used  as  the  emblem 
both  of  Divine  purity  and  of  human  suffering;  water  is  used  as  the  emblem  both  of 
peace  and  of  trouble;  and  the  cloud  is  employed  as  an  emblem  both  of  good  and  evil. 
Here  the  Almighty  Himself  speaks  of  sin  as  a  "  cloud."  In  order  to  guard  against 
an  abuse  of  the  comparison,  notice  two  striking  points  of  dissimilarity.  (1)  Clouda 
are  objects  of  beauty.  (2)  Qouds  are  sources  of  blessing.  In  what  respect,  then, 
is  sin  like  a  cloud  ?  I.  He  blotteth  out  sin  as  a  cloud  which  OBSTRtrcTS  the  geniai. 
influences  of  heaven.  It  rolls  like  a  thick  cloud  between  God  and  the  soul.  It 
obstructs  the  rays  of  His  love ;  it  makes  life  gloomy  and  sad.  11.  He  blotteth  out 
sins  as  a  cloud  which  rises  from  beneath.  Whence  come  these  clouds?  Not 
from  the  celestial  regions.  They  are  exhalations  from  the  earth.  From  noxious 
marshy  lands  and  stagnant  pools,  as  well  as  from  restless  seas  they  rise.  So  it  is 
with  sin.  It  is  an  exhalation  from  the  depraved  heart.  The  clouds  that  roll  between 
the  soul  and  its  God  are  an  aggregation  of  the  noxious  vapours  that  have  risen  from 
the  heart.  III.  He  blotteth  out  sins  as  a  cloud  which  exists  in  every  variety  op 
FORM.  Clouds  are  endless  in  their  variety.  It  is  so  with  sin.  You  have  it  in  the 
fleeting  thought,  the  transient  feeling,  the  passing  word;  as  well  as  in  the  deep  plot, 
the  cherished  passions,  the  confirmed  habits,  the  dark,  dark  life.  IV.  He  blotteth 
out  sins  as  a  cloud  which  is  charged  with  evil.  Whilst  clouds  are  sources  of 
blessings  to  the  world,  they  are  often  filled  with  elements  of  destruction.  There  are 
forged  the  thunderbolts  that  terrify;  there  are  kindled  the  lightnings  that  consume; 
there  are  the  floods  that  deluge.  It  is  so  with  sin.  The  miseries  of  retribution  are 
aU  nursed  in  it  as  storms  in  the  cloud.  V.  He  blotteth  out  sins  as  a  cloud  which 
no  finite  intelligence  can  disperse.  Who  can  dispel  the  smallest  cloud  from 
the  face  of  the  sky?  No  skill,  no  strength,  can  dispel  one  cloud.  It  is  so  with  sin. 
No  finite  being  can  dispel  it.  No  Chvu-ch,  priesthood,  &c.  VI.  He  blotteth  out  sins 
as  a  cloud,  which  once  dispersed,  is  gone  for  ever.  Sins  pardoned,  like  clouds 
dispersed,  are  lost  for  ever.  "  In  those  days,  saith  the  Lord,  the  iniquity  of  Israel 
shall  be  sought  for  and  there  shall  be  none,  and  the  sins  of  Judah,  and  they  shall  not 
be  found,  for  I  will  pardon  them."  VII.  He  blotteth  out  sins  as  a  cloud,  which 
whbn  dissipated  benefits  the  universe.  {Homtlist.)  God's  forgiveness: — 
I.  A  description  of  sin.  Man's  transgressions  are  as  a  thick  cloud.  1.  In  their 
number.  (1)  The  sins  of  the  wicked — murders,  revellings,  debaucheries,  and  the 
like.  (2)  The  sins  of  the  moral  man — intellectual  sins,  worse  than  the  animal — 
avarice,  pride,  ambition,  unbelief.  (3)  The  sins  of  the  good.  The  lives  of  the  best 
of  men  may  seem,  to  the  natural  eye,  holy  and  good;  but,  seen  under  the  microscope 
of  God's  law,  these  are  full  of  impurities.    2.  Because  they  intervene  between  God 


CHAP,  xuv.]  ISAIAH.  423 

and  man.  3.  Because  they  engloom  the  earth.  4.  Because  they  contain  the  con- 
sequences which  we  dread.  Out  of  the  cloud  the  angry  lightnings  flash,  and  in  the 
cloud  the  fury  of  the  tempest  sleeps.  11.  A  description  of  forqivbniss.  "  I 
have  blotted  out,"  &c.  You  have  witnessed  the  dispersion  of  a  storm.  This  is 
a  symbol  of  God's  forgiveness.  1.  It  is  so  because  it  is  the  work  of  God  only.  It  is 
a  transaction  in  which  man  has  no  share.  2.  God's  forgiveness  is  a  complete  forgive- 
ness. 3.  May  we  not  learn  that  all  sin  is  overruled  to  our  good?  After  the  storm 
has  gone  over  us,  have  we  not  found  the  atmosphere  purified?  Can  we  not  see  that 
the  world  is  disciplined  by  the  deluge  of  evils  which  pours  forth  from  the  clouds  of 
sin?  4.  This  is  a  symbol  of  God's  forgiveness  in  respect  to  the  gladness  which 
succeeds  the  storm.  The  prophet  represents  the  whole  earth  as  awakening,  after 
the  dispersion  of  the  storm,  to  exiiltant  joy.  "  Sing,  0  ye  heavens,"  &c.  Such  is 
the  joy  of  the  world  on  account  of  God's  forgiveness.  III.  A  description  of  thb 
CONDUCT  OF  THE  FORGIVEN.  "  Return  unto  Me,"  &c.  {H.  M.  Jackson.)  De- 
parting clouds: — The  bestowment  of  spiritual  blessings  is  a  warrant  for  the  expecta- 
tion of  all  needful  temporal  blessings.  This  passage  is  the  foundation  on  which  God 
causes  His  ancient  people  to  rest.  God's  forgiving  love  is  the  promise  of  all  needful 
help  and  grace.  I.  We  make  ottr  own  clouds.  As  the  natural  clouds  are  formed 
by  the  vapours  drawn  up  from  the  sea,  so,  in  a  degree,  those  clouds  which  darken 
our  skies  are  the  effects  of  our  transgressions.  II.  God  makes  our  clouds  thb 
MINISTERS  OF  His  MERCY.  The  natural  clouds  are  the  ministers  of  His  mercy,  the 
testimonies  of  His  faithful  care,  of  His  loving  thoughtfulness  for  the  children  of  men. 
But  how  wonderful  that  the  clouds  of  our  sins  should  be  the  ministers  of  His  mercy! 
The  clouds  lead  us  to  appreciate  the  glorious  sunlight.     III.  God  disperses  cub 

CLOUDS  BY  THE  INTERVENTION  OF  HiS  REDEEMING  LOVE  AND  POWER.       Clouds  mOVe 

in  obedience  to  nature's  laws ;  and  the  clouds  of  our  sins  cannot  be  blotted  out  in  an 
arbitrary  method.  Not  as  a  bad  debt,  not  as  chalked  figures  may  be  obliterated.  God 
is  a  Father,  but  He  is  a  moral  Governor.  Even  He  has  only  a  right  to  blot  out  trans- 
gressions, because  He  has  redeemed.  IV.  God  disperses  our  clouds  in  ordbb 
THAT  WE  MAY  STAND  IN  THE  CLEAR  SUNSHINE.  When  sin  is  blotted  out,  then  the  soul 
is  started  on  a  career  of  never-ending  fruitfulness.  V.  God  makes  the  DEPARTiNa 
CLOUDS  His  pathetic  preachers.  "  Return  unto  Me."  Every  time  we  see  the 
clouds  sweeping  across  the  heavens,  let  us  listen  to  their  still  small  voice.  (W. 
Burrows,  B.A.)  God's  abundant  pardon: — In  pardoning  His  people  God  freely 
forgives  them  all  their  sins  of  every  description,  flowing  from  corrupt  propensities 
and  evil  habits,  committed  through  ignorance,  infirmity,  temptation,  or  presump- 
tion, (i?.  Macculloch.)  Barriers  obliterated: — I.  Here  is  an  interposing  and 
DIVIDING  MEDIUM:  a  cloud  of  sins.  A  vapour,  says  the  Hebrew;  and,  then,  a 
thick  cloud.  God's  people  ought  always  to  dwell  in  fellowship  with  their  God. 
There  ought  to  be  nothing  between  the  renewed  heart  and  God  to  prevent  joyful 
and  hallowed  fellowship;  but  it  is  not  so.  Sometimes  a  cloud  comes  between, — a 
cloud  of  sin;  and,  whenever  that  cloud  of  sin  comes  between  us  and  God,  it  speedily 
chills  us.  Our  delight  in  God  is  no  longer  manifest;  we  have  little  or  no  zeal  in  His 
service,  or  joy  in  His  worship.  Beneath  that  cloud,  we  feel  like  men  who  are  frozen; 
and,  at  the  same  time,  darlmess  comes  over  us.  We  get  into  such  a  sad  state  that 
we  hardly  know  whether  we  are  God's  people  or  not.  Besides  that,  it  threatens  us. 
Remember,  clouds  are  earthbom  things.  Yet,  recollect  that  the  sun  is  not  affected 
by  the  clouds.  II.  The  complete  removal  of  this  barrier.  "  I  have  blotted 
out,"  &c.  1.  No  known  human  power  can  remove  the  clouds.  So  it  is  with  your 
darkness  and  doubts  if  you  have  fallen  into  sin.  2.  But  what  a  mercy  it  is  that  God 
can  remove  these  clouds  of  sin.  3.  When  God  drives  away  these  clouds  from  us, 
though  we  may  see  other  clouds,  we  shall  never  see  those  black  ones  any  more. 
When  the  Lord  takes  away  His  people's  sins,  they  are  gone,  and  gone  for  ever. 
4.  The  glory  of  it  is  that  the  Lord  has  already  done  this  great  work  of  grace.  "  I 
have,"  &c.  III.  The  tender  command.  " '  Return  unto  Me.'  The  great  barrier 
that  separated  us,  is  removed  ;  so  let  us  not  be  divided  from  one  another  any 
longer."  1.  When  He  says,  "  Return,"  He  wants  you  to  give  up  that  which  has 
grieved  Him.  2.  The  Lord's  gracious  invitation  also  means,  "  Come  back,  and  love 
Me.  See  how  I  have  loved  you.  I  have  already  forgiven  you  your  sin,  you  who 
are,  indeed.  My  child,  but  whose  faith  has  almost  disappeared.  Though  you  have 
provoked  Me,  I  stiU  love  you.  WiU  you  not  love  Me?  "  After  such  pleading,  can 
you  keep  on  in  this  cold-hearted  state  towards  your  God?  3.  The  Lord  also  means, 
"  Return  again  to  your  old  joys."  IV.  The  sacred  claim  which  backs  up  thb 
OBAcious  invitation.     "  I  have  redeemed  thee."     1.  The  meaning  is  this:  "  I 


424  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xuy. 

have  loved  you  so  much  that  I  redeemed  you  with  the  blood  of  My  dear  Son;  and, 
having  loved  you  so  much  in  the  ages  past,  I  love  you  still.  Come  back  to  Me.  I 
did  not  make  a  mistake  when  I  first  loved  you,  through  which  I  shall  have  to 
change  the  object  of  My  choice.  I  knew  all  about  you  from  eternity;  all  that  you 
ever  would  be  or  could  be,  I  knew  it;  yet  I  loved  you  and  bought  you,"  &c.  2.  You 
belong  to  Me.  (C.  H.  Spurgeon.)  Return  unto  Me. — TJie  freeness  of  the  gospel 
scheme,  and  the  universality  of  God^s  love : — I.  The  freeness  of  the  method  of  majt's 
ACCEPTANCE.  "  Return  unto  Me;  for  I  have  redeemed  thee."  There  can  be  no 
difficulty  in  proving  that  we  are  bought  with  a  price;  there  can  be  no  difficulty  in 
showing  that  it  was  God  Himself  to  whom  the  price  was  paid.  But  there  is  some- 
thing of  a  difficulty  in  understanding  how  purchase  can  consist  with  gift;  and  how 
that  which  is  dearly  bought  can  be  said  to  be  freely  bestowed.  The  difficulty  is  just 
what  follows.  Much  is  said  in  the  Bible  as  to  our  deliverance  being  perfectly 
gratuitous ;  but  if  God  bestows  nothing  that  has  not  been  paid  for,  what  oecomea 
of  that  gratuitous  character  of  redemption  ?  Certainly  it  would  seem  that  purchase 
is  so  inconsistent  with  donation,  that  He  of  whom  forgiveness  is  bought  can  lay  but 
slight  claim  to  a  surprising  liberality.  Careful  examination,  however,  will  set  this 
in  a  proper  light.  "  Return  unto  Me;  for  I  have  redeemed  thee,"  is  an  assertion 
whose  proof  Ues  in  the  assurance  that  God  is  ready  to  receive  the  prodigal.  A 
deliverance  that  has  been  bought  for  the  world  is  more  illustrative  of  God's  free 
grace  than  any  other  which  would  have  required  no  satisfaction.  For  a  plan  of 
deliverance  in  every  sense  gratuitous  is  one  of  those  absurd  creations  of  the  fancy 
which  it  would  have  been  impossible  to  turn  into  reality.  If  it  could  not  have  been 
said  to  man,  Thou  art  a  redeemed  thing,  and  a  purchased  thing,  it  must  have  been 
said,  in  opposition  to  our  text,  Thou  shalt  not  return;  thou  shalt  continue  a  ruined 
thing.  It  fell  not  within  the  power  of  Deity  to  grant  what  men  call  unconditional 
forgiveness.  It  is  requiring  God  to  undeify  HimseK — to  cease  to  be  the  Just 
One,  the  Faithful  One.  The  fact  that  we  may  return  to  the  Father  only  because  we 
are  pm"chased  by  the  blood  of  His  Son,  wondrously  demonstrates  the  freeness  of  the 
grace.  The  death  of  the  Son  does  not,  after  all,  place  the  Father  under  the  necessity 
of  extending  forgiveness  to  sinners;  He  need  not  have  said,  "  Return,"  even  though 
we  were  redeemed.  We  are  not  merely  debtors  who  have  nothing  to  pay — we  are 
criminals  who  have  punishment  to  endure.  If  I  were  only  a  debtor,  and  Christ  had 
discharged  the  debt,  I  cease  to  be  a  debtor,  and  God  cannot,  in  justice,  refuse  to 
release  me;  but,  if  I  were  a  criminal,  I  do  not  cease  to  be  a  criminal  because  another 
might  have  died  in  my  room.  Hence  it  is  free  grace,  and  nothing  else,  that  grants 
me  forgiveness.  II.  The  earnest  longing  that  God  has  that  sinners  SHOtrLD 
BE  saved,  discovered  IN  THE  PATHOS  OF  THE  ENTREATY.  Men  are  bid  to  retiu-n 
because  they  are  redeemed.  There  are,  therefore,  two  conditions :  they  must  have 
faith  in  the  Redeemer,  and  they  must  have  that  repentance  which  includeth  for- 
saking of  sin:  so  precious  are  you  in  God's  sight  that  to  return  is  to  please  God. 
(H.  Melvill,  B.D.)  I  have  redeemed  thee. — "/  have  redeemed  thee": — To 
redeem  is  "  to  buy  back  ";  and  our  redemption  is  a  buying  us  out  of  bondage.  We 
are  "  sold  under  sin,"  and  God  has  bought  us  back  with  the  precious  blood  of  Hia 
well-beloved  Son.  If  you  will  look  at  Leviticus  xsv.  23,  &c.,  you  will  find  the  law 
by  which  the  land  could  be  redeemed;  or  those  persons  who  had  waxen  poor  and  sold 
themselves  as  bondmen — the  law  of  redemption.  1.  Christ  is  born  in  our  midst 
that  He  may  become  a  Kinsman,  a  Brother  to  us  all.  He  comes  bringing  our 
ransom  price.  But  he  does  not  bid  the  angels  bring  the  gold  and  pearls  for  our 
deliverance.  He  gives  Himself  a  ransom  for  all.  And  now  Jesus  comes  to  us,  our 
loving  Brother,  and  He  saith,  "  I  have  redeemed  thee."  2.  Now  do  not  let  us  serve 
sin  any  more.  Jesus  has  bought  us  back  from  this  hard  master.  He  has  bought 
for  us  the  Father's  house  too  He  has  put  us  in  possession  of  heaven  and  all  its  joys. 
And  thus  from  the  bondage  of  sin  and  evil  of  our  hearts,  we  can  cry  to  the  King  for 
His  help.  Prayer  is  the  white-winged  bird  that  can  bear  our  message  right  up  to 
the  Father's  house.     And  an  answer  shall  come.     (M.  O.  Pearse. ) 

Ver.  23.  Sing,  0  ye  heavens. — A  song  about  redemption : — The  text  is  s 
magnificent  call  to  heaven  and  earth  to  join  in  singing  the  glories  of  redemption. 
1.  In  WHAT  PARTICULARS  REDEMPTION  CALLS  FOR  A  SONG.  Redemption  calls 
for  a  song  when  we  remember — 1.  Its  Author.  "  The  Lord  hath  done  it."  "  The 
Lord  hath  redeemed  Jacob."  Herein  is  indeed  a  marvel  of  grace,  demanding 
the  highest  anthems  ransomed  lips  can  raise.  What  could  man  have  been  to 
Him?     What  shadow  of  an  obligation  was  there  on  His  part  to  put  forth  the 


CHAP,  xuv.]  ISAIAH.  425 

Blightest  effort  to  save  a  single  one?  The  Lord  hath  done  it  alone.  With 
whom  took  He  counsel  in  this  matter?  Who  paid  part-price  with  BHm?  Re- 
demption is  no  work  of  the  many;  it  is  God's  own  in  plan  and  execution.  2.  Ita 
cost  (1  Pet.  i.  18,  19).  3.  Its  completeness.  Christ  hath  so  gloriously  completed 
the  work  of  redemption  that  nothing  can  possibly  be  added  to  it.  Unlike  the 
atonement  made  by  the  Aaronic  priesthood,  it  lasts  for  ever.  4.  Its  compre- 
hensiveness. It  will  take  eternity  to  reveal  all.  If  we  are  Christ's,  then  have 
we  been  redeemed  from  the  hand  of  Satan.  From  the  guilt  of  sin.  With  the 
guilt,  away  goes  the  power  of  sin.  We  are  also  redeemed  from  the  consequences 
of  sin.  From  the  power  of  death  (Hos.  xiii.  14).  Christ  hath  redeemed  the 
bodies  of  His  saints  for  the  glories  of  the  resurrection  mom.  5.  The  chiefest 
cause  for  song  is  redemption  being  that  in  which  God  has  been  pleased  to  glorify 
Himself  the  most.  "  The  Lord  hath  glorified  Himself  in  Israel."  AU  the  attributes 
of  God  are  most  gloriously  to  be  seen  in  redemption  work.  II.  Who  those  abb 
WHO  SHOULD  SING  THE  SONG.  1.  Heaven!  Sing,  0  ye  heavens,"  and  well 
you  may,  for  redemption  has  shed  a  fresh  lustre  on  your  glories.  The  highest 
joy  the  angels  can  have,  is  that  which  arises  from  seeing  their  King  glorified. 
Behold  also  the  redeemed  in  heaven!  Listen  to  their  song,  sweeter  even  than 
an  angel's,  "  Unto  Him  that  loved  us."  All  heaven  unites  in  this  redemption 
Bong.  2.  Let  the  ransomed  on  earth  take  their  part.  "  Shout,  ye  lower  parts 
of  the  earth."  Behold  your  serfdom  gone — your  bonds  broken — your  chains 
snapped — your  sins  forgiven — your  heaven  secured,  and  then  sing.  3.  Surely 
who  that  have  loved  ones  that  have  been  redeemed  should  join  us  in  the  song. 
4.  The  trembling  sinner  has  good  cause  to  join  his  voice  with  ours.  "  The  Lord 
hath  done  it."  If  done,  then  there  can  be  no  necessity  for  any  addition  of  thine. 
{A.  0.  Brown.)  Praise  to  God  for  redemption, : — I.  What  is  imported  in  God's 
EEDEEMING  Jacob.  1.  That  He  pays  a  ransom  for  our  souls.  2.  That  He  rescues 
us  from  captivity.  3.  That  He  takes  vengeance  on  our  enemies.  4.  That  He 
puts  us  in  possession  of  our  inheritance.  II.  How  God  is  glorified,  when 
MAN  is  redeemed.  1.  His  infinite  wisdom  was  displayed.  2.  His  power  was 
illustrated.  3.  His  grace  was  shown.  4.  His  truth  was  vindicated.  III.  Thb 
praise  which  ought  to  be  ascribed  unto  God  on  account  op  redemption. 
The  language  of  the  text  has  a  certain  grandeur  and  beauty.  Two  things  seem 
to  be  expressed  in  it.  1.  Let  every  creature  rejoice  in  the  event.  2.  Let  all  express 
their  joy  in  every  form.  "  Sing,"  "  shout,"  "  break  forth  into  singing."  Ih:aise 
Him  with  the  heart.  Let  "  aU  that  is  within  you  bless  His  holy  name."  Praise 
Him  with  the  lips.  "  Speak  of  the  glory  of  His  kingdom,  and  talk  of  His  power, 
to  make  known  to  the  sons  of  men  His  mighty  acts."  Praise  Him  with  your 
life.  "  Ye  are  bought  with  a  price,  therefore  glorify  God  in  your  body  and  in 
your  spirit,  which  are  God's.'  Praise  Him  in  private.  "  Is  anyone  merry? 
Let  him  sing  psalms."  Praise  Him  in  public.  "  0  sing  unto  the  Lord  a  new  song, 
and  His  praise  in  the  congregation  of  the  saints."  {E.  Brown.)  The  joy  of 
redemption  : — There  are  three  redemptions  which  may  well  make  all  hearts  rejoice. 
I.  Redemption  by  blood.  II.  Redemption  by  power.  Conversion  and  re- 
generation. What  sort  of  people  are  those  whom  Christ  saves?  Some  were 
the  very  worst  of  the  worst.  Think  of  what  these  souls  are  saved  from,  and 
of  what  they  are  saved  to.  Some  are  saved  in  the  teeth  of  ten  thousand  obstacles. 
III.  Redemption  in  perfection.  (C.  H.  Spurgeon.)  The  song  of  songs  .• — 
I.  Let  us  survey  the  scene.  "  I  have  blotted  out  as  a  thick  cloud  thy  trans- 
gressions, and  as  a  cloud  thy  sins."  So,  going  forth  and  returning  to  their  God 
beneath  that  clear  sky,  from  which  the  Sun  of  Righteousness  shone  down  with 
beams  of  love,  the  forgiven  people  were  filled  with  rejoicing,  and  by  the  mouth 
of  the  prophet  they  cried  aloud,  "  Sing,  0  heaven,  clouds  veil  thee  no  longer ; 
shout,  ye  lower  parts  of  the  earth,  which  have  been  refreshed  with  fertiUsinc 
showers;  shout,  6  ye  forest  trees,  whose  every  bough  has  been  hung  with  diamond 
drops;  for  the  Lord  hath  redeemed  Jacob,  and  glorified  Himself  in  Israel."  Thus 
the  scenery  of  the  text  is  helpful  to  the  full  understanding  of  it.  Read  the  two 
verses  together,  and  their  beauty  is  seen.  When  did  the  joyous  event  take  place 
which  we  are  bidden  to  celebrate  with  song?  1.  We  may  consider  it  as  virtually 
accomplished  in  the  eternal  coimsels  of  God,  for  our  Lord  is  "  the  Lamb  slain 
from  before  the  foundation  of  the  world."  2.  The  clouds  were  actually  removed 
when  the  atonement  was  presented.  3.  The  text  also  receives  an  actual  fulfil- 
ment to  each  one  of  God's  people  in  the  moment  when  the  eye  of  faith  is  first 
turned  to  the  crucified  Saviour.    4.  This  also  comes  true  not  only  at  first,  but 


426  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xliv. 

frequently  during  the  Christian  life;  for  there  are  times  when  our  unbelief  makes 
new  clouds,  and  threatens  new  storms.  5.  The  text  will  obtain  its  best  fulfilment 
at  the  day  of  the  Lord's  appearing, — that  day  around  which  our  chief  hopes 
must  ever  centre.  II.  Let  us  contemplate  the  glorioxts  subject  fob  joy. 
The  great  subject  of  joy  is  redemption — the  redemption  of  God's  Israel.  1.  This 
is  a  stupendous  work.  2.  Of  redemption  by  price  and  by  power  we  are  bidden 
to  sing,  a  redemption  so  pre-eminently  desirable  that  we  can  never  sufficiently 
value  it.  3.  The  very  centre  and  emphasis  of  the  song  seems  to  me  to  lie  in  this : 
"  The  Lord  hath  done  it."  Whatever  God  does  is  the  subject  of  joy  to  all  pure 
beings.  4.  It  is  sweet  to  reflect  that  redemption  is  an  accomplished  fact.  It 
is  not  "  The  Lord  will  do  it,"  but  "  The  Lord  hath  done  it."  5.  We  may  lay 
peculiar  force  upon  the  word,  the  Lord  hath  "  done  "  it,  for  He  has  finished  the 
work.  6.  A  very  important  part  of  the  song,  however,  lies  in  the  fact  that  what 
God  has  done  glorifies  Himself.  III.  Let  us  listen  to  the  song.  The  angels 
sing,  for  they  have  deep  sympathy  with  the  redemption  of  man ;  the  redeemed 
in  glory  sing,  for  they  have  been  the  recipients  of  this  mighty  mercy ;  the  material 
heavens  themselves  also  ring  with  the  sweet  music,  and  every  star  takes  up  the 
refrain,  and  with  sun  and  moon  praise  the  Most  High.  Descending  from  heaven, 
the  song  charms  the  lower  earth,  and  the  prophet  calls  upon  materialism  to  share 
in  the  joy;  mountains  and  valleys,  forests  and  trees,  are  charged  to  join  the  song. 
Why  should  they  not?  This  round  earth  of  ours  has  been  o  ershadowed  by  the 
curse  through  sin;  she  has  yet  to  be  unswathed  of  all  the  mists  which  iniquity 
has  cast  upon  her  (Rom.  viii.  20, 21 ).  IV.  Let  us  join  in  this  song.  Consider  how 
we  sing  this  song.  We  sing  it  when  by  faith  we  see  the  grand  truth  that  Jesus 
Christ  took  His  people's  sin  upon  Him,  and  so  redeemed  them.  You  will  be 
still  better  able  to  sing  this  if  you  every  day  realise  the  blessings  of  redemption 
and  pardon,  by  drawing  near  to  God,  using  the  privilege  of  prayer,  trusting  the 
Lord  for  everything,  enjoying  sonship,  and  communing  with  your  heavenly  Father. 
(Ibid.) 

Ver.  24.  1  am  the  Lord  that  maketh  aU  things.— TAe  Maker  of  heaven 
and  earth  : — Our  object  is,  not  so  much  to  discover  from  the  creation  the  truth 
of  the  being  and  character  of  the  Creator,  as  to  see  how  the  Christian  belief  in 
Him  as  Maker  must  influence  us  about  the  world  He  has  made.  Trust  Him  as 
the  Fatherly  God,  who  is  indeed  Maker  of  heaven  and  earth,  and  what  will  follow? 
I.  Such  a  trust  will  ensure  your  right  attitude  with  regard  to  science. 
1.  It  wiU  free  you  from  all  alarm  as  to  the  contradictions  between  science  and 
the  Scripture.  2.  But  our  Christian  belief  should  not  only  take  away  all  dread 
of  science,  it  should  inspire  its  earnest  pursuit.  For  it  is  the  study  of  the  work 
of  God;  a  solution  of  His  problems.  The  stars  gleam  with  the  glory  of  (Jod, 
the  flowers  are  fragrant  with  His  sweetness;  so  that  astronomy  and  botany, 
as  well  as  all  the  sciences,  have  been  well  called  "  sections  of  theology."  II.  Such 
a  trust  in  God  as  the  maker  of  heaven  and  earth  qualifies  you  for  right 
use  and  enjoyment  of  nature.  He  who  believes  in  the  Creator  with  all  his 
heart  will  be  altogether  a  different  man  in  trade  or  travel,  in  manufacture  of 
the  earth's  productions,  search  into  her  secrets,  or  enjoyment  of  her  scenery, 
from  the  man  who  darkly  doubts — not  to  say  from  the  man  who  impiously  denies. 
For  such  a  belief  excludes  the  Manichsean  heresy,  that  matter  is  the  creation 
of  evil.  It  gives  to  man  that  vision  and  voice  about  nature  that  were  vouch- 
safed to  Peter  when  he  was  taught  to  call  nothing  "  common  or  unclean."  He 
who  has  the  spirit  of  Jesus  Christ,  who  is  reconciled  by  Him  and  taught  by  Him 
about  God,  wiU  cherish  Christ's  spirit  about  nature.  III.  Such  a  trust  in  God 
INSPIRES  with  hope  ABOUT  THE  DESTINY  OF  CREATION.  There  is  much  that 
is  saddening  and  bewildering  in  some  of  the  aspects  of  creation.  "  The  whole 
creation  groaneth  and  travaileth  in  pain."  In  the  midst  of  such  reflections, 
a  great  hope  glows  in  the  heart  that  believes  in  God  as  "  the  maker  of  heaven 
and  earth.'  For  then  He  is  not  only  seen  as  a  Redeemer  mercifully  interposing 
to  alleviate  misfortune  and  to  restore  some  from  ruin;  but  He  is  known  to  he 
the  utterly  good  God,  whose  goodness  is  "  over  all  His  works,"  over  creation 
as  much  as  over  redemption  He  is  a  "  faithful  Creator."  He  will  care  for 
His  own;  will  bring  it  to  the  destiny  for  which  He  made  it.  IV.  Such  a  trust 
IN  God  is  completely  possible  through  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ.  Jesus 
has  to  do  with  nature,  with  us,  and  with  God.  He  is  "  the  Door  "  into  nature. 
Connect  all  with  Jesus,  and  we  shall  connect  all  with  God.     {V.  R.  Thomas,  B.A.) 


CHAP.  XMV.]  ISAIAH.  427 

Ver.  28.  That  Baith  of  Cjrrus,  He  is  my  shepherd. — Cyrus,  the  Lord's  shepherd  : 
— Cyrus  was  the  ideal  king  of  the  Persians  and  Greeks.  His  is  the  only  name 
that  is  mentioned  with  any  detail,  I  believe,  both  in  the  Persian  and  in  the  Greek, 
and  also  in  the  Hebrew  literature.  We  speak  of  the  great  heroes  of  the  world 
as  Alexander  and  Caesar  and  Napoleon.  That  list  begins  too  late.  We  ought 
to  begin  instead  with  Cyrus,  who  was  at  first  a  prince  of  a  small  principality  at 
the  head  of  the  Gulf  of  Oman.  Later  he  conquered  the  Medes  and  Persians. 
Later  Asia  Minor,  including  Lydia,  and  at  last  he  captured  Babylon.  In  captur- 
ing Babylon  he  released  from  captivity  the  chosen  people,  and  it  is  because  of 
that  fact  that  he  is  called  in  the  Scriptures,  and  that  he  is  known  in  history  by 
the  very  unique  title  of  the  Lord's  shepherd.  There  is  only  one  other  person 
to  whom  that  phrase  has  ever  been  applied,  and  it  is  a  very  singular  fact  that 
a  heathen  king,  one  entirely  out  of  all  line  with  the  chosen  people,  one  so  far 
away  from  traditions,  which  we  have  been  in  the  habit  of  calling  sacred,  holy, 
as  if  his  name  had  been  Confucius  or  Buddha,  in  the  Scriptures  should  have  been 
given  exactly  the  same  title  that  was  given  to  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ  Himself. 
{A.  H.  Bradford,  D.D.)  The  unity  of  history  : — We  will  observe  a  few  facts 
in  support  of  my  contention  that  history  is  the  record  of  a  beneficent  develop- 
ment. 1.  The  governments  of  the  world.  In  the  early  time  government  was 
simply  for  a  few;  there  was  no  monarchy  but  force;  there  was  no  place  for  love. 
In  the  present  time,  in  the  immortal  words  of  our  President,  "  Government  is 
of  the  people,  by  the  people,  for  the  people."  The  word  which  I  best  remember 
of  any  which  I  heard  spoken  in  London  was  by  Dr.  Bevan,  "  Of  old,  government 
wasior  the  few;  to-day,  government  is  for  the  many."  And  that  is  what  things 
have  been  moving  towards  as  the  years  have  been  passing.  2.  Take  another 
illustration,  and  that  from  the  realm  of  religion.  We  think  of  one  God;  but 
to  those  early  Hebrews  there  were  many  gods.  They  were  not  those  who  be- 
lieved simply  in  one  God  for  all  the  world.  They  believed  in  Jehovah  as  the 
God  able  to  subdue  aU  the  gods  of  the  heathen.  They  had  not  reached,  except 
in  the  person  of  a  few  of  their  leaders,  the  sublime  altitude  of  modern  times  of 
one  pervading  and  all-enduring  Unity,  one  holy,  spiritual,  true,  and  loving  God. 
What  was  their  worship?  3.  We  come  to  another  illustration  quite  as  familiar. 
We  hear  very  much  in  our  time  concerning  the  social  condition  of  the  labouring 
people.  The  great  dumb  multitudes  have  found  a  voice;  and  every  now  and 
then,  some  man,  ignorant  of  history,  writes  to  say  the  rich  were  never  so  rich, 
and  the  poor  never  so  poor;  the  condition  of  one  class  was  never  so  luxurious, 
the  condition  of  the  other  class  was  never  so  mean.  He  does  not  know  what  the 
condition  of  the  masses  was  in  the  time  when  the  pyramids  were  built,  in  the 
time  when  the  Csssars  ruled  in  Rome  and  doled  out  corn  to  the  multitude.  H© 
has  not  read  the  history  of  Great  Britain,  or  of  France,  or  of  any  other  nation 
of  Europe,  or  on  the  face  of  the  earth.  The  condition  of  the  world  is  improving. 
In  the  old  time  the  condition  of  the  woman  was  that  of  a  thing  or  an  animal; 
she  belonged  to  her  husband.  She  is  a  woman  now,  the  equal  of  her  husband. 
In  the  old  time  the  child  was  absolutely  imder  the  power  of  the  father.  If  the 
child  was  an  orphan  he  was  put  on  the  street.  Now,  to  use  the  phrase  of  a  con- 
temporary writer,  "  If  he  hath  no  father  and  if  he  hath  no  mother,  he  becomes 
the  child  of  the  public."  What  mean  our  charities?  Conclusion — (1)  Providence 
is  compelling  progress  and  no  individual  can  possibly  prevent  it.  (2)  Not  all 
are  equally  worthy  of  blessing,  of  commendation;  although  all  may  bear  their 
part  in  bringing  about  the  glorious  consummation.  (3)  Cyrus  shows  to  us  th© 
sweep  of  the  Divine  purpose.  God's  plan  includes  the  nations  and  the  ages. 
There  is  a  place  for  Greece,  for  India,  for  China,  for  Rome,  for  Great  Britain, 
there  is  a  place  for  every  nation  as  well  as  for  Judah.  There  is  a  place  for  Napoleon, 
and  Confucius,  and  Buddha,  because  there  was  a  place  for  Cyrus.  (4)  But  th© 
other  One  to  whom  that  glorious  name  was  applied,  the  Lord's  Shepherd,  shows 
us  what  Cyrus  does  not  show  us,  namely,  the  nature  of  that  plan,  revealing  to 
us  the  nature  of  the  One  who  made  the  plan.  I  look  upon  the  face  of  Jesus  Christ, 
and  I  see  there  is  a  person,  and  a  sacrificial  purpose,  and  a  sacrifice  which  reaches 
even  to  the  uttermost.  (Ibid.)  Notables  fvIfUling  Ooda  purpose: — Rich 
princes  shall  do  what  poor  prophets  have  foretold.    {M.  Henry.) 


428  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xlt. 


CHAPTER  XLV. 

Vbb3.  1-6.  ThuB  saith  tlie  Lord  to  His  anointed. — Cyrus : — The  name  of 
Cyrus  is  written  Kuras  in  Babylonian  cuneiform,  Kurush  in  Old  Persian.  Ctesiaa 
stated  on  the  authority  of  Parysatis,  the  wife  of  the  Persian  king  Ochus,  that  her 
younger  son  was  named  Cyrus  from  the  sun,  as  the  Persians  called  the  sun  KOpos 
{E'pit.  Phot.  80;  Pint.  Artax.  1).  In  Zend,  however,  the  sun  is  hware,  which  could 
not  take  the  form  KOpos  in  Old  Persian,  though  in  modern  Persian  it  is  khur,  khir, 
and  kher.  .  .  .  The  classical  writers  have  given  extraordinary  accounts  of  his 
birth  and  rise  to  power.  .  .  .  All  these  versions  have  been  shown  to  be  unhistorical 
by  contemporaneous  cuneiform  inscriptions.  The  most  important  of  these  are^ 
(1)  a  cylinder  inscription  of  Nabonidus,  the  last  king  of  the  Babylonian  Empire, 
from  Abu  Habba  (Sippara);  (2)  an  annalistic  tablet  written  shortly  after  the  con- 
quest of  Babylonia  by  Cyrus;  (3)  a  proclamation  of  Cyrus  of  the  same  date.  .  .  . 
The  proclamation  of  Cyrus  shows  that  he  was  not  a  Zoroastrian  like  Darius  and 
Xerxes,  but  that  as  he  claimed  to  be  the  successor  of  the  Babylonian  kings,  so  also 
he  acknowledged  the  supremacy  of  Bel-Merodach  the  supreme  Babylonian  god. 
Hence  the  restoration  of  the  Jewish  exiles  was  not  due  to  any  sympathy  with 
monotheism,  but  was  part  of  a  general  policy.  Experience  had  taught  him  the 
danger  of  allowing  a  disaffected  population  to  exist  in  a  country  which  might  be 
invaded  by  an  enemy;  his  own  conquest  of  Babylonia  had  been  assisted  by  the 
revolt  of  a  part  of  its  population ;  and  he  therefore  reversed  the  policy  of  deporta- 
tion and  denationahsation  which  had  been  attempted  by  the  Assyrian  and  Baby- 
Ionian  kings.  The  exiles  and  the  images  of  their  gods  were  sent  back  to  their  old 
homes;  oiily  in  the  case  of  the  Jews,  who  had  no  images,  it  was  the  sacred  vessels 
of  the  temple  which  were  restored.  {Prof.  A.  H.  Sayce,  LL.D.)  Cyrus  :  his 
character  : — To  Greek  literature  Cyrus  was  the  prince  pre-eminent, — set  forth  as 
the  model  for  education  in  childhood,  self-restraint  in  youth,  just  and  powerful 
government  in  manhood.  Most  of  what  we  read  of  him  in  Xenophon's  Cyro- 
pcedia  is,  of  course,  romance;  but  the  very  fact  that,  like  our  own  king  Arthur, 
Cyrus  was  used  as  a  mirror  to  flash  great  ideals  down  the  ages,  proves  that  there 
was  with  him  native  brilliance  and  width  of  siurface  as  well  as  fortunate  eminence 
of  position.  He  owed  much  to  the  virtue  of  his  race.  {Prof.  0.  A.  Smith,  D.D.) 
Cyrus,  God's  tool : — Cyrus  is  neither  chosen  for  his  character,  nor  said  [in  the 
Isaiah  passages]  to  be  endowed  with  one.  But  that  he  is  there,  and  that  he  does 
BO  much,  is  due  simply  to  this,  that  God  had  chosen  him.  What  he  is  endowed 
with  is  force,  push,  swiftness,  irresistibleness.  He  is,  in  short,  not  a  character, 
but  a  tool;  and  God  makes  no  apology  for  using  him  but  this,  that  he  has  the 
qualities  of  a  tool.  Now,  we  cannot  help  being  struck  with  the  contrast  of  all 
this,  the  Hebrew  view  of  Cyrus,  with  the  well-known  Greek  view  of  him.  To 
the  Greeks  he  is  first  and  foremost  a  character.  {Ibid. )  The  victories  of  Cyrus  : — 
We  have  vividly  described  to  us  the  victories  of  Cyrus;  in  his  whirlwind  career, 
subduing  the  nations  before  him,  loosing  the  loins  of  kings  (that  whole  troop  of 
vassal  empires  enumerated  by  Xenophon),  and  opening  before  him  the  hundred 
brazen  gates  of  Babylon  (also  minutely  described  by  Herodotus,  as  guarding  alike 
the  approaches  to  the  river  and  the  temple  of  Belus),  and  cutting  in  sunder  the 
bars  of  iron.  The  spoil  amassed  on  that  occasion  was  probably  unexampled  in 
the  annals  of  war;  for  besides  the  enormous  wealth  of  palatial  Babylon  itself, 
it  included  the  fabulous  riches  of  Croesus,  king  of  Lydia,  who  brought  waggon- 
load  after  waggon-load  to  lay  at  the  feet  of  the  conqueror.  The  aggiegate  was 
computed  to  be  equivalent  to  upwards  of  a  hundred  and  twenty-six  millions  of 
our  money.  Well,  therefore,  might  the  prophet  here  chronicle,  among  the  pre- 
destined exploits  of  this  mighty  prince  (ver.  3),  "  the  treasures  of  darkness,  and 
hidden  riches  of  secret  places."  (J.  R.  Macduff,  D.D.)  Loosing  the  loins  of 
kings  : — The  monarchs  of  eastern  nations  were  accustomed  to  wear  girdles  about 
their  loins,  which  were  considered  as  giving  strength  and  firmness  to  their  bodies; 
and,  being  richly  decorated,  served  as  badges  of  royal  dignity.  When,  therefore, 
God  declares  that  He  would  deprive  them  of  their  girdles  and  loose  their  loins,  the 
expression  imports  that  He  would  divest  them  of  their  power  and  majesty,  and 
reduce  them  to  a  mean  and  contemptible  condition.  {R.  Macculloch.)  Special 
Divine  instrumentalities  in  the  world  s  renovation  : — 1.  For  the  enlargement  of  His 
Church,  God  often  selects  special  instruments.  In  setting  into  motion  a  whole 
Bystem  of  agencies  this  is  almost  uniformly  the  case.    We  recognise  the  fact  all  along 


CHAP.  XLV.]  ISAIAH.  429 

the  history  of  the  Church.  We  see  men  raised  up  with  peculiar  gifts  and  clothed  with 
peculiar  powers  to  effect  certain  great  works.  The  text  gives  us  a  remarkable  illus- 
tration of  this  method  of  Divine  procedure.  In  the  bosom  of  the  Church  itself  there 
are  two  still  more  remarkable  examples  of  this  law;  the  two  men  who  bore  the 
largest  part  in  the  inauguration  and  establishment  of  the  chief  dispensations.  Moses 
and  Paul  were  not  indifferent  characters;  nor  were  their  training  and  position 
like  that  of  the  multitude.  They  stand  out  boldly  in  history  as  men  of  peculiar 
natural  gifts  and  attainments.  Their  early  discipline  exalted  their  intrinsic 
power;  while  their  relation  to  the  people  among  whom  their  work  was  to  be 
performed,  and  to  the  science  of  the  age  in  which  they  lived,  imparted  special 
qualifications  for  their  great  mission.  It  is  not  that  the  human  is  thus  exalted 
above  the  Divine,  but  simply  that  the  Divine  uses  that  kind  and  measure  of  humanity 
which  are  best  fitted  to  accomplish  its  purposes.  2.  It  is  just  as  certain  that  the 
great  Sovereign  chooses  particular  nations  to  effect  certain  parts  of  His  work  in 
the  final  triumph  of  the  Gospel,  as  that  He  chooses  certain  individuals  for  some 
special  operation.  "  This  people  have  I  formed  for  myself;  they  shall  show  forth 
My  praise."  His  sovereignty  reaches  back  of  the  immediate  work.  It  chooses 
according  to  the  character  of  the  nation;  it  reaches  to  the  antecedent  training 
and  the  natural  characteristics  which  combine  to  prepare  the  nation  most  fully 
for  the  work;  nay,  this  sovereignty  in  its  far-reachang  wisdom  has  been  busy  all 
along  the  history  of  the  people  in  so  ordering  the  moulding  influences  under  which 
characters  and  position  are  attained,  that  when  the  time  comes  for  them  to  enter 
into  His  special  work,  they  will  be  found  aU  ripe  for  His  purpose.  This  nation, 
to  whom  the  passage  before  us  refers,  is  a  marked  illustration  of  this  thought. 
The  Jew  was  designed  to  be  the  conservator  of  the  Word  of  God.  He  was  chosen 
for  this  purpose.  The  object  was  not  propagation,  but  conservation.  The  race 
by  nature  and  education  had  just  those  qualities  which  fitted  it  for  this  work. 
Its  wonderful  tenacity  of  impression,  its  power  to  hold  what  once  had  fairly  been 
forced  into  it  by  Divine  energy,  like  the  rock  hardened  around  the  crystal,  belongs 
to  its  nature,  reveals  itself  after  Providence  had  shattered  the  nation,  in  that 
granite  character  which,  under  the  fire  of  eighteen  centuries,  remains  unchanged. 
At  every  step  of  the  progress  of  Christianity  since,  illustrations  multiply  of  the 
truth  that  God  forms  nations  to  His  work,  and  chooses  them  because  of  their 
fitness  to  accomplish  certain  parts  of  that  work.  The  Greek  with  his  high  mental 
culture  and  his  glorious  language — fit  instrument  through  which  the  Divine  Word 
breathed  His  life-giving  truth;  the  Roman  sceptred  in  power  over  the  whole  realm 
of  civilisation,  and  undesignedly  constructing  the  great  highway  for  the  Church 
of  Jesus;  the  German,  with  his  innate  freedom  of  spirit,  nourishing  the  thoughtful 
souls  whose  lofty  utterances  awoke,  whose  wondrous  power  disentl^alled  a  sleeping 
and  captive  Church.     (5.  W.  Fisher,  D.D.) 

Vers.  2,  3.  I  will  go  before  thee. — Ood  going  before  : — Man  must  go.  Each 
man  is  accomplishing  a  journey,  going  through  a  process.  The  only  question  is. 
How?  Man  may  go,  either  with  God  or  without  Him.  Whether  we  go  with 
God  or  without  Him,  we  shall  find  crooked  places.  I.  We  should  regard  the  text 
as  A  WAKNiNG.  There  are  crooked  places.  II.  The  text  is  also  a  peomisb.  "  I 
will  go  before  thee."  God  does  not  say  where  He  will  straighten  our  path;  He 
does  not  say  how;  the  great  thing  for  us  to  believe  is  that  there  is  a  special  promise 
for  us,  and  to  wait  in  devout  hope  for  its  fulfilment.  He  who  waits  for  God  is  not 
misspending  his  time.  Such  waiting  is  true  living — such  tarrying  is  the  truest 
speed,  ni.  The  text  is  also  a  plan.  It  is  in  the  word  "  before  "  that  I  find  the 
plan,  and  it  is  in  that  word  "  before  "  that  I  find  the  difficulty  on  the  human  side. 
God  does  not  say,  I  will  go  alongside  thee;  we  shall  go  step  by  step:  He  says,  I 
will  go  before  thee.  Sometimes  it  may  be  a  long  way  before  us,  so  that  we  cannot 
see  Him;  and  sometimes  it  may  be  just  in  front  of  us.  But  whether  beyond,  far 
away,  or  here  close  at  hand,  the  great  idea  we  have  to  live  upon  is  that  God  goes 
before  us.  1.  Let  us  beware  of  regarding  the  text  as  a  mere  matter  of  course. 
There  is  an  essential  question  of  character  to  be  settled.  "  The  steps  of  a  good 
man  are  ordered  by  the  Lord."  2.  Let  us  beware  of  regarding  this  text  as  a  licence 
for  carelessness.  Let  us  not  say,  "  If  God  goes  before  me,  and  makes  all  places 
straight,  why  need  I  care?  "  To  the  good  man  all  life  is  holy;  there  is  no  step 
of  indifference;  no  subject  that  does  not  bring  out  his  best  desires.  "  The  place 
whereon  thou  standest  is  holy  ground  "  is  the  expression  of  every  man  who  knows 
what  it  is  to  have  God  going  before  him.     {J.  Parker,  D.D.)        Treasures  of 


430  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xlv. 

darkness  : — If  we  be  Zion's  pilgrims,  heavenward  bound,  we  shall  find  the  need 
of  such  promises,  in  their  spiritual  fulfilment,  as  God  here  gave  to  Cyrus.  I.  GoD'S 
PRELiAnNARY  WORK  in  "  going  before  His  people,  making  for  them  crooked  places 
straight,  breaking  in  pieces  gates  of  brass,  and  cutting  in  sunder  bars  of  iron." 
1.  The  first  promise  lays  a  foundation  for  all  the  rest;  "  I  will  go  before  thee." 
How  great  must  those  difficulties  be  which  need  God  Himself  to  go  before  us  ia 
order  to  overcome  them !  Surely  they  must  be  insuperable  by  any  human  strength. 
K  we  are  rightly  taught,  we  shall  feel  a  need  for  the  Lord  to  go  before  us,  not 
only  now  and  then,  but  every  step  of  the  way,  for  unless  led  and  guided  by  Him, 
we  are  sure  to  go  astray.  How  strikingly  was  this  the  case  with  the  children  of 
Israel.  You  may  apply  this  promise  to  a  variety  of  things.  (1)  It  is  applicable 
not  only  to  spiritual,  out  to  temporal  trials  and  perplexities — to  His  going  before 
ns  both  in  providence  and  grace.  (2)  But  the  words  apply  to  the  manifestation 
of  His  holy  and  sacred  will.  (3)  It  is  especially  in  the  removal  of  obstructions 
that  the  Lord  fulfils  this  part  of  the  promise.  2.  "  And  make  crooked  things 
straight."  This  promise  springs  out  of  the  former,  and  is  closely  connected  with 
it;  for  it  is  only  by  the  Lord  s  going  before  that  things  really  crooked  can  be 
straightened.  But  what  is  meant  by  crooked  places,  and  whence  come  they? 
(1)  Some  are  inherently  crooked,  that  is,  it  is  in  their  very  nature  to  be  so.  Thus 
crooked  tempers,  dispositions,  desires,  wills,  lusts  are  in  themselves  inherently 
crooked,  because  being  bent  out  of  their  original  state  by  sin,  they  do  not  now 
lie  level  with  God's  holy  will  and  Word.  (2)  But  there  are  crooked  places  in  the 
path  of  God's  family,  which  are  not  inherently  crooked  as  being  sinful  in  themselves, 
but  are  crooked  as  made  so  by  the  hand  of  Grod  to  us.  Of  this  kind  are  afflictions 
in  body  and  mind,  poverty  in  circumstances,  trials  in  the  family,  persecution 
from  superiors  or  ungodly  relatives,  heavy  losses  in  business,  bereavement  of 
children,  and,  in  short,  a  vast  variety  of  circumstances  curved  into  their  shape  by 
the  hand  of  God,  and  so  made  "  crooked  things  "  to  us.  Now,  the  Lord  has  pro- 
mised to  make  "  crooked  things  straight."  Taken  in  its  fullest  extent,  the  promise 
positively  declares  that  from  whatever  source  they  come,  or  of  whatsoever  nature 
they  be,  the  Lord  will  sxurely  straighten  them.  By  this  He  manifests  His  power, 
wisdom,  and  faithfulness.  But  how  does  He  straighten  them?  In  two  ways, 
and  this  according  to  their  nature.  Sometimes  by  removing  them  out  of  the  way; 
and  sometimes  by  reconciling  our  minds  to  them.  3.  But  the  Lord  also  promised 
Cyrus  that  He  would,  by  going  before  him,  "  break  in  pieces  the  gates  of  brass," 
&c.  Cyrus  longed  to  enter  the  city  of  Babylon  ;  but  when  he  took  a  survey  of 
the  only  possible  mode  of  entrance,  he  saw  it  firmly  closed  against  him  with  gates 
of  brass  and  iron.  Can  we  not  find  something  in  our  experience  which  corre- 
sponds to  this  feeling  in  Cyrus?  There  is  a  longing  in  the  soul  after  a  certain 
object.  We  press  forward  to  obtain  it,  but  what  do  we  find  in  the  road?  Gates 
of  brass  and  bars  of  iron.  Look,  for  instance,  at  om-  very  prayers.  Are  not  the 
heavens  sometimes  brass  over  our  heads,  so  that,  as  Jeremiah  complains,  "  they 
cannot  pass  through  "  ?  Nay,  is  not  your  very  heart  itself  sometimes  a  gate  of 
brass,  as  hard,  as  stubborn,  and  as  inflexible  ?  So  the  justice,  majesty,  and  hoUness 
of  God,  when  we  view  these  dread  perfections  of  Jehovah  with  a  trembling  eye 
under  the  guilt  of  sin,  stand  before  the  soul  as  so  many  gates  of  brass.  The  various 
enemies,  too,  which  beset  the  soul;  the  hindrances  and  obstacles  without  and  within 
that  stand  in  the  path;  the  opposition  of  sin,  Satan,  self,  and  the  world  against 
all  that  is  good  and  godlike — may  not  all  these  be  considered  "  gates  of  brass," 
barring  out  the  wished- for  access  into  the  city?  4.  But  there  are  also  "  bars  of  iron." 
These  strengthen  the  gates  of  brass  and  prevent  them  from  being  broken  down 
or  burst  open,  the  stronger  and  harder  metal  giving  firmness  and  solidity  to  the 
softer  and  weaker  one.  An  unbelieving  heart;  the  secret  infidelity  of  the  carnal 
mind;  guilt  of  conscience  produced  by  a  sense  of  our  innumerable  wanderings 
from  the  Lord ;  doubts  and  fears  often  springing  out  of  our  own  want  of  consistency 
and  devotedness;  apprehensions  of  being  altogether  deceived,  from  finding  so 
few  marks  of  grace  and  so  much  neglect  of  watchfulness  and  prayer — all  these 
may  be  mentioned  as  bars  of  iron  strengthening  the  gates  of  brass.  Now,  can  you 
break  to  pieces  these  gates  of  brass,  or  cut  in  sunder  the  bars  of  iron  ?  Here,  then, 
when  so  deeply  wanted,  comes  in  the  promise,  "  I  will  break,"  &c.  II.  Thb 
GIFTS  WHICH  THE  LoRD  BESTOWS  UPON  THEM,  when  He  has  broken  to  pieces  the 
gates  of  brass,  and  cut  in  sunder  the  bars  of  iron,  here  called  "  treasures  of  darkness 
and  hidden  riches  of  secret  places."  1.  "  Treasures  of  darkness."  But  is  not 
this  a  strange  expression?    How  can  there  be  darkness  in  the  city  of  Salvation 


CHAP.  XLV.]  ISAIAH.  431 

of  which  the  Lord,  the  Lamb,  is  the  eternal  light?  The  expression  does  not  mean 
that  the  treasures  themselves  are  darkness,  but  that  they  were  hidden  in  darkness 
till  they  were  brought  to  light.  The  treasures  of  Belshazzar,  like  the  Bank  bullion, 
were  buried  in  darkness  till  they  were  broken  up  and  given  to  Cyrus.  It  is  so  in 
a  spiritual  sense.  Are  there  not  treasiu:es  in  the  Lord  Jesus  ?  Yet,  all  these  are 
"  treasures  of  darkness,"  so  far  as  they  are  hidden  from  our  eyes  and  hearts,  till 
we  are  brought  by  His  special  power  into  the  city  of  Salvation.  2.  But  the  Lord 
promised  also  to  give  to  Cyrus  "  the  hidden  riches  of  secret  places,"  that  is,  literally, 
the  riches  of  the  city  which  were  stored  up  in  its  secret  places.  But  has  not  this 
also  a  spiritual  meaning?  Yes.  Many  are  "  the  hidden  riches  of  secret  places  " 
with  which  the  God  of  all  grace  enriches  His  believing  family.  Look,  for  instance, 
at  the  Word  of  God.  But  observe,  how  the  promises  are  connected  with  "  crooked 
places,"  "  brazen  gates,"  and  "  iron  bars,"  and  the  going  before  of  the  Lord  to 
remove  them  out  of  the  way.  Without  this  previous  work  we  should  be  ignorant 
to  our  dying  day  of  "  the  treasures  of  darkness  " ;  we  should  never  see  nor  handle 
"  the  hidden  riches  of  secret  places."  IIL  The  blessed  effects  produced 
by  what  the  Lord  thus  does  and  thus  gives — a  spiritual  and  experimental  know- 
ledge, that  "  He  who  has  called  them  by  their  name  is  the  God  of  Israel."  Observe 
the  expression,  "  I,  the  Lord,  which  call  thee  by  thy  name."  What  an  individuality 
it  stamps  on  the  person  addressed!  How  it  makes  religion  a  personal  thing! 
But  what  is  produced  by  this  special,  individual,  and  personal  calling?  Know- 
ledge. What  knowledge?  Spiritual,  heartfelt,  and  experimental.  Of  what? 
"  That  the  Lord  who  called  them  by  name  is  the  God  of  Israel."  It  is  as 
"  the  God  of  Israel  "  that  He  manifests  mercy  and  grace;  that  He  never  leaves 
nor  forsakes  the  objects  of  His  choice;  that  He  fulfils  every  promise,  defeats 
every  enemy,  appears  in  every  difiiculty,  richly  pardons  every  sin,  graciously  heals 
every  backsliding,  and  eventually  lands  them  in  eternal  bliss.  Now,  perhaps,  we 
can  see  why  God's  people  have  so  many  gates  of  brass  and  bars  of  iron,  so  many 
trials  and  severe  temptations.  This  is  to  bring  them  into  personal  acquaintance 
with  God,  the  covenant  God  of  Israel ;  to  make  religion  a  reality.    (J.  C.  PhUpot.) 

Ver.  3.  And  I  will  give  thee  the  treasures  of  darkness. — Spiritual 
mineralogy : — There  is  a  whole  library  of  sacred  philosophy  in  the  words  of  the 
Psalmist  on  the  relation  subsisting  between  God  and  His  creatures.  "  That 
Thou  givest  them,  they  gather.  Thou  openest  Thine  hand,  they  are  filled  with 
good."  Perhaps  one  is  hardly  ever  reminded  more  strongly  of  this  fellowship 
of  Providence  and  industry  than  when  passing  through  a  district  seamed  ana 
bored  and  blackened  by  the  mining  operations  in  search  of  the  metals  which 
yield  the  wealth  of  a  country,  or  of  the  hardly  less  precious  coal,  by  the  aid  of 
which  the  iron,  the  copper,  or  the  silver  is  smelted  into  useful  forms.  The  ore, 
it  is  beyond  the  miner's  province  to  fashion;  God  makes  it  to  him  a  free  present; 
but  the  digging,  and  the  hoisting,  and  the  smelting,  and  the  moulding,  and  the 
chasing,  and  the  carving,  and  the  coining  into  currency,  these  things  God  no 
more  does  for  man  than  man,  in  the  beginning,  created  the  heavens  and  the 
earth.  Let  us  learn  to  be  grateful  without  being  indolent.  Let  us  equally  take 
care  to  be  diligent  without  being  proud.  There  is  a  high  moral  and  spiritual 
mineralogy,  wherein  we  may  become  rich,  "  not  with  corruptible  things,  such 
as  silver  and  gold."  There  are  caverns  of  unimaginable  wealth,  every  grain 
of  which  comes  from  God's  free  bounty,  but  not  one  grain  of  which  man  can  touch, 
except  he  do  it  "  in  the  sweat  of  his  brow."  Bring  to  the  text  not  only  faith  in 
God's  promise,  but  strong  hands  and  swift  feet  to  do  according  to  God's  com- 
mandment. We  are  now  ready  to  foUow  on  into  the  figure  we  have  borrowed, 
and  show  how  frequently  God  blesses  His  people,  as  He  provides  for  the  workers 
or  the  owners  of  mineral  quarries,  fetching  "  treasures  "  out  of  "  darkness," 
and  "  hidden  riches  "  out  of  "  secret  places."  I.  St.  Paul  represents  the  Chris- 
tian FAITH  as  a  secret  which  is  now  for  the  first  time  discovered  and  made  known, 
and  the  implication  of  the  apostle,  whenever  he  employs  the  term,  js  that  the 
great  blessing  which  prophecies  and  types  had  contained,  but,  containing,  had 
concealed,  was  now  in  Clu'ist  Jesus  brought  out  as  into  open  daylight  for  all  men 
to  behold  and  possess.  It  has  never  been  questioned  that  this  truth  was  the 
real  meaning  of  the  rending  of  the  veil  in  the  Temple  at  the  moment  of  our  Lord's 
giving  up  of  the  ghost.  For  three  hours  there  had  been  suspended  over  Mount 
Calvary  a  thick  curtain  of  darkness;  but  at  the  ninth  hour  that  veil,  like  the 
other  close  by,  was  "  rent "  also  "  in  twain,  from  the  top  to  the  bottom."     I 


432  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xlv. 

find  in  that  darkness  the  awful  symbol  of  the  misery,  and  the  ignorance,  and 
the  confusion  whereof  the  world  itself  had  been  the  victim  all  through  the  ages 
preceding  the  Advent.  But  the  very  same  fact  which  tore  down  the  rich  drapery 
in  the  building  dispelled  the  dense  blackness  on  the  mountain,  and  declared 
the  very  same  doctrine  that "  Christ  Jesus  was  the  Saviour  of  all  men,  and  specially 
of  them  that  believe."  Learn  to  ascribe  your  redemption  to  the  clouds  of  misery 
behind  which  your  Surety  laid  down  His  life.  II.  Somewhat  in  this  way  it  would 
not,  perhaps,  be  extravagant  to  represent  any  one  of  ourselves,  at  the  crisis  of 
his  CONVEESION,  as  looking  towards  the  Saviour  much  as  one  of  those  spectators 
literally  did  when  the  darkness  was  beginning  to  clear  off  from  the  crucifixion. 
When  the  veil  is  rent,  and  the  power  of  faith  scatters  the  clouds,  and  the  soul 

Eeering  through  catches  the  first  glimpse  of  a  Saviour,  the  rapture  of  being  forgiven 
as,  so  to  speak,  been  quarried  and  hewn  out  of  the  black  deep  pit  of  conviction 
and  remorse.  III.  It  will  be  far  less  difficult  to  show  that  all  along  the  journey 
of  the  Christian  he  digs  his  best  and  brightest  mercies  out  of  thick,  and  often 
terrible,  gloom.  I  find  some  of  you  shut  up  in  the  deep  pit  of  constant  bodily 
pain,  or  infirmity.  I  find  others  of  you  wandering  through  the  pitch  dark  avenues 
of  a  recent  family  funeral.  There  is  a  time  for  the  digging  of  the  gold.  That  is 
yours  now.  And  there  is  a  time  for  the  burnishing  and  the  chasing,  and  the 
putting  on  of  the  gold.  That  is  not  yet  come.  There  is  a  place,  says  Solomon, 
for  the  sapphires  in  the  stones  of  the  earth;  but  the  men  who  take  the  sapphires 
first  out  of  the  stones  need  all  their  skill  and  practice  to  tell  which  is  which,  and 
yon  would  not  thank  the  miner  for  the  jewellery  just  left  as  he  gets  it.  You 
must  allow  a  fair  time  for  the  lapidary  or  the  goldsmith  to  take  up  the  business 
where  the  rough  black  denizens  of  the  pit  leave  off — and  "  no  affliction  for  the 
present  seemeth  to  be  joyous,  but  grievous.  Nevertheless,  afterwards  it  yieldeth 
the  peaceable  fruits  of  righteousness  to  them  who  are  exercised  thereby."  (H. 
Christopherson.)  Treasures  of  darkness: — As  Cyrus,  as  a  deliverer,  was  but 
a  type  of  the  Messiah,  this  promise  has  been,  and  is  being,  fulfilled  in  Christ  in 
His  great  triumph  over  the  powers  of  darkness.  These  words  present  a  special 
phase  of  His  triumphs.  The  preceding  words  have  already  found  striking  fulfil- 
ment,  "  I  will  go  before  thee,  and  make  the  crooked  places  straight,"  &c.  But 
to  Christ  God  has  also  given  the  treasures  of  darkness  and  the  hidden  riches  of 
secret  places.  L  In  one  sense,  this  is  typical  op  all  God's  disclosures.  Those 
things  which  men  discover  to-day  are  treasures  which  have  been  in  darkness 
for  countless  generations,  jewels  which  have  been  concealed  in  hidden  places 
during  millenniums.  II.  This  is  supremely  true  of  the  advent  and  BEDEMPTiva 
work  of  Christ.  Look  at  the  manner  of  His  coming.  See  the  poverty  which 
surrounded  His  birth.  Look  at  the  nature  of  His  life — "  Without  a  place  to 
lay  His  head  ";  "a  Man  of  Sorrows,  and  acquainted  with  grief."  He  was,  more- 
over, "  obedient  unto  death,  even  the  death  of  the  cross."  There  is  nothing 
very  bright  in  that  record.  When  Christ,  in  the  hour  of  utter  loneliness,  uttered 
that  piercing  cry,  "  My  Godl  My  God!  why  hast  Thou  forsaken  Me?"  and  dark- 
ness covered  earth  and  heaven,  then  out  of  that  dense  gloom  He  who  in  the 
beginning  made  light  to  shine  out  of  darkness,  made  the  most  glorious  light  to 
shine;  so  that  from  the  Cross  to-day  there  streams  the  greatest  revelation  with 
which  God  has  ever  enriched  our  race.  Again,  how  graciously  true  this  is  of 
Christ's  redemptive  work  in  view  of  the  spiritual  darkness  of  the  world  which 
He  came  to  save!  What  a  revelation  of  the  world's  night  we  find  in  the  advent 
of  our  Lord.  Until  then  men  knew  not  how  dark  this  world  was.  These  words 
only  gain  their  full  significance  in  the  story  of  Christ's  redemption.  When  He 
came  the  world  was  hopeless  and  undone.  It  had  exhausted  its  energies  in  its 
numberless  attempts  to  save  and  ennoble  itself,  and  down  deep  in  recesses  of 
darkness  and  iniquity  were  buried  the  brightest  talents  with  which  humanity 
had  been  enriched — so  many  glorious  impulses  and  high  capacities  prostituted 
to  the  vilest  uses,  or  paralysed  in  the  dark  and  made  utterly  useless.  Oh,  the 
countless  lost  pieces  of  silver,  and  the  priceless  jewels  which  He  has  rescued  since 
then  from  hopeless  degradation  and  sin!     III.  This  is  gloriously  true  in  the 

EXPERIENCE    OF    THOSE    WHO    ACCEPT    ChRIST    AS    THEIR    SaVIOUR.       1.    WaS    not 

the  first  hour  of  our  spiritual  enlightenment  and  enrichment  a  fulfilment  of  the 
same  Divine  promise?  2.  Then,  again,  you  have  had  your  doubts  and  fears. 
They  were  terrible  to  bear  at  the  time;  yet  out  of  them  you  were  at  length  per- 
mitted to  snatch  a  new  wealth  of  assurance  and  joy.  3.  This  is  true  also,  in  the 
life  of  every  one  who  has  accepted  Christ,  of  that  other  experience  which  darkens 


CHAP.  XLV.]  ISAIAH.  433 

our  vision,  namely,  that  of  sorrow  in  its  many  and  varied  forms.  It  is  in  darkness, 
too,  that  we  learn  trustfulness  and  faith.  (Z).  Davits.)  Treasures  of  dark- 
ness:— We  cannot  hear  of  the  "  treasures  of  darkness  "  without  finding  our  interest 
quickened.  We  seem  suddenly  made  aware  of  treasures  we  had  never  dreamed 
of ;  and  aware,  too,  that  what  we  had  deemed  empty,  and  even  repellent,  may 
be  made  to  yield  up  most  surprising  wealth,  not  that  merely  of  a  temporal,  perish- 
able kind,  such  as  some  would  call  "  treasures,"  but  what  the  wisest  and  most 
spiritual  men  would  call  such,  under  the  blessed  teaching  of  the  Master  (Matt, 
vi.  19).  1.  It  ought  not  to  be  difficult  for  us  to  believe  that  there  are  spiritual 
treasures  that  we  have  never  even  got  a  glimpse  of  yet.  Christ  spoke  of  treasure 
"  hid  in  a  field."  That  surely  must  have  been  among  the  treasures  of  darkness. 
And  the  Apostle  Paul,  long  after,  spoke  of  the  "  unsearchable  riches  of  Christ." 
What  he  had  himself  freely  taken  from  this  store  made  him  feel  himself  rich 
indeed;  so  rich,  that  he  had  not  the  least  inclination  for  anything  that  the  world 
could  give.  One  of  the  saddest  and  most  mournful  of  all  things  for  us  would 
be  to  settle  down  contentedly  with  the  notion  that  God  had  no  treasures  to  bestow 
but  what  we  see  all  about  us  with  the  utterly  inexperienced  eye!  To  think  the 
common  experience  of  life,  to  think  our  own  experience,  the  limit  of  all  things, 
would  be  to  make  life  a  very  poor  thing  indeed.  2.  God  must  have  infinite 
treasures  and  pleasures  which  He  does  not  want  to  keep  in  darkness  unused. 
That  ought  to  be  an  axiom  with  us.  If  we  should  never  dream  of  speaking  of 
ourselves  as  spiritually  rich,  it  cannot  be  because  either  God  has  nothing  better 
to  bestow,  or  that  He  grudges  to  bestow  it.  3.  We  seem  to  believe  readily  enough 
that  the  future  may  reveal  to  us  glories  that  we  cannot  forecast.  But  why  be 
content  to  postpone  to  a  future  state  the  higher  degrees  of  true  blessedness? 
Why  not  possess  some  of  the  treasures  now?  4.  The  phrase  suggests  to  us 
that  what  we  deem  empty,  void,  and  even  repellent  as  darkness,  may  contain 
things  imspeakably  precious.  We  speak  of  the  "  night  of  sorrow."  But  it  only 
requires  a  very  moderate  faith  in  God  to  believe  that  He  is  too  good  and  kind 
ever  to  let  a  single  sensitive  being  pass  through  such  trials  as  are  the  lot  of  not 
a  few,  unless  it  were  that  only  so  can  they  be  prepared  for,  and  put  in  possession 
of,  choicer  good.  But  there  is  a  darkness  far  blacker  than  the  night  of  affliction 
and  sorrow.  It  is  this  awful  gloom,  this  darkness  that  may  be  felt,  which  we 
all  feel  at  times  to  involve  the  moral  world.  This  is  a  world  of  tremendous  mystery 
to  the  morally  sensitive  soul.  Let  a  man  ever  come  to  see  that  a  world  which 
he  cannot  but  feel  to  be  evil  to  the  core,  is  nevertheless  the  very  best  possible 
school  for  man  in  the  early  stage  of  his  training  for  immortality;  that  this  dis- 
cipline of  evil  is  absolutely  essential  for  a  while;  that  he  would  clearly  be  a  poorer 
creature  without  it ;  that  it  is  the  conflict  with  evil  which  brings  out  some  of  the 
most  precious  quaUties  of  the  soul;  that  without  evil,  good  itself  could  not  be 
known;  that  God  Himself  could  not  be  so  gloriously  revealed  to  the  heart  as 
He  is  through  the  occasion  that  every  man's  sin  affords;  that  the  greatest  proof 
that  God  is  Love  must  have  been  for  ever  wanting,  had  He,  by  restraint  and  force, 
mechanically  prevented  the  entrance  of  evil  into  the  universe.  Only  let  one — 
this  one — little  ray  of  light  fall  upon  the  darkness,  and  you  will  feel  how  priceless 
are  the  treasiu-es  of  darkness !  6.  But  the  darkness  can  be  made  to  yield  up  treasures 
only  to  those  who  will  Usten  for  the  voice  Divine.  To  the  upright  there  will 
arise  light  in  darkness.  It  is  only  the  children  of  light  who  can  go  into  the  dark- 
ness, and  from  it  fetch  out  the  hid  treasures.  "  God  is  light:  in  Him  is  no  darkness 
at  all."  Christ  is  the  Light  of  the  World:  whoso  walketh  with  Him  shall  have 
the  Light  of  Life.  {H.  H.  Dohney.)  Did  Cyrus  acknowledge  Jehovah? — The 
prophet  apparently  expects  that  Cyrus  will  come  to  acknowledge  Jehovah  as 
the  true  God  and  the  author  of  his  success.  Whether  this  hope  was  actually 
realised  is  more  than  ever  doubtful  since  the  discovery  of  cuneiform  in- 
scriptions, in  which  Cyrus  uses  the  language  of  crude  polytheism.  (Records  of 
the  Past.) 

Vers.  4,  5.  For  Jacob  My  servant's  sake. -^G^rea<  men  the  servants  of  Ood: — 
It  appears  from  this  prediction,  taken  in  connection  with  its  wonderful  accom- 
plishment, that  God  justly  claims  a  sovereign  right  to  make  great  men  the  instru- 
ments of  executing  His  wise  and  benevolent  designs.  God  claims  a  supreme  right 
to  the  services  of  great  men,  in  almost  every  page  of  His  Word.  How  often  do 
we  hear  Him  saying  of  this,  of  that,  and  of  the  other  great  character.  He  is  My 
servant!  How  often  do  we  meet  with  this  sovereign  language.  My  servant  Moses; 
My  servant  Job;  My  servant  Jacob;  My  servant  Israel;  My  servant  Isaiah; 
VOL.  II. — 28 


434  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xlv. 


My  servant  Nebuchadnezzar  !  Bat  He  more  fully  displays  this  prerogative 
by  publishing  to  the  world  what  great  men  shall  do,  before  they  are  brought 
into  being.  He  claimed  the  services  of  Solomon,  the  wisest  of  men,  and  appointed 
the  business  of  his  life,  before  he  was  born  (1  Chron.  xxii.  9,  10).  In  the  prediction 
concerning  Nebuchadnezzar,  God  claimed  a  sovereign  right  to  employ  him  as 
the  minister  of  BUs  vengeance,  in  punishing  the  people  of  His  wrath.  He  asserted 
His  absolute  Divinity  and  sovereignty,  in  His  prophetic  address  to  Cyrus.  And 
He  displayed  the  same  sovereign  right  to  the  powers  and  influence  of  great  men, 
in  His  predictions  of  Alexander  the  Great,  of  Augustus  Caesar,  of  John  the  Baptist, 
of  Constantino  the  Great,  of  Mohammed,  and  of  the  Man  of  Sin.  1.  He  gives 
men  their  superior  natvu-al  capacity  for  doing  good.  2,  He  presides  over  their 
education,  and  gives  them  the  means  of  improving  their  superior  talents,  and 
forming  themselves  for  eminent  usefulness,  3.  God  gives  them  the  disposition, 
which  they  at  any  time  have,  to  employ  their  superior  abilities  in  promoting 
the  happiness  of  mankind.  4.  God  gives  great  men  the  opportunity  of  employing 
all  their  power  and  influence  in  executing  His  wise  and  benevolent  designs. 
6.  It  is  God  who  succeeds  their  exertions  for  the  benefit  of  the  world.  {N. 
Emmons,  D.D.) 

Ver.  6.  I  girded  thee,  though  thou  hast  not  known  Me. — CyrtLS  girded  by  Ood: — 
The  contrast  to  "  loose  the  loins  of  kings  "  (ver.  1).  {Prof.  J.  Skinner,  D.D.)  Tht 
girdings  of  Jehovah: — I.  God's  plan,  as  it  astects  society.  1.  It  is  comprehensive, 
sweeping  from  age  to  age,  threading  millenniums,  building  its  structure  from  the 
dust  of  earth's  earliest  age  to  the  emergence  of  the  new  heavens  and  earth  at  the 
close  of  time.  But  it  is  minute  and  particular.  2.  He  works  through  individuals. 
The  story  of  man  is  for  the  most  part  told  in  the  biographies  of  men.  It  is  through 
human  instruments  that  God  executes  His  beneficent  purposes,  His  righteous 
judgments.  Through  Columbus,  He  draws  aside  the  veil  from  the  coast-line  of 
America.  Through  a  Watt  and  a  Stephenson,  He  endows  men  with  the  co-opera- 
tion of  steam;  through  a  Galvani  and  an  Edison,  with  the  ministry  of  electricity. 
Through  a  De  Lesseps,  He  unites  the  waters  of  the  eastern  and  western  seas,  and 
brings  the  Orient  and  Occident  together.  Through  a  Napoleon  He  shatters  the 
temporal  power  of  the  Pope;  and  by  a  Wilberforce  strikes  the  fetters  from  the  slave. 
Men  do  not  know  the  purpose  of  God  in  what  they  are  doing.  3.  God's  use  of  men 
does  not  interfere  with  their  free  action.  This  is  clearly  taught  in  more  than  one 
significant  passage  in  Scripture — Joseph's  brethren.  Herod,  Pilate,  and  tho 
religious  leaders  of  the  Jews,  were  swept  before  a  cyclone  of  passion  and  jealousy; 
and  it  was  with  wicked  hands  that  they  crucified  and  slew  the  Lord  of  glory :  but  they 
were  accomplishing  the  determinate  counsel  of  God.  11.  God's  plan,  as  it  affects 
iNDiviDTTALS.  We  are  all  conscious  of  an  element  in  life  that  we  cannot  account 
for.  Other  men  have  started  life  under  better  auspices,  and  with  larger  advantages 
than  we,  but  somehow  they  have  dropped  behind  in  the  race,  and  are  nowhere 
to  be  seen.  Omi  health  has  never  been  robust,  but  we  have  had  more  working 
days  in  our  lives  than  those  who  were  the  athletes  of  our  school.  We  have  been 
in  perpetual  peril,  travelling  incessantly,  and  never  involved  in  a  single  accident; 
whilst  others  were  shattered  in  their  first  journey  from  their  doorstep.  Why 
have  we  escaped,  where  so  many  have  fallen?  Why  have  we  climbed  to  positions 
of  usefulness  and  influence,  which  so  many  more  capable  ones  have  missed?  Why 
has  our  reputation  been  maintained,  when  better  men  than  ourselves  have  lost 
their  footing  and  fallen  beyond  recovery?  There  is  not  one  of  us  who  cannot  see 
points  in  the  past  where  we  had  almost  gone,  and  our  footsteps  had  well-nigh  slipped: 
precipices  along  the  brink  of  which  we  went  at  nightfall,  horrified  in  the  morning 
to  see  how  near  our  footprints  had  been  to  the  edge.  Repeatedly  we  have  been 
within  a  hair- breadth  of  taking  some  fatal  step.  How  strangely  we  were  plucked 
out  of  that  companionship !  How  marvellously  we  were  saved  from  that  marriage, 
from  that  investment,  from  embarking  in  that  ship,  travelling  by  that  train,  taking 
shares  in  that  company!  It  is  God  who  has  girded  us,  though  we  did  not  know 
Him.  {F.  B.  Meyer,  B.A.)  The  girding  of  the  Almighty: — Christ  Himself  testifies 
to  the  girding  of  the  Almighty  when  He  says,  "  To  this  end  was  I  born,  and  for 
this  purpose  came  I  into  the  world."  Abraham  was  girded  for  a  particular  work 
and  mission,  in  what  is  otherwise  denominated  his  call.  Joseph,  in  Egypt,  dis- 
tinguishes the  girding  of  God's  hand,  when  he  comforts  his  guilty  brothers  in  the 
assurance,  "  So  it  was  not  you  that  sent  me  hither,  but  God.  Moses  and  Samuel 
were  even  called  by  name,  and  set  to  their  great  life-work  in  the  same  manner. 
And  what  is  Paul  endeavouring  in  all  the  stress  and  pressure  of  his  mighty  apostle* 


CHAP.  XLV.]  ISAIAH.  435 

ship,  but  to  perform  the  work  for  which  God's  Spirit  girded  him  at  his  call,  and 
to  apprehend  that  for  which  he  was  apprehended  of  Christ  Jesus?  {H.  Bushndl, 
D.D.)  Every  man's  life  a  plan  of  God: — God  has  a  definite  life- plan  for  every 
human  person,  girding  him,  visibly  or  invisibly,  for  some  exact  thing,  which  it  wiU 
be  the  true  significance  and  glory  of  his  life  to  have  accomplished.  1.  The  Holy 
Scriptures  not  only  show  us  explicitly  that  God  has  a  definite  purpose  in  the  lives 
of  men  already  great,  but  they  show  us  how  frequently,  in  the  conditions  of  obscurity 
and  depression,  preparations  of  counsel  are  going  on,  by  which  the  commonest 
offices  are  to  become  the  necessary  first  chapter  of  a  great  and  powerful  history. 
Davidamongthe  sheep;  Elisha  following  after  the  plough;  Nehemiah  bearing  the  cup; 
Hannah,  who  can  say  nothing  less  common  than  that  she  is  the  wife  of  Elkanah 
and  a  woman  of  a  sorrowful  spirit, — who,  that  looks  on  these  humble  people,  at 
their  humble  post  of  service,  and  discovers,  at  last,  how  dear  a  purpose  God  was 
cherishing  in  them,  can  be  justified  in  thinking  that  God  has  no  particular  plan 
for  him,  because  he  is  not  signalised  by  any  kind  of  distinction?  2.  Besides,  what 
do  the  Scriptures  show  us,  but  that  God  has  a  particular  care  for  every  man, 
a  personal  interest  in  him,  and  a  sympathy  with  him  and  his  trials,  watching  for 
the  uses  of  his  one  talent  as  attentively  and  kindly,  and  approving  him  as  heartily, 
in  the  right  employment  of  it,  as  if  He  had  given  him  ten ;  and  what  is  the  giving 
out  of  the  talents  itself,  but  an  exhibition  of  the  fact  that  God  has  a  definite  purpose, 
charge,  and  work  for  every  man?  3.  They  also  make  it  the  privilege  of  every 
man  to  live  in  the  secret  guidance  of  God;  which  is  plainly  nugatory,  unless  there 
is  some  chosen  work,  or  sphere,  into  which  he  may  be  guided.  4.  God  also  professes 
in  His  Word  to  have  purposes  prearranged  for  all  events;  to  govern  by  a  plan 
which  is  from  eternity  even,  and  which,  in  some  proper  sense,  comprehends  every- 
thing. And  what  is  this  but  another  way  of  conceiving  that  God  has  a  definite 
place  and  plan  adjusted  for  every  human  being?  5.  Turning  now  from  the 
Scriptures  to  the  works  of  God,  how  constantly  are  we  met  here  by  the  fact,  every- 
where visible,  that  ends  and  uses  are  the  reg\ilative  reasons  of  all  existing 
things?  6.  But  there  is  a  single  but  very  important  and  even  fearful  qualification. 
Things  all  serve  their  uses,  and  never  break  out  of  their  place.  They  have  no  power 
to  do  it.  Not  so  with  us.  We  are  able,  as  free  beings,  to  refuse  the  place  and  the 
duties  God  appoints;  which,  if  we  do,  then  we  sink  into  something  lower  and  less 
worthy  of  us.  That  highest  and  best  condition  for  which  God  designed  us  is  no 
more  possible.  And  yet,  as  that  was  the  best  thing  possible  for  us  in  the  reach 
of  God's  original  counsel,  so  there  is  a  place  designed  for  us  now,  which  is  the  next 
best  possible.  God  calls  us  now  to  the  best  thing  left,  and  wiU  do  so  till  all  good 
possibihty  is  narrowed  down  and  spent.  And  then,  when  He  cannot  use  us  any 
more  for  our  own  good.  He  will  use  us  for  the  good  of  others — an  example  of  the 
misery  and  horrible  desperation  to  which  any  soul  must  come,  when  all  the  good 
ends,  and  all  the  holy  callings  of  God's  friendly  and  fatherly  purpose  are  ex- 
hausted. Or  it  may  be  now  that,  remitting  all  other  plans  and  purposes  in  our 
behalf.  He  will  henceforth  use  us,  wholly  against  our  will,  to  be  the  demonstration 
of  His  justice  and  avenging  power  before  the  eyes  of  mankind;  saying  over  us, 
as  He  did  over  Pharaoh  in  the  day  of  His  judgments,  "  Even  for  this  same  piurpose 
have  I  raised  thee  up,  that  I  might  show  My  power  in  thee,  and  that  My  name 
might  be  declared  throughout  all  the  earth."  {Tbid. )  Finding  God's  life-plan : — 
But  the  inquiry  will  be  made,  supposing  all  this  to  be  true,  how  can  we  ever  get 
hold  of  this  Ufe-plan  God  has  made  for  us,  or  find  our  way  into  it?  1.  Observe 
some  negatives  that  are  important,  and  must  be  avoided!  (1)  You  will  never 
come  into  God's  plan  if  you  study  singularity;  for  if  God  has  a  design  or  plan 
for  every  man's  life,  then  it  is  exactly  appropriate  to  his  nature;  and,  as  every 
man's  nature  is  singular  and  peculiar  to  himself, — as  peculiar  as  his  face  or  look, — 
then  it  follows  that  God  will  lead  every  man  into  a  singular,  and  peculiar  life,  without 
any  study  of  singularity  on  his  part.  (2)  As  little  will  he  seek  to  copy  the  life 
of  another.  No  man  is  ever  called  to  be  another.  (3)  In  this  view,  also,  you  are 
never  to  complain  of  your  birth,  your  training,  your  employments,  your  hardships; 
never  to  fancy  that  you  could  be  something  if  only  you  had  a  different  lot  and 
sphere  assigned  you.  God  understands  His  own  plan,  and  He  knows  what  you 
want,  a  great  deal  better  than  you  do.  (4)  Another  mistake  is  that,  while  you 
surrender  and  renounce  all  thought  of  making  up  a  plan,  or  choosing  out  a  plan, 
for  yourself,  as  one  that  you  set  by  your  own  will,  you  also  give  up  the  hope  or 
expectation  that  God  will  set  you  in  any  scheme  of  life,  where  the  whole  course 
of  it  will  be  known,  or  set  down  beforehand-  If  you  go  to  Him  to  be  guided.  He 
will  guide  you;  but  He  will  not  comfort  your  distrust,  or  half- trust  of  Him,  by 


436  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR  [chap.  xlv. 

showing  you  the  chart  of  all  His  purposes  concerning  you.  He  will  only  show  you 
into  a  way  where,  if  you  go  cheerfully  and  trustfully  forward,  He  will  show  you 
on  still  further.  2.  But  we  must  not  stop  in  negatives.  How,  then,  or  by  what 
more  positive  directions  can  a  man,  who  really  desires  to  do  it,  come  into  the  plan 
God  lays  for  him,  so  as  to  live  it  and  rationally  believe  that  he  does?  (1)  Consider 
the  character  of  God,  and  you  will  draw  a  large  deduction  from  that;  for  all  that 
God  designs  for  you  will  be  in  harmony  with  His  character.  He  is  a  being  infinitely 
good,  just,  true.  Therefore,  you  are  to  know  that  He  cannot  really  seek  anything 
contrary  to  this  in  you.  (2)  Consider  your  relation  to  Him  as  a  creature.  Afl 
created  wills  have  their  natural  centre  and  rest  in  God's  will.  (3)  You  have  a 
conscience,  which  is  given  to  be  an  interpreter  of  His  will,  and  thus  of  your  duty, 
and,  in  both,  of  what  you  are  to  become.  (4)  God's  law  and  His  written  Word 
are  guides  to  present  duty,  which,  if  faithfully  accepted,  will  help  to  set  you  in 
accordance  with  the  mind  of  God  and  the  plan  He  has  laid  for  you.  "  I  am  a  stranger 
in  the  earth,"  said  one;  "  hide  not  Thy  commandments  from  me  ";  knowing  that 
God's  commandments  would  give  him  a  clue  to  the  true  meaning  and  business 
of  his  life.  (5)  Be  an  observer  of  providence.  Study  your  trials,  your  talents, 
the  world's  wants,  and  stand  ready  to  serve  God  now,  in  whatever  He  brings  to 
your  hand.  (6)  Consult  your  friends,  and  especially  those  who  are  most  in  the 
teaching  of  God.  (7)  Go  to  God  Himself,  and  ask  for  the  calling  of  God;  for,  as 
certainly  as  He  has  a  plan  for  you.  He  will  somehow  guide  you  into  it.  This  is  the 
proper  work  of  His  Spirit.  Young  man,  or  woman  !  this  is  the  day  of  hope  to  you. 
All  your  best  opportunities  are  still  before  you.  And  what  shall  I  say  to  the  older 
man,  who  is  further  on  in  his  course  and  is  still  without  God  in  the  world?  The 
best  end,  the  next  best,  and  the  next  are  gone,  and  nothing  but  the  dregs  of  oppor- 
tunity are  left.  And  still  Christ  calls  even  you.  There  is  a  place  still  left  for  you ; 
not  the  best  and  brightest,  but  a  humble  and  good  one.  {Ibid. )  Cyrus  directed, 
equipped,  and  prospered  by  God,  though  not  one  of  God's  enlightened  worshippers  : — 
Idolatry  in  its  grosser  forms  was  unknown  in  Persia.  The  religion  of  Persia  re- 
cognised one  God,  beneficent  in  character  and  work  and  purpose,  revealed  under 
the  symbol  of  light.  This  one  God,  however,  was  not  clothed  with  infinite  attributes. 
His  dominion  was  limited  by  the  existence  and  activity  of  a  rival  spirit  of  evil, 
equally  great  and  imbegotten  with  Himself.  It  was  in  this  imperfect  faith  that  the 
gieat  and  noble  Cyrus  was  trained.  Till  after  his  contact  with  the  Jews,  he  did 
not  know  God  in  His  essential  nature  as  spirit  without  symbol,  supreme  in  His 
sovereignty,  and  infinite  in  the  attributes  that  clothed  Him.  And  yet  in  his  temper 
there  was  a  ready  answerableness  to  the  unseen  touch  of  God's  hand,  an  unconscious 
obedience  to  sacred  purposes  he  but  dimly  discerned,  and  a  providential  sanctifica- 
tion  for  the  fulfilment  of  God's  counsels,  in  spite  of  his  imperfect  conceptions 
of  God.  {T.  0.  Selby.)  Irresponsible  ignorance: — Ignorance  that  is  inseparable 
from  the  circumstances  in  which  men  are  cradled,  ignorance  that  is  entirely  in- 
voluntary, does  not  disqualify  men  from  being  the  instruments  of  God's  will,  and 
receiving  some  of  the  most  lustrous  honours  dispensed  by  His  hand.  (Ibid.) 
The  worth  of  our  several  ministries  caimot  always  be  tested  by  the  degree  of  know- 
ledge that  informs  them.  Some  men,  like  the  bees,  do  much  of  their  work  in  the  sun- 
shine. They  fulfil  the  tasks  of  Ufe  in  the  light  of  a  clear  illumination.  For  them 
the  knowledge  of  God  always  precedes  a  vocation  from  God.  There  are  men  also 
who  are  like  the  coral  insect,  which  works  a  fathom  or  two  below  the  surface  of  the 
sea,  and  dies  when  the  reef  upon  which  it  has  laboured  is  just  beginning  to  tower 
into  the  sunlight.  {Ibid.)  The  characteristic  distinction  between  inspiration  and 
providential  equipment: — Providential  equipment  consists  in  being  girded  by  a 
God  who  may  be  more  or  less  unknown.  Inspiration  implies  that  God's  chosen 
agent  has  all  his  faculties  filled  with  God's  presence  as  He  girds.  (Ibid.)  The 
providence  of  the  unknown : — I.  Is  it  not  a  reasonable  and  a  consistent  thought, 
that  the  providential  equipment,  vocation,  and  sovereignty  in  a  man's  life  should 
transcend  his  knowledge  of  God  and  God's  purpose?  1.  God  may  sometimes  use 
a  man  who  seems  half  a  heathen,  to  remind  His  people  that  His  providential 
sovereignty  is  larger  than  all  finite  thought.  In  the  early  days  of  the  British  rule 
in  India,  the  old  Mogul  at  Delhi,  and  the  mediatised  native  sovereigns  in  other 
cities,  were  allowed  independent  rights  within  their  own  palace  precincts.  The 
British  rule  did  not  intrude  there.  Now  and  again  half-clad  slave  girls  and  palace 
dependents,  in  terror  for  their  lives,  and  wretches  waled  and  trembling  with  recent 
chastisements,  would  escape  the  palace  precincts  and  seek  protection  under  the 
humane  governments  that  had  been  planted  in  the  surrounding  cities.  These 
spacious  palaces  were  like  little  islands  of  the  old  despotisms,  cruelties,  and  oppres* 


CHAP.  XLV.]  ISAIAH.  43n 

eioDS  bristling  above  the  tide  of  constitutional  right  and  privilege  and  liberty  that 
was  rising  far  and  near.  In  God's  empire  there  are  no  spots  of  organised  diabolism 
of  that  sort,  that  are  separated  from  the  control,  direction,  and  over-rule  of  pro- 
vidential law.  Alas!  it  is  only  too  easy  to  find  signs  of  individual  and  collective 
resistance  to  God's  law  ;  but  there  are  no  indrawn  spheres  or  reservations,  dominated 
by  pagan  ignorance,  from  which  His  power,  sovereignty,  and  prerogative  are  shut 
out.  He  rules  where  He  is  not  worshipped,  directs  where  He  is  not  recognised, 
girds  where  He  is  not  known.  2.  In  going  beyond  the  circle  of  the  elect  nations 
to  choose  an  instrument  for  the  fulfilment  of  His  counsels,  God  seems  to  remind 
us  that  the  motive  of  His  providential  activity  is  altogether  Divine.  He  uses  the 
imperfectly  taught  Gentile,  and  puts  upon  him  honour  that  might  seem  to  belong 
to  the  Jew,  to  illustrate  the  sovereignty  of  His  grace.  3.  Partial  ignorance  of  God 
may  be  an  appointed  condition  for  the  test  and  development  of  faith.  It  is  not 
only  the  virtuous  heathen  who  is  girded  by  an  unrecognised  Hand  and  made  the 
agent  in  providential  plans  and  purposes  he  cannot  fathom.  The  distinction 
between  Isaiah  and  Cyrus,  between  Cyrus  and  ourselves,  is  one  of  degree.  On 
its  intellectual  side,  at  least,  our  rehgious  knowledge  is  still  imperfect,  fragmentary, 
hesitating.  God  suffers  it  to  be  so,  possibly  that  we  may  be  the  better  disciplined 
in  that  humihty  which  is  the  basis  of  faith.  I  have  sometimes  thought  that  so 
long  as  heathen  darkness  does  not  involve  a  gross  and  demoralising  misrepresenta- 
tion of  God,  but  only  a  partial  privation  of  knowledge,  it  offers  the  occasion  for  the 
exercise  of  a  higher  faith  than  that  which  is  possible  amidst  the  breaking  twilights 
of  Christian  knowledge.  The  devout  and  pure-minded  pagan,  like  Cyrus,  who 
trusts  his  moral  instincts  without  any  adequate  knowledge  of  their  Divine  origin, 
who  with  touching  fidelity  follows  an  unsyllabled  vocation  from  heavens  that 
have  not  yet  opened  themselves  in  revelation  and  definite  testimony,  who  accepts 
an  equipment  from  a  Hand  that  has  touched  and  guided  him  out  of  the  darkness, 
is  perhaps  a  more  splendid  example  of  faith  than  the  man  who  manifests  the  same 
trust  and  loyalty  and  obedience  in  the  midst  of  clearer  intellectual  conceptions 
of  God.  The  puzzle  of  the  long  pagan  centuries  is  not  so  painful  and  oppressive  if 
we  look  at  it  from  this  standpoint.  11.  Examples  of  this  peovidential  gibdino 
BY  AN  UNKNOWN  GoD  will  readily  occur  to  us  that  seem  to  conform  to  the  type 
represented  by  Cjnrus.  1.  If  we  think  of  the  men,  the  tradition  of  whose  teaching 
and  example  is  intertwined  with  all  that  is  highest  and  best  in  the  life  of  the  nations 
outside  the  range  of  Christendom,  we  shall  see  that  these  men  have  been  girded 
for  their  moral  conquests  and  guided  to  their  ascendencies  over  their  fellow-men 
by  the  same  imrecognised  Hand  that  guided  and  girded  this  elect  Persian.  It  is, 
perhaps,  impossible  to  recall  the  name  of  a  great  and  permanently  honoured 
teacher  in  the  past  history  of  India,  China,  Persia,  Egypt,  Greece  or  Rome,  whose 
influence  rested  upon  an  immoral  doctrine  or  a  contradiction  of  conscience.  There 
must  have  been  such  leaders  in  the  insignificant  races  that  relapsed  into  cannibalism, 
scalp-himting,  and  animal  debasement.  But  no  such  names  appear  in  the  histories 
of  the  great  civilised  empires.     2.  We  must  not  judge  the  issues  of  the  social  and 

f political  movements  of  the  present  and  past  times  by  the  measure  of  Divine  know- 
edge  they  exhibit.  Some  of  these  movements,  however  little  they  seem  to  re- 
cognise God,  are  empowered  by  His  mysterious  hand,  and  minister  to  the  accom- 
plishment of  His  secret  purpose.  The  dark  despotisms  enthroned  over  the  ancient 
world  annealed  men  into  stable  communities.  And  there  are  doubtless  providential 
issues  of  the  highest  value  in  the  democratic  movements  that  are  agitating  Europe 
to-day,  however  reluctant  those  movements  may  be  to  recognise  God.  3.  Does  not 
the  fact  that  the  theology  of  the  modern  scientist  is  sometimes  very  dim  and  defective 
tempt  us  to  deny  the  Divine  authority  of  his  vocation  and  to  discredit  the  pro- 
vidential issue  in  the  special  work  he  is  called  to  do  ?  Some  of  the  schools  of  research 
and  experiment  and  invention  to  which  we  are  most  deeply  indebted  are  indifferent 
and  even  hostile  to  the  claims  of  religion.  And  yet  God  calls  the  man  of  science 
to  his  work,  vouchsafes  the  needful  equipment  for  success,  and  guides  all  the  far- 
off  issues  to  which  that  work  may  tend.  4.  And  all  this  is  true  for  oxu'selves.  The 
knowledge  possessed  by  those  of  us  who  know  God  best  is,  after  all,  infinitesimal 
in  amount  and  degree.  It  is  nothing  in  comparison  with  what  remains  to  be  known. 
It  seems  we  can  scarcely  be  the  true  servants  of  God  and  doing  Divine  work  unless 
we  have  broader  and  brighter  and  more  penetrating  views  of  God's  nature.  We 
are  crushed  by  the  inevitable  secularisms  of  our  life,  and  cannot  beUeve  that  we 
are  breathing  the  sacred  atmosphere  that  encodes  God's  priests  and  kings.  It 
seems,  at  times,  as  though  God,  and  providence,  and  supernatural  vocation,  and 
the  high  sanctions  under  which  we  seek  to  bring  ourselves,  were  dreams.    We 


438  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xlv. 

are  haunted  by  the  thought  that  there  is  some  subtle  curse  of  ineradicable  atheism 
cleaving  to  our  inmost  souls.  In  spite  of  the  limit  in  our  yision  and  the  miserable 
failure  in  the  spirit  of  our  service.  He  is  guiding  us  to  beneficent  conquests,  and 
strengthening  us  to  achieve  holy  emancipations,  and  fitting  us  for  eternal  honours. 
He  was  making  us  ready  for  service  of  some  sort,  when  we  knew  far  less  about  Him 
than  we  know  to-day.  And  it  is  so  still.  And  even  after  God  seems  to  have  been 
revealed  to  us  in  the  person  of  Jesus  Christ,  how  often  do  we  find  God  becoming  a 
hidden  and  an  miknown  God  to  us  in  His  providential  relations !  At  times  it  may 
seem  rather  as  though  some  malignant  demon  were  presiding  over  our  lives,  or  at 
least  sharing  the  sovereignty.  But  beyond  the  widest  boimd  of  our  faith  and 
knowledge  there  is  providential  guiding  and  girding  and  victory.  And  these  words 
seem  to  suggest  solemn  comfort  to  us  in  view  of  the  final  conflict  to  which  we  shall 
all  one  day  be  brought.  We  shall  enter  the  world  to  come  as  conquerors  girded  for 
our  triumph  by  an  unseen  Hand.  God's  elect  servants  sometimes  die  in  circum- 
stances that  make  thoughts  of  God  impossible.  Perhaps  they  are  snatched  away 
by  imexpected  accident.  They  leave  life  in  a  struggle  that  petrifies  thought  and 
feeling.  In  that  solemn  hour  of  darkness  and  humiliation  and  mental  inaptitude, 
God,  miknown  and  unrecognised,  girds  for  the  victory  still.  Let  us  not  forget 
that,  though  the  girding  is  often  in  darkness,  the  motive  of  this  girding  in  shadows 
is  the  inbringing  of  the  perfect  life.  {Ibid.)  The  light  of  God's  love  seen  in  pagan 
darkness  : — It  is  when  the  sun  is  in  ecUpse  that  the  astronomer  is  able  to  see  the 
foimtains  of  glowing  hydrogen  that  rise  out  of  the  inner  substance  of  the  sun  and 
project  their  splendour  for  thousands  and  tens  of  thousands  of  miles  beyond  its 
BTu-face.  The  strange  and  superb  spectacle  is  visible  only  on  the  margin  that  lies 
between  the  incandescent  body  and  the  sphere  of  less  luminous  space  that  surroimds 
it.  And  so  there  are  sublime  illustrations  of  God's  providential  love  and  care  that 
can  be  most  nobly  seen  in  contrast  with  pagan  darkness.  (Ibid.)  Pagan 
teachers  enlightened  by  God: — Confucius  was  the  instrument  for  keeping  alive  in 
China  a  morality  that  was  almost  as  pure  as  the  morality  of  the  decalogue.  He 
stamped  out  aU  traces  of  Moloch  worship.  He  can  be  quoted  with  commanding 
effect  against  many  of  the  cruelties  and  superstitions  of  the  present  day.  Gautama 
Buddha  taught  a  morality  equally  pure,  and  so  emphasised  the  demerit  of  sin 
as  to  make  his  teaching  the  best  available  basis  that  can  be  foimd  for  the  evangelical 
doctrine  of  the  atonement.  The  weU-considered  and  dispassionate  and  reverent 
scepticism  of  Socrates  acted  as  a  solvent  of  Greek  superstition,  and  prepared  the 
way  for  the  thoughtful  Christianity  of  Alexandria.  Mohammed  gave  form  and 
force  to  a  system  which,  in  spite  of  its  excesses  and  fanaticisms,  has  been  a  useful 
protest  against  idolatry,  and  has  gathered  together  into  a  simple  civilisation  and 
worship  tribes  that  would  otherwise  have  been  incurably  degraded  by  fetich 
worship.  Now,  are  we  to  suppose  that  it  was  without  any  supreme  direction  or 
control  that  these  famous  teachers  conspired  together  to  support  these  high  theories 
of  life  and  conduct?  They  were  not  prophets,  because  they  had  not  the  hght 
which  brought  into  view  the  mysterious  Person  who  guided,  equipped,  and  succoured 
them.  But  they  were  providential  iustruments,  instruments  that  in  spite  of  their 
defective  discernments  were  plastic  to  God's  controlling  purpose.  {Ibid. )  God's 
beneficent  agency  in  the  lives  of  those  who  ignore  Him  : — "  Man  cannot  exclude  Me  from 
his  little  universe;  even  though  he  deny  My  existence  and  denounce  My  claim — 
I  am  still  there.  I  water  the  garden  of  the  atheist,  and  bring  his  flowers  to  summer 
bloom  and  his  fruits  to  autumnal  glory.  Men  deny  Me,  curse  Me,  flee  from  Me — 
I  am  still  round  about  them,  and  their  Ufe  is  more  precious  to  Me  than  is  their 
blasphemy  detestable,  and  until  the  very  last  I  will  work  for  them  and  with  them, 
and  if  they  go  to  perdition  it  shall  be  through  the  very  centre  of  My  heart's  tenderest 
grace."  "  I  girded  thee,  though  thou  hast  not  known  Me."  (J.  Parker,  D.D.) 
A  God-girded  life  : — Who  is  that  boy  sitting  on  the  steps  there  ?  He  has  a  hat 
on  that  was  made  for  any  head  but  his  own;  and  his  coat,  who  made  it?  His 
mother,  very  likely — rough  spun,  not  too  well  fitting.  What  is  he  waiting  for?  To 
get  the  job  of  sweeping  the  steps  he  sits  on?  Perha])s.  Years  pass  by,  and  a 
portly  man  comes  down  those  steps.  Broad  his  face,  a  great  round  shining  blessing, 
kindness  in  his  eye,  power  in  the  uplifting  of  his  hand.  Who  is  he?  That  is  the 
^oy,  grown  now  fully,  physically,  intellectually  and  socially.  The  boy  and  the 
man  are  both  Horace  Greeley,  an  editorial  prince,  a  man  whose  writings  no  one 
among  his  countrymen  can  afford  to  decline  to  read.  "  I  girded  thee,  I  brought 
thee  to  those  steps,  I  set  thee  down  upon  them,  I  appointed  an  angel  to  watch 
thee  all  the  time:  it  was  My  way  of  nursing  and  caring  for  thee,  and  training 
thee."     He  bringeth  the  blind  by  a  way  that  they  know  not.     (Ibid.)        God  in 


CHAP.  XLV.]  ISAIAH.  439 

national  life: — Nations  are  not  cards,  with  which  politicians  play  at  gambling: 
they  may  think  they  do,  they  may  seem  to  do  so,  but  the  Lord  reigneth.  {Ibid.) 
The  unknown  influence  of  Ood  /^Cyrus  is  now  proved  to  have  been  a  polytbeist.  Yet 
even  he  was  girded  by  the  unknown  God  of  heaven  and  earth.  Let  us  consider 
this  unknown  influence  of  God.  I.  It  springs  from  the  almiohty  power  of 
God.  God  is  not  merely  a  passive  object  of  worship.  He  exerts  active  influence. 
He  did  not  only  work  in  the  past  in  creating  the  world.  He  is  a  living,  active  God 
now.  Jesus  said,  "  My  Father  worketh  hitherto."  Perhaps  the  poorest  definition 
of  God  ever  framed  is  that  of  "  A  power,  not  ourselves,  that  makes  for  righteousness." 
Still,  even  this  meagre  description  of  Divinity  recognises  the  fact  of  an  active  Divine 
influence.  God's  power  is  not  limited  by  our  confession  of  it,  nor  by  our  willingness 
to  submit  to  it.  It  inspired  the  eye  of  the  Greek  artist  and  the  tongue  of  the  Greek 
orator  as  truly  as  those  of  a  Christian  Chrysostom  and  Fra  Angehco.  II.  It  is 
DIRECTED  BY  THE  INFIKITE  GOODNESS  OF  GoD.  We  cixcumscribe  this  goodness 
to  a  pale  of  grace  and  a  day  of  grace ;  but  it  overflows  our  boundaries  and  breaks 
out,  free  as  the  air  and  broad  as  the  sunlight.  God  does  not  wait  to  be  called. 
He  is  the  first  to  awaken  His  slumbering  children.  God  thinks  of  the  Ijeathen, 
and  gives  strength  to  those  who  know  Him  not.  Then  no  doubt  if  a  Chinese 
Mandarin  pronoimces  a  just  sentence,  or  a  Hindu  Pundit  utters  a  true  thought, 
or  an  African  chief  vindicates  the  rights  of  an  oppressed  tribe,  the  goodness  of 
these  heathen  men  is  an  outcome  of  God's  goodness  to  them.  Let  us  take  heart: 
there  is  more  grace  in  the  world  than  we  know  of.  HI.  It  aims  at  the  execution 
op  the  WILL  OF  God.  Cyrus  is  called  God's  shepherd  (chap.  xliv.  28).  So  even 
Nebuchadnezzar,  a  man  of  a  very|different  character,  is  called  by  God  "  My  servant  " 
(Jer.  xhii.  10).  1.  Some  serve  God  when  they  think  to  oppose  Him.  As  the  gale  that 
seems  to  be  tearing  the  ship  to  pieces  may  be  driving  her  the  faster  to  her  haven, 
so  Satan,  in  Job,  aiming  at  opposition  to  the  right,  occasioned  the  most  glorious 
vindication  of  it.  Persecutors  often  help  the  cause  they  hate.  2.  Many,  like 
Cyrus,  serve  God  unconsciously.  As  the  corn  ministers  to  our  sustenance  un- 
wittingly, and  as  science  reveals  the  glory  of  God,  even  when  the  naturalists  who 
pursue  it  are  agnostics.  Lessons — (1)  The  unknown  influence  of  God  should 
lead  to  our  knowing  God.  We  have  not  to  search  the  heavens  for  the  unseen  God. 
He  is  nigh  us.  Oiu"  own  experience  and  the  blessings  of  our  own  life  should  open 
our  eyes  to  the  goodness  of  God.  (2)  This  influence,  once  recognised,  shoiJd 
lead  us  to  trust  God.  If  God  girded  Cyrus  the  heathen,  will  He  not  gird  Israel 
His  people?  (3)  This  influence  should  warn  us  against  neglecting  the  recognition 
of  God.  We  cannot  escape  from  God.  To  do  so  would  be  our  own  undoing.  But 
the  hand  which  girds  can  ungird !  (4)  This  influence  should  prompt  us  to  greater 
zeal  in  mission  work.  For  God  claims  the  heathen  by  His  present  influence  on 
them.  He  has  begun  the  work  and  wiU  help  His  servants  in  it.  It  is  sad  that 
millions  should  be  left  in  ignorance  of  the  hand  that  girds  them.  (W.  F.  Adeney, 
M.A.) 

Vers.  6-13.  1  am  the  Lord,  and  there  Is  none  else. — The  beneficent  sovereignty 
of  Ood  : — The  key-thought  to  all  the  intricacies  of  the  whole  of  this  passage  is  that 
God  is  the  absolute  Author  of  all  that  exists  and  the  infinite  Supreme  Ruler  of  all 
events;  and  the  implied,  though  not  expressed  inference  from  this  claim  is,  that 
He  is  to  be  absolutely  trusted  in  the  matter  and  manner  of  Israel's  redemption 
from  Babylon.  In  the  7th  verse,  the  attitude  which  the  prophet  makes  the 
Almighty  assume  is  most  absolute.  Why  summon  Cyrus,  a  heathen  prince? 
Why  not  one  of  their  own  nation,  a  prince  of  their  own  people  ?  The  answer  to 
this  implied  objection  is  contained  in  verses  9,  10,  11.  "Woe  unto  him  that 
Btriveth  with  his  Maker,"  &c.  Will  Israel  be  more  wise  than  God  who  made  him 
and  the  world  and  rules  them  in  His  own  manner?  The  question  in  the  11th 
verse  means,  "  Will  ye  take  the  disposition  of  things  out  of  My  hands,  and  direct 
Me  how  I  am  to  deal  with  My  own  chosen  people?  "  The  12th  and  13th  verses 
are  intended  to  calm  the  anxieties  of  the  exiles  in  reference  to  Cyrus.  He  who 
created  all  things  had  also  raised  up  Cyrus,  whose  victorious  career  had  awakened 
the  fears  of  the  exiles;  but  Jehovah  had  in  righteousness  summoned  him  to  the 
work,  and  this  was  to  be  the  guarantee  that  Cyrus  would  build  up  Jerusalem  again, 
and  set  the  captives  free,  and  that  without  redemption  of  money.  This  whole 
passage  may  have  its  drift  and  meaning  summed  up  in  a  single  sentence.  It  is  an 
appeal  of  God  to  His  people  to  leave  the  whole  management  of  their  redemption 
in  His  hands,  and  to  let  His  power,  wisdom,  and  righteousness  reassure  their  minds 
under  any  difScnlties  or  fears  that  may  trouble  them.    (C.  Short,  M,A,) 


440  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xlv. 

Ver.  7.  I  form  the  light,  and  create  darkness. — Evil  in  the  Old  Testament : — 
There  is  no  thought  in  the  Old  Testament  of  reducing  all  evil,  moral  and  physical, 
to  a  single  principle.  Moral  evil  proceeds  from  the  will  of  man,  physical  evil  from 
the  will  of  God,  who  sends  it  as  the  punishment  of  sin.  The  expression  "  create 
evil  "  implies  nothing  more  than  that.  {Prof.  J.  Skinner,  D.D. )  Evil  and  God  : — 
Certainly  evil  as  an  act  is  not  God's  immediate  work,  but  the  possibility  of 
evil  is,  its  self-punishment,  and  therefore  the  sense  of  guilt  and  the  evil  of  punish- 
ment in  the  broadest  sense.  {F.  Delitzsch,  D.D.)  God's  relation  to  evil: — 
Soften  it  down  as  we  will,  it  is  a  tremendous  claim,  a  claim  which  plunges  our 
thoughts  into  impenetrable  mysteries,  and  suggests  problems  we  cannot  solve. 
And  yet,  it  must  also  be  admitted,  that  it  meets  and  satisfies  the  cravings  both  of 
intellect  and  heart  as  no  easier,  no  dualistic,  theory  does  or  can  do.  The  universe 
is  so  obviously  one  that  the  intellect  demands  imity,  and  will  be  satisfied  with 
nothing  short  of  one  Sovereign  Lord,  one  Supreme  Governor  of  the  universe. 
And  how  can  our  hearts  be  at  rest  until  we  know  and  are  sure  that  God  rules  over 
the  kingdom  of  darkness  as  well  as  in  the  kingdom  of  light ;  that  the  evils  which 
befall  us  are  under  His  control  no  less  than  the  blessings  which  enrich  and  gladden 
us;  that  wherever  we  wander,  and  through  whatever  sorrowful  changes  we  pass, 
we  are  never  for  a  single  moment  out  of  His  hand  ?  These  mysteries  will  never 
become  credible  to  us  except  as  the  mysteries  of  Energy,  Life,  Thought  become 
credible  to  us,  by  patient  and  steadfast  mental  toil.  On  these  terms,  though  on  no 
other,  the  mystery  here  announced  by  Isaiah — that  darkness  as  well  as  light,  evil 
as  well  as  good,  are  under  the  control  of  God,  and  must  therefore  be  consistent 
both  with  His  power  and  His  goodness — will,  I  believe,  become  credible  to  us. 
And  in  considering  this  question  it  will  be  well  for  us  to  determine,  first  of  all, 
what,  and  how  much,  of  the  evil  that  exists  we  ourselves  can  honestly  attribute 
immediately  to  God  our  Maker.  1.  For,  obviously,  much  of  the  evil  within  and 
around  us  is  of  our  own  making.  2.  Much  has  also  been  of  our  neighbours'  making. 
We  inherited,  with  much  that  was  good,  some  evil  bias  from  our  fathers.  We  have 
often  had  to  breathe  an  atmosphere  charged  with  moral  infections  which  sprang  from 
the  corrupt  habits  of  the  world  around  us.  Our  education  was  not  good,  or  was  not 
whoUy  good  and  wise.  We  have  had  to  live  and  trade,  to  work  and  play,  with  men 
whose  influence  on  us,  if  often  beneficial,  has  also  been  often  injurious.  The 
laws,  maxims,  customs  of  the  little  world  in  which  we  have  moved  have  done 
much  to  blunt  and  lower  our  moral  tone,  to  encourage  us  in  self-seeking  or  self- 
indulgence,  to  countenance  us  in  yielding  to  our  baser  passions  and  desires.  As 
we  look  back  and  think  of  all  that  we  have  lost  and  suffered,  it  is  probable  that 
we  attribute  far  more  of  the  evils  which  have  fallen  on  us  to  men  than  to  God. 
3.  Much  that  seems  evil  to  us  is  not  really  evil,  or  is  not  necessarily  evil,  or  is  not 
altogether  evil.  Cyrus  and  his  Persians  had  such  evils  as  noxious  plants  and 
animals,  excessive  heat  and  cold,  famine,  drought,  earthquake,  storms,  disease, 
and  sudden  death  in  their  minds  mainly  when  they  spoke  of  the  works  of  Ahriman, 
the  eternal  and  malignant  antagonist  of  God.  But,  as  we  know,  these  apparent 
ills  are  not  necessarily  ills  at  all,  or  they  are  the  products  of  causes  which  work  for 
good  on  the  whole,  or  they  carry  with  them  compensations  so  large  that  the  world 
would  be  the  poorer  for  their  loss.  To  take  but  a  few  illustrations.  The  storms, 
that  wreck  a  few  ships  and  destroy  a  few  lives,  clear  and  revivify  the  air  of  a  whole 
continent,  and  carry  now  health  to  the  millions  in  populous  cities  pent.  The 
constant  struggle  for  existence  among  plants  and  animals  is  a  necessary  condition 
of  the  evolution  of  their  higher  and  more  perfect  species.  To  variations  of  heat 
and  cold,  and  even  to  excessive  variations,  we  owe  the  immense  variety  of  the 
climates  and  conditions  under  which  we  Uve;  and  to  these  variations  of  climate 
the  immense  variety  and  abundance  of  the  harvests  by  which  the  world  is  fed. 
Is  adversity  an  evil?  It  is  to  the  struggle  with  adversity  that  we  owe  many 
of  our  highest  virtues.  And  as  we  are  driven  to  toil  by  the  sting  of  want,  and  trained 
to  courage  by  the  assaults  of  adversity,  so  also  we  are  moved  to  thought  by  the 
perplexities  of  life,  and  to  trust  and  patience  by  its  sorrows  and  losses  and  cares. 
We  should  not  realise  how  much  of  good  there  is  in  our  lives  if  the  current  of  our 
days  were  never  vexed  by  ill  winds.  (5.  Cox,  D.D.)  Evil:  its  origin,  function, 
and  end : — There  is  a  hypothesis,  a  theory  of  the  origin,  and  function,  and  end  of 
evil  suggested  by  Scripture  which  seems  an  eminently  reasonable  one;  a  theory 
which  confirms  the  claim  of  God  to  be  the  Creator  and  Lord  of  evil,  and  disposes  of 
that  dualistic  hypothesis  which  recognises  two  rival  and  opposed  Powers  at  work 
in  the  world  around  us  and  in  the  mind  of  man.  I.  When  we  contemplate  the 
universe  of  which  we  form  part,  the  first  impression  made  on  as  is  of  its  immense 


CHAP.  XLV.]  ISAIAH.  441 

variety;  but,  as  we  continue  to  study  it,  the  final  and  deepest  impression  it  makes 
upon  us  is  that,  under  this  immense   and  beautiful  variety,  there  lies  an  all- 
pervading  unity.    As  it  is  with  us,  so  it  has  been  mth  the  race  at  large.    At  first  men 
were  so  profoundly  impressed  by  the  variety  of  the  universe  that  they  split  it  up 
into  endless  provinces,  assigned  to  each  its  ruling  spirit,  and  worshipped  gods  of 
heaven  and  of  earth,  gods  of  motmtains  and  plains,  of  sea  and  land,  of  air  and  water, 
of  rivers  and  springs,  of  fields  and  woods,  trees  and  flowers,  of  hearth  and  home, 
of  the  individual,  the  clan,  the  nation,  the  empire.     Yet  even  then  there  hung  in 
the  dark  background  of  their  thoughts  some  conviction  of  the  underlying  unity 
of  the  universe,  as  was  proved  by  their  conception  of  an  inscrutable  Destiny  or  Fate, 
to  which  gods  and  men  were  alike  subject,  and  by  which  aU  the  ages  of  time  were 
controlled.     This  conviction  grew  and  deepened   as  the  world  went  spinning 
down  the  grooves  of  change,  imtil  now  Science  herself  admits  that,  by  a  thousand 
different  paths  of  investigation  and  thought,  it  is  led  to  the  conclusion  that,  if 
there  be  a  God  at  all,  there  can  be  but  one  God;  that,  if  the  universe  had  a  Maker, 
it  could  have  had  but  one  Maker;  that  if  human  life  is  under  rule,  there  can  be 
but  one  ruler  over  aU.     There  may  be  one  God, — that  to  Science  is  still  an  open 
question ;  but  there  cannot  be  more  than  one, — that  question  is  closed,  and  Science 
herself  stands  to  guard  the  way  to  it  as  with  a  sword  in  her  hand.     But  if  there 
be  only  one  Supreme  Lord,  there  cannot,  of  course,  be  any  rival  Power  to  His, 
any  Power  that  introduces  alien  forces  or  works  by  other  laws.     There  may  be 
Bubordinate  powers;  and  at  times  these  may  seem  to  oppose  Him,  to  contend 
against  Him.     But  one  Power  or  Will  is  supreme;  for,  as  the  very  word  itself 
suggests,  the  universe  is  an  Tinity, — a  vast  complex  of  many  forces  perhaps  and 
many  laws,  but  still  a  single  and  organised  whole.     In  reverting  to  the  Persian 
hypothesis  of  two  antagonistic  Powers,  therefore.  Mill  siimed  against  the  most 
settled  conclusion  of  modern  thought.     Now,  if  we  either  believe  in  one  supreme 
Creator  and  Lord,  or,  following  Mill's  advice,  lean  to  that  conclusion  as  hard  as  we 
can,  our  next  step  is  to  conceive,  as  best  we  may,  what  this  great  first  Cause,  this 
creative  and  ruling  Power,  is  like.     Accordingly,  we  look  around  us  to  find  that 
which  is  highest  in  the  universe,  sure  that  in  that  which  is  highest  we  shall  find 
that  which  most  resembles  the  Most  High.     And  in  the  whole  visible  creation  we 
find  nothing  so  high  as  man,  no  force  of  so  Divine  a  quality  and  temper  as  the 
will  of  man,  when  once  that  will  is  guided  by  wisdom  and  impelled  by  love. 
To  him  alone  of  aU  visible  creatiures  is  the  strange  power  accorded  of  consciously 
and  intentionally  arresting  or  modifying  the  action  of  the  great  physical  forces, 
of  conquering  Nature  by  obeying  her,  of  changing  her  course  by  a  skilful  applica- 
tion of  her  own  laws.     So  that,  even  though  the  Bible  did  not  assure  us  that  man 
was  made  in  the  image  of  God,  reason  would  compel  us  to  conclude  that,  since  the 
Creator  of  all  things  must  include  in  Himself  all  the  forces  displayed  in  the  work  of 
His  hands,  and  since  we  must  see  most  of  Him  in  the  highest  of  His  works,  we  must 
Bee  most  of  Him  in  man,  and  in  that  which  is  highest  in  man, — namely,  thought, 
will,  affection.     Reason  has  reached  this  conclusion  in  that  ancient  oracle :  "  Would 
you  know  God?     Look  within."     2.  Now  we  are  prepared  to  take  our  next  step, 
and  ask:    How  evil  came  to  be?  and  how,  if  God  is  responsible  for  it,  we  can 
reconcile  it  both  with  His  perfect  goodness  and  His  perfect  power?     (1)  For  the 
origin  of  evil  we  must  go  back  to  the  creation  of  aU  things,  and  be  content  to  use 
words  which,  though  quite  inadequate  to  the  subject,  may  nevertheless  convey 
true  impressions  of  it.     If  the  conception  of  God  we  have  just  framed  be  a  true 
one,  then  there  must  have  been  a  time  when  the  Great  Creative  Spirit  dwelt  alone. 
And  in  that  Divine  solitude  the  question  arose  whether  a  creation,  an  universe, 
should  be  called  into  being,  and  of  what  kind  it  should  be.     Or,  perhaps,  we  may 
rather  say,  that,  just  as  the  intelligent  and  creative  spirit  of  man  must  work  and 
act,  so  the  creative  Spirit  of  God  m-ged  Him  to  commence  "  the  works  of  His 
hands."     However  we  may  conceive  or  phrase  it,  let  us  suppose  the  physical 
universe  determined  upon  as  the  stage  on  which  active  intelligences  were  to  play 
their  part;  and  then  ask  yourselves  what  is  implied  in  the  very  nature  of  active 
intelligent  creatures  such  as  we  are,  and  whether  anything  less  than  such  creatures 
could  satisfy  the  Maker  and  Lord  of  all.     Would  you  have  God  surround  Himself 
with  a  merely  inanimate  world,  or  tenant  that  world  with  mere  automata,  mere 
puppets,  with  no  will  of  their  own,  capable,  indeed,  of  reflecting  His  own  glory 
back  on  Him,  but  incapable  of  a  voluntary  affection,  a  spontaneous  and  unforced 
obedience?     Why,  even  you  yourselves  cannot  gain  full  scope  for  your  powers  until 
you  are  surrounded,  or  surround  yourselves,  with  beings  capable  of  loving  you 
ireely,  and  obeying  you  with  a  cheerful  and  imforced  accord,  beings  whose  wills 


442  TEE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  ilv. 

are  their  own  and  who  yet  make  them  yours.  How  much  less,  then,  can  yon 
imagine  that  God  should  be  content  with  a  purely  mechanical  obedience,  with 
anything  short  of  a  voluntary  obedience  and  affection?  But  if  you  admit  so  much 
as  this,  consider,  next,  what  is  implied  in  the  very  nature  oi  creatures  such  as 
these.  If  free  to  think  truly,  must  they  not  be  free  to  think  untruly  ?  if  free  to 
love,  must  they  not  be  free  not  to  love?  if  free  to  obey,  must  they  not  be  free  to 
disobey  ?  The  very  creation  of  beings  in  themselves  good  involves  the  tremendous 
risk  of  their  becoming  evil.  Nay,  if  we  consider  the  matter  a  little  more  closely 
we  shall  find  that  thera  was  more  to  be  confronted  than  the  mere  risk  of  the  intro- 
duction of  evil.  To  me  it  seems  a  dead  certainty,  a  certainty  which  must  have 
been  foreseen  and  provided  for  in  the  eternal  counsels  of  the  Almighty,  that  in  the 
lapse  of  ages,  with  a  vast  hierarchy  of  creatures  possessed  of  freewill,  some  among 
them  would  assert  and  prove  their  freedom  by  disobedience.  How  else  could 
man,  for  instance,  assure  himself  that  he  was  free,  that  his  will  was  in  very  deed 
his  own?  Are  we  not  impatient  of  any  law  even  by  which  we  are  bound,  or  suspect 
that  we  are  bound,  however  good  the  law  may  be  in  itself?  Free  creatures,  again, 
creatures  with  intelligence,  will,  passion,  are  active  creatures:  and  there  is  some- 
thing, as  all  observers  are  agreed,  in  the  very  nature  of  activity  which  blunts  and 
weakens  our  sense  of  inferiority,  dependence,  accountability.  The  Bible  afl&rms 
that  what  reason  might  have  anticipated  actually  took  place.  It  tells  us  that  both 
in  heaven  and  on  earth  the  creatures  God  had  made  did  thus  fall  away  from  Him, 
doing  their  own  will  instead  of  His,  taking  their  own  course  instead  of  the  course 
marked  out  and  hedged  in  for  them  by  His  pure  and  kindly  laws.  And  it  moreover 
asserts,  in  full  accordance  with  the  teachings  of  philosophy  and  science,  that,  by 
their  disobedience  to  the  laws  of  their  being  and  happiness,  they  jarred  themselves 
into  a  false  and  sinister  relation  to  the  material  universe;  that,  by  introducing 
moral  evil  into  the  creation,  they  exposed  themselves  to  those  physical  ills  from 
which  we  suffer  to  this  day.  It  must  be  obvious  to  every  reflective  mind  that  if  the 
whole  physical  universe  was  created  by  the  Word  of  God,  if  it  is  animated  by  His 
Spirit  and  ruled  by  His  will,  then  as  many  as  disobey  that  high  will  must  put 
themselves  out  of  harmony  with  all  that  obey  it,  must  find  the  very  forces  which 
once  worked  for  them  turned  against  them.  They  are  at  war  with  the  will  which 
pervades  and  controls  the  universe:  how,  then,  can  the  universe  be  at  peace  with 
them?  If,  then,  we  now  repeat  the  question  :  In  what  sense  may  we  reverently 
attribute  evil  to  God?  in  what  sense  can  we  concede  His  claim  to  be  responsible 
for  evil  as  well  as  for  good?  our  reply  must  be  that,  in  creating  beings  capable 
of  loving  and  serving  Him  of  their  own  choice.  He  created  the  possibility  of  evil, 
ran  the  risk  of  its  existence,  and  even  knew  beforehand  that  it  wovdd  certainly 
enter  in  and  mar  the  work  of  His  hands.  (2)  How,  then,  can  we  justify  evil? 
how  can  we  reconcile  it  at  once  with  His  perfect  goodness  and  unbounded  power? 
On  our  hypothesis  we  reconcile  it  with  His  power  by  the  plain  and  obvious  argu- 
ment that  even  Omnipotence  cannot  at  once  create  freewill  and  not  create  it; 
that,  when  once  He  has  created  it,  even  the  Almighty  cannot  interfere  with  it 
without  destroying  it.  But  if  we  would  reconcile  the  existence  of  evil  with  the 
goodness  of  God — and  this  is  by  far  the  more  difficult  achievement — we  must 
take  the  whole  theory  of  human  life  and  destiny  taught  by  the  Bible,  and  not 
merely  a  part  of  it.  As  I  read  it,  then,  the  Bible  teaches  what  human  reason  had 
conjectured  and  hoped  apart  from  the  Bible, — that  the  lines  of  human  life  and 
destiny  are  to  be  produced  beyond  the  grave,  and  wrought  out  to  their  final  result 
in  other  worlds  than  this.  {Ibid.)  God's  love  in  relation  to  evil : — The  Bible  goes 
on  to  teach  us  that,  in  His  pity,  the  great  Father  of  our  spirits  came  down  to  us  His 
sinful  children,  virtually  saying  to  us  :  "I  might  much  more  reasonably  attribute 
the  evils  from  which  you  suffer  to  you  than  you  to  Me;  for  you  owe  them  to  your 
disobedience  and  self-will.  But,  see,  I  freely  take  them  all  on  Myself.  I  claim 
to  be  responsible  for  them  all.  And  since  you  cannot  drive  it  away,  I  take  away 
the  sin  of  the  world  by  a  sacrifice  so  great  and  so  far-reaching,  by  an  atonement 
Bo  potent,  so  Divine,  that  you  can  but  apprehend  it  afar  off,  and  must  not  hope 
to  fathom  its  full  virtue  and  extent.  To  brace  you  for  your  daily  strife  with  evil, 
I  foretell  a  final  and  complete  victory  over  it;  I  promise  you  that  in  the  end  I  will 
sweep  the  evil  that  harasses  and  afficts  you  clean  out  of  the  universe  it  has  marred 
and  defiled.  And,  meantime,  it  shall  have  no  power  to  hurt  or  harm  you  if  you 
will  but  put  your  trust  in  Me.  All  that  is  painful  in  it,  all  the  sting  of  it,  I  take  on 
Myself.  For  you,  if  you  will  but  meet  it  wisely  and  trustfully,  it  shall  be  nothing 
but  a  helpful  discipline,  a  training  in  vigour,  in  holiness,  in  charity."  (Ibid.) 
Pain  and  death  co-oxtttent  with  animd  lift : — There  is  the  strongest  indireot  evideno0» 


CHAP.  XLV.]  ISAIAH,  443 

and  not  a  little  direct,  that  predacious  animals  have  existed  from  a  very  early 
period  in  the  world's  history.  The  struggle  for  existence  and  the  survival  of  the 
fittest  mean  the  suffering  and  the  extinction  of  the  weaker.  Read  the  great  stone 
book  of  nature,  that  truth  is  sculptured  deep  in  its  pages  in  no  illegible  hieroglyphics. 
Pain  and  death,  then,  if  evils,  must  have  been  present  in  the  world  from  the  date 
when  organic  life,  or  at  any  rate  animal  life,  began.  The  inorganic  world  being 
as  it  is,  pain  seems  to  be  correlative  with  sensation,  and  death  is  but  the  end  of  each 
individual  paragraph  in  the  history;  and  if  this  came  by  either  injury  or  violence, 
we  cannot  believe  it  at  any  rate  to  have  been  altogether  painless.  Nay,  we  may  go 
further,  and  assert  that  unless  we  suppose  the  laws  of  Nature  to  have  been  whoUy 
different  from  those  which  now  prevail,  we  cannot  understand  how  organised 
beings  could  live  without  at  any  rate  occasional  sensations  of  discomfort;  they  must 
have  felt  extremes  of  heat  and  cold;  they  must  have  known  hunger  and  thirst; 
and  what  are  these  but  minor  degrees  of  pain?  Perfection  through  suffering  is 
a  more  general  law  of  nature  than  we  commonly  think.  At  the  same  time,  I  fully 
believe  that  to  the  majority  of  living  creatures  life  brings  far  more  pleasiu-e  than 
pain;  indeed,  I  think  there  is  much  reason  to  suppose  that  the  acuteness  with 
which  the  latter  is  felt,  and  the  diu-ation  of  its  memory,  is  proportional  to  its 
possible  disciplinary  effect.  {T.  0.  Bonney,  D.Sc,  LL.D.)  Evil : — A  vast 
moral  gulf  is  fixed  between  what  are  popularly  held  to  be  evils,  things  which  have 
no  deleterious  effect  on  the  spirit  life,  and  those  which  are  called  evils  in  revelation; 
the  things  which  are  fatal  ultimately  to  the  spirit  life.  {Ibid. )  The  real  evils  : — 
The  sins  and  wickedness  of  the  world  are  the  real  evils,  and  it  is  to  these  that  the 
works  of  the  spirit  are  opposed-  But  these — sensuality,  lust,  selfishness,  cruelty, 
injustice,  oppression — whence  are  they?  what  are  they?  St.  Paul  calls  these 
the  works  of  the  flesh,  and  the  more  we  ponder  his  words  the  more  far-reaching 
we  shall  usually  find  them.  When  we  investigate  these  evils,  we  can  trace  them 
back  till  we  find  they  originate  in  yielding  to  promptings  of  the  nature  which  we 
have  in  common  with  the  animal  kingdom.  A  member  of  this  does  what  the 
organism  of  sensation  demands,  and  we  do  not  designate  the  action  as  evil  unless, 
either  in  earnest  or  in  figurative  speech,  we  attribute  to  the  creature  some  kind  of 
moral  consciousness,  to  which  the  action  is  repugnant.  The  law  of  the  animal 
would  appear  to  be  "  gratify  the  various  desires  of  the  body."  The  only  limitation 
is  "  abstain  from  excess,"  which  seems  more  easily  observed  in  its  case  perhaps 
because  there  is  so  little  opportunity  of  revolt  against  laws  of  a  straiter  character. 
Man,  as  sharing  the  animal  nature,  is  liable  to  a  greater  or  less  degree  to  each 
animal  impulse,  but  as  possessing  another  and  a  higher  nature  he  is  called  upon  to 
control  these  impulses,  and  if  he  do  not  obey  this  call,  if  he  prefer  to  follow  the 
lower  nature,  he  fails  to  accomplish  the  purpose  and  attain  the  goal  set  before 
him,  and  thus  his  deeds  are  evil,  his  life  is  sinful.  {Ibid.)  Evil  in  relation  to 
good  : — In  an  order  of  things  where  choice  exists  and  where  there  is  a  scheme  of 
progress,  evil  is  as  inevitable  an  antithesis  to  good  as  a  shadow  is  to  light,  because 
each  time  that  the  person  either  remains  inactive  where  he  should  have  obeyed 
the  call  of  the  higher  law,  or  where,  if  two  definite  impulses  are  in  conflict,  he 
follows  the  lower,  he  does  an  evil  act.  Evil,  then,  in  the  present  state  of  things 
is  as  necessary  a  correlative  to  good  as  decay  is  to  growth,  for  good  is  obedience 
to  the  promptings  of  the  spirit  Ufe,  and  evil  is  the  refusal  to  submit  to  this,  and 
consequent  yielding  to  the  animal.  This  view  appears  to  me  to  be  distinctly 
maintained  by  St.  Paul  in  the  seventh  chapter  of  the  Epistle  to  the  Romans, 
a  passage  universally  regarded  as  very  diflicult,  but  one  which  I  think  becomes 
comparatively  clear  when  considered  in  this  light.  In  it  the  apostle  depicts  the 
conflict  between  the  animal  life  and  the  spirit  life.  (Ibid.)  Evil,  in  this  world, 
lies  not  so  much  in  the  deed  as  in  the  doer.  {Ibid.)  The  origin  and  prevalence 
of  evil : — I.  The  quantity  of  existing  evil  is  not  so  great  as,  at  first  view,  it 
MAY  APPEAR  TO  BE.  1.  By  a  wise  appointment  of  Providence,  scenes  of  distress 
are  made  to  strike  our  minds  more  forcibly,  and  to  awaken  a  far  livelier  fellow- 
feeling  in  our  breasts  than  any  species  of  f ehcity  which  we  witness ;  and  for  this 
obvious  reason,  that  distress  stands  in  need  of  that  active  consolation  and  relief 
which  our  compassion  will  naturally  prompt,  while  happiness  is  more  independent 
of  sympathy.  Add  to  this,  that  misery,  in  consequence  of  the  same  occasion  for  the 
participation  of  social  natures  in  its  feelings,  is  much  more  clamorous,  and  therefore 
more  noticed,  than  satisfaction.  And  the  sum  of  evil  has  been  still  further  exagger- 
ated by  writers  who  were  aware  that  the  tale  of  woe  would  find  a  chord  more 
responsive  to  it  in  the  human  heart,  than  any  which  vibrates  in  unison  with  the 
voice  of  joy;  as  well  as  by  many  mistaken  devotees,  who  have  esteemed  a  gloomy 


444  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xlv. 

discontent  with  the  present  life  as  essential  to  piety.  2.  To  any  calm  and  un- 
prejudiced observer,  however,  the  latent,  but  multiplied,  satisfactions  of  mankind 
will  not  fail  to  discover  themselves;  and  he  wiU  learn  to  look  up  with  confidence 
to  that  all-gracious  Being,  who,  although  He  suflfers,  for  wise  ends,  the  existence 
of  darkness  and  evil,  creates  more  of  light  than  of  darkness,  and  more  of  peace  than 
of  evil.  To  nearly  all  natiu-al  evils,  indeed,  a  compensation  may  be  discovered. 
After  all,  however,  it  cannot  be  denied  that  the  world  contains  much  real  distress. 
II.  Its  origin.  Whatever  evil  afflicts  the  human  race,  is  all,  in  one  way  or  other, 
of  their  own  procuring.  God  "  doth  not  afflict  willingly,  nor  grieve  the  children 
of  men."  When  He  first  called  the  human  race  into  existence.  He  designed  them 
to  be  happy,  and  He  made  them  so.  "  By  one  man's  disobedience  sin  came  into 
the  world,"  and  misery  and  death  by  sin.  With  respect  to  every  species  of  evil, 
man  may  be  pronounced  the  author  of  his  own  tribulation.  III.  By  the  gracious 
interference  of  providence,  it  tends  to  a  happy  issue  ;  to  an  issue  which,  to  say 
the  least  of  it,  counterbalances  the  previous  evil.  Let  us  learn  to  improve  our 
confidence  in  the  Divine  goodness;  to  redress,  as  far  as  lies  within  our  capacity, 
the  multiform  evils  that  exist  around  us;  and  to  convert  to  wise  and  beneficial 
purposes  such  of  these  evils  as  affect  ourselves.  {J.  Grant,  M. A.)  The  mystery 
of  evil : — In  the  hour  of  pain,  sickness,  sorrow,  death,  oiu-  anguished  nerves  and 
bleeding  hearts  make  us  cry  out,  "  Why  should  we  be  smitten?  Whose  hand  has 
smitten  us?  "  It  is  natural,  as  many  of  the  heathen  creeds  show,  to  attribute  our 
suffering  to  some  wrathful  or  malignant  power.  Many  of  our  neighbours  so 
attribute  it,  either  to  an  angry  God,  or  to  a  malicious  devil.  The  Bible  unhesi- 
tatingly attributes  it  to  God,  but  is  careful  to  remind  us  that  "  the  Lord  is  good  to 
all,  and  His  tender  mercies  are  over  all  His  works."  There  are  two  points,  a  right 
view  of  which  is  essential  to  our  getting  at  the  truth  of  the  matter.  L  Death 
itself  is  not  an  evil.  Simply  because  it  is  as  common  and  as  natiural  to  us  as 
sleep,  death  is  no  more  evil  in  itself  than  sleep.  Continual  birth  makes  continual 
death  necessary,  if  there  is  to  be  any  such  thing  as  equal  opportunities  in  the 
world.  And  what  is  death  but  a  birth  into  another  life  ?  Even  in  the  case  of  the 
wicked,  whom  it  introduces  to  evil  beyond,  death  is  not  in  itself  an  evil,  any  more 
than  the  door  is  evil  through  which  any  wrong-doer  passes  to  trial  or  to  imprison- 
ment. Dying  is  simply  going  through  the  door  between  two  worlds.  2.  Suffering 
is  evil,  but  is  worked  by  goodness  to  good  ends.  But,  we  ask,  couldn't  the  good 
ends  have  been  accomplished  without  the  evil  of  suffering?  Well,  put  the  question 
home.  Could  you  have  been  made  free  from  faults  and  follies  without  suffering? 
Experience,  both  of  ourselves  and  others,  answers.  No.  What  the  Bible  affirms, 
in  a  certain  point,  of  Jesus,  must  be  much  more  broadly  affirmed  of  every  man — 
"  perfect  through  suffering  "  only.  The  only  conceivable  way  of  dispensing 
with  suffering  is  to  dispense  with  imperfection.  But  a  creation  in  which  there 
is  nothing  imperfect,  but  everything  is  finished,  is  inconceivable.  We  cannot 
conceive  what  that  state  of  things  would  be,  in  which  there  was  not  only  no  infancy 
and  childhood,  but  no  growth  of  anything;  nothing  to  learn,  because  everything 
is  known;  and  nothing  to  do,  because  everything  is  done.  But  it  is  staggering 
to  think  of  the  amount  of  suffering  that  this  involves.  Perhaps  we  may  think 
that  it  might  have  been  largely  prevented,  if  God  had  provided  better  instruction, 
had  had  guide-boards  set  up  to  show  the  right  way,  and  thorn-hedges  to  close  up 
wrong  ways.  Well,  has  He  not  done  so?  Have  we  never  known  people  to  take 
the  wrong  way  in  spite  of  wise  counsel,  and  to  take  it  again  and  again  in  spite  of 
bitter  experience?  What  we  have  to  admit,  then,  is  that  suffering,  though  evil 
in  itself,  is  a  means  to  good,  and  is  an  instrument  in  the  hands  of  goodness.  Our 
difficulty  is,  that  while  we  see  this  to  be  true  to  a  certain  extent,  we  do  not  see  it  in 
every  case.  Nevertheless,  it  appears  true,  as  far  as  we  are  able  to  trace  the  con- 
nection of  cause  and  effect.  What  is  the  most  reasonable  conclusion  from  that? 
Simply  this,  that  we  should  see  the  same  if  we  were  able  to  see  further.  The  great 
mystery  of  the  evil  in  God's  world  requires  for  its  solution  a  right  answer  to  the 
supreme  question,  What  is  it  that  we  are  to  be  intent  on  as  our  first  aim?  Not 
happiness,  surely.  Happiness  for  the  imperfect  means  content  with  imperfection. 
Perfection,  rather  than  happiness,  this  is  first;  in  order  to  this,  suffering;  then, 
in  proportion  to  the  perfection  attained  thereby,  resulting  blessedness.  Nor  is 
this  a  mere  opinion.  History,  observation,  and  experience  point  that  way.  It  was 
in  the  intuition  of  this  great  truth  that  one  appointed  to  more  hardship  than  is 
common  to  the  lot  of  man  bore  his  testimony  to  the  ages  thus:  "  Our  light  affliction, 
which  is  for  the  moment,"  &c.  {J.  M.  Whiton.)  Good  out  of  evil : — Here  the 
familiar  story  of  the  Pilgrim  Fathers  of  New  England  is  in  point.     They  arrived 


OHAP.  XI.V.]  ISAIAH.  446 

on  the  American  coast  in  the  most  unseasonable  time,  at  the  setting  in  of  winter. 
Their  exposures  and  hardships  consequently  brought  on  a  fatal  siclmess.  Before 
their  first  corn  was  planted  half  of  them  had  been  buried.  Seldom  has  a  more 
pathetic  tale  been  told  than  that  of  these  poor,  pious  exiles — 

A  screen  of  leafless  branches 
Betwixt  them  and  the  blast. 

But  had  it  better  not  have  been  so?  Is  heroism  worth  so  little  that  there  had 
better  be  no  occasion  made  for  it  by  the  presence  of  great  evils  calling  out  all  the 
strength  of  spirit  that  man  is  capable  of?  Who  can  tell  how  much  that  terrible 
suffering,  met  with  such  loftiness  of  spirit,  has  been  worth  to  the  world,  in  kindling 
the  same  unquenchable  fire  of  heroism  in  multitudes  of  admiring  beholders? 
(Ibid.)  Man  and  sin  ;  the  problem  of  moral  evil  (with  1  John  iii.  4,  R.V.): — 
The  proper  order  in  which  to  investigate  our  experience  of  the  subject  is  to  begin 
with  the  existence  of  moral  evil,  and  from  that  standing-ground  look  out  upon  the 
larger  question  of  cosmical  evil.  I.  The  peesence  op  moral  evu,  in  htjmait 
UATUKE — THE  SENSE  OF  SIN.  By  far  the  greatest  amount  of  the  suffering  of  life  is 
owing  to  the  depravity  of  human  nature.  If  men  were  good  and  kind  there  would  be 
little  left  to  mourn  over.  Speaking  generally,  we  may  say  that  human  experience 
of  this  great  fact  rims  from  the  crude  and  selfish  perception  of  the  faults  of  other 

Seople  up  to  the  self-humiliation  of  the  saint  in  whom  the  sense  of  sin  is  strongly 
eveloped.  To  take  the  lower  ground  first — there  are  some  who  are  smarting 
under  a  sense  of  injury.  It  may  be  that  life  is  altogether  sadder  than  it  once  was, 
because  of  the  heart-breaking  conduct  of  some  from  whom  a  very  different  course 
of  action  might  have  been  expected.  To  such  as  these  the  fact  that  human  nature 
is  vitiated,  and  that  the  world  is  made  wretched  in  consequence,  needs  no  complete 
demonstration.  Or  again,  there  may  be  some  who  remember  with  pain  and 
regret  certain  of  their  own  mistakes  which  have  brought  evil  results  in  their  train. 
Self-reproach,  however,  does  not  put  things  right  again.  It  is  not  only  that  the 
mistakes  are  beyond  recall,  but  that  the  character  itself  is  intractable.  No  man 
who  is  true  to  himself  can  escape  the  necessity  of  self-blame.  This  self-blame 
may  be  perfunctory  and  imperfect,  or  it  may  be  radical  and  strong.  It  may  be 
only  a  form  of  self-pity,  or  it  may  be  a  deep  experience  of  guilt.  Let  me  state  a  few 
things  about  this  sense  of  guilt.  In  the  first  place,  we  may  recognise  that  it  is  not 
tiniversal,  though  in  some  form  or  other  it  is  one  of  the  most  general  of  experiences. 
Some  of  the  great  religions  in  the  world  are  deficient  in  it:  Confucianism.  Con- 
fucius, like  so  many  of  the  world's  prophets,  died  a  disappointed  man.  He  had 
aimed  at  something  higher  than  the  nature  of  his  countrymen  was  prepared  for. 
He  had  to  put  up  with  opposition,  slander,  persecution,  and  poverty.  We  might 
think  that  the  problem  of  human  sinfulness  would  have  suggested  itself  to  him, 
but  we  have  no  such  indication  in  his  teachings.  In  these  there  is  an  utter  absence 
of  any  cognisance  of  sin  as  such.  What  is  true  of  this  religion  is  true  of  others. 
Their  recognition  of  faultiness  is  not  a  recognition  of  sinfulness.  Even  in  our  own 
day,  and  amongst  our  circle  of  acquaintance,  there  are,  no  doubt,  some  who  are 
without  the  sense  of  sin,  and  who  evince  no  consciousness  of  the  need  of  forgiveness. 
Men  may  be  aware  in  a  general  way  that  things  are  not  right  in  their  own  disposi- 
tions or  in  those  of  their  fellows,  and  yet  be  strangers  to  the  mood  of  contrition. 
Censoriousness  and  the  sense  of  sin  do  not  usually  go  together.  We  come  to 
another  and  higher  order  of  experience  when  we  enter  the  ranks  of  those  in  whom 
perception  of  personal  unworthiness  is  vivid.  Especially  has  this  been  the  case 
where  the  idea  of  a  righteous  God  has  been  powerfully  presented.  It  is  within  the 
circle  of  Christianity,  however,  that  this  conviction  has  been  quickened  and 
deepened  to  the  greatest  degree.  It  has  been  held  that  the  sense  of  sin-is  a  morbid 
development  of  religious  life.  We  are  not  better,  but  worse,  than  we  think  we 
are.  The  mood  of  contrition  is  a  note  of  awakening  nobility.  An  accompaniment 
of  the  sense  of  sin  is  the  depressing  discovery  of  our  helplessness  to  escape  it. 
To  conclude  this  first  point,  then,  we  may  say  that  we  are  sadly  aware  of  the 
presence  of  moral  evil  in  human  nature,  and  we  are  also  aware  that  it  "  ought  not 
to  be."  II.  Attempts  to  account  for  the  origin  of  moral  evil.  That  men 
should  have  been  exercised  in  their  minds  about  the  presence  of  moral  evil  in  the 
world  is  not  to  be  wondered  at,  and  it  is  instructive  to  notice  some  of  the  attempts 
that  have  been  made  to  account  for  it.  In  stating  certain  of  the  theories  which 
have  been  projected  to  explain  human  depravity,  we  may  take  them  in  the  order 
of  their  relative  importance.  1.  Let  us  note  that  sin  has  often  been  held  to  be 
a  delusion,  that  it  is  simply  a  form  of  mental  experience,  and  no  more  real  than  a 


446  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xlv. 

torturing  dream.  Culpability  is  only  a  fancy;  no  one  is  to  blame  for  anything; 
and  if  the  soul  is  to  persist,  and  self-consciousness  be  continued  in  a  higher  state, 
man  will  then  discover  that  all  his  agony  and  tears  and  self-reproach  had  no  sterner 
cause  than  a  Uttle  child's  dread  of  the  dark.  This  explanation  we  can  soon  dismiss. 
Self-blame  is  no  fancy.  Sin  is  not  something  negative,  it  is  positive — an  enemy 
that  we  have  to  fight.  2.  Further,  right  through  human  history  a  tendency  is 
observable  to  account  for  the  presence  of  moral  evil  by  a  dualistic  theory  of  exist- 
ence. Darkness  has  been  represented  as  the  foe  of  light,  matter  of  spirit,  and  Satan 
of  God.  The  variations  of  these  dualistic  theories  are  manifold.  Platonists, 
Gnostics,  Manichseans  are  a  great  family  who  regarded  matter  as  being  in  some 
degree  independent  of  God,  and  imperfectly  under  His  control.  AU  these  move- 
ments had  something  in  common,  and  that  something  was  the  tendency  to  place 
matter  in  opposition  to  spirit,  and  regard  evil  as  resident  in  matter.  Thorough- 
going behef  in  such  positions  has,  as  a  rule,  run  into  the  two  extremes  of  asceticism 
and  license.  Although  Plato's  dualism  was  a  very  different  thing  from  the 
Gnostic  heresies,  the  latter  really  sprang  from  it.  It  has  sometimes  been  thought 
that  Scripture  lends  some  coimtenance  to  the  theory  here  indicated.  "  The  world," 
for  instance,  is  presented  as  antithetic  to  "  the  kingdom,"  and  "  the  flesh  "  as 
antithetic  to  "  the  spirit."  This  is  undoubtedly  the  case,  but  we  must  be  warned 
against  thinking  that  the  New  Testament  writings  should  be  construed  to  mean 
that  evil  has  its  seat  in  the  flesh,  and  that  the  spirit  only  needs  the  liberation  of 
death  in  order  to  be  holy  at  a  bound.  3.  Positivism,  and  all  allied  modes  of  belief, 
effect  a  practical,  though  not  theoretical,  division  of  the  universe.  Humanity 
and  the  moral  order  are  represented  as  an  entity  apart  from  the  hard  backgroimd 
of  nature,  and  we  are  bidden  to  do  our  best  to  further  the  advance  of  everything 
that  makes  for  human  good  without  seeking  sanctions  in  natiure  or  the  super- 
natural. It  is  ciu-ious  to  note  that  the  advocates  of  this  principle  are  usually 
the  strongest  in  the  assertion  that  the  universe  is  one  and  indivisible.  One  power 
is  observed  to  be  at  work  within  it,  and  not  two  powers  pitted  against  each  other. 
4.  This  brings  us  to  the  consideration  of  the  theory,  which  is  Christian  as  well  as 
non-Christian,  that  in  the  imiverse  we  have  a  personal  dualism  represented  in  the 
familiar  names,  God  and  Satan.  We  need  not  deny  the  existence  of  a  personal 
captain  of  the  host  of  evil,  but  we  are  not  prepared  to  admit  that  there  is  room  in 
the  universe  for  a  power  whom  God  cannot  overthrow.  This  is  a  cmrsory  summary 
of  theories  which  have  occupied  the  attention  of  men  from  age  to  age.  We  may 
say  of  them  all — (I)  They  fail  in  that  they  limit  the  omnipotence  of  Deity. 
(2)  They  fail  in  that  they  deny  human  responsibility.  (3)  The  truth  common 
to  all  these  theories  appears  to  be,  that  good  is  only  Imown  by  the  background  of 
evil,  righteousness  only  achieved  in  opposition  to  unrighteousness.  5.  AlUed  with, 
but  independent  of,  the  foregoing,  is  the  Christian  doctrine  of  the  fall.  It  is  remark- 
able that  this  doctrine  is  also  extra- Christian.  It  has  a  place,  for  instance,  in  the 
old  Teutonic  mythology.  The  doctrine  is  also  pre-Christian.  It  has  a  place  in 
the  Old  Testament,  though  not  a  large  place.  It  is  within  the  field  of  Christianity, 
however,  that  the  theory  of  a  fall  of  the  race  from  original  piurity  has  had  its 
greatest  vogue.  About  this  Prof.  Orr  says:  "  I  do  not  enter  into  the  question  of 
now  we  are  to  interpret  Gen.  iii. — whether  as  history  or  allegory  or  myth,  or,  most 
probable  of  aU,  as  old  tradition  clothed  in  Oriental  allegorical  dress ;  but  the  truth 
embodied  in  that  narrative,  namely,  the  fall  of  man  from  an  original  state  of 
purity,  I  take  to  be  vital  to  the  Christian  view."  Upon  this  point,  however, 
science  is  in  direct  confiict  with  received  theology,  and  in  recent  years  the  attempt 
to  reconcile  the  doctrine  of  the  fall  with  the  accepted  theory  of  evolution  has  been 
felt  as  a  considerable  difficulty.  The  way  in  which  it  has  been  sought  to  solve 
that  difficulty  may  be  illustrated  from  a  sermon  preached  by  a  friend  of  my  own. 
"  The  fact  of  the  fall  is  simply  in  effect  the  statement  of  these  biological  facts  in 
the  spuitual  region.  It  is  that  there  came,  at  the  beginning  of  human  history, 
when  man  was  physically  complete,  and  had  reached  a  stable  equilibrium,  where 
his  moral  and  spiritual  development  was  to  begin, — there  came,  how  we  do  not 
know,  a  backward  step,  and  that  backward  step  has  been  perpetuated  in  the  history 
of  the  race  because  of  the  scientific  fact  of  the  solidarity  of  the  race.  What  St. 
Paul  would  call  the  fall  of  man  is  simply  the  statement  of  a  spiritual  fact  which  has 
its  precise  analogy  in  the  very  doctrine  of  evolution  that  is  supposed  to  contra- 
dict it."  The  same  preacher  goes  on  to  say  that  through  the  entrance  of  sin  into 
the  world,  by  man's  fault  and  in  opposition  to  the  purpose  of  God,  there  has  come 
into  the  world,  not  the  fact  of  death,  for  death  was  nere  before,  but  the  horror  of  it 
of  which  hnmanity  is  conscious,  and  that  the  misery  of  humanity  has  only  been 


CHAP.  XLV.]  ISAIAH.  447 

alleviated  by  second  creation,  as  it  were — the  entrance  of  Christ  into  the  world 
and  the  proclamation  of  the  good  news  of  redemption.  To  these  statements  the 
one  sweeping  objection  may  be  taken  that  if  they  presume  the  historicity  of  the 
story  of  Grenesis  and  the  theory  of  a  fall  in  time,  through  man's  own  fault  and 
against  the  intention  of  God,  they  are  in  direct  contradiction  to  the  judgings  of 
modem  science,  and  no  hypothesis  about  "  a  backward  step  "  or  "  a  new  creation" 
can  get  over  the  difficulty.  Om*  theology  must  be  in  harmony  with  the  rest  of  our 
knowledge.  We  are  on  safer  ground  if  we  appeal  once  more  to  experience,  and 
say  that  the  fall  ought  not  to  be  regarded  as  an  historical  event,  but  a  psychological 
fact.  In  this  connection  we  may  observe  that  Jesus  never  says  a  word  about  an 
historical  faU  of  the  race.  The  parable  of  the  Prodigal  Son  has  been  quoted  as  the 
analogue  of  the  story  in  Genesis,  but,  on  the  face  of  it,  it  is  meant  to  be  interpreted 
psychologically  rather  than  historically.  In  addition  to  this  we  must  say  that 
the  theory  of  a  faU  in  time  is  surrounded  by  other  and  graver  difficulties,  which 
lead  us  to  a  view  of  the  character  of  God  inconsistent  with  our  Lord's  revelation 
of  the  nature  of  the  Father.  That  God  should  have  made  man  so  that  he  was  not 
only  hable  but  certain  to  fall,  and  should  then  have  visited  the  whole  race  with 
disastrous  consequences,  is  altogether  incomprehensible.  But,  further,  it  is 
unthinkable  that  unbiassed  human  nature  would  ever  voluntarily  choose  evil. 
Speaking  in  all  reverence,  we  may  say  that  as  it  is  unthinkable  that  God  should 
fall,  so  is  it  unthinkable  that  man  should  fall,  unless  he  were  so  made  as  to  desire 
evil  without  knowing  good.  To  sum  up  this  point,  therefore,  we  may  say  that 
the  presence  of  moral  evil  cannot  be  accounted  for  either  as  a  delusion,  or  by  a 
dualistic  theory  of  the  universe,  or  even  by  a  fall  in  time.  The  explanation  must 
be  sought  elsewhere.  III.  The  hypothesis  that  the  OEiGrisr  of  moeal  evil  is  m 
God.  We  come,  then,  to  the  consideration  of  a  theory  which,  hke  the  foregoing, 
is  both  Christian  and  non-Christian,  namely,  that  moral  evil  has  its  origin  in  the 
good  purpose  of  God.  This  has  been  held  by  some  of  the  greatest  of  the  teachers 
of  the  Christian  Church,  from  Augustine  to  the  Reformation  Fathers.  Even  later 
Roman  CathoHc  theology  has  hngered  around  it  in  the  song,  "  0  felix  culpa," 
"  which  by  so  great  a  faU  has  secured  a  greater  redemption."  Evil  is  an  experience 
necessary  for  the  sake  of  good,  and  it  must  disappear  when  its  work  is  done.  For 
what  is  good  ?  No  man  knows  save  by  the  struggle  to  realise  it.  Every  man  is 
conscious  not  only  of  the  desire  to  choose  evil,  but  of  the  obligation  to  choose  good. 
To  sin  is  to  follow  the  lower  in  presence  of  the  higher  ;  it  is  jdelding  to  that  which 
is  easy  in  opposition  to  that  which  is  right.  If  evil  within  the  disposition  suppUea 
the  tendency,  sin  is  in  yielding  to  that  tendency.  This  reUeves  no  man  of  moral 
responsibihty.  Sin  is  real,  and  we  are  to  blame  for  it,  but  we  are  not  quaUfied 
to  judge  one  another.  God,  and  God  only,  can  disentangle  the  threads  of  human 
motive,  and  estimate  the  amoimt  of  individual  culpability.  Without  Christ  there 
would  be  but  a  feeble  light  on  this  world  problem.  From  what  we  know  of  Him 
we  can  look  forward  and  upward.  Primordial  evil  is  the  appointment  of  our  God 
and  Father,  who  shares  in  every  experience  of  EBs  children.  Salvation  is  escape 
from  sin  ;  atonement  escape  from  guilt ;  God  provides  both.  There  is  no  longer 
room  for  despair,  but  only  for  solemn  gladness.  "  Let  the  wicked  forsake  his 
way,"  &c.    {R.  J.  Campbell,  M.A.)        The  Divine  use  of  pain  (Hospital  Simday) : — 

I.   DiVINB  SOVEREIGNTY  EN  RELATION  TO  DISEASE  AND  PAIN.      What  the  apostle 

wrote  in  the  spirit  of  prophecy  is  confirmed  by  the  page  of  history.  "  Of  Him,  and 
to  Him,  and  through  Him  are  aU  things ;  to  whom  be  glory  for  ever."  We  do  not 
find  it  difficult  to  assent  to  this  doctrine  when  all  thixigs  go  well  with  us.  It  is 
when  He  says :  "  I  create  darkness,  I  create  evil,"  that  we  feel  it  strange  and 
shrink  back  from  a  fuU  hearty  assent.  It  has  been  suggested  that  this  truth  of 
the  text  was  given  as  a  correction  of  the  old  Eastern  myth  of  two  gods,  one  opposed 
to  the  other,  and  creating  evil  in  opposition  to  the  work  of  the  good  god.  Th« 
modem  form  of  this  theory,  and  one  which  prevails  in  certain  circles  of  Christian 
people,  is  that  all  disease  and  physical  evil  is  by  the  work  and  machination  of 
Satan.  This  is  equally  contrary  to  the  teaching  of  the  text  and  the  whole  of 
Scripture.  These  things  perplex  oxir  thoughts  and  try  our  faith;  but  it  only 
increases  the  perplexity  and  trial  to  attribute  them  to  Satan.  We  are  stiU  in  God's 
hand.  II.  The  use  these  things  serve  in  the  Divine  government.  The 
question  of  the  use  which  anything  serves,  which  God  in  His  providence  sends  or 
permits,  must  ever  be  asked  with  the  humble  consciousness  that  the  thing  may  be 
too  deep  for  us  to  iinderstand.  Yet  God  does  not  leave  us  without  some  knowledge 
of  His  will,  and  of  the  use  which  He  makes  of  this  suffering  and  pain.  1,  For 
on«  thing  is  dear,  pain  and  disease  bade  men  to  respect  Divine  law.    2.  This  evil 


448  TEE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xlv. 

often  leads  to  the  fuller  manifestation  of  His  power.     When  the  disciples  asked 
concerning  one  bom  blind,  "  Who  did  sin,  this  man  or  his  parents?  "  our  Lord 
replies  that  the  man  had  the  misfortune  "  that  the  works  of  God  should  be  made 
manifest  in  him."     Not  merely  or  chiefly  the  opening  of  the  bodily  eye,  but  the 
works  of  God  to  which  our  Lord  referred  were  those  changes  and  that  spiritual 
enlightenment  which  came  to  the  man  through  intercourse  with  Christ.     So  that 
the  ignorant  and  poor  blind  beggar  saw  what  the  well-instructed  and  self-righteous 
Pharisee  did  not  see,  and  could  answer  calmly  the  cavils  of  Christ's  opponents, 
and  endure  persecution  for  His  sake.     These  works  of  God  have  often  been  mani- 
fested through  the  instrumentality  of  fiery  pain  and  disease.     Days  of  sickness 
have  been  days  when  the  wandering  soul  has  heard  the  voice  of  the  Good  Shepherd, 
and  returned  from  its  wanderings,  and  has  learned  to  say,  "  It  is  good  for  me  that 
I  have  been  afflicted."     3.  Sometimes,  also,  pain  and  disease  have  been  in  God's 
hand  a  protection  against  sin.     The  curb  which  physical  weakness  puts  upon  us 
may  be  the  very  check  that  is  needed  to  keep  us  within  the  boimds  of  true  modera- 
tion, beyond  which  the  path  is  strewn  thick  with  temptations  frequent  and  great, 
«o  that  escape  were  almost  impossible.     4.  In  the  same  way  these  things  are  essential 
in  the  purifying  process  which  is  being  now  carried  on.     6.  Beside  all  this,  the  pain 
and  sorrow  wmch  sometimes  nearly  overwhelm  us,  call  out  sympathy  and  com- 
passion which  unite  men  in  this  closest  of  bonds.     III.  OuB  duty  in  view  of  these 
truths.     1.  There  ought  to  be  in  connection  with  these  things  the  distinct  recognition 
of  His  hand,  which  should  extend  to  the  whole  circumstances  of  the  case.     It  is 
only  a  partial  and  untrue  view  that  regards  God's  hand  in  permitting  suffering, 
and  refuses  to  acknowledge  His  goodness  in  the  alleviations  and  remedies  which 
He  provides,  and  the  medical  skill  with  which  He  endows  men.     2.  But  most  of 
all  we  need  to  cultivate  tender  sympathy  for  those  who  suffer,  and  as  far  as  may 
be  to  help  them  by  kindly  patient  service.     (W.  Page,  B.A.)        Light  and  dark- 
ness in  the  universe  : — Interwoven  with  the  texture  of  the  revelation  there  is  an 
element  of  mystery  to  prove  and  humble  and  solemnise.     I  shall  not  soon  forget 
a  visit  I  once  paid  in  the  dead  of  night  to  the  Colosseum.     The  moon  was  just 
rising  behind  the  gigantic  walls.     Its  light  was  almost  golden  in  depth  and  rich- 
ness.    The  towering  battlements  cast  shadows  dense  as  a  thundercloud.     The 
vast  circle  of  masonry  was  all  but  filled  with  gloom  and  darkness.     By  and  by 
the  light  of  the  rising  moon  fell  in  quivering  bars  through  the  rents  in  the  walla 
and  the  doorways  in  the  galleries.     At  last  the  whole  place  looked  like  a  colossal 
wheel  with  spokes  of  burnished  metal  divided  off  from  each  other  by  intervals 
of  ebony.     In  that  vast,  fan-bke  figure,  quivering  light  and  unbroken  shadow, 
cast  by  the  piles  of  masonry,  lay  side  by  side  with  each  other  with  an  alternation 
that  was  almost  mathematicaL     Was  not  that  a  figure  of  the  universe?     Dazzling 
light  and  impenetrable  shadow,  clear  revelation  and  dim  mystery,   the  compre- 
hensible and  the  incomprehensible  things  of  God's  love  lie  side  by  side  with  each 
other,  throughout  the  whole  of  the  wonderful  circle.     "  We  know  in  part,  and  we 
prophesy  in  part."     {T.  0.  Selby.)        Sorrow  a  shadow  of   the  Divine  love  : — I 
remember  on  a  glorious  day  of  all  but  cloudless  sunshine  passing  in  view  of  a 
well-known  line  of  bare  and  majestic  downs,  then  basking  in  the  full  beams  of 
noon.     But  on  one  face  of  the  hill  rested  a  mass  of  deep  and  gloomy  shadow.     On 
searching  for  its  cause  I  at  length  discovered  one  little  speck  of  cloud,  bright  as 
light,  floating  in  the  clear  blue  above.     This  it  was  which  cast  on  the  hillside  that 
ample  track  of  gloom.     And  what  I  saw  was  an  image  of  Christian  sorrow.     Dark 
and  cheerless  often  as  it  is,  and  unaccountably  as  it  passes  over  our  earthly  path, 
in  heaven  its  tokens  shall  be  found,  and  it  shall  be  known  to  have  been  but  a 
shadow  of  this  brightness  whose  name  is  Love.     {Dean  Aljord. )        I  make  peace. — 
Ood  the  Author  of  peace  : — The  same  power  which  placed  the  sun  in  the  heavens, 
gives  to  the  nations  of  the  earth  the  light  and  comfort  of  peace;  and  He  who  made 
the  night  before  the  day,  when  darkness  lay  upon  the  face  of  the  deep,  creates 
the  evil  of  war.     I.  The  causes  of  war.     Let  but  God  leave  men  to  themselves, 
and  they  fall  into  discord  and  anarchy,  as  the  elements  of  the  world  would  sink 
into  confusion  without  His  support,  and  return  to  their  primitive  chaos.     As 
soon  as  two  men  appeared  upon  earth  in  a  state  of  equality  and  competition,  war 
arose  between  them,  and  the  one  slew  the  other.     I.  No  wonder  there  are  wars 
without  in  the  world,  when  there  is  an  inward  war  in  the  mind  of  man;  a  restless- 
ness of  appetite  which  breaks  out  into  acts  of  violence,  and  can  never  be  satisfied. 
2.  But  there  is  another  principle  in  the  world,  which,  if  possible,  is  productive  of 
more  mischief  than  all  the  rest;  this  is,  false  religion.     These  are  the  principal 
causes  of  war  on  the  part  of  man.    3.  But  war  has  another  cause  on  the  part  of 


CHAP.  XLV.]  ISAIAH.  449 

God.  It  is  sent  by  Him  for  the  punishment  of  sin,  and  has  never  failed  to  chastise 
and  reduce  a  people  when  fallen  into  pride  or  disobedience.  IL  The  effects  of 
WAS.  The  words  of  the  text  are  remarkable;  for  here  war,  as  opposed  to  peace, 
is  called  by  the  name  of  "  evil  " :  and  a  dreadful  evil  it  is,  comprehending  all  the 
evils  that  are  to  be  found  in  the  world,  whether  we  consider  it  as  a  sin  or  a  punish- 
ment. III.  The  use  we  ought  to  make  of  the  blessings  asd  oppoKTUNirrES 
AFFORDED  us  BY  A  TIME  OF  PEACE.  {W.  Joues,  M.A.)  I,  the  Lord,  do  all  these 
things. — The  agency  of  Ood  universal : — I.  In  what  the  agency  of  God  consists. 
The  agency  of  God  consists  in  His  will.  His  choice  or  vohtion.  God  is  a  perfectly 
free  agent.  God  is  a  moral  agent.  He  perfectly  knows  and  loves  moral  good, 
and  as  perfectly  knows  and  hates  moral  eviL  IL  His  agency  is  universal. 
God  claims  to  be  the  universal  agent.  1.  God  has  made  all  things.  2.  This 
further  appears  from  His  upholding  all  things.  God  did  not  and  could  not  make 
any  creature  or  object  independent,  and  give  it  the  power  of  self-preservation. 
3.  God  must  extend  His  agency  to  all  created  objects  in  the  universe,  because  He 
has  made  all  things  for  Himself.     {N.  Emmons,  D.D.) 

Ver.  8.  Drop  down,  ye  heavens. — Salvation  comes  of  man's  response  to  Ood : — 
To  the  eye  of  the  seer  the  earth  lies  open  to  heaven  as  a  wide  corn-land  over 
which  the  clouds  of  heaven  hang,  the  air  breathes,  and  the  sim  sheds  sheets  of 
light.  Those  clouds  are  big  with  righteousness,  the  special  term  used  through- 
out this  book  of  the  faithfulness  of  Jehovah.  At  the  call  of  prayer  the  skies 
pour  down  their  precious  treasmre,  and  the  earth  opens  every  pore  to  receive 
the  plentifxil  rain;  presently  every  acre  brings  forth  salvation,  and  righteousness 
springs  up  in  the  hearts  of  men,  as  their  answer  to  the  descent  of  the  righteous- 
ness of  God.  It  is  the  bridal  of  heaven  and  earth,  a  fulfilment  of  the  prediction 
of  the  psalm:  "  Truth  springeth  out  of  the  earth;  and  righteousness  hath  looked 
down  from  heaven."  The  conception  is  one  of  surpassing  beauty.  The  brooding 
of  heaven;  the  response  of  earth.  Deep  calling  unto  deep.  The  nature  of  God 
originating  and  inspiring;  the  nature  of  man  responding.  And  when  the  de- 
scending grace  of  God  is  thus  received  by  the  believing  yearning  heart  of  man, 
the  result  is  salvation.  As  the  margin  of  R.V.  reads:  '  Let  the  skies  be  fruitful 
in  salvation,  and  let  the  earth  cause  righteousness  to  spring  up  together."  The 
whole  paragraph  to  the  close  of  the  chapter  rings  with  salvation  as  its  keynote. 
Does  God  hide  Himself?  He  is  the  God  of  Israel,  the  Saviour.  Are  the  makers 
of  idols  ashamed  and  confounded?  Yet  Israel  is  saved  with  an  everlasting  sal- 
vation. Are  graven  images  held  up  to  contempt?  It  is  because  they  are  gods 
that  cannot  save.  Does  God  assert  His  unrivalled  Deity?  It  is  because  He 
is  a  just  God,  and  a  Saviour.  Are  men  bidden  to  look  to  BUm,  though  they  be 
far  removed  as  the  ends  of  the  earth  ?  It  is  that  they  may  be  saved.  Primarily, 
no  doubt,  this  salvation  concerns  the  emancipation  of  the  chosen  people 
from  the  thraldom  of  Babylon,  and  their  restoration  to  Jerusalem.  "  He 
shall  build  My  city;  he  shall  let  My  exiles  go  free,  not  for  price  nor  reward, 
Baith  the  Lord  of  hosts."  This  deliverance,  which  is  a  type  of  the  greater 
deliverance  from  the  guilt  and  power  of  sin,  was,  in  the  fixed  purpose  of  God, 
sure  as  the  creation  of  the  earth  and  man  ;  guaranteed  by  the  hands  that 
stretched  out  the  heavens,  and  by  the  word  that  commanded  all  their  host, 
(f.  B.  Meyer,  B.A.) 

Ver.  9.  Woe  unto  him  that  striveth  with  his  Maker  I — Striving  with  Ood  : — 
The  strong  word  "  strive,"  and  the  emphatic  reassertion  of  the  mission  of  Cyrus 
(ver.  13),  as  well  as  the  connection  with  vers.  1-8,  show  that  deliberate  opposition 
to  the  Divine  purpose,  and  not  mere  faint-hearted  unbeUef  (as  in  chaps,  xl.  27, 
li.  13),  is  here  referred  to.  {Prof.  J.  Skinner,  D.D.)  Opposing  the  Divine 
purpose  : — Those  who  were  primarily  addressed  were  at  variance  with  God  their 
Creator  on  two  accounts — 1.  Because  He  permitted  His  people  to  be  led  captive 
by  their  enemies  into  a  distant  country,  where  they  were  oppressed.  2.  Because, 
notwithstanding  the  servants  of  the  Lord  spoke  much  concerning  their  liberation, 
the  event  seemed  altogether  improbable,  and  beyond  even  the  power  of  God 
to  efEect.  (B.  MaccvMoch. )  Contending  with  Ood : — I.  By  murmubino  at 
His  dispensations.  II.  By  resisting  bEis  authority.  III.  By  contemning 
His  instructions.  (Ibid.)  Striving  with  our  Maker  : — If  we  duly  consider 
the  life  of  man  since  the  fall,  we  shall  find  it  to  be  one  continued  struggle.  In 
the  great  and  most  momentous  affair  of  religion,  upon  which  our  whole  ^ppinesa 
VOL.  II. — 29 


450  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xlv. 

depends,  what  a  domestic  war  do  we  find  within  our  own  breasts !  Happy  are 
they  who  are  successful  in  this  spiritual  conflict;  and  are  so  wise  as  vigorously 
to  join  forces  with  the  Lord  of  hosts !  But  woe  be  to  him  who  is  of  a  party  with 
the  enemy,  and  "  striveth  with  his  Maker."  I.  We  will  consider  what  it  is  to 
STRIVE  WITH  OUE  Makeb.  In  general  it  is  to  resist  His  will,  and  oppose  our- 
selves to  His  government,  to  struggle  against  the  dispensations  of  Has  providence. 
n.  The  extbemb  vtleness  and  folly  oi  so  doing.  1.  In  general,  if  the  height 
of  ingratitude  be  a  vile  thing,  and  if  to  oppose  and  contend  with  our  best  Friend, 
who  is  infinitely  wiser  than  we  are,  and  loves  us  better  than  we  do  ourselves,  and 
whose  power  too  is  so  irresistible,  that  after  all  our  strugglings  His  pleasure  shall 
be  accomplished  one  way  or  other,  if  not  to  our  happiness,  as  He  at  first  intended, 
then  to  our  ruin,  since  we  are  resolved  to  have  it  so, — if  this  be  a  foolish  thing, 
then  to  "  strive  with  our  Maker  "  does  imply  all  the  foUy  and  baseness  that  a 
man  can  possibly  be  giiilty  of.  2.  But  more  particularly,  to  strive  with  oiu:  Maker 
is  a  most  vile  and  foolish  thing,  as  it  signifies — (1)  Our  denying  obedience  to  Hia 
commands;  for  what  can  be  more  base  than  to  refuse  even  our  utmost  services 
to  that  infinitely  glorious  and  good  Being  who  made  us  what  we  are!  (2)  Our 
murmuring  at  His  disposal  of  us,  and  restless  discontent  at  the  circumstances 
He  thinks  fit  to  place  us  in.  (3)  Our  being  stubborn  and  refractory  to  the  conduct 
of  His  Divine  Spirit,  and  the  guidance  of  His  ministers,  in  things  relating  to  His 
service  and  our  own  eternal  salvation.  III.  The  misebable  consequence  of 
thus  striving  with  our  Maker.  "  Woe  unto  him."  1.  As  it  signifies  disobedience 
to  His  commands.  For  who  can  imagine  but  that  a  Governor  so  wise,  and  so 
powerful,  and  so  just  as  God  is,  will  in  due  time  assert  His  authority,  and  secure 
His  laws  and  government  from  contempt,  by  the  condign  punishment  of  those 
who  have  been  so  hardy  as  to  resist  and  rebel  against  Him,  and  made  no  account 
of  the  plainest  and  most  express  declarations  of  His  will?  And  when  the  Almighty 
shall  proceed  to  do  justice,  who  can  withstand  Him,  or  hope  to  avoid  the  stroke, 
but  must  sink  under  the  weight  of  it  for  ever!  2.  Nor  will  our  discontents  and 
murmurings  at  the  Divine  disposals  escape  without  due  punishment.  For  suppose 
that  God  should  be  so  far  provoked  by  our  repirdngs  as  to  throw  us  ofi  from  His 
care  and  protection,  and  leave  us  to  ourselves,  and  in  ffis  anger  comply  with  our 
foolish  desires,  and  give  us  what  we  are  so  fond  of,  and  which  He  sees  will  be  our 
ruin,  how  sadly  sensible  shall  we  then  soon  be  of  the  vast  difference  between 
God's  government  and  our  own  !  3.  And  so  for  impatience  under  troubles  and 
afflictions,  suppose  our  outcries  and  strugglings  and  resistance  should  make  God 
withhold  His  paternal  chastisements,  and  suffer  sin  upon  us  without  correction, 
and  disregard  us  as  desperate  and  incorrigible ;  what  woe  on  earth  could  befall 
U8  greater  than  this  7  4.  What  but  the  extremest  of  all  woes  can  be  expected 
from  our  rejecting  those  proposals  of  reconciliation  to  God,  which  are  not  only 
offered  but  pressed  upon  us  daily  by  the  ministers  of  Christ,  and  to  which  we 
are  constantly  nioved  by  the  workings  of  the  Spirit  of  God  within,  upon  oiu:  souls ! 
{ W.  Bragge. )  The  misery  of  contending  with  God  : — I.  Specify  some  instances 
IN  which  the  sinner  may  be  considered  as  stbivino  with  God.  I  hardly  think 
it  worth  while  to  mention  atheism,  which  opposes  His  very  being,  and  tries  to 
banish  Him  from  the  world  which  He  has  made.  Some,  indeed,  have  supposed 
that  a  speculative  atheist  is  an  impossibility.  How  far  God  may  give  up  a  man 
"  to  strong  delusion  to  believe  a  lie,"  who  has  despised  and  rejected  the  advantages 
of  revelation,  it  is  not  for  us  to  determine, — but  "  if  the  light  that  is  in  thee  be 
darkness,  how  great  is  that  darkness!  "  It  is  undeniable,  however,  that  we  have 
a  multitude  of  practical  atheists.  That  is,  we  have  thousands  who  live  precisely 
as  they  would  do  if  they  believed  there  was  no  God.  They  strive  with  Him 
— 1.  By  transgressing  His  holy  and  righteous  law.  2.  By  opposing  the  Gospel. 
3.  By  violating  the  dictates  of  conscience.  4.  By  refusing  to  resign  themselves 
to  the  dispensations  of  His  providence.  6.  By  the  persecution  of  His  people. 
6.  By  trying  to  hinder  the  spread  of  His  cause.  II.  Consider  the  "  woe  "  which 
ms  opposition  necessarily  entails  upon  him.  This  striving  with  God  is — • 
1.  A  practice  the  most  shameful  and  ungrateful.  What  would  you  think  of  a 
child  who  should  strive  with  his  father,  reproach  his  character,  counteract  all 
his  designs,  and  endeavour  to  injure  his  concerns?  But  such  is  your  conduct 
towards  God.  2.  A  practice  the  most  unreasonable  and  absurd-  For  observe 
— in  all  the  instances  in  which  you  oppose  Him  He  is  aiming  to  promote  your 
good :  His  design  is  to  make  you  wise,  to  make  you  holy,  to  make  you  happy  ; 
and  the  advantages  of  compliance  will  be  all  your  own.     Besides,  can  you  do 


CHAP.  XLV.]  ISAIAH.  451 

•withont  Him?  In  life?  In  death?  3.  Therefore  nothing  can  be  more  injurious 
and  ruinous.  In  striving  with  Him,  you  only  resemble  the  wave  that  dashes 
against  the  rock,  and  is  driven  back  in  foam;  or  the  ox  that  kicks  against  the 
goad,  and  only  wounds  himself;  or  the  thorns  and  briers  that  should  set  them- 
selves in  battle  array  against  the  fire.  To  improve  this  awful  subject  let  me  ask 
— Whether  you  are  for  God  or  against  Him?  There  is  no  neutrality  here.  We 
have  been  speaking  of  a  striving  with  God  which  is  unlawful  and  destructive 
— but  there  is  a  striving  with  Him  which  is  allowable  and  necessary.  It  is  by 
prayer  and  supplication.  {W.  Jay.)  The  indelicacy  of  criticising  God  (ver.  10): 
— That  a  child  should  so  speak  of  father  or  mother  is  unthinkably  uimatural  and 
impious.  And  such  are  they  who  criticise  God's  method  of  saving  His  people 
through  Cyrus.     {A.  B.  Davidson,  D.D.) 

Ver.  11.  Thus  saith  the  Lord  .  .  .  Ask  Me. — Prayer  and  criticism :-~ 
*'  Ask  Me,  but  do  not  criticise  Me."  "  Command  Me  "  must  mean  "  leave  to 
My  care."  {Prof.  J.  Skinner,  D.D.)  Encouragement  to  pray  from  the  names 
of  God  : — "  The  Lord  " — that  is,  God  in  His  everlasting  redemptive  purpose; 
"  the  Holy  One  of  Israel  " — that  is,  the  moral  perfections  of  Israel's  God,  as 
contrasted  with  the  abominations  perpetrated  under  the  sanction  of  heathen 
religions;  "his  Maker" — suggesting  the  purpose  which  from  the  clay  gathered 
in  Abraham's  time  from  the  highlands  of  Mesopotamia,  was  fashioning  a  fair 
vessel  meet  for  His  use.  This  threefold  description  of  God  introduces  the  august 
command  which  bade  the  people  seek  by  prayer  the  fulfilment  of  the  purpose  on 
which  the  Divine  heart  was  set.  {F.  B.  Meyer,  B.A.)  Putting  forth  of  God^a 
power  dependent  on  prayer  : — In  launching  an  ironclad,  the  pressure  of  a  baby's 
finger  is  not  infrequently  required  to  put  in  operation  the  ponderous  machinery 
by  which  the  iron  leviathan  glides  evenly  and  majestically  on  to  the  ocean  wave. 
So,  if  we  may  dare  to  say  it,  all  the  purposes  of  God,  and  the  providential  machinery 
by  which  they  were  to  be  executed,  stood  in  suspense  until  the  chosen  people 
had  asked  for  the  things  which  He  had  promised,  and  had  even  commanded 
Him  concerning  the  work  on  which  His  heart  was  set.  (Ibid.)  Asking  and 
commanding  : — I.  Pbaybr  is  a  necessary  link  in  the  pebpormance  op  thd 
Divine  promises.  "  Ask  Me  of  things  to  come."  Even  to  the  Son,  Jehovah 
says,"  "  Ask  of  Me,  and  I  will  give  Thee  the  heathen,"  &c.  And  to  the  chosen 
people,  at  the  end  of  a  paragraph  beginning  with  "  I  will,"  and  unfolding  the 
work  which  He  is  prepared  to  do,  not  for  their  sakes,  but  for  His  own — He  says, 
"  For  this,  moreover,  will  I  be  inquired  of  by  the  house  of  Israel,  to  do  it  for  them." 
Our  Lord  is  unremitting  in  the  stress  He  lays  on  prayer,  and  pledges  Himself  to  do 
only  whatsoever  is  asked  in  His  name.  1.  Prayer  is  part  of  the  system  of  co-opera- 
tion between  God  and  man  which  pervades  nature  and  life.  2.  Prayer,  when 
genuine,  indicates  the  presence  of  a  disposition  to  which  God  can  entrust  His  best 
gifts  without  injury  to  the  recipient.  To  bless  some  men,  apart  from  humility  and 
submission,  and  weanedness  of  soul  from  creature  aid,  would  only  injure.  And 
so,  in  His  dear  love,  God  withholds  Has  choicest  gifts  until  the  heart  is  sore  broken, 
and  cries  to  Him.  That  cry  is  the  blessed  symptom  of  soul-health.  3.  Prayer 
is  also  in  its  essence,  when  inspired  by  faith,  an  openness  towards  God,  a  recep- 
tiveness,  a  faculty  of  apprehending  with  open  hand  what  He  would  impart.  Let 
us  pray — (1)  Unitedly.  God  would  be  inquired  of  by  the  "  house  "  of  Israel. 
(2)  Sympathetically.  A  prayer  offered  in  the  presence  of  others  should  receive 
their  endorsement.  (3)  Earnestly.  The  Divine  gauge  of  the  worth  of  prayer 
is  its  pressure  on  the  heart  of  God.  (4)  In  the  name  of  Jesus.  II.  The  imper- 
ative ACCENT  in  faith.  "  Concerning  My  sons,  and  concerning  the  work  of  My 
hands,  command  ye  Me."  Our  Lord  spoke  in  this  tone  when  He  said,  "  Father, 
I  will."  Joshua  used  it  when  in  the  supreme  moment  of  triumph  he  lifted  up 
his  spear  towards  the  setting  sun,  and  cried,  "  Sun,  stand  thou  still!  "  Elijah 
used  it  when  he  shut  the  heavens  for  three  years  and  six  months,  and  again  opened 
them.  Luther  used  it  when,  kneeling  by  the  dying  Melanchthon,  he  forbade  death 
to  take  his  prey.  It  is  a  marvellous  relationship  into  which  God  bids  us  enter. 
We  are  accustomed  to  obey  Him.  But  with  the  single  limitation  that  our  biddings 
must  concern  His  sons,  and  the  work  of  His  hands,  and  must  be  included  in  His 
word  of  promise,  Jehovah  says  to  us.  His  redeemed  children  in  Jesus  Christ,  "  Com- 
mand ye  Me!  "  The  world  is  full  of  mighty  forces  which  are  labouring  for  our 
weal.  How  is  it  that  these  great  natural  forces — which  are  manifestations  of 
the  power  of  God — so  absolutely  obey  man?    Is  it  not  because,  since  the  days 


452  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  xlv, 

of  Bacon,  man  has  so  diligently  studied,  and  so  absolutely  obeyed,  the  conditions 
under  which  they  work?  "  Obey  the  law  of  a  force,  and  the  force  will  obey  you," 
is  almost  an  axiom  in  physics.  So  God  gives  the  Holy  Spirit  to  them  that  obey 
Him.  All  the  resources  of  God  dwell  bodily  in  the  risen  and  glorified  Lord.  Obey 
Him,  and  He  pours  such  mighty  energy  into  and  through  the  spirit  that  men  are 
amazed  at  the  prodigality  of  its  supply;  resist  or  thwart  Him,  and  He  retires 
from  the  spirit,  leaving  it  to  struggle  as  best  it  may  with  its  difl&culties  and  trials. 
But  after  our  greatest  deeds  of  prayer  and  faith  we  shall  ever  lie  low  before  God; 
as  Elijah  did,  who,  after  calling  &e  from  heaven,  prostrated  himself  on  the  ground, 
with  his  face  between  his  knees.  {Ibid.)  Counsel  for  OocTa  people  in  trovble 
(vers.  11-15): — I.  The  people  of  God  in  captivity  abb  invitbd  to  inquieb 
CONCERNING  THE  ISSUE  OF  THEIR  TROUBLES  (ver.  11).  The  Holy  One  of  Israel, 
though  He  doth  not  allow  them  to  strive  with  Him,  yet  encourageth  them — 1.  To 
consult  His  Word.  "  Ask  Me  of  things  to  come."  2.  To  seek  unto  Him  by  prayer. 
"  Command  ye  Me."  II.  They  are  encouraged  to  depend  on  the  poweb 
OF  God  vthen  they  were  brought  very  low,  and  were  utterly  incapablb 
of  helping  themselves  (ver.  12).  III.  They  are  particularly  told  what 
God  would  do  for  them,  that  they  might  know  what  to  depend  upon  (vers. 
13,  14).  IV.  They  are  taught  to  trust  God  further  than  they  can  sbb 
Him  (ver.  15).  {M.  Henry.)  God's  abounding  liberality: — I  am  told  that, 
in  the  olden  times,  on  Christmas  Day,  it  was  the  custom  in  country  villages  for 
the  squire  always  to  fill  with  good  things  whatever  vessels  the  poor  people  brought 
up  to  the  hall,  that  they  might  have  a  Christmas  dinner.  It  was  strange  how 
big  the  basins  grew  year  after  year.  Whenever  the  man  came  round  with  the 
crockery  cart,  every  good  housewife  would  look  all  over  his  stock  to  see  if  there 
was  not  a  still  larger  basin.  It  was  a  rule  that  the  squire's  servants  should  always 
fill  the  bowl,  whatever  size  it  was,  and  thus  the  bowls  grew  bigger  and  bigger. 
God  will  fill  your  bowl,  however  large  it  is  !  Get  as  big  a  bowl  as  you  can;  and 
when  you  bring  it,  if  ever  there  comes  a  whisper  in  your  ear,  "  Now  you  have 
presumed  upon  God's  benevolence,  you  have  brought  too  big  a  bowl,"  smile  at 
yourself,  and  say,  "  This  is  as  nothing  to  His  overflowing  fulness."  If  I  said, 
"  O  poor  sea,  poor  sea,  now  thou  wilt  be  drained  dry,  for  they  bring  such  big 
bowls  to  be  filled  with  thy  waters";  the  sea,  tossing  its  mighty  billows  far  and 
wide,  would  laugh  at  my  folly.  Come,  then,  and  bring  your  largest  conceptions 
of  God,  and  multiply  them  ten  thousandfold,  and  believe  in  Him  as  this  Book 
would  make  you  believe  in  Him.  Open  thy  mouth  wide,  and  He  will  fill  it.  He 
bids  you  even  to  command  Him.  He  says,  "  Ask  Me  of  things  to  come  concerning 
My  sons,  and  concerning  the  work  of  My  hands  command  ye  Me."  That  is  a 
wonderful  expression;  rise  to  the  sublimity  of  faith,  and  be  daring  with  your  God. 
{C.  H.  Spurgeon.) 

Ver.  12.  I  have  inade  the  earth. — Nature  and  Scripture  (with  ver.  22) : — The 
study  of  Nature  reveals  a  Creator.  This  is  the  order:  God,  creation,  fishes,  animals, 
men,  women,  the  human  race,  the  culture  of  the  soil,  the  building  of  cities,  the 
navigation  of  the  sea,  and,  in  course  of  ages,  the  formation  of  society  as  we  know 
it.  But  man  as  a  moral  agent  required  moral  laws;  having  also  a  capacity  for 
religion,  he  needed  spiritual  light.  This  made  revelation  from  above  necessary. 
Mankind  have  had  both  vocal  and  written  messages  from  God.  Creation  tells  of 
His  power,  and  the  Scripture  tells  of  His  salvation — the  two  books  together  reveal- 
ing His  perfect  glory.  I.  A  careful  study  of  nature  and  man  will  bring  vividly 
before  you  the  law  of  dependence.  The  man  who  would  attempt  to  be  indepen- 
dent of  Nature  would  soon  die  of  hunger  and  thirst,  and  the  soul  that  is  arrogant 
enough  to  deem  itself  independent  of  Christ  will  soon  find  that  saying  true,  '  He 
that  hath  not  the  Son  of  God,  hath  not  life."  II.  In  nature  you  see  also  thb 
LAW  OF  cultivation.  Every  living  thing  needs  cultivation,  and  is  improved, 
beautified,  and  perpetuated  by  it.  Man,  the  "living  soul,"  is  under  the  same  law. 
In  a  higher  sense  the  soul  of  man  is  subject  to  this  law  of  cultivation.  The  fruits 
and  flowers  found  in  a  cultivated  soul  are  faith,  prayer,  virtue,  knowledge,  temper- 
ance, patience,  godliness,  brotherly  kindness,  and  charity.  III.  Nature  conspicu- 
ously displays  and  relentlessly  enforces  the  law  of  deprivation.  In  the  great 
caves  of  Kentucky  there  are  dark  waters  where  the  light  never  comes.  Eyeless 
fishes  swim  there.  Their  ancestors  had  eyes  that  could  see ;  but  their  descendants, 
choosing  to  dwell  in  lightless  waters,  have  only  rims  and  specks  in  their  heads 
where  eyes  might  have  been.     Use  well  a  sense,  a  faculty,  a  power,  and  you  increase 


CHAP.  XLV.]  ISAIAH.  453 

it;  neglect  it,  and  it  will  die.  That  is  the  law  of  Nature.  Scripture  teaches  you 
the  same  lesson  as  to  the  spiritual  world.  IV.  Nature  does  also  undoubtedly 
embrace  the  law  of  teemination.  "  The  grass  withereth  and  the  flower  fadeth." 
The  bones  of  leviathan  whiten  the  deep  places  of  the  sea.  And  what  of  man?  To 
him  also  the  law  of  termination  applies.  Shall  nature,  man,  life  as  we  know  it, 
continue  as  they  are  for  ever  ?  No,  for  both  Nature  and  Scripture  proclaim 
the  law  of  termination  (2  Pet.  iii.  10).  V.  But  both  Scripture  and  Nature  point 
us  to  another  law — that  of  cONTnruiTy.  And  this  eternal  law  of  continuity  will 
be  in  existence  after  the  present  world  is  left  behind.  Consider,  then,  these 
natural  and  spiritual  truths.  Let  Nature  teach  you  how  great  the  Creator  is:  let 
Scripture  teach  you  that  His  salvation  and  love  and  righteousness  are  for  ever 
and  ever.     {G.  W.  W'Cree.) 

Ver.  14.  Surely  God  is  in  thee. — Jehovah  Etnudf  preaent  in  Eta  Church: — 
I.  The  dignity  of  the  Chttech.  One  cannot  wonder  that  Solomon  should  have 
been  overwhelmed  with  astonishment  when  Jehovah  promised  His  presence  in 
the  temple  that  had  just  been  erected  for  His  worship  and  glory.  But  there  is  a 
nobler  temple  building  for  God — even  that  Church  which  is  composed  of  living 
stones.  It  is  to  the  presence  of  God  therein  that  the  text  refers,  and  in  vouch- 
safing His  presence  we  may  remark  that  Jehovah  is — 1,  Doing  honour  to  His  own 
truth.  2.  Exalting  His  own  Son.  3.  Imparting  His  own  graces,  n.  The  con- 
sequent spiKiTtrALiTY  OF  THE  EXPEEiENCB  OF  THE  Chtxrch.  By  no  phrase  could 
you  more  accurately  describe  the  real  Christian  than  by  the  text — "  Surely  God  is 
in  thee."  True  religion  is  not  an  opinion  merely  of  the  understanding,  nor  external 
decorum  merely  of  fife,  nor  ecstatic  ra,ptvires  merely  of  affection.  But  it  is  nothing 
less  than  a  union  of  our  soul  with  God — a  real  participation  of  the  Divine  natmre. 
III.  Our  text,  however,  not  only  intimates  the  dignity  of  the  Christian  and  the 
spirituahty  of  his  experience,  but  also  the  holiness  of  his  conduct.  And  unless 
there  be  this  there  is  nothing.     {B.  C.  Dillon,  D.D.) 

Ver.  15.  Verily  Thou  art  a  God  that  hidest  Thyself. — The  mystery  of  God's  ways : — 
1.  Isaiah's  mind  is  impressed  with  the  fact  that  if  God  is  "  the  God  of  Israel "  "  and 
the  Saviour,"  He  does  some  things  scarcely  in  apparent  consistency  with  that 
character.  How  many  times  did  He  abandon  His  people  Israel  to  their  enemies! 
And  how  was  He  about  to  suffer  them  to  be  led  captive  into  Babylon  for  a  long 
threescore  years  and  ten !  And  even  when  His  ways  to  them  were  evidently  merciful 
and  kind,  God's  acts  of  kindness  came  at  times,  under  circumstances,  in  ways, 
by  persons,  that  could  not  have  been  looked  for;  making  His  very  mercies  as 
B\u-prising  on  the  one  hand  as  His  judgments  might  have  been  on  the  other. 
"  Verily,  Thou  art  a  God  that  hidest  Thyself " — that  hidest  Thy  coimsels.  Thy 
purposes.  Thy  mercies.  Thy  methods  of  operation.  2.  A  reflection  of  this  sort 
might,  with  full  as  much  justice,  arise  from  a  contemplation  of  the  ways  of  God 
towards  His  spiritual  Israel — a  people  to  whom  He  is  attached  by  stiU  stronger 
ties  than  those  which  bound  Him  to  Israel  of  old.  Precious  is  His  mercy;  and 
yet  how  severe  some  of  His  dealings  appear !  And  His  mercies  too ! — how  strangely 
they  come;  as  though  He  would  choose  the  unlikeliest  of  all  circumstances,  the 
darkest  of  all  seasons,  the  most  improbable  of  all  means,  for  commimicating  them  ; 
as  though  He  would  make  us  have  mercies  when  we  expect  trials,  and  find  out 
of  the  darkest  cloud  there  proceeds  the  brightest  simshine.  And  He  works  strange 
things — things  not  apparently  congruous  or  reconcilable  with  Has  character  of 
covenant  friendship  and  love.  3.  Nor  is  this  any  peculiarity  at  all,  attaching 
itself  to  this  part  of  the  ways  and  administration  of  God.  The  same  feature  of 
the  Divine  conduct  may  be  seen  wherever  else  we  look,  whether  at  home  or  taking 
a  wider  circle.  (1)  If  we  look  at  the  works  of  nature  there  is  the  same  thing. 
About  one  half  the  animal  world  prey  upon  the  other  half,  (2)  Or  look  at  man. 
Look  at  the  body  of  man;  made  in  marvellous  wisdom,  with  a  thousand  adaptations 
for  action;  and  yet  this  very  body  of  man  is  seized  upon  by  several  thousand  diseases, 
that  inflame  and  torment,  as  though  it  were  their  domain  and  home.  Look  at 
the  mind  of  man;  made  to  be,  adapted  to  be,  a  source  of  innumerable  dehghts; 
and  yet  to  what  a  vast  extent  it  is  the  prey  of  ignorance,  pride,  anger,  jealousy, 
rage,  and  impure  and  tormenting  passions.  (3)  Look  at  human  society.  You 
see  social  affections  at  play,  and  the  various  circumstances  in  which  men  are  placed 
adapted  and  prepared  lor  their  most  delightful  exercise,  so  that  even  trying  circum- 
stances are  fitted  for  calling  into  exercise  the  livehest  and  happiest  affections; 


454  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR  [chap.  xlt. 

but  yet  what  is  human  society?  You  may  call  it  Aceldama — a  field  of  blood; 
a  sphere  in  which  the  weak  are  trampled  upon  by  the  strong;  in  which  violence, 
fraud,  rapine,  gain,  plunder,  the  sword,  and  all  instruments  of  moral  and  physical 
mischief  are  brought  to  bear  upon  the  destruction  of  the  happiness  and  the  life  of 
men.  (4)  And  God's  providence.  God's  providence  is  to  be  taken  to  be  a  system 
of  wise  and  holy  and  beneficent  administration;  and  yet  what  is  it,  when  you 
look  at  it?  There  are  many  appearances,  indeed,  of  its  being  so;  but  many  dark 
things  in  it  that  one  cannot  at  all  understand.  (5)  Or  if  you  contemplate  the 
works  of  God  in  the  state  of  this  world — in  the  condition  in  which  it  becomes  the 
theatre  for  the  interposition  of  God  in  redemption,  and  affords  scope  for  the  great 
work  of  redeeming  love  through  His  dear  Son — what  a  mystery  is  here!  God 
made  man  upright — made  a  world  for  holiness,  for  happiness,  for  virtue,  for  religion ; 
but  into  what  a  condition  the  world  is  come  before  it  affords  Him  opportunity 
for  redemption!  Why,  the  whole  world  is  contaminated  ;  the  world  becomes 
a  theatre  of  rebellion;  and  God,  with  all  His  love,  is  obliged  to  come  forth  with 
a  curse,  and  reveal  wrath  from  heaven  against  the  universal  impiety  and  injustice  of 
men.  Now,  views  of  this  sort  are  painful  in  two  ways.  1.  They  give  occasion 
to  men  of  sceptical  minds  to  think  and  to  say  hard  things;  they  feed  and  nourish 
the  enmity  of  their  hearts  against  God.  2.  They  give  occasion  to  many  painful 
thoughts  in  the  children  of  God.  {J.  H.  Hinton,  M.A.)  Relief  in  contemplating 
the  mystery  of  God's  ways : — There  are  considerations  by  which  the  painfukiess  of 
Buch  views  may  be  diminished  and  taken  away.     I.  Taking  the  case  at  thh 

VERY  WORST,  IT  IS  NOTHING  BUT  A  CASE  OF  DIFFICULTY.      It  iS  not  that  the  WayS 

of  God  are  in  any  case  such  as  yield  demonstration  of  ill.  It  is  admitted  that  these 
difficulties  may,  for  aught  that  appears,  admit  of  a  wise  and  happy  solution.     II.  Wa 

HAVE  NO  REASON  AT  ALL  TO  COMPLAIN  OF  THE  DIFFICULTIES,  THE  KIND  AND  DEGBBB 
OF  MYSTERY,   THAT  NOW  ATTACHES  TO   THE  WAYS   OF  GoD,   NOR  ANY  REASON  TO 

EXPECT  IT  SHOULD  BE  OTHERWISE.  1.  The  mystery  which  attaches  to  the  ways 
of  God  arises  in  part  from  physical,  from  natural  causes.  In  fact,  there  is  an 
impossibility  of  its  being  removed.  And  this  arises  out  of  the  great  diversity  of 
knowledge  and  understanding  that  there  is  betwixt  God  and  ourselves.  2.  Then 
this  mystery  arises  in  part  from  the  unfavourableness  of  our  position  even  for 
making  use  of  what  faculties  we  have.  We  do  not  stand  so  in  relation  to  God  and 
His  ways  as  to  take  the  most  clear  and  favourable  view  of  them.  We  are  looking 
upon  the  ways  of  God  from  the  earth;  let  us  wait  till  we  get  to  a  better  position. 
3.  Then  we  have  no  reason  to  complain  of  this  mystery,  because  God,  as  the 
Governor  of  the  world,  has  a  right  to  work  in  darkness.  The  Foreign  Secretary 
of  the  English  Government  works  in  mystery.  How  the  world  would  laugh  at 
him  if  he  did  not! — if  he  let  all  men,  friends  or  foes,  know  what  he  was  about! 
And  is  the  Governor  of  all  things  to  have  no  mysteries?  "  It  is  the  glory  of  God 
to  conceal  a  thing  " ;  and  that  He  can  form  designs  and  work  them  out,  and  defy 
the  whole  universe  to  penetrate  them,  or  to  know  what  He  means  to  do  till  He 
sees  fit  to  disclose  His  plan  in  all  its  completeness,  and  lay  bare  the  beauty  in  the 
eyes  of  all — there  is  His  glory  as  a  Governor.  And  there  is  not  any  one  of  Hia 
friendly  subjects  that  will  ever  complain  of  this.  4.  The  provision  of  God's  govern- 
ment, as  respecting  ourselves,  has  a  probationary  and  disciplinary  design.     III.  Thb 

AVISDOM,  HOLINESS,  AND  GOODNESS  OF  GOD  ARE  IN  POINT  OF  FACT  ESTABLISHED 
80  FIRMLY  BY  SOLID  PROOFS  AND  ARGUMENTS  THAT  NOT  ALL  THE  MYSTERY  WHICH 
ATTACHES   TO   THE   WAYS   OF   GOD   AT  PRESENT  CAN   EVER   DISTURB   THE  TRUTH   OF 

THEM.     IV.  When  we  look  at  such  parts  of  God's  ways  as  are  already 

FINISHED    WE    SEE    THE    MYSTERY    DISAPPEAR   FROM    THEM;    and   howevCr,    if    they 

had  been  looked  at  in  their  progress,  they  would  have  seemed  very  mysterious 
and  difficult  to  be  imderstood,  when  they  are  finished  they  appear  wise  and  kind 
and  good.  For  some  parts  of  God's  ways,  though  small  comparatively,  are  finished. 
Look  at  the  history  of  Joseph,  for  example,  from  the  time  when  he  provoked  the 
jealousy  of  his  brethren.  Look  at  the-  case  of  Job;  the  apostle  notices  it  in  this 
way —  Ye  have  seen  the  end  of  the  Lord,  that  the  Lord  is  very  pitiful  and  of  tender 
mercy."  Now  from  one,  judge  all  the  ways  of  God.  V.  The  mystery  which 
NOW  attaches  to  the  ways  of  God  must  be  effectually  and  completely 
DONE  away  hereafter,  because  God  Himself  (if  one  may  speak  it  reverently) 
stands  as  a  candidate  for  the  applause  of  the  universe.  He  is  working  out  His 
designs  in  the  presence  of  beings  whom  He  has  made  capable  of  understanding 
them  in  i)art;  ourselves,  for  example,  and  the  devils,  and  the  angels  in  heaven. 
He  is  working  out  TTia  designs  in  the  presence  of  critical  judges.     Not  that  it  is  of 


CHAP.  XLV.]  ISAIAH.  455 

any  consequence  to  God,  one  may  say,  what  we  think  of  His  ways;  but  yet,  inas- 
much as  God  has  made  us  capable  of  appreciating  His  ways,  and  of  deriving 
emotions  from  understanding  them,  there  can  be  no  question  but  that  God  means 
to  stand  well  in  the  judgment  of  creatures  whom  He  has  thus  made  capable  of 
judging.  Practical  improvement — 1.  One  may  learn  hence  the  infinite  importance 
of  a  spirit  of  friendship  with  God.  (1)  Because  it  is  only  in  the  spirit  of  a  friend 
that  His  character  can  be  justly  viewed.  (2)  Because  of  the  very  fact  of  the 
mystery  of  His  ways.  God's  ways  to  yourself  will  be  mysterious;  and  how  can 
you  bear  to  be  in  the  hands  of  a  mysterious  Being,  a  Being  whose  ways  are  mysterious, 
without  being  sure  that  He  is  yoiu:  friend?  2.  The  friends  of  God  should  learn 
to  trust  Him  with  unshaken  confidence.  We  have  grounds  for  confidence — security 
that  God's  character  is  all  that  it  should  be.  3.  Let  us  anticipate  with  joy  the 
world  that  is  to  come.  The  world  to  come  will  be  the  time  (so  to  speak)  for  God's 
turning  towards  us  the  tapestry  which  He  is  working.  {Ibid.)  God  hiding  Him- 
self : — 1.  God  hid  Himself  when  He  brought  them  into  the  trouble,  hid  Himself, 
and  was  wroth  (chap.  Ivli.  17).  2.  He  hid  Himself  when  He  was  bringing  them 
out  of  the  trouble  (Psa.  Ixxvii.  19).  (if.  Henry.)  The  Lord  a  God  that  hideth 
Himself : — When  the  Holy  Scriptures  represent  the  Lord  to  us,  or  describe  any 
of  the  more  splendid  manifestations  of  Himself,  we  find  united  together  the  fire 
and  the  cloud,  light  and  darkness.  It  is  this  imion  which  Isaiah  exhibits:  **  Verily 
Thou  art  a  God  that  hidest  Thyself,  O  God  of  Israel,  the  Saviour."  The  phrase 
denotes  the  incomprehensibility  of  Providence,  the  obscm-ity  of  God's  ways  and 
dealings  with  the  children  of  men.  I.  God,  the  SAViotTB  of  Israel,  is  a  (Jod 
THAT  HIDETH  HiMSELF.  That  His  dispensations,  though  wise  and  merciful,  are 
often  mysterious — 1.  Would  be  supposed  by  reason.  2.  Is  proved  by  experience. 
II.  Though  He  hideth  Himself  He  is  always  the  Saviotjr  of  His  people. 
Though  the  dispensations  of  Providence  towards  them  are  inscrutable,  they  have 
a  certain  connection  with  their  salvation.  {H.  KcHloch,  D.D.)  The  hidden 
God : — In  all  times  and  circumstances  this  tendency  of  God  to  hide  Himself  has 
been  forced  upon  men.  God  hid  Himself  in  the  burning  bush,  in  the  cloud  of 
glory  that  rested  over  the  tabernacle.  He  shined  forth  from  Mount  Paran,  and 
Sinai,  and  Seir,  but  no  man  beheld  Him.  Often  were  the  tones  of  His  voice  heard, 
but  no  form  was  seen.  Often  was  His  glory  made  manifest,  but  His  face  concealed. 
Men  like  Enoch  and  Noah  and  Elijah  walked  with  God  and  communed  with  EQm; 
yet  upon  the  Almighty  they  gazed  not.  Often  did  God  speak  to  men  in  dreams 
and  visions  of  the  night,  but  none  ever  saw  the  face  or  distingmshed  the  form  of 
the  Eternal.  Moses  coidd  sing  his  grand  song,  but  God  must  put  into  his  mouth, 
*'  I  will  hide  My  face  from  them;  I  will  see  what  their  end  shall  be."  Job  inquires 
— and  how  pathetic  is  the  question  on  this  man's  lips ! — "  Wherefore  hidest  Thou 
Thy  face  ?  "  Even  Isaiah,  who  enjoyed  a  clearer  vision  of  God  than  most  men, 
makes  Him  out  to  be  the  Great  Mystery  of  all  things,  and  yet  says:  "  I  will  wait 
upon  the  Lord  that  hideth  His  face  from  the  house  of  Jacob,  and  I  will  look  for  Him." 
Tixdy  "  no  man  can  see  God  "  ;  no  man  can  see  anything  that  is  really  great.  The 
invisible  things  are  the  greatest,  and  God  is  in  them  all.  He  is  nearer  to  you  than 
yova  hands  and  feet,  and  closer  to  you  than  your  breathing;  yet  you  cannot  see 
Him.  {G.  Felix  Williams.)  God  hiding  Himself: — I.  Nattjbb  is  a  house  of 
concealment  for  God.  II.  Pbovtdenoe  is  also  a  house  of  concealment  for  God. 
m.  God  was  bidden  in  Jesus  Chbist.  (Ibid.)  God  hidden  from  the  sinner: — 
There  is  a  hiding  of  Himself  mentioned  in  the  Scripture — God's  spiritual  withdrawal 
of  Himself  from  our  souls,  which,  far  from  being  His  volimtary  purpose  concerning 
us,  is  a  dire  misfortxine  which  we  entail  upon  ourselves, — a  correcting  punishment 
in  all  cases — a  tremendous  judgment  in  some.  It  is  most  important,  therefore, 
that  we  should  consider  the  different  instances  in  which  God  may  be  said  to  be 
spiritually  hidden  from  us,  in  order  that  we  may  learn  how  to  avoid  falling  into 
so  heavy  a  calamity,  as  well  as  how  best  to  profit  by  it  when  God's  chastening 
hand  so  visits  us.  1.  God  is  often  hidden  from  us  in  prayer.  2.  He  must  be  hidden 
from  us  whenever  we  presumptuously  sin  against  Him.  3.  He  is  also  hidden  when 
we  feel  a  want  of  reliance  on  Him,  and  comfort  in  Him,  under  the  ordinary  trials 
and  sufferings  of  the  present  life.  {A.  Gatty,  M.A.)  The  hidings  of  Deity: — 
The  inspired  writers  dwell  frequently  and  earnestly  on  the  inaccessible  splendour 
that  surrounds  the  Creator.  "  Clouds  and  darkness  are  round  about  Him  "  ; 
"  touching  the  Almighty,  we  cannot  find  Him  out "  ;  "  He  made  darkness  His 
secret  place;  His  pavilion  round  about  Him  were  dark  waters,  and  thick  clouds 
of  the  skies."     It  was  a  cloud  which  conducted  the  wanderings  of  Israel;  it  was 


k 


456  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xlv. 

a  cloud  which  filled  the  tabernacle  of  the  Lord.  The  symbols  of  God's  greatness 
wear  the  robes  of  concealment,  and  He  demands  homage,  not  so  much  by  what 
He  has  revealed  as  by  what  the  revelation  itself  pronounces  obscure.  And  it 
should  be  observed  that  all  this  proceeded  not  from  unwillingness  to  disclose  His 
brightness,  but  rather  from  the  fact  that  since  this  brightness  was  Divine  it  could 
not  be  endured  by  human  vision.  To  this  He  Himself  referred  when  discoursing 
with  Moses  as  His  own  friend.  "  Thou  canst  not  see  My  face,  for  there  shall  no 
man  see  Me  and  live  "  ;  and  although  He  "  made  all  His  goodness  to  pass  before 
him,"  as  being  that  which  the  creatures  of  earth  might  behold  and  yet  breathe, 
when  the  august  train  of  His  glory  swept  by.  He  hid  His  servant  in  the  cleft  of  the 
rock,  lest  he  should  be  withered  to  nothing  by  the  unearthly  blaze.  {H.  Mdvill,  B.D.) 
Ood  hiding  Himself : — If  we  pass  from  the  days  of  ancient  Israel  to  our  own,  it  is 
to  be  remarked  that  we  think  much  and  speak  much  of  the  mysteries  which  un- 
deniably exist  in  the  nature  of  God,  and  in  His  operations  whether  in  providence 
or  in  grace;  but  after  all,  it  may  be  that  we  scarcely  regard  those  mysteries  in 
their  most  important  point  of  view, — that  we  rather  consider  them  as  secrets 
which  oppose  our  ingenuity  than  as  fields  which  yield  a  rich  harvest  of  honom* 
to  the  Creator  and  of  advantage  to  ourselves.  There  is  a  likelihood  of  our  not 
regarding  these  mysteries  as  necessary  portions  of  the  dealings  between  finite 
beings  and  the  Infinite;  as  forced,  so  to  speak,  into  God's  dispensations  by  His 
unmeasured  superiority  over  the  work  of  His  own  hands.  Nay,  we  are  well  aware 
that  many  go  even  so  far  as  to  denounce  and  decry  revelation  altogether,  just 
because  it  contains  truths  too  big  for  human  comprehension;  forgetting  or  over- 
looking that,  since  it  is  probably  essential  to  the  very  nature  of  God  that  He  should 
hide  Himself,  their  ground  of  rejection  is  virtually  a  ground  of  belief  and  acceptance. 
Thus  our  text  seems  to  breathe  the  language  of  admiration  and  praise.  I.  That 
OF  God  hidino  Himself  in  regard  of  His  own  nature  and  properties.  In 
real  truth,  we  know  nothing  of  God  in  Himself;  we  know  Him  only  in  His  attributes, 
and  His  attributes  only  as  written  in  His  Word  and  His  works.  Let  it  only  be 
remembered  that  we  are  a  mystery  to  ourselves;  that  every  object  around  us 
baffles  our  penetration ;  that  there  is  not  an  insect,  nor  a  leaf,  nor  an  atom,  which 
does  not  master  us  if  we  attempt  to  apprehend  its  nature  and  its  growth,  and  we 
must  admit  that  there  is  a  presumption  which  outbraves  language  in  expecting 
that  we  may  ascertain  what  God  is,  and  how  God  subsists.  Even  when  God  makes 
announcements  of  His  nature,  they  are  such  as  quite  baffle  our  reason !  1 .  Look  at 
the  doctrine  of  the  Trinity.  2.  So  soon  as  God  has  been  addressed  as  a  "  God  that 
hideth  Himself"  He  is  addressed  as  "the  Saviour."  And  we  are  free  to  own, 
in  respect  of  the  scheme  of  our  salvation,  that  whilst  everything  is  disclosed  which 
has  reference  to  ourselves,  there  is  much  hidden  which  has  reference  to  God.  We 
can  form  no  adequate  notion  of  the  Incarnation  :  how  the  Godhead  could  tabernacle 
in  flesh;  how  Divinity  and  humanity  could  coalesce  to  make  a  Mediator;  how 
there  could  be  a  bearing  of  sin  and  yet  freedom  from  sinfulness ;  the  impossibihty 
of  being  overcome  by  temptation,  and  yet  such  a  capacity  of  being  tempted  as 
should  ensure  sympathy  to  ourselves.  It  lies  beyond  human  power,  at  least  %vith 
the  present  amount  of  revelation,  to  scan  the  wonders  of  the  Person,  and  to  unravel 
the  intricacies  of  the  work  of  redemption.  "  Verily  Thou  art  a  God  that  hideth  Thy- 
self "  is  what  we  are  forced  to  exclaim  even  when  contemplating  God  as  "  the  God  of 
Israel,  the  Saviour."  But  in  what  tone  should  we  make  the  exclamation?  The 
points  to  which  we  have  referred  are  not  points  which  it  concerns  men  accurately  to 
understand,  though  it  is  at  their  own  peril  not  to  believe  ;  and  there  is  nothing  by 
which  God  is  so  much  honoured,  and  the  soul  so  much  advantaged,  as  by  our  taking 
Him  at  His  word.  3.  We  observe  in  reference  to  the  Bible,  as  before  in  reference  to 
the  Divine  nature,  that  it  is  the  sublimity  which  produces  the  obscurity.  4.  And 
if  God,  when  discovering  Himself  as  the  Saviour,  hide  much  in  regard  of  the  mysteries 
of  redemption,  does  He  not  also  hide  much  of  its  individual  application?  How 
secretly  the  Holy  Spirit  enters  into  the  heart  of  man !  II.  That  of  His  hiding  Him- 
self IN  EEQARD  OF  Hl8  DEALINGS  W^TH  HiS  CREATURES.       1.  God  COnCCals  mUCh  in 

the  dispensations  of  ffis  providence.  He  does  not  lay  open  the  reasons  of  His 
appointments;  He  does  not  explain  why  prosperity  should  be  allotted  to  one  man 
and  adversity  to  another.  2.  God  hides  from  His  creatures  the  day  of  their  death. 
3.  God  has  hidden  much  from  us  with  regard  to  a  future  state.  {Ibid.)  God  a 
mystery : — God  is  a  mystery,  unsearchable,  unfathomable,  inscrutable.  So  am  I; 
so  is  everything.  In  his  poem,  "  Flower  in  the  crannied  wall,"  Tennyson  stored 
one  of  his  profoundest  thoughts:  If  I  could  explain  God  He  would  cease  to  be  God. 


CHAP.  XLV.]  ISAIAH.  457 

An  infinite  subject  can  never  come  within  the  limitations  of  a  finite  mind.  It 
matters  not  whether  we  surround  God  with  clouds  and  darkness,  or  "  light  inaccess- 
ible " — He  is  equally  hidden  by  either.  Since  the  prophet  uttered  the  text,  men 
have  advanced  no  further  into  the  sanctuary  that  veils  from  sight  the  Deity.  Science 
has  made  many  discoveries,  solved  many  mysteries,  but  upon  one  subject  sheds  no 
light,  and  in  the  presence  of  God  is  "  dumb  with  silence."  I.  God  hides  Himself 
IN  NATUBE.  "  In  Him  we  live  and  move  and  have  our  being,"  yet  where  is  He? 
Worlds  move  in  their  orbits  and  "  stars  in  their  courses,"  because  an  unseen  hand 
upholds  and  guides.  The  telescope  brings  distant  worlds  in  view  and  reveals  every- 
where His  presence  and  power,  but  no  telescope  is  so  powerful  as  to  bring  Grod 
within  range  of  oiu*  vision.  Study  the  origin  of  life,  and  with  aid  of  the  microscope 
gaze  upon  the  simplest  germs  fresh  from  the  hand  of  God,  and  that  hand  seems 
almost  in  sight,  but  still  He  eludes  our  sight.  11.  The  God  op  providence  hides 
Himself.  Thy  way  is  in  the  sea,  and  Thy  footsteps  are  not  known."  His  pro- 
vidences stagger  human  reason,  and  His  purposes  and  ways  are  past  finding  out 
(Psa.  Ixxiii.).  We  look  on  the  wrong  side  of  the  pattern,  but  God  is  behind  the 
curtain.  His  hand  holds  the  shuttle.  His  foot  is  on  the  treadle.  He  will  weave  the 
web  of  our  life  into  a  pattern  beautiful  and  glorious  according  to  His  Divine  design. 
History  is  the  unfolding  of  His  providence  on  a  large  scale,  which  "  almost  reveals, 
but  does  not  quite  conceal,"  the  finger  that  writes  its  records,  m.  The  God  of 
GBAOB  HIDES  BEHIND  His  PURPOSES  OP  GRACE.  The  analogy  between  nature  and 
grace  is  very  striking.  IV.  Will  God  hide  Himself  in  heaven  also;  or  vstll  He 
COME  FORTH  TO  VIEW  IN  THE  LIGHT  OP  ETERNITY  ?  "  No  man  shaU  See  Me  and  live  " 
seems  to  imply  a  possibility  after  death.  "  Blessed  are  the  pure  in  heart,  for  they 
shall  see  God."  But  do  not  the  pure  of  earth  see  God  in  that  sense?  In  a  certain 
sense  we  wiU  "  see  His  face,"  but  in  all  probabihty  He  will  even  in  eternity  be  a  God 
that  hideth  Himself,  in  order  that  eternity  may  be  a  continual  revelation  more  and 
more  of  His  beauty  and  glory.  V.  God  hides  Himself,  but  not  His  mercy.  His 
love  shines  on  every  page  of  the  Scriptures,  and  "  Hjs  mercy  is  in  the  heavens," 
above  the  brightness  of  the  sun.     Whatever  else  may  be  dark,  the  way  of  life  is 

Elain.  {8.  L.  Morris,  D.D.)  Mysteries  in  religion : — Verily,  God  hideth  Himself. 
,  As  regards  His  personal  existence.  II.  As  regards  the  sovereignty  of 
AT.T.  His  works  in  creation  and  providence,  m.  In  the  riches  op  His  atonino 
LOVE  IN  Jesus  Christ.  IV.  In  the  energy  of  His  saving  power  by  the  Holy 
Ghost.  {H.  M'Neile,  M.A.)  God  hides  to  reveal  Himself: — If  the  chapter  is 
examined  it  will  be  seen  that  God's  hiding  Himself  is  regarded  but  as  a  preparation 
of  manifestation,  and  as  a  means  of  it.  He  hid  Himself  in  employing  Cyrus,  but  it 
was  that  He  might  be  better  known,  that  His  control  over  men  and  nations  might 
be  recognised.  We  have  then  to  consider  the  truth  that  God's  hiding  of  Himself 
is  in  order  that  He  may  be  better  known,  and  that  His  great  end  in  all  is  that  all  the 
ends  of  the  earth  may  look  to  Him  and  be  saved.  I.  This  is  true  op  the  material 
universe.  1.  Think  of  an  infinite  Being,  a  perfect  and  eternal  One,  and  of  depen- 
dent spirits  created  and  sustained  by  Him.  Should  we  not  have  expected  that 
this  great  and  glorious  Being  would  make  Himself  known  to  His  creatures  in  some 
direct,  clear,  unmistakable  way?  Instead  of  such  a  visible,  unmistakable  appear- 
ance of  God  we  have  only  a  vast  expanse  of  matter.  Matter  everywhere;  God 
nowhere  to  be  seen.  There  are  great  forces  moAong  aroimd  us;  but  they  are  not 
God.  We  cannot  see  a  face.  We  believe,  we  feel,  we  know  that  behind  aU  a  great 
Will  is  working,  but  we  cannot  see  or  touch  that  Will.  Matter  in  its  dulness  and 
insensibility  hides  God.  Its  crassness  and  opacity  keep  the  thought  of  God  out  of 
our  minds.  We  lose  God  in  the  multitudinousness  of  the  forms  He  presents  to  us. 
Beauty  and  grandeur  even  enchain  our  souls.  We  are  delighted  with  the  picture, 
and  never  rise  beyond.  2.  Yet  this  matter,  so  often  felt  as  a  concealing  of  God,  is 
truly  a  revealing,  a  manifestation  of  qualities  in  God  which  otherwise  would  have 
been  hidden  from  us.  How  could  God's  almighty  power  have  been  made  plain  to 
us  except  through  matter  ?  The  variety,  which  may  seem  to  hide  God,  reveals  the 
inexhaustibleness  of  His  resources.  Minuteness  reveals  the  greatness  of  His  care. 
And  though  God  remains  hidden,  the  fact  of  His  existence  is  made  clear  and  certain 
to  the  practical  reason  of  man.  The  marks  of  adaptation,  purpose,  and  design  are 
so  multiplied,  so  direct  and  obvious  in  some  cases,  and  so  elaborate  and  complex  in 
others,  that  conviction  comes  irresistibly  on  the  general  mind.  The  destruction 
and  pain  that  are  found  in  some  parts  of  nature  form  a  contrast  needful  to  the 
Betting  off  of  the  beneficence  displayed  in  the  enjoyment  that  abounds.  Would 
not  the  beauty  of  the  world  be  tame  and  unappreciated  if  it  were  confronted  with 


458  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR,  [ohap.  xlv, 

no  opposite?  The  very  inexplicableness  of  some  parts  of  the  universe,  their 
apparent  contradiction  to  the  goodness  of  God,  are  part  of  the  lesson,  and  a  most 
important  part.  They  give  us  a  sense  of  the  mystery  of  God.  They  are  the  very 
things  that  waken  up  certain  classes  of  minds.  They  serve,  above  all,  to  impress  us 
with  the  thought  that  nature  is  no  sufficient  manifestation  of  God.  They  render 
necessary  a  lofty  faith  in  God,  and  make  welcome  that  higher  revelation  wluch  is  its 
nutriment.  II.  It  is  tbtje  of  law,  which  is  found  everywhere  in  the  material 
universe,  that  while  it  seems  to  hide  God  it  yet  manifests  Him  in  a  higher  way.  I.  A 
system  of  law  everywhere  prevails.  Each  separate  existence  has  its  own  law,  and 
all  are  bound  together  by  general  laws.  The  thought  of  this  all- pervading  invari- 
able law  has  something  in  it  pleasing  to  the  intellect  of  man.  It  even  gives  him 
delight  to  contemplate  the  unvarying  order,  and  to  trace  regularity  and  harmony 
where  at  first  there  appeared  only  confusion.  But  the  human  heart  does  not  take 
kindly  to  this  idea  of  law.  It  feels  as  if  it  were  imprisoned,  and  God  put  far  away 
and  deprived  of  power  to  help.  It  seems  even,  .at  times,  as  if  God  were  put  out  of 
the  um verse,  and  scarcely  even  the  name  of  Him  left.  2.  But  it  is  a  groundless 
alarm.  The  belief  in  law  neither  takes  away  God,  nor  deprives  Him  of  His  freedom 
and  power  to  help.  To  show  that  God's  working  is  regular  is  not  to  make  it  less  His 
working.  Order  is  not  force.  The  channel  in  which  power  operates  is  not  the 
power.  The  existence  of  law,  then,  does  not  really  hide  God.  It  reveals  Him  in  a 
grand  and  elevating  way.  What  lessons  it  teaches  of  the  Divine  love  for  order,  of 
the  unity  of  God's  mind,  and  His  unchangeableness.  What  an  impression  it  gives 
of  the  entire  absence  of  caprice  in  His  nature,  and  His  absolute  reliableness.  How 
grandly  it  shows  the  subordination  of  all  things,  even  the  minutest,  to  one  vast 
purpose,  in.  It  is  trtte  of  the  means  and  agents  employed  by  God  that  in  them 
He  hides  Himself,  and  yet  reveals  Himself  in  a  higher  way.  1.  God's  great  channels 
of  power  in  the  moral  world  are  two — truth  and  men.  The  truth  of  God  is  so 
perfectly  adapted  to  its  purpose  that  it  seems  to  be  doing  all  the  work.  So  also  is 
it  with  the  human  agency  that  God  employs.  The  influence  of  men  appears  to 
depend  so  entirely  on  the  energy  they  put  forth,  upon  their  adaptation  to  particular 
classes  of  men,  upon  their  intellectual  and  moral  incisiveness,  upon  a  certain  shining 
through  of  conviction,  and  a  contagiousness  of  natiure,  that  it  seems  as  if  it  were  a 
thing  wholly  in  the  human  sphere.  God  is  thoroughly  hidden  behind  man.  2.  But 
look  what  a  grand  revelation  of  Himself  God  gives  by  this  arrangement.  What  a 
regard  He  shows  to  the  souls  He  has  made  in  using  such  an  array  of  truth  upon  them. 
It  is  one  of  the  greatest  displays  of  God  that  He  condescends  to  win  by  truth,  that 
He  stoops  to  reason  and  plead.  And  what  noble  quahties  God  shows  in  using 
human  agents  as  He  does.  Does  He  not  show  His  desire  to  bring  out  of  each 
creature  all  its  capabilities.  His  desire  to  give  to  the  children  the  highest  possible 
honour,  to  make  them  dear  and  honourable  to  each  other,  by  making  them  the 
channels  of  the  very  highest  blessing?  IV.  God  hides  Himself  behind  delay 
and  disaster,  and  yet  reveals  Himself  through  these  in  a  higher  way.  It  is 
an  old  cause  of  perplexity  to  men  that  one  event  happens  to  the  evil  and  the  good, 
and  that  God's  work  moves  with  such  incredible  slo%vness.  And  yet,  in  all  this 
God  is  revealing  Himself.  He  reveals  His  grand  purpose  and  determination  that 
men  shall  walk  by  faith.  Would  it  be  a  benefit  to  men  to  be  freed  from  the  necessity 
of  walking  by  faith?  It  would  be  stopping  the  channel  between  us  and  all  God  s 
blessings.  God  makes  the  world  so  full  of  contradiction  and  disaster,  makes  it  so 
incalculable  and  mysterious,  just  because  He  loves  us  and  does  not  wish  us  to  stray 
away  from  Himself.  What  wealth  of  consolation  He  spreads  abroad  in  hearts 
through  the  occasion  and  opportunity  of  sorrow.  (J.  Leckie,  D.D.)  The  Divine 
invisibility : — We  have  in  us  from  babyhood  an  irrepressible  desire  to  know  the  un- 
known. The  unknown  is  the  awful.  And  so  in  heathen  religions  there  is  always 
some  mysterious  place  into  which  only  a  high  priest  enters,  some  inner  sanctuary 
veiled  from  mortal  eyes  where  the  Divine  presence  is  more  perceptible  than  else- 
where. Even  Judaism  had  it,  and  its  veil  of  the  temple  was  not  rent  in  twain  tiU 
Christ  came.  Sacerdotal  chm-ches  maintain  the  idea  tQl  this  day.  Idolatry — what 
is  it?  What  but  the  effort  to  make  the  invisible  visible?  When  Jesus  the  Christ 
came  into  this  world's  life,  He  came  to  answer  the  longing  of  the  human  heart  after 
some  such  expression  of  Deity  as  should  satisfy  that  desire  to  make  the  invisible 
visible.  In  our  noblest  moments  it  must  seem  to  us  that  the  demand  for  a  full  and 
perfect  revelation  of  Deity  is  unreasonable,  not  to  use  the  stronger  word,  absiu-d. 
Reasonable  c-nough  is  the  demand,  let  us  know  the  heart  of  Deity.  And  so,  while  it 
is  still  true  that  the  eternal  One  is  a  God  that  hideth  Himself  it  is  also  true  that  the 


CHAP.  XLV-J  ISAIAH.  459 

prayer  of  man's  heart,  "  Lord,  show  us  the  Father,  and  it  sufficeth  us,"  has  been 
answered.  But  can  we  not  see  that  the  Divine  invisibility  has  its  uses  in  the  develop- 
ment of  this  nature  of  ours  ?  1.  One  use  is  to  train  us  to  reverence.  2.  God's  hiding 
of  Himself  is  necessary  to  our  freedom.  Our  great  Teacher  puts  this  thought,  as  is 
His  wont,  into  the  parable  of  an  Eastern  lord  going  into  a  far  country  and  deliver- 
ing his  goods  into  the  custody  of  his  servants,  that,  in  his  absence,  they  may  so  use 
them  as  to  increase  them.  In  order  to  the  development  of  every  human  life  a 
certain  amount  of  freedom  is  necessary.  The  over-awing  sensible  presence  of  God 
would  completely  destroy  oiu:  freedom.  It  would  paralyse  our  activities.  3.  It  is 
necessary  to  our  perfectness  of  nature.  But  perfectness  in  man  is  not  simply  a 
matter  of  outward  condition,  it  imphes  internal  correspondence  with  an  environment 
in  itself  perfect.  In  order  to  perfectness  of  inward  condition  there  must  be  the 
ability  of  faith  in  a  Power  outside  ourselves,  and  of  faith  in  all  around  us,  the 
abihty  of  perpetual  hope,  the  ability  of  undying  love.  And  it  is  not  possible,  so 
far  as  we  can  see,  to  develop  these  virtues  unless  we  have  room  for  their  growth. 
The  invisibility  of  God  is  necessary  to  their  growth.  {R.  Thomas,  D.D.) 
Withholding  the  law  of  revealing : — I.  See  how  continuotis  has  been  this  IiAW. 
1.  The  records  of  the  world  before  the  flood,  scanty  as  they  are,  show  us  that  it  was 
ever  present  in  that  earliest  dispensation.  Through  that  darkness  we  can  see  man 
Tinder  the  dispensation  of  an  incomplete  revelation;  God,  ever  present  and  yet  ever 
hidden,  and  restraining  His  manifestation  of  Himself  even  as  He  gives  it.  What 
an  expression  it  is,  "  God  looked  upon  the  earth,  and  behold  it  was  corrupt."  That 
looking  on  it,  His  revelation;  that  turning  aside  from  it.  His  hiding  of  His  face, 
because  He  could  not  endure  its  corruption  and  its  violence.  2.  After  the  flood  it  ia 
still  the  same;  as  to  the  world  at  large  most  evidently  so.  How  soon  does  the  know- 
ledge of  God  die  out,  even  in  the  family  of  Noah !  Then  the  Lord  calls  Abraham, 
and  reveals  Himself  to  that  one  chosen  witness.  What  a  hiding  of  Himself,  even 
in  His  revelation,  does  this  imply.  Even  more  remarkable  yet  is  the  presence  of 
this  law  amongst  those  to  whom  the  Ught  was  given.  Marvellous  communications 
of  Himself  were  made  by  God  to  Abraham.  When  the  three  mysterious  strangers 
stood  suddenly  before  him  as  he  sat  in  his  tent-door  in  the  heat  of  the  day,  how  near 
he  is  to  the  knowledge  of  the  Divine  Trinity;  and  when  the  men  vanish  out  of  hia 
sight,  and  he  is  left  alone  "  before  the  Lord,"  how  is  the  Trinity  gathered  up  again 
into  the  unity  of  the  Godhead.  So  again,  when  the  assurance  of  his  own  acceptance 
is  vouchsafed  to  him  as  the  lamp  of  God  moves  between  the  divided  pieces  of  his 
sacrifice,  a  horror  of  great  darkness  falls  upon  the  spirit  of  the  favoured  man.  In 
the  revelation  of  Himself  God  still  hides  Himself,  even  from  the  opened  eye  of 
Abraham.  So  it  continues  all  along  the  line.  3.  So  it  was  throughout  the  whole 
prophetic  dispensation.  What  growing  light, — what  remaining  darkness  meet  us 
everywhere.  4.  How  plainly  ia  the  same  feature  to  be  traced  in  the  personal 
ministry  of  our  Lord  Himself !  This  is  everywhere  discernible  in  His  conduct  to 
the  scribes  and  Pharisees,  and  even  to  the  multitude.  What  else  were  those  charges 
to  one  and  another  not  to  make  known  His  miraculous  works  of  healing;  what  dse 
the  wrapping  up  of  His  words  in  parables:  that  "  seeing  they  might  see  and  not 
perceive,  and  hearing  they  might  hear  and  not  vmderstand  "  ?  And  even  with  His 
own  disciples  He  acted  to  a  great  degree  on  the  same  rule.  How  plainly  do  their 
words  and  acts  convey  to  us  the  idea  of  men  hving  imder  a  sense  of  mystery  which 
they  could  not  fathom.  5.  Is  not  the  same  law  marked  even  upon  the  open  revela- 
tion of  the  dispensation  of  the  Spirit?  God's  sovereignty  and  man's  free  agency; 
the  CO- working  of  His  almighty  grace  aad  our  own  personal  responsibility;  the 
infinite  love  and  power  of  God,  and  the  origin  and  being  of  evil;  who  can  explain 
the  co-existence  of  these  wonders?  6.  Nor  is  it  otherwise,  if  from  these  imsolved 
difficulties  of  thought  we  turn  to  the  direct  appointments  of  the  Church  of  Christ. 
Do  not  the  blessed  sacraments  of  the  Gospel  at  once  reveal  and  hide  the  Divine 
Presence?  7.  Most  signally,  too,  is  this  true  as  to  God's  dealings  with  individual 
Bouls  in  the  Church  of  the  redeemed.  8.  We  may  trace  it  in  the  Chiurch  at  large. 
Bright  as  is  the  light,  where  is  it  without  the  shadow  following  it?  IL  Its  object. 
Here,  then,  is  the  dispensation.  Why  we  are  put  under  it  the  fewest  words  may 
safest  teU.  Evidently  it  is  of  God's  love  for  us,  and  of  His  pity  for  our  weakness. 
It  is  because  we  cannot  now  bear  more;  and  that  we  may  be  led  on  to  more. 
III.  Its  conseqtjencbs.  What  especially  we  should  learn  from  His  having  placed 
us  under  such  a  dispensation  seems  to  be — 1.  That  if  we  would  know  Him  we  must 
follow  hard  after  Him.  2.  The  need  of  reverence  in  seeking.  3.  The  true  mode  of 
treating  these  mysteries  is  neither  to  deny  their  existence  nor  to  fear  their  presence. 


460  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xlv. 

still  less  to  let  them  minister  to  the  production  of  doubt  or  unbelief,  but  to  look  at 
them  as  men  look  at  the  clouds  which  fleck  the  heavens;  which,  though  for  the  time 
they  hide  the  sun,  yet  do  not  make  it  the  less  present  in  the  firmament,  but  which 
may  themselves  become  so  full  of  its  Ught  as  to  give  back  its  radiance  with  a  beauty 
which,  if  its  burning  brightness  had  not  been  broken  by  them  into  the  infinity  of 
light  and  shade,  it  could  not  have  possessed.  (B-p.  8.  Wilberforr.e,  D.D.)  The 
knowledge  of  a  triune  God : — In  this  short  verse  there  is  contained  the  description  of 
God  in  two  characters,  as  known  and  yet  unknown,  as  revealed  and  yet  a  mystery, 
as  showing  and  yet  hiding  Himself.  This  comprehensive  idea  of  God  had  been 
gained  from  experience.  The  names  "  God  of  Israel "  and  "  Saviour  "  embody 
the  remembrance  of  the  many  occasions  when  He  had  shown  Himself  identified 
with  the  nation's  life  and  safety,  as  He  had  guided  or  protected  them.  And  yet, 
running  all  through  that  same  history  had  been  the  feature  of  imexpectedness  and 
strangeness  in  His  mode  of  working;  so  that  at  last  the  people  felt  that  they  knew 
TTim  and  yet  did  not  know  Him.  Each  new  proof  of  His  power  and  presence  only 
introduced  a  new  point  at  which  the  mystery  of  His  being  and  His  ways  was  felt. 
Our  experience  cannot  be  said  to  be  greatly  different  from  the  prophet's.  We  go 
over  the  hfe  of  Christ,  and  each  point  of  it  is  a  revelation  of  our  God;  and  then  we 
complete  our  thoughts  with  an  expression  of  God's  being  full  of  hard  thoughts  and 
mystery.  1.  Christ  as  the  revelation  of  God  leads  to  the  doctrine  of  the  Trinity. 
Happy  shall  we  be  if  we  can  feel  the  imity  of  the  two  aspects  of  mystery  and  revel- 
ation as  the  prophet  did,  and  join  them,  as  he  did,  without  any  sense  of  hostiUty 
between  them.  2.  If  men  would  only  see  that  the  doctrine  of  a  Trinity  has  its  first 
ground  in  the  longing  of  God  to  get  near  to  man,  it  would  not  so  often  be  pronoimced 
hard,  cold,  and  useless.  We  should  all  see  how  to  use  it.  When  hfe  and  the  world 
seemed  cruel  and  disappointing,  seemed  to  be  discouraging  us  from  any  attempt  to 
find  God,  then  we  would  turn  to  our  doctrine  of  God  and,  gathering  re-assurance 
from  the  announcement  that  there  is  in  the  Godhead  not  only  the  power  of  sitting 
afar  off  in  mysterious  grandeur,  but  also  the  power  of  coming  near  to  each  one  of 
us,  and  being  one  with  us,  we  should  take  up  our  life  again  with  new  courage,  and  go 
back  to  the  world  with  new  confidence,  feehng  sure  that  God  is  in  it,  and  is  not 
beyond  meeting  us  there.  3.  Another  characteristic  of  our  search  for  God  is,  that 
we  want  Him  to  be  like  us  in  character  and  feehng.  If  He  is  not,  we  do  not  see  how 
we  can  form  any  estimate  of  Him,  and  know  Him  at  all.  And  yet  that  desire  to 
have  Him  like  us  has  led  to  such  evil  results  that  men  often  distrust  it.  It  has  so 
generally  resulted  in  making  a  man's  God  only  an  unnaturally  magnified  reflection 
of  his  own  character  that  the  pictures  thus  produced  have  been  anything  but 
attractive.  They  have  so  often  had  cruelty,  hatred,  and  narrowness  in  them  that 
men,  rejecting  such  representations,  have  said,  "  We  cannot  know  God,  He  is  so 
different  from  us;  He  is  a  God  that  hideth  Himself."  4.  We  turn  again  to  that 
revealed  picture  of  our  God  as  it  is  given  in  the  thought  of  a  Trinity,  and  we  find 
that  it  contains  the  very  central  idea  of  human  hfe, — mutual  feeling  and  relation, 
{A.  Brool's,  D.D.)  God  hides  Himself : — It  is  supposed  by  some,  that  after  Cyrus 
took  possession  of  the  city  he  was  shown  this  prophecy,  probably  by  Daniel,  and  he 
was  so  impressed  with  it  that  he  resolved  still  further  to  fulfil  it,  by  allowing  the 
Jewish  captives  to  return  to  their  own  land;  and  the  way  in  which  God  would 
accompHsh  the  work  without  openly  appearing  in  it  led  the  prophet  to  exclaim: 
"  Verily  Thou  art  a  God  that  hidest  Thyself,"  &c.  This  sentiment  is  often  expressed 
in  God's  Word,  and  is  still  more  frequently  justified  by  His  ways  and  works. 

1.  The  fact  here  stated,  that  God  hides  Himself.  This  is  a  fact  that  none  will 
dispute;  for — 1.  He  is  unseen.  (1)  In  the  works  of  nature.  We  do  not  see  Him 
engaged  in  them  as  we  see  men  engaged  in  what  they  do.  (2)  In  the  dispensations 
of  providence.  The  word  "  providence  "  means  God,  foreseeing,  arranging,  and 
controlling  events  that  happen.  We  are  often  so  staggered  by  what  takes  place, 
it  is  so  contrary  to  what  we  expected,  that  we  have  no  answer  to  the  question, 
"  Where  is  thy  God?  "  (3)  In  His  spiritual  operations.  "  The  wind  bloweth  where 
it  Usteth,"  &c.     The  Lord  opened  the  heart  of  Lydia,  but  no  one  saw  Him  do  it. 

2.  God  hides  Himself,  in  that  He  has  not  revealed  Himself  to  us  in  such  a  way  as  to 
render  doubt  and  unbelief  impossible.  He  has  not  left  Himself  without  witnesses. 
God  may  be  known  by  His  works,  not  must  be.  God  has  revealed  Himself  in  His 
Word.  God  Has  revealed  Himself  in  His  Son.  But  the  incarnation  is  a  concealment 
of  God,  as  well  as  a  manifestation-  II.  Reasons  why  God  thus  hides  Hoiseu'. 
There  must  be  some  very  sufficient  reason  for  this  conduct  on  the  part  of  God. 
There  is  a  very  deep  sense  in  which  God  hides  Himself  from  us  on  account  of  our 


CHAP.  xi,v.]  ISAIAH.  461 

sins;  that  is,  withdraws  from  us  the  sense  of  His  spiritual  presence  and  the  tokens 
of  His  favour  (chap,  hx  2).  But  that  is  not  the  hading  to  which  the  prophet  here 
refers.  He  hides  Himself  because  this  is  necessary  for  our  moral  probation  and 
discipline.  He  was  not  always  visible  to  our  first  parents  in  the  garden ;  for  when 
they  heard  His  voice,  after  they  sinned,  they  hid  themselves.  They  would  scarcely 
have  eaten  of  the  forbidden  fruit  while  conscious  that  His  eye  was  upon  them.  In 
hke  manner  it  is  necessary  for  our  probation  that  God  should  not  be  seen.  He  hides 
Himself — 1.  To  try  our  faith.  Jesus  said  to  Thomas,  "  Because  thou  hast  seen 
thou  hast  beUeved;  blessed  are  they  that  have  not  seen  and  yet  have  believed." 
Faith  has  reason  and  a  sufificient  revelation  on  which  to  rest;  but  if  a  man  does  not 
wish  to  retain  the  knowledge  of  God,  he  may  find  room  for  doubt  and  unbeUef  even  in 
regions  where  the  pure  in  heart  see  God.  2.  To  test  our  love.  We  must  have  a  high 
and  intelligent  appreciation  of  the  character  of  a  being,  and  our  love  to  him  must 
have  its  roots  deep  down  in  our  moral  nature,  if  we  are  to  continue  to  love  him  during 
a  long  absence,  even  though  at  one  time  we  have  seen  him;  but  how  high  must  be 
our  appreciation  of  his  character  and  work  if  we  can  say  of  him,  "  Whom  having 
not  seen,  we  love;  in  whom,  though  now  we  see  Him  not,  yet  believing,  we  rejoice 
with  joy  unspeakable  and  full  of  glory."  If  we  so  love  Christ  when  we  do  not  see 
Him.  how  shall  we  love  Him  when  we  see  Him  as  He  is !  3.  To  test  the  strength  of 
our  principles.  A  master  wishes  to  know  how  his  servant  does  when  he  is  absent; 
a  father  wishes  to  know  how  his  son  conducts  himself  when  from  home.  If  he  hears 
that  his  son  is  as  pure  and  upright  and  loving  as  he  ever  was  when  the  eyes  of  his 
parents  were  upon  him,  it  fills  his  heart  with  satisfaction  and  dehght;  so  God  wishes 
to  know  what  we  will  do  when  we  seem  to  be  left  to  ourselves.  It  is  then  that  our 
principles  are  tested.  God  hides  Himself  to  see  what  we  wiU  do.  He  sees  us, 
though  we  cannot  see  Him.  No  dispensation  could  be  better  than  the  one  under 
which  we  Uve,  to  develop  our  principles  and  form  our  character;  it  is  a  dispensation 
of  faith,  not  sight,  in  winch  we  are  being  trained  to  do  right  because  it  is  right,  even 
though  we  cannot  at  the  time  see  the  consequences  that  will  foUow  right  or  wrong. 
4.  To  test  our  confidence  in  His  arrangements,  whether  we  will  trust  Him  even  when 
we  cannot  trace  Him.  There  are  many  who  think  that  they  could  bear  the  ills  of 
life  if  they  were  sure  that  God  appointed  them,  but  their  trials  seem  to  come  so 
entirely  from  human  sources  that  it  seems  to  them  as  though  they  were  just  left  to 
be  the  victims  of  human  caprice.  But  we  must  endure  as  seeing  the  invisible,  and 
say  of  man  as  Jesus  said  to  Pilate:  "  Thou  couldest  have  no  power  against  Me 
except  it  were  given  thee  from  above  "  (John  xix.  11).  5.  In  order  that  we  may  seek 
Him.  We  spare  no  pains  in  seeking  that  which  we  highly  value,  and  God  will  be 
appreciated.  He  seeks  us,  but  we  must  also  seek  Him.  Lessons — (1)  This  subject 
ought  to  rebuke  ostentation  when  engaged  in  works  of  benevolence.  God  hides 
Himself  even  when  He  does  good.  How,  then,  ought  we  to  hide  ourselves  even  when 
doing  good!  (2)  This  also  rebukes  those  who  hide  their  talents  because  they  are 
few,  and  do  nothing  because  they  cannot  do  great  things.  They  think  that  the 
httle  they  can  do  will  never  be  noticed  or  seen,  and  therefore  they  neglect  to  do  it. 
We  are  to  hide  ourselves,  but  not  om*  talents.  We  are  to  do  the  good  we  can, 
however  small  it  be,  and  even  though  it  should  never  be  known  that  we  did  anything. 
(3)  The  fact  that  God  hides  Himself  is  no  excuse  for  our  not  knowing  Him.  He  has 
never  said,  "  Seek  ye  Me  in  vain."  He  has  said,  "  Seek  ye  My  face,"  and  "  They 
that  seek  Me  shall  find  Me  "  (chap.  Iv.  6,  7).     {A.  Clark.) 

Ver.  17.  But  Israel  shall  be  saved  in  the  Lord. — A  forecast  of  the 
Messianic  age: — As  is  usual  in  the  prophets,  the  perfect  dispensation,  or  what 
is  called  the  Messianic  age,  is  conceived  as  issuing  immediately  from  the  historical 
crisis  which  is  the  subject  of  the  prophecy — in  this  case,  the  deliverance  from 
Babylon.  {Prof.  J.  Skinner,  D.D.)  Israel  saved  in  the  Lord: — I.  The  glorious 
OBJECT.  Everlasting  salvation  in  the  Lord.  1.  Includes  deUverance  from 
ignorance,  guilt,  &c.,  and  the  possession  of  light,  peace,  &c. ;  and  this  state  con- 
tinued and  increased  for  ever.  It  is  grace  consummated  in  eternal  glory.  2.  This 
salvation  is  "  in  the  Lord  ": — the  Lord  Messiah.  (1)  As  a  possession,  pmrchased 
by  His  own  blood,  in  whose  right  only  we  can  obtain  it.  (2)  As  an  inheritance, 
kept  in  trust,  and  to  be  conveyed  by  Him  to  the  appointed  heirs  of  it.  (3)  As 
in  a  grand  exemplar,  in  His  human  nature,  of  the  complete  and  final  happiness 
of  the  saints  (Rom.  viii.  29;  Phil.  iii.  21).  It  is  in  Him  both  as  a  beatific  object 
and  a  perpetual  medium,  through  which  the  blessed  will  see  and  enjoy  God  for 
ever.    II.  Thb  character  of  the  persons  to  whom  everlasting  salvation 


462  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xlv. 

IS  PROMISED.  "  Israel."  1.  A  name  of  great  distinction  in  Scripture  The 
Israelites,  to  whom  everlasting  salvation  is  promised,  are  such  as  are  so  in  a  spiritual 
sense.  2.  True  Israelites  are  such  as  have  given  their  unfeigned  consent  to  be 
God's  people,  subjects,  and  servants ;  such  as  have  "  joined  themselves  to  the 
Lord  in  a  perpetual  covenant."  3.  True  Israelites  are  such  as  live  in  an  un- 
reserved subjection  to  the  laws  and  government  of  God  and  the  Redeemer  {Rom. 
vii.  22).  Through  faith  in  Christ  they  are  vitally  united  to  Him,  and  from  Him 
receive  those  hourly  supplies  of  grace  that  quahfy  men  for  every  good  word  and 
work.  m.  The  groxinds  of  the  CEETAiNTy  of  their  salvation.  1.  The 
possession  Christ  has  taken  of  it  in  the  name  and  nature  of  all  true  believers 
in  Him  (Heb.  vi.  20;  John  xiv.  2,  3).  2.  Christ's  intercession,  which  He  ever 
lives  in  heaven  to  make  for  them  {Heb.  vii.  25).  3.  His  mighty  power  which  is 
engaged  for  them  {1  Pet.  i.  4,  6).  4.  God's  promise  {Titus  i.  2;  Heb.  vi.  17,  18). 
(Sketches  of  Sermons.)  Saved  in  the  Lord: — That  is,  through  Him  {Rom.  v.  9). 
The  elect  of  God  dispersed  over  the  earth  shall  be  saved  through  the  powerful 
operation  of  His  glorious  excellences,  and  in  virtue  of  the  perfect  righteousness 
of  the  great  Messiah.  They  shall  be  saved — 1.  Through  the  love  of  God  {John 
iii.  16).  2.  In  His  infinite  wisdom,  which  He  hath  wonderfully  displayed  in 
devising  and  executing  the  astonishing  plan  of  salvation.  3.  Through  His 
almighty  power.  4.  In  His  consummate  righteousness;  the  rectitude  of  His 
nature,  the  equity  of  His  providence,  and  the  faithfulness  of  His  promises,  being 
clearly  demonstrated  by  the  accomplishment  of  this  salvation.  {R.  MaccvUoch.) 
Isaiah'' 8  far-reaching  glance: — He  foresaw  the  redemption  of  suffering  Israel  by 
the  hand  of  Cyrus,  but  uses  terms  that  it  would  be  a  misleading  and  inexcusable 
blunder  to  employ  if  they  are  intended  to  be  restricted  to  those  small  bands  of 
immigrants  returning  imder  Ezra  and  Nehemiah,  whose  descendants  rejected 
the  Christ,  and  went  forth  into  the  great  and  long-ending  dispersion  after  the 
Romans  had  destroyed  the  rebuilt  city.  Standing  once,  at  sunrise,  on  a  lower 
height  of  the  Himalayas — lower,  though  still  10,000  feet  above  the  plains — we 
saw  beneath  us,  stretching  away  into  the  blue  distance,  leagues  upon  leagues  of 
rolling  country  clothed  with  evergreen  forests  of  tree  ferns,  tree  rhododendrons 
and  magnolias,  till  the  view  was  lost  in  cloudland.  But,  behold!  even  as  we 
watched,  the  clouds  broke  and  scattered,  trooping  away  into  the  vault  of  heaven 
like  hosts  of  white-robed  angels.  Between  their  ranks  were  revealed,  one  after 
another,  the  mighty  flanks  of  Kinchinjunga  and  her  sister  mountains;  then 
their  snow-peaks  and  glaciers.  Another  few  minutes,  and  the  last  cloud  had 
vanished,  and  the  glittering  crest  of  Mount  Everest,  the  loftiest  summit  in  the 
world — we  know  not  how  many  hvmdreds  of  miles  afield — flashed  upon  the  horizon. 
The  lower  and  nearer  landscape  was  not  lost,  it  was  there  stiU,  in  all  its  beauty 
and  verdure,  but  we  had  no  longer  any  eyes  for  it  because  of  the  glory  that  exceeded. 
Something  like  that  would  have  been  the  prospect  unfolded  to  the  "  rapt  Isaiah's  " 
spiritual  eyesight,  could  he  have  tmderstood  all  that  was  involved  in  his  pro- 
phecies. He  must  have  had  at  least  a  partial  understanding  of  their  meaning, 
for  we  read  that  "  these  things  said  Isaiah  because  he  saw  [Christ's]  glory,  and 
he  spake  of  Him."  Nevertheless,  it  is  reserved  for  us  to  see  most  distinctly  the 
fuU  extent  of  the  prophetic  landscape,  because  from  before  our  eyes  even  the 
remotest  clouds  that  linger  on  the  horizon  have  been  lifted  by  the  sun- 
rising  of  New  Testament  teaching.  {F.  Sessions.)  "World  without  end": — 
"  To  eternal  eternities."  {F.  Delitzsch.)  The  expression  does  not  occur  again. 
(J  Skinner.) 

Vers.  18-25.  For  thus  saith  the  Lord  that  created  the  heavens. — 
How  Ood  reveals  Himself : — The  main  current  of  the  section  may  be  thus  ex- 
pressed— I.  God's  revelatiok  of  Himself  is  open  and  truthful.  He  has 
not  spoken  in  secret;  and  He  has  not  bid  men  seek  Him  in  vain.  11.  God's 
revelation  of  Himself  is  in  reference  to  the  highest  practical  objects. 
"  Reek  ye  My  face ;  look  unto  Me,  and  be  ye  saved ;  He  is  a  just  God  and  a  Saviour." 
III.  God's  revelation  of  Himself  is  to  issue  in  the  salvation  of  the  whole 
EARTH.  "  Every  knee  shall  bow,  and  every  tongue  shall  confess  to  Him."  (C. 
Short,  M.A.)  The  reasonableness  of  Ood's  procedure : — We  have  here  the  repeti- 
tion of  that  deep,  strong  note  which  Isaiah  himself  so  often  sounded  to  the  comfort 
of  men  in  perplexity  or  despair,  that  God  is  at  least  reasonable,  not  working  for 
nothing,  nor  beginning  only  to  leave  off,  nor  creating  in  order  to  destroy.  The 
same  God,  says  our  prophet,  who  formed  the  earth  in  order  to  see  it  inhabited, 


CHAP.  XLv.]  ISAIAH.  463 

must  surely  be  believed  to  be  consistent  enough  to  carry  to  the  end  also  Hia 
spiritual  work  among  men.  Our  prophet's  idea  of  God's  righteousness,  there- 
fore, includes  the  idea  of  reasonableness;  implies  rational,  as  weU  as  moral  consist- 
ency, practical  sense  as  well  as  good  faith;  the  conscience  of  a  reasonable  plan, 
and,  perhaps,  also  the  power  to  carry  it  through.     {Prof.  O.  A.  Smith,  D.D.) 

Ver.  19.  I  have  not  spoken  in  secret. — "  In  a  dark  place  of  the  earth,"  is  an 
expression  used  for  the  purpose  of  pointing  out  the  contrast  between  the  prophecies 
of  Jehovah  and  the  heathen  cave,  oracles  and  spirit-voices  of  the  necromancers, 
which  seemed  to  rise  up  from  the  interior  of  the  earth.  (C.  Short,  M.A.)  OocTs 
speech  to  men : — Two  thoughts  branch  off — 1.  Prophecy,  proceeding  from  Him  is  a 
thing  of  the  light,  no  black  art,  essentially  different  from  heathen  divination.  2.  The 
same  love  of  Jehovah  which  is  revealed  already  in  creation,  is  also  shown  in  His 
relation  to  Israel;  He  did  not  point  Israel  to  Himself  as  chaos  ("I  said  not  to  the 
seed  of  Jacob;  seek  Me  as  chaos!  "),  even  as  He  did  not  create  the  earth  a  chaos 
("  He  has  not  created  it  a  chaos,"  ver.  18).  {F.  Dditzsch,  D.D.)  I  said  not 
unto  the  seed  of  Jacob,  Seek  ye  Me  in  vain. — "  Seek  ye  Me  in  vain,"  literally,  in  a 
waste,  i.e  where  there  are  no  ways  or  indications  how  He  is  to  be  found.  (A.  B. 
Davidson,  D.D.)  Comfort  to  seekers  from  what  the  Lord  has  not  said: — We  might 
gain  much  solace  by  considering  what  God  has  not  said.  We  have  an  assurance 
that  God  will  answer  prayer,  because  He  hath  not  said  unto  the  seed  of  Israel,  Seek 
ye  My  face  in  vain.  The  proposition  is  this :  that  those  who  seek  God,  in  God's  own 
appointed  way,  caimot,  by  any  possibiHty  seek  Him  in  vain;  that  earnest,  penitent, 
prayerful  hearts,  though  they  may  be  delayed  for  a  time,  can  never  be  sent  away 
with  a  final  denial  (Rom.  x.  13;  Matt.  vii.  8).  I.  I  shall  prove  this  by  thh 
KBGATiVB,  as  our  text  has  it.  I.  Suppose  that  sincere  prayer  could  be  fruitless,  then 
the  question  arises.  Why  are  men  exhorted  to  pray  at  all?  Would  it  not  be  a  piece 
of  heartless  tyranny  if  the  Queen  should  wait  upon  a  man  in  his  condemned  cell, 
and  encourage  him  to  petition  her  favour,  nay,  command  him  to  do  it,  saying  to 
him,  be  importunate,  and  you  will  prevail;  and  yet,  all  the  while,  should  intend 
never  to  pardon  the  man,  but  had  determined  in  her  heart  that  his  death-warrant 
should  be  signed  and  sealed,  and  that  on  the  execution  morning  he  should  be 
launched  into  eternity?  Would  this  be  consistent  with  royal  boimty — fit  conduct 
for  a  gracious  monarch?  Can  you  for  a  moment  suppose  that  God  would  bid  you 
come  to  Him  through  Jesus  Christ,  and  yet  intend  never  to  be  gracious  at  the  voice 
of  your  cry?  2.  If  prayer  could  be  offered  continuously,  and  God  could  be  sought 
earnestly,  but  no  mercy  found,  then  he  who  prays  would  be  worse  ofif  than  he  who 
does  not  pray,  and  suppUcations  would  be  an  ingenious  invention  for  increasing  the 
ills  of  mankind.  For  a  man  who  does  not  pray  has  less  woes  than  a  man  who  does 
pray,  if  God  be  not  the  answerer  of  prayer.  He  who  has  been  taught  to  pray  has 
great  desires  and  wants;  his  heart  is  an  aching  void  which  the  world  can  never 
fill ;  but  he  that  never  prays  has  no  longings  and  pinings  after  God.  If,  then,  a  man 
may  have  these  vehement  longings,  and  yet  God  will  never  grant  them, then  assuredly 
the  man  who  prays  is  in  a  worse  position  than  he  who  prays  not.     How  can  this  be  ? 

3.  If  God  do  not  hear  prayer,  since  it  is  clear  that  in  that  case  the  praying  man  would 
be  more  wretched  than  the  careless  sinner,  then  it  would  follow  that  God  would  be 
the  author  of  unnecessary  misery.     This  is  inconsistent  with  the  character  of  God. 

4.  Should  there  still  be  some  desponding  ones,  who  think  that  God  would  invite  them 
to  pray  and  yet  reject  them,  I  would  put  it  on  another  ground.  Would  men  do  so? 
Would  you?  Can  God  be  less  generous  than  men?  5.  This  is  God's  memorial  by 
which  He  is  distinguished  from  the  false  gods  (comp.  Psa.  cxv.  6  and  Ixv.  2).  One 
of  the  standing  proofs  of  the  Deity  of  Jehovah  is,  that  He  does  answer  the  supplica- 
tions of  His  people.  6.  If  God  do  not  hear  prayer  what  is  the  meaning  of  His 
promises  ?  7.  What  is  the  meaning  of  all  the  provisions  which  He  has  already  made 
for  hearing  prayer?  Why  a  mediator,  an  intercessor?  &c.  8.  If  God  hear  not 
prayer,  what  Gospel  have  I  to  preach?  9.  Where,  then,  were  the  believer's  hope? 
10.  What  would  they  say  in  hell,  if  a  soul  could  reaUy  seek  the  Lord  and  be  refused? 
There  are  some  who,  when  under  conviction  of  sin,  stUl  cleave  to  this  dark 
delusion,  that  God  will  not  hear  them.  Therefore,  I  have  tried,  by  blow  after  blow, 
to  smite  this  fear  dead.  II.  That  the  Lord  does  hear  prayer  may  be  positively 
SUBSTANTIATED.  1.  For  the  Lord  to  hear  prayer  is  consistent  with  BUs  nature. 
2.  It  is  harmonious  with  all  His  past  actions  (Psa.  ovii.  3).  Conclusion — Try  for 
yourself.  (C.  H.  Spurgeon.)  God's  praying  people: — 1.  The  seed  of  Jacob  are  a 
praying  people;  it  is  the  generation  of  them  that  seek  Him  (Psa.  xziv.  6).     2.  As  He 


464  TEE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  xlv 

has  invited  them  to  seek  Him,  so  He  never  denied  their  believing  prayers,  nor  dis- 
appointed their  believing  expectations.  3.  If  He  did  not  think  fit  to  give  them  the 
particular  thing  they  prayed  for,  yet  He  gave  them  that  grace  sufficient  and  that 
comfort  and  satisfaction  of  soul  which  was  equivalent.  {M.  Henry.)  OotTs 
straightforwardness  : — "  I,  the  Lord,  speak  righteousness."  The  word  is  used  in 
its  ethical  sense  of  "  trustworthiness,"  or  straightforwardness, — perfect  corre- 
spondence between  deeds  and  words.     {Prof.  J.  Skinner,  D.D.) 

Vers.  21,  22.  A  just  God  and  a  Saviour. — The  just  God  and  the  Saviour: — To 
human  apprehension,  light  and  darkness  are  not  more  opposed  than  justice  and 
mercy.  We  cannot  conceive  how  they  possibly  can  meet  together.  But  God's 
ways  are  not  our  ways  ;  He  is  "  a  just  God,"  leaving  not  the  smallest  possibihty  of 
escape  for  the  smallest  sin;  and  He  is  "  a  Saviour,"  freely  and  completely  pardoning 
the  most  atrocious  sinner.  I.  God  is  a  jttst  God.  The  law  of  God  is  holy,  and 
just,  and  good.  It  is  man's  plain,  reasonable,  bounden  duty  to  obey  these  com- 
mandments; and  when  he  fails  in  the  performance  of  that  duty,  it  is  a  righteous 
thing  on  the  part  of  God  to  punish  him.  Some,  indeed,  have  objected  to  this 
principle,  and  have  supported  their  objection  by  perverting  the  Scripture  doctrine 
of  original  sin,  alleging  that,  if  man's  natural  corruption  render  guUt  inevitable,  it 
is  imjust  in  God  to  punish  him  for  that  guilt.  To  meet  this  objection  in  a  plain 
practical  manner,  we  would  reply  that,  before  any  individual  can  reasonably  plead 
this  excuse  in  his  own  case,  he  must  be  able  to  prove  that  he  has  never  been  guilty 
of  any  transgression,  except  those  only  which  were  rendered  inevitable  by  his 
original  corruption;  for  the  moment  that  he  knowingly  and  wilfiilly  breaks  the  law 
of  God  in  any  one  instance,  it  becomes  a  righteous  thing  in  the  Lawgiver  to  inflict 
upon  him  the  threatened  punishment.  11.  God  in  Christ  is  a  just  God  and  a 
Savioub.  Jesus  Christ  is  an  adequate  substitute  for  the  sinner.  Every  impedi- 
ment to  the  most  unbounded  exercise  of  mercy  being  thus  righteously  removed, 
the  invitation  is  given  forth  in  aU  its  blessed  broadness  and  fulness  unto  all  lands, 
"  Look  imto  Me,  and  be  ye  saved,  all  the  ends  of  the  earth."  (Z).  Dickson,  D.D.) 
The  highest  glory  of  the  Divine  character: — I.  These  words  present,  in  part  at  least, 
AN  ASPECT  OP  APPALLTNQ  TERKOB — "  a  just  God."  It  is  necessary  to  attend  to  this 
with  becoming  reverence  and  awe.  Some  deny  it,  or  overlook  it,  regarding  nothing 
but  His  mercy,  and  forgetting  that  there  could  be  no  occasion  for  the  exercise  of 
mercy  did  not  His  justice  consign  guilty  men  to  punishment.  1.  The  fallen  angels 
who  have  been  cast  down  from  their  first  estate,  and  are  reserved  in  chains  of  darkness 
to  the  judgment  of  the  last  day,  are  monuments  of  His  avenging  justice.  Adam 
and  his  transgressing  partner  exiled  from  Paradise,  and  that  paradise  accursed  for 
their  sakes;  the  inhabitants  of  the  world  before  the  flood,  with  the  exception  of  a 
single  family,  swept  away  into  a  watery  grave  by  a  single  stroke;  Sodom  and 
Gomorrah  and  the  cities  of  the  plain  overwhelmed  by  a  torrent  of  Uquid  fire  from 
the  skies;  Movmt  Sinai  itself  with  its  clouded  summit  and  trembling  base,  its  flashing 
lightnings,  its  roUing  thunders,  and  trumpet  voices,  all  bespeak  the  terrors  of  that 
inflexible  justice  which  overlooks  no  sin  of  men  or  angels,  and  suffers  no  transgres- 
sion against  the  eternal  authority  and  sovereignty  of  God  to  go  unpunished. 
2.  Consider  further  what  proofs  are  afforded  of  the  justice  of  God  in  His  dispensa- 
tions with  the  offending  race  of  men.  The  lot  of  the  progenitor  has  now  become  that 
of  all  his  posterity;  and  man  everywhere  is  a  suffering  and  dying  creature,  because 
he  is  everywhere  a  sinner.  Consider  the  awful  calamities  which  have  attended  the 
human  race,  from  the  first  generations  to  the  present.  3.  These  proofs  of  Divine 
justice  may  be  further  strengthened  and  enlarged  by  considering  the  very  method 
He  has  chosen  for  displaying  His  mercy.  Is  He  not  a  just  God?  Let  the  agonies 
of  His  beloved  Son  declare—let  the  cross  of  Jesus  stand  as  a  witness.  II.  The  deep 
AND  GLORIOUS  MYSTERY  which.  Under  another  view,  these  words  present.  This 
glorious  mystery  consists  in  the  union  of  these  two  characters  in  the  one  God  of 
revelation — two  characters  which  it  appeared  were  hostile  to  each  other — two 
characters  which  no  other  system  ever  did  or  ever  could  reconcile — and  the  difficulty 
of  reconciling  which  has  led  some  to  deny  the  one,  and  some  to  deny  the  other.  The 
mystery  lies  in  the  union  of  these  two  perfections  of  the  Divine  nature,  justice  and 
mercy — and  in  their  united  exercise  towards  the  same  sinful  creatures.  This  the 
Gospel  fully  develops  in  the  doctrine  of  the  incarnation  of  the  Son  of  God,  in  His  sub- 
Btituted  obedience.  His  voluntary  submission,  His  vicarious  sacrifice.  III.  These 
words  possess  an  aspect  of  Divine  comfort  foe  the  soul  of  man.  1.  The 
comfort  depends  on  your  reception  of  the  salvation,  which  is  essentially  a  salvation 


CHAP.  XLV.]  ISAIAH.  465 

from  sin,  in  all  those  respects  in  which  it  has  affected  our  nature,  whether  by  guilt, 
pollution,  degradation,  or  separation  from  God.  2.  This  Divine  comfort  is  open  to 
aU.  3.  The  comfort  never  fails — never  fluctuates — will  accompany  through  life, 
and  abound  even  in  death — when  all  other  sources  of  comfort  fail.  {The  Evangelist.) 
A  just  God  and  a  Saviour: — I.  The  grand  truth  is  manifestly  this — that  there  is  m 
God  an  everlasting  haemony  between  the  jttst  and  thb  merciful.  He  is  just, 
not  in  opposition  to  salvation,  but  because  He  is  a  Saviour.  He  is  a  Saviour,  not 
in  opposition  to  justice,  but  because  He  is  justice  seeking  to  save.  1.  Let  us  mark 
the  ground  on  which  Isaiah  founded  that  mighty  truth,  the  supreme  and  solitary 
sovereignty  of  God — "  I  am  the  Lord,  and  there  is  none  else;  there  is  none  beside 
Me."  He  had  looked  over  the  conflict  of  nations  and  the  decay  of  empires,  and  seen 
one  eternal  God  causing  aU  to  work  His  will.  Reahse  that  vision  of  God,  and  then 
the  idea  that  He  needs  reconciling  to  Himself  must  instantly  fall:  for  if  God's 
justice  needs  reconciling  to  His  mercy,  then  we  have  two  Gods,  the  just  and  the 
merciful;  and  it  is  no  longer  true  that  He  is  God,  "  beside  whom  there  is  none  else." 
Realise  this,  and  the  idea  of  the  atonement  which  represents  Christ  as  simply 
appeasing  God  the  just  and  inducing  Him  to  be  merciful,  passes  away.  God  needs 
no  reconciling  to  Himself:  justice  is  in  everlasting  union  with  mercy.  2.  Let  us  ask 
what  is  God's  justice,  and  what  His  salvation  ?  and  then  we  shall  see  how  they  are 
in  perfect  harmony.  God's  justice  is  not  merely  the  infhction  of  penalty;  God's 
salvation  is  not  merely  deliverance  from  penalty.  It  is  true  that  He  does  execute 
penalty  and  award  retribution.  We  see  it  in  the  stern  laws  of  life  by  which  one 
error  brings  down  life-long  sorrow;  one  true  effort  reaps,  inevitably,  its  blessed 
reward.  There  is  a  just  God  over  all,  for  men  ever  reap  just  what  they  sow.  But 
justice  in  God  is  something  far  grander  than  the  mere  exercise  of  retribution;  it 
is  the  love  of  eternal  truth,  purity,  righteousness;  and  the  penalties  of  untruth, 
impurity,  imrighteousness,  are  the  outflashings  of  that  holy  anger  which  is  founded 
in  His  love  of  the  right,  the  pure,  and  the  true.  In  the  same  way,  God's  salvation 
is  more  than  the  mere  deUverance  from  penalty.  It  is,  at  the  same  time,  the 
deliverance  from  evil,  salvation  from  the  cruel  lusts  of  wrong;  from  the  bondage  of 
■unholy  passions  growing  into  the  giant-life  of  eternity;  from  the  deep  degradation 
and  horrible  selfishness  of  sin.  Here,  then,  we  see  how  His  justice  and  His  salvation 
are  in  perfect  harmony.  His  salvation  is  to  free  men  from  the  penalties  of  justice 
by  making  them  righteous,  true,  and  holy  in  Christ.  3.  Take  now  one  step  further. 
Take  the  two  great  revelations  of  law  and  mercy,  and  we  shall  see  how  the  law  is 
merciful  and  mercy  holy.  (1)  The  law,  the  revelation  of  justice,  came  to  lead  men 
to  God  the  Saviour,  (a)  The  sense  of  immortality.  Man,  feehng  that  life  is  bounded 
by  the  present,  will  never  be  freed  from  evil.  But  sin  destroys  the  sense  of  im- 
mortality, confines  him  to  the  narrow  circle  of  the  earth,  and  dares  him  to  look 
beyond.  Under  its  infiuence  man  forgets  the  grandeur  of  his  nature,  sinks  into  a 
mere  animal,  and  becomes  the  slave  of  material  things.  To  awaken  him  there  is  no 
other  voice  so  powerful  as  that  of  the  law  he  cannot  obey — a  law  majestic  in  purity, 
and  thundering  penalties  on  transgression.  The  Divine  voice  in  the  law  speaks  to 
him,  making  him  feel  that  he  is  greater  than  material  things — greater  than  his  sinful 
idols.  He  asks:  Why  does  it  mark  out  me?  And  the  awful  Sinai  of  conscience 
awakens  at  that  voice,  and  the  man  feels  the  sublimity  of  his  nature;  and  there  is 
the  beginning  of  salvation.  (6)  The  sense  of  sin.  as  a  power  ia  life.  The  voice  of 
law  shows  him  that  in  him  is  the  power  which  the  just  God  hates  in  holy  anger. 
Cursing  evil,  it  cvises  him.  Thus  law  is  the  revelation  of  God  the  Saviour.  Before 
its  awful  majesty  and  impossible  claims  man  learns  the  weakness,  and  slavery,  and 
horror  of  sin;  and  is  prepared  to  accept  the  mercy  that  delivers  him.  (2)  Christ, 
the  revelation  of  God  the  Saviour,  came  to  glorify  God  the  just.  The  righteousness 
of  God  never  was  so  revealed  as  in  the  loving  Saviour  of  the  world.  Mount  Sinai  is 
less  terrible  than  the  purity  of  the  man  of  Nazareth.  Men  felt  it  as  they  said, 
"  Depart  from  us  for  we  are  sinful."  Look  now  at  His  sufferings.  Nothing  could 
tear  Him  from  them — nothing  alter  His  course.  Where  is  there  a  greater  revela- 
tion of  the  righteousness  of  God?  In  the  garden,  the  pure  and  holy  One  shudders 
at  the  contact  with  sin.  Where  can  we  see  the  awfukiess  of  holiness  so  sublimely 
revealed  as  in  that  passion  of  woe?  The  just  God  was  in  the  Saviour.  Mark  now 
the  consummate  power  of  Christ  crucified;  and  what  is  it  but  a  power  rousing  men 
to  be  holy  as  God  is  holy  ?  Sin  never  was  so  slain  as  by  Him  whom  sin  slew.  The 
law  never  was  so  attested  as  by  Him  who  bore  its  penalty.  11.  We  infer  two 
LESSONS  from  this  great  truth.  1.  The  necessity  of  Chiistian  endeavour.  Wo  are 
justified  at  once;  for  the  germ  of  a  righteous  manhood  exists  ia  the  first  act  of 
VOL.  II. — 30 


466  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xlv. 

&ith.  But  the  realisation  of  it  is  progressive.  The  Christian  ideal  is  to  be  as  Christ 
was,  faithful,  holy,  and  undefiled.  Every  day  we  have  untruthfulness,  selfishness, 
unbelief,  to  overcome.  2.  The  ground  of  Christian  trust.  Some  men  find  security 
in  the  belief  that  they  are  dehvered  from  the  stern  awards  of  justice.  But  we  are 
not  delivered  from  God's  purity,  we  are  reconciled  to  it.  In  the  justice  of  God  lies 
our  confidence  now,  for  He  will  make  us  righteous  and  holy  in  Christ.  And  this 
gives  us  hope  in  the  midst  of  life's  discipline,  and  explains  much  of  its  mystery. 
The  object  of  His  discipline  is  not  to  make  us  happy  simply,  but  to  train  us  into 
holiness,  which  is  blessedness.  There  are  men  who  trust  in  the  infinite  mercy  of 
God,  and  feel  that  He  will  deliver  them  at  last.  Remember,  that  to  remain  in 
unbelief  is  to  adopt  the  spirit  which  killed  Christ.  To  refuse  His  salvation  is  to 
challenge  the  holy  indignation  of  the  Most  High.  {E.  L.  Htdl,  B.A.)  "Look 
unto  Me ! " — Consider — I.  How  God  is  just.  He  will  not  deal  unfairly  with  His 
creatures.  He  will  not  ascribe  a  single  sin  to  them  which  they  have  not  committed. 
He  will  not  punish  them  beyond  what  their  iniquities  deserve.     II.  How  He  is  at 

THE  SAME  TIME  A  SaVIOTTB.      HI.  WhAT  IS  THE  INVITATION  WHICH  He  ADDRESSES 

TO  A  BxnNED  woELD.  Mark — 1.  To  whom  it  is  addressed.  "  AU  the  ends  of  the 
earth."  How  broad  an  invitation !  Who  is  there  who  can  say,  "  I  am  not  called  "  ? 
2.  What  does  He  invite  us  all  to  do?  "  Look  unto  Me!  "  "  Behold  Me  with  the 
eye  of  faith,  as  '  the  Lamb  of  God  which  taketh  away  the  sin  of  the  v  orld !  '  '  Look 
nnto  Me '  as  your  refuge,  your  resomrce,  your  hope,  your  confidence  your  almighty, 
all-sufficient,  only  Saviour  !  '  Look  unto  Me  '  for  life,  for  pardon,  for  righteousness, 
for  peace  on  earth,  for  heavenly  happiness  hereafter!  '  Look  unto  Me,'  by  looking 
off  from  every  object  of  your  carnal  confidence,  from  every  vain  deceitful  hope 
which  you  have  invented  for  yourselves,  and  by  placing  your  entire,  unbounded 
trust  in  the  merits  of  My  Cross!  "  3.  And  what  spiritual  benefit  shall  that  look  of 
faith  procure  to  them?  "  Be  ye  saved."  Are  there  not  those  that  look  for  mercy 
even  though  they  look  not  unto  Jesus  ?  Consider  seriously  that  expression,  "  There 
is  none  beside  Me  " — "  A  just  God  and  a  Saviour."  Ye  that  are  looking  unto  Him 
for  salvation!  remember  that,  in  the  very  act  by  which  the  Lord  hath  delivered 
you  from  death  He  hath  shown  you  also  His  horror  and  His  hatred  of  your  sins. 
(A.  Roberts,  M.A.)  Looking  unto  Jesus,  the  only  Saviour: — I.  The  aEACiOTJS 
INVITATION.  Notice — 1.  The  benevolent  Being  by  whom  the  invitation  is  given. 
2.  To  whom  it  is  addressed.  Not  to  the  Jews  ordy,  but  also  to  the  Gentiles:  to 
every  nation,  and  kindred,  and  tongue  and  people.  3.  What  is  implied  in  the 
invitation.  (1)  The  state  of  those  to  whom  it  is  addressed.  (2)  That  there  is  no 
obstacle  whatever  in  the  way  of  salvation.  4.  What  the  invitation  calls  upon  us  to 
do  in  order  to  secure  our  salvation.  "  Look  unto  Me."  In  our  natural  state  we 
are  all  looking  from  Him;  and  even  when  we  are  convinced  of  our  lost  condition, 
how  prone  we  are  to  look  to  anything  rather  than  to  Him  for  salvation — our  repent- 
ance, our  obedience,  our  duties,  our  morality,  our  usefulness!  What,  then,  is 
meant  by  looking  to  Him?  It  signifies  the  same  thing  with  beheving  in  Him. 
n.  The  poweeful  seasons  by  which  that  invitation  is  enfoboed.  1.  He  is 
God.  2.  A  just  God.  3.  A  gracious  God,  for  He  is  a  Saviour.  4.  The  only  God, 
and  consequently  the  only  Saviour.     (D.  Rees.) 

Ver.  22.  Look  unto  Me. — Turning  to  Ood : — "  Turn  ye  to  Me  and  be  saved." 
The  first  imperative  exhorts,  the  second  promises.  Jehovah  desires  two  things — 
1.  All  men's  turning  to  Him.  2.  Their  blessedness  by  so  doing.  {F.  Delitzsch,  D.D.) 
Look: — The  word  does  not  correspond  exactly  to  the  English  "  look,"  but  denotes 
the  act  of  turning  round  in  order  to  look  in  a  different  direction.  The  text,  there- 
fore, bears  a  strong  analogy  to  those  in  which  the  heathen,  when  enlightened,  are 
described  as  turning  from  their  idols  unto  God  (I  Thess.  i.  9;  Acts  xiv.  15,  xv.  19). 
(J.  A.  Alexander.)  The  ends  of  the  earth: — The  expression  accords  with  the 
Jewish  notion,  that  their  land  was  situated  in  the  midst  of  the  earth,  and  that  the 
countries  which  lay  most  remote  from  them,  whose  circumstances  formed  a 
contrast  to  theirs,  were  the  ends  or  extremities  of  the  earth.  {R.  Macculloch.) 
Sovereignty  and  salvation : — It  has  ever  been  one  of  the  objects  of  the  great  Jehovah 
to  teach  mankind  that  He  is  God,  and  beside  Him  there  is  none  else.  I.  How  has 
God  been  teaching  this  lesson  to  mankind?  1.  He  has  taught  it  to  false  gods 
and  to  the  idolaters  who  have  bowed  before  them.  How  hath  God  poured  con- 
tempt on  the  ancient  gods  of  the  heathen!  Where  are  they  now?  2.  Mark  how 
God  has  taught  this  truth  to  empires.  3.  To  monarchs.  Nebuchadnezzar,  Herod, 
&c.     4.  To  the  wise  men  of  this  world.     6.  "  Surely,"  says  one,  "  the  Church  of  God 


CHAP,  sxv.]  ISAIAH.  467 

does  not  need  to  be  taught  this."  Yes,  she  does!  How  did  the  church  in  Canaan 
forget  it  when  they  bowed  before  other  gods !  If  God  gives  us  a  special  mission,  w© 
generally  begin  to  take  some  honour  to  ourselves.  IL  Salvation  is  God's  geeatest 
WORK,  and  in  this  He  specially  teaches  us  this  lesson.  Our  text  tells  us  how  He 
teaches  it.  1.  Bv  the  person  to  whom  He  directs  us.  "  Me."  2.  By  the  means  He 
tells  us  to  use.  '  Look."  3.  By  the  persons  whom  He  calls  to  look.  "  All  the  ends 
of  the  earth."  (C.  H.  Spurgeon.)  Life  for  a  look: — The  great  sin  of  man,  ever 
since  he  has  fallen,  has  been  that  of  idolatry.  He  is  ever  seeking  to  get  away  from 
God,  who  is  real,  but  whom  he  cannot  see,  and  to  make  for  himself  a  god,  which  can 
only  be  an  idol,  but  which  pleases  him  because  he  can  gaze  upon  it.  And  thus  it 
comes  to  pass  that,  some  with  images  of  wood  and  stone,  and  others  with  carnal 
confidences  and  the  like,  put  something  else  into  the  place  which  should  be  occupied 
by  God  alone;  and  they  look  to  that  something,  and  expect  good  from  it,  instead 
of  looking  for  aU  good  to  God,  and  to  Him  alone.  This  looking  to  anything  which 
usurps  the  place  of  God  cannot  but  be  most  offensive  to  Him,  and  it  must  also  be 
very  disappointing  to  ourselves,  for  it  is  impossible  for  the  false  god  to  yield  us  any 
true  comfort.  Yet  note  the  Lord's  great  patience  even  with  those  who  are  thus 
provoking  Him  by  this  idolatry  of  theirs.  I.  Fob  salvation  out  op  any  tbottblb, 
WE  SHOtTLD  look  TO  GoD  ALONE.  There  are  some  troubles  in  which  men  do 
look  to  God  alone.  I  have  known  even  the  most  profane  men  turn  to  God,  after 
a  fashion,  in  the  hour  of  supreme  peril  Now,  if  men  will  act  thus  by  the  compulsion 
of  great  calamity,  is  there  not  sound  reason  why  you  should,  cheerfully  and 
willingly,  do  the  same,  and  resort  to  God  in  every  trial,  and  difficulty,  and  dilemma? 
Is  any  trial  too  shght  for  you  to  bring  in  prayer  before  Him?  II.  For  eternal 
SALVATION,  WE  MUST  LOOK  TO  GoD  ALONE.  1.  Salvation  is  not  to  be  found  in  any 
mere  agent.  2.  The  great  thing  that  thou  needest  to  know,  and  look  at,  and  rely 
upon,  is  the  mercy  of  God.  3.  Since  God  says,  "  Look  unto  Me,"  let  me  ask  you 
whether  you  are  looking  unto  Him  as  He  has  revealed  Himself  to  us  in  His  WordT 
4.  Especially  is  it  intended  that  we  should  look  unto  God  as  He  reveals  Himself  in 
the  person  and  work  of  His  dear  Son.  5.  Settle  this  matter  in  your  mind  as  an 
absolute  certainty  that,  whoever  and  whatever  you  are,  you  may  look  to  God  in 
Christ,  and  be  saved.  6.  Let  no  feeling  of  thme  beat  thee  ofE  from  looking  to 
Christ.  {Ibid.)  Characteristics  of  salvation: — I.  It  is  a  simple  salvation — 
plain,  clear,  distinct,  intelligible  in  its  terms.  It  is,  in  this  respect,  unlike  the  false 
rehgions  referred  to  in  ver.  19,  whose  utterances,  being  involved  in  designed 
obscurity  and  ambiguity,  are  there  represented  as  "  spoken  in  secret,  and  in  dark 
places  of  the  earth."  Such  were  the  dubious  responses  which  came  from  the 
Delphic  oracle,  the  Cave  at  Lebadea,  the  Cumean  Sybil,  the  Eleusinian  Ceres,  the 
soothsayers  and  necromancers  of  Egypt,  Phoenicia,  and  Persia.  The  salvation  of 
the  Gospel  is  so  clear  and  perspicuous  that  "  he  who  runs  may  read."  11.  It  is  a 
FBEE  salvation,  uncumbered  and  imconditional  in  its  offers.  There  is  no  costly, 
protracted,  elaborate  preparation  or  probation  needed.  No  painful  penances;  no 
rites,  no  fastings,  no  lustrations,  no  priestly  absolutions.  In  ver.  13,  God  says  of 
Cyrus  (and  He  says  the  same  in  a  nobler  sense  of  a  Greater  than  the  earthly 
liberator),  "  He  shall  let  go  My  captives,  not  for  price  nor  reward."  This  is  not, 
indeed,  after  the  manner  of  men,  nor  in  accordance  with  that  natural  legahty  of 
spirit  which  loves  to  fetter  itself  with  conditions  and  terms.  If  the  prophet  had 
bid  the  Syrian  leper  of  old  "  do  some  great  thing,"  Naaman  would  have  cordially 
assented;  but  he  could  not  brook  the  trifling  expedient  of  dipping  himself  in  the 
river  Jordan.  HI.  It  is  a  righteous  salvation  (vers.  19, 21).  See  Rom.  iii  26.  It 
is  a  salvation  which  has  been  secured  in  accordance  with  the  principles  of  ever- 
lasting truth  and  rectitude.  Let  us  not,  however,  misinterpret  the  relation  of 
justice  to  mercy,  as  if  between  these  two  Divine  attributes  there  existed  any 
antagonism, — as  if  they  represented  two  conflicting  principles  (similar  to  the 
Magian),  one  of  which  had  to  be  propitiated  before  the  other  could  exercise  its 
benignant  will,  or  go  forth  on  its  benignant  behests.  Nay,  they  are  in  perfect 
harmony.  Love  can  hold  out  her  blissful  sceptre  only  when  standing  by  the 
throne  of  justice.  In  that  glorious  salvation,  every  attribute  of  the  Divine  nature 
has  been  magnified  and  made  honourable.  IV.  It  is  a  SURE  salvation.  The  rites  of 
the  heathen  leave  their  votaries  in  uncertainty,  groping  in  the  dark.  Their  feelings 
and  experiences  are  well  described  in  ver.  16.  In  impressive  and  sublime  contrast 
with  this,  Jehovah  avows  in  ver.  23,  "  I  have  sworn  by  Myself:  the  word  "  or 
"truth"  (Lowth)  "  is  gone  out  of  My  mouth  in  righteousness"  ;  and  in  ver.  19, 
*'  I  said  not  unto  the  seed  of  Jacob,  Seek  ye  Me  in  vain  "  ;  or  ver.  17,  "  Ye  shall 


468  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xlv. 

not  be  ashamed  nor  confounded."  Truly  the  covenant  of  grace  is  a  covenant "  well 
ordered  in  all  things,  and  sure."  V.  It  is  here  further  unfolded  to  us  as  the  only 
salvation  (ver.  24).  Bishop  Lowth  renders  it,  "  Only  to  Jehovah  belongeth 
salvation  and  power."  "  Neither  is  there  salvation  in  any  other."  VL  It  is  an 
ETERNAL  salvatiou  (ver.  17).  {J.  R.  Macduff,  D.D.)  Looking  to  Christ: — 
Faith  is  one  of  the  principal  subjects  of  sacred  Scripture,  and  is  expressed  in 
various  forms:  sometimes  in  plain  terms,  but  more  frequently  in  metaphors 
borrowed  from  earthly  things,  and  particularly  from  the  actions  of  the  body. 
I.  Explain  the  duty  here  expressed  by  the  metaphor  of  looking.  Observe 
in  general,  that  a  man's  looks  often  discover  his  condition  and  the  frame  of  his 
mind.  Hence  we  can  understand  a  look  of  surprise  and  consternation,  of  sorrow 
and  compassion,  a  look  of  joy,  the  look  of  a  perishing  supphcant,  or  of  a  needy, 
expecting  dependant.  If  an  agonising  patient  casts  an  eager  look  upon  his 
physician,  we  understand  it  to  be  a  silent  petition  for  relief.  Hence  "  looking  to 
Christ  implies  those  suitable  dispositions  and  exercises  of  heart  towards  Him, 
which  are  expressed  by  the  earnest  and  significant  looks  of  persons  in  a  distressed 
condition  towards  their  deliverer."  1.  Looking  to  Christ  impHes  a  particular 
notice  and  distinct  knowledge  of  Him.  2.  An  importunate  eagerness  for  relief 
from  Him  (Psa.  xxv.  15).  3.  A  wishful  expectation  of  deUverance  from  Him  (Psa. 
Ixix.  3).  It  may  be  illustrated  by  the  history  of  the  lame  beggar  (Acts  iii.  4,  5). 
4.  A  humble  dependence  upon  Him  for  salvation  (2  Chron.  xx.  12).  5.  A  universal 
cheerful  submission  to  His  authority  (Psa.  cxxiii.  1,  2).  6.  A  hearty  approbation 
of  Him  as  a  Saviour,  and  supreme  affection  to  Him.  Love  is  often  expressed  by 
looks.  7.  Joy  and  gratitude  for  His  deUvering  goodness.  II.  Urge  you  to  look 
to  Him  by  several  weighty  considerations.  Tliis  is  the  great  duty  of  saints 
and  sinners,  and  consequently  of  every  one  in  all  ages  and  places,  even  to  "  the 
ends  of  the  earth."  1.  It  is  salvation  we  are  called  upon  to  pursue.  2.  It  may 
be  obtained  upon  the  easiest  terms,  without  any  personal  merit,  viz.,  by  a  "  look." 

3.  It  is  Immanuel,  the  incarnate  God,  who  commands  and  invites  us  to  look. 

4.  He  is  the  glorious  and  affecting  Object  to  which  we  are  to  look.  5.  Our  looking 
shall  not  be  in  vain,  for  He  is  God,  who  engages  to  save  those  who  look  to  Him. 
6.  It  is  vain  to  look  elsewhere  for  salvation,  and  needless  to  fear  His  grace  should 
be  controlled  by  another;  for  He  is  God,  so  there  is  none  else.  7.  We,  in  particular, 
are  invited,  being  especially  meant  by  "  the  ends  of  the  earth."  {S.  Davies,  M.A.) 
The  saving  look : — I.  That  all  mankind  are  enslaved  to  sin.  II.  That  thb 
universal  desire  of  mankind  is  fob  happiness.  III.  That  the  only  source 
op  real  happiness  is  to  be  found  in  God.  "  Look  unto  Me."  "  I  am  God, 
and  beside  Me,"  &c.  IV.  That  the  salvation  which  God  has  provided  is 
boundless  in  its  provisions,  and  unlimited  in  its  extent.  "  All  the  ends 
of  the  earth."  V.  That  the  reception  of  this  blessing  is  nevertheless 
conditional.  "  Look  imto  Me,"  &c.  What  does  this  imply  ?  1.  An 
apprehension  of  the  object  presented.  2.  Of  the  good  it  proposes  to  impart. 
3.  An  earnest  desire  to  obtain  it.  4.  A  vigorous  use  of  appointed  means. 
VI.  The  ground  of  encouragement.  "I  am  God"  ;  and  therefore,  know  that 
you  need  it  —  have  prepared  it  for  you  —  invite  you  to  partake  of  it  — 
promise  to  impart  it — warn  you  of  the  consequences  of  refusing  it.  None  other 
can  save  you.  "  Now  is  the  accepted  time,"  &c.  {R.  Shepherd.)  Life  by 
looking: — Sin  came  by  an  unbelieving  look.  Eve  saw  that  the  tree  was  good 
for  food  and  pleasant  to  the  eyes.  Distrusting  God,  she  looked  and  plucked 
and  ate.  Salvation  comes  fi-om  a  believing  and  trustful  look.  "  Look  unto 
Me,  and  be  ye  saved."  To  those  "  who  look  for  Him  "  will  He  appear  with 
salvation.  I.  As  sin  first  entered,  so  it  still  enters.  It  enters  through 
the  eye.  He  who  first  saw  the  wedge  of  gold  and  the  Babylonish  garment  lusted 
for  them,  went  after  them,  took  and  hid  them.  Therefore  it  is  wise  to  say 
"  Look  not  upon  the  wine  when  it  is  red,"  for  temptations  come  through  the  eye. 
The  Scriptures  tell  of  those  whose  "  eyes  are  full  of  sin  "  and  cannot  cease.  This 
truth  is  realised  in  our  own  mournful  experience.  We  look  on  injuries  and  brood 
over  them.  We  contemplate  objects  of  desire  and  lust  after  them.  When  it 
has  conceived  lust  bringeth  forth  sin.  II.  Salvation  comes  by  the  same  easy 
method.  "  Look  unto  Me  and  be  ye  saved."  1.  This  is  a  spiritual  vision.  Some 
regard  that  which  we  call  spiritual  as  unreal  and  dreamy,  whereas  carnality  is 
unreal,  and  spiritual  things  are,  of  all,  the  most  actual.  2.  It  is  an  immediate 
vision.  Of  our  physical  functions  sight  is  the  most  immediate.  So  faith  is  the 
1)  ost  positive  and  assuring.     You  end  a  dispute  by  saying,  but  I  saw  it  with  my 


CHAP.  XLV.]  ISAIAH.  469 

own  eyes  and  so  I  know  it.  The  believer  is  able  to  speak  thus  of  Him  whom  he 
knows,  for  he  has  seen  Him.  III.  How  are  we  to  see  Christ?  In  what  respects? 
1.  As  a  Saviour.     2.  As  an  Intercessor.     3    As  King  and  Master.     IV.  Therb 

ARE   SPECIAL   TIMES   WHEN   WE   SHOULD   LOOK  EXCLUSIVELY  TO   ChRIST.       1.    In  all 

our  acts  of  public  worship.  2,  In  temptations.  Are  you  injured?  Nothing 
so  cleanses  the  heart  of  stinging  pain  as  this.  Do  unholy  desires  annoy?  Here 
is  the  remedy.  .3.  In  approaching  weakness.  Though  the  outward  man  perishes, 
the  inward  man  is  renewed  day  by  day.  By  looking  the  hght  will  increase  more 
and  more  to  the  perfect  day.  God  has  promised  to  show  us  the  path  of  life. 
EvangeUst  asked  the  Pilgrim,  "  Seest  thou  yonder  hght?  "  "  I  think  I  do." 
Evangelist  by  a  long  looking  had  acquired  keen  vision,  and  Pilgrim  found  his  eyes 
opened  as  he  looked.  The  way  grew  clearer,  and  you  know  the  glorious  end  to 
which  he  came.  His  weakness  was  perfected  in  his  Leader's  strength.  The 
subject  before  us  has  a  twofold  apphcation.  1.  For  self-examination.  In  our 
worship  have  we  been  looking  only  to  God  whom  we  have  professed  to  address? 
In  hymn  and  prayer  and  preaching  have  our  acts  been  merely  formal  and  pro- 
fessional? 2.  By  way  of  invitation.  The  invitation  is  to  all,  even  to  "  the  ends 
of  the  earth."  {A.  Whyte,  D.D.)  Salvation  offered: — These  words  show  us 
that  we  have  need  to  be  saved.  We  have  to  be  saved  from  enormous  evils.  But 
there  is  a  great  change  that  must  take  place  in  everyone  before  he  can  be  saved. 
There  is  no  salvation  to  an  unregenerate  man.  Let  me  remind  you  what  God 
intends  when  He  says,  "  Look  unto  Me."  L  He  bids  you  look  to  Him  for  mercy, 
to  save  you  gratuitously,  without  bringing  to  Him  anything.  2.  We  should  look 
to  the  Son  of  God,  as  well  as  to  the  Father — for  His  meritorious  intercession — that 
we  may  be  saved.  3.  Look  to  God  the  Spirit,  as  well  as  to  the  Father  and  the 
Son.  He  who  wrought  mightily  in  the  persecutor  Saul,  to  make  him  an  eminent 
trophy  of  grace  and  a  large  benefactor  to  his  fellow-creatures,  has  no  less  power, 
condescension  and  goodness,  to  extend  to  you,  and  to  give  to  you  all  the  same 
principle,  the  same  courage,  and  the  same  perseverance.  4.  The  same  blessed 
duty  rests  on  all  of  you  who  by  the  grace  of  God  have  looked  to  Him  and  lived. 
You  are  called  to  prosecute  your  joiurney  heavenwards,  from  one  degree  of  faith 
and  grace  and  comfort  and  joy  to  another,  till  you  reach  your  eternal  home,  every 
day  looking  to  God  that  you  may  be  saved.  5.  But  He  never  meant  His  servants 
to  be  selfish,  as  He  is  beneficent  and  good;  and  therefore  let  me  bid  you  notice 
the  extent  of  this  invitation:  "  All  the  ends  of  the  earth."  Then  it  is  God's  will 
that  Japan,  and  China,  and  India  must  look  to  Him  and  be  saved,  as  well  as  we. 
At  the  time  these  words  were  uttered  by  the  prophet,  we  were  the  ends  of  the 
world  to  them,  as  China,  Japan,  and  Borneo  are  to  us;  yea,  we  were  beyond  the 
limits  of  the  known  world  at  that  time.  And  we  have  heard  the  good  news  and 
believed.  {B.  W.  Nod,  M.A.)  A  Saviour: — I.  The  everlasting  God,  He  who 
alone  is  God,  declares  Himself  to  be  the  Source  op  salvation.  II.  The 
ttnivbbsality  of  the  plan  of  SALVATION.  "All  the  ends  of  the  earth."  Men 
of  all  tribes  and  kingdoms  shall  be  made  to  feel  the  power  of  Almighty  grace. 
The  plan  of  salvation  is  adapted  to  every  variety  of  circumstance.  The  monarch 
on  the  throne  of  vast  empire — he  is  seated  there  in  the  sight  of  God  a  poor  rebel, 
and  he  needs  salvation.  Or  take  the  other  extreme — the  lowhest  and  obscurest  of 
the  children  of  men — he  is  a  sinner  before  God,  an  immortal  creature.  III.  God's 
simple  command  to  the  guilty  and  the  lost,  while  announcing  Himself  as  the 
Source  of  salvation,  and  while  proclaiming  its  universality,  is  '  Look  unto  Mej" 
1.  To  look  unto  God,  as  the  Source  of  salvation,  implies  knowledge  of  Him.  2.  The 
exercise  of  faith.  3.  Confidence  in  God.  4.  We  may  give  emphasis  to  the  expres- 
sion, "  Unto  Me."  God  requires  that  you  should  look  away  from  all  other  objects 
which  would  interfere  with  the  entire  yielding  up  of  the  whole  soul  to  Him. 
5.  There  should  be  in  the  mind  of  the  believer  a  full  assurance  that  He  is  able 
to  save,  and  willing  to  save.  {G.  Fisk,  LL.B.)  Salvation  obtained  only  by 
looking  unto  Jesus  : — I.  The  invitation,  "  Look  unto  Me,  and  be  ye  saved,  all 
the  ends  of  the  earth,"  may  be  regarded  as  involving  an  ofiEer  of  an  invaluable 
blessing,  a  statement  of  the  means  by  which  the  blessing  is  secured,  and  finally, 
an  intimation  of  the  extent  of  the  offer  made.  II.  The  reason  why  that 
invitation  should  be  complied  with.  "  For  I  am  God,  and  there  is  none  else." 
There  are  two  ideas  involved  in  this  statement.  1.  That  Jesus  is  the  true  God, 
and  therefore  able  to  save.  2.  That  on  Him  only  should  we  depend,  for  there  is 
no  other  being  in  the  universe  who  is  able  to  rescue  an  immortal  soul  from  eternal 
ruin.     We  see  from  this  subject — 1.  The  folly  and  danger  of  unbelief.     2.  The 


470  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xlv. 

habitual  duty  of  all  true  Christians.  It  is  to  look  unto  Jesua  at  every  stage  of 
their  spiritual  history.  (P.  Grant.)  The  Divine  invitation: — I.  Thb  Speakbb. 
n.  Thb  persons  addressed,  in.  The  blessfngs  promised.  IV.  The  manner 
OF  OBTAININO  THEM.  (Bp.  R.  BicTcersttth,  D.D.)  Looking  to  Christ: — I.  If 
you  look  unto  the  Lord  Jesus  you  will  see  God  manifest.  EC.  If  you  look  to 
Jesus  you  will  see  love  incarnate — Divine  love.  According  to  the  medium 
through  which  it  shines,  the  same  lamp  can  be  made  to  give  a  radiance  of  a  very 
different  coloiu-,  a  cheering  or  a  gloomy  light.  In  a  sinful  world  like  this,  could 
you  not  easily  imagine  a  vindictive  incarnation  and  manifestation  of  the  blessed 
God,  which  would  have  brought  into  the  midst  of  our  sinfulness  the  consuming 
fire  of  His  holiness,  which,  thus  coming  in  contact  with  our  combustible  corruption, 
would  have  turned  our  earth  into  an  early  perdition?  But  what  was  the  actual 
fact?  "  The  Word  dwelt  among  us,  full  of  grace  and  truth."  in.  Looking  unto 
the  Lord  Jesus,  there  is  yet  another  sight  with  which  the  earnest  sinner  is  regaled, 
and  that  is  righteous  reconciliation.  IV.  Whosoever  looks  at  Him  long  enough, 
simply  enough,  intently  enough,  will  find  in  Him  transfused  immortality, 
life  transmitted  from  that  Saviovu:  unto  his  own  soul.  V.  If  you  look  to  Jesus 
simply  as  God  reveals  Him  in  His  Word,  and  as  He  is  in  Himself,  you  will  see 
A  LOVE- attracting  AND  A  LIFE-ASSIMILATING  Saviour  ;  a  Saviour  who,  when 
he  attracts  your  love,  will  assimilate  your  life  to  His.  (J,  Hamilton,  D.D.) 
Looking  unto  Jesus  : — In  these  words,  we  have  the  same  sort  of  invitation  that 
we  find  in  the  New  Testament :  "  Come  unto  Me,  all  ye  that  labour  and  are 
heavy  laden  "  ;  '*  Looking  unto  Jesus,  the  Author  and  Finisher  of  our  faith  "  ; 
"  Consider  the  Apostle  and  High  Priest  of  our  profession,  Christ  Jesus."  Such 
texts  as  these  contain  the  very  secret  of  Christianity.  They  meet  all  our  wants, 
they  heal  all  our  sorrows,  they  save  out  souls.  Christianity  consists  in  having  to 
do  with  Christ,  in  having  the  love  of  Christ  implanted  in  the  soul,  and  then  the 
spirit  of  Christ  guiding  and  influencing  us  every  moment  of  our  earthly  history. 
I.  As  to  the  people  who  are  ADDRESSED.  "  All  the  ends  of  the  earth  " — all  men. 
n.  Why  are  they  to  look  ?  "  And  be  saved."  Now,  under  the  New  Testament 
you  and  I  are  directed  especially  to  Jesus  Christ.  He  tells  us  that  no  man  cometh 
unto  the  Father  but  by  Him.  Look  upon  this  for  your  encouragement,  what 
faith  sees  when  she  looks  upon  Jesus.  She  finds  love  in  Jesus,  pardon  in  Jesus, 
peace  in  Jesus,  eternal  happiness  in  Jesus.  And  this  is  so  with  God.  He  sees 
the  sinner  in  Jesus,  He  is  satisfied  with  His  atoning  work,  and  accepts  the  believing 
sinner  for  His  sake.  III.  How  they  are  to  look.  The  term  "  look  "  in  the 
Word  of  God  is  ordinarily  intended  to  mean  "  belief."  That  we  should  look 
to  the  Lord  Jesus  expecting  something,  just  as  the  lame  man  looked  at  Peter 
and  John  at  the  Beautiful  gate  of  the  temple,  expecting  to  receive  something  of 
them.  1.  If  you  can  take  this  view  of  Christ,  that  He  intends  your  salvation, 
then  there  will  be  a  look  of  real  sorrow  for  sin.  We  shall  mourn  for  sin  on  the 
one  hand,  but  rejoice  in  Christ  Jesus  on  the  other.  2.  A  look  of  acquiescence,  of 
trust  and  confidence.  3.  A  look  of  prayer.  (J.  W.  Reeve,  M.A.)  The  saving 
look : — I.  The  nature  of  the  command,  or  what  it  is  to  look  at  the  Lord  Jesus 
Christ.  1.  The  very  idea  of  looking  to  the  Saviour,  implies  a  looking  off  ourselves, 
our  idols,  our  sins,  our  righteousnesses,  and  our  unrighteousnesses.  It  is  to  look 
off  our  duties,  our  prayers,  our  tears,  our  humiliations,  om:  resolutions,  and  simply 
and  singly  to  look  to  Christ  for  salvation.  2.  To  look  at  Christ  for  salvation 
implies  a  conscious  need  of  salvation.  3.  To  look  at  Christ  is  to  look  at  Him  not 
only  as  the  very  Christ  of  God,  but  as  the  Son  of  God.  4.  To  look  at  Christ  is 
to  look  to  Him  for  a  whole  salvation.  II.  The  necessity  of  the  precept. 
We  have  a  natural  disinclination  to  it;  we  naturally  look  at  any  other  object. 
When  in  the  world,  and  of  the  world,  this  is  grossly  the  case.  Our  friends,  our 
families,  our  prospects,  profits,  our  pleasures,  our  sins,  form  ovir  world.  If  we 
withdraw  from  its  grossness,  and  are  mingled  up  with  its  more  decent  enjoyments, 
and  add  something  of  religion;  its  forms,  its  ceremonies,  its  worship,  quite  occupy 
us.  Our  little  orbit  of  vision  is  full,  quite  full;  we  can  look  at  nothing  else.  A 
mere  hand  before  the  eyes  hides  the  sim.  We  think  ourselves  far  better  than  many, 
far  from  being  so  vile  as  some;  and  even  after  the  Holy  Spirit  has  convinced  ua 
of  sin,  yet  still  what  backwardiiess  to  look  to  Christ!  III.  The  blessed  effect 
OF  OBEYING  THE  PRECEPT.  Salvation.  I.  How  wonderful  is  this  salvation — that 
one  real  look  at  Christ  has  eternal  life  in  it ;  that  if  the  vilest  sinner  do  but  look 
at  Him,  he  is  saved  even  at  the  eleventh  hour!  2.  The  longer  thou  livest,  the 
more  the  Spirit  will  open  the  depravities  of  thy  nature  to  thee.     As  He  does  this. 


CHAP.  XLV.]  ISAIAH.  471 

pray  that  He  may  open  the  very  grace  and  glories  of  Jesns  to  thee.  3.  When, 
through  the  power  of  the  Holy  Spirit,  this  peace  is  established  in  thy  conscience, 
through  the  precious  blood  of  the  Cross,  seek  its  increase  into  the  full  assurance 
of  hope,  in  aU  the  ways  of  holy  walking,  still  looking  to  Jesus  for  all  the  supplies 
of  His  grace  and  Spirit.  {J.  H.  Evans,  M.A.)  The  extent  of  the  Ooapel  can: — 
I.  An  OBJECT  OF  ATTRACTION.  "Me";  the  true  God — the  one  Saviour,  and  none 
else  but  Me.  But  in  what  capacity  is  Christ  exhibited  in  the  Gospel?  1.  As  a 
Mediator.  2.  As  the  Lord  our  righteousness.  3.  As  the  Fountain  to  wash  away 
ein.  4.  As  the  sinner's  Life.  II.  An  act  called  forth.  "  Look  unto  Me,"  or 
as  some  would  understand  the  origir^l,  "  Turn  your  face  to  Me  from  false  idols." 
This  act  implies — I.  Knowledge.  2.  Faith.  3.  Conversion.  Every  man  has  gone 
astray  from  God.  4.  A  waiting  posture.  IIL  The  extent  of  this  call.  All 
the  ends  of  the  earth."  This  phrase  imples — 1.  That  all  men  have  gone  astray 
from  God.  2.  That  God  is  no  respecter  of  persons.  3.  That  there  is  salvation  in 
no  other.  4.  The  sufficiency  there  is  in  Christ  to  every  returning  soul.  IV.  Thb 
BENEFITS  inseparably  connected  with  a  looking  to  Jesus  Christ.  "  And  be 
Baved" — not  be  made  rich  for  threescore  years  and  ten.  No!  "and  be  saved." 
{T.  Jones.)  Looking  unto  Christ: — I.  In  what  manner  we  are  to  look  to 
Christ.  1.  With  an  eye  of  faith.  To  direct  our  thoughts  to  Him  in  the  same 
manner  as  to  any  other  person,  is  not  enough.  2.  With  eager  desire  of  relief. 
3.  With  gratitude  and  love.  4.  As  an  example  of  righteousness  whom  it  behoves 
us  to  follow.  5.  As  our  Intercessor.  II.  Some  considerations  to  enforce 
THE  DUTY.  1.  Who  is  the  glorious  Object  to  which  you  are  required  to  look  ? 
None  other  than  the  Son  of  God.  2.  WTio  it  is  that  requires  you  to  look.  3.  It 
is  salvation  for  which  we  are  to  look.  4.  The  facility  of  the  duty  here  enjoined. 
5.  The  boundless  extent  of  the  invitation.  {A.  Ramsay,  M.A.)  Looking 
within,  looking  around,  and  looking  up: — Let  us  hear  the  story  of  the  Look — a 
story  in  three  chapters.  I.  Chapter  the  first.  How  he  looked  within.  I  do 
not  know  much  about  him,  except  this.  How  it  came  about,  indeed,  I  know 
not.  Whether  it  was  some  sermon  that  smote  him;  whether  it  was  the  death 
of  some  neighbour;  whether  it  was  some  peril  of  his  own;  whether  it  was  some 
sharp  sickness  that  overtook  him,  I  know  not;  but  so  it  was.  One  day  that 
man  stopped  and  looked  in  at  himself,  and  he  said,  "  There  is  no  mistake  about 
it;  I  am  wrong,  I  can  see.  I  am  all  wrong,  and  I  will  just  set  to  work,  and  I  will 
make  things  right.  I  will  turn  over  a  new  leaf."  And  he  set  to  work,  and  he 
began  to  tie  up  his  sins  with  the  strong  cords  of  his  resolutions  and  his  good  desires, 
and  there  he  set  them  all  of  a  row.  This  was  never  going  to  be  indulged  any  more, 
and  this  should  not,  and  the  other  should  be  denied.  All  went  well  for  a  day, 
and  then  something  or  other  came  across  him,  and  snap  went  the  cords,  and  up 
sprang  one  old  sin.  Snap  went  the  cords,  and  another  sprang  at  him.  "  There, 
he  said,  "  I  knew  that  it  was  no  good  my  trying,"  and  he  just  gave  it  up.  Who 
is  that?  You.  I  think  I  see  here  a  man  who  has  turned  over  a  new  leaf.  Here 
it  is  all  white  and  clean  without  a  blot.  Ah,  there  is  a  blot  now.  Oh,  there  is 
another  smudge;  there  is  a  mistake.  If  we  cannot  find  a  better  way  than  turning 
over  new  leaves,  we  shall  soon  give  it  up  in  despair.  Besides,  if  thou  couldst  do 
eo,  what  would  it  do  for  thee?  Here  is  a  man  who  has  got  into  low  water,  and 
he  cannot  make  ends  meet,  and  one  day  a  friend  steps  in  to  advise  him  and  finds 
him  in  a  state  of  glee,  and  the  man  says,  "  I  have  got  credit  for  this,  and  I  have 
received  this  ";  and  there  he  is  filling  up  the  column  of  his  receipts.  "  Why, 
what  does  this  mean?  "  says  the  friend — "  My  dear  fellow,  you  have  forgotten  the 
'  brought  forward.'  You  have  left  out  the  '  carried  over.'  "  That  dreadful 
"carried  over!"  That  awful  "brought  forward  !"  What  about  the  past? 
There  it  is,  what  can  I  do  with  it  ?  We  have  not  done  with  that  chapter  yet,  for  there 
is  a  second  part  of  it.  You  say  to  me,  "  Yes;  I  can  see  that  if  I  am  ever  going 
to  be  what  I  want  to  be,  I  must  just  come  right  up  to  God,  and  let  Him  do  it. 
But,  dear  friend,  what  ails  thee?  "  Well,  you  see,  I  do  not  know.  I  have  not 
got  any  faith.  I  have  not  got  any  repentance.  I  have  not  got  any  earnestness. 
What  is  a  man  like  I  am  to  do?  "  Hast  thou  never  learnt  how  to  make  thy 
hindrances  into  thy  helps?  Hast  thou  never  learnt  how  to  make  thy  very  need 
thy  claim  upon  thy  Grod?  I  pray  thee  now,  just  as  thou  art,  with  all  thy  sense 
of  want,  lift  up  thine  eyes.  Why,  the  only  thing  that  I  know  about  repentance 
is  what  I  feel  in  my  heart  when  I  see  Jesus.  I  have  never  found  any  place  of  repent- 
ance except  at  the  foot  of  the  Cross.  The  only  thing  that  I  know  about  faith  is 
what  springs  up  in  my  heart  when  I  look  at  Jesus.     Faith  does  not  come  from 


472  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xlt. 

looking  within.  Let  thy  whole  soul  say,  "  I  will  look  unto  Him,  and  be  saved." 
II.  Chapter  the  second.  How  he  looked  rotind.  You  say,  "  There  is  to-morrow; 
people  would  notice  the  change,  and  I  should  not  like  to  tell  them  that  I  had  given 
myself  to  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  and  how  I  was  going  to  be  His  soldier  and  His 
servant;  and  there  would  be  the  sneer,  and  scorn,  and  ridicule,  and  one  would 
perhaps  try  this  temptation,  and  another  would  see  whether  I  could  bear  the 
other,  and  I  do  not  know  that  I  could."  The  Gospel  is,  that  Christ  comes  right 
to  me  and  takes  my  hand.  He  lives,  and  He  comes  to  thee  and  me,  and  He  saith, 
"  Thou  art  setting  forth  to  be  My  child  and  My  servant,  and  I  am  never  going 
to  let  thee  be  alone."  Now,  wilt  thou  put  thy  hand  in  His?  But  we  have  not 
done  with  the  second  chapter  quite  yet.  I  can  think  of  some  one  going  a  step 
farther  and  saying,  "  Well,  I  do  look  to  Jesus,  you  know,  and  I  am  looking  to 
Him,  and  I  have  been  trying  to  look  to  Him,  but  somehow  or  other  I  cannot  get 
on."  Why  not?  Well,  it  may  be  that  you  are  looking  around  stiU.  Some  of 
you  say  to  me,  "  Well,  you  see,  I  look  to  Him,  but  I  cannot  rejoice.  I  do  not 
feel  happy."  Well,  I  do  not  know  that  it  says,  "  Feel  happy."  It  says,  "  Look 
unto  Me,  and  be  ye  saved."  I  think  that  we  must  let  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ  take 
care  of  our  feelings.  All  we  have  got  to  do  is  just  to  look  to  Him.  But  we  look 
around  at  one  man  and  another.  Somebody  says  to  me,  "  John  Bunyan  went 
for  three  months  weeping  and  crying.  I  am  a  dry  eyes;  I  cannot  shed  a  tear." 
Well,  who  wants  you  to  shed  a  tear?  What  have  you  got  to  do  with  other  people? 
We  will  look  no  more  round.  III.  Chapter  the  third.  How  he  looked  up. 
You  must  look  up.  Will  you?  {M.  Guy  Pearse.)  Would  you  be  saved? — The 
object  of  salvation  is  to  bring  a  man  into  harmonious  communion  with  God. 
I.  All  men  need  to  be  saved.  We  need  to  be  saved — 1.  From  our  propensity 
to  wrong -doing.  2.  We  need  also  to  be  saved  from  our  spirit  of  unrest.  3.  From^ 
our  weakness  in  being  overcome  by  pain  and  trouble.  4.  From  our  fear  of  death, 
n.  God  does  not  fobcb  any  man  to  be  saved  against  his  will.  In  the 
occurrences  of  this  life  we  may  have  to  employ  force  sometimes  to  save  the  body 
of  a  fellow-creature  against  his  will.  But  God  cannot  act  so,  because  He  is  God, 
and  would  have  men  love  Him.  The  only  way  God  has  of  compelling  us  to  follow 
Him  is  through  the  attraction  of  His  love,  as  showTi  in  Jesus  Christ,  who  laid 
down  His  hfe  on  the  Cross  for  love  of  us.  Love  is  the  strongest  power  in  the 
universe,  for  God  is  Love.  III.  The  power  and  simplicity  o^  the  salvation 
offered  to  us.  1.  Its  power.  Salvation  does  not  exist  anywhere  except  in 
God.  We  ministers  are  only  like  the  boys  with  handbiUs  inviting  you  in  to  buy 
salvation  from  our  Master  without  money.  2.  The  simplicity  of  the  salvation- 
It  is  to  be  had  for  a  look ;  but  it  must  be — ( 1 )  A  penitent  look.  (2)  A  look  of  entreaty, 
the  sort  of  look  that  a  man  has  who  is  trying  to  save  himself  from  drowning,  and 
seeing  you,  calls  to  you  for  help.  (3)  A  look  of  hope.  (4)  A  look  of  faith.  IV.  It 
IS  A  universal  invitation,  embracing,  "  all  the  ends  of  the  earth."  You  know 
what  the  "  ends  "  are.  When  a  coat  becomes  frayed,  or  a  shawl  worn,  the  ends 
are  of  no  use  and  you  cut  them  off.  The  outcasts  of  men,  of  what  use  are  they  ? 
This  salvation  is  for  the  despised  ones,  for  the  very  "  ends  "  that  the  world  throws 
away;  and,  better  stiU,  it  is  for  you.  (IT'.  Birch.)  The  Gospel  simple,  rich, 
universal: — I.  Here  is  the  simplest  method.  "Look  unto  Me."  I  give  the 
highest  praise  to  the  man  of  science  who  can  unify  the  manifold  facts  of  the 
world,  and  to  the  philosopher  who  can  reduce  to  order  the  strange  and  complex 
phenomena  of  the  mind.  How  I  should  thank  the  God  who  expresses  His  will 
for  me  in  a  single  word,  and  that  word  so  easy  and  uuencuinbered.  II.  Herb 
IS  THE  richest  boon.  "  And  be  ye  saved."  Salvation  is  a  treasure  unutterably 
and  inconceivably  great.  If  it  begins  \vith  "  no  condemnation,"  it  ends  with 
"  no  separation."  There  is  pardon  in  it,  and  hohness,  and  wisdom,  and  power; 
there  is  the  blessed  life  here,  and  hereafter  there  is  the  hfe  of  "  full  and  everlasting 
and  passionless  renown."  III.  Here  is  the  widest  outlook.  "  All  the  ends 
of  the  earth  " — thus  far  the  love  of  the  Father  and  the  grace  of  the  Son  and  the 
fellowship  of  the  Holy  Spirit  travel  and  reach.  There  is  notliiug  calculating, 
niggardly,  arithmetical  in  God's  largesse  and  bounty.  (.4.  Smellie,  31. A.)  Look 
ami  be  saved  (vers.  22-25): — I.  A  blessed  invitation.  "Look  unto  Me,  and 
be  ye  saved,  all  the  ends  of  the  earth:  for  I  am  God,  and  there  is  none  else." 
1.  The  subject  to  which  it  refers  is  unspeakably  momentous.  The  word  "  saved  " 
is  easily  pronounced,  but  who  can  comprehend  the  fulness  of  its  meaning?  2.  The 
duty  it  enjoins  for  securing  this  great  blessing  is  exceedingly  simple.  "  Look 
unto  Me."     Many  are  quite  confounded  at  the  simplicity  of  the  Gospel  termfl 


CHAP.  XLV.]  ISAIAH.  473 

of  salvation.  3.  The  range  of  this  invitation  is  unlimited.  "  All  the  ends  of 
the  earth."  The  call  is  wide  as  the  world.  4.  The  ground  on  which  it  rests  is 
highly  encouraging.  "  For  I  am  God,  and  there  is  none  else."  In  a  previous 
verse  it  is  said,  "  They  have  no  knowledge  that  set  up  the  wood  of  their  graven 
image,  and  pray  unto  a  god  that  cannot  save."  The  idols  of  the  heathen  are 
altogether  impotent.  But  our  God  is  able  to  save,  and  He  alone  is  able.  At 
the  same  time,  something  more  than  mere  power  is  necessary,  and  that  something 
is  not  wanting  in  Him  to  whom  we  are  invited  to  look.  He  is  "  a  just  God  and 
a  Saviour."  II.  An  emphatic  peoclamation.  "  I  have  sworn  by  Myself,  the 
word  is  gone  out  of  My  mouth  in  righteousness,  and  shall  not  return;  that  unto 
Me  every  knee  shall  bow,  every  tongue  shall  swear."  In  reference  to  this  subjec- 
tion two  things  are  stated — 1.  Its  universality.  In  the  time  of  Ehjah,  God  had 
reserved  unto  Himself  seven  thousand  men  who  had  not  bowed  the  knee  to  Baal; 
but  here  we  have  a  period  predicted  when  idols  shall  be  utterly  abolished.  2.  Its 
certainty.  "  I  have  sworn  by  Myself."  These  emphatic  expressions  denote 
that  the  purpose  was  made  in  the  most  solemn  manner,  and  ratified  in  the  most 
sacred  form.  It  is  a  purpose,  therefore,  that  will  be  infallibly  executed.  "  From 
henceforth  expecting."  says  the  apostle  of  the  enthroned  Redeemer,  "  till  His 
enemies  be  made  His  footstool."  And  has  He  not  ample  grounds  for  such  an 
expectation?  The  desires  even  of  the  righteous  shall  be  granted,  their  hope 
will  not  be  disappointed;  how  certain,  then,  must  be  the  fulfilment  of  the  desires 
and  hopes  of  Him  whom  the  Father  heareth  always?  Is  it  not  said,  "  Ask  of 
Me "  7  &c.  III.  A  WISE  resolution.  "  Surely,  shall  one  say,"  &c.  (ver.  24). 
The  two  blessings  which  are  here  referred  to,  are  absolutely  necessary  to  salvation, 
and  all  who  are  enhghtened  from  above  will  be  led  to  apply  for  them  where  alone 
they  are  to  be  found.  It  is  here  stated,  "  Surely  shall  one  say,  in  the  Lord  have 
I  righteousness  and  strength":  let  each  of  us  determine,  by  Divine  aid,  to  be 
that  one.  It  must  be  a  personal  resolution,  as  the  surrender  is  a  personal  surrender. 
It  is  added,  "  Even  to  Him  shall  men  come,  i.e.  they  will  apply  to  Him  for  these 
blessings.  On  the  other  hand.  He  will  be  made  known  by  terrible  things  in  right- 
eousness to  those  who  refuse  to  seek  His  face,  and  continue  to  rebel  against  His 
authority.  "  AU  that  are  incensed  against  Him  shall  be  ashamed."  IV.  An 
IMPORTANT  DECLARATION.  "  In  the  Lord  shall  all  the  seed  of  Israel  be  justified, 
and  shall  glory."  {Anon.)  The  metaphor  of  looking: — In  the  language  of 
metaphor  the  mind  has  got  an  eye  as  well  as  the  body.  We  say,  "  Look  at  this 
fact;  look  at  this  or  that  other  historic  personage;  look  at  Luther;  look  at  Julius 
Caesar;  look  at  Abraham"  ;  and  we  all  understand  what  is  meant  when  such 
language  is  employed.  It  is  in  some  such  a  way  that  we  are  told  to  look  at  the 
Saviour.  {J.  Hamilton,  D.D.)  Looking  to  God.- — While  the  moon  looketh 
directly  upon  the  sun,  she  is  bright  and  beautiful;  but  if  she  once  turn  aside, 
and  be  left  to  herself,  she  loseth  all  her  glory,  and  enjoys  but  only  a  shadow  of 
light,  which  is  her  own.  (J.  Trapp.)  The  contrite  soul  must  look  away  from  self  .• 
— Passing  through  a  graveyard  with  her  parents,  a  little  girl  drew  them  after  her 
to  look  at  a  beautiful  stone  figure  of  the  Christ,  with  a  face  fuU  of  suffering  and  yet 
of  tenderest  pity,  leaning  upon  a  massive  marble  cross.  As  they  paused  to  look, 
she  held  her  head  down  and  said  in  a  low  voice,  "  I  can  hardly  lift  up  my  eyes  to 
look  at  Him,  I  have  done  so  many  wrong  things."  It  is  just  because  we  have 
done  so  many  "  wrong  things  "  that  we  have  need  to  lift  up  our  eyes  to  look  at 
Him.  (Quiver.)  Looking: — Some  years  ago  I  was  asked  by  a  workman  to 
see  a  dying  fellow-creature,  as  this  man  said  in  his  peculiar  way,  to  "  pilot  him 
to  heaven."  I  went,  and  foimd  that  the  poor  man  was  too  far  gone  to  speak. 
All  he  could  do  was  to  look.  I  did  not  know  whether  he  could  hear,  for  when 
I  spoke  he  only  looked  at  me.  Wishing  at  least  to  show  him  the  way  of  salvation, 
I  took  a  picture  from  the  wall,  turned  it,  and  then  drew  on  it  with  my  lead  pencil 
the  figure  of  the  (>oss  with  Jesus  upon  it.  I  held  this  picture  before  the  man's 
eyes,  and  then  he  looked  at  me  in  an  expressive  way,  and  tried  to  nod  his  head. 
Shortly  after  he  died.  ( W.  Birch. )  Looking  up  and  lifted  up  : — In  Mrs.  Fletcher's 
biography  she  tells  us  of  a  convert  who  had  a  strange  dream.  He  thought  he  was 
down  a  very  steep  well  in  the  night,  and,  looking  up,  he  saw  a  single  star  shining 
far  above  him,  and  it  seemed  to  let  down  hues  of  silver  light  that  took  hold  upon 
him  and  lifted  him  up.  Then  he  looked  down  and  began  to  go  down.  He  looked 
up  and  began  to  go  up,  and  he  looked  down  again  and  began  to  go  down;  and  he 
found  that  by  simply  keeping  his  eye  on  that  star  he  rose  out  of  the  well,  and  his 
foot  stood  on  the  firm  ground.     A  parable  is  in  the  dream.     If  you  look  down, 


474  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xlv. 

you  go  down;  if  you  look  up,  you  go  up.     There  must  be  first  the  looking  up 
before  there  can  be  the  lifting  up.     (J.  8.  Drummond.) 

Ver.  24.  Surely  shall  one  say,  In  the  Lord  have  I  righteousness  and 
strengrth. — Our  righteousness  and  strength: — It  is  important  to  us,  in  reading 
the  Old  Testament,  and  more  particularly  its  prophetical  portions,  to  take  with 
us  as  our  guide  the  well-known  statement  of  the  angel  to  the  evangeUst  John: 
"  The  testimony  of  Jesus  is  the  spirit  of  prophecy."  The  preceding  verse  contains 
one  of  the  most  remarkable  predictions  concerning  the  kingdom  of  Christ  in 
the  Old  Testament,  and  in  this  prediction  the  kingdom  of  Christ  is  described 
as  becoming  imiversal  and  permanent.  After  such  a  prediction  as  that,  we 
might  have  expected  to  find  the  prophet  speaking  of  numbers  being  brought 
to  acknowledge  and  to  bow  the  knee  to  Christ.  Listead  of  that,  however,  he 
speaks  of  one — a  single,  isolated,  unknown  individual;  and  he  introduces  to  us 
this  solitary  individual  as  if  the  state  of  his  mind,  the  subjugation  of  his  heart 
to  Christ,  were  an  indication  of  the  complete  fulfilment  of  the  most  glorious  pro- 
phecies of  the  imiversality  of  Christ's  kingdom.  In  looking  for  the  progress 
of  the  Redeemer's  kingdom,  we  are  too  much  disposed  to  undervalue  individual 
conversions.  We  may  trace  the  progress  of  Christ's  kingdom  in  the  subjuga- 
tion of  a  single  heart  to  the  Saviour.  I.  The  state  of  this  individual's  mind 
IN  relation  to  the  bighteousness  of  Christ.  The  term  "  righteousness " 
is  one  of  those  words  in  the  Bible  which  it  is  of  the  first  importance  that  you 
should  thoroughly  imderstand.  It  includes  all  that  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ  has 
done  and  suffered  for  us.  Mark  three  stages  in  the  history  of  this  man's  mind. 
1.  The  first  thing  a  man  does  when  he  is  awakened  to  a  sense  of  his  need  of  some 
righteousness,  is  to  try  to  find  it  in  himself.  But  when  once  brought  to  see  his 
own  righteousness  aright,  he  sees  innumerable  defects.  2.  Look  at  the  second 
step  in  this  man's  history.  We  might  have  expected  that  the  man  would  have 
received  this  righteousness  with  promptitude;  but  he  sets  himself  as  dehberately 
against  the  righteousness  of  God  as  against  the  law  of  God.  Long  will  he  struggle 
against  the  friendly  hand  that  would  lead  him  to  the  Cross  of  Christ;  but  when 
brought  there,  he  will  exclaim,  "  In  the  Lord  have  I  righteousness  and  strength." 
3.  Mark  the  third  stage  of  the  human  mind  in  reference  to  the  righteousness  of 
Christ.  This  man  appropriates  it.  11.  His  state  of  feeling  in  refebencb 
TO  the  strength  of  Christ.  This  latter  word,  "  strength,"  conveys  an  idea 
totally  distinct  from,  and  additional  to,  that  suggested  by  the  first.  By  the 
"  righteousness  "  of  Christ  we  always  understand  what  the  Lord  Jesus  has  done 
for  us;  by  the  "  strength  "  of  Christ  we  always  understand  what  the  Lord  has 
done  in  us;  and  it  is  the  combination  of  these  two  that  works  out,  in  all  its  com- 
pleteness, the  salvation  of  an  individual  sinner.  When  he  is  first  awakened  to 
a  sense  of  his  own  condition,  he  naturally  tries  to  put  forth  his  own  strength, 
but  he  soon  discovers  that  this  is  the  wrong  order.  It  is  just  in  this  way  that 
the  conviction  is  forced  upon  his  nund  that  he  has  no  strength  in  himself,  but 
that  there  is  strength  for  him  in  Christ.  If  you  have  sought  Christ's  strength 
and  are  conscious  that  you  possess  it,  you  must  arise  with  vigour  in  the  strength 
of  the  new  man;  and  then,  and  not  till  then,  will  you  go  forth  free.  Mark  the 
connection  between  the  strength  of  Christ  and  the  righteousness  of  Christ.  The 
righteousness  of  Christ  is  laid  hold  of  first,  the  strength  of  Christ  is  appropriated 
next.  "  Unto  Ham  shall  men  come."  That  is  the  practical  conclusion  of  the 
whole  matter.  (1)  You  ought  to  come.  (2)  You  may  come.  {S.  Luke.)  Five 
Divine  declarations: — God's  power  over  mankind  is  exerted  in  a  way  of  grace, 
although  it  is  also  true  that  His  power  is  put  forth  in  a  way  of  judgment  towards 
those  who  reject  His  mercy.  I  read,  with  dehght,  the  expressions  of  my  text 
as  the  decrees,  and  determinations,  and  promises,  and  declarations  of  the  God 
of  grace,  who  affirms  that  men  shall  say,  "  In  the  Lord  have  we  righteousness 
and  strength,"  &c.  There  are  five  Divine  declarations  in  the  text.  I.  There 
shall  be  a  people  who  shall  own  the  truth  concerning  God.  Our  version 
says,  "  Surely,  shall  one  say,  In  the  Lord  have  I  righteousness  and  strength"  ; 
but  there  are  other  readings  which  appear  to  be  more  accurate.  "  Men  shall 
say,  In  the  Lord  is  righteousness  and  strength,"  would  be  quite  as  correct  a  ren- 
dering, or  even  more  so.  It  means  that  there  shall  be  a  people  who  shall  confess 
that  in  God  there  is  righteousness  and  strength.  1.  They  shall  see  these  to  be 
His  attributes.  2.  They  will  see  that  all  their  righteousness  and  strength  must 
be  found  in  God.     3.  They  shall  be  prepared  openly  to  avow  it.     "  Surely  shall 


CHAP.  XLXi.]  ISAIAH.  475 

one  say,"  &c.  II.  Men  will  not  only  own  the  truth  concerning  God,  but  they 
WILL  ACT  UPON  IT.  "  Even  to  Him  shall  men  come."  III.  Those  who  do 
COME  SHALL  BE  ASHAMED  OF  THEIR  FORMER  OPPOSITION.  "  All  that  are  incensed 
against  Him  shall  be  ashamed."  1.  There  are  some  who  are  angry  with  God's 
providence.  2.  Some  are  incensed  against  God  because  of  His  law  and  its  penalty, 
3.  Others  are  incensed  against  God  because  of  the  great  plan  of  salvation.  4.  Some 
are  even  incensed  against  the  Saviour  Himself.  IV.  The  fourth  Divine  declara- 
tion is,  that  THE  Lord's  people  shall  all  be  justified.  "  In  the  Lord  shall 
all  the  seed  of  Israel  be  justified."  V.  Those  who  come  to  Christ,  and  are 
JUSTIFIED  IN  Him,  shall  glory.  What  does  the  text  mean  when  it  says  that 
they  shall  glory?  Sometimes,  when  I  have  been  preaching  in  Wales,  or  among 
Methodists,  when  I  have  set  before  them  good,  rich.  Gospel  truth,  perhaps  two 
or  three  have  shouted,  at  the  same  time,  "  Glory!  "  And  though  it  has  not 
increased  the  solemnity  of  the  service,  it  has  added  a  good  deal  of  vivacity  to  it. 
And,  really,  when  we  see  what  Divine  grace  has  done  for  us,  we  often  feel  incUned 
to  cry  out,  "  Glory!  Glory  be  to  God!  "  1.  Have  not  many  of  you  felt  the  glory 
in  your  soul,  even  if  you  have  not  uttered  it  with  yoiur  mouth?  2.  But  the 
Lord's  true  people  will  not  keep  that  glory  all  to  themselves.  They  shall  so 
glory  that  they  shall  speak  about  it  to  others.  3.  Those  who  truly  know  Christ 
will  glory  in  Him  alone.  (C  H.  Spurgeon.)  Even  to  Him  shall  men  come. — 
Men  coming  to  Christ : — The  doctrinal  truth,  deduced  from  these  words,  is  the 
certainty  of  men,  as  sinners,  coming  to  Christ,  and  being  saved  in  Him.  It 
is  but  necessary  to  direct  attention  to  the  meaning  and  import  of  the  terms,  in 
the  text,  as  seen  in  their  connection  with  the  context.  I.  The  word  "  Him," 
viewed  in  its  connection,  points  out  several  important  particulars  concerning 
Christ,  His  person,  office,  and  work.  1.  His  person.  The  word  "  Him  "  refers 
to  Jehovah,  as  its  antecedent.  Redemption  is  the  work  of  Jehovah.  Christ 
is  Jehovah — our  great  God  and  Saviour.  But  Christ  is  man,  too.  This  con- 
stitutes the  glory  of  Christ's  person.  He  is  a  God-man.  2.  His  office.  The 
Mediator  between  God  and  man.  3.  His  work.  The  law  is  obeyed,  magnified, 
and  made  honourable,  its  penalty  borne,  infinite  justice  satisfied,  and  everlasting 
righteousness  brought  in.  11.  They  come  to  Him.  To  come  to  Christ  is  to  beheve 
upon  Him.  III.  They  shall  come.  The  language  expresses  certainty.  This 
certainty  depends  upon — 1.  The  purpose  of  God.  2.  The  work  of  Christ.  3.  The 
agency  of  the  Holy  Spirit.  IV.  Men  shall  come.  No  sinner  who  comes  to  Christ 
will  be  lost.  Men  do  come  to  Christ  and  are  saved.  1.  They  are  justified. 
2.  Sanctified.     3.  Preserved.     (J.  I.  Dunlop.) 

Ver.  2.5.  In  the  Lord  shall  all  the  seed  of  Israel  be  justified.— TAe 
believer  justified  and  glorying  in  the  Redeemer : — This  passage  is  prophetic  of  the 
Messiah.  Ver.  23  is  quoted  in  Romans  xiv.  11,  and  applied  to  Christ.  I.  Let 
us  then  attend  to  the  assertion  that  "  in  the  Lord  shall  the  seed  op  Israel 
BE  justified."  1.  They  are  justified  as  it  is  through  Him  they  obtain  the  for- 
giveness of  their  sins,  and  the  acceptance  of  their  persons  in  the  sight  of  God. 
2.  As  it  is  through  Him  they  acquire  a  right  to  aU  the  privileges  of  the  children 
of  God  in  a  present  and  future  state.  II.  How  we  ought  to  glory  in  Him 
BY  WHOM  WE  are  THUS  JUSTIFIED.  1.  By  entertaining  suitable  affections 
towards  our  Divine  Redeemer.  2.  Those  who  glory  in  Christ  must  avow  their 
regard  to  Him  before  the  world,  and  particularly  by  a  frequent  and  devout  attend- 
ance on  the  ordinances  of  the  Gospel.  3.  We  must  glorify  ffim  by  an  active 
and  steady  zeal  to  promote  the  interests  of  His  kingdom.  4.  The  seed  of  Israel 
are  to  glorify  Christ  by  their  patience  and  constancy  under  all  their  afflictions, 
especially  those  that  are  endured  for  His  sake.     (.4.  Hunter,  D.D.) 


CHAPTER  XLVI. 


Vbbs.  1-4.  Bel  boweth  down. — Bel  and  Nebo  are  the  Jupiter  and  Mercury 
of  the  Babylonian  pantheon  (they  are  represented  by  these  planets),  and  were 
the  supreme  deities  in  Babylon  at  this  time.  Bel  (BUu)  is  the  Babylonian  form 
of  the  Hebrew  Ba'al  (  =  lord),  and  like  that  word  is  a  generic  name  applicable 


476  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xlvi. 

to  any  deity.  When  used  as  a  proper  name  it  usually  denotes  Merodach  (Mar- 
duk),  the  tutelary  divinity  of  the  city  of  Babylon  (Jer.  1.  2,  li.  44);  although 
there  was  an  older  Bel,  who  is  spoken  of  as  has  father.  The  elevation  of  Bel- 
Merodach  to  the  chief  place  among  the  older  gods,  as  recorded  in  the  mythical 
Chaldean  account  of  the  Creation  (Tablet  iv.  1  £E.),  is  the  legendary  counterpart 
of  the  ascendency  acquired  by  Babylon  over  the  more  ancient  cities  of  the 
Euphrates  valley.  Nebo  (Nahu)  was  the  son  of  Merodach ;  the  chief  seat  of  his  wor- 
ship being  Borsippa,  in  the  vicinity  of  Babylon.  His  name,  which  is  supposed  to 
be  irom  the  same  root  as  the  Hebrew  ndh'C,  "  prophet,"  seems  to  mark  him  out 
as  the  "  speaker  "  of  the  gods  (another  point  of  contact  with  Mercury,  "  the 
chief  speaker  " — Acts  xiv.  12).  He  was  also  regarded  as  the  inventor  of  writing. 
The  frequency  with  which  the  Chaldean  kings  are  named  after  him  (Nabo-polassar, 
Nebu-chadnezzar,  Nabo-nidus)  has  been  thought  to  show  that  he  was  the  patron 
deity  of  the  dynasty.  (Prof.  J.  Skinner,  D.D.)  A  contrast — idols  and  God: — 
1.  This  is  an  incident  in  the  fall  of  Babylon.  Cyrus  has  broken  in,  and  the  mighty 
city  lies  open  to  the  Persian  army,  exasperated  by  long  waicing  at  her  gates. 
The  blood  of  her  nobles  has  flowed  freely  over  the  marble  floors  of  her  palaces; 
most  of  her  defenders  are  slain.  Women  and  children  are  cowering  in  the  inmost 
recesses  of  their  homes,  or  filling  the  streets  with  screams  of  terror  and  appeals 
for  help,  as  they  fly  from  the  brutal  soldiery.  The  final  and  most  sanguinary 
conflicts  have  taken  place  within  the  precincts  of  the  idol  temples;  but  all  is 
still  now.  The  priests  have  fallen  around  the  altars  which  they  served  ;  their 
blood  mingling  with  that  of  their  victims,  and  their  splendid  vestments  are 
become  their  winding  sheets.  And  now,  down  the  marble  staircases,  trodden  in 
happier  days  by  the  feet  of  myriads  of  votaries,  lo,  the  soldiers  are  carrying  the 
helpless  idols.  The  stern  monotheism  of  Persia  would  have  no  pity  for  the  many 
gods  of  Babylon;  there  are  no  idol-shrines  in  the  land  of  the  sun- worshippers 
where  they  could  find  a  niche  :  but  they  are  borne  away  as  trophies  of  the  com- 
pleteness of  the  victory.  There  is  Bel,  whose  name  suggested  that  of  the  capital 
itself.  How  ignominiously  it  is  handed  down  from  its  pedestal!  And  Nebo 
follows.  The  hideous  images,  lavishly  inset  with  jewels  and  richly  caparisoned, 
are  borne  down  the  stately  steps,  their  bearers  laughing  and  jeering  as  they  come. 
The  gods  get  little  respect  from  their  rude  hands,  which  are  only  eager  to  despoil 
them  of  a  jewel.  And  now,  at  the  foot  of  the  stairs,  they  are  loaded  up  on  the 
backs  of  elephants,  or  pitched  into  the  ox-waggons.  In  more  prosperous  days 
they  were  carried  with  excessive  pomp  through  the  streets  of  Babylon,  wherever 
there  was  plague  or  sickness.  Then  the  air  had  been  full  of  the  clang  of  cymbals 
and  trumpets,  and  the  streets  thronged  with  worshipping  crowds;  but  all  that  is 
altered.  "  The  things  that  ye  carried  about  are  made  a  load,  a  burden  to  the 
weary  beast.  They  stoop,  they  bow  down  together;  they  could  not  deliver  the 
burden,  but  themselves  are  gone  into  captivity  "  (xlvi.  1,  2,  R.V.).  So  much 
for  the  gods  of  Babylon  being  borne  off  into  captivity.  2.  Close  on  this  graphic 
picture  of  the  discomfiture  of  the  gods  of  Babylon,  we  are  invited  to  consider  a 
description  of  Jehovah,  in  which  the  opposite  to  each  of  these  items  stands  out 
in  clear  relief.  He  speaks  to  the  house  of  Jacob,  and  to  all  the  remnant  of  the 
house  of  Israel,  as  children  whom  He  had  borne  from  the  birth,  and  carried  from 
earliest  childhood.  Their  God  needed  not  to  be  borne,  He  bore;  needed  no 
carriage,  since  His  everlasting  arms  made  cradle  and  carriage  both.  Such  aa 
He  had  been.  He  would  be.  He  would  not  change.  He  would  carry  them, 
even  to  hoar  hairs.  He  had  made  and  He  would  bear;  yea,  He  would  carry 
and  deliver.  3.  This  contrast  is  a  perpetual  one.  Some  people  carry  their 
religion;  other  people  are  carried  by  it.  Some  are  burdened  by  the  prescribed 
creeds,  ritual,  observances,  exactions,  to  which  they  believe  themselves  to  be 
committed.  Others  have  neither  thought  nor  care  for  these  things.  They 
have  yielded  themselves  to  God,  and  are  persuaded  that  He  will  bear 
them  and  carry  them,  as  a  man  doth  bear  his  son,  in  all  the  way  that  they 

fo,  until  they  come  to  the  place  of  which  God  has  spoken  to  them  (Deut.  i.  31; 
sa.  Ixiii.  9).  {F.  B.  Meyer,  B.A.)  Israel's  infancy  and  maturer  life: — 
"  From  the  womb  "  and  "  from  the  lap  "  point  b{ick  to  the  time  when  the  nation 
whose  existence  began  with  Abraham,  marching  from  Egypt,  was  born,  so  to  speak, 
to  the  hght  of  the  world;  from  that  time  it  has  lain  like  a  willingly  assumed  burden 
on  Jehovah,  who  carries  it  as  a  nurse  the  babe  (Num.  xi.  12);  as  a  man  his  son 
(Deut.  L  31);  as  an  eagle  its  young  (Deut.  xxxii.  11).  The  senectvs  and  canities  in 
verse  4  are  self-evidently  the  nation's,  but  not  as  if  this  were  at  present  in  a  senile 


CHAP.  xLvi.]  ISAIAH.  477 

state,  but  the  yet  future  and  latest  days  of  its  history.  Up  to  that  moment 
Jehovah  is  He,  i.e.  the  Absolute  One,  and  always  the  same  (chap.  xli.  4).  As 
He  has  done  hitherto,  He  will  act  in  the  future — bearing  and  saving.  {F.  Dclitzsch, 
D.D.)  National  life — its  stages: — The  general  analogy  between  the  life  of 
individuals  and  that  of  nations,  is  sufiBciently  obvious,  and  is  finely  expressed 
by  Florus,  in  his  division  of  the  Roman  history  into  the  periods  of  childhood, 
youth,  manhood,  and  old  age.  (J.  A.  Alexander.)  Idols  found  wanting,  hut 
Jehovah  found  faithful : — The  confidence  of  Babylon  is  buried  among  her  heaps 
of  rubbish,  for  her  gods  have  fallen  from  their  thrones.  As  for  us,  our  trust 
is  in  the  living  God,  who  lives  to  carry  His  chosen.  I.  False  confidences 
PASS  AWAY.  1.  The  Lord  has  made  a  full  end  of  false  gods  and  their  worship. 
"  Bel  boweth  down,"  &c.  Not  only  concerning  Bel  and  Nebo,  but  concerning 
many  a  set  of  heathen  deities,  a  note  of  exultant  derision  may  be  taken  up.  "  The 
idols  He  shall  utterly  abolish."  2.  The  like  thing  has  happened  unto  false  systems 
of  teaching.  If  you  are  at  all  readers  of  the  history  of  religious  thought,  you 
will  know  that  systems  of  philosophy,  and  philosophical  religions,  have  come 
up,  and  have  been  generally  accepted  as  indisputable,  and  have  done 
serious  injury  to  true  religion  for  a  time;  and  yet  they  have  vanished 
like  the  mirage  of  the  desert.  3.  It  will  be  just  the  same  with  us  if  we 
trust  in  false  confidences  of  any  sort;  such,  for  instance,  as  our  experiences, 
or  attainments,  or  services,  or  orthodox  belief.  11.  Our  God  abides  always 
THE  SAME.  "  Even  to  your  old  age  I  am  He."  He  is  always  the  same  in  Himself, 
and  always  the  same  to  His  people.  1.  We  rightly  expect  trials  between  hero 
and  heaven;  and  the  ordinary  wear  and  tear  of  life,  even  if  life  should  not  be 
clouded  by  an  extreme  trial,  will  gradually  wear  us  out.  What  saith  our  God 
concerning  the  days  of  decline  and  decay?  He  says  to  us,  "  I  am  He."  He  will 
not  grow  weak.  His  eye  will  not  be  dim.  His  ear  will  not  be  heavy.  2.  If 
life  should  flow  never  so  smoothly,  yet  there  are  the  rapids  of  old  age,  and  the 
broken  waters  of  infirmity,  and  the  cataract  of  disease — and  these  we  are  apt 
to  dread;  but  why?  Is  it  not  sure  that  the  Lord  changes  not?  3.  In  the  course 
of  years,  not  only  do  we  change,  but  our  circumstances  change.  If  you  are  where 
you  ought  to  be,  your  confidence  is  in  God  now,  and  you  will  have  the  same  God 
then,  and  He  will  still  be  your  guardian  and  provider.  His  bank  will  not  break, 
nor  His  tr&asury  fail.  4.  "  Ah !  "  say  you,  "  but  what  I  most  mourn  is  the  death 
of  friends."  Yes;  that  calamity  is  a  daily  sorrow  to  men  who  are  getting  into 
years.  But  the  Lord  says,  "  I  am  He,"  as  much  as  to  say,  "  I  am  left  to  you, 
and  will  not  fail  you."  5.  Some  trouble  themselves  more  than  there  is  need 
concerning  prophetic  crises  which  are  threatened.  We  know  so  little  of  the 
future  that  to  worry  about  it  will  be  the  height  of  unwisdom.  The  Lord  took 
care  of  the  world  before  we  were  here  to  help  Him,  and  He  will  do  it  just  as  well 
when  we  are  gone.  We  can  leave  politics,  religion,  trade,  morals,  and  everything 
else  with  Him.  What  we  have  to  do  is  to  obey  Him,  and  trust  Him,  and  rejoice 
in  Him.  6.  "  Still,"  says  one,  "  there  are  such  evil  tokens  in  the  Church  itself 
as  must  cause  serious  apprehension  to  godly  men."  But  never  despair  of  the 
Church  of  God,  for  of  her  it  is  true,  "  Even  to  hoar  hairs  will  I  carry  you;  to  your 
old  age  I  am  He."  The  Head  of  the  Church  never  alters.  His  choice  of  His 
Church  is  not  reversed.  His  purpose  for  Has  Church  is  not  shaken.  We  shall 
see  better  days  and  brighter  times  yet,  if  we  have  but  faith  in  God  and  importunity 
in  prayer.  III.  While  false  confidences  pass  away,  God  will  fob  ever 
BE  the  same.  His  former  mercies  guarantee  to  us  future  mercies.  L  He  says, 
"  I  have  made."  It  is  well  to  remember  the  mercy  of  God  to  us  in  our  formation, 
and  in  the  first  days  of  our  birth  and  infancy.  But  God  made  us  in  another  sense. 
He  new-made  us.  2.  Then  He  also  tells  us  that  He  has  carried  us;  and  if  we  have 
been  carried  by  Him,  He  will  carry  us  the  rest  of  the  way.  What  a  great  care 
has  our  gracious  God,  since  none  of  His  children  can  run  alone  without  His  power, 
His  love,  His  grace!  3.  Practically,  God's  mercies  through  life  are  always  the 
same.  Notice  two  things  which  are  always  here — the  same  God  and  the  same 
mercy.  There  is  nobody  else  here  but  the  Lord  alone  with  His  people.  You 
and  your  God;  and  you  are  nobody  but  a  poor  thing  that  has  to  be  carried.  Grod's 
great  "  I,"  and  that  alone,  fills  up  the  whole  space.     (C  H.  Sturgeon.) 

Ver.  4.  And  even  to  your  old  age  I  am  He. — The  best  support  in  frailty : — > 
Nothing  can  exhibit  the  character  of  God  in  a  more  amiable  point  of  view,  than 
the  representations  which  the  Scriptures  give  us  of  His  conduct  to  youth  and 


478  TEE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  xlvi 

age.  Youth  is  ardent,  thoughtless,  and  presumptuous.  But  to  them  God  says. 
Wilt  thou  not  from  this  time  cry  unto  Me,  My  Father,  Thou  art  the  guide  of  my 
youth?  Old  age  needs  a  comforter.  God  saith  in  the  text,  "  Even  to  your  old 
age,"  &c.  I.  The  geaciotts  assxibance  God  here  delivers  to  His  aobd 
SAINTS.  1.  God's  continued  presence  with  them.  Few  of  the  companions  of 
their  early  days  remain.  But  the  Guide  of  their  youth  Uves  to  be  the  companion 
of  their  age.  2.  It  implies  \mabated  affection.  The  aged  are  ready  to  complain, 
and  in  many  cases  with  truth,  that  relatives  and  friends  are  cold  to  them,  and 
weary  of  them.  They  fear  that  their  moral  infirmities  will  provoke  the  anger 
of  their  Father  in  heaven.  But  God  having  loved  His  own  that  are  in  the  world, 
will  love  them  to  the  end.  3.  The  promise  assures  aged  saints  of  the  kindest 
tokens  of  endearment  from  their  God  and  Father.  He  will  bear  them  in  His 
arms  as  the  parent  does  the  child  for  whose  welfare  she  is  most  solicitous.  4.  This 
promise  assures  aged  believers  of  effectual  support.  Various  are  the  burdens 
which  the  aged  have  to  bear,  and  various  are  the  duties  which  they  are  required 
to  perform,  and  for  which  they  have  no  might.  In  youth,  saints  are  apt  to  err 
on  the  side  of  presumption,  and  in  old  age,  on  that  of  despondence.  But  the 
grace  of  God  can  strengthen  the  bending  back  and  invigorate  the  fainting  spirit. 
5.  It  assures  them  of  His  patience  and  indulgence.  This  may  be  intimated  in 
the  phrase — "  I  will  bear."  Men  are  more  disposed  to  bear  with  the  young  than 
with  the  old.  He  will  correct  you  for  the  failings  of  age  to  secure  their  amendment, 
and  to  make  your  decline  a  more  happy  specimen  of  the  beauty  and  the  power  of 
religion;  but  it  will  be  with  a  gentle  hand.  He  will  dig  about  the  aged  tree, 
and  prune  it,  that  it  may  still  bear  friiit.  6.  The  text  contains  a  promise  of  com- 
plete  deliverance.  Many  are  the  afflictions  and  temptations  of  old  age,  but  the 
Lord  delivereth  them  out  of  them  all  Human  Ufe  is  Uke  a  hill.  Its  sunny  side 
we  cUmb  in  childhood  and  youth;  in  middle  life  we  loiter  a  while  on  its  summit; 
in  old  age  we  descend  its  dark  side,  and  at  its  foot  lies  the  valley  of  the  shadow 
of  death.  The  staff  which  supported  your  decrepitude  shall  help  you  in  your 
dying  agony;  the  rod  which  drove  enemies  from  your  course  shall  terrify  them 
from  your  pillow;  yea,  the  Comforter  of  your  age  shall  take  you  to  Himself,  that 
in  BQm  you  may  find  the  bliss  of  eternity.  II.  The  grounds  of  confidence 
IN  THESE  PROMISES,  that  God  will  do  all  this  to  His  aged  people.  I.  God  hath 
made.  His  creating  goodness  is  frequently  employed  in  Scripture  as  an  encourage- 
ment to  hope  in  His  protecting  care  (chap,  xliii.  1,  2).  Besides,  you  are  His 
workmanship,  created  anew  in  Christ  Jesus  unto  good  works.  2.  The  character 
of  Him  who  makes  the  promise  confirms  it.  What  is  the  reason  why  the  word 
"  I  "  is  five  times  repeated  in  this  verse?  It  is  to  point  out  the  pleasure  God 
takes  in  making  promises  of  mercy  to  His  aged  people,  and  to  fix  their  view  on 
the  Author  of  it,  that  they  may  confide  more  fully  in  its  accomplishment.  The 
greatest  promises,  if  made  by  those  destitute  of  power  to  fulfil  them,  excite  con- 
tempt; or,  if  made  by  persons  whose  integrity  is  questionable,  are  thought  of 
with  the  torturing  anxieties  of  suspicion,  rather  than  the  comforts  of  hope;  but 
in  God  we  see  everything  to  make  distrust  appear  foohsh  and  criminal,  and  to 
produce  a  steadfast  and  triumphant  faith.  Conclusion — 1.  This  subject  is  admir- 
ably adapted  to  lead  the  aged  to  their  proper  duties.  It  should  lead  them  to 
love  God  with  all  their  heart  and  strength.  The  reflection,  I  am  poor  and  needy, 
but  the  Lord  thinks  on  me,  is  powerfully  adapted  to  melt  the  heart.  Your  capac- 
ities of  service  are  more  Umited  than  they  once  were;  but  this  consideration 
should  make  you  more  zealous  in  the  holy  improvement  of  them.     Let  it  teach  you 

Eatience.  Let  it  teach  you  to  be  joyfuL  Be  not  weary  of  a  season  thus  marked 
y  the  Divine  pity  and  care.  2.  Let  the  conduct  of  God  to  the  aged  be  imitated 
by  us  as  far  as  possible.  Let  not  your  regard  to  them  wax  cold,  though  you  may 
perceive  in  them  increasing  infirmities.  Give  them  every  proper  testimony 
of  your  kindness.  3.  Let  aged  transgressors  consider,  that  none  of  these  con- 
eolations  is  theirs,  and  that  they  exclude  themselves  from  them  by  their  temper 
and  conduct.  {H.  Bdjrage,  D.D.)  The  aged  saint  comforted: — I.  What  has 
God  done  for  you  already?  "  I  have  made."  This  brings  Him  very  near. 
Others  have  claimed  us  as  children;  and  we  early  learned  to  say.  My  father. 
But  to  them  we  owe  our  being  subordinately,  and  instrumen tally:  to  Him  we 
owe  it  supremely  and  efficiently.  They  were  "  fathers  of  our  flesh":  but  He  is 
"  the  Father  of  our  spirits."  But  there  is  another  and  a  higher  operation 
of  which  the  Scripture  speaks,  "  This  people  have  I  formed  for  Myself;  they 
shall  show  forth  My  praise."     "  We  are  His  workmanship,  created  in  Christ 


CHAP.  XLVi.]  ISAIAH.  479 

Jesus  unto  good  works."  As  the  subjects  of  His  grace,  a  foundation  is  laid  for 
everlasting  confidence  and  joy  in  Him.  EE.  What  God  will  do.  1.  He  will 
carry.  This  implies  something  more  than  to  guide  and  to  lead.  It  supposes 
helplessness  on  their  side;  and  tender  support  and  assistance  on  His.  God  haa 
a  large  family;  but,  as  Bishop  Hall  observes,  none  of  His  children  can  go  alone. 
Yet  they  are  not  left  to  perish  in  their  weakness.  2.  He  will  deUver.  This  impHes 
that  they  are  exposed  to  danger;  but  that  they  shall  not  become  a  prey.  He 
delivers  them  from  trouble.  In  trouble.  By  trouble.  III.  But  how  long — 
HOW  FAB  WTLL  His  TENDERNESS  AND  CAEE  EXTEND?  "  To  old  age;  to  hoar  hairs." 
This  is  a  period  in  which  a  man  is  deprived  of  many  of  his  relations  and  friends; 
is  gazed  on  by  a  new  generation;  feels  a  thousand  infirmities,  anxieties,  and 
distresses;  and  is  reduced  to  dependence  upon  those  around  him.  1.  The  promise 
does  not  necessarily  suppose  that  you  will  reach  this  period.  The  meaning  is, 
that  if  you  should  reach  this  period  you  need  not  be  afraid  of  it;  He  will  be 
with  you,  and  "  a  very  present  help  in  trouble."  2.  It  is  only  said  that  He  will 
be  with  you  "  to  old  age,  and  to  hoar  hairs."  He  will  be  with  you  all  through  "  the 
months  of  vanity,  and  the  wearisome  nights  appointed  you  ";  He  will  be  with 
you  even  when  "  yoiu*  heart  and  flesh  fail  you."  This  is  implied.  But  it  was 
not  necessary  to  mention  it — old  age  and  death  are  so  near  each  other — they 
touch.  This  subject  displays — (1)  The  patience  of  God.  What  a  number  of 
provocations  has  He  had  to  bear  with  from  you  in  the  course  of  sixty,  seventy, 
eighty  years!  (2)  Encouragement  for  those  who  are  descended  into  the  vale  of 
years.  Doubts  may  assail  the  mind  of  a  believer  to  the  last.  But  be  of  good 
comfort,  ye  aged  servants  of  God.  He  will  not  turn  you  out  of  doors  now  yovu* 
labour  is  over.  Yovu:  salvation  is  nearer  than  when  you  beUeved.  (3)  What 
shall  I  say  to  the  hoary-headed  sinner  ?  (4)  What  a  motive  is  there  here  to  induce 
us  all  to  become  the  Lord's  followers!  {W.  Jay.)  The  God  of  the  aged: — 
I.  The  doctrinb  op  the  text  I  hold  to  be,  the  constancy  of  God's  love,  its  per- 
petuity, and  its  unchangeable  nature.  God  declares  that  He  is  not  simply  the 
God  of  the  young  saint;  that  He  is  not  simply  the  God  of  the  middle-aged  saint: 
but  that  He  is  the  God  of  the  saints  in  all  their  ages  from  the  cradle  to  the  tomb. 
The  doctrine,  then,  is  twofold:  that  God  Himself  is  the  same,  whatever  may  be 
our  age;  and  that  God's  dealings  towards  us,  both  in  providence  and  in  grace, 
are  alike  unchanged.  IL  But  now  we  come  to  our  real  subject,  which  is,  to  con- 
sider the  timb  of  OLD  AGE  AS  A  SPECLiL  PERIOD,  and  to  mark,  therefore,  the 
constancy  of  Divine  love — that  God  bears  and  succours  His  servants  in  their 
later  years.  1.  Old  age  is  a  time  of  peculiar  memory.  2.  The  aged  man,  too, 
hath  pecuhar  hopes.  He  hath  few  hopes  of  the  future  in  this  world.  But  he 
has  one  hope,  and  that  is  the  very  same  which  he  had  when  he  first  trusted  in 
Christ.  What  is  the  groimd  of  thy  hope?  Is  it  not  the  same  as  that  which  ani- 
mated thee  when  thou  wast  first  united  with  the  Christian  Church?  Thou  saidst 
then,  "  My  hope  is  in  the  blood  of  Jesus  Christ."  And  the  object  or  end  of  hope, 
is  not  that  the  same?  And  is  not  the  joy  of  that  hope  just  the  same?  3.  Old 
age  is  a  time  of  pecuhar  sohcitude.  An  old  man  is  not  anxious  about  many  things, 
as  we  are;  for  he  hath  not  so  many  things  for  which  to  concern  himself.  He 
hath  not  the  cares  of  starting  in  business,  as  he  once  had.  He  hath  no  children 
to  launch  out  in  business.  But  his  solicitude  hath  somewhat  increased  in  another 
direction.  (1)  He  hath  more  sohcitude  about  his  bodily  frame  than  he  once 
had.  Even  your  bodily  pains  are  but  proofs  of  His  love,  for  He  is  taking  down 
your  old  tenement,  stick  by  stick,  and  is  building  it  up  again  in  brighter  worlds, 
never  to  be  taken  down  any  more.  (2)  And  there  is  another  sohcitude — a  failure 
of  mind  as  well  as  of  body.  God  is  just  the  same:  His  goodness  does  not  depend 
on  their  memory;  the  sweetness  of  His  grace  does  not  depend  upon  their  palate. 
(3)  But  the  chief  sohcitude  of  old  age  is  death.  God's  faithfulness  is  the  same; 
for  if  nearer  death,  he  has  the  sweet  satisfaction  that  he  is  nearer  heaven;  and 
if  he  has  more  need  to  examine  himself  than  ever,  he  has  also  more  evidence 
whereby  to  examine  himself.  4.  Old  age  hath  its  pecuhar  blessedness.  The 
old  man  has  a  good  experience  to  talk  about.  He  has  pecuhar  fellowship  with 
Christ.  There  are  pecuhar  communings,  pecuhar  openings  of  the  gates  of  paradise, 
pecuhar  visions  of  glory,  just  as  you  come  near  to  it.  5.  The  aged  saint  has  pecuhar 
duties.  (1)  Testimony.  (2)  Comforting  the  young  behever.  (3)  Warning. 
Apphcation — 1.  What  a  precious  thought,  young  men  and  women,  is  contained 
in  this  text.  You  want  a  safe  investment;  here  is  an  investment  safe  enough. 
Young  man,  God's  religion  will  last  as  long  as  you  will;  His  comforts  you  will 


480  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  xi.ru 

never  be  able  to  exhaust  in  all  your  life.  2.  Middle-aged  men,  you  are  plunged 
in  the  midst  of  business,  and  are  sometimes  supposing  what  will  become  of  you 
in  your  old  age.  But  is  there  any  promise  of  God  to  you  when  you  suppose  about 
to-morrows?  Listen  to  what  David  says,  "  I  have  been  young,  and  now  am  old; 
yet  have  I  not  seen  the  righteous  forsaken,  nor  his  seed  begging  bread."  3.  Vener* 
able  fathers  in  the  faith,  and  mothers  in  Israel,  take  these  words  for  your  joy. 
Do  not  let  the  young  people  catch  you  indulging  in  melancholy,  sitting  in  your 
chimney  corner,  grumbling  and  growling,  but  go  about  cheerful  and  happy,  and 
they  will  think  how  blessed  it  is  to  be  a  Christian.  (C  H.  Spurgeon.)  Qod 
always  with  His  people : — When  we  begin  with  the  Alpha  of  our  life's  spelling, 
we  find  Him  good;  and  when  we  come  to  the  Omega,  and  faintly  pronounce 
the  last  letter  of  Ufe,  we  know  still  better  how  gracious  He  is.  (Ibid.) 
God's  presence  with  the  aged  : — I  remember,  when  I  was  a  lad,  I  took  a  long  walk 
from  the  place  where  I  was  working,  late  on  a  Saturday  night,  to  my  father's 
house;  and  all  the  way  along  that  walk  the  night  increased  about  me,  the  darkness 
got  thicker  and  thicker.  I  knew  that  just  before  I  should  reach  home  I  should 
pass  through  what  to  me  was  the  gloomiest  and  thickest  wood  that  ever  was. 
It  was  gloomy  even  at  midday.  And  I  remember  I  was  feeling  my  way  through 
that  dense  wood,  when  suddenly  my  heart  leapt  to  my  mouth,  and  the  same 
instant  almost  all  my  fears  vanished.  For  a  great,  strong  voice  rang  through 
every  timber  of  the  wood — "  Are  you  coming,  Johnny?  "  'Twas  my  father 
coming  to  meet  me !  Oh,  the  night  became  almost  hght  about  me.  I  could  almost 
fancy  I  saw  the  outline  of  a  great,  strong  man  flashed  upon  the  darkness — so 
vivid  was  the  impression,  not  only  on  the  ear,  but  also  on  the  imagination.  Then 
the  whole  darkness  was  vocal  with  the  crash  of  his  voice.  Some  of  you  are  in 
darkness.  It  is  wearing  late,  my  brother.  It  is  getting  dark  and  late  and 
lonely,  and  not  many  people  are  tramping  your  road  now.  Time  was  when  the 
road  was  filled  with  your  friends.  You  are  like  one  who  sits  up  far  into  the  night, 
and  sees  the  lights  in  the  neighbours'  houses  one  by  one  put  out,  while  the  dark- 
ness and  silence  are  deepening  round  about  him.  But  suddenly,  suddenly,  in 
this  darkness  and  loneliness,  God's  voice  rings  out,  "  I  am  here;  fear  not;  never 
nearer  than  now,  in  your  hoar  hairs  and  old  age."  (J.  M'Neill.)  The  reward 
of  life-long  consecration  to  God : — In  our  great  naval  and  mihtary  hospitals,  it 
is  only  those  grey-haired  veterans  who  have  fought  the  battle  in  youth  and  man- 
hood, who  can  be  received  as  in-door  pensioners.  It  is  long  and  devoted  service 
which  is  the  passport  to  admission  there.  The  inmates  bear  upon  them  marks 
of  the  fight — the  mutilated  Hmb  or  the  scar  of  battle,  or  medals  hang  on  their 
breast,  the  mementoes  of  brave  and  heroic  deeds.  Let  us  work  while  it  is  called 
to-day.  Let  us  give  to  God,  not  the  crumbs  which  fall  from  life's  table,  but  the 
best  of  the  feast;  not  the  evening  hour  of  weariness  and  sleep,  but  the  morning 
prime  of  active  energy;  not  the  few  stray  winter  berries  left  on  the  top  of  the 
olive  tree,  but  the  ripe  and  abundant  autumn  fruits.  {J.  R.  Macduff,  D.D.) 
Old  age  with  and  without  God  : — Old  age  without  God — it  is  the  picture  of  queru- 
lousness,  discontent,  fretfulness,  gloom!  Old  age  with  God — it  is  love,  joy, 
peace,  gentleness,  goodness.  Old  age  without  God — it  is  graphically  described, 
in  this  chapter,  as  the  overturn  of  all  worldly  pride  and  glory — "  Bel  boweth 
down,  Nebo  stoopeth  "  ;  it  is  the  spoliation  of  the  earthly  temple,  the  pillage  of 
everything  that  ministered  to  earth's  ephemeral  happiness.  Old  age  with  God 
— it  can  stand  with  the  prophet,  even  in  the  midst  of  catastrophe  and  ruin  and 
death,  claiming  as  its  own  the  sustaining  words,  "  Even  to  your  old  age  I  am 
He,"  &c.  (Ibid.)  I  liave  made,  and  I  will  bear. — Creating  and  carrying: — 
I.  The  two  ideas  of  creating  and  carrying  are  tlirown  together,  and  in  such  a 
way  as  to  show  that  they  are  related:    that  in  the  fact  of  God  the  Creatob 

LIES    ENFOLDED   THE    FACT   OF    GoD   THE    REDEEMER.       We    mUSt   nOt   let   the   fact 

of  redemption,  wonderful  as  it  is,  throw  the  fact  of  creation  into  the  background; 
because  the  two  are  inseparably  Unked.  Redemption,  in  one  sense,  grows  out 
of  creation.  Because  God  made  man  in  His  own  image.  He  is  bent  on  restoring 
him  to  that  image.  Because  God  made  us,  God  loves  us,  educates  us,  bears 
with  us,  carries  on  the  race  on  the  Uue  of  His  infinite  patience,  ministers  to  us 
with  help  and  sympathy,  is  burdened  with  our  perverseness  and  blindness,  yea, 
comes  down  in  person  into  the  sphere  of  our  humanity -and  takes  its  awful  load 
of  sin  and  sorrow  and  pain  and  death  upon  Himself.  In  anything  that  one  makes 
he  has  a  pecuHar  interest.  The  young  artist  knows  that  his  first  picture  stands 
no  chance  in  comparison  with  the  works  of  his  masters,  and  yet  that  piece  of 


CHAP.  XLVi.]  ISAIAH.  481 

canvas  is  more  to  him  than  a  Raphael  or  a  Rembrandt.     Love  seems  to  thrive 
on  defect.     The  idea  is  worked  out  in  Wordsworth's  little  poem,  "  The  Idiot  Boy." 
And  the  same  fact  holds  on  the  moral  side.     Parental  love  is  not  conditioned 
on  a  child's  goodness.     All  this  is  famihar  enough.     Are  we  afraid  to  carry  the 
truth  farther  up — up  to  God?     Are  we  of  those  who  say  that  God  must  be  just 
and  may  be  merciful — as  if  mercy  were  not  one  of  His  essential  attributes  as 
well  as  justice  ?     Why  should  the  "  must "  hold  in  the  one  case  any  more  than 
in  the  other?     All  that  is  included  in  the  word  "bear"  is  practically  pledged 
to  us  in  the  fact  of  creation.     One  reason  why  we  take  so  slowly  to  the  idea  of 
God's  bearing  or  carrying  us,  is  because  we  divorce  it  from  the  fact  that  He  made 
Tis;  and  we  look  at  the  bearing  simply  as  a  concession,  forgetting  that  God  the 
Redeemer  is  bound  up  with  God  the  Creator.     You  find  that  in  the  New  Testa- 
ment.    Take  the  parable  of  the  Prodigal  Son.     What  is  at  the  bottom  of  the 
whole  story  but  this  truth  of  sonship?     It  is  that  which  defines  the  measure 
of  the  prodigal's  sin.     That  also  defines  the  father's  longing,  and  the  joy  over 
the  returning  son,  the  free  forgiveness  and  the  festivity.     God  is  under  the  stress 
of  the  parental  instinct  to  take  our  sicknesses  and  to  bear  our  infirmities,  and 
He  yields  to  it,  gives  Himself  up  to  it  in  His  own  Divine  measure.     I  am  saying 
nothing  which  goes  to  mitigate  the  essential  badness  of  sin,  or  God's  hatred  of 
it,  or  to  deny  the  fact  of  God's  punishment  of  it.     Even  fatherhood  has  limitations. 
God  cannot  restore  His  erring  child  without  conditions.     Simply  to  forgive  the 
past  is  not  enough.     God  aims  at  the  perfect  establishment  of  the  filial  relation, 
and  that  cannot  be  without  a  filial  heart  in  the  son,  and  the  son's  cheerful  obedience. 
If  the  prodigal  had  not  come  back  repentant,  he  would  not  have  had  the  robe 
and  the  ring.     IL  Some  of  the  aspects  tjnder  which  this  truth  of  God's 
BEARIKG  MANIFESTS  ITSELF.     1.  It  appears  as  a  matter  of  tolerance.     It  is  perfectly 
clear  from  the  Bible  that  God's  love  for  His  children  makes  Him  bear  patiently 
with  their  infirmities  and  errors.     When  an  enthusiastic  sculptor  has  once  con- 
ceived the  idea  of  a  statue,  he  is  not  daimted  by  hardness  in  the  stone,  nor  by 
defects  in  the  grain.     He  is  bent  on  carrying  out  his  cherished  ideaL     The  greater 
the  difficulties,  the  more  his  energies  are  called  out.     Are  we  to  suppose  that 
God  conceives  a  purpose  less  sharply  or  works  it  out  with  less  intensity  than 
a  man  does?     This  idea  of  bearing  is  at  the  root  of  the  doctrine  of  Christ's  atone- 
ment.    The  triith  also  comes  out  experimentally  in  the  Christian  life  of  each 
one  of  us.     Every  one,  if  he  is  honest  with  himself,  knows  that  God  has  had  much 
to  bear  with  him,  and  knows,  too,  how  patiently  God  has  borne  it:  and  every 
one  of  us  has  had  experience  of  God's  bearing  in  the  sense  of  sympathetic  love 
and  helpfulness.     How  many  of  us  know  from  most  blessed  experience  what 
it  is  to  have  a  great  High  Priest  touched  with  the  feeling  of  our  infirmities.     How 
many  of  us  have  known  what  it  was  to  have  Him  bear  our  heavy  load  for  us; 
and  therefore,  in  the  way  that  lies  before  us,  can  we  not  trust  in  larger  measure 
the  love  of  Him  who  made  us  to  bear  with  us?     God  makes  nothing  in  vain. 
When  He  made  man  in  His  own  image.  He  did  not  make  him  to  gratify  a  caprice, 
or  in  mere  wantonness  of  power.     He  made  him  with  a  solemn,  an  awful,  a  glorious 
purpose  over  which  He  took  heaven  into  counsel:  and  be  sure  that  He  will  accom- 
plish that  purpose,  that  His  patience  shall  not  fail,  that  He  who  made  will  bear 
until  He  shall  have  perfected  His  work.     2.  And  meanwhile  let  us  not  forget 
the  lesson  of  His  bearing  as  it  speaks  to  us  of  duty.     Let  us  not  presume  on  it. 
(M.  R.  Vincent,  D.D.)        God  our  burden-hearer  : — L  The  burdens  for  which 
God  makes  BLcmself  responsible.     The  hves  of  most  of  us  are  heavily  weighted. 
We  began  our  race  unencumbered,  but  the  years  as  they  have  passed  have  added 
burdens  and  responsibilities.     There  is  the  biurden  of  existence.     Of  sin.     Of 
responsibility  for  others.     Of  our  hfe-work.     In  all  these  things  we  are  doomed 
to  be  solitary.     Each  human  soul  must  bear  his  own  burden.     We  are  a  dead- 
weight; but  it  matters  nought  to  Him.     IT.  The  reason  why  God  assumes 
THIS  responsibility.     "  I  have  made,  and  I  will  bear."     When  a  parent  sees 
his  own  evil  nature  re-appearing  in  his  child,  so  far  from  casting  that  child  aside, 
and  quoting  its  faults  as  reasons  for  disowning  it,  he  draws  nearer  to  it,  filled 
with  a  great  pity,  and  murmurs,  "  I  have  made,  and  I  wiU  bear."     When  a  man 
has  ehcited  in  another  a  love  which  will  never  be  at  rest  till  it  has  nestled  to  his 
heart,   even  though  considerations  arise  which  make  it  questionable  whether 
he  has  been  wise,  yet  as  he  considers  the  greatness  of  the  love  which  he  has  evoked 
he  says  to  himself,  "  I  have  made,  and  I  will  bear."     When  a  Christian  minister 
has  gathered  around  him  a  large  congregation,  and  many  have  been  converted 
VOL.  II. — 31 


482  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xlvi. 

from  the  world,  as  he  looks  around  on  those  who  count  him  captain  or  father, 
he  says  to  himself,  when  voices  summon  him  elsewhere,  unless  some  overmastering 
consideration  is  pressed  upon  him,  "  I  have  made,  and  I  will  bear."  Now  let 
us  ascend,  by  the  help  of  these  reflections,  to  the  Divine  nature,  which  is  not  above 
similar  considerations.  He  has  made  and  fashioned  us;  He  has  implanted  with- 
in us  appetites  that  only  He  can  satisfy;  He  has  placed  us  amid  circumstances 
of  unusual  difficulty,  and  entrusted  to  us  work  of  unwonted  importance;  He  has 
committed  to  us  the  post  of  duty  which  taxes  us  to  the  uttermost:  and  because 
He  has  done  all  this.  He  is  responsible  for  all  that  is  needed  for  the  accomplish- 
ment of  Has  purposes.  III.  The  consolation  which  arises  fkom  these  con- 
siderations. I.  In  hours  of  anguish  for  recent  sin.  The  sin  is  our  own.  And 
yet  from  the  depth  of  sin-consciousness  there  is  an  appeal  to  God.     He  created, 

Permitted  us  to  be  born  as  members  of  a  sinful  race.  He  knew  all  we  should  be, 
efore  He  set  His  heart  upon  us  and  made  us  His  own.  May  we  not  ask  Him 
to  bear  with  us  whom  He  made,  redeemed,  and  took  to  be  His  children  by  adoption 
and  grace?  And  will  He  not  answer,  "  I  have  made,  and  I  will  bear"?  2.  In 
moments  of  great  anxiety.  3.  In  days  of  anxious  foreboding.  {F.  B.  Meyer, 
B.A.)  False  and  true  religion — hearing  or  home  : — It  makes  all  the  difference 
to  a  man  how  he  conceives  his  religion — whether  as  something  that  he  has  to 
carry,  or  as  something  that  will  carry  him.  We  have  many  idolatries  and  idol 
manufactories  among  us.  This  cleavage  is  permanent  in  humanity — between 
the  men  that  are  trying  to  carry  their  reHgion  and  the  men  that  are  allowing 
God  to  carry  them.  Let  us  see  how  God  does  carry.  1.  The  first  requisite  for 
stable  and  buoyant  Ufe  is  ground,  and  the  faithfulness  of  law.  What  sends  us 
about  with  erect  bodies  and  qmck,  firm  step,  is  the  sense  that  the  siirface  of  the 
earth  is  sure,  that  gravitation  will  not  fail,  that  our  eyes  and  the  touch  of  our 
feet  and  our  judgment  of  distance  do  not  deceive  us.  Now,  what  the  body  needs 
for  its  world,  the  soul  needs  for  hers.  For  her  carriage  and  bearing  in  Hfe  the  soul 
requires  the  assurance  that  the  moral  laws  of  the  universe  are  as  conscience  has 
interpreted  them  to  her,  and  will  continue  to  be  as  in  experience  she  has  found 
them.  To  this  reqtiisite  of  the  soul  God  gives  His  assurance,  "  I  have  made, 
and  I  will  bear."  These  words  were  an  answer  to  an  instinct,  the  instinct  that 
springs  from  the  thought,  "  Well,  here  I  am,  not  responsible  for  being  here,  but 
80  set  by  someone  else,  and  the  responsibiUty  of  the  life,  which  is  too  great  for 
me,  is  His."  God's  Word  comes  to  him  to  tell  him  that  his  instinct  is  sure.  2.  The 
most  terrible  anguish  of  the  heart,  however,  is  that  it  carries  something  which 
can  shake  a  man  off  even  that  ground.  The  firmest  rock  is  of  no  use  to  the  para- 
lytic or  to  a  man  with  a  broken  leg.  And  the  most  steadfast  moral  universe, 
and  most  righteous  moral  governor,  is  no  comfort — but  rather  the  reverse — 
to  the  man  with  a  bad  conscience,  whether  that  conscience  be  due  to  the  guilt 
or  to  the  habit  of  sin.  Conscience  whispers,  "  God  indeed  made  thee,  but  what 
if  thou  hast  unmade  thyself  ?  God  reigns;  the  laws  of  hfe  are  righteous;  creation 
is  guided  to  peace.  But  thou  art  an  outlaw  of  this  universe,  fallen  from  God 
of  thine  own  will.  Thou  must  bear  thine  own  guilt,  endure  thy  voluntarily  con- 
tracted habits.  How  canst  thou  beUeve  that  God,  in  this  fair  world,  would  bear 
thee  up,  so  useless,  soiled,  and  infected  a  thing?  "  Yet  here,  according  to  His 
blessed  Word,  God  does  come  down  to  bear  up  men.  The  thing  is  man's  realest 
burden,  and  man's  realest  burden  is  what  God  stoops  lowest  to  bear  (chap.  hii.  4,  11 ). 
God  has  made  this  sin  and  giiilt  of  ours  His  special  care  and  anguish.  We  can- 
not feel  it  more  than  He  does.  3.  But  this  Gospel  of  God's  love  bearing  our  sins 
is  of  no  use  to  a  man  unless  it  goes  with  another — that  God  bears  him  up  for 
victory  over  temptation,  for  attainment  in  holiness.  God  never  gives  a  man 
pardon  but  to  set  him  free  for  effort,  and  to  constrain  him  for  duty.  He  bears 
us  best  and  longest  by  being  the  spirit  and  tlie  soul  and  the  life  of  our  life.  The  Lord 
and  His  own  are  one.  4.  God  does  not  carry  dead  men.  His  carrying  is  not 
mechanical,  but  natural;  not  from  below,  but  from  within.  You  dare  not  be 
passive  in  God's  carriage.  Again,  in  His  bearing  God  bears,  and  does  not  overbear, 
using  a  man  not  as  a  man  uses  a  stick,  but  as  a  soul  uses  a  body, — informing, 
inspiring,  recreating  his  natural  faculties.  Many  distrust  religion,  as  if  it  were 
to  be  an  overbearing  of  their  originaUty.  But  God  is  not  by  grace  going  to  undo 
His  work  by  nature.  "  I  have  made,  and  I  will  bear  " — will  bear  what  I  have 
made.  If  that  be  God's  bearing,  how  wrong  those  are  who,  instead  of  asking 
God  to  carry  them,  are  more  anxious  about  how  He  and  His  rehgion  are  to  be 
sustained  by  their  consistency  or  efforts!     {Prof.  0.  A.  Smith,  D.D.) 


CHAP.  XLVi.]  ISAIAH.  483 

Ver.  5.  To  wliom  will  ye  liken  Me  ? — Idols  cannot  represent  God : — The  Jews 
might  have  alleged  that  they  served  not  the  false  gods  of  the  Gentiles,  but 
the  God  of  Israel;  and  that  they  used  images  when  they  worshipped  Him  only 
that  they  might  have  before  their  eyes,  like  other  nations,  some  beautiful  object. 
This  delusive  notion  is  here  reprobated;  and  they  were  taught  that  there  is 
neither  likeness  nor  equality  betwixt  the  true  God  and  these  foolish  pretended 
resemblances  made  of  Him  by  the  hands  of  men.  {R.  Macculloch.)  Ood 
incomprthenstble  by  mere  reason: — God  asserts  an  immeasurable  difference  between 
Himself  and  all  created  beings.  1.  We  distinguish  the  Creator  from  every  crea- 
ture by  declaring  Him  self-existent.  There  is  no  way  of  accounting  for  the  origin 
of  everything  except  by  supposing  something  which  never  had  origin.  Nothing 
could  have  begun  to  be  unless  there  had  been  something  which  never  began  to 
be.  Here  is  the  grand  distinction  between  the  Creator  and  the  creature  :  the 
being  of  the  one  is  underived,  and  that  of  the  other  derived.  The  existence 
of  all  creatures  is  a  dependent  existence;  it  has  been  imparted  by  another,  and 
may  be  withdrawn  by  that  other.  The  existence  of  the  Creator  is  a  necessary 
existence,  altogether  independent,  indebted  to  none  for  commencement,  and 
resting  on  none  for  continuance.  It  is  by  His  name  Jehovah — that  name  which 
breathes  self- existence — that  God  proclaims  Himself  inscrutable  and  unimagin- 
able. 2.  We  learn  from  this  the  vanity  of  all  attempts  to  explain  or  illustrate 
the  Trinity  in  Unity.  If  we  were  able  to  produce  exact  instances  of  the  union 
of  three  in  one,  we  should  have  no  right  to  point  it  out  as  at  all  parallel  with  the 
union  of  the  Godhead.  We  ought  to  know  beforehand  that  the  created  can 
furnish  no  delineation  of  the  uncreated;  so  that  it  shows  a  forgetfulness  of  the 
self-existence  of  God  to  seek  His  resemblance  in  what  He  hath  called  into  being. 
He  best  shows  the  workings  of  a  sound  judgment  and  ripened  intellect  who, 
in  such  a  matter  as  the  doctrine  of  the  Trinity,  submits  to  the  disclosures  of 
revelation,  and  receives  it  on  the  authority  of  God,  though  unable  to  explain 
it  through  any  reasoning  of  his  own.  The  doctrine  of  the  Trinity  is  above  reason, 
but  it  is  not  against  reason.  3.  Consider  the  paramount  importance  of  the 
doctrine  of  the  Trinity.  The  doctrine  of  the  Trinity  is  so  bound  up  with  the 
whole  of  Christianity,  that  to  think  of  removing  it  and  yet  of  preserving  the 
religion  is  to  think  of  taking  from  the  body  all  its  sinew  and  its  bone,  and  yet 
leaving  it  all  its  symmetry  and  its  strength.  The  whole  falls  to  pieces  if  you  destroy 
this  doctrine.  The  short  but  irresistible  way  of  proving  that  the  doctrine  of  the 
Trinity  is  in  the  largest  sense  a  practical  doctrine  is  to  remind  you  that  if  this 
doctrine  be  false,  Jesus  Christ  is  nothing  more  than  a  man  and  the  Holy  Spirit 
nothing  more  than  a  principle  or  quahty.  To  remove  the  doctrine  of  the  Trinity 
is  to  remove  whatever  is  peculiar  to  Christianity,  to  reduce  the  religion  to  a  system 
of  loftier  morals  and  stronger  sanctions  than  the  world  before  possessed;  but, 
nevertheless,  having  nothing  to  deserve  the  name  of  Gospel,  because  containing 
no  tidings  of  an  expiation  for  sin.     (H.  Melvill,  B.D.) 

Vers.  9-11.  Remember  the  former  things  of  old. — The  purposes  of  Ood: — 
I.  When  we  come  to  look  at  the  pitrposes  of  God,  we  must  not  be  misled  by 
words.  The  word  "  purpose,"  with  us,  supposes  several  things,  which  have 
nothing  to  do  with  the  same  term  when  applied  to  God.  There  is,  with  God, 
no  ignorance  previously  to  the  formation  of  His  purposes;  no  new  light  thrown 
on  circumstances,  out  of  which  His  purpose  arises;  no  period  in  His  past  eternity, 
when  His  purposes  were  not  formed ;  no  consulting  either  with  Himself  or  with 
others,  with  regard  to  their  formation.  Perhaps  you  may  be  ready  to  say,  if 
we  are  to  look  at  the  purpose  of  God  in  this  way,  it  is  not  a  purpose  at  all,  in  the 
sense  in  which  we  use  the  term.  And  it  certainly  is  not,  as  you  will  perceive. 
We  accommodate  human  language  to  the  infinite  characteristics  of  the  Divine 
nature;  but  we  must  do  it  with  caution,  and  must  be  careful  what  measure  of 
idea  we  associate  with  ovu:  common  terms,  when  we  are  applying  them  to  God. 
If  not,  we  shall  be  deceived  in  the  conclusions  we  draw  and  the  doctrines  we 
believe.  If  the  purpose  of  God  is  to  be  viewed  as  it  really  is,  we  take  it  to  be 
simply  this :  God's  foreknowledge  of  everything  that  is  to  come  to  pass,  together 
with  the  operation  of  His  influence  upon  that  foreknowledge,  in  connection  with 
those  things.  His  foreknowledge  had  no  beginning;  His  resolution,  as  to  what 
He  was  to  do,  could  have  no  beginning.  From  the  moment  He  foresaw.  He 
resolved  or  purposed.  Such  appears  to  be  the  meaning  of  the  word  "  purpose  " 
as  applied  to  God.     If  it  should  be  said,  "  This  is  a  view  of  '  purpose  '  altogether 


484  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xlvi. 


foreign  from  the  view  we  take  of  it,"  we  grant  it.     But  why?     Because    the 
nature  of  God  is  altogether  foreign  from  ours.     Ours  is  a  finite  and  limited  nature 
in  itself;  His  is  infinite  and  unlimited.     II.  Thb  application  of  God's  ptjbposh 
IN  BEFEEENCE  TO  MAN.     1.  Are  we  to  regard  the  purposes  of  God  as  involv- 
ing in  them  the  charge  of  originating  immorality  and  sin?     Did  God  purpose 
that  man  should  be  a  sinner?     If  His  purposes  are  to  be  taken  and  explained, 
as  we  take  and  explain  our  own,  then  this  was  the  case.     If  He  foresaw  that 
man  would  fall  before  He  made  him,  yet  had  not  determined  whether  He  should 
permit  this  or  not,  and  then  permitted  it,  we  should  say  that  the  purpose  of  (Jod 
implies  in  it  a  part  at  least  of  the  moral  guilt  of  His  creatiire.     But  He  had  formed 
no  such  purpose  as  this.     He  foresaw  that  man  would  fall;   He  foresaw  the  pro- 
vision that  was  to  be  made  for  his  case;  but  there  was  no  period  in  eternity  when 
He  had  not  foreseen  this,  and  hence  no  purpose  arose  out  of  the  mere  incident 
of  the  liability  of  man  to  fall.     He  was  left  to  the  working  of  those  powers  which 
God  gave  him:   and  with  the  working  of  those  powers  the  piurposes  of  God  never 
interfered.     2.  But  if  we  look  not  merely  to  the  connection  between  the  purpose 
of  God  and  the  origin  of  evil,  but  also  to  the  connection  between  the  purpose 
of   God  and  the  free  agency  of  man,  we  have  another  field  opened  to  us,  in 
examining  which  we  must  very  carefully  recollect  the  views  that  we  have  taken 
of  the  Divine  purpose.     When  God  created  man.  He  gave  him  powers  and  facul- 
ties which  He  intended  to  commit  to  his  trust,  and  which  He  did  commit  to  his 
trust.     He  foresaw  what  use  he  would  make  of  them,  and  how  far  he  would  abuse 
them;    but  He  did  not  destroy  them,  in  order  that  they  might  not  be  abused. 
There  is  an  entire  freedom  in  the  operation  of  our  faculties,  so  far  as  our  own 
consciousness  is  concerned;  are  they  not  also  exhibited  to  us  as  free,  in  the  Word 
of  God?     Are  we  not  addressed  upon  the  subject  of  our  shortcomings  and  our 
sins,  as  if  we  were  held  strictly  free  by  the  God  that  addresses  us?     Are  we  not 
hailed  to  return  from  oiu-  iniquity,  as  if  we  were  free  to  retiurn?     Are  we  not 
invited  to  "  lay  hold  on  the  hope  set  before  us  in  the  Gospel,"  as  if  we  were  free 
to  accept  the  invitation?     Let  us  look  next  at  the  view  that  men  take  of  our 
capacity  ;  and  we  shall  find,  that  except  when  they  are  induced  to  quarrel  with 
the  Word  of  God,  except  when  they  are  induced  to  throw  difficulties  in  the  way 
of  their  own  salvation,  they  too  act  upon  the  principle  that  man  is  free.     3.  But 
let  us  look  at  the  pxu-pose  of  God  in  reference  to  man's  responsibility.     If  man 
were  not  free,  on  what  ground  could  he  be  held  to  be  responsible?  and  does  any  one 
doubt  of  his  responsibility  to  God?     The  responsibility  of  man  arises  out  of  the 
very  nature  of  his  faculties,  just  like  the  proof  of  his  free  agency  in  the  use  of 
them.     And  we  find  the  Word  of  God  harmonising  with  the  view,  which  our  own 
faculties  would  alone  give  us,  in  holding  the  responsibility  of  man.     Then  what 
has  the  purpose  of  God  to  do  with  our  responsibiUty  ?     It  merely  foresees  the 
consequences  of  that  responsibility,  and  purposes  to  leave  the  man  to  those 
consequences.     Reject  and  neglect  the  "  great  salvation,"  and  you  cannot^  be 
saved:    such  is  the  announced  purpose  of  God.     Accept  that  salvation,  and  "  he 
that  believeth  shall  be  saved  " :   such  is  also  the  announced  purpose  of  God. 
His  purpose,  therefore,  in  all  these  respects,  is  nothing  more  than  His  foreknow- 
ledge, connected  with  9is  determination  respecting  what  He  foresees ;    both  the 
foreknowledge  and  the  determination  how  He  shall  act  in  reference  to  what  He 
foresees,  being  eternal.     4.  Regarding  the  purpose  of  God  in  this  light,  we  may 
take  yet  another  view  of  its  application,  namely,  its  connection  with  the  Gospel 
of  Christ.     With  your  belief,  or  your  unbelief,  the  purpose  of  God  has  nothing 
to  do,  except  so  far  as  that  piu-pose  determines  to  reward  the  one,  and  to  punish 
the  other.     (1)  Remembermg  these   things,  which   of  you  would  be  disposed, 
in  the  face  of  the  nature  of  God,  in  the  face  of  his  own  consciousness,  m  the 
face  of  the  settled  opinions  of  all  men  and  all  ages,  in  the  face  of  the  Word 
of  God  itself,  to  say  that  he  is  not  held  responsible  for  the  exercise  of  the  powers 
which  God  has  given  him  ?     In  everything  but  religion,  we  act  upon  this  conscious- 
ness of  freedom  and  responsibility.     (2)  Let  us  associate  our  own  salvation  with 
llie  determined  purpose  of  God,  that  they  who  come  to  Him  shall      in  no  wise 
be  cast  out,"  and  that  he  that  believeth  shall  and  must  be  saved.     (J.  Burnet.) 
A  fourfold  aspect  of  the  InfinUe  :—I.  As  the  one  and  only  God.        I  am  God, 
and  there  is  none  else."     The  Bible  establishes  the  doctrme  of  monotheism.     This 
doctrine— 1.  Agrees  with  our  spu-itual  nature.     The  whole  soul,  both  in  its  searches 
after  truth  and  love,  one  for  the  intellect,  the  other  for  the  heart,  struggles  after 
unity ;  it  turns  to  the  centre,  as  the  needle  to  the  pole,  as  the  flower  to  the  sun, 


CHAP.  XLVi.]  ISAIAH.  486 

2.  Explains  the  harmony  of  the  universe.  How  is  it  that  all  things  in  their  con- 
stitution fit  into  each  other,  and  in  their  operations  are  so  harmonious  and  uniform  ? 
The  whole  machine  shows  in  all  its  parts  and  revolutions  that  it  had  but  one 
Architect.  3.  Makes  clear  human  obligation.  If  there  be  but  one  God,  His 
will  should  be  the  supreme  law  of  all  our  activities;  His  being  should  be  the  centre 
of  our  sympathies  and  love.  Were  there  more  gods  than  one  we  might  be  dis- 
tracted on  "the  question  as  to  who  should  have  our  love  and  obedience.  II.  As 
ACQUAINTED  WITH  ALL  THE  FUTURITIES  OF  THE  UNIVERSE.  "  Declaring  the  end 
from  the  beginning,  and  from  ancient  times,  the  things  that  are  not  yet  done." 
There  is  one  mind  in  the  universe,  and  only  one,  whose  infinite  glance  compre- 
hended all,  swept  over  all  space,  and  over  all  durations.  Though  such  a  fact 
baflSes  all  our  attempts  at  comprehension,  its  denial  would  undeify  God.  The 
whole  history  of  the  universe,  from  beginning  to  end,  was  in  His  mind  before  it 
took  active  shapes,  or  concrete  embodiments.  Hence — (1)  He  can  have  no  sur- 
prises. (2)  He  can  have  no  disappointments.  HI.  As  purposing  nothino 
THAT  CAN  BY  ANY  POSSIBILITY  FAIL.  "  My  counsel  shall  Stand,"  &c.  1.  God 
has  a  concern  for  His  pleasure.  The  apostle  calls  His  pleasure  a  "  good  pleasure." 
What  is  it?  The  pleasure  of  disinterested  benevolence.  2.  All  God's  purposes 
point  to  His  pleasure.  Whatever  will  make  His  creatures  happy  is  His  pleasure; 
and  the  whole  universe  is  constructed  on  this  principle.  3.  None  of  God's  pur- 
poses shall  fail.  "  My  purposes  shall  stand."  The  special  purpose  here  referred 
to  was  terribly  realised  (Dan.  v.  30).  Our  purposes  are  constantly  being  broken; 
the  vast  shore  of  human  history  is  crowded  with  the  wrecks  of  broken  purposes. 
Our  purposes  are  broken  sometimes — (1)  Through  the  lack  of  power  to  carry  them 
out.  (2)  Through  the  lack  of  time  to  carry  them  out.  God  has  ample  power 
and  ample  time  to  carry  out  His  purposes.  IV.  As  having  absolute  power  to 
SUBORDINATE  EVEN  UNGODLY  MEN  TO  His  SERVICE.  "  Calling  a  ravenous  bird," 
&c.  In  God's  great  moral  kingdom  He  has  two  classes  of  servants.  (1)  Those 
who  serve  Him  by  their  will — all  holy  angels  and  sainted  men.  (2)  Those 
who  serve  Him  against  their  will — wicked  men  and  devils.  Conclusion — What 
an  ennobling  view  of  our  God!  He  is  One:  let  us  centre  our  souls  on  Him;  He 
knows  all  futurities,  let  us  trust  His  providence.  He  will  fulfil  all  His  purposes, 
let  us  acquiesce  in  His  arrangements.  He  renders  even  His  moral  enemies  sub- 
servient to  His  own  will,  therefore  let  us  "  trust  in  Him  who  liveth  for  ever." 
(Homilist.)  Cyrus,  a  ravenous  bird : — Cyrus  is  compared  to  a  "  ravenous  bird  " 
on  account  of  the  celerity  of  his  movements  (chap.  xli.  3),  just  as  Nebuchad- 
nezzar had  been  likened  to  an  eagle  (Jer.  xlix.  22 ;  Ezek.  xvii.  3).  {Prof.  J. 
Skinner,  D.D.) 

Ver.  10.  Declaring  the  end  from  the  beginning. — God  as  a  Worker: — Gfod  is 
not  a  passive  existent,  resting  idly  in  immensity.  He  is  essentially,  incessantly, 
everlastingly  active.  He  "  fainteth  not,  neither  is  weary."  He  has  done  wonderful 
things,  and  He  will  do  wonders  more.  The  text  suggests  four  things  in  relation 
to  God,  as  a  Worker  in  the  future.  I.  He  knows  all  that  is  to  be  done  in  the 
FUTURE.  "  Declaring  the  end  from  the  beginning."  When  we  embark  in  an 
enterprise,  difficulties  start  up  in  our  path  that  never  entered  into  our  calculation 
and  baffle  us.  Not  so  with  God.  When  He  began  the  work  of  redemption.  He 
saw  all  the  infidelities,  superstitions,  depravities,  devils,  and  hells  that  would 
oppose  Him.  11.  He  has  revealed  at.t.  that  is  to  be  done  in  the  future. 
"  Declaring,"  &c.  Applying  the  words  to  redemption.  He  has  declared  in  many 
a  grand  prophetic  passage  what  will  be  its  end,  sweeping  all  wrongs  and  woes, 
all  sins  and  sufferings,  from  this  planet,  and  filling  it  with  Christly  virtues  and 
heavenly  blessedness.  Yes,  and  more,  peopling  heaven  with  untold  millions  of 
souls.  His  declaration  of  "  the  end  "  is  very  explicit,  very  frequent,  very  en- 
couraging, in.  He  will  execute  all  that  is  to  be  done  in  the  future. 
"  My  counsel  shall  stand."  He  will  employ  thousands  of  instrumentalities  and 
ministries,  but  He  will  do  it.  They  will  work  by  His  direction,  and  by  His  power. 
He  will  do  it  gradually  and  efficiently.  IV.  He  has  a  pleasure  in  all  that 
IS  TO  BE  done  in  THE  FUTURE.  "  I  will  do  all  My  pleasure."  To  re-create  and 
re-paradise  lost  souls  is  His  pleasiu-e.  He  rejoices  over  repentant  sinners. 
(Homilist.)  My  counsel  shall  stand. — God's  standing  counsel: — To  form  a  plan 
and  then  to  alter  it,  or  to  have  a  fixed  plan  and  to  fail  in  it,  is  one  of  the 
many  sad  imperfections  of  humanity.  In  the  Sist  case,  some  new  light  springs 
up  which  was  not  evident  before.     In  the  second  some  difficulty  arises,  which. 


486  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  xlvl 

as  a  mountain,  hinders  the  carrying  out  of  the  plan.  But  who  can  suppose  any 
of  this  in  God — a  Being  of  Infinite  Power?  (Chap.  xl.  15-17.)  With  Him  there 
is  no  diflBculty.  He  is  a  Being  of  Infinite  wisdom.  Nothing  escapes  Him.  The 
past,  the  present,  the  future  are  an  everlasting  now.  Unchanged  are  His  resolves, 
as  His  nature  is  unchangeable  (Psa.  xxxiii.  11;  Prov.  xix.  21,  xxi.  30;  Acts 
V.  39;  Heb.  vi.  17).  I.  The  declaration.  1.  We  see  this  exempMfied  in  the 
works  of  nature.  Such  is  the  regularity  of  all  that  the  Great  Mechanist  is  too 
usually  lost  sight  of  in  the  very  machinery  of  His  hands,  as  if  it  worked  by  its 
own  power,  regulated  itself.  2.  Still  more  distinctly  do  we  see  this  declaration 
in  the  works  of  Providence.  Wheel  runs  within  wheel,  but  He  is  in  every  wheel, 
whatever  its  direction,  whatever  its  movement.  He  is  directly  or  indirectly  in 
it.  Look  at  Cyrus.  Look  at  the  history  of  Joseph.  Look  at  Jesus  Himself. 
(Acts  ii.  23,  iii.  18,  iv.  26-28.)  3.  But  if  He  does  all  His  pleasure  in  His  works 
of  creation  and  providence,  how  much  more  in  the  greater,  infinitely  greater 
displays  of  Himself  in  His  grace,  which  is  His  glory!  (2  Tim.  i.  9.)  II.  Thh 
GROUND  OP  SUCH  DECLARATION.  "  I  will  do  all  My  pleasure."  It  is  His  own 
work.  True,  He  works  by  means,  and  most  commonly  by  human  instrumentality. 
But  it  is  in  all  respects  His  own  work.  1.  The  subject  has  an  awful  look  upon 
any  who  have  been  trifling.  "  My  counsel  shall  stand,  and  I  wiU  do  all  My 
pleasure."  Look  at  the  fall.  Look  at  the  sin  and  sinfulness  of  this  polluted 
world.  These  are  but  a  fearful  comment  on  "  My  counsel  shall  stand."  "  In 
the  day  that  thou  eatest  thereof  thou  shalt  siu'ely  die."  "  By  one  man  sin  entered 
into  the  world,  and  death  by  sin."  Look  at  the  flood.  Look  at  Babylon.  Look 
at  Jerusalem.  2.  The  subject  is  most  encoiuraging  to  every  returning  sinner. 
3.  This  is  most  consolatory  to  the  tried  saint.  4.  Beware  of  any  abuse  of  this  great 
and  glorious  truth.  If  God's  counsel  sta'ndeth  fast,  and  He  does  all  His  pleasure, 
it  is  that  God  who  delights  in  human  instrumentality.     {J.  H.  Evans,  M.A.) 

Vers.  12,  13.  Hearken  unto  Me,  ye  stout-hearted. — Ood^s  voice  to  sinners: — 1.  A 
WRETCHED  CONDITION,  1 .  Insensibility  to  the  good.  "  Stout-hearted."  The  word 
"  stout-hearted"  does  not  mean  courageous,  intrepid,  morally  brave ;  it  means  hard- 
ness, obduracy,  spiritual  stubbornness.  It  represents  a  soul  dead  to  all  that  ia 
spiritually  true  and  good.  2.  Alienation  from  the  good.  "  Far  from  righteous- 
ness." To  be  "  far  from  righteousness  "  is  to  be  far  from  all  that  is  noble.  Godlike, 
and  happy;  it  is  to  be  in  the  kingdom  of  darkness,  and  in  regions  under  the  ban  of 
Heaven.  II.  A  glorious  promise.  "  I  bring  near  My  righteousness,"  &c. 
"  Righteousness  and  salvation  "  are  in  morals  convertible  terms.  The  promise  is. 
Divine  deliverance  to  men  in  this  wretched  condition.  This  deliverance  God 
brings  near  to  the  sinner.  "  Near  " — 1.  In  the  Gospel  of  Christ.  2.  In  the 
ministry  of  the  good.  3.  In  the  suggestions  of  conscience.  4.  In  the  spiritual 
influence  of  events.  .  III.  An  urgent  duty.  "  Hearken  unto  Me."  1.  Earnestly. 
Withdraw  thine  ear  from  the  din  of  worldliness,  sinful  thoughts,  and  carnal 
passions,  and  open  it  to  Me  when  I  speak.  Adjust  yourself  in  a  listening  attitude. 
2.  Constantly.  I  am  constantly  speaking  in  nature,  in  conscience,  in  history,  as 
well  as  in  the  Cospel.  All  My  voices  are  one  in  significance  and  aim.  I  am  calling 
you  to  My  "righteousness"  and  "salvation."  3.  Practically.  What  I  say 
attend  to.  Don  t  let  My  voice  pass  away  in  mere  impressions.  Act  on  My 
counsels,  obey  My  behests.  {Homilist.)  God's  call  to  the  unrighteous: — 1.  The 
first  thing  on  which  we  would  fasten  your  attention  is  that  God's  dealings  with 
mankind  have  been  all  of  a  character  which  may  be  called  unexpected.  We  do 
not  believe  that  any  reason  could  have  been  given  why  men  should  be  redeemed, 
had  the  question  been  proposed  to  higher  ranks  of  intelligence.  Nay,  forasmuch 
as  no  provision  had  been  made  for  the  rescue  of  fallen  angels,  it  could  not  have 
been  imagined  that  any  would  have  been  made  for  the  rescue  of  fallen  man;  the 
conclusion  must  rather  have  been  that  ruin  followed  inevitably  on  rebellion,  and 
there  could  not  be  reconciliation  where  once  there  had  been  offence.  Even  now 
that  we  know  of  the  Mediator's  interference  we  can  trace  it  to  nothing  but  the 
unmeasured  love  of  God,  and  can  give  no  account  of  the  wondrous  matter  of  our 
redemption  save  that  so  it  pleased  Him  "  who  worketh  all  things  after  the  counsel 
of  His  own  will."  2.  We  may  be  sure,  that  having  summoned  the  stout-hearted 
to  hearken,  the  words  which  immediately  follow  are  such  as  God  knows  to  be 
specially  adapted  to  the  case  of  the  stout-hearted,  that  is,  to  contain  the  motives 
which  are  most  Ukely  to  bring  them  to  contrition  and  repentance.  The  nearness 
of  salvation  is  made  an  argument  with  the  ungodly  why  they  should  turn  from 


CHAP.  XLVi.]  ISAIAH.  481 

evil  courses,  just  as  preached  the  Baptist — "  Repent  ye,  for  the  kingdom  of  heaven 
is  at  hand."  3.  God  goes  on  to  speak  with  more  distinctness  of  His  purposes  of 
mercy — "  And  I  will  place  salvation  in  Zion  for  Israel  My  glory."  We  may 
believe  of  this  prophecy  as  of  similar  ones  where  Zion  is  mentioned,  that  it  refers 
originally  to  what  Christ  would  accomplish  at  His  first  appearing  in  Judea,  and 
delineates  also  what  He  would  effect  at  His  Second  Advent.  This  salvation  God 
placed  in  Zion,  for  it  was  only  by  the  going  up  of  the  Mediator  as  a  victim  to  the 
altar,  by  His  ascending  the  Cross  erected  upon  Calvary,  that  the  cxirse  of  the  law 
was  exhausted  and  the  honour  of  the  Divine  attributes  secured.  "  For  Israel 
My  glory."  Wonderful  words!  I  had  thought  that  "  the  heavens  declared  Thy 
glory  "  ;  I  read  of  the  glory  of  the  Lord  like  a  devouring  fire  abiding  in  Sinai ; 
and  when  the  sun  and  moon  are  withdrawn  from  the  firmament,  of  the  New 
Jerusalem  I  am  told  that  "  the  glory  of  God  doth  lighten  it."  In  such  cases, 
if  I  cannot  define  the  glory,  I  am  at  least  dazzled  by  its  shinings;  and  there  is 
something  of  correspondence  between  what  I  know  of  the  nature  of  God  and 
what  I  hear  of  His  glory.  But  that  man,  fallen,  sinful  man  should  be  His  glory, 
the  mortal  the  glory  of  the  immortal,  the  corruptible  the  glory  of  the  incorruptible 
— in  this  is  a  mystery  which  might  seem  too  deep  to  be  fathomed  by  our  searchings, 
yet  not  a  mystery  while  I  have  the  Bible  in  my  hands  and  know  what  God  "  hath 
done  for  us  men  and  for  our  salvation."  {H.  Melvill,  B.D.)  The  ungodly 
world : — I.  Thb  unhappy  moral  condition  of  the  world.  1.  A  condition  of 
moral  stubbornness.  2,  Of  moral  unrighteousness.  II.  The  gloriotts  remedial 
PROVISION  OF  HEAVEN.  "  I  bring  near,"  &c.  1.  Christ  has  brought  righteousness 
very  near  to  mankind.  It  is  inculcated  in  His  teaching,  exemplified  in  His  life, 
honoinred  in  His  death.  2.  Christ  has  brought  salvation  very  near  to  mankind. 
It  comes  within  the  reach  of  all  to  whom  His  Gospel  is  preached.  "  Say  not  in 
thine  heart  who  shall  ascend  up  into  heaven,"  &c.  III.  The  urqent  sptrttttat. 
DUTY  OP  MANKIND.  "  Hearken  unto  Me."  Why  this  attention?  1.  It  is  only 
by  faith  that  the  remedial  provision  can  be  enjoyed.  2.  It  is  only  by  attention 
that  this  faith  can  be  attained.  "  Faith  cometh  by  hearing,  and  hearing  by  the 
Word  of  God."     (HomilisL) 

Yet.  13.  I  bring  near  My  righteousness. — Justifying  righteousness  hroughi 
near  : — It  appears  from  a  comparison  of  many  texts  of  Scripture,  that  when  the 
word  "  righteousness  "  is  connected,  as  in  this  passage,  with  "  salvation,"  it  does 
not  mean  the  Divine  attribute  of  justice  or  rectitude,  but  the  work  of  righteousness 
wrought  out  by  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  and  which  it  is  the  grand  design  of  the 
Gospel  to  reveal  and  make  offer  of  to  sinners  of  (mankind  for  their  justification — 
their  salvation.  I.  Let  us  inquire  with  reference  to  the  righteousness  spoksji 
OF,  why  it  is  termed,  in  this  and  so  many  other  parts  of  Scripture,  "  the  righteous- 
ness of  God  "  ?  The  Lord  terms  the  work  of  His  Son  Jesus  Christ — His  obedience 
unto  death — His  whole  endurance  of  the  curse,  and  fulfilment  of  the  precept  of 
the  law,  His  own,  God's  righteousness.  There  is  no  difficulty  in  seeing  why  it 
should  be  called  Christ's,  because  He  wrought  it  out.  Our  question  is.  Why 
the  obedience  unto  death  of  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ  is  termed  "  the  righteousness 
of  God  "  ?  1.  It  is  so  called,  in  marked  contrast  and  opposition  to  man's  own 
fancied  righteousness  (Rom.  x.  3).  2.  Because  it  is  that  which  God  has,  for  the 
sinner's  justification,  devised,  provided,  and  stamped  with  the  seal  of  His  approba- 
tion and  acceptance.  .3.  Because  it  was  wrought  out  by  God  in  the  person  of 
His  eternal  Son — Emmanuel,  "  God  manifest  in  the  flesh."     11.  Where,  how, 

AND  to  what  parties  OR  PERSONS  THE  LORD  BRINGS  THIS  RIGHTEOUSNESS  NEAR? 

1.  Where  ?  In  the  Gospel  (Rom.  i.  16).  2.  How  ?  In  the  free  and  earnest 
character  of  the  offers  and  invitations  of  the  Gospel  3.  To  whom?  "Ye  stout- 
hearted that  are  far  from  righteousness."  Ye  that  not  only  have  no  righteousness 
but  are  hving  at  ease. — "  stout-hearted,"  careless,  and  indifferent,  for  the  present, 
at  least,  about  finding  one — "  I  bring  near  My  righteousness  "  to  you.  While 
ye  despise  it,  "  stout-hearted,"  I  offer  it  to  you;  while  ye  are  "  far  from  right- 
eousness," righteousness  is  brought  near  to  you — it  is  pressed  and  urged  upon 
you.  Improvement — 1.  It  may  occur  to  some  as  an  objection.  What  use  in 
bringing  near,  and  freely  offering,  a  salvation  to  men  wholly  indifferent  about  it  ? 
There  can  be  no  doubt,  that  so  long  as  men  are  "  stout-hearted,  and  far  from 
righteousness,"  they  cannot,  in  the  very  natvire  of  the  thing,  embrace  this  right- 
eousness; and  the  offer  of  it  to  them  is  thus,  in  one  sense,  to  no  purpose.  But 
only  in  one  sense.     For,  not  to  speak  of  beUevers,  who  often  find  their  hearta 


488  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xlvi. 

so  hard,  that  till  they  see  invitations  to  the  "  stout-hearted,"  they  cannot  perceive 
their  warrant  at  all  to  trust  in  Christ — the  very  freeness  and  universaUty  of  the 
offer,  coming  with  overwhelming  grace  upon  the  "stout-hearted"  sinner,  may 
just  be  among  the  most  powerful  means  blessed  of  the  Holy  Ghost  for  awakening 
him  to  deep  and  serious  concern  and  thought.  2.  That  you  may  see  how  little 
weight  there  is  in  the  objection  to  the  doctrine  of  Christ's  righteousness  as  the 
ground  of  justification,  observe  that  we  read  comparatively  seldom  in  Scripture 
of  the  righteousness  of  Christ — generally  of  the  righteousness  of  God.  3.  We 
might  have  remarked,  on  the  question,  how  the  righteousness  is  brought  near, 
that,  besides  the  freeness  and  urgency  of  Gospel  offers,  the  Lord  comes  specially 
near  at  particular  seasons,  in  the  events  and  dealings  of  His  providence.  (C.  J. 
Brown.)  Two  aspects  of  salvation: — The  two  verses  express  a  paradox  which 
enters  deeply  into  the  thought  of  the  prophet.  While  salvation  is  near  in  point 
of  time,  yet  Israel  is  spiritually  far  from  it.  Hence  the  work  of  salvation  or 
righteousness  has  two  aspects;  along  with  the  providential  deliverance  of  which 
the  agent  is  Cyrus,  there  is  an  inward  and  spiritual  salvation  which  consists  in 
bringing  the  nation  to  right  thoughts  about  itself  and  God.  And  in  this  spiritual 
transformation  the  instrument  is  the  servant  of  Jehovah.  (Prof.  J.  Skinner,  D.D.) 
Jehovah^s  righteousness  and  Israel's  salvation  (with  chap.  li.  5): — I.  What  are 
these  two  things — Jehovah's  RiGHTEOtrsNESS  and  Israel's  salvation?  How 
are  they  related  to  one  another  and  connected  with  one  another?  And  what 
in  particular  is  the  meaning  of  the  precedence  or  priority  assigned  to  the  one  as 
coming  before  the  other — My  righteousness.  My  salvation?  1.  It  is  very  evident 
that  the  Lord's  righteousness  must  mean,  not  a  Divine  attribute,  but  a  Divine 
work,  or  effect  or  manifestation  of  some  kind.  2.  A  judicial  dealing  with  His 
enemies,  on  the  part  of  God,  precedes  and  prepares  the  way  for  the  deliverance 
or  salvation  of  His  people;  and  when  He  brings  near  the  one,  the  other  will  not 
tarry.  3.  God  must  first  consult  for  His  own  righteous  name  before  He  can 
consult  for  His  people's  complete  safety;  He  must  first  right  Himself  before  He 
can  consistently  and  conclusively  deliver  them.  Only  in  the  train  of  the  right- 
eousness of  God  can  His  salvation  go  forth.  II.  It  may  be  said  that  the  Lord 
BRINGS  His  righteousness  near,  or  that  it  is  near,  in  three  senses.  1.  In  the 
Gospel  offer  as  a  free  gift,  wholly  of  grace,  not  of  works  at  all.  2.  In  the  powerful 
striving  and  working  of  His  Spirit.  3.  In  the  believing  appropriation  of  it 
which  His  Spirit  enables  you  to  make.  {R.  S.  Candlish,  D.D.)  I  will  place 
salvation  in  Zion,  for  Israel  My  glory. — 7'Ae  connection  between  the  use  of  means 
and  the  accomplishment  of  Divine  purposes: — I.  The  Divine  purposes  which 
THE  sacred  Scriptures  reveal.  They  have  respect — 1.  To  the  exhibition  of 
God's  glory  in  the  development  of  His  perfections.  2.  To  the  deliverance  of 
mankind  from  the  consequences  of  sin.  3.  To  the  establishment  of  Messiah's 
kingdom  in  the  earth.  4.  To  the  total  overthrow  of  the  empire  of  darkness. 
5.  To  the  everlasting  happiness  of  believers  in  the  realms  of  glory.     II.  What 

MEANS   ARE   BSIPLOYED   FOR   THE    ACCOMPLISHMENT    OF   THESE    PURPOSES.       1.    The 

means  which  are  primary.  (1)  The  mediatorial  character  of  Clirist.  (2)  The 
agency  of  the  Holy  Spirit.  (3)  The  energy  of  Divine  providence.  2.  Those 
means  which  are  subordinate.  (1)  The  revelation  of  God's  vriU  in  the  inspired 
volume.  (2)  The  preaching  of  the  Gospel.  (3)  The  constitution  of  the  Christian 
Church.  III.  The  connection  which  exists  between  the  use  of  Divinely 
appointed  means  and  the  accomplishment  of  the  Divine  purposes.  That 
such  a  connection  exists  we  may  argue — 1.  On  the  principle  of  analogy.  Through 
all  the  works  of  God  there  is  an  evident  connection  between  the  means  and  the 
end.  2.  There  is  a  peculiar  fitness  in  the  means  to  accomphsh  the  end.  3.  From 
Divine  authority.  That  the  means  shall  accomplish  the  end  is  the  frequent 
subject  of  the  Divine  promise.  4.  The  evidence  of  fact  further  estabHshes  this 
connection.  5.  To  deny  this  connection  involves  the  greatest  absurdity.  IV.  The 
practical  influence  of  the  doctrine.  1.  Ought  we  not  to  consider  our  personal 
interest  in  the  subject?  We  are  within  the  precincts  of  the  Divine  purposes,  and 
the  means  of  their  accomplishment.  2.  This  subject  strongly  inculcetes  holiness 
in  the  disciples  of  Christ.  Both  the  means  and  the  end  seem  encircled  with  a 
halo  of  sanctity.  3.  We  learn  our  obligation  and  encouragement  in  the  use  of 
appointed  means.  4.  Let  us  be  careful  that  the  means  we  employ  are  those 
only  of  Divine  appointment.  5.  How  dreadful  the  condition,  and  dangerous  the 
conduct,  of  those  who  oppose  the  Divine  purposes,  and  despise  Divinely 
appointed  means  1     {J.  R.  Cooper.) 


OBAP.  XLvn.]  ISAIAH.  4B9 


CHAPTER  XLVn. 

Vebs.  1-3.  Come  down,  and  sit  in  the  dnst. — Dirge  on  the  downfall  o/ 
Babylon : — Babylon  is  pictured  as  a  royal  lady,  dethroned,  led  in  captivity  ov«r 
the  streams  to  a  distant  land,  and  there  made  the  meanest  slave  behind  tho 
millstones.     {A.  B.  Davidson,  D.D.) 

Yer.  3.  Thy  nakedness  shall  be  imcovered. — Mental  and  moral  naked- 
ness:— Every  person  hath  somewhat  which  may  properly  be  called  his  naked- 
ness or  shame,  in  a  figurative  sense — such  as  a  weak  judgment,  imprudence, 
inconsideration,  injustice,  cruelty,  avarice,  poverty,  or  contempt  of  religion. 
Over  that  he  studiously  endeavours  to  throw  a  veil,  that  it  may  be  preserved 
from  public  observation.  Now,  when  the  covering  is  taken  away  by  which  any 
of  these  things  were  concealed,  then  people's  nakedness  or  shame  is  laid  open 
to  the  inspection  of  those  who  possess  penetration  and  discernment.  {R.  Mac- 
evlloch.)  A  fearfvl  meeting: — I.  *'Thy  nakedness  SHAii  be  uncovered." 
Man  practises  deceit.  He  imposes  upon  himself,  and,  as  far  as  possible,  upon  his 
fellows.  He  cloaks  his  sins,  his  motives,  his  evil  ways.  He  is  not  sincere  in 
his  professions,  not  open  in  his  conduct,  not  honest  in  his  judgments.  Sin  itself 
is  a  monstrous  deceit  and  lie.  The  author  of  sin  is  a  "  liar.  And  so  with  the 
children  of  the  devil.  There  is  nothing  in  them — in  their  hearts,  lives,  characters 
— that  will  stand  the  light  of  the  throne.  The  truth  will  flash  the  sunlight  into 
the  chamber  of  the  soul,  and  into  every  transaction  of  life,  and  lay  bare  to  the 
eye  of  God  and  the  quest  of  the  universe  the  true  real  state  and  status  of  the 
moral  man.  Then  "  thy  nakedness  shall  be  uncovered."  The  awful  sight  of 
a  rational  and  immortal  soul,  steeped  in  guilt,  lost  to  virtue  and  to  God,  and 
deceived  to  its  eternal  undoing,  will  shock  the  very  heavens.  II.  "  Yea,  thy  shame 
SHALL  BE  SEEN."  The  shame  of  wanton  rebellion  against  the  great  God,  our 
Heavenly  Father;  the  shame  of  sinning  unto  death  against  the  Cross  of  the  loving 
and  dying  Christ;  the  shame  of  consummating  a  character  of  incorrigible  wicked- 
ness, and  a  doom  more  awful  than  that  of  sinning  angels,  under  all  the  light  and 
influences  of  the  glorious  Gospel  of  the  blessed  God.  To  look  upon  such  shame 
in  the  judgment  day  will  shock  and  confound  the  sinner  himself,  and  fill  all  heaven 
with  loathing  and  indignation.  HI.  "I  will  take  vengeance,  and  I  will  not 
MEET  thee  as  A  MAN."  The  vengeance  of  God!  Who  can  stand  before  it? 
The  partial  displays  of  it  in  this  Ufe,  where  wrath  is  restrained  and  clemency 
bears  rule,  are  fearful  tokens  of  what  is  in  store  for  those  who  refuse  offered  mercy 
and  exhaust  God's  long-suffering  goodness  in  the  world  of  retribution.  It  is 
awful  to  face  an  angry  man  whom  we  have  grievously  wronged.  It  is  more 
fearful  still  to  confront  a  stern  judge,  who,  as  minister  of  the  law  we  have  broken, 
makes  inquisition  upon  us.  But  oh,  to  stand  face  to  face  before  the  offended 
Majesty  of  heaven,  now  risen  up  to  take  "  vengeance  "  upon  the  despisers  of 
His  grace,  is  a  thought  that  may  well  fill  us  with  the  profoundest  concern. 
{Homiletic  Review.)  I  will  not  meet  thee  as  a  man. — "  I  mil  not  meet  thee  a* 
a  man": — The  sense  is  very  obscure.  {Skinner.)  "  I  will  run  against  no  man," 
namely,  that  I  should  need  to  give  way  to  him.  {Stier.)  "  I  will  not  intervene 
as  a  man."  {RuetscM.)  "  I  shall  not  meet  a  man,  so  depopulated  will  Babylon 
be."  {Hahn.)  "  I  shall  encounter  no  one  who  can  resist  Me."  (Cheyne.)  It 
means  to  encounter,  meet,  hit  upon  one,  not  only  in  a  hostile,  but  also,  as  here 
and  chap.  Ixiv.  5,  in  a  friendly  sense;  so  I  will  befriend  no  one,  pardon  no  one, 
{Delitzsch.)  "  Vengeance  I  take,  and  strike  treaty  with  none."  ((?.  A.  Smith.) 
Possibly,  "  I  will  take  vengeance,  and  will  not  spare,  saith  our  Redeemer."  (A.  B. 
Davidson.)  Independently  of  these  minuter  questions,  it  is  clear  that  the  whole 
clause  is  a  laconic  explanation  of  the  figures  which  precede,  and  which  are  summed 
up  in  the  simple,  but  terrific  notion  of  resistless  and  inexorable  vengeance.  (J. 
A.  Alexander.)  "  I  will  not  meet  thee  as  a  man,"  whose  compassion  may  induce 
him  to  show  ill-judged  forbearance  and  clemency,  but  thou  shalt  have  judgment 
without  mercy,  who  hast  showed  no  mercy:  I  will  not  meet  thee  with  the  justice 
of  a  man,  that  may  be  perverted,  but  with  that  impartial  equity  which  can  neither 
be  corrupted  nor  evaded.  I  will  not  meet  thee  with  the  anger  of  a  man,  which 
for  certain  reasons  may  be  concealed  or  deferred,  but  with  my  fierce  wrath  that 
Bhall  inevitably  consume  thee.  I  will  not  meet  thee  with  the  strength  of  a  man, 
that  may  be  opposed  or  vanquished,  but  clothed  with  omnipotence  that  cannot 


490  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  iLVn. 

be  resisted,  so  that  it  shall  appear  that  it  is  not  the  vengeance  of  man,  but  of 
God.  (R.  Maccvlloch.)  God  meeting  sinners  as  a  man : — His  threat  is  a  threat 
of  departure  from  His  usual  course.  Thus,  the  expression  is  resolvable  into  a 
statement,  that  there  is  a  human  character  about  God's  dealings  with  men,  and 
that  it  is  an  evidence  of  His  not  having  given  them  up  to  vengeance,  that  He 
continues  to  meet  them  "  as  a  man."  Let  us  consider  the  evidences  which  we 
have,  that  as  a  God  of  love,  God  meets  us  "  as  a  man."  I.  Let  us  begin  with 
those  OPEEATIONS  OF  THE  HoLT  Ghost,  through  which  God  may  emphatically 
be  said  to  "  meet "  us,  to  come  in  contact  with  us.  There  is  much  of  mystery 
around  these  operations ;  we  recognise  them  by  their  effects.  Not  only  are  these 
operations  hidden  from  others,  but  the  very  party  himself,  within  whose  breast 
they  are  making  themselves  felt,  can  give  little  or  no  account  whence  they  come, 
or  how  they  work.  He  resolves  whatever  he  experiences  into  the  strugglings 
of  his  own  mind,  and  the  wrestlings  of  his  own  conscience.  Would  it  be  for  our 
advantage,  that,  in  meeting  us,  God  should  meet  us  as  a  God.  and  not  "  as  a 
man  "  ?  We  could  not  have  borne  that  God  should  have  spoken  with  us  by 
unearthly  voices,  and  warned  us  by  unearthly  spectacles,  and  approached  us 
through  unearthly  avenues.  Hence,  the  evidence  that  God  has  dealt  lovingly 
with  us,  when  we  observe  the  appointed  method  in  which  the  Spirit  operates^ 
it  is,  that  Divinity  may  be  said  to  identify  itself  with  humanity.  11.  The  mind 
turns  naturally  to  the  great  scheme  of  redemption,  and  finds  at  once  in  that 
scheme  full  material  of  demonstration.  Does  it  not  commend  itself  to  us  as  an 
arrangement  beautifully  indicative  of  the  tenderness  of  God,  that  the  "  great 
High  Priest  of  our  profession,"  who  was  essentially  Divine,  was,  at  the  same 
time,  "  a  man  "  ?  If  the  Divine  nature  had  entered  into  union  with  the  angelio 
so  that  God  had  met  us,  not  "as  a  man,"  but  as  a  cherub  or  seraph,  we  should 
have  had  no  power,  comparatively,  of  estimating  what  had  been  done  on  our 
behalf.  We  have  little  or  no  knowledge  of  higher  orders  of  being,  and  there 
could  consequently  have  been  nothing  which  came  home  to  the  heart  in  the 
tidings  of  a  Mediator,  who,  though  essentially  God,  had  assumed,  for  oiu-  sake, 
the  Ukeness  of  one  of  those  ranks.  But  when,  in  order  to  the  meeting  us  in  love 
in  place  of  vengeance,  God  has  become'man,  we  can  judge,  we  can  feel  the  stu- 
pendousness  of  this  humiliatioru  III."  When  Christians  comb  to  die,  how 
are  they  accompanied  through  the  dark  valley  and  across  the  dark  waters  ?  God 
still  meets  them  "  as  a  man."  "  Thy  rod  and  Thy  stafE " — a  shepherd's  imple- 
ments, a  man's  implements — "  they  comfort  me.'  IV.  What  shall  we  say  to 
THE  judgment  SEAT,  occupicd  by  One  so  terrible  in  His  splendour  that  the 
very  earth  and  heavens  flee  away  at  His  presence  ?  This  is  the  last  great  display 
of  the  mercy  of  that  appointment  through  which  a  man  has  been  given  as  a  Mediator. 
How  could  an  angel,  with  all  his  purity  and  his  equity,  make  due  allowance  for 
human  infirmity,  or  place  himself  in  our  circumstances,  so  as  to  decide  with  refer- 
ence to  our  powers  and  opportunities,  and  thus  throw  into  his  verdict  that  con- 
sideration for  our  trials  and  temptations,  without  which,  if  there  may  be  the 
strictness  of  justice,  there  can  scarcely  be  the  admixture  of  mercy?  But  the 
Man  who  hath  "  borne  our  griefs. and  carried  our  sorrows  " — this  is  the  Being 
who  is  to  gather  all  nations  before  Him,  and  determine  the  eternal  condition  of 
each  individual.  V.  We  may  draw  one  more  striking  illustration  of  the  text 
from  THE  appointed  means  through  which  the  Gospel  is  propagated.  In 
the  great  work  of  gathering  in  the  nations,  and  shrining  the  religion  of  Christ 
in  the  households  and  hearts  of  the  human  population,  the  Almighty  makes 
not  use  of  lofty  angels,  who  have  "  kept  their  first  estate,"  but  of  persons  who 
are  themselves  in  peril,  themselves  but  wrestlers  for  immortality.     God,  in  the 

?erson  of  His  ambassadors,  might  have  met  us  as  an  angel,  and  not  "  as  a  man." 
'ou  could  not,  as  you  listened  to  the  angel,  or  reflected  on  his  preaching,  put 
from  you  the  feeling  that  he  knew  nothing  experimentally  of  your  trials,  nothing 
of  your  difficulties— that  he  had  no  evil  heart  to  struggle  with,  no  mighty  foes 
to  withstand  him  in  a  course  of  obedience;  and  very  easy  you  would  think  it, 
for  one  pure  as  this  exalted  creature  to  urge  upon  men  the  practice  of  righteous- 
ness, and  to  declaim  with  lofty  vehemence  on  the  vanity  and  worthlessness  of 
the  best  earthly  pleasures;  very  easy  to  recommend  that  to  which  he  is  prompted 
by  his  nature,  and  to  denounce  that  for  which  he  has  neither  inclination  nor 
capacity.  And  this  feeling  would  tell  quickly  and  fatally  on  the  moral  hold 
which  he  might  gain  on  an  audience;  making  them  suspicious  that  he  spake 
on  a  matter  of  which  he  was  no  fair  judge,  and  giving  to  the  whole  discourse 


CHAP.  xLvn.]  ISAIAH.  491 

the  aspect  of  an  airy  speculation.     Therefore  is  it  in  love  to  yon  that  Grod  meets 
you  "  as  a  man."     {H.  Mdvill,  B.D.) 

Vers.  7-11.  And  thou  saidst,  I  shall  be  a  lady  for  ever. — False  security: — 
L  The  catjsb  of  their  secitbity.  They  did  not  lay  this  to  heart  (ver.  7),  did 
not  apply  it  to  themselves,  and  give  it  due  consideration.  They  lulled  themselves 
asleep  in  ease  and  pleasure,  and  dreamed  of  nothing  else  but  that  "  to-morrow 
shall  be  as  this  day,  and  much  more  abundant."  They  did  not  "  remember  the 
latter  end  of  it  " — the  latter  end  of  their  prosperity,  that  it  is  a  fading  flower  and 
will  wither;  the  latter  end  of  their  iniquity,  that  it  will  be  bitterness;  that  the 
day  will  come  when  their  injustice  and  oppression  must  be  reckoned  for  and 
punished.  II.  The  grottnd  op  their  sectjrity.  They  trusted  in  their  wicked- 
ness and  in  their  wisdom  (ver.  10).  1.  Their  power  and  wealth,  which  they  had 
gotten  by  fraud  and  oppression,  was  their  confidence.  2.  Their  policy  and  craft, 
which  they  called  their  wisdom,  was  their  confidence.  HL  The  expressions 
OP  their  security.  Three  things  this  haughty  monarchy  said  in  her  security. 
1.  "  I  shall  be  a  lady  for  ever."  She  looked  upon  the  patent  of  her  honour  to 
be,  not  during  the  pleasure  of  the  Sovereign  Lord,  the  foimtain  of  honour,  or 
during  her  own  good  behaviour,  but  to  be  perpetual  to  the  present  generation, 
and  their  heirs  and  successors  for  ever  (Rev.  xviii.  7).  2.  I  shall  not  sit  as 
a  widow,"  in  soUtude  and  sorrow;  shall  never  lose  that  power  and  wealth  I  am 
thus  wedded  to.  The  monarchy  shall  never  want  a  monarch  to  espouse  and 
protect  it,  and  to  be  a  husband  to  the  State;  nor  shall  I  "  know  the  loss  of  children." 
3.  "  None  seeth  me  "  when  I  do  amiss,  and  therefore  there  shall  be  none  to  call 
me  to  account.  It  is  common  for  sinners  to  promise  themselves  impunity  because 
they  promise  themselves  secrecy  in  their  wicked  ways.  IV.  The  punishment 
OF  their  security.  It  shall  be  their  ruin.  1.  A  complete  ruin;  the  ruin  of  all 
their  comforts  and  confidences  (ver.  9).  2.  Sudden  and  surprising.  The  evil 
shall  come  in  one  day,  nay  in  a  moment.  "  Thou  shalt  not  Imow  from  whence 
it  riseth,"  and  therefore  shalt  not  know  where  to  stand  upon  thy  guard.  Babylon 
pretended  to  great  wisdom  and  knowledge,  but  with  aU  her  knowledge  cannot 
possess,  nor  with  all  her  wisdom  prevent,  the  niin  threatened.  3.  Irresistible 
(ver.  11).  {M.  Henry.)  Earthly  honour  fleeting  : — Saints  shall  be  saints  for  ever, 
but  lords  and  ladies  will  not  be  so  for  ever.  {Ibid.)  Afflictions  in  perfection 
(ver.  9): — Affictions  to  God's  children  are  not  afflictions  in  perfection;  widowhood 
is  not  to  them  a  calamity  in  perfection,  for  they  have  this  to  comfort  themselves 
with,  that  their  Maker  is  their  husband.  Loss  of  children  is  not,  for  He  is  better 
to  them  than  ten  sons.  But  on  His  enemies  they  come  in  perfection.  {Ibid.) 
Sinful  boasting: — The  utterance  of  proud  Babylon  is  identical  with  that  of  the 
vain  and  self-confident  in  all  ages.  The  delusion  prosperity  produces  in  such 
men  or  nations  is  always  of  this  sort.  This  expression  suggests  that  lengthened 
prosperity  in  the  case  of  the  ungodly  leads  to — 1.  False  security.     2.  Presumption. 

A  lady  for  ever,"  i.e.  in  my  own  right;  "  no  contingency  can  arise  to  deprive 
me  of  any  title  and  wealth."  3.  Boasting.  The  vernacular  of  pride — "  a  lady," 
superior  to  others.  4.  Self-satisfaction.  "  A  lady."  "  I  am  that  now.  None 
will  dispute  it  "  (Rev.  iii.  17).  5.  Abandonment  to  luxury.  "  A  lady  for  ever." 
I  mean  to  be  at  ease,  to  enjoy  hfe.  6.  Spiritual  blindness.  Prosperity  dazzles 
the  eye;  the  future  is  wilfully  disregarded.  Conclusion — Remember  the  desola- 
tion of  self-confident  Babylon-widowhood,  childlessness,  poverty,  famine,  shame, 
disease,  insanity,  exile,  death.  {R.  A.  Griffin.)  Thou  didst  not  lay  theB» 
things  to  thy  beart. — Neglected  warnings : — God  warns  before  He  strikes.  L  Tna 
course  op  conduct  condemned.  "  Thou  didst  not  lay,"  &c.  This  insensibihty 
to  the  threatened  judgments  of  heaven  is — 1.  Very  common.  2.  Very  sinful. 
3.  Very  foolish.  4.  Very  dangerous.  II.  The  fearful  judgment  denouncbi> 
— a  type  on  a  large  scale  of  the  overthrow  of  sinners.  1.  The  certainty  of  it  (vers. 
8.  9).  2.  The  suddenness  of  it.  "  In  a  moment "  (ver.  9).  3.  The  retributory 
character  of  it.  An  exact  proportionment  of  the  punishment  to  the  crime.  No 
undue  severity  shown  even  to  Babylon  (ver.  6;  Jas.  ii.  13;  Rev.  xviii.  5,  6).  Nor 
even  to  the  chief  of  sinners.  Always  a  just  recompense  of  reward.  4.  The  utter 
hopelessness  of  those  on  whom  it  comes  (vers.  12-15).     {S.  Thodey.) 

Ver.  10.  Thou  hast  said,  None  seeth  me. — Omniscience  ignored: — L  This 
notion  has  great  influence  upon  the  conduct  op  man.  Such  a  notion  is 
convenient.     Concealment  is  the  helpmeet  of  wrong.     It  is  not  necessary  that 


492  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xLvn. 

this  be  formulated.  It  is  sufficient  if  the  mind  accustoms  itself  to  question 
whether  God  sees.     The  sinner  will  take  advantage  of  a  doubt.     II.  This  notion 

IS  TTTTEIILY  TJNTBUTHFTJX  AND  DELITSIVE.  III.  GOD  HAS  OFTEN,  IN  HUMAN  EX- 
PERIENCE,  SHOWN  THE   DELUSIVENESS   OF  THIS   NOTION,   AND   THE   TIME  IS   FIXED 

FOB  THE  COMPLETE  DEMONSTRATION  OF  ITS  DELUSIVENESS.  1.  Character  is  often 
seen  through  by  man.  2.  Retribution  often  follows  man's  deeds  in  the  present 
world-  3.  The  future  state  will  show  what  God  saw.  {Pvlfit  Analyst. )  Practical 
atheism  arid  genuine  piety  (with  Gen.  xvi.  13): — I.  Practical  atheism.  "Thou 
hast  said.  None  seeth  me,"  i.e.  God  is  indifferent  to  our  conduct.  This  is  the 
practical  denial  of  Divine  omniscience.  This  haughty  language  suggests  a  sad 
tendency  in  human  nature.  The  causes  of  this  tendency  are — 1.  Dislike  of  God. 
2.  Dread  of  God.  11.  Genuine  piety.  "  Thou  God  seest  me."  1.  The  very 
nature  of  God  implies  this.  2.  The  Bible  teaches  it.  m.  General  instruc- 
tions which  this  subject  conveys.  1.  It  warns  the  wicked.  2.  It  should  restrain 
from  eviL  3.  It  should  incite  to  a  beautiful  and  useful  hfe.  4.  It  should  comfort 
and  strengthen  the  people  of  God  amid  the  duties  and  conflicts  and  trials  of  life. 
{A.  Tucker.)  "  None  seeth  me  "  ; — Graceless  men,  having  hid  God  from  them- 
selves, think  also  to  hide  themselves  from  God.  {J.  Trapp.)  Thy  wisdom 
and  thy  knowledge,  it  hath  perverted  thee. — Pernicious  knowledge  : — I.  Examenh 
AND  vindicate  THIS  DECLARATION.  I.  Of  what  wisdom  and  knowledge  does 
Isaiah  thus  speak?  It  was  human  wisdom  and  science  in  the  highest  perfection! 
To  this  Babylon  even  the  sages  of  Greece  came  as  learners.  2.  Against  this  wisdom 
and  knowledge  the  Scriptures  bring  the  charge  of  perverting  men's  minds  in 
morals  and  religion  (text;  Ezek.  xxviii.  3-7;  1  Cor.  i.  21-27,  iii  18-20;  Rom. 
i.  22,  23).  3.  That  this  testimony  is  not  overcharged,  all  history  proclaims.  4.  All 
this  is  accounted  for  by  the  Scriptural  accoimt  of  the  fall  of  man.  Intellectual 
blindness  is  upon  the  heart  of  man;  all  his  rational  faculties  are  incapable  of 
just  conclusions  on  any  religious  subject,  except  they  be  assisted  by  a  supernatural 
power.  5.  Hence  it  inevitably  follows  that  the  cultivation  of  the  intellectual 
parts  of  man  can  of  itself  have  no  tendency  towards  moral  or  spiritual  good.  If 
all  the  mental  powers  of  man  be  in  themselves  depraved,  the  increase  of  his 
intelligence  can  only  increase  his  faculty  of  evil;  so  that  secular  education,  apart 
from  religious  and  moral  control,  must  be  in  itself  a  cvirse  and  not  a  blessing. 
It  may  create  a  generation  of  philosophic  sceptics  and  apologists  for  vice,  or  even 
praters  about  virtue,  but  a  moral  and  religious  people  it  never  has  produced, 
and  never  can.  II.  The  remedy  which  God  hath  provided  against  at.t. 
THESE  intellectual  EVILS.  1.  The  supreme  need  is  instruction  in  the  wisdom 
and  knowledge  which  are  of  God,  above  those  which  are  of  men.  2.  This  wisdom 
and  knowledge  must  be  imparted  by  those  means  which  God  has  appointed.  The 
Bible.     Preaching.     The  instruction  of  children  in  Divine  truth.     {F.  Close,  M.A.) 

Vers.  11-15.  Therefore  shall  evil  come  upon  thee. — Sudden  destruction: — The 
predicted  calamity  is  represented  as  a  great  storm,  which  suddenly  arises  in  eastern 
covmtries,  and  blows  with  such  violence  as  to  spread  devastation  and  ruin  wherever 
its  fury  extends.  {R.  MaccuUoch).  False  securities :  an  exposure  and  a 
challenge: — Can  you  find  a  solitary  instance  in  which  God  approved  iniquity? 
Was  ever  His  sword  sheathed  in  presence  of  evil?  This  constancy  of  judgment 
upon  corrupt  ways  is  itself  an  argument.  One  act  of  moral  hesitation  would 
have  destroyed  God !  Time  cannot  modify  Divine  judgments.  What  was  wrong 
in  Babylon  is  wrong  here:  what  was  right  in  the  most  ancient  time  will  be  right 
on  the  world's  last  day.  We  should  remind  ourselves  of  these  elementary  principles; 
for  their  very  simplicity  may  cause  us  to  neglect  their  claims.  We  shall  regard 
the  solemn  denunciations  as  if  spoken  to  our  own  city.  I.  Look  at  this  picturb 
OF  UTTER  AND  MOST  PAINFUL  BEWILDERMENT.  "  Evil  shall  come  upon  thee; 
thou  shalt  not  know  from  whence  it  riseth:  and  desolation  shall  come  upon  thee 
suddenly,  which  thou  shalt  not  know."  There  are  times  when  the  wind  seems 
to  be  blowing  from  all  quarters  at  once.  There  are  times  when  all  things  seem 
to  have  a  controversy  with  us.  We  set  down  our  feet,  and,  lo,  they  are 
fastened  to  the  ground:  we  put  forth  our  hand,  and  an  invisible  weapon  smites 
it:  we  look  round,  and  behold  the  path  is  ploughed  up,  so  that  there  is  no  way 
of  retreat.  We  lose  our  own  sagacity.  Our  wit  fails  us.  Once  our  mind  was 
<juick,  now  it  is  dead  or  helpless.  We  lose  confidence  in  ourselves;  substances 
become  shadows;  the  strongest  of  oiu:  fortresses  melt  away;  and  in  our  friend's 
■face  there  are  discovered  lines  of  suspicion  or  of  mortal  hate.     This  is  the  necessary 


CHAP.  XLvn.]  ISAIAH.  493 

and  inevitable  result  of  sin.  1.  We  have  been  warned  of  it.  2.  A  way  of  escape 
has  been  made.  II.  Hear  thb  Divine  challenge  addressed  to  thb  palsh 
POWERS  IN  WHICH  WB  HAVE  TRUSTED.  "  Stand  now  with  thine  enchantments,"  &c. 
(ver.  12).  Think  that  we  are  now  called  upon  to  set  out  in  order  the  false  securities 
in  which  we  have  trusted!  There  is  one, — Money;  there  is  two, — Chance;  there 
is  three, — Self-confidence;  there  is  foiu: — Atheistic  speculation.  Now  let  them 
do  for  us  all  they  can.  God  has  challenged  them!  1.  They  ought  to  be  most 
useful  when  most  needed.  2.  They  should  show  their  sufficiency  by  their  fear- 
lessness. It  is  a  challenge.  I  hear  the  whirlwind  coming, — get  out  your  money. 
You  thought  something  would  happen — something  is  happening, — God's  judg- 
ment is  descending;  where  is  your  God  Chance?  You  have  confidence  in  yourself; 
be  it  so;  make  bare  your  arm, — see,  it  is  but  lightning, — it  is  but  flood  upon 
flood, — it  is  but  world  dashing  against  world,  &c.  "  Let  now  the  astrologers, 
the  stargazers,  the  monthly  prognosticators,  stand  up,  and  save  thee  from  these 
things  that  shall  come  upon  thee."  There  is  to  be  a  great  collision.  In  that 
collision  only  the  true  can  stand.  III.  See  the  doom  of  false  securities. 
"  Behold,  they  shall  be  as  stubble,"  &c.  (ver.  14).  1.  Let  no  man  complain  of 
want  of  opportunity  of  observing  the  value  of  his  moral  securities.  2.  Let  no  man 
complain  of  having  been  allowed  to  live  unwarned.  3.  Think  of  so  living  that 
at  last  a  man  shall  be  left  without  a  coal  at  which  to  warm  himself !  This  is  the 
end  of  sin, — this  is  the  worthlessness  of  false  gods!  So  far  as  we  have  had  ex- 
perience of  life,  we  have  seen  the  terrible  failure  of  all  false  things.  We  have 
seen  the  judgment  of  God  in  parts.  It  is  not  all  left  to  be  revealed.  We  are 
entitled  to  reason  from  the  past  to  the  future;  and  when  our  own  experience  has, 
as  a  matter  of  fact,  confirmed  the  revelation  of  God,  we  may  know  that  future 
to  be  a  terrible  one  to  the  servants  of  unrighteousness.  What  is  the  duty  of  man 
as  dictated  by  mere  common  sense?  It  is  to  seek  and  trust  that  which  is  true. 
(1)  We  cannot  escape  the  trial  of  our  securities.  (2)  If  we  set  ourselves  against 
God,  we  challenge  all  the  forces  of  His  creation,  fire,  wind,  flood,  pestilence,  &c. 
"  It  is  a  fearful  thing  to  fall  into  the  hands  of  the  living  God."  (<7.  Parker,  i>.D.) 
Monthly  prognosticators  (ver.  13): — The  special  reference  is  to  the  preparation 
of  monthly  almanacs  (based  on  astrological  calculations)  in  which  conu'ng  disasters 
were  foretold,  lucky  and  unlucky  days  pointed  out,  &c.  A  specimen  of  these 
almanacs  is  translated  by  Sayce  in  Transactions  of  the  Society  of  Biblical 
Archaeology.     (Prof.  J.  Skinner,  D.D.) 

Ver.  14.  Behold,  they  shall  be  as  stubble. — God's  judgment  as  consuming  fire  : — 
The  flame  is  no  comfortable  fire  for  warmth,  no  hearth-fire  (chap.  xliv.  16)  to  sit 
in  front  of ;  but,  on  the  contrary,  consuming,  eternal,  i.e.  annihilating  flames 
(chap,  xxxiii.  14).  {F.  Delitzsch,  D.D.)  The  portion  of  the  ungodly: — I.  With 
reference  to  the  first  sentence.  1.  One  of  the  most  striking  thoughts  which  it 
conveys  to  the  mind  is  this^  that  the  punishment  of  the  wicked  will  be  easily 
inflicted.  "  They  shall  be  as  stubble."  Nothing  can  be  more  easy  than  to  kindle 
stubble  when  it  is  fully  dry.  Oh,  ungodly  and  impenitent  man,  there  is  that 
in  thyself  to-day  which,  let  alone  and  permitted  to  ripen,  will  bring  a  hell  upon 
thee.  Thou  hast  in  thyself  the  power  of  memory,  and  that  power  shall  become 
a  vehicle  of  sorrow  to  thee.  Thou  hast,  beside  thy  memory,  a  conscience ;  a  con- 
science which  thou  hast  striven  to  silence;  but,  even  drugged  and  gagged  as  it  is, 
it  sometimes  makes  thee  feel  unhappy.  You  will  then  find  that  you  cannot 
palliate  the  guilt  of  sin.  Thy  memory  and  thy  conscience  shall  be  as  two  great 
millstones  grinding  thee  to  powder.  Then,  added  to  thy  memory  and  to  thy 
conscience,  there  shall  come  thy  increased  knowledge.  Thou  knowest  enough 
now  to  leave  thee  without  excuse,  but  then  thy  knowledge  shall  increase  so  as 
to  leave  thee  without  pretence  of  apology.  Thou  shalt  then  perceive  the  craft 
of  the  tempter  who  deluded  thee.  Thou  shalt  then  see  the  blackness  and  the 
filthiness  of  sin  as  thou  dost  not  see  it  now.  Then  shalt  thou  understand  the 
greatness  and  the  goodness  of  the  God  whom  thou  hast  despised;  thou  shalt 
then  discern  the  glory  of  the  heaven  which  thou  hast  lost;  thou  shalt  then  bet^iu 
to  get  an  idea  of  that  eternity  which  shall  roU  over  thy  head  for  ever.  Beside, 
think  of  thy  companions.  Shut  up  fifty  drunkards  and  profane  men  together, 
and  would  they  not  soon  make  a  hell  for  themselves  without  any  interposition  of 
Divine  power  ?  What  will  it  be  when  they  are  bound  up  in  bundles  ;  when  the 
tens  of  thousands  of  those  who  obey  not  Christ  shall  find  themselves  in  their  own 
place?     2.  This  punishment  shall  be  most  searching  and  terrible.     The  metaphor 


494  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  xlvhi. 

of  fire  is  used  in  Scripture  because  it  is  that  which  of  all  things  causeth  the  most 
pain,  and  is  the  most  searching  and  trying.  As  fire  consumes,  and  so  reaches 
to  the  very  essence  of  things,  so  shall  the  wrath  to  come  reach  to  the  very  essence 
and  subsistence  of  the  soul.  3.  This  destruction  will  be  most  inevitable.  "  They 
Bhall  not  deliver  themselves  from  the  power  of  the  flame."  There  is  hope  now; 
there  shall  be  no  hope  then.  The  Lord  Jesus,  though  the  most  loving  of  spirits, 
was  the  most  awful  of  preachers;  and  in  His  sermons,  while  there  is  everything 
that  could  melt  and  woo,  there  is  no  lack  of  the  great  and  terrible  thunderbolt, 
and  the  sounding  forth  of  wrath  to  come,  and  the  judgment  which  must  await 
the  impenitent.  IT.  Bxtt  oub  text  now  changbs  its  figuee.  "  Thus  saith 
the  Lord,  There  shall  not  be  a  coal  to  warm  at,  nor  fire  to  sit  before  it "  ;  by  which 
is  meant  that  there  shall  be  nothing  in  hell  that  can  give  the  sinner  a  moment's 
comfort;  nothing.  III.  And  now  our  text  bids  us  "  Behold,"  therefore  I  pray 
ye  turn  not  away  your  eyes  from  this  meditation.  L  Children  of  God,  behold  it; 
it  will  make  you  grateful.  Does  not  the  thought  of  the  misery  from  which  you 
have  escaped  make  you  love  your  Saviour?  And  oh,  will  it  not  make  you  love 
poor  sinners  too?  2.  But  specially,  you  that  are  unconverted,  the  text  says. 
Behold."  It  is  a  gloomy  subject  for  you  to  think  upon,  but  better  to  think 
of  it  now  than  to  thmk  of  it  for  ever.     (C.  H.  Spurgeon.) 


CHAPTER  XLVm. 


Vbes.  1,  2.  Hear  ye  this,  0  house  of  Jacob. — Goi'a  appeal  to  Israel:— - 
The  lessons  of  God's  method  of  prophetic  revelation  which  Israel  is  to  lay  to 
heart.  (A.B.Davidson,  D.D.)  "  The  waters  of  Jiidah": — The  people,  by  a 
natural  figure,  are  described  as  streams  from  the  fountain  of  Judah  (Psa. 
Ixviii.  26).  (J.  A.  Alexander.)  Hollow  profession: — Here  is — L  Peivilegbi. 
n.  FoEM.  m.  Peofession.  IV.  Yet  no  eeal  ebmgion.  (J.  Lyth,  D.D.) 
"  Hear  ye  this  "  .• — I.  How  ?  Place  yourselves  in  a  hearing  postiore,  that  the 
intense  application  of  your  minds  may  be  discovered  in  yoiu:  attitude  and  gestures. 
Listen  with  diUgence  and  candour.  IL  What?  L  To  the  reproofs  I  administer. 
2.  To  the  arguments  I  adduce.  3.  To  the  duties  I  inculcate.  4.  To  the  assur- 
ances I  give  you.  III.  Why  ?  L  That  your  obdurate  hearts  may  be  mollified. 
2.  Your  consciences  convinced.  3.  Your  conversion  from  your  evil  ways  effected, 
(R.  MacciUloch.)  A  twofold  charge  against  Israel: — God  chargeth  them  with 
hjrpocrisy  in  that  which  is  good,  and  obstinacy  in  that  which  is  evil  (vers.  1-8). 
(M.  Henry.)        Religious  prof ession : — Observe — L  How  high  theib  peofession 

OF  EELIGION  SOAEED.  EL  HOW  LOW  THEIE  PEOFESSION  OF  BKLIGION  SANK  FOB 
ALL  THIS.      (Ibid.) 

Ver.  3.  I  have  declared  the  former  things  from  the  beglTiTilng. — Tht 
probability  and  use  of  inspired  predictions  : — I.  It  is  quite  plain  that  any  beino 

THAT  IS  DISTTNGtllSHBD  ABOVE  OTHBE3  MUST  BE  EXALTED  EITHEB  BY  KNOWLEDGB 

OE  BY  POWEE,  OE  BY  BOTH.  If,  then,  God  is  to  make  Himself  known  to  His 
creatures,  it  must  be  by  some  displays  of  this  kind — by  power,  doing  those  things 
which  they  cannot  do;  or  by  intellect,  making  kno^vn  those  things  which  they 
cannot  know.  There  is  one  advantage  in  these  displays  of  God  by  means  of 
knowledge,  telling  things  that  we  could  not  know  otherwise — that  it  addresses 
our  judgment.  Miracles  seem  to  astound  us;  they  may  be  supposed  to  throw 
us  out  of  our  calm  self-possession,  and  to  bewilder  us  by  their  wonders;  but 
prophecies  coolly  address  our  judgment,  without  disturbing  our  passions,  and 
enable  us  to  exercise  our  reason  in  reflection  upon  these  discoveries  of  the  great 
superior  Mind.  Though  we  cannot  tell  exactly  what  preference  we  are  to  give 
to  one  or  the  other,  some  minds  being  most  struck  with  the  displays  of  power 
in  miracles,  others  most  with  the  displays  of  knowledge  in  predictions,  yet  we 
can  easily  see  that  these  may  concur  and  aid  each  other.  Is  it  not  probable 
that  God  will  make  Himself  known  to  man?  But  is  it  not  equally  probable 
that  if  He  tells  us  about  a  futurity  and  eternity,  He  will  take  some  method  of 
convincing  us  that  what  He  thus  tells  us  is  true  and  will  surely  come  to  passT 
IL  The  uses  of  inspieed  peedictions.     These  are  various;    many  of  them 


CHAP.  XLvm,]  ISAIAH.  495 

we  have  yet  to  discover.  1.  A  most  important  use  of  the  inspired  predictions 
of  Scripture  is,  that  you  should  study  the  Book  that  contains  them.  2.  You 
should  watch  His  providence,  that  you  may  see  how  it  fulfils  His  Word.  He 
that  eyes  providences  shall  never  want  providences  to  eye.  3.  You  should  leaxn 
from  hence  to  admire  and  adore  the  omniscience  and  faithfulness  and  truth  of 
God.  4.  Expect  all  that  God  has  predicted  both  for  time  and  eternity.  (/. 
Bennett,  D.D.) 

Ver.  6.  See  all  this. — Things  seen  as  a  whole : — ^The  words  "  See  all  this," 
have  been  rendered  by  one  of  the  latest  commentators,  "  See  it  as  a  whole." 
This  rendering  reproduces  the  prophetic  argument.  Isaiah  had  recalled  a  period 
of  history  which,  taken  as  a  whole,  was  a  fulfilled  word  of  Jehovah.  That 
completed  epoch  of  history  from  the  predictions  of  old  to  the  events  in  which 
it  had  issued  was  to  the  prophet  proof  of  God's  control  of  human  affairs.  Any 
completed  historic  cycle,  taken  as  a  whole,  becomes  to  us  significant  of  God. 
The  evidence  of  the  Divine  providence  discovers  itself  when  we  view  things  largely, 
when  we  see  life  as  a  whole.  1.  Look  at  your  life  in  the  large  relations  of  it, 
see  it  as  a  whole.  This  is  not  the  view  of  life  which  it  is  altogether  easy  for  us 
to  take.  For  we  touch  life  at  single  points  ;  we  receive  fife  moment  by  moment ; 
and  our  first  views  of  things  are  apt  to  be  partial.  We  ought,  in  ova  moral  matu- 
rity, to  fit  our  daily  doings  into  some  large  conception  of  our  whole  reason  for 
being  here  in  this  world.  We  do  not  know  how  to  Uve  well,  certainly  we  have 
not  learned  to  Uve  richly  if  we  have  not  gained  something  of  the  happy  art  of 
massing  things  in  nobler  groupings;  if  we  cannot  hold  the  httle  things  and  daily 
details  of  fife  imder  some  broad,  generous  conception  of  our  fife;  very  much 
as  from  some  height  we  see  the  several  parts  of  a  landscape,  not  singly,  but  to- 
gether, as  one  wide  simny  expanse.  2.  That  particular  thing,  for  example,  for 
which  it  may  be  necessary  for  you  to  strive  to-morrow  in  your  business,  or  which 
it  seems  desirable  to  secure  for  your  enjoyment,  needs  to  be  sought  for,  not  as 
though  it  were  the  one  thing  only  to  be  attained,  but  as  a  possible  part  of  some 
greater  good  in  which  your  life  is  to  find  its  satisfaction.  A  man  to  be  successful 
in  any  calling  must  have  something  of  that  power  of  concentration  to  which  Sir 
Fowell  Buxton  once  attributed  his  success — '  the  power  of  being  a  whole  man  to 
one  thing  at  a  time."  Nevertheless,  that  would  be  an  unworthy  success  which 
should  leave  us  entirely  confined  to  any  single  thing.  3.  If  we  desire  to  possess 
our  friendships  well,  we  must  learn  this  art  of  seeing  things  not  in  their  fittle,  often 
vexatious  details,  but  largely  and  as  wholes.  You  must  take  yoiu:  friend  largely 
for  what  he  is  in  his  entire  character,  if  you  would  keep  your  friend.  The  micro- 
scope has  its  uses;  but^it  was  never  made  for  the  eye  of  friendship.  4.  Another 
instance  for  the  appUcation  of  this  text  might  be  foxmd  in  our  habits  of  regarding 
oiu:  homes.  We  are  to  possess  the  home,  not  as  a  good  for  itself  alone,  but  in 
its  whole  social  setting,  in  its  relation  to  the  neighbourhood,  to  the  Church  of 
humanity,  to  the  kingdom  of  heaven,  of  which  it  is  part  and  portion.  5.  I  wish 
now  to  go  up  with  this  principle  to  some  higher  lines  of  experience,  and  to  observe 
how  this  entire  earthly  Hfe  of  ours  is  itself  life  but  in  part,  and  how,  if  we  would 
live  truly,  we  must  learn  to  see  all  our  life,  from  the  cradle  to  the  grave,  as  itself 
but  a  part  of  some  still  larger,  better  whole  for  us.  If  this  earthly  span  of  our 
days  be  all,  what  is  a  human  life  at  its  best  but  as  the  raiabow  which  we  have 
seen,  one  end  of  it  resting  upon  the  depths  of  the  waters,  and  the  other  end  lost 
in  the  cloud,  itself  as  fleeting  as  the  mist  upon  which  for  its  moment  of  promise 
it  becomes  visible?  But  here  hes  the  difficulty  and  the  doubt.  We  have  no 
experience  of  what  Hes  beyond.  Our  hand  can  lay  no  measiu:ing-rod  upon  futurity. 
We  have  only  this  present.  It  is  also  true,  and  it  is  the  more  important  part  of 
the  truth,  that  we  have  this  present  only  as  an  incomplete  thing,  we  have  this 
life  only  as  a  segment;  its  present  brief  span  is  the  arc  of  some  curve  of  larger 
sweep  than  we  can  measure.  What  its  future  may  be  Uke,  we  do  not  know;  but 
we  know  this  present  as  in  itself  incomplete  and  requiring  some  future  completion. 
"  If  you  ask  me,"  said  Savonarola,  as  he  was  ready  to  be  borne  to  the  stake,  "  what 
shall  be  in  general  the  issue  of  this  struggle,  I  reply,  Victory.  If  you  ask  me 
what  shall  be  the  issue  in  the  particular  sense,  I  reply.  Death."  It  was  the  answer 
of  a  seer.  Seen  in.  the  particular,  the  issue  of  life  may  be  death.  Seen  in  the 
general,  seen  as  a  whole,  true  life  is  not  death,  but  victory.  The  Christian  faith 
brings  to  a  man  its  Gospel  of  the  One  sinless  Man,  who  knew  whence  He  came, 
and  whither  He  went,  and  whose  life  was  always  to  Him  not  an  affair  of  the 


496  TEE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  xlyih. 


moment  only,  but  a  truth  of  eternity.  Jesus'  earthly  life  was  indeed  a  broken 
one.  In  one  aspect  of  it  no  human  life  has  been  left  so  incomplete  as  was  that 
life  which  we  can  follow  for  a  few  brief  years  of  it  through  these  gospels.  The 
verse  in  the  book  of  Acts,  "  All  the  things  which  Jesus  began  both  to  do  and  to 
teach,"  suggests  the  incompleteness,  the  utter  brokenness  of  Jesus'  earthly  life. 
What  work  did  He  live  to  see  completed  ?  what  doctrine  to  finish  ?  His  hands 
did  not  complete  His  work  of  mercy;  they  were  pierced  before  they  had  wrought 
all  their  possible  work  of  healing.  His  hps  did  not  finish  His  teachings;  He  had 
many  things  to  say,  and  He  died  leaving  much  unsaid.  Into  our  Lord's  Geth- 
semane  may  there  not  have  entered  the  pathos  of  an  unfinished  life?  Yet  He 
said,  "  I  have  finished  the  work  which  Thou  gavest  Me  to  do."  He  could  not 
have  said  that  had  He  not  looked  always  upon  His  hfe  here  as  part  and  daily 
portion  of  one  Divine  whole,  His  sacrifice  as  something  complete  in  God's  eternal 

Eurpose;  had  He  not  known  that  His  life  here,  and  there,  and  always,  is  one 
fe,  continuous  throughout,  on  earth  and  in  heaven,  one  will  of  the  Father— each 
part  of  it,  whether  of  humiliation  or  transfiguration,  of  suffering  or  resurrection, 
partaking  of  the  glory  of  the  perfect  whole.     {N.  Smyth,  D.D.) 

Ver.  8.  Yea,  thou  heardest  not. — God's  foreknowledge  of  man's  sin: — 
As  in  a  looking-glass,  let  us  see  ourselves.  1.  Let  the  unconverted  man  see  his 
own  picture.  God  has  spoken  quite  as  pointedly  to  you  as  ever  He  did  to  the 
seed  of  Israel.  He  has  called  you  by  providences  of  different  kinds.  As  for 
the  Bible,  has  it  not  often  addressed  you  with  a  voice  most  clear  and  simple, 
"  Turn  ye,  turn  ye  ;  why  will  ye  die?  "  You  have,  some  of  you,  been  called 
by  the  admonitions  of  godly  parents;  you  were  further  invited  to  the  path  of 
holiness  by  loving  friends  in  the  Sabbath  school.  Frequently  the  voice  of  God's 
minister  has  bidden  you  to  come  to  Jesus  from  the  pulpit;  and  conscience,  a 
nearer  pleader  still,  has  echoed  the  voice  of  God.  And  yet  it  may  be  said,  "  Yea, 
thou  heardest  not ;  yea,  thou  knewest  not,"  &c.  Three  times  a  "  yea  "  is  put 
in  our  text,  as  if  to  show  God's  wonder  at  man's  obstinacy,  and  the  certainty 
that  such  was  the  state  of  the  heart.  It  was  certainly  so.  You  heard,  but  it 
went  in  at  one  ear  and  out  at  the  other;  you  heard  and  heard  not.  2.  More 
painful  still  is  it  to  remember  that  in  a  certain  degree  the  same  accusation  may 
be  laid  at  the  door  of  believers  in  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ.  Even  those  who  have 
received  grace  to  become  the  sons  of  God,  have  not  such  a  degree  of  spiritual 
sensibility  as  they  shoiild  have.  Having  thus  reminded  you  of  your  sin,  trusting 
we  may  be  led  to  confess  it  with  deep  humility,  I  have  now  an  encouraging  truth 
to  tell  to  you — that  all  this  folly  and  ignorance,  and  obstinacy,  and  rebellion  on 
our  part,  was  foreknown  by  God,  and  notwithstanding  that  foreknowledge.  He 
yet  has  been  pleased  to  deal  with  us  in  a  way  of  mercy.  I.  We  shall  endeavour 
to  address  the  truth  to  thb  belibvbb.  1.  The  latter  part  of  our  text  mentions 
a  mournful  fact,  "  I  knew  that  thou  wouldest  deal,"  &c.  Thou  art  the  beloved 
of  heaven,  redeemed  by  blood,  called  by  grace,  preserved  in  Christ  Jesus,  accepted 
in  the  Beloved,  on  thy  way  to  heaven,  and  yet  "  thou  hast  dealt  very  treacher- 
ously "  ;  very  treacherously  with  God,  thy  best  friend;  with  Jesus,  whose  thou 
art;  with  the  Holy  Spirit,  by  whom  alone  thou  canst  be  quickened  unto  Ufe  eternal. 
That  word  "  treacherously  "  is  one  which  a  man  would  not  like  to  have  applied 
to  himself  in  the  common'transactions  of  life;  he  would  feel  it  to  be  very  galling, 
and,  if  there  were  truth  in  it,  very  degrading.  How  treacherous  you  and  I  have 
been  to  our  own  vows  and  promises  when  we  were  first  converted!  Instead  of 
a  heavenly  mind  there  have  been  carnal  cares,  worldly  vanities,  and  thoughts  of 
evil.  Instead  of  service  there  has  been  disobedience  ;  instead  of  fervency,  luke- 
warmness;  instead  of  patience,  petulance;  instead  of  faith,  confidence  in  an 
arm  of  flesh.  This  is  not  all.  It  is  not  merely  that  we  have  failed  in  promises 
which  were  made  in  a  period  of  excitement,  but  we  have  been  treacherous  to 
obligations  which  were  altogether  apart  from  voluntary  vows  on  our  part;  we 
have  been  treacherous  to  the  most  blessed  relationships  which  mercy  could  have 
instituted.  Know  ye  not  that  ye  are  redeemed  men  and  women,  and  therefore 
the  property  of  the  Lord  Jesus?  Have  you  not  found  yourselves  full  often  spending 
your  strength  for  self  and  for  the  world,  and  robbing  Jesus  of  that  which  He 
purchased  at  so  dear  a  price?  Remember  that  we  are  soldiers  of  Christ,  soldiers 
enlisted,  sworn  in  for  a  life-long  campaign.  As  soldiers,  by  cowardice,  disobedience 
and  desertion,  we  have  been  treacherous  to  a  very  shameful  degree.  You  know 
what  the  military  doom  is  of  a  treacherous  soldier  on  earth !  truly,  if  we  had  been 


CHAP.  XLVin.]  ISAIAH.  497 

accused,  and  condemned  by  court-martial,  and  ordered  to  be  shot  forthwith,  we 
should  have  been  dealt  with  most  righteously.  We  have  been  armed,  and  carried 
bows,  and  have  turned  back  in  the  day  of  battle.  Worst  of  all  is  the  fact  that  we 
have  been  treacherous  to  our  Lord  in  a  relationship  where  fidelity  constitutes 
the  very  essence  of  bliss,  I  mean  in  the  marriage  bond  which  exists  between  our 
Boul  and  Christ.  We  are  one  with  Him,  by  eternal  union  one,  and  yet  we  treat 
Him  ill!  Never  did  He  have  a  thought  towards  us  that  was  unkind,  never  one 
faithless  wandering  of  His  holy  immutable  mind;  but  as  for  us,  we  have  thought 
of  a  thousand  lovers,  and  suffered  our  heart  to  be  seduced  by  rivals,  which  were 
no  more  to  be  compared  with  Christ  than  darkness  is  to  be  compared  with  the 
blaze  of  noon.  2.  We  pass  on  to  the  Divine  statement  of  the  text,  that  all  this 
was  known.  "  I  knew."  As  the  Lord  foreknew  the  fountain  of  sin,  so  He  knew 
all  the  streams  which  would  gush  from  it.  Wherein  is  the  edification  to  the 
people  of  God?  (1)  Adore  the  amazing  grace  of  God.  (2)  Our  security  is  clearly 
manifest.  (3)  This  truth  should  tend  very  much  to  enhance  our  sense  of  the 
fulness  which  is  treasured  up  in  Christ  Jesus.  God  has  provided  for  us  in  Christ, 
for  all  the  necessities  that  can  occur,  for  He  has  foreknown  all  these  necessities. 
II.  I  have  to  use  the  text  in  its  relation  to  xtnconverted  persons.  You  have 
discovered  lately  the  natural  vileness  of  your  heart.  You  have  a  deep  regret 
for  your  long  delay  in  seeking  mercy.  You  are  willing  to  acknowledge  that  there 
have  been  special  aggravations  in  your  case.  Now,  the  Gospel  says  to  you,  "  Be- 
lieve in  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  and  thou  shalt  be  saved."  All  these  sins,  delays, 
aggravations,  and  rebellions  of  yours,  were  all  foreknown  to  God;  therefore,  since 
He  has  sent  the  Gospel  to  you,  be  not  slow  to  accept  it.  sjnce  it  is  not  possible 
that  your  sins,  whatever  they  may  be,  can  at  aU  militate  against  the  fact  that 
if  you  believe  and  receive  the  Gospel,  you  shall  be  saved.  For,  if  God  had  not 
intended  to  save  men  upon  believing,  then,  since  He  foreknew  these  things,  He 
•would  never  have  planned  the  plan  of  salvation  at  all.  (C.  H.  Spurgeon.)  A 
transgressor  from  the  womb. — Native  depravity : — God  here  traces  all  the 
insincerity,  stupidity,  obstinacy,  ignorance,  and  unbelief  of  sinners  to  the  native 
depravity  of  their  hearts,  which  led  them  to  disregard  His  commands  and  to 
disbeheve  His  predictions.  The  text  in  this  connection  naturally  leads  us  to 
conclude  that  mankind  begin  to  sin  as  soon  as  they  become  capable  of  sinning. 
I.  What  we  abe  to  ttnderstand  by  sin.  "  Sin  is  the  transgression  of  the 
law."  The  law  requires  true  love  to  God  and  man.  The  transgression  of  the 
law,  therefore,  must  essentially  consist  in  something  which  is  di'-ectly  opposite 
to  pure,  holy  love.  And  there  is  nothing  in  natiu-e  more  directly  opposite  to 
perfectly  disinterested  love,  than  interested  love,  or  selfishness.  So  that  all  sin 
consists  in  the  free,  voluntary  exercise  of  selfishness.  II.  When  mankind  be- 
came CAPABLE  OF  SINNING.  If  sin  be  a  voluntary  moral  exercise,  they  are  not 
capable  of  sinning  before  they  become  moral  agents.  Perception,  memory, 
and  volition  appear  to  be  the  essential  powers  or  properties  which  constitute 
a  free  agent.  Animals  are  free  agents.  They  act  freely  and  voluntarily  in  the 
view  of  motives.  But  God  has  endowed  man  with  a  moral  faculty  to  discern 
moral  good  and  evil.  This  we  call  conscience.  Those  who  allow  that  a  child 
four  years  old  is  a  moral  agent  and  knows  what  is  right  and  wrong,  will  generally 
allow  that  a  child  two  years  old  is  a  moral  agent  and  knows  what  is  right  and  what 
is  wrong.  And  where  shall  we  stop?  Why  may  we  not  suppose  that  a  child 
one  year  old,  or  half  a  year  old,  is  a  moral  agent,  and  hnows  what  is  right  and 
what  is  wrong  in  some  cases?  III.  They  do  sin  as  soon  as  they  become 
CAPABLE  OP  SINNING.  They  certainly  discover,  as  early  as  possible,  impatience, 
obstinacy,  and  revenge,  which  are  sinful  exercises  in  any  moral  agent  that  can 
distinguish  between  right  and  wrong.  The  testimony  of  observation  on  this 
subject  is  strengthened,  at  least,  by  the  testimony  of  experience.  Every  person 
in  the  world  is  conscious  of  sinning,  and  of  sinning  as  long  ago  as  he  can  remember. 
And  now,  if  we  look  into  the  Bible,  we  shall  there  find  conclusive  and  infallible 
evidence  that  mankind  do  actually  sin  as  soon  as  they  become  moral  agents, 
and  are  capable  of  sinning.  When  we  say  a  serpent  is  naturally  poisonous,  we 
mean  that  it  is  poisonous  as  soon  as  its  nature  renders  it  capable  of  having  poison. 
So,  when  the  inspired  writers  speak  of  men's  sinning  as  soon  as  they  be  born,  their 
expressions  plainly  imply  that  they  are  sinners  by  nature,  or  begin  to  sin  as  soon 
as  they  are  capable  of  sinning.  These  representations  of  the  sinfulness  and  guilt 
of  childhood  are  confirmed  by  God's  providential  treatment  of  children.  Death 
is  a  natural  evil,  and  was  threatened  to   mankind   as   a   punishment   for   sin. 

VOL.  II. — 32 


498  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  XLvm. 

IV.  Why  they  always  have  sinful,  before  they  have  holy  exercises.  "  By 
one  man's  disobedience  many  were  made  sinners."  {N.  Emmons,  D.D. )  Human 
depravity : — In  conversation  with  Boswell,  Dr.  Johnson  said,  with  respect  to  original 
sin,  the  inquiry  is  not  necessary;  for,  whatever  is  the  cause  of  human  corruption, 
men  are  evidently  and  confessedly  so  corrupt,  that  all  the  laws  of  heaven  and 
earth  are  insufficient  to  restrain  them  from  crimes.     {BoswelTa  "  Life  of  Johnson.") 

Vers.  9-11.  For  My  name's  sake  will  I  defer  Mine  anger. — God's  anger 
deferred : — "  For  My  name's  sake  I  draw  out  My  wrath."  Jehovah  lengthens 
out  His  wrath,  i.e.  delays  its  outbreak,  thus  shows  Himself  long-suffering  ;  He 
checks,  restrains,  damps  it  for  the  good  of  Israel,  that  He  may  not  by  unchaining 
TTia  wrath  utterly  destroy  it;  and  that  for  the  sake  of  His  name.  His  praise,  which 
demands  the  carrying  out  of  the  plan  of  salvation,  which  is  the  purpose  of  Israel's 
existence.  {F.  Delitzsch,  D.D.)  Mercy'' a  master  motive : — I  shall  take  the 
text  to  illustrate — I.  The  conversion  of  the  sinner.  1.  In  him  there  is  no 
argument  for  mercy,  no  plea  for  grace.  2.  God  Himself  finds  the  reason  for  Hia 
mercy.  He  finds  it  in  Himself.  The  Lord  is  a  patient  God,  and  determines 
to  make  His  patience  glorious.  God  also  would  illustrate  His  sovereign  and 
abundant  mercy  towards  sinners.  God  can  display  His  power.  3.  But  it  may 
be  that  a  soul  is  saying,  "  Well,  I  can  see  that  God  can  thus  find  a  motive  for 
mercy  in  Himself,  when  there  is  none  in  the  sinner,  but  why  is  it  that  the  Lord 
is  chastening  me  as  He  is?  "  Possibly  you  are  sickly  in  body,  have  been  brought 
low  in  estate,  and  are  grievously  depressed  in  mind.  God  now,  in  our  text,  goes 
on  to  explain  His  dealings  with  you,  that  you  may  not  have  one  hard  thought 
of  Him.  It  is  true  He  has  been  smiting  you,  but  it  has  been  with  a  purpose  and 
in  measure.  "  I  have  refined  thee,  but  not  with  silver."  God  has  not  brought 
upon  you  the  severest  troubles.  4.  Notice  the  next  thing:  the  Lord  declares 
that  the  time  of  trial  is  the  chosen  season  for  revealing  His  love  to  you.  "  I 
have  chosen  thee  in  the  furnace  of  affliction."  It  often  happens  that  the  time 
in  which  God  reveals  His  choice  and  manifests  His  electing  love  to  a  soul  is  when 
that  soul  is  almost  consumed  with  trouble.  5.  But  note,  before  I  leave  the  sinner's 
case,  that  lest  the  soul  should  forget  it,  the  Lord  repeats  again  the  point  He  began 
with,  and  unveils  the  motives  of  His  grace  once  more.  What  is  the  eleventh 
verse  but  the  echo  of  the  ninth?  If  a  soul  should  perish  while  trusting  in  the  blood 
of  Christ,  the  glory  of  God  would  go  over  to  Satan.  It  would  be  proved  that 
Satan  had  overcome  the  truthfulness  of  God,  or  the  power  of  God,  or  the  mercy 
of  God.  n.  The  reclaiming  of  the  backslider.  God  was  speaking  to  His 
own  people  Israel  in  these  remarkable  words.  I  see  more  reason  for  punishing 
you,  for  you  have  made  a  profession  and  belied  it  (ver.  1).  God  having  declared 
the  reason  of  His  love  to  the  backslider  goes  on  to  tell  him,  that  the  present  sufEer- 
ings  which  he  is  now  enduring  as  the  result  of  his  backsUdings  should  be  miti- 
gated. "  I  have  refined  thee,  but  not  with  silver;  I  have  put  thee  into  the  fire, 
but  I  have  not  blown  the  heat  to  such  an  extreme  degree  that  thy  sin  should 
be  melted  from  thee:  that  would  be  a  greater  heat  than  any  soul  could  bear. 
I  have  refined  thee,  that  was  needful,  but  not  as  silver;  that  would  have  been 
destructive  to  thee."  Thou  sayest,  "  All  Thy  waves  and  billows  have  gone  over 
me."  Not  so;  you  know  not  what  all  God's  waves  and  billows  might  be,  for 
there  is  a  depth  infinitely  lower  than  any  you  have  ever  seen.  Then  comes  His 
next  word:  I  have  chosen  thee  in  the  furnace  of  affliction"  ;  that  is,  as  if  He 
said,  "  I  will  renew  My  election  of  you."  It  was  never  revoked,  but  now  it  shall 
be  more  manifestly  declared.  God  has  looked  at  you  in  prosperity  and  He  has 
seen  you  treacherously  forgetting  Him.  Now,  however,  your  affairs  are  at  a 
low  ebb  and  you  begin  again  to  pray.  Hear  this  for  your  comfort — when  re- 
pentance defiles  the  feice  before  men  it  beautifies  it  before  God.     (C  H.  Spurgeon.) 

Ver.  10  Behold,  I  have  refined  thee,  but  not  with  silver. — Refined,  but 
not  with  silver  : — More  severely,  yet  more  exactly  than  silver  {Stier).  Less  strictly 
than  silver  (Cheyne),  It  was  a  melting  of  a  higher  sort,  the  suffering  which  befell 
Israel  doing  for  it  the  work  of  a  furnace  (Hitzig,  Delitzsch).  Possibly,  not  with 
the  result  of  gaining  silver  {A.  B.  Davidson).  Refined,  hut  not  with  silver  : — 
The  Lord  refines  His  people,  but  He  exercises  great  discrimination  as  to  the  means 
by  which  He  does  so.  A  silver  furnace  is  one  of  the  very  best  for  the  removal 
ol  dross,  and  would  seem  to  be  well  adapted  for  refining  the  most  precious  things, 
but  it  is  not  choice  enough  for  the  Lord's  purpose  with  Uis  people.     It  is  prepared 


CHAP.  XLvm.]  ISAIAH.  499 

trith  extreme  care,  and  has  great  separating  power,  but  the  purging  away  of  sin 
needs  greater  care  and  more  cleansing  energy  than  a  silver  refinery  can  supply. 
The  greatest  deUcacy  of  skill  is  exhibited  by  the  refiner,  who  watches  over  tn* 
process,  and  regulates  the  degree  of  heat  and  the  length  of  time  in  which  the 
precious  metal  shall  lie  in  the  crucible:  this,  then,  might  well  serve  as  a  figur* 
of  the  best  mode  of  sanctification,  but  evidently  the  figure  falls  short  in  its  delicacy. 
The  process  of  silver  refining  is,  no  doubt,  one  of  the  best  arranged  and  most 
ably  conducted  of  the  works  of  man;  but  when  the  Lord  sits  as  a  refiner.  He 
executes  His  work  with  greater  wisdom  and  Diviner  art.  Silver  refining  is  but 
rough  work  compared  with  the  Lord's  purification  of  His  people,  and  therefore 
He  says,  "  I  have  refined  thee,  but  not  with  silver."  The  Lord  hath  a  furnace 
of  His  own,  and  in  this  special  fiumace  He  purifies  His  people  by  secret  processes 
imknown  to  any  but  Himself.  No  one  would  think  of  refining  silver  by  the  same 
rough  means  as  they  smelt  iron,  so  neither  will  the  Lord  purify  Has  precious  ones, 
who  are  far  above  silver  in  value,  by  any  but  the  choicest  methods.  More  subtle 
and  yet  more  searching,  more  spiritual  and  yet  more  true,  more  gentle  and  yet 
more  effectual  are  the  purifying  processes  of  Heaven;  there  is  no  refiner  hke 
our  refiner,  and  no  purity  hke  that  which  the  Spirit  works  in  us.  {C.  H.  Spurgeon.) 
God's  refining  furnace  : — The  Lord  has  special  dealings  with  each  one  of  BQs  saints, 
and  refines  each  one  by  a  process  peculiar  to  the  individual,  not  heaping  all  His 

Erecious  metals  into  one  furnace  of  silver,  but  refining  each  metal  by  itself.     "  I 
ave  refined  thee."     "  I  have  chosen  thee."     Not  "  you,"  but  "  thee."     L  Be- 
tween God's  election  and  the  furnace  there  is  this  coimection — that  the  ftjbnacb 

WAS  THE  FIRST  TKYSTING-PLACB  BETWEEN  ELBCTXNQ  LOVE  AND  CUB  SOULS.      Before 

one  solitary  star  had  begun  to  peer  through  the  darkness  the  Lord  had  given 
over  His  people  unto  Christ  to  be  His  heritage,  and  their  names  were  in  EQs  book; 
but  the  first  manifestation  of  His  electiag  love  to  any  one  of  us  was^ where? 
I  venture  to  say  it  was  in  the  furnace.  Abraham  knew  httle  of  God's  love  to  him 
till  the  voice  said,  "  Get  thee  out  of  thy  country,  and  from  thy  kindred,  and  from 
thy  father's  house,  unto  a  land  that  I  will  show  thee."  I  do  not  think  that  Isaao 
knew  much  about  God's  choice  of  him  till  he  went  up  the  mountain's  side,  and 
said  to  his  father,  "  Behold  the  fire  and  the  wood;  but  where  is  the  lamb  for 
a  burnt  offering?  "  So  was  it  with  Jacob.  Little  did  he  imderstand  the  mystery 
of  electing  love  till  he  lay  down  one  night  with  the  stones  for  his  pillow,  the  hedges 
for  his  curtains,  the  skies  for  his  canopy,  and  no  attendant  but  his  God.  Certainly, 
Israel  as  a  nation  did  not  tmderstand  God's  election  till  the  people  were  in  Egypt; 
and  then,  when  Goshen,  the  land  of  plenty,  became  a  land  of  brickmaking  and 
sorrow  and  grief,  and  the  iron  bondage  entered  into  their  souls,  they  cried  unto 
God,  and  began  to  understand  that  secret  word — "  I  have  called  My  son  out 
of  Egypt."  They  knew  then  that  God  had  put  a  difference  between  Israel  and 
Egjrpt.  God  finds  His  people  in  the  place  of  trial,  and  there  He  reveals  Himself 
in  His  special  character  as  their  God.  Did  He  not  say  to  Moses,  "  I  have  surely 
seen  the  affliction  of  My  people  which  are  in  Egypt,  and  I  have  heard  their  cry  "? 
When  did  you  first  know  anything  about  God's  choice  of  you?  Was  it  not  when 
you  were  in  trouble — in  many  cases  in  temporal  trouble?  I  make  no  kind  of 
exception  to  another  rule,  namely,  that  we  first  began  to  learn  electing  love  when 
we  were  in  spiritual  distress.  11.  It  is  very  clear  that  the  pxteinacb  of  afflictiok 
DOES  NOT  CHANGE  THE  ELECTION  OF  GoD.  If  He  chose  US  in  it,  then  His  choice 
stands  good  while  we  are  in  it  and  when  we  are  out  of  it.  If  the  very  fijst  know- 
ledge we  had  of  His  electing  love  found  us  at  the  gates  of  despair,  we  can  never 
be  worse  than  we  were  then,  nor  can  His  love  see  less  to  rest  upon.  Yet  have 
I  known  a  great  many  fears  cross  the  mind  of  God's  anxious  people  when  the 
smoke  of  the  furnace  has  brought  tears  into  their  eyes.  No  amoiuat  of  trouble, 
no  degree  of  pain,  no  possibility  of  grief  can  change  the  mind  of  God  towards 
His  people.  The  furnace  may  alter  the  behever's  circumstances,  but  not  his 
acceptance  with  God.  The  furnace  very  often  alters  our  friends.  And  the  furnace 
changes  us  very  wonderfully.  Believe  very  firmly  in  the  fixity  of  the  Divine 
choice.  IIL  The  ftjbnacb  is  the  veby  ensign  of  election.  The  escutcheon 
— the  coat  of  arms — of  election  is  the  furnace.  You  know  that  it  was  so  in  the 
old  covenant  which  God  made  with  Abraham.  He  gave  him  a  type  when  the 
victim  was  divided.  When  a  deep  sleep  fell  upon  the  patriarch  there  passed 
before  him  a  smoking  furnace  and  a  burning  lamp, — two  signs  that  always  mark 
the  people  of  God.  There  is  a  lamp  to  Mght  them,  but  there  is  also  a  smoking 
furnace  to  try  them.     "  No  cross,  no  crown."     If  you  think  of  our  great  Master's 


600  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  xlvul 

dying  will  and  testament,  what  is  its  prominent  codicil?  "  In  the  world  ye  shall 
have  tribulation."  That  the  Lord  refines  us  shows  His  value  of  us.  IV.  Thk 
FURNACE  IS  THE  WORKSHOP  OF  ELECTING  LOVE.  God  has  chosen  US  unto  hoUness. 
There  is  no  man  in  this  world  chosen  to  go  to  heaven  apart  from  being  made 
fit  to  go  there.  Electing  love  uses  the  furnace  to  consume  our  dross.  The  Lord 
uses  the  furnace  also  to  prepare  the  soul  for  a  more  complete  fashioning.  The 
metal  must  be  melted  before  it  can  be  poured  into  the  mould,  and  affliction  is 
used  by  the  Holy  Ghost  to  melt  the  heart  and  to  fit  it  to  receive  the  fashion  and 
take  the  shape  of  the  sacred  mould  into  which  heavenly  wisdom  delivers  it.  Be- 
sides, affliction  has  much  to  do  in  loosening  a  Christian  from  this  world.     V.  Thb 

FURNACE   IS   A   GREAT   SCHOOL  WHEREIN   WB   LEARN   ELECTION   ITSELF.       1.    In   the 

furnace  we  learn  the  graciousness  of  election.  When  a  child  of  God  in  the  time 
of  trouble  sees  the  corruption  of  his  heart  he  begins  to  say,  "  How  can  the  Lord 
ever  love  me?  If  He  has  loved  me,  Hjs  affection  must  be  traced  to  free  sovereign 
grace."  2.  There,  too,  we  learn  the  holiness  of  election,  for  while  we  lie  suffering, 
a  voice  says,  "  God  will  not  spare  thee,  because  there  is  still  sin  m  thee:  He  will 
cleanse  thee  from  every  false  way."  3.  Then,  too,  we  see  what  a  loving  thing 
election  is,  for  never  is  God  so  loving  to  His  people  consciously  as  when  they 
are  in  the  flames  of  trouble.  4.  It  is  at  such  times  that  God's  people  know  the 
power  of  electing  love.  5.  And  it  is  at  such  times  that  the  sweetness  of  God's 
electing  love  comes  home  to  the  Christian  heart,  for  he  rejoices  in  his  tribulation 
while  he  is  conscious  of  the  love  of  God.     VI.  By  the  furnace  some  of  thb 

HIGHER  ENDS  OF  A  YET  MORE  SPECIAL  ELECTION  ARE  OFTEN  REVEALED,  for  there 

is  not  only  an  election  of  grace,  but  there  is  an  election  from  among  the  elect 
to  the  highest  position  and  to  the  noblest  service.  Jesus  Christ  had  many  choice 
disciples,  but  it  is  written,  "  I  have  chosen  you  twelve."  Out  of  the  twelve 
there  were  three;  and  out  of  the  three  there  was  one,  elect  of  the  elect — that 
loving,  tender  John,  who  leaned  upon  his  Master's  bosom.  The  furnace  has 
much  to  do  with  this,  as  a  rule,  since  it  usually  attends  and  promotes  the  higher 
states  of  grace,  and  the  wider  ranges  of  usefulness.  1.  Witn  the  preacher  this 
truth  is  seen;  affliction  makes  him  eminent.  I  do  not  think  that  the  preacher 
will  long  feed  God's  saints  if  he  does  not  read  in  that  volume  which  Luther  said 
was  one  of  the  three  best  books  in  his  library,  namely,  affliction.  That  book 
is  printed  in  the  black  letter,  but  it  has  some  wonderfid  illuminations  in  it,  and 
he  who  would  teach  the  people  must  often  weep  over  its  chapters.  Men  never 
bake  bread  so  well  as  when  the  oven  is  well  heated,  nor  do  we  prepare  sermons 
so  well  as  when  the  fire  burns  around  us.  2.  So  is  it  with  the  Christian  hero, 
he  could  never  lead  the  host  if  he  had  not  been  chastened  of  the  Lord  in  secret 
places.  Calvin,  that  mightiest  master  in  Israel,  clear,  upright,  and  profound, 
suffered  daily  under  a  list  of  diseases,  any  one  of  which  would  have  made  a  constant 
invalid  of  a  less  courageous  man;  and,  although  always  early  in  the  morning 
at  the  cathedral  delivering  his  famous  expositions  which  have  enriched  the  Church 
of  God,  yet  he  always  bore  about  with  him  a  body  full  of  anguish.  Nor  could 
England  find  a  Wycliffe,  nor  Scotland  a  Knox,  nor  Switzerland  a  Zwingle,  except 
it  be  where  the  refiner  sits  at  the  furnace  door.  It  must  be  so.  No  sword  is 
fit  for  our  Lord's  handling  till  it  has  been  full  oft  annealed.  So  it  will  be  with 
us  if  we  would  rise.  (Ibid.)  I  have  chosen  thee  in  the  furnace  of  affliction. 
— The  use  of  the  furnace  : — The  twofold  use  of  the  furnace  is — I.  To  prove  or 

TEST  METALS.       II.   To  PURIFY  THEM,  OR  REFINE  THEM  BY  SEPARATING  THE  DROSS 

FROM  THE  GENUINE.  Discipline  of  every  kind,  is  God's  chosen  furnace  to  test 
and  purify  His  people.  {Homiletic  Review.)  The  furnace  of  affliction  : — A 
furnace  is  a  fireplace  or  crucible  for  melting  and  refining  gold  or  other  metala 
(Prov.  xvii.  3,  xxvii.  21).  Sometimes  it  is  the  emblem  of  cruel  bondage  (Deut. 
iv.  20;  Jer.  xi.  4).  Also  of  judgments  and  severe  and  grievous  aiflictions, 
by  which  God  punishes  the  rebellious  (Ezek.  xxii.  18-20).  By  the  furnace  of 
affliction  He  also  tries  and  proves  His  people.  This  furnace  is — I.  Afflictive. 
It  is  composed  of  many  severe  trials,  which  are  designed  by  the  great  proprietor 
and  manager  of  this  furnace,  to  purge  and  refine  the  souls  of  His  people.  1.  Some- 
times they  are  tried  by  the  scantiness  of  temporal  things.  This  may  be  induced 
by  want  of  employment;  it  may  be  the  result  of  sickness;  it  maj'  result  from 
the  injustice  of  man.  2.  Frequently  the  saints  are  chastised  with  bodily  afflic- 
tions. 3.  Sometimes  they  suffer  from  bereavements.  4.  They  too  have  domestic 
trials  of  various  kinds  from  ungodly  relatives,  refractory  and  disobedient  children, 
&c.     Thousands  of  God's  people  have  been  in  this  furnace.     Moses,  David,  &,c. 


CHAP.  XLvm.]  ISAIAH.  601 

Even  Jesus  was  a  man  of  sorrows  and  acquainted  with  giief.  II.  This  fttbnach 
IS  Divinely  appointed.  It  is  not  the  result  of  chance;  afflictions  arise  not 
out  of  the  dust;  they  are  not  the  works  of  our  enemies  merely.  They  imply 
the  moral  government  of  God,  and  the  wise  and  gracious  arrangement  of  His 
providence.  Every  event  is  either  His  appointment,  or  has  His  all- wise  permission. 
Such  views  of  the  subject  have  reconciled  and  supported  the  minds  of  the  godly 
under  their  various  afflictions.  What  a  blessing  that  all  is  arranged  by  infinite 
Wisdom  and  Love!  III.  This  fuenace  is  not  vindictive,  but  gracious. 
Divine  chastisement  may  be  a  kind  of  punishment  for  sin  committed.  It  supposes 
some  fault,  which  it  is  intended  to  correct.  But  when  men  are  persecuted  for 
righteousness'  sake,  it  does  not  appear  to  be  for  sin.  It  may  be  for  righteous- 
ness' sake  on  the  part  of  man,  and  for  unrighteousness'  sake  on  God's  part.  God 
will  suffer  persecution  and  reproach  to  befall  us,  when  we  are  cold  and  indifferent 
in  His  cause.  But  such  punishment  is  not  like  that  inflicted  on  the  wicked. 
IV.  This  fubnace  is  designed  fob  the  spiritual  and  everlasting  benefit 
OF  THE  Church  only.  Even  as  a  furnace  is  prepared  for  the  refining  of  gold, 
so  afflictions  are  appointed  for  the  saints  who  are  compared  to  gold  (Lam.  iv.  2 ; 
Job  xxiii.  10).  This  intimates  to  us  the  high  value  which  the  Divine  Being  places 
upon  His  people.  They  are  His  jewels,  His  chosen,  a  peculiar  people.  &c.,  and 
it  is  His  will  that  they  should  shine  in  the  world,  and  exhibit  the  glory  and  power 
of  His  grace.  V.  This  furnace  is  proportionate.  He  will  regulate  its  heat 
according  to  the  circumstances  of  His  people  who  may  be  placed  there.  "  He 
sits  as  a  refiner  and  purifier  of  silver,"  &c.  As  a  refiner  adopts  this  posture  for 
minute  inspection,  and  that  he  may  quicken  the  fire,  or  lower  its  temperature, 
as  a  view  of  the  process  may  intimate,  so  the  Divine  presence,  inspection,  and 
compassion  may  well  comfort  the  afflicted  saint  (1  Cor.  x.  13;  Isa.  xliii.  2  ; 
Heb.  iv.  15).  There  can  be  no  caprice,  no  unwise  or  intemperate  anger  in  Him. 
Compassion  is  mixed  with  the  severest  dispensations,  and  a  wise  distinction  made 
between  the  different  members  of  His  family.  Grod  often  tries  the  faith  and  patience 
of  such  as  have  been  long  under  tuition,  and  are  like  the  elder  branches  of  His 
household,  while  He  spares  the  young  and  inexperienced.  VI.  The  tendency 
OF  this  furnace  is  beneficial.  "  I  have  chosen  thee  in  the  furnace  of  affliction." 
A  more  proper  translation  would  have  been,  "  I  have  tried  thee,"  &c.  By  afflic- 
tion of  various  kinds  I  have  proved  thy  faith,  hope,  patience,  and  love.  The 
root  of  the  matter  is  within  thee.  Matthew  Henry  gives  this  beautiful  exposition, 
"  I  have  made  thee  a  choice  one  by  the  good  which  the  furnace  has  done  thee." 
God  has  nevertheless  chosen  some  in  the  furnace  of  affliction.  He  has  met  them 
there,  and  by  His  Spirit  has  subdued  them,  and  brought  them  to  repentance, 
faith,  and  consecration  to  Himself.  The  design  of  a  position  in  this  furnace 
is  to  purify  the  Christian  from  sin,  to  wean  from  the  world,  &c.  Application — 
1.  Let  the  sublime  design  of  this  furnace  induce  patience  and  submission.  2.  Re- 
member the  time  of  trial  is  but  short.  "  Weeping  may  endure,"  &c.  Called 
the  day  of  adversity;  the  hour  of  affliction;  but  for  a  moment.  3.  What  a  furnace 
of  infiiction  awaits  the  ungodly  in  the  world  to  come.  (Helps  for  the  Pvlpit.) 
God^s  people  in  the  furnace  : — 1.  All  persons  in  the  furnace  of  affliction  are  not 
chosen.  It  is  a  great  truth  that  every  chUd  of  God  is  afflicted,  but  it  is  a  lie  that 
every  afflicted  man  is  a  child  of  God.  2.  The  second  preliminary  remark  I  would 
make  is  on  the  immutability  of  God's  love  to  His  people.  Think  not,  when  you 
are  in  trouble,  that  God  has  cast  you  off.  I.  If  you  want  God's  people  you 
must  generally  look  for  them  in  the  furnace.  Look  at  the  world  in  its 
primeval  age,  when  Adam  and  Eve  are  expelled  the  garden.  They  have  be- 
gotten two  sons,  Cain  and  Abel:  which  of  them  is  the  child  of  God?  Yonder 
one  who  lies  there  smitten  by  the  club,  a  lifeless  corpse;  he  who  has  just  now  been 
in  the  fiurnace  of  his  brother's  enmity  and  persecution.  A  few  hundred  years 
roll  on,  and  where  is  the  child  of  God?  There  is  one  man  whose  ears  are  con- 
tinually vexed  with  the  conversation  of  the  wicked  and  who  walks  with  God,  even 
Enoch,  and  he  is  the  child  of  God.  Descend  further  still  till  you  come  to  the  days 
of  Noah.  You  will  find  the  man  who  is  laughed  .  t,  hooted  as  a  fool,  building 
a  ship  upon  dry  land,  standing  in  the  furnace  of  slander  and  laughter:  that  is 
the  elect  of  God.  Go  on  still  through  history;  let  the  names  of  Abraham,  Isaac, 
and  Jacob  pass  before  you,  and  you  may  write  upon  all  of  them:  "  These  were 
God's  tried  people."  Then  go  down  to  the  time  when  Israel  went  into  Egypt. 
Do  you  ask  me  to  find  out  God's  people  ?  I  take  you  not  to  the  palaces  of  Pharaoh, 
but  to  the  brick-kilns  of  Egypt.     As  we  follow  on  in  the  paths  of  history,  where 


502  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  xlviii. 

were  God's  family  next?  They  were  in  the  furnace  of  the  wilderness,  suffering 
privation  and  pain.  Joshua  the  son  of  Nun,  and  Caleb  the  son  of  Jephunneh, 
against  whom  the  people  took  up  stones  to  stone  them:  these  were  distinguished 
above  their  fellows  as  being  elect  out  of  the  chosen  nation.  Pass  through  Judges 
and  come  to  the  time  of  Saul,  and  where  was  God's  servant  then?  He  is  in  the 
furnace — wandering  in  the  caves  of  Engedi,  climbing  the  goat  tracks,  hxmted 
like  the  partridge  by  a  remorseless  foe.  And  after  his  days  where  were  the  saints  ? 
Not  in  the  haUs  of  Jezebel,  nor  sitting  at  the  table  of  Ahab.  They  are  hidden 
by  fifties  in  the  cave,  and  fed  by  bread  and  water.  I  might  tell  you  of  the  daya 
of  Maccabees,  when  God's  children  were  put  to  death  without  number,  by  all 
manner  of  tortiures  till  then  unheard  of.  I  might  tell  you  of  the  days  of  Christ, 
and  point  to  the  despised  fishermen,  to  the  laughed  at  and  persecuted  apostles. 
I  might  go  on  through  the  days  of  popery,  and  point  to  those  who  died  upon  the 
mountains  or  suffered  in  the  plains.  I  suppose  it  shall  be  so  until  the  latest  age. 
n.  The  eeason  fob  this.  1.  It  is  the  stamp  of  the  covenant.  2.  All  precious 
things  have  to  be  tried.  The  diamond  must  be  cut.  Gold,  too,  must  be  tried. 
It  was  one  of  the  laws  of  God,  "  Everything  that  may  abide  the  fire,  ye  shall 
make  go  through  the  fire,  and  it  shall  be  clean"  (Num.  xxxi.  23).  It  is  a  law 
of  nature,  it  is  a  law  of  grace,  that  everything  that  can  abide  the  fire — every- 
thing'that  is  precious — must  be  tried.  3.  The  Christian  is  said  to  be  a  sacrifice 
to  Grod.  Now  every  sacrifice  must  be  burned  with  fire.  4.  Another  reason  why 
we  must  be  put  in  the  furnace  is,  because  else  we  should  not  be  at  all  like  Jesus 
Christ.  If  He  walked  through  the  fiames,  must  not  we  do  the  same?  III.  What 
ABE  THE  BENEFITS  OF  THE  FXTBNACE?  1.  It  purifies  US.  2.  It  makes  us  more 
ready  to  be  moulded.  What  could  our  manufacturers  do  if  they  could  not  melt 
the  metal  they  use?  They  could  not  make  half  the  various  things  we  see  around 
us,  if  they  were  not  able  to  liquify  the  metal,  and  afterwards  mould  it.  There 
could  be  no  good  men  in  the  world  if  it  were  not  for  trouble.  We  could  none 
of  us  be  made  useful  if  we  could  not  be  tried  in  the  fire.  3.  Then  the  fiunace 
is  very  useful  to  God's  people  because  they  get  more  light  there  than  anywhere 
else.  If  you  travel  in  the  neighbourhood  of  Birmingham,  or  in  other  manufactiu:- 
ing  districts,  you  will  be  interested  at  night  by  the  glare  of  light  which  is  cast 
by  all  those  furnaces.  It  is  labour's  own  honourable  illumination.  There  is 
no  place  where  we  learn  so  much,  and  have  so  much  light  cast  upon  Scripture, 
as  we  do  in  the  furnace.  4.  One  more  use  of  the  furnace — and  I  give  this  for  the 
benefit  of  those  who  hate  God's  people — is,  that  it  is  useful  for  bringing  plagues 
on  our  enemies.  Do  you  not  remember  the  passage  in  Exodus,  where  "  the  Lord 
said  unto  Moses  and  unto  Aaron,  take  to  you  handfuls  of  ashes  of  the  furnace, 
and  let  Moses  sprinkle  it  toward  the  heaven  in  the  sight  of  Pharaoh.  And  it 
shall  become  small  dust  in  all  the  land  of  Egypt,  and  shall  be  a  boil  breaking 
forth  with  blains  upon  man,  and  upon  beast "?  There  is  nothing  that  so  plagues 
the  enemies  of  Israel,  as  "  handfuls  of  ashes  of  the  furnace  "  that  we  are  able  to 
cast  upon  them.  The  devil  is  never  more  devoid  of  wisdom  than  when  he  meddles 
with  God's  people,  and  tries  to  run  down  God's  minister.  "  Run  him  down!  " 
Sir,  you  run  him  up!  Persecution  damages  our  enemies;  it  cannot  hmrt  ua. 
IV.  The  comfobts  in  the  furnace.  1.  The  comfort  of  the  text  itself — election. 
Let  affliction  come — God  has  chosen  me.  2.  You  have  the  Son  of  Man  with  you 
in  the  furnace.  Conclusion — There  is  another  great  furnace.  "  The  pile  thereof 
is  of  wood  and  much  smoke,  the  breath  of  the  Lord,  like  a  stream  of  brimstone, 
shall  kindle  it."  Would  you  be  saved?  There  is  but  one  way.  "  Believe  on 
the  Lord  Jesus  Christ."  (C.  H.  Spurgeon.)  God's  glory  concerned  in  our  holi- 
ness (with  ver.  11): — We  have  a  right  to  be  made  as  pure  as  God  can  make  us. 
This  is  our  claim  upon  Him.  He  created  us,  and  we  have  a  right  to  demand  that 
He  should  make  out  of  us  the  best  He  can,  and  should  do  this  refining  work  on 
the  creatures  He  has  called  into  being.  It  is  His  duty  to  burn  up  our  dross,  and 
bring  out  our  full  beauty  and  worth.  Love  demands  that  He  should.  {Mrs. 
H.  W.  Smith.)  Chosen  in  the  furnace  : — In  1553  Sir  Thomas  Palmer  was  led 
from  the  Tower  to  be  executed.  He  leaped  upon  the  scaffold,  red  with  the  blood 
of  four  companions  previously  executed.  "  Good-morning  to  you  all,  good  people," 
he  said,  looking  round  him  with  a  smile;  "  ye  come  hither  to  see  me  die,  and  to 
see  what  nerve  I  have.  Marry,  I  will  tell  you :  I  have  seen  more  in  yonder  terrible 
place  (the  Tower)  than  ever  I  saw  before  throughout  all  the  realms  that  ever  I 
wandered  in:  for  there  I  have  seen  God.  I  have  seen  the  world,  and  I  have 
Been  myself:  and  when  I  beheld  my  life,  I  saw  nothing  but  slime  and  clay,  full  of 


CHAP.  XLvra.]  ISAIAH.  503 

corruption:  I  saw  the  world  nothing  else  but  vanity,  and  all  the  pleasure  thereof 
nothing  worth:  I  saw  God  omnipotent.  His  power  infinite.  His  mercy  incom- 
prehensible: and  when  I  saw  this,  I  submitted  myself  to  Him,  beseeching  of 
His  mercy  and  pardon,  and  I  trust  He  hath  forgiven  me:  for  He  called  me  once 
or  twice  before,  but  I  would  not  turn  to  Him,  but  even  now,  by  this  sharp  kind 
of  death,  He  hath  called  me  unto  Him."  [H.  0.  Maclcey.)  The  furnace  needed 
for  perfection  of  character  : — "  He  would  be  a  nice  person,"  wrote  George  Eliot 
in  one  of  her  letters  concerning  one,  who  might  have  been  many  a  modern  pros- 
perous man,  "  if  he  had  another  soul  added  to  the  one  he  has  by  nature — the 
soul  that  comes  by  sorrow  and  love." 

Ver.  12.  Hearken  unto  Me,  0  Jacob. — God's  uncharvgeablenesa  throv^hout 
eternity : — "  The  eternity  and  immutabihty  of  God  are  in  their  own  nature  in- 
separable, and  are  so  generally  united  in  the  Holy  Scriptures  that  the  passages 
which  declare  the  one  declare  or  imply  the  other  also."  I.  God  is  eternal. 
1.  Reason  itself  claims  this  attribute  for  God.  Nor  was  it  unknown  even  to  the 
heathens.  Proclus,  a  follower  of  Plato,  proved  God  to  be  eternal,  because  He 
exists  of  Himself.  Thales  defined  God  to  be  a  being  without  beginning  and  end; 
before  all  things;  and  who  was  never  bom.  2.  What  reason  teaches,  the  Scriptures 
assert.  They  represent  God's  eternity  to  be — (1)  An  eternity  of  duration.  (2)  An 
eternity  of  perfection.  "  From  everlasting  to  everlasting.  Thou  art  God!  "  All 
that  is  involved  in  that  great  name  He  always  was,  and  always  will  be!  II.  God 
IS  TmcHANGEABLE,  eternally  imchangeable.  1.  Unchangeableness  is  an  essential 
perfection  of  Goi  (1)  In  His  existence  He  cannot  cease  to  be  (Psa.  cii,  27). 
(2)  In  His  nature  or  essence.  (3)  In  His  purposes  (chap.  xlvi.  10,  xiv.  24).  (4)  In 
His  promises  to  His  people;  in  His  threatenings  against  the  wicked;  and  in  all 
His  predictions  (Numb.  xxiiL  19).  2.  All  these  declarations  are  in  harmony  with 
the  teachings  of  Scripture  and  the  conclusions  of  reason.  (1)  Scripture  (Mai. 
iii.  6;  Psa.  xxxiii.  11;  Isa.  xlvi.  10;  James  i.  17).  (2)  Reason.  As  God  is  self- 
existent,  caused  by  none.  He  can  be  changed  by  none.  As  He  is  infinite  in  all  Hia 
perfections.  He  cannot  change,  for  nothing  can  be  added  to  or  taken  from  the 
infinite — any  change  woTild  make  Him  less  than  infinite  before  or  after.  The 
unchangeableness  of  God  is  confirmed — (a)  By  the  stability  of  His  natural  govern- 
ment. (6)  By  His  moral  government,  and  the  identity  of  the  several  dispensations 
of  grace.  III.  Practical  lessons  which  this  great  subject  teaches.  1.  It 
assm-es  us  of  the  essential  Divinity  of  the  Christ.  The  application  to  our  Lord 
of  the  terms  here  used  by  God  to  describe  Himself,  places  His  Deity  beyond  doubt 
(Rev.  i.  8,  17,  xxii.  13).  2.  It  assures  us  of  the  fulfilment  of  God's  promises  and 
the  accomphshment  of  His  plans.  3.  It  affords  "  strong  consolation  "  amid  all 
the  trjdng  changes  of  this  mortal  state.  4.  It  should  stimulate  us  to  seek 
stability  of  character  (Heb.  xiii.  8,  9).  5.  It  should  alarm  the  impenitent.  {A. 
Tucker.)  God's  eternity  a  ground  of  confidence : — Who  can  be  too  quick  for  EQm 
that  is  the  first,  or  prevent  Him?  Who  can  be  too  hard  for  Him  that  is  the  last, 
and  wiU  keep  the  field  against  all  opposers,  and  will  reign  till  they  are  all  made 
His  footstool?     (if.  Henry.) 

Ver.  13.  Wine  hand  also  hath  laid  the  foundation  of  the  earth. — The  Creator: — 

1.  The  foxindation  of  the  earth.  IL  The  over- arching  heavens.  III.  The 
Divine  purpose  ik  these  great  works.  1.  The  heavens  have  been  God's  grand 
lesson-books  for  the  instruction  and  elevation  of  His  children  (Psa.  viii.  and  xix.). 

2.  The  earth  has  been  the  scene  of  revelations  of  His  character  which  we  cannot 
beUeve  to  be  surpassed  by  any  vouchsafed  to  any  other  portion  of  His  universe; 
EUs  judgments  on  sin;  His  manifestations  of  mercy;  His  tabernacling  amongst 
men  in  the  person  of  His  Son;  the  death  on  the  Cross  for  the  redemption  of  lost 
humanity;  the  noblenesSj  sincerity,  patience,  imselfishness,  forgiveness  of  God 
manifested  in  the  spiritual  education  of  His  children.  3.  The  long  pro- 
cess of  sin  and  redemption  shall  at  length  have  a  glorious  consummation. 
{W.  Seward.) 

Ver.  16.  And  now  the  Lord  God  and  His  Spirit  hath  sent  me. — The  Holy  Spirit : 
— "  And  now  the  Lord  God  hath  sent  Me  with  His  Spirit."  The  Spirit  does  not 
send,  but  is  sent.  {Prof.  A.  B.  Davidson,  D.D.)  Note  the  tendency  in  chaps. 
xL-lzvi.  to  treat  the  Divine  Spirit  as  a  separate  personality  (zL  13,  lyiji.  10,  11. 
14).     {Prof.  8.  R.  Driver,  D.D.) 


504  TEE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  xltki. 

Vers.  17,  18.  Tlius  saith  the  Lord  thy  Redeemer. — The  "  I  ant's  "  of  God  and  of 
man: — How  beautiful  and  impressive  are  the  "  I  am's"  of  God;  so  different  from 
the  proud  and  empty  boastings  clearly  discernible  in  the  "  I  am's  "  of  man.  We 
are  never  nearer  to  misleading  others  and  deceiving  ourselves,  than  when  we  utter 
sentences  beginning  with  "I  am."  For,  after  all,  what  are  we  in  ourselves  that  ia 
worth  mentioning?  When  we  yield  to  the  constraint  of  the  Bible  and  conscience, 
and  come  to  know  something  of  our  own  hearts,  we  shall  not  dare  to  speak  aloud 
to  those  about  us;  but,  like  Job,  our  words  will  be  for  God,  and  into  His  ears  we 
shall  whisper,  "  I  am  vile."  Or,  if  beneath  the  influence  of  the  blessed  Spirit  we 
come  to  realise  that  our  nature  is  changed,  then  shall  we  temper  our  assertion  with 
humility,  and,  like  Paul,  say,  "  By  the  grace  of  God,  I  am  what  I  am."  Only  on 
God's  lips  has  the  declaration,  '  I  am,"  its  full  meaning.  This  is  God's  great 
name.  (W.  J.  Mayers.)  God  is  what  He  is  for  His  people: — This  grand  self- 
assertion  of  God  will  increase  in  its  beauty  and  power  for  us  when  we  remember 
that  God  is  not  some  powerful  monarch,  isolating  Himself  from  those  around  Him, 
withholding  succour  from  the  distressed,  guidance  from  the  perplexed,  reUef  from 
the  poor,  and  living  only  to  gratify  Himself.  What  God  is  He  is  for  His  people — 
as  the  sun  is  hght  for  the  earth,  or  the  earth  nourishment  for  the  crops,  or  the  crops 
food  for  the  people.  How  comforting  and  helpful  is  the  recollection  of  what  God 
is!  In  God's  "  I  am  "  the  sick  man  finds  his  medicine,  the  poor  man  his  riches, 
the  lonely  man  his  company,  the  sinner  his  salvation,  the  wanderer  his  hope,  the 
wounded  heart  its  balm,  the  himgry  soul  its  manna,  the  fearful  one  his  cordial,  the 
djang  one  his  life,  and  every  glorified  one  his  all.  We  must  go  out  of  ourselves  to 
get  real  blessing  for  ourselves;  and  to  whom  should  we  go  but  to  Him,  described 
as  the  "  Lord,  the  Redeemer,  the  Holy  One  of  Israel "?  The  heart  must  have  a 
person  to  love,  to  lean  on,  to  live  for.  No  doctrine,  no  idea,  no  creed  can  take  the 
place  of  the  person.  The  language  just  quoted  describes  a  character  peculiar  to 
the  Person  of  Jesus  Christ.  He  is  the  true  Lord,  the  Redeemer,  the  Holy  One, 
supreme  in  all  creation,  paramount  in  redemption,  having  the  pre-eminence  in 
holiness.  As  Lord  He  rules,  as  Redeemer  He  saves,  as  Holy  One  He  inspires  and 
guides.  He  claims  to  be  our  Lord  and  God,  and  in  this  high  station  deigns  to 
address  us.  Nor  would  we  be  slow  to  recognise  His  claims,  but  would  have  our 
faith  to  be  the  echo  of  His  love,  while,  with  Thomas,  each  one  of  us  says:  "  My 
Lord  and  my  God."  It  is  indeed  Divine  love  which  speaks  to  us  in  the  text,  and 
makes  known  to  us  the  good  will  and  pleasiu-e  of  the  great  "I  Am."  (Ibid.) 
God,  our  Teacher  and  Leader : — "  Learn  of  Me  "  and  "  Follow  Me  "  are  two  most 
impressive  commands  of  Jesus  Christ.  I.  There  is  an  important  relation 
BETWEEN  THESE  TWO  OFFICES  OF  otnB  DiNTNE  Master.  Not  every  teacher  is  a 
leader,  not  every  leader  a  true  teacher.  Theory  and  practice  are  often  divorced. 
Words  and  works  are  not  always  wedded.  But  in  our  Lord  there  is  perfection  in 
both  teaching  and  leading.  Does  Jesus  teach  us  to  "  pray  and  not  to  faint  "  ?  He 
also  leads  in  this,  for  He  prayed.  Does  Jesus  teach  us  to  glorify  God  by  our  "  good 
works  "?  He  "  went  about  doing  good."  Does  our  Master  teach  us  to  love  our 
enemies  and  pray  for  those  who  despitefuUy  use  us?  How  grandly  are  we  led  by 
His  dying  prayer,  "  Father,  forgive  them."  Are  we  to  "  seek  first  the  kingdom  of 
God,"  according  to  His  teaching?  So,  indeed,  did  He,  for  it  was  His  meat  and 
drink  to  do  His  Father's  will.  Would  He  have  us  patient  imder  suffering,  calm 
amid  reproach,  submissive  under  affliction,  and  alway  resigned?  So,  indeed, 
was  He.  Let  the  Garden  of  Gethsemane  bear  witness.  Let  Pilate's  hall  testify. 
Let  Calvary  give  answer.  He  truly  "  teaches  us  to  profit,  and  leads  us  by  the  way 
we  should  go."  These  are  the  two  great  forces  which  aid  us  in  the  formation  of 
the  Christian  character  and  the  development  of  the  Christian  fife.  The  teaching 
of  our  Master  is  sometimes  out  of  the  book  of  affliction  and  sorrow.  He  teaches 
us  our  folly,  and  weakness,  and  sin;  and  then  leads  us  into  His  wisdom,  and 
strength,  and  holiness.  He  teaches  us  in  the  valley  of  the  shadow  that  He  may 
lead  us  to  the  golden  height  of  Divine  light  and  love.  He  teaches  us  by  the  furnace 
that  He  may  lead  us  to  the  palace.  He  teaches  us  by  the  noon-day  heat,  and  then 
leads  us  to  the  sheltering  rock.  In  multitudes  of  ways  docs  our  Lord  teach  His 
people,  but  ever  to  the  end  that  He  may  lead  them  in  the  way  in  which  they  should 
go.  But  for  His  instructions  we  should  be  poor  followers.  If  He  beckoned  to  ua 
in  silence  we  should  hardly  dare  to  take  a  step.  But  He  is  not  silent,  for  as  He  goes 
before  us  we  can  hear  His  voice.  The  thought  of  His  instruction  encourages  us, 
while  His  leadership  emboldens  us.  II.  Let  us  now  spend  a  little  while  in  THB 
CONTEMPLATION  OF  THOSE  SWEET  WORDS,  "  WHICH  LEADETH  THEE."      Here,  indeed. 


CHAP.  xLvin.]  ISAIAH.  605 

is  found  soul-comfort  and  strength,  such  as  we  all  need  amid  our  feebleness  and 
the  bewilderment  around.  It  will  be  well  for  us  to  read  these  words  in  the  hght 
of  Scripture  thoughts  and  incidents.  How  they  remind  us  of  God  leading  His 
people  from  the  thraldom  of  Egypt.  Only  let  faith's  eye  be  clear,  and  the  leading 
pillar  will  ever  be  discerned.  In  the  Song  of  Moses  we  have  a  beautiful  figure  to 
help  us  in  \inderstanding  our  Lord's  leading.  There  the  mention  of  the  eagle's 
care  for  her  young  in  fluttering  over  them  as  they  try  to  fly,  and  spreading  her 
wings  beneath  them  to  give  them  confidence,  and  bearing  them  on  her  wings  when 
they  are  weary,  is  followed  by  the  declaration, — "  So  the  Lord  alone  djd  lead 
them."  As  we  pass  on  we  come  to  the  beautiful  poem  of  the  shepherd-king,  and 
we  hear  his  sweet  voice  singing,  "  He  leadeth  me  beside  the  still  waters."  And 
then  we  find  David's  son  putting  into  the  hps  of  wisdom  the  words,  "  I  lead  in  the 
way  of  righteousness."  Let  us  take  another  example;  now  from  the  prophet 
Isaiah.  There  we  find  this  precious  promise  of  our  God's  :  "  I  will  bring  the  bhnd 
by  a  way  that  they  knew  not;  I  will  lead  them  in  paths  that  they  have  not  known." 
Is  not  this  what  He  has  done  and  still  does  for  us?  How  strengthening,  again,  is 
the  promise  recorded  by  this  same  prophet:  "  I  will  heal  him;  I  will  lead  him  also, 
and  restore  comforts  imto  him  " ;  and  how  soothing  the  words  written  for  us  by 
Jeremiah :  "  With  favours  will  I  lead  them ;  I  will  cause  them  to  walk  by  the 
rivers  of  waters  in  a  straight  way,  wherein  they  shall  not  stumble."     III.  What 

SPIEIT  SHALL  WE  JVLANIFEST  IN  VIEW  OF  THIS  PRECIOUS  TRUTH?      Let  US  take  OUT 

place  by  the  Psalmist,  and  with  him  in  a  spirit  of  humihty,  resignation,  trustful- 
ness, and  hope,  put  up  these  petitions  :  Psa.  v.  8,  xxv.  5,  xxvii.  11,  xxxi. 
3,  Ixi.  2,  cxxxix.  24,  cxliii.  10.  Thus  shall  we  on  earth  have  a  true  foretaste  of 
the  unspeakable  rest  and  blessedness  of  that  sinless  place  where  "  the  Lamb, 
which  is  in  the  midst  of  the  throne,  shall  lead  them,  and  God  shall  wipe  away  all 
tears  from  their  eyes."  {Ibid.)  Profitable  teaching  and  right  leading: — I.  God 
AS  A  REDEEMER.  The  redemption  spoken  of  by  Isaiah  was  temporal  in  the  first 
place.  But  he  ascends  a  much  higher  sphere  than  that  circumscribed  by  any 
earthly  demand.  1.  The  captivity  of  evil;  the  Babylon  of  sin.  The  whole  human 
race  is  involved  in  misery  as  in  guilt.  The  bondage  of  iniquity  is  the  worst  sort 
of  captivity  that  beings  capable  of  a  better  hfe  can  possibly  suffer.  2.  The  mercy 
of  the  Redeemer  at  work  in  the  city  of  bondage.  (1)  The  greater  because  of  our 
helplessness  and  need.  (2)  The  greater  because  of  our  sinfulness  and  unbehef. 
(3)  Crowned  by  the  maintenance  of  God's  righteousness  with  the  recovery  and 
perfection  of  our  own.  The  Gospel  is  not  simply  a  principle  of  forgiveness,  it  is 
that  and  something  more:  it  is  the  power  to  become  holy — the  happiness  and 
endlessness  of  a  righteous  and  godly  Hfe.  11.  God  as  a  teacher.  The  Gospel  is 
too  generally  only  regarded  and  valued  as  a  something  which  adds  to  our  enjoy- 
ment. Few  Christians  even  understand  the  beneficence  of  discipline.  1.  Look  at 
the  Gospel  as  a  teacher.  The  new  birth  opens  the  eyes  to  a  new  world;  it  is 
followed  by  a  new  language.  Here  is  the  high  school  of  heaven  in  which  the  Spirit 
of  God  is  the  principal  Teacher.  2.  Learning  is  never  easy.  There  is  no  royal 
road  to  this  learning,  anymore  than  to  mere  secular  knowledge.  (1)  The  lessons 
are  harder  because  we  have  to  unlearn.  Satan  has  had  us  in  his  school,  where  we 
were  as  apt  to  learn  as  he  to  teach.  (2)  The  lessons  are  harder  because  we  are  not 
diligent.  The  elements  always  seem  most  difficult,  because  they  are  so  near.  If 
a  man  always  sticks  at  the  elements  he  is  ever  in  difficulties,  yet  never  makes 
progress.  (3)  The  learning  is  harder  because  as  yet  we  are  not  much  better  than 
invahds.  3.  Yet  all  the  teaching  is  profitable.  (1)  As  a  correction.  Our  weakness 
makes  us  more  humble,  and  less  prone  to  self-reHance.  (2)  As  a  spiritual  develop- 
ment. All  these  things  are  made  to  work  together  for  our  highest  good.  III.  God 
as  a  leader.  1.  The  way  God  would  have  us  go  is  not  always  according  to  our 
incHnation.  (1)  The  pleasantest  way  is  not  necessarily  the  best.  (2)  The  fact  that 
we  are  called  to  walk  in  an  unpleasant  path,  so  far  from  proving  God's  desertion 
may  indicate  just  the  reverse.  He  may  be  nearer  to  us  in  the  cloud  than  in  the 
sunshine.  The  wilderness  with  Him  in  it  is  the  way  to  Canaan:  no  other  way, 
however  pleasant,  can  be  safe.  2.  The  knowledge  that  it  is  His  way  should  be 
enough.  (1)  As  a  reason.  For  there  can  be  nothing  irrational  in  following  Him 
who  is  the  source  and  crown  of  wisdom.  (2)  As  an  incentive.  For  the  voice  of  His 
approval  should  sound  both  distinctly  and  pleasantly  to  our  ears.  (J.  Parrish,  B.A.) 
Life  an  education: — 1.  Our  life  is  an  education;  not  a  mere  probation,  or  trial  of 
what  we  are  to  be  and  to  do,  but  a  training  of  our  fives  and  characters  into  as 
great  hkeness  as  is  possible  to  the  perfect  Hfe  and  character  of  God,  revealed  to  at 


606  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  XLVin. 

in  Christ.  It  is  a  great  truth,  helping  us  to  see  many  things  in  their  true  light ; 
above  all,  helping  us  to  understand  the  meaning  of  our  life,  and  its  relation  to  the 
will  of  God.  The  human  father  is  too  often  but  a  deceiving  type  through  which 
to  try  to  understand  the  Divine  Father.  Still,  even  those  who  have  had  least  to 
thank  their  earthly  parents  for  shovdd  be  able  to  rise  to  the  idea,  however  imperfect, 
of  a  wise,  righteous,  unselfish  fatherhood,  and  to  picture  to  themselves  a  man  who 
should  show  these  qualities  in  his  relation  to  his  children.  And  thinking  of  such 
an  one,  could  you  think  of  him  as  content  that  they  should  simply  go  their  own 
way,  seek  their  own  pleasure,  indulge  their  own  whims,  let  loose  their  own  tempers 
and  desires,  and  own  no  authority,  and  recognise  no  purpose  in  life,  and  beUeve  in 
no  will  higher,  more  experienced,  more  just  than  their  own?  All  that  is  truest 
and  most  useful  in  the  discipline  and  training  which  an  earthly  father,  who  knows 
his  relation  to  his  family  and  is  faithful  to  it,  bestows  on  his  children,  is  based  on 
something  that  is  eternal  in  the  heavens,  that  exists  as  the  true  rule  of  fatherhood 
in  the  mind  of  God  the  Father.  Is  it  not  involved  in  the  very  idea  that  God  is  our 
Father  that  there  should  be  in  His  mind  a  design  for  each  of  us?  And  is  it  not 
inseparable  from  such  a  design  that  there  should  be  much  in  it  that  is  not  naturally 
easy  and  pleasant?  The  pain  has  been  inevitable  because  the  true  end  of  Ufe  has 
been  kept  in  view,  above  all  temporary  and  petty  objects  that  lie  in  the  way  to 
that  end  The  end  could  not  be  reached  by  one  ignorant,  untrained,  undisciplined, 
unaccustomed  to  obey  or  to  learn.  In  the  training  for  the  higher  life  it  is  not  all 
plain  and  smooth.  Least  of  all  is  it  so  at  the  beginning.  This  is  the  meaning  of 
the  "  strait  gate  "  and  the  "  narrow  way  "  that  "  lead  to  life."  They  are  strait 
and  narrow,  because  they  lead  to  life,  because  they  lead  us  on  to  a  definite  purpose 
of  God  for  us  that  is  not  laid  down  at  random,  not  shaped  by  chance,  but  is  the 
result  of  love  and  foresight,  and  must,  Hke  all  things  that  are  high  and  good,  be 
worked  out  not  carelessly  and  easily,  but  with  patience  and  thought  and  toil  2.  If 
we  beUeve  in  this  Divine  purpose  of  our  hfe,  if  we  believe  that  the  object  of  it  is 
to  train  us  into  more  perfect  imion  with  our  Father,  to  educate  us  to  fill  our  place 
as  His  children  in  His  family,  surely  it  will  be  our  wisdom  to  try  to  learn  what  it  is 
and  to  fulfil  it.  How  are  we  to  do  this?  Not  through  self -will;  of  that  we  may 
be  sure.  3.  There  are  two  great  errors  into  which  those  who  are  faiHng  of  God's 
plan  may  have  fallen,  or  be  falling.  There  is  the  error  of  being  self-confident, 
impatient  of  all  authority,  advice,  control,  even  of  such  control  (a  parent's,  for 
instance)  as  is  one  of  God's  own  ordinances,  one  of  the  abiding  bonds  of  human 
life,  which  cannot  be  broken  without  the  family  or  the  society  in  which  it  is  broken 
suffering  loss,  and  at  last  dissolution.  And  there  is  the  error  of  yielding  absoltttely 
to  some  authority  (other  than  a  natural  authority)  to  which  you  submit  your  own 
reason  and  conscience,  and  for  which  you  resign  your  own  responsibility.  We 
should  beware  of  either  of  these  errors.  And  lest  we  fall  into  them,  we  should  use 
our  reason  and  our  conscience  dihgently  in  striving  to  find  out  the  will  of  God  for 
us;  and  if  ever  it  Seems  hard  to  find,  then  there  is  the  refuge  of  work  and  of  prayer 
to  resort  to,  until  the  dawn  of  Ught  and  peace.  4.  It  is  a  great  thing  to  trust  God; 
to  have  faith  in  Him  and  in  !ffis  goodwill  and  loving  purpose  for  us,  really  to 
beUeve  that  we  are  children  in  His  family,  and  scholars  in  His  school  Such  faith 
is  the  root  of  strength,  hope,  patience  and  courage  in  human  life.  {R.  H.  Story, 
D.D.)  The  soul's  Guide  (for  the  New  Year): — 1.  The  chabacteeistics  o«"  thb 
Guide.  He  is  Jehovah — the  Lord  oiu*  strength;  the  Cause  of  all  existence,  and 
the  Foimtain  and  Source  of  life.  Thus  He  is  "  mighty  to  save,"  and  able  to  con- 
duct His  servants  through  every  danger,  and  deliver  them  from  every  foe.  He 
is  "  thy  Redeemer,"  loving  thee  "  with  an  everlasting  love."  A  companion  to 
rescue  thee  from  danger,  to  take  a  loving  interest  in  all  thy  cares  and  sorrows:  One 
who  has  "  chosen  thee  in  the  furnace  of  afl3iction,"  that  He  may  make  thee  "  all 

florious  within,"  and  imprint  on  thee  His  own  Ukeness.  He  is  "  the  Holy  One  of 
srael,"  faithful  and  true,  rich,  tender,  and  unfailing  in  His  promises.  11.  The 
methods  of  guidance.  "  Teacheth  thee  to  profit,  .  .  .  leadeth  thee  by  the  way 
that  thou  shouldest  go."  The  methods  are  various  and  sometimes  pecuUar,  but 
always  full  of  wisdom.  Nothing  is  ever  wanting  on  the  part  of  the  Teacher :  if  it 
is  necessary  for  the  pupil's  progress,  he  wiU  have  to  submit  to  the  discipline  of 
restraint,  and  to  bear  the  yoke  of  adversity.  1.  God  leads  us  sometimes  by  un- 
known paths,  by  ways  we  cannot  imderstand.  Joseph,  Jacob,  Daniel,  EUjah. 
The  ways  of  providence  need  careful  watching  to  see  their  fitness  and  beauty. 
2.  By  gentleness.  David  could  say,  "  Thy  gentleness  hath  made  me  great," — th© 
Divine  condescension  had  stooped  to  his  &{ulties  and  errors.     "  I  will  guide  theo 


CHi*".  xLvin.]  ISAIAH.  S07 

with  Mine  eye."  Not  with  bit  and  bridle,  nor  with  the  "  hook  in  thy  nose,"  as 
Sennacherib.  3.  This  guidance  is  continual  The  Guide  never  relaxes  His 
vigilant  care.  He  wiU  "  never  leave  thee," — "  even  unto  death  "  He  is  by  thy  side. 
Thus  guided  we  are  always  safe,  right,  and  happy.  III.  The  eestjlts  of  acceptdjo 
THIS  GUIDANCE  (ver.  18).  "  If  ye  be  wiUing  and  obedient,  ye  shall  eat  the  good  of 
the  land."  God's  promises  are  always  to  character.  1.  Peace — that  quiet,  restful 
condition  of  soul  which  is  the  heritage  of  those  from  whom  all  painful  emotions  and 
all  disturbing  influences  are  removed.  2.  Righteousness — as  the  foundation  on 
which  character  is  built,  and  the  element  of  which  it  consists.  "  Righteousness 
...  as  the  waves  of  the  sea — so  wide  in  its  influence  as  to  cover  all  the  interests 
of  life;  so  deep  as  to  go  down  to  the  deepest  places  of  the  heart,  and  permeate  the 
whole  life  with  its  power  and  beauty.  And  the  peace  and  righteousness  imited 
make  life  fruitful — so  that  it  abounds  in  goodness,  and  the  soul  at  all  times  and  in 
all  places  is  enabled  to  fulfil  life's  highest  duty.  {J.  Edwards.)  It  might  have 
been  : — These  words  would  be  sad  from  the  Ups  of  man,  but  coming  from  God  they 
are  inexpressibly  touching  and  solemn.  They  are  the  cry  of  a  wounded  heart. 
They  tell  not  of  the  wrath  of  justice,  but  of  the  sorrows  of  love.  This  may  be 
regarded  as  implying — I.  Gbief  fob  lost  hopes.     Once  there  was  hope  and  fair 

Eromise.  God's  beautiful  ideal  might  be  realised.  But  that  is  all  gone.  God  only 
nows  what  has  been  lost.  He  is,  so  to  speak,  alone  with  His  sorrow.  11.  Judg- 
ment FOB  neglected  OPPOETrTNiTiES.  God  is  Speaking  here  in  the  character 
of  "  the  Redeemer — the  Holy  One  of  Israel"  He  recalls  what  He  had  done,  and 
what  might  and  ought  to  have  been  the  happy  results.  But  the  precious  oppor- 
tunities had  been  abused.  1.  Gracious  instruction.  "  I  am  the  Lord  which  teacheth 
thee  to  profit."  2.  Infallible  guidance.  "  Which  leadeth  thee  by  the  way  that  thou 
shouldest  go."  3.  Holy  blessedness.  "  Then  had  thy  peace  been  as  a  river,  and  thy 
righteousness  as  the  waves  of  the  sea."  But  the  time  is  past.  The  glorious  vision 
has  faded  away  for  ever.  Neglected  opportunities  bring  sure  and  terrible  retribu- 
tion, in.  ExoNEBATiON  FOB  NEEDLESS  BUIN.  Reason,  conscience,  and  the  Holy 
Scriptures  combine  in  testifying  that  man's  ruin  is  not  of  chance  or  fate,  far  less 
of  God,  but  exclusively  of  himself.  {W.  Forsyth,  M.A.)  I  am  the  Lord  tliy 
Crod,  which  teacheth  thee  to  profit. — The  benefit  of  afflictions: — I.  Afflictions 
MAY  BE  MADE  PBOFiTABLB  TO  THE  CHiLDBEN  OF  GoD.  1.  They  may  be  greatly 
instrumental  in  turning  off  their  attention  from  the  world.  2.  They  may  turn  off 
their  affections  as  well  as  their  attention  from  the  captivating  objects  of  the  world. 
3.  They  may  be  of  much  greater  benefit  to  them  by  raising  their  affections  to  God, 
the  source  of  all  good.  11.  God  is  able  to  make  afflictions  pbofitablb  to 
His  childeen.  1.  He  is  able  to  bring  Himself  into  the  view  of  His  afficted 
children.  2.  He  can  place  their  affections  as  well  as  attention  upon  Himself. 
III.  This  is  a  mattee  of  consolation  to  them.  Improvement —  1.  Since  God  makes 
use  of  auctions  to  keep  His  children  near  to  Him,  it  appears  that  they  are 
extremely  prone  to  forsake  Him.  2.  It  appears  from  the  manner  in  which  God 
instructs  and  benefits  His  afflicted  children,  that  they  may  derive  the  greatest 
advantage  from  their  severest  sufferings.  3.  If  God  chastises  His  children  for 
good,  then  those  who  are  suffered  to  five  in  uninterrupted  prosperity  have  reason 
to  fear  that  they  do  not  belong  to  the  household  of  faith.  4.  If  God  can  make 
afflictions  profitable  to  His  children,  then  we  may  justly  conclude  that  He  can 
make  them  profitable  to  others.  5.  It  appears  that  every  person  may  know 
whether  he  belongs  to  His  family  or  not.  Afflictions  are  pecuhar  trials  of  the 
heart,  and  give  men  the  best  opportunity  to  determine  what  is  in  reaUty  the 
supreme  object  of  their  affections.  6.  The  afflicted  ought  to  be  of  a  teachable 
spirit  under  Divine  convictions.  {N.  Emmons,  D.D.)  True  profit: — It  is  not 
only  the  commercial  world  which  has  to  make  its  calculations  of  profit  and  loss. 
All  Mfe  is  made  up  of  profit  and  loss.  If  there  is  not  profit,  there  is  loss;  if  tliere 
is  not  loss,  there  is  profit,  1.  I  understand  the  text  to  mean,  not  that  God  teaches 
us  in  a  profitable  way,  but  that  He  instructs  us  how  to  get  the  profit  in  all  things; 
that  He  gives  that  faculty,  the  power  to  take  the  good  and  refuse  the  evil.  2.  Con- 
sider how  God  does  "  teach  to  profit."  (1)  The  first  thing  which  God  will  probably 
teach,  and  which  we  must  receive,  is  a  general  confidence  that  there  is  profit,  how- 
ever imperceptible  it  may  be  at  the  time  to  us,  in  the  thing  which  He  is  sending  to 
us.  (2)  This  faith  given,  the  next  thing  that  God  puts  into  our  hearts  is  to 
seek  that  good;  eternal  profit,  profit  both  to  ourselves  and  to  Him,  in  that  He  is 
glorified  in  His  own  work.  We  are  to  look  for  that  profit,  not  on  the  surface,  but 
in  certain  deeper,  liidden  meanings  and  intentions  which  he  underneath.     Into 


608  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  Lchap.  iLVin. 

those  deeper  meanings  God  will  lead  and  admit  you.  But  not  without  three 
things:  a  reverent  acceptance  of  His  teaching,  hard  work,  and  a  good  life.  (J. 
Yatighan,  M.A.) 

Ver.  18.  0  that  thou  hadst  hearkened  to  My  commandments. — Hearkening 
to  OotTa  commandments  : — 1.  It  is  the  duty  of  all  people  to  "  hearken,"  however  and 
whenever  God  may  see  fit  to  speak  to  them.  2.  To  hearken  denotes  a  reverent  and 
careful  attention  to  God's  message.  3.  To  hearken  implies  also  that  we  consider 
God's  commandments  as  binding  upon  us,  and  as  pointing  out  certain  particulars 
which  we  are  required  to  attend  to.  (J.  N.  Norton. )  Peace  as  a  river : — Peace 
may  be  compared  to  a  river — I.  In  its  origin;  small,  joyous,  sparkling,  vigorous, 
rapid.  II.  In  its  progress — widening  and  deepening;  receiving  new  tributaries 
on  the  right  and  left,  from  the  various  means  of  grace,  as  they  are  supplied  with  the 
dew  of  heaven  and  showers  of  blessings;  sweeping  away — as  it  rolls  on  in  its 
strength — the  obstacles  of  unsanctified  affections  and  unconquered  lusts.  III.  The 
beautiful  figure  of  the  text  conveys  the  idea  also  of  overflowing  abundance. 
The  ancient  heathen,  in  order  to  represent  the  universal  power  and  beneficence  of 
Jupiter,  used  the  symbol  of  a  river  flowing  from  his  throne.  The  prophet  Isaiah 
speaks  of  the  "  perfect  peace  "  enjoyed  by  God's  true  children.  The  Psalmist 
describes  it  as  "  great  peace."  St.  Paul  refers  to  it  as  "  the  peace  of  God  which 
passeth  all  understanding."  We  make  mention  of  it  in  our  daily  prayers  as  "  that 
peace  which  the  world  cannot  give."  It  is  not  a  scanty,  fluctuating,  failing  stream, 
but  a  full  tide  of  peace,  both  wide  and  deep,  and  supplying  to  the  utmost  every 
longing  of  the  soul.  IV.  The  language  suggests  the  idea  of  perpetuity.  It  is  not 
uniform,  indeed,  any  more  than  the  course  of  the  river.  Now  it  is  half  hidden 
in  a  narrow  channel,  among  overhanging  mountains  and  forests;  and  now  spread 
over  a  wide  bed  conspicuous  in  the  plain.  Again,  it  is  seen  contracting  and  deepen- 
ing itself,  and  moving  onward  with  tenfold  velocity  and  strength.  Such,  too,  are 
the  variations  in  the  Christian's  peace.  V.  The  promise  of  "  peace  as  a  river  " 
includes  the  idea  of  increase.  It  shall  grow  stronger  and  more  pervading.  As 
the  mighty  river  may  be  traced  back  to  an  insignificant  spring,  far  up  the  mountain- 
side, so  is  it  with  the  beginnings  of  peace  in  the  soul.  {Ibid. )  The  great  privation; 
or,  the  great  salvation  : — From  this  verse  we  may  learn  that  when  God  smites  men 
on  account  of  sin,  it  gives  Him  no  pleasure.  John  Knox  said  that  he  never 
chastised  his  children  without  tears  in  his  own  eyes.  Jeremiah,  in  the  bitterest 
chapter  of  his  Lamentations,  bears  this  graceful  witness  to  our  covenant  God: 
"  He  doth  not  afflict  willingly  nor  grieve  the  children  of  men."  And  surely  if  in 
the  gentler  chastisement  of  His  hands  the  Most  High  takes  no  pleasure,  much  less 
can  He  find  delight  in  that  withering  curse  which  destroys  the  finally  impenitent. 
Nor  is  this  the  only  lesson  which  lies  on  the  surface  of  the  text.  Observe,  the  Lord 
addresses  words  of  poignant  regret  over  the  prize  the  sinner  has  lost,  as  well  as  the 
penalty  he  has  incurred.  What  loss  thinkest  thou  is  that  which  God  bewails  on 
thy  account?  "  Peace  like  a  river,"  and  "  righteousness  Uke  the  waves  of  the  sea." 
There  is  a  privation  which  you  unconsciously  suffer.  You  are  a  stranger  to  peace. 
David  Hume  used  to  say  that  Christians  were  melancholy  people.  But  that  was 
a  happy  retort,  in  which  somebody  observed — "  David  Hume's  opinion  is  not  worth 
much,  for  he  never  saw  many  Christians;  and  when  he  did  see  any,  there  was 
enough  to  make  them  miserable  in  the  sight  of  David  Hume."  The  true  Christian 
has  a  peace  which  is  totally  unknown  to  any  other  man.  I.  The  metaphor  is  full 
of  beauty,  and  not  wanting  in  instructiveness  either,  by  which  peace  is  compared 
to  a  river.  1.  Peace  like  a  river,  for  continuance.  2.  For  freshness.  The 
water  which  runs  down  the  Thames,  say  at  Maidenhead,  never  was  there  before. 
It  is  fresh  water,  fresh  from  the  hills  to-day,  and  to-morrow  it  is  the  same,  and  the 
same  the  next  day — ever  fresh  supplies  from  the  heart  of  old  England,  to  keep 
her  glorious  river  swelling  and  abounding.  Now  the  peace  which  a  Christian  has  is 
always  fresh,  always  receiving  fresh  supplies.  3.  A  river  increases  in  breadth, 
and  its  waters  augment  their  volume.  Such  is  the  Christian's  peace.  Pure  and 
perfect  though  it  is  at  the  first,  little  temptations  seem  to  mar  it;  oftentimes  the 
troubles  of  this  life  threaten  to  choke  it.  When  the  Christian  is  ten  years  older, 
and  has  meandered  a  few  more  miles  along  the  tortuous  course  of  a  gracious  experi- 
ence, his  peace  will  be  like  a  broad  river.  4.  The  peace  of  the  Christian  is  like  a 
river,  because  of  its  joyful  independence  of  man.  We  have  heard  the  story  of  a 
simpleton  who  went  to  see  the  reputed  source  of  the  Thames,  and  putting  his 
hand  over  the  little  rivulet  that  came  trickling  down  the  ditch,  he  stopped  it,  and 


CHAP.  XLVin.]  ISAIAH.  609 

Baid,  "  I  wonder  what  they  are  doing  at  London  Bridge  now  that  I  have  stopped 
the  river."  But  who  knew  the  difference?  A  whole  Parliament  could  not  make 
the  Thames  swell  with  waves,  and  fifty  Parliaments  could  not  lessen  the  body  of  its 
waters.  It  were  well,  by  the  way,  if  they  could  preserve  its  streams  from  the 
pollution  of  those  foul  and  putrid  sewers  constantly  emptied  into  it.  The  rivers 
would  be  better  without  the  interference  of  men.  Such  is  the  Claristian's  peace. 
I  have  watched  this  river  as  it  broke  over  the  stones  of  adversity;  and  when  the 
tide  of  earthly  comfort  ran  low,  it  hath  seemed  as  if  the  flow  of  peace  were  clearer 
and  more  transparent  than  ever.  The  devil  cannot  rob  us  of  the  peace  which  comes 
from  God,  neither  can  the  world  take  it  away.  II.  "  Thy  righteoitsness  as  the 
WAVES  OF  THE  SEA."  1.  Notice  how  this  metaphor  surpasses  the  previous  one  in 
dignity,  if  not  in  delicacy.  We  can  all  see  a  sort  of  comparison,  and  yet  at  the 
same  time  a  strong  contrast,  between  the  water  of  an  inland  river  and  the  collection 
of  waters  which  make  up  the  wide  expanse  of  the  sea.  One  for  the  most  part  is 
tranquil,  the  other  always  heaving  and  surging  to  and  fro.  So  I  suppose,  as  the 
words  were  originally  addressed  to  the  Jewish  nation  and  referred  to  their  temporal 
welfare,  the  river  would  represent  the  beauty  and  happiness  of  their  own  land,  like 
the  garden  of  Eden,  watered  by  the  river  of  God's  pleasure ;  and  the  sea,  with  its 
waves  rolling  in  majestically  one  after  another  in  unbroken  succession,  would  set 
forth  that  progress  which  is  the  renown  of  righteousness.  Generation  after  genera- 
tion would  witness  the  rising  tide  of  prosperity.  Each  chapter  of  their  chronicles 
would  lift  its  crested  plume  and  tell  of  mighty  acts  and  righteous  deeds,  till,  like 
the  roar  of  ocean,  the  righteousness  of  Israel  should  proclaim  the  name  of  the  Lord 
from  the  river  even  to  the  ends  of  the  earth.  Oh !  what  did  that  rebellious  seed  of 
Jacob  lose  by  forsaking  the  Lord!  This  seems  to  me  to  be  something  like  the 
meaning.  2.  But  I  want  to  apply  this  metaphor  of  the  waves  of  the  sea,  like  that 
of  the  flowing  of  the  river,  to  the  happiness  of  the  believer.  The  man  who  believes 
in  Jesus  Christ  has  the  righteousness  of  Christ  imputed  to  him.  But  how  is  this 
righteousness  like  the  waves  of  the  sea  ?  ( 1 )  For  multitude.  You  cannot  count  the 
waves  of  the  sea,  do  what  you  will ;  and  so  is  it  with  the  righteousness  of  Christ, 
you  cannot  count  its  different  forms  and  fashions.  Let  us  tell  you  of  some  of  these 
waves.  I  was  born  in  sin  and  shapen  in  iniquity,  but  the  holiness  of  Christ's  birth 
takes  away  the  unholiness  of  my  nativity..  I  have  committed  sins  in  my  childhood, 
sins  against  my  parents;  but  Jesus  Christ  was  a  child  full  of  the  Spirit;  so  Christ's 
childish  perfection  is  imputed  to  me,  and  hides  my  childish  sins.  I  have  to  mourn 
over  sins  of  thought ;  but  Christ  can  say,  "  Thy  law  is  My  delight,"  and  the  thoughts 
of  Christ's  mind  cover  my  thoughts,  &c.  (2)  For  majesty.  What  an  illustration 
of  overwhelming  power !  And  ask  now,  who  can  withstand  the  power  of  Christ's 
righteousness?  "  Who  shall  lay  anything  to  the  charge  of  God's  elect?  "  Then,  it 
is  majestic  because  it  is  profound.  Who  can  plumb  the  depths  of  the  righteousness 
of  Christ  ? — deep  as  the  demands  of  the  law,  deep  as  the  miseries  of  hell,  deep  as  the 
thoughts  of  God.  It  is  majestic,  too,  because  of  its  ceaseless  energy.  Wave  upon 
wave,  it  breaks  upon  the  eternal  shore  of  Divine  justice,  fulfilling  the  counsels  of 
God,  while  it  covers  all  the  sins  of  His  people.  (3)  And  the  analogy  maybe  traced 
still  fiurther,  if  you  reflect  on  the  sufficiency  of  the  one  and  the  other.  All  over  the 
world,  at  low  water,  you  will  find  certain  muddy  creeks,  bays,  and  coves.  How  are 
all  these  to  be  covered?  There  is  water  enough  in  the  sea  to  cover  every  cove 
and  creek;  and  there  is  not  a  river  which  will  have  to  say  "  We  had  no  tide  to-day." 
There  is  enough  righteousness  in  Christ  to  cover  you.  (4)  The  righteousness  of  Christ 
is  like  the  waves  of  the  sea  for  origin.  (C.  H.  Spurgeon.)  The  river  an  image  of 
peace  : — I.  The  image  sets  before  us  a  peace  which  is  the  expression  of  life  and 
POWER.  II.  The  image  is  expressive  of  healthful  influence.  III.  Of  progress 
AND  PERPETTTiTY.  IV.  Of  PLEASANTNESS.  {W.  S.  Davis.)  The  Divine  Command- 
ments sources  of  peace  : — I.  The  conduct  these  men  ought  to  have  pursued. 
*'  O  that  thou  hadst  hearkened,"  &c.  What  does  this  hearkening  mean?  1.  An 
understanding  of  God's  commandments.  2.  A  remembering  of  God's  command- 
ments. 3.  A  regarding  of  them  as  commands.  II.  A  blessed  result  of  this 
CONDUCT  when  pursued.  1.  It  leads  the  soul  to  Christ,  the  great  Prince  of  Peace. 
2.  It  leads  us  to  the  Holy  Spirit,  the  Comforter.  3.  The  commands  gradually 
make  us  holy,  and  holiness  leads  to  peace.  III.  The  extent  of  this  blessed 
EFFECT.  "  As  a  river."  (C.  Bradley,  M.A.)  The  lost  ideal : — I.  The  lost 
ideal — what  night  have  been.  II.  The  Divine  lamentation  over  this. 
III.  The  Divine  proposal  for  restoration.  What  means  this  next  word,  "  Go 
ye  forth  of  Babylon"?  &c.  (ver.  20).     (.4.   Raleigh,  D.D.)         Obedience  and  its 


610  TEE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  ilvih. 

blessings  : — I.  The  dutt  of  the  cbeatttre.  To  hearken  to  the  Divine  command- 
raents.  Filial  obedience  springing  from  love  to  his  Father  in  heaven  ought  to  be 
the  rule  of  his  life.  II.  Blessings  restjltino  from  performino  this  duty 
GLADLY  AND  WILLINGLY.  1.  The  peace  of  such  is  as  a  river.  A  river  the  source 
of  verdure  and  fertility.  As  the  river  beautifies  the  landscape,  so  does  peace 
beautify  the  soul.  Its  fostering  influence  is  essential  if  the  virtues  and  graces  of 
the  Spirit  are  to  develop  within  us.  2.  "  Thy  righteousness  as  the  waves  of  the 
sea."  When  the  tide  is  coming  in  the  waves  advance  farther  and  farther  over  the 
strand.  Those  who  hearken  to  the  Divine  commandments  make  progress  in 
righteousness.  (H.  P.  Wright,  B.A.)  Peace  as  a  river  : — Not  as  the  brook,  as 
it  gushes  rapturously  forth,  breaking  musically  on  the  stones,  and  flashing  in  the 
glee  of  its  early  life;  not  as  a  streamlet  hardly  filling  its  wide  bed,  and  scarcely 
affording  water  enough  for  the  fish  to  pass  to  its  higher  reaches:  but  like  a  river 
far  down  its  course,  sweeping  along  with  majestic  current,  deep  and  placid,  able 
to  bear  navies  on  its  broad  expanse,  to  collect  and  carry  with  it  the  refuse  of  towns 
upon  its  banks  without  contamination,  and  approaching  the  sea  with  the  sympathy 
begotten  of  similarity  in  depth  and  volume  and  service  to  mankind.  Oh,  rivers 
that  minister  perpetually  to  man — not  swept  by  storm,  not  drained  by  drought, 
not  anxious  about  continuance,  always  mirroring  the  blue  of  the  azure  sky,  or  the 
stars  of  night,  and  yet  content  to  stay  for  every  daisy  that  sends  its  tiny  root  for 
nourishment — in  your  growth  from  less  to  more,  your  perennial  fulness,  your 
beneficent  ministry,  your  volume,  your  claim,  ye  were  meant  to  preach  to  man, 
with  perpetual  melody,  of  the  infinite  peace  that  was  to  rise,  and  grow,  and  unfold 
with  every  stage  of  his  experience!  Such  at  least  was  God's  ideal  for  Israel,  and 
for  all  who  swear  by  His  name  and  make  mention  of  Jehovah  as  God.  (F.  B. 
3Ieyer,  B.A.)  Peace  as  a  river  : — A  perennial  stream,  such  as  the  Euphrates 
(Amos  V.  24).  It  is  easy  to  understand  the  impression  made  on  the  mind  of  a 
native  of  Palestine,  accustomed  to  "  deceitful  brooks  "  that  run  dry  in  the  summer, 
by  the  sight  of  a  great  river,  flowing  on  for  ever  in  undiminished  volume.  The 
actual  history  of  Israel  had  been  like  the  wadis  of  Judea,  transient  gleams  of 
prosperity beinginterruptedbylongintervalsof misfortune.  {Prof. J.  Skinner, D.D.) 
Dredging  the  river  of  peace  : — God  promises  a  river  of  peace  if  we  will  dredge  out  the 
channel.  The  water  is  His  business — the  water-course  is  ours.  There  are  three 
important  words  which  we  should  consider  carefully.  I.  "  Peace."  If  we  are 
to  dredge  the  river  we  must  get  out  of  the  way  at  once  and  for  all  time  any  false 
conceptions  about  peace  itself  which  we  have  been  entertaining.  Nothing  stops 
the  inflow  of  Divine  life  more  effectually  than  false  notions.  Peace  is  an  essentially 
Hebrew  word,  but  it  contains  a  cosmopolitan  thought.  The  Jews  said  "  Peace  ' 
as  a  salutation  in  the  market-places  and  upon  the  highways,  but  we  all  want  peace 
as  a  proof  of  our  salvation  and  a  mighty  power  of  service.  The  Greek  salutation 
was  rejoice."  When  Christ  rose  from  the  dead  He  used  this  form:  "  Rejoice." 
(R.V.  "  All  hail!  ")  And  well  may  we  rejoice,  since  the  bands  of  death  have  been 
burst  asunder.  But  Christ  also  said,  Peace.  "  Peace  I  leave  with  you.  My  peace 
I  give  unto  you."  Hence  we  are  authorised  in  our  wish  to  appropriate  this  thought 
in  all  its  blessing.  The  Jew  has  always  said,  "  Peace."  The  whole  Orient  has 
adopted  His  salutation  in  the  universal  "  Shalom "  of  the  present  day.  His 
deeply  religious  natiure  was  clearly  set  off  from  the  volatile,  rejoicing,  joy-loving 
nature  of  the  Greek.  What,  then,  is  exactly  meant  by  the  word?  1.  Peace  versus 
Nirvana.  There  are  some  who  think  that  peace  means  a  sort  of  Christian  Nirvana, 
a  state  of  abstraction,  absorption  in  the  infinite,  or  self-surrender  to  nothingness 
in  general  and  nothing  in  particular.  Peace  is  consistent  and  co-existent  with  the 
intensest  activity.  A  river  may  run  through  the  busiest  cities  without  losing  its 
deep  steadiness  and  gentle  murmur.  Our  Lord  Jesus  was  called  the  "  Prince  of 
Peace,"  and  yet  He  was  the  most  practical  of  workers.  2.  Peace  versus  mere 
activity.  If  people  escape  the  error  of  supposing  that  peace  consists  in  mere 
contemplation,  they  are  apt  to  suppose  that  it  may  be  found  by  running  about  in 
ceaseless  activity.  The  blessed  Master  by  His  Spirit  imparts  peace.  It  may  not 
be  secured  by  mere  struggle,  anxiety,  and  activity.  3.  Peace  versus  compromise. 
Compromise  does  not  secure  permanent  or  genuine  peace.  Eli  compromised  for 
the  sake  of  peace,  and  his  sons  broke  his  heart.  Never  take  a  half-hearted  course 
to  avoid  turmoil.  Of  two  pains  you  may  choose  the  less,  but  never  of  two  evils 
in  the  sense  of  sins.  II.  "  River."  Among  the  quieter  objects  of  nature  none  is 
more  suggestive  of  God's  power  and  wisdom,  of  God's  loving  presence  in  the  world 
which  He  has  made,  than  the  river  which  winds  in  and  out  among  the  hills,  steals 


CHAP.  XLvin.]  ISAIAH.  611 

quietly  through  clattering  towns,  kisses  fields  and  pastures  into  fruitfulness  and 
verdure,  and  smilingly  bares  its  breast  to  be  scarred  by  the  countless  keels  of  the 
world's  commerce.  Hence  the  figure  of  the  text  gives  us  at  once  an  idea  of  what 
peace  is  and  what  it  does.  It  is  the  inflow  of  the  Divine  life,  bringing  the  Divine 
quietness,  patience  and  power,  and  resulting  in  spiritual  beauty  and  fruitfulness. 
We  have  hence  but  to  apply  our  ideas  of  a  river  to  peace  to  discover  the  practical 
lessons  we  need  to  learn.  1.  Heavenly  supply.  Every  river  has  a  source,  and  is 
dependent  upon  a  constant,  renewed  supply.  This  source  and  supply  are  always 
from  above.  Peace,  also,  comes  from  above.  Its  source  is  in  God.  God's 
resources  are  infinite,  and  the  supply  shall  not  fail.  2.  Useful  overflow.  Possibly 
when  God  made  the  promise  we  are  considering  He  had  in  mind  the  river  NQe, 
whose  regular  overflow  could  be  depended  upon  to  enrich  Egypt,  and  bring  food  to 
the  people.  Or  He  may  have  thought  of  the  Jordan,  which  "  overflowed  all  its 
banks  in  the  time  of  harvest."  Certain  it  is  that  the  river  of  peace  runs  out  of  its 
banks,  and  is  useful  only  when  it  does.  The  overflowing  heart  of  the  Christian 
is  the  sympathetic  heart.  3.  Progressional  expansion.  A  proper  river  grows 
broader  and  deeper  as  it  progresses  toward  the  sea.  Our  peace  shall  grow  broader 
and  deeper  as  we  go  on  in  the  Christian  life.  III.  "  Hearken."  This  is  the  most 
important  word  of  all,  when  we  consider  that  it  contains  the  condition  of  the  promise 
God  makes  as  to  peace.  All  God's  promises  are  conditional.  If  we  fulfil  our 
part  of  the  contract  He  will  not  fail  in  His.  "  Let  the  peace  of  God  rule  in  your 
hearts."  The  trouble  with  most  of  us  is  that  we  do  not  "  let  "  the  Holy  Spirit  do 
in  us  and  for  us  what  He  yearns  to  do.  Some  Christians  complain  that  God  does 
not  supply  them  with  peace  when  their  hearts  are  so  choked  and  their  lives  so 
clogged  and  cumbered  that  the  river  cannot  flow  in.  Let  us  pursue  the  thought 
a  little  to  see  how  we  may  dredge  the  channel  and  secure  the  blessing.  1.  Blasting 
out  deep-rooted  rocks.  This  is  the  arduous  part  of  the  engineer's  work  when  a  river 
channel  is  to  be  deepened.  Some  such  work  as  this,  deep  and  heroic,  needs  to  be 
done  by  us  if,  we  are  to  offer  a  free  course  to  the  river  of  peace.     Deep-rooted 

fjrejudices  against  the  truth  must  be  loosened  and  cast  out  of  our  minds.  Hidden 
oves  and  yearnings  for  the  world  must  be  explored  and  destroyed.  Pride  is  a  great 
rock  whose  adamantine  sides  must  be  pierced.  Love  of  excitement  is  another. 
Other  rocks  in  the  river's  com-se  are  mentioned  in  Col.  iii.  8.  God's  Word  fiu-nishes 
the  dynamite  by  which  they  may  be  uprooted.  2.  Rip-rapping  to  prevent  dissipa- 
tion of  power.  There  have  been  heavy  rains  in  the  mountains,  or  the  snows  have 
suddenly  melted  and  a  mighty  freshet  comes  tearing  down  the  stream.  The 
soil  composing  the  banks  is  loose  and  loamy,  and  some  protection  must  be  afforded 
where  the  bends  occur  and  the  cities  are  built.  Then  the  men  set  to  work,  and  great 
nets  of  boughs  and  branches  of  trees  are  built,  and  these  are  made  stable  by  rocks 
and  bags  of  sand,  and  so  the  "  rip-rap  "  is  formed  and  the  waters  are  kept  in  their 
course.  We  are  constantly  in  danger  of  losing  spiritual  power  through  the 
broadening  of  our  energies  and  the  dissipations  of  our  forces.  A  proper  overflow 
of  blessing  to  others  is  necessary;  yet  the  river  is  not  to  run  entirely  out  of  ita 
chaimel  and  waste  itself  fruitlessly  and  even  harmfully.  The  love  of  Chi-ist  is  to 
"  constrain  "  us — keep  us  within  limits.  Let  us  not  be  afraid  of  being  "  narrow  " 
in  this  sense.  A  river  is  powerful  only  when  properly  narrow, — otherwise  it 
becomes  a  bog  and  a  stench.  3.  Guarding  against  the  formation  of  sudden  sand- 
bars. Those  who  dwell  near  sandy  rivers  or  harbours  formed  by  river  mouths 
know  what  an  amount  of  careful  piering  and  dredging  is  necessary  to  keep  the 
channel  clear.  Let  us  learn  a  lesson  from  the  pains  taken  by  the  engineers.  If 
we  find  a  place  in  our  spiritual  life  where  sudden  bars  are  apt  to  form,  disturbing 
or  retarding  the  flow  of  peace,  let  us  at  once  protect  the  spot  by  special  prayer. 
{W.  J.  Harsha,  D.D.)  Peace  and  righteousness  sacrificed: — I.  Here  are  the 
PRIVILEGES  OF  God's  PEOPLE.  Peace  like  a  river;  righteousness  like  the  waves 
of  the  sea.  The  very  same  blessings  which  are  said  in  the  New  Testament  to 
constitute  the  kingdom  of  God  (Rom.  xiv.  17).  1.  This  blessed  peace  is  of  two 
kinds — peace  with  God,  and  peace  within  themselves.  This  peace  is  compared 
to  a  river.  The  comparison  is  very  beautiful  and  significant.  Look  at  a  river. 
What  are  you  struck  with?  (1)  The  stillness  and  the  smoothness  of  its  course, 
8o  striking  as  contrasted  with  the  noise  and  the  disturbance  which  are  so  often 
heard  upon  its  banks.  So  still  is  the  course  of  the  real  Christian  when  compared 
with  the  troublesome  world  through  which  he  moves.  (2)  Look  again  at  the  deep 
river.  What  an  idea  does  it  give  us  of  fulness  and  abundance!  And  what  an 
emblem  then,  in  this  respect,  of  the  abundance  of  the  Christian's  peace!     "  The 


612  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  xlvui. 

Lord  of  peace  Himself  gives  him  peace  always,  by  all  means."  "  Always  " — in 
prosperity  and  in  adversity — in  health  and  in  sickness — in  ease  and  in  pain — in 
abundance  and  in  want — in  joy  and  in  sorrow — in  the  midst  of  friends  and  in  the 
midst  of  enemies — in  life  and  in  death.  And  "  by  all  means  " — for  by  how  many 
instruments,  through  how  many  channels,  does  the  Lord  send  peace  into  His 
people's  hearts !  By  His  Word — by  His  ordinances — by  His  providences — nay,  by  a 
thousand  things  which  might  seem,  at  first  sight,  more  likely  to  mar  their  peace 
than  to  promote  it.  (3)  Take  another  view  of  a  deep  river.  How  long  has 
it  been  flowing?  How  long  will  it  flow?  And  how  long  wiU  the  peace  of  the 
Lord's  people  last?  "  As  long  as  the  moon  endureth  "  (Psa.  Ixxii.  7).  Yea,  longer 
far  (Isa.  xxxii.  17,  liv.  10).  2.  "  Righteousness."  The  people  of  God  are  clothed 
in  the  merits  of  their  Saviour,  Now,  of  this  righteousness  it  may  well  be  said  that 
it  is  "  like  the  waves  of  the  sea."  Behold  the  sea,  and  the  idea  it  gives  us  is 
that  of  vastness  and  immensity — an  almost  boundless  mass  of  waters.  And 
what  is  the  height,  the  length,  the  breadth,  the  depth  of  the  righteousness  of 
Christ!  The  waves  of  the  sea  are  a  fit  emblem  of  power  and  might — who  can 
withstand  them  ?  who  can  rebuke  them  ?  And  who  can  lay  anything  to  the  charge 
of  those  whose  righteousness  is  that  of  their  Redeemer?     II.  Why  do  not  the 

BLESSINGS     WE    HAVE     SPOKEN     OF     BELONG     TO     EVERYONE?      It    is    impossible 

to  enjoy  God's  peace  in  the  midst  of  the  world's  sins.  HI.  What  tenderness 
THERE  IS  IN  THE  TEXT!  what  commiscration  of  the  sad  estate  in  which  sinners 
have  reduced  themselves!  (A.  Roberts,  M.A.)  The  desire,  plan,  and  regret 
of  the  Eternal: — I.  An  earnest  desire  of  the  Eternal.  1.  He  desires  for  man 
an  abundance  of  peace.  The  word  "  peace  "  stands  for  something  more  than 
freedom  from  national  war  or  moral  agitations.  It  stands  for  happiness  in  its 
widest  and  deepest  import.  The  happiness  desired,  then,  is  not  a  little  happiness, 
not  a  few  drops,  not  even  a  copious  shower  that  soon  passes  away,  but  a  "  river." 
(1)  Ever  augmenting  in  fulness.  (2)  Ever  increasing  in  calmness.  The  deeper 
and  fuller  the  river  becomes,  the  more  calm.  (3)  Ever  approximating  to  its  con- 
summation. 2.  He  desires  for  man  an  abundance  of  spiritual  prosperity.  "  Thy 
righteousness  as  the  waves  of  the  sea."  "  Righteousness  "  must  also  be  taken 
in  a  general  sense  as  standing  for  rectitude  of  soul  and  holiness  of  character. 
Those  waves,  how  majestic  in  aspect!  how  resistless  in  flow!  how  unconquerable 
in  energy!  The  Eternal  does  not  wish  us  to  have  a  little  religion,  but  to  "  com- 
prehend with  all  saints  what  is  the  length,"  &c.  II.  An  unalterable  plan 
OF  the  Eternal.  The  plan  is  that  happiness  should  only  come  through  obedience. 
"  0  that  thou  hadst  hearkened,"  &c.  1.  The  constitution  of  the  human  soul 
ehows  this.  The  sum  of  all  God's  commandments  has  been  reduced  by  Christ 
to  love — supreme  love  to  God.  "  Thou  shalt  love  the  Lord  thy  God  with  all 
thine  heart."  Now,  the  nature  of  the  soul  shows  that  there  can  be  no  true  and 
perfect  happiness  without  this.  (1)  Nothing  but  a  supreme  love  for  Him  can 
draw  out  harmoniously  the  soul's  powers.  (2)  Nothing  but  supreme  love  for 
Him  can  satisfy  the  soul's  conscience.  2.  The  order  of  society  requires  this. 
All  are  members  of  a  social  system,  and  each  has  a  mission  to  fulfil,  not  only  in 
relation  to  himself,  but  in  relation  to  others.  For  society  to  act  in  harmony 
it  is  necessary  that  there  should  be  one  will  worked  out  by  aU.  Where  each 
follows  his  own  will  there  must  be  eternal  collisions  and  anarchies.  3.  The 
history  of  the  world  manifests  this.  Every  chapter  in  the  world's  history  shows 
that  the  disobedient  have  been  miserable,  whilst  the  obedient  have  been  happy. 
4.  The  Word  of  God  declares  this.  III.  An  inexpressible  regret  of  the 
Eternal.  "O  that  thou  hadst  hearkened  unto  My  commandments."  Such 
Divine  exclamations  are  not  altogether  unusual.  Such  expressions  of  Divine 
feeling  indicate  two  things — 1.  The  immense  evils  involved  in  disobedience. 
God  alone  knows  the  evils  connected  with  disobedience  to  the  individual,  society, 
the  universe.  And  seeing  the  dark  and  turbulent  ocean  of  miseries  springing 
from  disobedience.  He  seems  to  sigh  over  it.  His  heart  seems  to  break  into 
commiseration.  Fools  may  laugh  at  sin,  but  God  is  solemn  over  it.  2.  That 
restoration  to  obedience  is  man's  deepest  necessity.  God  does  three  things  to 
restore  man  to  obedience.  (1)  Presents  His  law  in  the  most  attractive  forms; 
not  in  characters  on  stone,  in  dry  propositions,  but  in  the  lovely  life  of  Jesus. 
(2)  Presents  the  most  powerful  encouragement  to  obedience.  The  Gospel  abounds 
with  motives  from  heaven,  earth,  and  hell,  from  time  and  eternity,  to  follow 
Christ.  (3)  Offers  the  Divine  Spirit  to  help  to  obedience.  Mark  the  pivot  on 
which  thy  destiny  hinges.     It  is  obedieace.     {Homilist.)         What  might  Jiav* 


CHAP.  XLViii.]  ISAIAH.  513 

been: — What  is  a  commandment  of  God?  We  are  too  commonly  inclined  to 
regard  it  merely  as  the  expression  of  the  wish  of  God.  It  is  more  than  that. 
It  expresses  a  law  of  hfe.  To  disobey  a  commandment  is  not  merely  to  go 
against  the  will  of  God  ;  it  is  to  violate  eternal  law.  Every  commandment  is 
the  expression  of  a  fundamental  law,  which  it  is  our  welfare  to  observe,  and 
our  destruction  to  ignore.  A  parent  says  to  her  child,  "  Thou  shalt  keep  thy- 
self clean."  There  is  a  commandment.  But  why?  Because  it  is  thy  parent's 
wish?  Yes,  but  more  than  that.  Because  it  expresses  a  law  of  hfe,  the  condition 
of  physical  health.  It  is  even  so  with  all  the  commandments  of  God.  The 
Ten  Commandments  are  just  ten  laws,  proclaiming  what  are  the  conditions  of 
a  healthy  moral  Ufe.  1.  Let  us  hear  our  text  again.  "  O  that  thou  hadst  heark- 
ened when  I  made  known  to  thee  the  laws  of  moral  and  spiritual  health.  I 
Lave  instructed  thee  what  laws  to  observe  in  building  a  house  ;  I  have  instructed 
thee  what  laws  to  observe  in  building  a  hfe.  0  that  thou  hadst  hearkened  to 
My  commandments."  "  Hearkened."  The  word  is  full  of  intentness  ;  it  ia 
suggestive  of  quick  apprehension.  It  means  to  prick  the  ears,  as  some  hare 
or  rabbit  pricks  its  ears  and  listens  at  the  slightest  movement  in  the  thicket, 
or  at  the  sound  of  a  footfall  in  the  distant  field.  2.  But  they  had  not  hearkened. 
They  had  not  pricked  their  ears  and  hstened.  They  turned  a  sort  of  inJvjlent 
and  indifferent  ear,  and  pursued  their  own  way.  Now,  what  happens  when  a 
man  will  not  hearken  to  God's  commandments,  when  he  shapes  his  hfe  in  utter 
indifference  to  the  revealed  law?  Two  things  happen,  and  they  are  as  inevitable 
as  death,  for  they  are  the  forerunners  of  death — spiritual  restlessness  and  spiritual 
feebleness.  (1)  Let  a  man  hearken  to  the  commandments  of  physical  health, 
and  all  the  many  organs  of  his  body  will  work  together  in  a  smooth  harmony, 
as  though  they  were  not  many  but  one.  But  now  let  the  man  refuse  to  hearken 
to  the  commandments  of  health,  what  then?  The  harmony  will  be  broken, 
the  brotherhood  will  be  changed  into  anarchy,  one  after  another  the  organs  will 
rise  in  mutiny,  and  the  man's  bodily  life  will  become  the  abode  of  restlessness 
and  pain.  Defiance  of  physical  law  produces  physical  restlessness.  It  is  even 
so  with  those  spiritual  organs  which  inhere  in  the  soul.  Let  a  man  hearken 
to  God's  commandments,  let  him  obey  the  laws  of  spiritual  health,  and  all  his 
spiritual  organs  will  form  a  holy  brotherhood;  conscience,  will,  affection,  emotion, 
reason,  shall  all  work  together  in  the  harmony  which  we  name  peace.  But  let 
a  man  defy  the  laws  of  God,  and  the  soul  will  become  a  scene  of  civil  strife;  con- 
science, will,  reason,  and  desire  will  be  pitted  one  against  another,  and  the  whole 
soul  of  man,  hke  to  a  httle  kingdom,  will  suffer  the  nature  of  an  insurrection. 
(2)  Defiance  of  spiritual  law  also  produces  spiritual  feebleness.  Every  time  I 
disobey  a  commandment  of  God  I  weaken  my  moral  resources.  Is  it  not  to 
this  process  of  gradual  impoverishment  that  we  refer  when  we  say  of  some  man, 
"  Poor  fellow,  he  has  got  no  will  left  "  ?  3.  But  now,  see  what  might  have 
happened.  "  0  that  thou  hadst  hearkened  to  My  commandments,"  five,  ten, 
fifteen,  twenty,  thirty,  or  forty  years  ago  :  instead  of  spiritual  restlessness 
and  spiritual  weakness,  "  then  had  thy  peace  been  as  a  river,  and  thy  righteous- 
ness as  the  waves  of  the  sea."  (1)  Peace  like  a  river!  I  don't  think  it  is  the 
figure  we  should  have  chosen  as  a  symbol  of  peace.  I  rather  think  we  should 
have  taken  some  lonely  mountain  tarn,  some  sheet  of  glassy  water,  hidden  away 
in  the  bosom  of  the  everlasting  hills,  as  oiir  symbol  of  peace.  "  Peace  like  a 
river."  The  moxmtain  tarn  is  a  symbol  of  ease;  the  flowing  river  is  the  symbol 
of  peace.  The  river,  deep  and  full  and  progressive!  The  Apostle  Paul  declared 
that  he  had  the  peace  which  is  the  gift  of  Christ.  Then  it  was  peace  like  a  river. 
Was  it?  Listen  to  the  old  man:  "I  am  content,"  there  is  peace — full,  deep, 
rich  contentment.  But  hsten  again — "Not  that  I  am  already  perfect,  ...  I 
press  toward  the  mark."  Peace,  but  hke  a  river!  Fulness  with  progress!  Con- 
tentment with  aspiration!  Life  at  rest,  but  moving  on  to  the  perfection  of  God! 
(2)  But  more  than  that,  instead  of  thy  present  spiritual  feebleness,  thy  righteous- 
ness would  have  been  "  hke  the  waves  of  the  sea."  Take  your  stand  upon  the 
shore,  and  watch  the  waves  roll  in,  like  an  army  of  white-crested  warriors,  shaking 
their  snowy  plumes,  and  riding  forth  to  battle.  Do  you  remember  that  Old  Testa- 
inent  figure  which  describes  the  strength  of  the  pure — "  terrible  as  an  army  with 
banners"?  I  have  sometimes  been  reminded  of  the  figure  as  I  have  stood  upon 
the  beach,  and  watched  the  great  waves  rolling  in  and  tossing  up  their  snowy 
foam — "  terrible  as  an  army  with  banners."  "  Thy  righteousness  like  the  waves 
of  the  sea,"  a  conquering  and  jubilant  army!  Have  you  ever  tried  to  stop  a  wave 
VOL.  II.— 33 


514  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  xlvui. 

of  the  sea?  It  cannot  be  stopped.  "  Thy  righteousness  like  the  waves  of  the 
sea  " — nothing  shall  check  it.  No  threats  shall  hinder  it.  No  bribe  shall  allure 
it  aside.  Temptations  shall  be  only  like  those  sand-castles  which  our  Uttle  ones 
build  along  the  shore,  and  thy  righteousness  shall  sweep  them  away  with  joyful 
ease.  4.  It  would  be  a  poor  and  melancholy  business  for  a  preacher  to  get  up 
and  merely  tell  his  people  what  might  have  been  ;  it  would  be  a  funeral  dirge 
rather  than  a  Gospel.  If  the  Gospel  of  God  has  a  tender  and  inspiring  note  for 
anybody,  it  is  for  those  souls  which  are  burdened  with  a  depressing  sense  of  what 
might  have  been.  "  What  might  have  been  "  must  be  followed  by  "  what  may 
be,"  if  souls  are  to  be  lifted  out  of  bondage  and  darkness  into  liberty  and  light. 
Still,  if  you  can  get  a  man  to  sigh  for  what  might  have  been,  you  have  laid  the 
foundation  for  what  may  be.  A  sigh  for  the  past  is  a  prayer  for  the  future.  Hope 
may  be  born  out  of  sorrow,  as  diamonds  are  born  out  of  slime.  What  do  we  need  ? 
Well,  first  of  all  we  need  to  know  that  we  have  another  chance,  that  we  can  begin 
again.  Don't  let  anyone  fall  into  that  fatal  snare  of  believing  that  God  has 
cast  them  off.  God  never  hides  His  face.  It  is  we  who  obscure  it.  Go  down 
into  the  West  Riding  of  Yorkshire,  and  look  at  those  tall  mill  chimneys  as  they 
pour  out  dense  volumes  of  coal  black  smoke,  which  hangs  Uke  a  dark  paU  between 
the  inhabitants  and  God's  sky.  What  would  you  think  if  some  poet,  living  in 
one  of  these  towns,  were  to  begin  to  cry,  "  Hide  not  thy  face  from  us,  0  blue  sky  "? 
The  blue  sky  is  not  hiding  its  face  ;  it  is  your  own  black  smoke  that  obscures 
it.  Can  the  obscuring  cloud  be  removed?  "  I  have  blotted  out  as  a  thick  cloud 
thy  transgressions,  and  as  a  cloud  thy  sins."  (J.  H.  Jowett,  M.A.)  The  outline 
of  the  ideal  in  every  man's  life  : — If  you  have  ever  been  at  St.  Andrews,  and  have 
looked  at  the  ruins  of  that  great  cathedral,  you  have  seen  not  only  the  massive 
walls  that  are  left  in  a  small  part  of  it,  but  you  have  seen  just  the  appearance 
above  ground,  the  whole  shape  of  the  cathedral — nothing  more  than  that :  you 
can  just  form  an  idea  of  what  it  would  be  if  it  stood  there  in  aU  its  grandeur, 
WeU,  there  is  left  in  every  man  something  of  this  kind.  Sin  depraves,  but  it 
does  not  obliterate  the  organic  powers  and  the  natural  pecuUarities  and  tendencies 
of  the  individual.  What  I  might  have  been — that  is  not  a  picture  which  has  alto- 
gether vanished  in  the  air  ;  there  is  some  outline  of  it  left,  an  outline  in  each 
man.  Of  course,  these  differ  very  much  among  themselves,  just  as  pictures  differ 
in  a  gallery  or  as  human  faces  in  a  crowded  street,  all  of  which,  perhaps,  you  will 
find  to  have  a  general  resemblance,  but  none  of  which  are  exactly  ahke.  The 
ideal  of  another  person  would  not  be  mine,  nor  mine  his.  There  are  diversities. 
{A.  Raleigh,  D.D.)  God's  appeal  to  man: — I.  An  appeal  of  God  to  man. 
1.  The  appeal  made  by  the  Almighty  to  the  Jew,  and  also  to  the  Gentile,  is  full 
of  pathos  and  the  most  intense  affection.  It  tells  us  how  unwilling  God  was 
and  is  that  any  man,  or  any  body  of  men,  should  perish;  should  pass  away  from 
His  love  and  care  and  protection,  and  that  if  anyone  did  so,  it  would  be  their 
own  fault ;  and  that  such  a  consequence  of  disobedience  would  be  necessary 
for  the  upholding  of  the  Divine  laws.  2.  The  manner  of  the  appeal,  too,  indicates 
that  the  commandments  of  God  had  not  been  properly  regarded,  and  therefore 
there  is  a  tone  of  sorrow  and  regret.  The  case  reminds  us  of  Christ  weeping 
over  the  doomed  city  of  Jerusalem.  If  we  are  neglecting  our  first  and  foremost 
duties  with  respect  to  God,  if  we  are  so  taken  up  with  the  world,  its  different 
callings,  its  pleasures,  its  ambitions,  its  cares,  and  its  disappointments,  as  to 
keep  out  of  view  the  imperative  duty  of  seeking  first  the  kingdom  of  God  and 
His  righteousness,  and  of  working  out  by  self-denial  and  constant  obedience 
to  the  Almigh(>y  will  our  own  personal  salvation,  then  the  words  of  our  text, 
with  all  their  force  of  meaning,  may  be  applied  to  ourselves.  3.  But  such  an 
expression  of  grief  with  God  is  generally  predictive  of  judgment.  It  was  so  with 
the  tearful  words  of  the  Redeemer.  II.  The  results  which  might  have  been; 
or  those  which  follow  obedience  to  the  commandments  of  God,  I.  On  the  con- 
dition of  hearkening  to  or  obeying  the  Divine  commands  there  would  follow  A 
peace  as  full  and  deep  and  calm  as  to  be  like  a  river.  2.  This  latter  comparison 
of  righteousness  is  very  striking.  Like  the  waves  of  the  sea  for  constant  activity, 
for  breadth  and  depth,  for  a  wide  circuit  of  influence,  for  sublimity,  power,  and 
greatness.  And  such  is  Christian  life  and  character  when  considered  in  their 
relative  bearings  on  ourselves  and  society  at  large.  ( W.  D.  Horwood.)  National 
peace  and  righteousness: — The  words  are  addressed  to  a  nation;  the  images  before 
us  are  images  of  national  life  ;  the  peace — that  is,  the  outward  prosperity  of  the 
people — shall  flow  like  a  river;   the  righteousness  of  the  united  people  shall  be 


CHAP.  XL VIII.]  ISAIAH.  515 

like  the  prevailing  unity,  the  accumulated  power,  the  forceful,  restless  energy 
of  the  sea  waves.  (W.  S.  Davis.)  Thy  righteousness  as  the  waves  of 
the  sea. — Righteousness: — 1.  Religion  being  the  supreme  act  of  the  soul,  it  is 
not  strange  that  its  highest  product  should  claim  the  grandest  symbol  in  the 
vocabulary  of  God  for  its  utterance.  Isaiah,  whose  mind  was  more  ocean-like 
in  grand  unity  and  rich  variety  of  colom:  than  any  other  prophet,  saw  so  deeply 
into  the  nature  of  righteousness  that  not  the  plain,  or  sky,  or  mountain,  with 
which  he  was  famihar,  offered  him  so  complete  a  definition  of  its  quaUty,  or  so 
full  a  suggestion  of  its  life  in  the  soul,  as  the  wonderful  sea.  Poets  have  always 
sought  the  melodies  of  ocean  to  reinforce  and  complete  their  own  especially 
when  the  deeper  and  larger  experiences  and  hopes  of  man  are  touched.  2.  Inno- 
cence is  not  righteousness,  though  many  a  soul  thinks  because  it  has  not  been 
stained  by  sin  it  is  righteous.  Innocence  has  no  waves,  no  perils,  no  tragedies, 
no  gulf  streams,  nothing  so  stormy  as  a  plunging  breaker.  Lmocence  is  a  plain 
of  white  snow.  The  rosy  hues  of  sunset  do  not  glimmer  down  into  its  deeps! 
No  one  is  enguKed  in  its  splendour  ;  no  one  can  sail  upon  its  bosom.  It  is  passion- 
less, without  a  yearning  or  a  song.  Righteousness  is  hke  a  sea,  full  of  currents; 
it  is  restless  and  restful  with  Uving  energies.  It  has  perils,  and  means  storm  and 
stress,  as  well  as  peace  and  beauty.  It  offers  opportunities  to  its  sailor  for  heroisms 
and  enterprises  of  soul.  A  mountain  can  describe  justice;  it  is  its  portrait,  hard, 
unmovable,  grand,  crystalline.  But  righteousness  is  mobile,  just  as  grand,  but 
full  of  movement.  3.  Even  Jesus  sought  the  seaside  because  He  felt  most  of 
all  souls  how  something  above  His  soul  influenced  it  as  the  moon  influences  the 
ocean.  All  nation-builders,  poets,  great  achievers  of  the  intellectual  and  spiritual 
wealth  of  the  race  know  that  not  from  within,  or  from  beneath,  but  from  above 
the  long,  sweet  influences  work  to  lift  the  life  to  its  sublime  heights.  Part  of 
the  secret  of  a  strong  and  blessed  hfe  Hes  in  knowing  the  tides,  in  counting  upon 
them,  and  in  relying  on  the  fact  that  these  influences  from  above  will  do  more 
for  our  exaltation  and  joy  than  any  of  our  own  efforts  may  do.  At  low  tide, 
with  a  fresh  east  wind,  a  white-capped  wave  seems  to  try  to  reach  some  beautiful 
place  on  the  shore.  It  yearns  and  strains  and  fails.  Let  it  wait  till  the  moon- 
drawn  tide  comes  under  it  with  soft,  strong  advances,  and  lo,  the  walls  of  the 
land  are  washed  to  jasper,  and  the  wave  has  mounted  where  it  never  could  have 
reached  alone.  Wait  until  God  sends  His  tide  and  you  will  reach  your  highest 
goal.  4.  Righteousness  has  majestic  unity  and  richest  variety,  like  the  waves 
of  the  sea.  Men  would  often  make  one  type  or  aspect  of  righteousness  the  judge 
of  all  others,  and  call  it  alone  perfect.  The  sea  is  so  much  Hke  man's  soul  because 
it  is  so  much  a  changeful  unit;  so  like  man's  righteousness  because  every  man's 
righteousness  takes  on  all  the  hues  of  his  personality.  At  all  moments  of  the 
day  and  night  the  sea  is  a  palette  of  colours,  yet  one  sea  roUs  in  aU  this  marvel 
of  changing  tints.  Righteousness  is  equally  variant ;  it  takes  on  the  sky's  hues 
above  the  soul,  and  the  wonderful  tints  of  the  bottom  of  the  sea.  The  sea  is  a 
challenge  to  man's  sense  of  infinity.  It  whispers  of  eternity.  So  does  all  genuine 
righteousness,  for  it  is  ageless,  and  seems  to  rely  on  the  Hfe  everlasting.  Its  whole 
mission  is  to  fling  us  out  on  the  forever  of  God  and  the  soul.  So  the  sea  shall 
be  no  more  when  we  have  learned  its  lesson.  {F.  W.  Gunsatdus,  D.D.)  Bight- 
eousness  as  the  waves  of  the  sea: — God  would  have  a  man's  righteousness  to  be 
like  the  waves  of  the  sea  ;  that  is.  He  would  have  him  to  be  possessed  of  a  goodness 
that  cannot  be  measured,  and  that  can  never  end.  For  if  we  want  the  symbol 
of  strength,  of  variety,  of  voluminousness,  abundance,  and  endlessness,  we  have 
it,  not  in  the  grand  mountains  that  are  called  everlasting,  but  in  these  ever-fluent 
never-resting  waves  of  the  sea.  The  waves  of  the  sea!  why,  they  have  made  aH 
the  strata  of  the  world  nearly;  they  have  immersed  every  continent  ia  turn  again 
and  again  and  again  ;  they  have  been  lapping  and  chafing  the  shores  of  this 
world  through  ten  thousand  ages,  and  roaring  in  answer  to  the  winds  all  over 
the  lengths  and  breadths  of  the  ocean,  and  yet  now,  to-day,  they  are  as  fresh 
and  young  and  buoyant  as  they  have  ever  been  before.  Well,  this  is  the  emblem 
which  God  takes  to  set  forth  the  beauty  and  glory  of  man's  life.  {A.  Raleigh, 
D.D.)  Righteousness  as  the  waves  of  the  sea: — Walk  along  the  coast-line  when 
the  tide  has  ebbed,  mark  the  wastes  of  sand,  the  muddy  ooze,  the  black  unsightly 
rocks.  Not  thus  did  God  intend  that  any  of  His  children  should  be.  It  was 
never  His  will  that  their  righteousness  should  ebb,  that  there  should  be  wastes 
and  gaps  and  breaks  in  their  experience,  that  there  should  be  the  fatal  lack  of 
strength  and  purity  and  virtue.     The  Divine  ideal  of  the  inner  life  is  mid-ocean, 


616  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  XLvm. 

where  the  waves  reach  to  the  horizon  on  every  side,  and  there  are  miles  of  sea- 
water  beneath.  (F.  B.  Meyer,  B.A.)  Righteousness: — 1.  Is  not  the  first  idea 
of  the  waves  of  the  sea  their  multitudinousness  ?  Righteousness,  then,  Uke  these 
waves  of  the  sea,  would  mean  an  unfaihng  movement,  an  active  goodness,  strong 
or  gentle,  reaching  over  the  boundless  siu:face  of  life,  breaking  in  pure  foam  and 
music  on  every  beach.  It  would  mean  a  kind  of  Umitless  and  incalculable  force, 
too,  not  contracted  hke  waters  in  a  pool  or  pond,  but  issuing  out  of  vast  depths 
and  distances,  and  swayed  by  cosmic  impulses,  so  that  there  is  no  end,  no  pause, 
no  exhaustion — a  sense  of  the  infinite,  a  promise  of  eternity.  2.  The  second 
idea  must  be  that  of  the  beauty  of  the  waves  of  the  sea.  That  is  not  a  modern 
sentiment;  it  occurs  in  the  earUest  poetry  of  the  world.  It  was  ^Eschylus  that 
coined  the  exquisite  phrase,  "  the  countless  smile  of  the  many-sounding  sea," 
and  a  poet  hke  Isaiah  must  have  felt  that  poetry  of  the  sea  as  you  have  done. 
3.  May  we  add  a  third  suggestion,  which  would  hardly  occur,  perhaps,  to  those 
who  Imew  only  the  tideless  Mediterranean,  namely,  the  beneficence  of  the  waves 
of  the  sea.  They  are  for  ever  washing  the  land.  Our  righteousness  is  intended 
to  have  a  cleansing  efEect  on  the  shores  of  earth.  Not  fike  the  troubled  waters, 
which  throw  up  mire  and  dirt — they  are  intended  to  ring  human  Ufe  with  a  belt 
of  ozone,  to  wash  out  into  the  depths  the  corruptions  of  the  earth,  and  to  fling 
high  upon  the  shore  the  sting  and  the  strength  of  the  salt.  To  influence  the  world 
for  good  is  a  thought  to  thrill  you  with  hope  and  desire,  to  be  good,  to  do  good, 
to  make  good.     (R.  F.  Horton,  D.D.) 

Vers.  20,  21.  Go  ye  forth  of  Babylon. — Summoned  to  an  exodus: — There 
has  never  been  an  era  in  which  God's  people  have  not  been  face  to  face  with  a  great 
principle  of  evil,  embodied  in  a  city,  confederation,  or  conspiracy  of  darkness. 
Always  the  same  spirit  under  differing  forms.  This  great  system  is  as  strong 
to-day  as  when  the  massive  walls  of  Babylon  enclosed  their  milUons,  and  proudly 
dominated  the  world.  Some  have  identified  it  with  the  Church  of  Rome,  or  the 
spirit  of  ecclesiastical  assumption,  but  it  is  better  to  consider  it  as  that  element 
which  is  ever  working  through  human  society,  which  is  spoken  of  as  "  the  world." 
We  are  therefore  warranted  in  applying  to  present  surroimdings  every  item  in 
the  description  given  of  the  olden  foe  of  Israel,  and  of  heeding  the  summons 
to  go  forth.  I.  Sent  to  Babylon.  God's  ideal  for  the  chosen  people  is  set 
forth  imder  a  beautiful  similitude  (ver.  18).  This  ideal  is  within  the  reach  of 
everyone  who  will  hearken  to  God's  commandments.  But  if  we  refuse,  we  may 
have  to  pass,  as  Israel  did,  into  the  furnace  of  suffering  in  the  Babylon  of  the 
world.  II.  Life  in  Babylon.  The  mighty  city  was  called  the  Lady  of  kingdoms. 
We  must  think  of  her  with  massive  walls,  broad  spaces,  colossal  bulls  guarding 
the  entrances  to  vast  temples  with  flights  of  stairs  and  terraces;  with  pyramids, 
towers,  and  hanging-gardens;  her  wharves  receiving  the  freights  of  the  Indian 
Ocean;  her  marts  thronged  with  the  merchants  of  the  world;  her  streets  teeming 
with  tributary  populations.  But  right  across  her  splendour  ran  the  fatal  bars 
of  cruelty,  luxury,  wickedness,  and  devil-worship.  Amid  such  scenes  the  Jews 
spent  the  weary  years  of  their  captivity.  But  through  this  awful  discipUne 
there  was  slowly  emerging  a  nobler,  loftier  ideal,  which  was  fostered  by  the  ancient 
words  that  foretold  their  destiny.  It  was  not  possible  that  they  should  be  long 
holden  by  their  captors.  Were  they  not  the  elect  people  of  God,  destined  to  bless 
the  world?  Yes,  they  might  be  in  Babylon,  Uke  many  another  captive  people, 
but  they  had  a  great  hope  at  their  heart.  And  in  the  light  of  that  hope,  under 
the  searching  fires  of  their  anguish,  they  for  ever  abandoned  their  love  for  idolatry. 
Some  are  now  in  their  Babylon.  They  look  back  to  a  sunny  past,  which  might 
have  continued  had  they  not  stepped  out  of  the  narrow  path  of  obedience.  Let 
such  still  hope  in  God:  they  shall  still  praise  Him;  let  them  repent  of  their  sins 
and  put  them  away;  let  them  learn  the  deep  lessons  which  God's  Spirit  is  endeav- 
ouring to  teach;  let  them  dare  to  praise  God  for  the  disciphne  of  pain.  Presently 
the  clarion  call  of  the  exodus  will  ring  out.  III.  Exodus  from  Babylon.  The 
old  order  was  changing  and  giving  place  to  the  new.  From  the  ruins  of  the 
mightiest  city  that,  perhaps,  the  world  has  ever  seen,  the  Jews  are  bidden  to 
go  forth.  The  summons  for  an  exodus  rings  out  to  the  Church  of  the  Uving  God. 
If,  B.  Meyer,  B.A.) 


CHAP.  XLix.]  ISAIAH.  617 


CHAPTER  XLIX. 

Vbbs.  1-6.  Listen,  0  isles,  unto  Me. — A  forecast  of  the  universal  religion  : — 
In  the  previous  chapters  we  find  very  glorious  things  spoken  of  the  deliverance 
of  the  Jews  from  Babylon.  But  in  this  chapter  we  seem  to  commence  a  new 
departure,  to  rise  to  a  higher  strain,  and  to  launch  out  into  broader  and  grander 
predictions.  A  larger  audience  is  invoked — "  Listen,  0  isles,  unto  Me."  A 
greater  than  the  prophet  is  the  speaker — "  The  Lord  hath  called  me  from  the 
womb,"  &c.  And  the  calling  of  the  Gentiles  to  a  share  in  the  blessings  of  the  greater 
redemption  is  clearly  indicated.  "  I  will  also  give  thee  for  a  light  to  the  Gentiles, 
that  thou  mayest  be  My  salvation  unto  the  end  of  the  earth."  {D.  Howell,  B.D.) 
The  ideal  servant  of  Jehovah  : — Here,  not  only  does  the  language  describe  apparently 
the  acts  of  an  individual  person,  but  the  servant  is  expressly  distinguished  from 
the  historic  nation;  and  part  of  the  servant's  office  is  to  consist  in  the  restoration 
of  the  historic  nation,  and  (ver.  8)  the  re-allotment  of  its  desolated  land.  At  the 
same  time,  the  servant  is  still  in  some  sense  "  Israel  ";  for  the  term  is  directly 
appUed  to  Him  (ver.  3)  •  .  .  Israel,  from  this  point  of  view,  is  delineated  by 
[the  prophet]  as  an  ideal  personality,  and  projected  upon  the  future  as  a  figure 
displaying  the  most  genuine  characteristics  of  the  nation,  and  realising  them  in 
action  with  an  intensity  and  clearness  of  aim  which  the  historic  Israel  had  never 
even  remotely  attained.  It  is  a  great  ideal  creation  which  the  prophet  constructs, 
a  transfigured  reflection  of  the  historic  people,  a  figure  conscious  of  the  colossal 
task  allotted  to  it,  but  impeded  by  no  moral  slackness,  or  other  deficiency,  from 
undertaking  it.  And  so  vividly  is  this  wonderful  creation  a  figiu-e  present  to  his 
imagination,  that  it  exhibits  all  the  concrete  traits  of  an  individual  person.  (Prof. 
S.  E.  Driver,  D.D.)  The  servant  of  Jehovah  is  the  kernel  of  the  kernel  of  Israel, 
Israel's  inmost  centre,  Israel's  highest  head.  {F.  Delitzsch,  D.D.)  The  speaker  : 
— Who  is  this  that  speaks  in  the  Hebrew  tongue,  and  presumes  to  address  the  world 
as  his  audience  ?  We  had  thought  the  Jew-speech  too  exclusive,  too  conservative, 
too  intolerant  of  strangers,  to  care  to  make  itself  heard  beyond  the  limits  of  Judaism. 
Whence  this  sudden  interest  in  the  great  family  of  man?  Ah!  these  are  the  words 
of  the  Messiah,  the  ideal  Jew;  speaking  in  the  name  of  the  elect  race,  and  repre- 
senting its  genius,  not  as  warped  by  human  prejudice,  but  as  God  intended  it  to 
be.  "  He  said  unto  me.  Thou  art  My  servant;  Israel,  in  whom  I  will  be  glorified." 
There  can  be  no  doubt  that  this  is  the  true  way  of  considering  these  noble  words. 
They  were  expressly  referred  to  Jesus  Christ  by  His  greatest  apostle  on  one  of  the 
most  memorable  occasions  in  his  career  (Acts  xiii.  47).  But,  it  may  be  asked, 
how  can  words,  so  evidently  addressed  to  Israel,  be  appropriated,  with  equal  truth, 
to  Jesus  Christ  ?  It  is  sufficient  to  say  that  He  was  the  epitome  and  personification 
of  all  that  was  noblest  and  divinest  in  Judaism.  When,  in  spite  of  all  that  they 
had  suffered  in  their  exile,  they  for  a  second  time  failed  to  realise  or  fulfil  their  great 
mission  to  the  world;  when  under  the  reign  of  Pharisee  and  Scribe  they  settled 
down  into  a  nation  of  legahsts,  casuists,  and  hair-splitting  ritualists — He  assumed 
the  responsibilities  which  they  had  evaded,  and  fulfilled  them  by  the  Gospel  He 
spoke  and  the  Chm:ch  He  formed.  In  the  mission  of  Jesus,  the  heart  of  Judaism 
unfolded  itself.  What  He  was  and  did,  the  whole  nation  ought  to  have  been  and 
done.  As  the  white  fiower  on  the  stalk.  He  revealed  the  essential  nature  of  the 
root.  {F.  B.  Meyer,  B.A.)  A  polished  shaft : — We  are  justified  in  referring 
this  paragraph  to  the  Lord  Jesus,  as  the  ideal  Servant  of  God.  And  we  may  get 
some  useful  teaching  as  to  the  conditions  of  the  loftiest  and  best  service  which, 
following  His  steps,  we  may  render  to  His  Father  and  our  Father.  I.  The  qttaupi- 
CATiONS  OF  THE  IDEAL  SERVANT.  1.  A  holy  motherhood.  "  The  Lord  hath  called 
me  from  the  womb."  The  greatest  and  best  of  men  have  confessed  their  indebted- 
ness to  their  mothers;  and  not  a  few  have,  without  doubt,  enshrined  in  their 
character,  and  wrought  out  in  their  life,  inspirations  which  had  thrilled  their 
mothers'  natmres  from  early  girlhood.  It  is  from  their  mothers  that  men  get  their 
souls.  To  make  a  man,  God  begins  with  his  mother.  Few  of  us  realise  the 
immense  importance  attaching  to  the  education  of  girls.  2.  Incisive  speech. 
"  He  hath  made  My  mouth  like  a  sharp  sword."  Speech  is  the  most  God-like 
faculty  in  man.  Christ  did  not  scruple  to  be  called  the  word  or  speech  of  God. 
This  regal  faculty  is  God's  chosen  organ  for  announcing  and  establishing  Hia 
kingdom  over  the  earth.  Our  mouth  must  be  surrendered  to  God,  that  He  may 
implanttherethe  sharp  two-edged  sword  that  proceeds  from  Hisownlips  (Rev.  i.  16). 


618  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xmx. 

3.  Seclusion.  "  In  the  shadow."  We  must  all  go  there  sometimes.  The  photo- 
graph of  God's  face  can  only  be  fixed  in  the  dark  chamber.  4.  Freed  from  rust. 
A  polished  shaft. ' '  Weapons  of  war  soon  deteriorate.  Rust  can  best  be  removed 
by  sand-paper  or  the  file.  Similarly  we  must  be  kept  bright  and  clean.  For  this 
purpose  God  uses  the  fret  of  daily  life,  the  chafe  of  small  annoyances,  the  wear 
and  tear  of  irritating  tempers  and  vexing  circumstances.  II.  Appakewt  failttre 
(ver.  4).  This  heart-break  seems  inevitable  to  God's  most  gifted  and  useful 
servants.  It  is  in  part  the  result  of  nervous  overstrain,  e.g.  Elijah  (1  Kings  xix.). 
But  in  part  it  results  from  the  expanding  compassion  of  the  soul.  There  are  three 
sources  of  consolation.  1.  That  failure  will  not  forfeit  the  bright  smile  of  the 
blaster's  welcome  nor  the  reward  of  His  judgment-seat.  He  judges  righteously; 
and  rewards,  not  according  to  results,  but  to  faithfulness.  2.  The  soul  leans  more 
heavily  upon  God.  "  My  God  is  become  My  strength  "  (ver.  5).  3.  We  tiirn  to 
prayer.  How  sweetly  God  refers  to  this,  saying,  "  In  an  acceptable  time  have  I 
answered  thee,  and  in  a  day  of  salvation  have  I  helped  thee  "  (ver.  8).  Thus  God 
deals  with  us  all.  He  is  compelled  to  take  us  to  the  back  side  of  the  desert,  where 
we  sit  face  to  face  with  the  wreck  of  our  fairest  hopes.  There  He  teaches  us,  as  He 
only  can,  weaning  us  from  creature-confidence,  and  taking  pride  from  our  hearts. 
III.  Ultimate  success.  When  Jesus  died,  failure  seemed  written  across  His  life- 
work.  But  that  very  Cross,  which  man  deemed  His  supreme  disgrace  and  dethrone- 
ment, has  become  the  stepping-stone  of  universal  dominion.  Thus  it  may  be  with 
some.  They  are  passing  through  times  of  barrenness,  and  disappointment,  and 
suffering.  But  let  them  remember  that  the  Lord  is  faithful  (ver.  7).  He  will  not 
suffer  one  word  to  fail,  one  seed  to  be  lost,  one  effort  to  prove  abortive,  one  life  to 
be  wasted.  (Ibid.)  Service  ;  call  and  qualifications  : — I.  The  call  to  the 
SERVICE  APPOINTED  US  OF  GoD.     "  The  Lord  hath  called  me  from  the  womb." 

1.  To  every  human  life  that  enters  the  world  there  is  a  special  call,  and  a  distinct 
sphere  of  duty.  Jeremiah  was  called  from  his  birth  (Jer.  i.  5),  and  so  was  St. 
Paul  (Gal.  i.  15).  These  are  types,  not  exceptions.  Their  call  teaches  us  that 
every  human  life  is  a  real  and  distinct  entity,  a  thing  complete  in  itself,  as  much 
so  to  the  eye  of  God  as  the  grandest  object  in  any  sphere  of  created  life.  Behind 
all  secondary  causes  there  is  a  design  and  a  purpose  to  each  separate  existence, 
which  gives  it  a  dignity,  and  makes  it  a  necessity  in  the  government  of  God.  This 
truth  is  not  one  easy  to  realise.  An  individual  is  so  insignificant  a  thing  among 
the  millions  inhabiting  the  surface  of  this  globe,  while  the  globe  itself  is  only  as  a 
grain  of  sand  on  the  seashore  beside  countless  other  worlds,  that  it  is  with  no 
mock  modesty  we  ask,  "  What  is  man,  that  Thou  art  mindful  of  him?  or  the  son  of 
man,  that  Thou  so  regardest  him?  "  This  is  true,  but  it  is  none  the  less  true  that 
each  individual  life  has  a  meaning  and  a  mission  in  the  plan  and  purpose  of  God; 
and  to  realise  this  is  no  unimportant  element  in  fitness  for  service.  Two  opposite 
errors  there  are  which  have  gone  far  to  ruin  countless  human  lives.  One  is  the 
overestimating  and  the  other  the  underestimating  our  importance  as  individuals. 

2.  The  question  naturally  arises,  how  is  the  Divine  call  to  be  discerned?  The 
natural  predilections  of  a  man  may,  to  some  extent,  be  taken  as  pointing  the  direction 
in  which  his  sphere  of  action  lies.  There  are,  besides,  his  aptitudes,  liis  special 
endowments.  There  is,  also,  the  concurrent  direction  of  circumstances.  Nor 
should  a  light  stress  be  laid  on  the  opinions  of  those  whose  experience  of  life,  and 
unbiassed  judgment,  qualify  them  to  give  sound  advice.  Nor  again,  should  the 
conscious  promptings  of  some  power  within  us,  compelling  us  to  face,  perhaps, 
an  unwelcome  prospect,  be  ignored.  But  at  no  crisis  in  life  is  humble,  submissive, 
patient,  trustful  waiting  upon  God  of  greater  importance  than  when  we  arc  respond- 
ing, definitely  and  finally,  to  the  call  of  circumstances,  of  inclinations,  and  of 
qualifications  in  the  choice  of  life's  sphere  of  duty.  "  Trust  in  the  Lord  with  all 
thine  heart,  and  lean  not  to  thine  own  understanding.  In  all  thy  ways  acknow- 
ledge Him,  and  He  shall  direct  thy  paths."  And  when  the  call  comes,  it  is  at 
our  peril  that  we  hesitate  to  obey  it.  II.  The  qualifications  for  it  (ver.  2). 
This  was  emphatically  true  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ.  'When,  in  the  fulness  of  time. 
He  was  revealed  to  the  world,  His  own  words  were,  "  I  came  not  to  bring  peace, 
but  a  sword."  Moreover,  in  the  apocalyptic  vision,  the  description  given  of  His 
ascended  and  enthroned  Majesty  is  that  of  one  "  out  of  whose  mouth  there  went  a 
sharp  two-edged  sword."  The  same  figure  is  also  apjUied  to  the  third  person  of  the 
Holy  Trinity,  of  whom  it  is  said,  that  the  "  sword  of  the  Spirit  is  the  Word  of  God  " 
— and  never  should  it  be  forgotten,  that  Bible  truth,  in  mind,  and  heart,  and 
life,  and  at  ready  command  for  use,  is  pre-eminently  the  instrument  of  power  for 


CHAP.  XLix.]  ISAIAH.  619 

effective  service.  Now  the  sword  is  the  symbol  of  authority,  as  well  as  of  war, 
and  is  intended  to  vindicate  the  true  as  well  as  to  slay  the  false.  For  this  we 
need,  not  only  a  sword,  but  a  sharp  sword.  There  are  great  and  vital  interests  to 
be  vindicated,  the  interests  of  truth,  and  of  humanity.  We  also  need  a  sword, 
and  a  sharp  sword,  to  cut  down  errors  and  abuses.  But  for  effective  service  we 
need  not  only  to  be  as  sharp  swords,  but  also  as  "  polished  shafts."  A  polished 
shaft  is  a  symbol  of  cultivated  gifts,  of  trained  endowments,  and  of  aggressive 
power  at  its  best.  The  call  and  the  gifts  come  from  God;  while  the  response  to 
that  call,  and  the  due  cultivation  and  employment  of  the  gifts  depend  upon  man, 
and  if  he  neglects  to  do  his  part,  what  can  his  life  be  but  a  disastrous  failure? 
Definiteness  of  purpose  is  an  essential  condition  of  success  in  earthly  affairs. 
Moreover,  in  all  true  service  there  must  be  the  element  of  sacrifice — not  merely 
the  sacrifice  of  time,  thought,  pleasure,  profit,  preference,  but,  above  all,  of  self. 
One  more  element  in  fitness  for  service  must  I  mention,  viz.,  that  moral  chivalry 
which  goes  by  the  name  of  didinterestedness.     (D.  Howell,  B.D.) 

Ver.  2.  And  He  hath  made  my  mouth  like  a  sharp  sword. — A  sharp  sword: 
— 1.  God  does  not  undo,  in  His  relationship  to  us  as  Re-creator,  the  work 
which  He  has  already  performed  as  Creator.  He  does  not  strip  us  of  our  natural 
faculties,  and  endow  us  with  others  altogether  distinct  from  these.  Our  natural 
faculties  are  in  themselves  neither  good  nor  bad,  but  in  every  case  are  capable 
of  development,  either  in  the  direction  of  good  or  of  evil.  When  first  the  grace 
of  God  finds  us,  the  powers  of  evil  have  more  or  less  infected  our  nature,  and 
most  of  our  faculties  (if  not  all  of  them)  have  exhibited  a  downward  inclination; 
our  members  have  become  "  instruments  of  unrighteousness,"  the  weapons  which 
Satan  has  used  to  do  his  own  fell  work.  It  is  upon  these  dishonoured  faculties 
that  God  lays  His  hand  when  He  enters  and  takes  possession  of  the  new-created 
soul.  What  He  demands  on  our  part  is,  that  these  members  should  be  sur- 
rendered to  Him,  as  they  formerly  were  to  the  powers  of  darkness.  2.  The  prophet 
here  speaks  of  one  important  faculty  which  exercises  an  influence  for  good  or 
evil  second  to  none  that  affects  society — the  tongue.  The  faculty  of  speech 
is  one  of  the  noblest  endowments  of  humanity,  distinguishing  us,  as  it  does,  from 
all  the  lower  animals,  rendering  social  life  possible,  and  binding  humanity  into 
one.  How  much  of  evil  originates  with  the  tongue !  And  yet  what  a  mighty 
engine  for  good  language  may  be!  Surely  God  has  put  no  small  honour  on 
human  speech  when  He  permits  His  own  Son  to  be  described  as  "  the  Word  " 
of  God.  3.  How  many  of  us  have  endeavoured  to  use  our  tongues  in  the  service 
of  God,  and  yet  our  efforts  have  been  singularly  weak  and  unsuccessful.  Let 
us  not  be  discouraged,  but  listen  to  this  word  of  power:  "  I  have  made  thy  mouth 
a  sharp  sword  " — sharp  no  longer  for  sarcasm  and  cutting  scorn.  The  withering 
scoff,  the  poisoned  slander,  the  bitter  reproach,  are  no  longer  to  proceed,  like 
a  sharp  two-edged  sword,  from  those  consecrated  lips  of  thine  ;  but,  if  thou 
wouldst  but  believe  it,  a  new  power  has  been  communicated,  in  virtue  of  which 
that  very  member,  which  was  of  old  so  keen-edged  a  weapon  in  the  hands  of 
the  destroyer,  is  now  to  be  equally  sharp  and  pointed  in  the  grasp  of  its  Divine 
Master.  But  have  we  yet  begun  to  be  discontented  with  our  want  of  sharp- 
ness? Are  we  ready  to  be  used  by  God  as  a  sharp  sword?  Have  we  counted 
the  cost  ?  Are  we  prepared  for  the  consequences  ?  If  we  are,  our  weakness  matters 
not.  God  can  use  us.  "  Fear  not,  thou  worm  Jacob ;  I  will  make  thee  a  sharp 
threshing  instrument,  having  teeth,  and  thou  shalt  break  in  pieces  the  mountains." 
How  many  of  our  well-meant  efforts  fail  for  want  of  teeth !  4.  What  is  required 
in  order  to  render  us  efficient  instruments  in  the  hands  of  God?  (1)  Definiteness 
of  purpose.  The  man  whose  mouth  is  a  sharp  sword  will  speak,  not  for  speaking's 
sake,  nor  to  ease  his  conscience,  but  to  reach  the  heart.  (2)  Incisiveness  of 
language.  Our  words  need  not  be  imgentle  nor  severe,  and  yet  they  may  be 
pointed.  (3)  Earnestness.  (4)  One  other  characteristic  will  be  embodied  in 
the  word  "  now."  The  man  who  speaks  for  God  will  ever  remember  that  "  the 
King's  business  requires  haste."  "The  Holy  Ghost  saith,  To-day";  and 
he  who  speaks  in  the  Spirit, will  speak  as  the  Spirit.  (W.  Hay  Aitken,  M.A.) 
A  sharp  sword  in  Ood's  hand: — Two  young  men  were  educated  together  in  an 
American  university.  The  one  was  possessed  of  very  considerable  talents,  and 
subsequently  became  the  popular  minister  of  a  large  and  fashionable  congrega- 
tion; the  other  was  a  man  of  humble  abilities,  but  possessed  by  an  ardent  desire 
to  win  souls,  and  therefore  ready  to  adapt  his  means  to  the  attainment  of  this 


620  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xlix. 

end.  Years  rolled  on,  and  the  popular  preacher  had  occasion  to  pay  a  visit  to 
the  parish  of  his  old  acquaintance.  After  witnessing  all  that  was  going  forward 
in  connection  with  his  friend's  congregation,  he  could  no  longer  repress  his 
astonishment.  "  I  cannot  understand  how  it  is,"  he  said,  "  that  everything 
in  your  district  and  congregation  seems  to  flourish.  Your  church  seems  full  or 
really  converted  souls.  The  number  of  your  communicants  is  astonishing,  and 
the  amount  of  work  that  seems  to  be  going  on  all  round  fills  me  with  amazement. 
How  can  it  be  that  I,  preaching  the  same  truth,  yet  see  scarcely  any  definite 
result  of  my  labours?  I  can  scarcely  point  to  any  who  have  been  turned  from 
darkness  to  light  as  the  result  of  my  ministry."  After  much  conversation,  his 
friend  requested  him  to  try  an  experiment.  "  Will  you,"  he  said,  "  take  one  of 
my  sermons  (which  in  style  and  composition  are  by  no  means  to  be  compared 
to  your  own),  and  deliver  it  to  your  own  flock?  Make  it  a  matter  of  prayer 
beforehand  that  God  will  make  use  of  it,  not  only  for  their  good,  but  as  a  lesson 
to  you  in  your  own  ministry,  if  it  is  intended  to  be  so.  Then  watch  the  results." 
He  agreed  to  do  so,  and  on  retiu-ning  to  his  flock,  delivered  with  much  feeling 
one  of  his  friend's  fervid  discourses.  The  effect  was  evident,  and  to  him  aston- 
ishing. It  was  clear  that  many  in  the  congregation  were  deeply  stirred  by  what 
they  had  been  listening  to.  At  the  conclusion  of  the  service  he  was  sent  for 
by  a  lady,  whom  he  found  remaining  behind  in  the  church,  in  a  state  of  con- 
siderable agitation.  "  If,"  she  exclaimed,  "  my  dear  sir,  what  I  have  heard 
from  you  to-day  is  true,  then  I  am  all  wrong!  "  "  My  dear  madam,"  he  replied, 
with  great  consternation,  "  what  is  the  matter?  I  hope  I  have  said  nothing 
that  has  hurt  your  feelings!  "  {Ibid.)  The  Word  of  God  as  a  sword: — I.  Be- 
cause it  pierceth  the  very  heart  (Acts  ii.  37,  vii.  54).  2.  Because  it  separateth 
between  virtue  and  vice,  by  teaching  what  is  good  and  what  is  evil.  3.  Because  it 
cutteth  off  sin,  by  the  threats  which  are  therein  contained  against  sinners,  and 
by  the  promises  which  are  thereby  made  to  those  who  forsake  sin.  4.  Because 
it  cuts  off  error  and  heresy  by  teaching  the  truth.  (W.  Day,  31. A.)  In  the 
shadow  of  His  hand  hath  He  hid  Me. — Seclusions: — These  words  refer  in 
the  first  place  to  Him  who  is  the  central  figure  of  all  prophecy,  the  coming  Messiah. 
Perhaps  they  point  to  His  pre-existent  state,  and  denote  the  concealment  of 
the  Eternal  Word  before  it  was  made  flesh.  Or  the  words  may  contain  an  allusion 
to  certain  aspects  and  experiences  of  Christ's  earthly  history,  and  notably  the 
first  thirty  years  of  it.  What  holds  good  with  regard  to  the  Master,  holds  good 
also  with  regard  to  the  servants.  As  He  was  in  this  world,  so  are  they.  It  is  not 
so  much  the  expression  of  a  general  and  abiding  relationship  we  have  here,  as 
of  a  special  and  occasional  experience.  Every  believer  lies  locked  in  the  closed 
hand  of  God,  nor  shall  any  pluck  him  out  of  it.  But  it  is  not  of  a  hiding  such 
as  this  that  the  text  speaks.  It  is  rather  of  what  is  temporary  and  repeated. 
What,  then,  are  some  of  the  ideas  involved  in  the  special  figiu-e  of  the  text  ? 
I.  We  have  God's  love  brought  before  us  as  an  influence  to  preserve  and 
PROTECT.  And  it  preserves  us  in  a  special  way,  it  protects  us  through  a  special 
process — by  withdrawal.  That,  of  course,  is  not  always  God's  plan.  He  has 
other  ways  of  arranging  in  providence  for  the  safety  of  His  people,  than  by  remov- 
ing them  from  the  sphere  of  their  danger.  When  opposition  threatens  or  tempta- 
tion assails.  He  may  keep  men  face  to  face  with  the  foes  that  encompass,  and 
seek  to  educate  and  to  strengthen  them  by  the  process.  At  such  times  as  these 
they  are  called  to  comport  themselves  as  good  soldiers  of  Christ.  But  at  other 
times  it  is  not  incitement  that  the  Christian  needs,  nor  the  strength  that  enables 
him  to  do  and  to  dare.  It  is  shelter,  screening,  quiet,  and  removal.  And  when 
such  seasons  are  needed,  they  are  given.  And  what  a  hand  it  is  to  retreat  to! 
Think  of  all  that  the  Scripture  reveals  to  us  of  its  power.  II.  The  text  leads  us 
to  think  of  God's  care  as  a  preparing  influence.  It  trains,  as  well  as  pro- 
tects. He  quenches  not  the  smoking  flax;  on  the  contrary,  He  fosters  and  fans 
it.  And  for  this  end  He  covers  it  with  the  shadow  of  His  arched  hand,  till  it 
brightens  from  a  smouldering  spark  to  a  clear  and  steady  flame.  Sometimes 
these  seasons  of  concealment  take  place  at  the  beginning  of  a  man's  life-work. 
Take  Paul,  the  newly-converted.  When  the  due  time  came,  and  study  and 
seclusion,  meditation  and  silence,  had  accomplished  their  work,  the  hand  was 
unclosed,  the  shadow  was  withdrawn.  God  drew  the  shaft  He  had  polished  from 
its  quiver,  and  Paul  came  forth  from  his  retreat,  ready  to  do  and  to  speak,  to 
suffer  and  to  dare  for  the  cause  of  Christ.  And  what  happens  at  the  outset  of 
a  believer's  life,  happens  often  in  its  course;  and  many  an  active  Christian  life 


CHAP.  XLix.]  ISAIAH  621 

has  been  cleft  in  twain  by  the  silence  and  the  pause  it  imposes.  There  is  a  special 
illustration  in  the  history  of  Luther.  The  man  had  attained  the  very  climax 
of  his  immense  activities.  The  nations  had  wakened  from  the  sleep  of  ages  at 
the  thunder  of  his  lips.  Hither  and  thither  he  had  been  moving;  here  attacking, 
there  defending,  yonder  restraining.  And  now  every  nerve  was  strung  to  tense- 
ness by  the  strain,  every  faculty  wrought  to  fever  in  the  whirl.  And  what  does 
God  do  with  him  ?  He  suddenly  bears  him  off  out  of  view,  takes  him  from  pulpit 
and  from  councils,  hushes  and  encloses  him  in  the  Wartburg,  and  leaves  him 
there  in  imprisonment  and  isolation  for  a  time.  Had  God  no  piu-pose  in  view,  in 
thus  plunging  His  servant  into  the  darkness  awhile — apart  from  the  work  that 
he  loved  so  well?  Assuredly  He  had.  The  Church  of  Christ  was  all  the  better 
of  this  temporary  withdrawal  of  its  one  outstanding  defender.  It  was  reminded 
thereby  that  the  cause  was  God's  and  not  man's.  And  it  was  taught  that  the. 
cause  could  go  on,  though  the  man  who  was  its  agent  was  removed.  Luther 
himself  was  all  the  better  of  the  discipline  too.  And  when  Luther  emerged  from 
the  shadow,  in  God's  good  time,  to  achieve  and  withstand,  to  struggle  and  to 
conquer,  once  more,  he  did  so  as  a  stronger,  because  a  wiser  and  a  calmer  man. 
And  a  year's  or  a  month's  time  spent  in  quiet  waiting  in  the  shadow  of  His  hand, 
may  do  more  to  ripen  the  soul  for  its  future  existence  with  Himself  than  half-a- 
century  of  busy  labour  amidst  the  outward  activities  of  life.  The  believer  passes 
from  the  sphere  of  active  work  to  the  sphere  of  quiet  waiting,  that  the  discipline 
of  service  may  be  supplemented  by  the  discipline  of  submission,  and  the  God 
of  peace  be  enabled  through  the  training  to  sanctify  him  wholly.  The  shadow 
where  the  life  disappears  is  only  the  shadow  of  the  hand.  And  when  the  hand 
is  unclosed  on  the  other  side  death,  the  light  it  has  covered  will  be  found  to  be 
all  the  more  steady  and  brilliant  for  the  discipline,  and  shall  shine  in  God's  holy 
place,  as  the  stars  in  the  firmament,  for  ever  and  for  ever.  III.  Pass  from  the 
protecting  and  preparing  influences  of  God's  hand,  to  its  chastening.  For  you 
have  the  idea  here  not  only  of  isolation,  but  of  pressure;  pressure  and  pain.  It 
does  not  always  lie  gently  round  about  us,  this  hand  of  God.  There  are  times 
when  it  contracts  more  tightly,  darkens  more  deeply,  impinges  ihore  closely. 
And  it  does  so  in  many  ways — does  so  even  when  we  are  least  ready  to 
realise  the  source  whence  the  pressm-e  arises.  If  ever  a  Christian  is  tempted 
to  think  his  trials  come  from  another  source  than  the  wise  and  tender  Father- 
hood of  God,  it  is  when  they  shape  themselves  in  the  words  and  deeds  of  sinful 
men.  Yet  the  shadow  which  they  cast  on  the  life  is  only  the  shadow  of  the 
hand,  and  the  pain  the  experience  gives  us  only  its  contracting  pressure. 
And  of  other  trials  than  these,  it  is  still  the  same.  There  are  complications 
of  adversity  at  times  so  persistent  and  perplexing  that  they  almost  seem 
to  argue  the  operation  of  some  malignant  fate.  You  are  in  dark  places? 
But  it  is  only  the  shadow  of  the  hand.  Lie  quiet,  and  bear  it  as  well  as 
you  can.  And  He  who  at  present  contracts  BUs  hand  will  in  due  time  open  it, 
and  set  you  in  a  large  room  once  more.  IV.  The  text  speaks  of  the  individ- 
ualising influence  of  God's  care.  While  I  rest  in  the  shadow  of  the  hand, 
God  of  course  has  the  whole  of  me;  but  there  is  another  side  to  the  relationship: 
I  have  the  whole  of  God.  V.  The  text  reminds  us  of  the  hand  of  God  in  its 
KEMOviNG  influences.  When  lover  and  friend  are  put  far  away  from  us,  and 
our  acquaintance  are  hid  in  darkness,  they  are  only  removed  by  the  same  loving 
hand,  and  covered  awhile  in  its  shadow,  but  blessed  and  safe  where  they  rest, 
awaiting  the  adoption,  to  wit,  the  redemption  of  the  body.  And  what  of  the 
body  itself?  {W.  A.  Gray.)  A  polished  shaft. — A  polished  shaft: — I.  The 
prophet  speaks  of  the  servant  of  the  Lord  under  the  figure  of  a  polished  shatt. 
There  are  not  wanting  some  who,  in  their  eagerness  to  deliver  their  souls,  and 
to  be  faithful  to  their  responsibilities,  outstep  the  limits  of  Christian  courtesy. 
They  have  their  own  blvmt  way  of  working  for  God,  and  they  are  disposed  to 
flatter  themselves  that  it  is  the  best  way,  because  it  is  most  in  accordance  with 
their  own  natural  dispositions;  but  the  Lord  seeks  polished  shafts  for  His  quiver. 
No  sword  was  ever  so  sharpened  as  were  the  words  of  Jesus;  and  yet  how  gentle 
He  was,  how  considerate!  But,  you  say,  we  have  all  our  natural  peculiarities, 
and  we  must  continue  to  be  what  nature  has  made  us.  Not  so,  my  dear  brother. 
Thou  art  to  be  perfected  by  grace,  not  by  nature.  Cut  a  rough  stick  from  a 
hedge:  if  it  be  tolerably  straight,  and  a  spike  be  stuck  in  the  end  of  it,  it  may 
serve,  on  an  emergency,  in  the  place  of  an  arrow  at  a  short  range.  But  every 
little  notch,  every  distinguishing  peculiarity,  of  that  rough  stick  is  an  impedi* 


622  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xux. 

ment  to  its  flight.  We  need  not  fear  for  the  skill  of  the  Great  Archer  who  keeps 
His  saints  in  His  quiver;  but  we  must  remember  that  when  we  assert  oiu*  natural 
peculiarities  of  disposition,  instead  of  siurendering  ourselves  to  Him  to  be  polished 
according  to  His  will,  the  fault  is  ours,  not  His,  if  we  miss  the  mark.  We  have 
no  right  to  be  content  with  doing  the  Lord's  work  in  a  "  rough  and  ready,"  bung- 
ling, clumsy  fashion,  effecting  perhaps  a  little  good  and  a  great  deal  of  harm.  "  He 
that  wins  souls  is  wise  ";  he  that  seeks  merely  to  relieve  his  own  conscience  can 
afford  to  do  things  in  a  blundering  way.  What  does  it  matter  to  him,  so  long 
as  it  is  done?  But  surely  if  the  work  is  to  produce  its  proper  effect,  we  need 
much  tact,  much  delicacy  of  feeling,  much  tenderness  of  sympathy;  we  need 
to  learn  when  to  hold  our  tongues,  and  when  to  speak.  It  is  quite  true  that 
God  may  bless  our  very  blunders  when  He  sees  they  are  committed  with  true 
sincerity  of  piu-pose,  and  arise  rather  from  ignorance  and  bad  taste  than  from 
wilful  carelessness;  but  that  does  not  warrant  us  in  continuing  to  blunder,  still 
less  in  regarding  our  blunders  as  almost  meritorious,  and  reflecting  self-com- 
placently  that  it  is  "  our  way  of  working."  We  shrink  from  the  polishing  process; 
but  He  who  desires  to  see  us  so  polished  that  we  shall  reflect  His  own  glory,  not 
exhibit  ouir  own  peculiarities,  will  take  care  that  the  means  for  oiu:  polishing  are 
forthcoming.  It  is  by  friction  that  the  arrow  is  polished,  and  it  is  by  friction 
that  our  idiosyncrasies  are  to  be  worn  away.  This  friction  is  provided  in  different 
ways.  Perhaps  it  will  be  suppMed  by  failures  and  disappointments,  until,  like 
Gideon  of  old,  we  are  ready  to  say,  "  If  the  Lord  be  with  us,  why  is  it  thus  with 
us?"  Perhaps  it  will  besuppUed  by  the  violent  and  bitter  antagonism  which  our 
inconsiderate  roughness  and  unwisdom  has  stirred  in  the  hearts  of  those  whom 
we  seek  to  benefit.  Sometimes  it  is  provided  in  our  common  intercourse  with 
others,  not  unfrequently  in  our  intercoiurse  with  fellow- Christians.  Possibly  He 
may  subject  us  to  the  severest  discipline  of  trial  before  the  work  of  polishing 
is  complete;  but  polished  in  one  way  or  another  the  shafts  must  be  which  He 
is  to  use  for  His  own  glory.  II.  The  shaft  is  polished  only  to  be  hidden. 
It  might  seem  that  when  once  the  process  of  polishing  had  been  completed,  the 
arrow  would  be  a  proper  object  for  display,  and  here  is  a  peril  which  even  polished 
shafts  are  exposed  to.  There  is  so  much  of  the  beauty  of  the  Lord  impressed 
upon  some  of  His  servants,  that  men  cannot  withhold  their  admiration.  Chris- 
tians are  lavish  of  their  love,  and  there  are  hidden  perils  concealed  under  this 
favourable  esteem.  Sharpened  and  polished,  how  apt  are  we  to  display  our- 
selves, even  as  the  Assyrian  axe  of  old  "  boasted  against  him  who  hewed  there- 
with." "  But,"  says  the  great  apostle  (himself  a  polished  and  sharpened  arrow), 
"  we  preach  not  ourselves,  but  Christ  Jesus  the  Lord."  And  so  it  is  that  the 
polished  shaft  has  to  be  hidden.  Yovir  attention  is  not  directed  to  the  arrow 
while  it  is  waiting  to  be  used;  it  is  concealed  within  the  quiver.  The  eye  is  not 
caught  by  it  when  it  is  in  the  hand;  it  is  hidden  under  the  shadow  of  the  hand. 
Another  moment,  it  rests  on  the  bow;  another  moment,  and  it  speeds  to  the 
mark.  Neither  in  the  quiver,  nor  in  the  hand,  nor  on  the  bow,  nor  in  its  flight, 
is  the  arrow  conspicuous.  The  more  swiftly  it  flies,  the  more  invisible  it  is.  Thus 
the  archer  wins  all  the  applause,  and  the  arrow  is  nothing;  yet  it  is  by  the  arrow 
that  he  has  done  his  work.  And  while  man  is  not  attracted  to  the  arrow,  the 
great  Archer  Himself  is.  It  is  upon  it  that  He  bends  His  eye.  It  is  to  it  that 
He  gives  the  credit  of  the  victory:  "  Thou  art  My  servant,  0  Israel,  in  whom 
I  will  be  glorified."  Yes,  there  is  a  special  joy  in  His  heart  when  He  can  truly 
say  of  us,  "  Thou  art  My  servant."  How  near  we  are  to  His  sacred  Person  when 
we  are  thus  hidden  in  God's  hand,  concealed  in  His  quiver!  And  how  much 
truer  and  deeper  the  joy  of  such  service  than  the  momentary  excitement  of 
human  applause!  And  then  the  thought  that  it  is  possible  for  God  to  be  glorified 
in  us  as  the  archer  is  glorified  in  the  arrow,  that  the  intelligences  of  heaven  shall 
gaze  down  and  admire  the  work  that  God  hath  wrought  by  instruments  once 
so  unpromising,  and  shall  praise  Him  for  it;  that  men  on  earth  shall  be  con- 
strained to  admit  that  this  is  the  finger  of  God,  and  to  take  knowledge  of  us  that 
we  have  been  with  Jesus;  that  the  devils  in  hell  shall  recognise  in  our  lives  the 
presence  of  Omnipotence,  and  tremble  as  they  see  the  mighty  Archer  draw  us  from 
the  hiding-place  within  the  quiver!  "Hidden  in  God's  hand!  "  Hidden  from 
the  grasp  of  Satan.  He  fain  would  snatch  us  out  of  God's  keeping;  but  his 
hostflo  hand  can  never  touch  those  who  are  concealed  in  God's  quiver.  Hidden 
from  the  desecrating  touch  of  the  world  to  which  we  no  longer  belong.  Hidden 
above  all  from  ourselves — our  morbid  self-consciousness,  our  inflated  self-esteem. 


CHAP,  xux.]  ISAIAH,  623 

our  gloomy  self- depression.  {W.  Hay  Aitlcen,  M.A.)  The  pride  that  apea 
humUity: — I  remember  once  overhearing  the  remark  from  the  lips  of  one  whom 
long  experience  and  keen  observation  had  taught  more  of  the  subtlety  of  the 
human  heart  than  most  men  ever  discern:  "  Ah,  my  dear  brother,  the  truth 
is  that  we  are  all  full  of  self;  only  some  of  us  have  the  good  taste  not  to  show  it, 
and  some  have  not."  The  words  may  appear  almost  cynical,  but  a  little  reflection 
will  show  us  how  true  they  are.  {Ihid. )  A  polished  arrow: — Mark  Guy  Pearse 
says  that  the  crest  for  the  Lord's  worker  is  "  an  arrow  "  polished  and  feathered, 
content  to  be  in  the  quiver  until  the  Master  uses  it;  lying  on  the  string  for  His 
unerring  fingers  to  send  it  forth,  then  going  strong,  swift,  sure,  smiting  through 
the  heart  of  the  King's  enemies,  and  with  this  for  the  motto,  "  I  fly  where  I  am 
sent." 

Vers.  3,  4.  And  said  unto  me,  Thou  art  My  servant. — The  service  of  man 
the  manifestation  of  God's  highest  glory  : — How  numerous  are  God's  servants! 
All  things  in  heaven  and  upon  earth,  all  worlds,  all  elements,  and  all  creatures 
are  His  servants,  which  obey  His  word,  and  declare  His  greatness  and  glory. 
But  of  all  God's  servants  in  this  world  man  ranks  highest,  and  through  his  service 
God  is  glorified  in  a  sense  that  He  could  not  be  glorified  through  the  service  of 
any  other  creature.  Israel  was  God's  servant  in  a  pre-eminent  sense,  whether 
the  word  bo  taken  to  mean  the  nation  as  God's  chosen  people  or  an  individual 
as  God's  messenger  to  do  His  will.  But  the  ideal  of  God's  servant  in  this  book 
was  realised  only  in  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ.  Man  appears  greatest  when  he  serves, 
and  there  is  no  way  to  true  greatness  but  through  service.  And  God  appears 
greatest  when  He  condescends  to  serve.  The  Son  of  God  looks  more  Divine 
on  the  Cross  of  His  humiUation  than  on  the  throne  of  His  glory,  for  on  the  Cross 
that  which  was  deepest  in  His  nature  became  visible.  And  it  may  be  said  that 
in  every  good  man  God  becomes  incarnate,  and  takes  upon  Himself  the  form 
of  a  servant,  and  by  so  doing  bestows  upon  him  the  highest  greatness.  God 
says  to  every  one  of  His  faithful  children,  "  Thou  art  My  servant,  in  whom  I 
will  be  glorified."  The  way  to  glorify  God  is  by  serving  man.  I.  What  is  meant 
BY  God's  gloey?  With  glory  we  associate  the  ideas  of  purity,  beauty,  and 
BubUmity;  and  God's  glory  is  the  energetic  expression  of  His  hoUness  in  all  His 
works,  in  myriad  different  forms  and  ways.  II.  The  service  of  man  as  the 
MANIFESTATION  OF  God's  HIGHEST  GLORY.  Man  has  been  created  for  the  revelation 
of  the  highest  glory  of  the  Divine  nature,  and  when  he  serves  God  faithfully, 
God  breaks  forth  into  glory  in  his  character  and  work.  This  is  the  glory  of  His 
moral  attributes,  the  glory  of  His  love,  mercy,  compassion,  and  tenderness,  which 
is  infinitely  greater  than  all  the  glory  of  the  material  universe.  You  can  never 
learn  the  character  of  God  from  the  facts  of  nature,  any  more  than  you  can  learn 
the  character  of  the  artist  from  his  paintings,  of  the  architect  from  the  buUdings 
he  has  planned,  or  of  the  builder  from  his  work.  In  every  gentle  and  kind  word 
spoken  to  the  afflicted,  in  every  look  of  compassion,  in  every  tear  of  sympathy, 
and  in  every  deed  of  kindness,  God  breaks  into  glory  that  would  make  you  tremble 
and  adore  if  you  were  spiritual  enough  to  see  it.  How  the  Divine  glory  shone 
in  the  hfe  of  the  apostle  Paul !  In  a  dark  age,  when  the  superstition  of  the  Papacy 
covered  the  land,  God  called  Martin  Luther,  and  said,  "  Thou  art  My  servant, 
in  whom!  will  be  glorified."  And  in  Rowlands,  Whitefield,  Wesley,  and  others, 
God's  glory  broke  forth  in  a  similar  manner.  In  the  only-begotten  Son  was 
revealed  the  glory  of  God  as  the  Eternal  Father  (John  i.  14).  Before  the  same 
glory  shines  forth  in  us  we  must  become  something  more  than  professed  Christians, 
we  must  become  Christ's.  (Z.  Mather.)  God's  servants : — Painters,  poets, 
and  musicians  are  God's  servants,  and  in  their  masterly  productions  the  Divine 
glory  bursts  forth.  Raphael  was  God's  servant,  and  in  the  Transfiguration 
God's  glory  broke  forth.  Handel  was  God's  servant,  and  in  his  Mcfisiah 
God's  glory  broke  forth.  Milton  was  God's  servant,  and  in  his  Paradise  Lost 
the  Divine  glory  majestically  broke  forth.  Statesmen,  reformers,  and  philan- 
thropists are  also  God's  servants,  and  He  says  to  each  one  of  them,  "  Thou  art 
My  servant,  in  whom  I  will  be  glorified."  But  the  shining  of  the  Divine  glory 
is  not  confined  to  the  highly  gifted,  but  breaks  forth  in  those  who  faithfully  serve 
God  in  obscure  spheres  of  labour,  unnoticed  by  the  world.  (Ibid.)  The  three' 
fold  experience  of  Christ : — I.  The  consciousness  of  a  high  vocation.  "  He 
said  unto  Me,  Thou  art  My  servant,"  &c.  Just  as  the  words,  "  Out  of  Egypt 
have  I  called  My  son,"  never  found  their  full  significance  until  they  were  applied 


524  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xlix. 

to  God's  greater  Son,  so  the  name  "  Israel "  was  never  fulfilled  finally  in  Jacob, 
who  first  Bore  it,  nor  even  in  the  nation  that  has  borne  it  after  him,  but  has  found 
it^  ultimate  fulfilment  in  Him  who  is  pre-eminently  a  "  Prince  with  God,"  and 
our  Prince,  because  He  is  our  Saviour.  We  have,  therefore,  here  a  prediction 
of  the  consciousness  of  a  high  mission  which  possessed  the  Christ,  and  brought 
Him  to  this  world  of  ours.  Some  of  us  will  never  forget  the  day  when  we  were 
conscious  for  the  first  time  of  the  inspiring  fact  that  God  had  spoken  to  us,  and 
through  that  experience  of  ours  we  may  be  able — as,  indeed,  the  prophet  through 
his  experience  was  supremely  able — to  understand  something  of  the  ecstasy 
with  which  Christ,  conscious  of  His  glorious  mission,  came  to  this  world  of  ours. 
It  was  that  that  Christ  remembered  throughout  His  life,  and  it  was  that  which 
sustained  Him  throughout  His  personal  ministry  in  the  face  of  opposition  and 
discouragement  of  every  kind.  He  knew  that  He  was  doing  His  Father's  will, 
and  it  was  this  consciousness  that  found  expression  in  the  prayer  which  He  uttered 
on  the  eve  of  His  great  passion,  "  I  have  finished  the  work  which  Thou  gavest 
Me  to  do."  It  was  this  assurance,  too,  that  He  sought  to  gi\e  to  His  disciples  as 
the  mainspring  of  all  their  heroism.  "  As  the  Father  hath  sent  Me,  even  so 
send  I  you."  "  Israel,  in  whom  I  will  be  glorified."  Scholars  are  divided  here 
in  opinion.  Some  say  that  this  ought  to  be  translated,  "  In  whom  I  will  burst 
forth  into  glory."  This  is  a  translation  that  charms  me.  Jesus  was  indeed 
"  the  effulgence  "  of  the  Father's  glory — the  shining  forth  of  the  light  which 
had  ever  been  the  light,  but  which  would  have  been  largely  invisible  to  man 
apart  from  the  Incarnation.  Then  there  is  the  other  translation,  "  In  whom 
I  will  beautify  " — or  "  glorify  " — "  Myself."  In  harmony  with  this  Jesus  ex- 
claimed near  the  close  of  His  life,  "  Father  .  .  .  glorify  Thy  Son,  that  Thy  Son 
also  may  glorify  Thee."  Did  not  the  Son  glorify  the  Father  by  the  very  out- 
burst of  light  which  distinguished  His  life  among  men  ?  11.  The  consciousness 
OF  APPARENT  FAiLTTBE.  I  have  laboured  in  vain,  I  have  spent  my  strength 
for  nought  and  in  vain."  We  trace  this  consciousness  at  times  even  in  the  Master 
in  Gospel  story.  His  disappointment  in  the  face  of  human  unbelief.  His  sorrow 
over  human  sinfulness  and  ingratitude,  the  apparent  waste  of  the  JDivinest  life 
that  was  ever  lived  among  men  in  precept  and  example — these  weighed  heavily 
upon  Him.  In  this  respect,  as  in  many  others.  He  was  touched  with  the  feeling 
of  our  infirmity.  III.  The  assttbance  of  final  vindication.  "  Yet  surely 
My  judgment  is  with  the  Lord,  and  My  recompense  with  My  God."  In  other 
words.  He  knows  the  motives  which  have  prompted  Me,  and  what  led  Me  on 
step  by  step.  Whether  life  be  a  failure  or  not,  whether  My  self-sacrifice  appear 
fruitless  or  not,  He  knows  what  is  the  root  of  all.  Yea,  I  know  more  than  that 
— I  know  not  only  that  He  will  vindicate  Me  and  the  motives  which  prompted 
Me ;  but  I  also  know  that  My  work  must  find  its  reward ;  that  all  that  is  apparent 
failure  is  only  apparent;  that  My  toil  must  bring  forth  fruit — "  Surely  .  .  . 
My  work  is  with  My  God  "  (or,  according  to  the  R.V.,  "  My  recompense  is  with 
My  God  ").  Here  again  there  is  the  double  meaning,  and  therefore  a  special 
wealth  of  significance.  The  word  denotes  more  than  the  "  work,"  and  more 
than  the  "  recompense."  It  denotes  the  work  and  its  result;  all  that  the  work 
meant:  the  toil  of  saving  men,  and  the  reward  of  seeing  them  saved.  Thus 
the  Christ  Himself,  amidst  aU  the  ignominy  and  anguish  of  the  Cross  and  Passion, 
fell  back  upon  the  assurance  of  the  Father's  fijial  vindication.  These,  then, 
being  pre-eminently  the  words  of  the  world's  Redeemer,  are  siurely  an  example 
and  an  inspiration  to  us  to  follow  His  example.     {D.  Davies.) 

Ver.  4.  Then  I  said,  I  have  laboured  In  vain. — Christ  in  prophecy : — 
These  prophetic  sayings  go  to  Christ,  not  outside  of  and  separate  from  man's 
struggle,  but  in  and  through  it.  As  all  true  Christians  are  living  over  again, 
in  an  imperfect  way,  the  details  of  Christ's  own  experience,  so  were  all  true  godly 
men,  before  His  coming,  feeling  their  way  into  it,  being  guided  by  Christ's  spirit, 
and  having  the  throb  of  His  life,  which  is  the  life  of  God,  already  palpitating 
in  then:  bosoms.  {J.  Ker,  D.D.)  The  complaint  for  frustrated  aims: — These 
words  bring  before  us  a  feeling  that  belongs  to  the  human  heart  in  all  places  and 
times — the  complaint  of  man  for  frustrated  aims.  It  is  not  easy  to  say  in  what 
distinct  form  it  is  present  to  the  mind  of  the  original  speaker  here.  Sometimes 
he  appears  to  express  the  feeling  as  his  own  personal  experience — a  man  among 
his  fellow-men — and  sometimes  he  seems  to  personifv  the  nation  to  which  he 
belongs.     Probably  both  are  struggling  together  in  his  heart.     The  people  of 


CHAP,  xux.]  ISAIAH.  525 

his  race  were  selected  by  God  for  a  great  purpose — to  hold  up  His  name  and 
knowledge  pure  and  unsullied  in  the  midst  of  the  world's  defections.  But  the 
purpose  is,  for  the  while,  an  apparent  failure.  The  world  has  corrupted  those 
who  should  have  purified  it,  and  God's  judgment  has  fallen  on  their  unfaithful- 
ness till  they  are  scattered  among  the  heathen  and  ready  to  perish.  It  seems 
as  if  Israel's  history  were  labour  in  vain.  For  himself,  the  prophet  thought 
that  he  had  been  chosen  to  bring  back  his  people  to  the  way  of  truth  and  i-ight- 
eousness.  But  the  people  have  erred,  the  prophet  has  failed,  and  he  speaks 
both  for  himself  and  for  the  best  part  of  the  nation,  the  true  Israel  of  the  Covenant. 
(Ibid.)  Apparent  failure: — I.  Sorrow  for  the  failttre  of  labour.  In 
thinking  of  this  we  may  go  down  to  a  still  lower  stage  than  that  from  which  these 
words  sprang  in  the  heart  of  this  man  of  God.  The  complaint  is  made  by  many 
who  have  never  sympathised  with  his  high  aim  or  shared  in  his  Divine  work. 
1.  Take  the  first  of  the  two  great  objects  that  call  man  to  labour — the  gratification 
of  self .  How  few  prizes  are  drawn  for  the  many  blanks!  When  some  one  spoke 
to  Napoleon  of  his  Italian  campaign,  and  asked  if  that  marvellous  part  of  his 
career  did  not  give  him  exquisite  pleasure,  he  replied:  "  It  did  not  give  me  one 
moment  of  peace.  Life  was  only  incessant  strife  and  solicitude.  The  inevitable 
battle  of  the  morrow  might  annihilate  all  memory  of  the  victory  of  to-day." 
We  may  call  to  mind  the  saying  of  poor  Keats  when  dying:  "  I  have  written 
my  name  in  water  ";  nor  would  it  probably  have  comforted  him  much  more  at 
that  time  to  think  he  had  engraved  it  in  marble.  Even  affection  and  sympathy 
— how  often  are  they  not  reciprocated,  or  returned  with  ingratitude,  or  felt  to 
be  not  of  the  deep  kind  the  heart  had  yearned  for!  2.  The  second  is  God  and  the 
good  of  His  world.  The  higher  a  man's  idea  of  what  the  condition  of  the  world 
should  be — of  what  a  reign  of  righteousness  and  happiness  there  might  be  if 
Grod  had  His  due  place — the  more  likely  is  he  to  be  depressed  at  times  by  the 
view  of  things  around  him,  and  the  slow  way  in  which  all  our  effort  is  bringing 
us  to  the  goal.  II.  Some  of  the  temptations  to  which  this  sorrow  for  the 
FAXLTXRE  OF  LABOXTR  IS  SUBJECT.  1.  Take  first,  again,  that  class  of  men  who 
have  set  before  them  in  Mfe  some  personal  object,  and  have  been  disappointed 
in  it.  The  great  temptation  in  such  cases  is  to  brood  over  and  magnify  their 
disappointment.  2.  Then,  as  to  those  who  have  a  higher  aim  in  life  than  any 
mere  personal  one — who  are  truly  seeking  the  glory  of  God  and  the  good  of  their 
fellow-men — they  have  also  their  temptations  under  failure.  We  are  so  ready 
to  judge  of  the  plan  of  the  world  by  our  own  little  share  in  it,  and  to  think  all 
the  war  is  lost  when  our  small  detachment  suffers  a  check.  III.  The  resource 
WB  HAVE  IN  THE  MIDST  OF  THIS  SORROW  FOR  FAILURE.  "  Yet  surely  my  judg- 
ment la  with  the  Lord,  and  my  work  with  my  God."  There  are  two  things  this 
speaker  fixes  upon,  and  they  are  a  powerful  stay  if  we  can  bring  them  as  clearly 
and  confidently  to  Grod  as  he  did.  "  My  judgment  is  with  the  Lord."  I  can 
appeal  to  His  decision  for  the  character  of  my  motive.  It  was,  so  far  as  I  knew 
it,  pure  and  true.  "  My  work  is  with  my  God."  I  can  cast  on  His  decision  the 
result  of  my  labour.  I  do  not  say  that  any  mere  man  can  do  this  with  a  perfect 
assurance  that  all  is  right  with  him,  and  that  He  who  searches  the  hearts,  and 
tries  the  reins,  can  absolve  him  as  faultless ;  but  I  do  say  that  there  are  men  who, 
by  the  grace  of  God,  can  appeal  to  God  Himself  for  the  sincerity  of  their  aim. 
Let  us  see  how  it  should  influence  both  the  classes  we  have  been  considering. 
\.  Those  men  who  have  been  seeking  some  personal  object  in  life,  and  have 
failed  in  it,  may  learn  much  here.  Let  us  take  it  for  granted  that  there 
was  nothing  sinful  in  your  aim,  and  that  you  did  not  wish  for  any  good, 
inconsistent  with  the  rights  and  the  happiness  of  your  fellow-creatures.  It 
seems  very  hard  to  you  that  you  should  be  denied  what  many  of  them  enjoy, 
and  you  can  scarcely  help  comparing  your  lot  with  theirs,  with  a  sense  of 
bitterness,  at  least  of  regret.  Here  is  a  more  excellent  way  of  it.  Instead  of 
putting  your  life  beside  theirs,  refer  yourself  to  God's  judgment.  If  you  can 
put  the  case  truly  before  the  Judge  and  Controller  of  life,  you  may  find  some- 
thing in  your  Ufe  to  correct,  and  something  also  that  will  give  comfort.  May 
it  not  be  that  you  have  been  making  the  aim  of  your  Mfe  too  narrow,  even  as 
it  concerns  your  own  welfare?  You  have  been  thinking,  perhaps,  of  worldly 
position  and  acknowledgment,  more  than  of  the  building  up  of  your  character 
in  what  is  true  and  pure  and  godlike — more  of  your  outward  than  of  your  inward 
and  real  Ufe.  These  failures  may  be  to  teach  you  to  begin  again,  and  to  aim 
at  a  wider  basement  and  a  higher  top-stone — to  take  into  your  edifice  the  soul' a 


626  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xlix. 

interests,  and  to  let  its  front  look  Godward  and  heavenward.  And  you  have 
been  making,  perhaps,  the  aim  of  your  life  too  narrow  as  it  concerns  your  fellow- 
men.  You  have  made  self  too  exclusive.  If  you  come,  after  all  the  failures 
of  life,  in  this  submissive  spirit  to  God  for  His  judgment,  He  will  give  you  not  only 
means  of  correction,  but  comfort.  Though  you  may  have  lost  what  you  once 
reckoned  the  good  of  life,  there  is  another  and  higher  good  still  open  to  you,  not 
merely  hereafter,  but  here.  God  can  teach  you  how  to  build  on  the  ruins  of  former 
hopes — nay.  He  can  show  you  how  you  may  take  the  very  stones  of  them  that 
have  fallen  and  lie  scattered  around,  and  may  joint  them  into  a  new  and  most 
beautiful  and  enduring  structure.  You  may  never  in  this  world  have  the  keen 
thrill  of  joy  your  heart  once  panted  for,  but  a  conscious  and  deep  peace  will  re- 
compense its  absence, — more  satisfying  and  more  abiding.  2.  There  is  a  resource 
here,  also,  for  that  nobler  style  of  men,  who  have  laboured  for  the  cause  of  God 
and  their  fellow-creatures,  and  have  failed  to  find  the  success  they  sought.  It 
may  seem  strange  at  first  sight  that  there  should  be  such  failures.  Yet  there 
are  some  things  which  make  it  not  so  strange,  if  we  will  but  reflect.  Are  we 
sure  that  our  motives  are  always  as  high  as  we  ourselves  fancy,  and  may  not 
failure  be  meant  to  send  us  back  to  sift  and  purify  them?  Our  very  despondency 
may  arise  from  our  having  looked  too  much  to  success  and  too  little  to  duty. 
God  must  have  standard-bearers  who  are  ready  to  make  a  shroud  of  their  colours, 
and  how  can  they  be  known  but  in  hours  of  defeat?  And,  though  ovu*  motives 
are  pure,  is  our  work  always  wise?  Are  Christians  to  expect  that  carelessness 
and  rashness  will  succeed,  simply  because  of  good  intentions?  After  all,  how- 
ever, the  great  resource  we  have  is  to  fall  back  on  this  appeal,  "  My  judgment 
is  with  the  Lord,  and  my  work  with  my  God."  Man  judges  by  success,  God  by 
simplicity  of  heart;  and  many  an  unnoticed  effort  and  inarticulate  prayer  that 
never  seemed  to  touch  the  conflict  shall  share  in  the  full  triumph  of  the  victory. 
Those  who  have  failed  to  find  position  or  comfort,  fame  or  sympathy  in  the  world, 
may  have  One  who  can  bear  His  share  with  you  here,  who  chose  this  place  in 
life,  which  you  call  loss,  that  He  might  be  nearer  you,  and  show  you  that  life 
has  greater  things  than  all  you  have  coveted.  Those  of  you  who  complain 
that  you  have  laboured  for  your  fellow-men  and  God  with  small  return,  have  One 
here  who  gave  up  infinitely  higher  things,  and  met  from  men  a  more  cruel  award. 
Let  all  be  done  under  the  cover  and  trusting  in  the  strength  of  Him  who  alone 
"  works  all  our  works  in  us."  Let  the  sinful  past  come  under  this  shadow  to  find 
forgiveness;  the  narrow  and  selfish  life,  to  find  a  new  and  lofty  aim;  and  all  our 
fears  and  griefs  and  disappointments,  to  find  comfort  and  hope  in  Him  who  entered 
the  world  to  redeem  it  from  fall  and  loss,  and  to  make  every  true  life  succeed 
at  last,  even  where  it  seemed  to  fail.  {Ibid.)  The  glorification  of  civic  life  : — 
Think  of  the  worth  and  greatness  of  a  human  life  in  that  elect  society  and  holy 
city  which  is  the  servant  of  God.  If  the  corporate  consciousness  of  the  city 
should  become  a  judgment  and  recompense  with  God;  if  the  sense  of  God  and 
His  holy  presence  should  envelop  the  whole  city  in  its  power,  and  reach  every 
man  in  it,  even  as  the  morning  light  comes  into  every  home;  if  the  city  should 
awake  with  God;  if,  throughout  the  day,  in  the  mind  of  the  city,  the  thought 
of  God  should  have  its  dweUing-place,  and  if  in  the  government  of  the  people 
the  law  of  God  should  have  its  throne;  if  some  awe  of  the  Divine  righteousness 
should  pervade  the  business  of  the  city,  and  some  deep  sense  of  Divine  blessed- 
ness, like  a  fountain  of  life,  should  well  up  and  abound  in  the  happiness  of  the 
city,  and  some  greatness  of  the  Divine  purpose  should  enlarge  all  the  work  of 
the  city,  and  make  the  least  faithfulness  a  service  of  God;  if  some  peace  of  the 
Divine  eternity  should  rest  upon  all  life's  changes  in  the  city,  and  the  hope  of 
some  Divine  event  bend  over  every  new-made  grave,  and  the  comfort  of  some 
Divine  omnipresence  fill  as  with  an  all-pervasive  love  every  heart  in  the  city 
that  had  been  left  in  loneliness  of  grief; — if,  in  one  word,  a  whole  city  should 
become,  what  Isaiah  beheld  in  the  far  future,  a  city  of  God,  a  Messianic  city, 
the  elect  servant  of  God, — think  you  that  in  that  city  "  Sought  out,  a  city  not 
forsaken,"  any  human  life  could  seem  to  be  a  life  for  nought,  and  its  labour  in 
vain? — a  worthless  thing  to  be  trodden  under  foot,  or  only  a  moment's  flash  of 
pleasure? — a  life  not  to  be  prized  and  kept  as  a  sacred,  immortal  trust?  Would 
not  every  least  hfe  in  a  city  of  God,  full  of  the  consciousness  of  God,  become  a 
life  of  moral  worth,  a  birth  into  an  immortal  consciousness,  a  part  in  some  uni- 
versal good,  a  fellowship  with  something  celestial,  an  anticipation  and  a  share 
in  some  eternal  triumph  and  joy  of  life?     {N.  Smyth,  D.D.)        The  ineffective- 


CHAP,  xux.]  ISAIAH.  52T 

ness  of  Christ's  personal  ministry,  a  man-revealing  fact : — Assuming  that  these 
words  express  Christ's  experience,  they  cannot  be  taken  in  an  absolute  sense. 
He  laboured  in  vain,  compared  with  what  the  kind  and  amount  of  agency  em- 
ployed were  suited  to  effect.  We  shall  look  at  this  fact  as  revealing  certain  other 
facts  in  relation  to  human  nature.  I.  It  reveals  man's  freedom  of  action. 
We  cannot  conceive  of  a  mightier  moral  energy  being  brought  to  bear  upon  mind 
than  that  which  Jesus  brought  to  bear  upon  the  Jewish  mind,  and  yet  it  was 
resisted.  The  Jews  resisted  moral  omnipotence.  He  appealed  in  the  most 
powerful  way  to  three  of  the  most  influential  principles  in  our  nature.  1.  Belief. 
If  you  want  to  influence  men,  you  must  take  your  stand  upon  their  faiths.  There 
were,  especially,  two  faiths  which  Christ  appealed  to;  the  one  instinctive,  and 
the  other  attained.  The  former  was,  that  miracles  are  the  works  of  God;  the 
latter,  that  their  Scriptures  predicted  a  Messiah.  Christ  appealed  to  these  pre- 
dictions. 2.  Conscience.  His  character,  doctrines,  and  precepts  bore  directly  on 
the  conscience.  3.  Interest.  He  revealed  the  judgment-day,  unfolded  heaven, 
uncovered  hell.  Thus  He  assailed  their  souls;  and  yet  they  resisted.  Do  not 
say  that  man  has  no  moral  power;  he  has  proved  himself,  by  the  comparative 
ineffectiveness  of  our  Saviour's  labours,  to  have  power  to  resist  the  mightiest 
moral  influences  of  God.  II.  It  reveals  man's  perversity  of  character. 
The  possession  of  the  capacity  to  resist  the  highest  moral  influences  is  the  gift 
of  God.  It  is  neither  subject  for  blame  nor  praise,  but  for  thankfulness  to  God. 
But  the  using  of  that  capacity  to  oppose  holy  and  Divine  influences  is  our  guilt 
and  ruin.     There  were  three  perversities  in  the  Jews  that  led  to  this  resistance. 

1.  Perversity  of  judgment.  (I)  Their  judgments  were  sensuous.  They  "  judged 
after  the  flesh."  In  the  Scriptm-es  they  read  of  a  coming  king,  priest,  conqueror; 
they  identified  that  king  with  pageantry — that  priest,  with  flowing  robes  and 
sacrifices — that  conqueror,  with  mighty  armies.  When  the  true  King,  Priest, 
and  Conqueror  came.  He  had  none  of  these,  and  they  would  not  have  Him. 
(2)  Their  judgments  were  servile.  The  Scribes  and  Pharisees  were  their 
theological  masters.  They  allowed  them  to  manufactiu-e  their  creed.  Christ 
came  and  denounced  their  great  leaders  as  heretics  and  hypocrites,  and  they 
waxed  indignant.  This  sensuous,  servile  judgment  in  religion  is  ever  an  obstruc- 
tion to  the  spread  of  truth.  2.  Perversity  of  feeling.  There  were  two  perverse 
feelings,  especially,  that  led  them  to  reject  Christ.  (1)  An  undue  reverence  for 
the  antique.  They  loved  the  antiquity  of  Judaism.  Men  who  tie  themselves 
to  precedents  rather  than  principles,  can  never  advance.  (2)  An  undue  respect 
for  worldly  greatness.  They  thought  a  deal  about  worldly  wealth  and  pomp; 
Christ  had  none.  3.  Perversity  of  life.  Josephus  informs  us  that  so  corrupt 
was  the  Jewish  nation  in  the  time  of  Christ,  that  had  not  the  Romans  come  and 
destroyed  them,  God  would  have  rained  fire  from  heaven,  as  of  old,  to  consume 
them.  These  perversities  of  judgment,  feeling,  and  life,  have  ever  been  impulses 
stimulating  man  to  oppose  Christianity.  III.  It  reveals  man's  exclusive 
support  in  his  highest  labours.  The  highest  labour  is  that  in  which  Christ 
was  engaged.  What  was  His  support?  Not  adequate  success;  for  He  complains 
of  not  having  it.  Here  it  is,  "  Surely  My  judgment  is  with  the  Lord,  and  My 
work  with  My  God."  Two  supporting  ideas  are  here  involved — 1.  That  the 
cause  in  which  we  are  engaged  is  the  cause  of  God.     "  My  work  is  with  my  God." 

2.  That  the  reward  of  our  efforts  is  from  God.  "  My  judgment  "  (reward)  "  is 
with  the  Lord."  The  good  will  be  rewarded,  not  according  to  the  success  of 
their  labours,  but  according  to  the  purity  of  their  motives,  and  the  devotion 
of  their  power.  (Z).  Thomas,  D.D.)  Apparent  failure  sometimes  the  truest 
success  : — 1.  This  is  just  the  language  which  we  find  at  times  forcing  its  way 
from  the  lips  of  most  of  those  great  men  who  have  felt  most  conscious  of  having 
a  mission  from  God.  Those  who  have  most  deeply  and  radically  influenced 
for  good  the  minds  of  their  generation  have  been  usually  distinguished  by  fits 
of  profound  melancholy;  regret  that  they  have  ever  entered  on  their  heroic  course; 
weariness  at  the  opposition  which  they  meet  with;  distrust  of  their  own  fitness 
for  the  task;  doubts  whether  God  has  really  commissioned  them  to  act  on  His 
behalf.  Why  is  this?  It  is  because  God's  results  are  for  the  most  part  secret. 
A  man  who  sets  a  great  example  is  hardly  ever  conscious  of  the  effect  which  his 
example  produces.  If  his  plans  are  not  carried  out  precisely  in  the  way  and  to 
the  end  which  he  had  originally  contemplated,  he  persuades  himself  that  they 
have  been  an  utter  failure,  that  no  good  can  have  arisen  from  them;  whereaa 
the  truth  is,  and  other  persons  see  it,  that  the  particular  plans  were  from  the 


THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xlix. 


outset  worthless,  in  comparison  with  the  exhibition  of  character  by  which  the 
very  attempt  to  execute  them  was  accompanied.     2.  The  Cross  of  Christ  is  the 
true  guide  to  the  nature  and  value  of  real  success.     What  a  failure  was  the  life 
of  Christ,  if  we  measure  it  by  immediate  results!     No  wonder  that  the  Cross 
was  to  the  Jews  a  sore  stumbling-block,  and  to  the  cultivated  Greeks  utter  foolish- 
ness, just  as  it  would  now  appear  to  most  of  us.     For  even  we,  the  heirs  of  eighteen 
centuries  of  faith  in  the  Crucified  One,  seem  hardly  yet  to  have  learned  the  lesson 
that  the  sufEering,  self-sacrifice,  devotion  to  principles,  and  heedlessness  of  im- 
mediate consequences,  are  the  indispensable  foundations  of  all  permanent  success. 
(H.    M.    Butler,    D.D.)        Comfort    under    nelf -depreciation : — 1.    Some    persons 
give  themselves  much  unnecessary  pain  by  underrating  their  real  service  in  the 
world.     The  question  of  good-doing  is  one  of  great  subtlety.     The  quiet  worker 
is  apt  to  envy  the  man  who  lives  before  society  in  a  great  breadth  of  self-demon- 
stration.    It  is  as  if  the  dew  should  wish  to  be  the  pattering  hail,  or  as  if  the 
soft  breeze  should  disqmet  itself  because  it  cannot  roar  Uke  a  storm.     We  forget 
that  whirlwind  and  earthquake,  fire  and  cloud,  tempest  and  silence,  have  all 
been  God's  messengers;  and  it  would  be  foolish  of  any  of  them  to  suppose  that 
it  had  been  of  no  use  to  the  world.     2.  The  text  shows  the  true  comfort  of  those 
who  mourn  the  littleness  and  emptiness  of  their  lives.     "  My  judgment  is  with 
the  Lord,"  &c.     God  knows  our  purposes,  our  opportunities,  and  our  endeavours, 
and  He  will  perfect  that  which  concemeth  us.     The  intention  of  the  heart,  which 
it  was  impracticable  to  realise,  will  be  set  down  to  our  favour,  as  if  we  had  accom- 
pUshed  it  alL     {J.  Parker,  D.D.)        Discouragement : — Each  epoch  has  its  special 
temptations  and  trials.     For  Christians  of  to-day,  one  of  these  maladies  is  dis- 
couragement.    Discouragement!  not  in  that  acute  and  passionate  form  which 
strikes  us  in  the  bitter  and  despairing  complaints  of  the  prophets  and  behevers 
of  other  centimes.     We  suffer  from  a  less  violent  ill,  less  dangerous  in  appearance, 
but  dull,  slow,  and  treacherous.     1.  Many  causes  explain  it  to  us.     The  human 
mind,  in  its  progressive  march,  passes  by  turns  through  phases  of  assurance  and 
distiirbance.     (1)  At  an  epoch  when  analysis  is  carried  to  excess,  the  vital  powers 
of  the  soul  become  weak  and  are  in  danger  of  dying.     One  of  the  first  fruits  of 
this  tendency  in  religious  minds,  will  be  languor.     How  can  one  love,  act,  and 
believe,  when  at  each  of  its  aspirations  the  soul  finds  planted  before  it  a  "  perhaps  "  T 
If  this  spirit  of  analysis  is  destructive  to  individual  enthusiasm,  it  acts  in  a  still 
more  enervating  manner  upon  the  collective  life.     Every  one  asserts  his  inde- 
pendence, his  right  to  examine;  and  often  the  spirit  of  party  alone  replaces  the 
unity  which  disappears.     (2)  Our  age  has  another  character — it  wants  to  be 
practical     A  scorn  scarcely  dissembled  confronts  inquiries,  which  reach  beyond 
the  world  of  sense  or  of  pure  logic.     The  supernatural  passes  for  mysticism,  and 
this  word,  with  many,  is  a  condemnation  without  appeal.     This  tendency  reacts 
on  the  Chvirch.     It  is  certain  that  the  same  utilitarianism  is  invading  it.     (3)  Add 
to  these  causes  the  influence  of  certain  tendencies  of  spirit  and  temperament, 
causes  entirely  physical,  which  act  in  a  mysterious  but  powerful  manner  on  the 
moral  state.     Add  to  these  that  inclination  which  the  most  serious  minds  have 
to  look  on  the  sad  side  of  human  things.     Add  those  tendencies  which  exist  in 
all  ages,  but  which,  in  the  general  condition  I  have  described,  develop  with  much 
more  power  and  rapidity; — and  you  will  comprehend  why  nothing  is  rarer  in 
these  days  than  that  joyous,  heroic,  serene  faith  which  characterised  other  ages. 
2.  In  certain  circles  it  is  sought  to  escape  from  it  by  excesses  of  feverish  zeaL 
The  imagination  is  excited  by  the  prospect  of  the  immediate  reaUsation  of  the 
promises  of  prophecy.     These  fictitious  but  intermittent  flashes  only  terminate 
m  changing  this  languor  into  incredulity.     What  must  be  done  then?     Build 
up  your  Ufe  on  another  foundation  than  that  of  your  passing  impressions;  fix 
it  upon  the  central,  eternal  truth  which  dominates  over  the  fluctuations  of  opinions 
and  beliefs;  live  in  Jesus  Christ;  and  upon  the  heights  to  which  this  communion 
lifts  you,  breathe  the  vivifying  air  which  alone  can  give  you  strength.     Then 
only  can  you  oppose  faith  to  sight,  the  eternal  to  the  transitory,  and  thanks- 
giving to  discouragement.     But  this  is  to  tell  you  that  you  must  be,  must  (it 
may  be)  become  again.  Christians.     Now  this  remedy  is  not  to  be  reached  in 
a  single  day.     3.  In  going  to  the  bottom  of  things  I  discover  two  principal  causes 
of  the  discouragement  of  the  Christian.     The  first  is  the  greatness  of  the  task 
which  God  sets  before  him;  the  second  is  his  inability  to  accomplish  it.     (1)  We 
are  so  constituted  that  every  time  the  ideal  of  love  and  holiness  to  which  the 
CkMpel  calla  us  is  presented  to  us  in  its  sublime  beauty,  our  heart  vibrates  with 


CHAP,  xux.]  ISAIAH.  529 

a  profound  assent,  and  we  feel  that  it  is  for  this  end  that  we  were  created.  But 
when  we  must  not  only  admire  but  act,  then  we  measure  with  dismay  the  distance 
which  separates  us  from  it,  and  discouragement  seizes  us.  It  prescribes  for 
us  not  only  that  love  of  our  neighbours,  which  is  after  all  only  an  enlarged 
selfishness,  but  charity,  and,  if  need  be,  charity  which  goes  even  as  for  88 
sacrifice.  (2)  The  iU  success  of  his  labour  is  the  second  cause  of  the 
Christian's  discouragement.  What  Christians  mourn  the  most  deeply  over  the 
ill  success  of  their  efforts?  They  are  almost  always  the  most  active  and  advanced 
Christians.  It  enters  into  God's  plan  to  conceal  from  us  almost  always 
the  results  of  what  we  do  for  Him.  Why  does  God  will  it?  Doubtless, 
that  faith  may  be  exercised.  God  does  not  wish  to  be  served  by  mer- 
cenaries. He  often  hides  from  His  children  the  fruit  of  their  labours,  to  the 
end  that  they  may  work  for  Him  and  not  for  themselves;  He  hides  it  from 
them  in  order  that  they  may  find  in  Him  their  recompense,  and  not  in  the 
result  of  their  work,  nor  in  the  outward  success  which  would  take  the  place 
of  His  approbation,  nor  even  in  the  progress  of  a  sanctified  life,  for  perfection 
apart  from  Him  might  become  an  idoL  It  is  also  to  humble  us.  How  seldom 
is  it  that  man  can  bear  success,  and  not  bend  under  its  weight!  He  teaches 
them,  moreover,  gentleness  and  compassion.  Success  alone  will  never  develop 
these.  However,  this  fruit  is  only  hidden;  it  will  appear  in  due  time.  No  one 
in  serving  the  Lord  has  the  right  to  say,  "  I  have  laboured  in  vain."  Even  when 
the  indifference  of  the  world  shall  seem  to  conceal  for  ever  yom:  labours  and  your 
sacrifices,  there  will  be  left  you  the  consolation  of  the  prophet,  "  My  judgment 
is  with  the  Lord,  and  my  work  with  my  God."  {E.  Bersier.)  Ideal  and  real- 
isation : — Draw  near  to  those  giants  of  the  spiritual  order,  those  workmen 
of  God  who  in  different  ages  have  been  called  Elijah,  St.  Paul,  Chrysostom, 
St.  Bernard,  Luther,  or  Whitefield,  and  who  confound  you  by  the  immense  work 
which  they  have  accompUshed,  you  will  hear  them  groan  imder  the  small  results 
of  their  works.  EHjah  cries  out  to  God:  "  Take  away  my  life;  I  am  not  better 
than  my  fathers."  Isaiah  pronounces  the  words  of  my  text:  "  I  have  spent 
my  strength  for  naught,  and  in  vain."  St.  Paul  trembles  in  fear  of  having  been 
a  useless  labourer;  St.  Bernard  expresses  in  his  last  letters  the  painful  feeling 
of  having  accomplished  almost  nothing.  Calvin,  dying,  said  to  those  who  stir- 
roimded  him:  "  All  that  I  have  done  has  been  of  no  value.  The  wicked  will 
gladly  seize  upon  this  word.  But  I  repeat  it,  all  that  I  have  done  has  been  of 
no  value,  and  I  am  a  miserable  creature."  What  must  we  conclude?  That 
these  men  did  nothing?  No,  but  that,  in  the  presence  of  the  ideal  which  God  has 
put  in  their  heart,  their  work  appeared  to  them  almost  lost.  {Ibid.)  Labour 
in  vain,  yet  not  in  vain  in  the  Lord : — L  A  lamentable  complaint,  wherein  our 
Lord  complaineth,  that  although  He  came  to  the  house  of  Israel,  where  He  pub- 
lished the  Divine  doctrine,  wrought  many  miracles,  and  showed  admirable  holiness 
of  life,  yet  for  most  part  He  had  lost  His  labour.  "  I  have  laboured  in  vain,'* 
&c.  n.  A  CONSOLATION  of  Himself  upon  this  complaiat,  wherein  He  reareth 
up  Himself  with  the  consolations  of  God  in  the  midst  of  all  those  oppositions 
that  were  made  against  Him,  and  aU  His  lost  labour.  "  My  judgment  is  with 
the  Lord,  and  My  work  with  My  God."  III.  A  confirmation  of  tins  consolatory 
part,  by  three  arguments — 1.  From  the  assurance  of  His  calling.  "And  now 
thus  saith  the  Lord  that  formed  Me  from  the  womb  to  be  His  servant."  2.  From 
His  own  faithfulness.  "  Though  Israel  be  not  gathered,  yet  shall  I  be  glorious 
in  the  eyes  of  the  Lord";  I  do  My  duty  faithfully.  3.  From  the  faithfulness 
of  God.  "  My  God  shall  be  My  strength":  as  if  He  had  said,  I  know  that  God 
called  Me  to  this  ofi&ce,  and  that  I  am  faithful  in  it,  and  therefore  He  will  assist 
and  stand  by  Me,  and  reward  Me.  {T.  Taylor,  D.D.)  Apparent  failure : — 
Of  Livingstone,  on  his  last  journey,  has  biographer.  Dr.  Blaikie,  says:  "  Diuing 
all  his  past  Hfe  he  had  been  sowing  his  seed  weeping,  but  so  far  was  he  from  bringing 
back  Ins  sheaves  rejoicing,  that  the  longer  he  lived  the  more  cause  there  seemed 
for  his  tears.  In  opening  Africa,  he  had  seemed  to  open  it  for  brutal  slave-traders, 
and,  in  the  only  instance  in  which  he  had  yet  brought  to  it  the  feet  of  men  '  beautiful 
upon  the  mountains,  pubUshing  peace,'  disaster  had  befallen,  and  an  incom- 
petent leader  had  broken  up  the  enterprise.  After  twenty-three  years  of  labour, 
he  wrote :  '  By  the  failure  of  the  Universities  Mission,  my  work  seems  vain.  No  fruit 
likdy  to  come  from  J.  Moffat's  mission  either.     Have  I  not  laboured  in  vain?'  " 

Ters.  5-7.  And  now,  saitti  the  Lord. — Paradoxes  of  prophecy  : — ^I  would  weigh 
VOL.  II. — 34 


630  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xux. 

with  you  two  of  those  larger,  and  at  the  same  time  intense  paradoxes  of  prophecy, 
which  run  throughout  the  prophetic  word,  and  which  Isaiah,  in  these  wonderful 
words  concentrates  in  one.  1.  That  He,  who  was  foretold  should  Himsell  be  the 
light  and  salvation  of  those  who  knew  not  God  unto  earth's  utmost  bound,  yet 
should  fail  as  to  those  to  whom  He  should  first  come,  the  prophet's  own  nation, 
the  people  among  whom  alone,  before  He  came.  He  was  looked  for,  hoped  for, 
believed  in.  2.  That  He,  whom  to  adore  should  be  the  glory  of  kings,  before  whose 
presence  they  should  "  arise  "  from  their  thrones  and  bow  down  before  Him, 
should  be  first  "  despised  of  man,  abhorred  by  the  "  Jewish  "  people,"  be  in  the 
power  of  the  rulers  of  this  world,  as  a  slave  is  in  the  power  of  his  masters.  {E.  B. 
Pusey,  D.D.) 

Ver.  6.  And  He  said.  It  is  a  light  thing  that  Thou  shouldest  be  My  servant. — 

The  evangelical  prophet :  his  wide  outlook  : — In  the  whole  of  this  prophetical 
book  there  is  not  a  single  verse  in  which  the  character  of  the  evangelical  prophet 
is  more  conspicuous  than  it  is  here.  How  must  he  have  been  transported  beyond 
himself — how  far  must  he  have  been  raised  not  merely  above  the  vulgar  passions 
and  prejudices,  but  above  the  noblest  and  piurest  aspirations  of  his  contemporaries — 
how  deeply  must  he  have  been  permitted  to  enter  not  only  into  the  secret  purpose, 
but  into  the  heavenly  spirit  of  the  Divine  counsels,  before  he  could  have  given 
utterance  to  rnch  words  as  these!  Try  to  realise  in  some  measure  the  import, 
the  power,  the  charm  of  those  names — the  names  of  Jacob,  of  Israel,  in  the  mind  of 
every  faithful  Israelite.  Think  how  not  only  his  human  afiFections,  but  his  deepest 
religious  feelings,  were  centred  in  the  prosperity  of  Zion  and  the  peace  of  Jerusalem. 
Think  of  the  grief  and  the  longing,  the  prayers  and  the  tears  of  the  exiles  in  their 
captivity,  when  they  remembered  Zion.  What  joy  could  there  be  to  such  an  one 
comparable  for  a  moment  to  the  joy  of  raising  up  the  tribes  of  Jacob,  and  bringing 
back  the  preserved  of  Israel  ?  And  yet  he  was  called  upon  by  the  voice  of  God  to 
regard  this  as  a  light  thing,  and  in  comparison  with  what  was  it  a  light  thing? 
What  object  was  so  far  to  transcend  that  which  must  have  appeared  in  his  eyes 
as  the  greatest  of  all?  It  was  that  he  should  be  given  as  a  light  to  the  Gentiles, 
and  that  he  should  be  the  bearer  of  God's  salvation  unto  the  ends  of  the  earth. 
How  doubly  strange  must  such  a  commission  have  seemed  to  the  prophet  who 
received  it !  Like  every  child  of  Abraham,  he  had  been  wont  to  look  down  with 
mingled  aversion  and  contempt  on  the  mightiest  and  wisest  of  the  nations.  He 
had  directed  his  bitterest  sarcasm  against  their  idols ;  he  would  have  held  himself 
defiled  by  sitting  down  at  the  board  even  of  their  nobles  and  princes.  Yet  now  the 
honour  and  welfare  of  the  Gentiles  is  to  be  set  far  above  the  deliverance  and 
exaltation  of  the  chosen  people.  He  must  break  the  bands  of  prejudice,  and  learn 
a  new  estimate  of  life.  (Bp.  Perowne,  D.D.)  Missions  to  the  heathen: — I.  I 
venture  to  say,  looking  at  the  diffusion  of  Divine  truth  and  its  attendant  bless- 
ings which  are  shadowed  forth  in  the  words  of  the  prophet,  even  oxjr  national 
GREATNESS  AND  GLORY  IS  A  LIGHT  THING.  Consider  what  is  the  true  test  and  measure 
of  real  glory.  I  am  not  now  speaking  of  it  as  it  appears  in  the  sight  of  Him  by 
whom  the  nations  are  counted  as  the  small  dust  of  the  balance,  and  who  taketh 
up  the  isles  as  a  very  little  thing.  I  would  have  you  look  at  it  from  a  human  but 
still  manly  and  reasonable  point  of  view  as  it  appears  in  the  estimate  of  strangers, 
in  the  eyes  of  posterity,  in  the  pages  of  history,  in  your  own  sober  judgment, 
when  applied  to  other  instances  where  you  are  not  under  the  bias  of  personal 
feeling  or  national  prejudice.  Take  the  case  of  an  individual.  Would  you 
seriously  count  it  a  glorious  thing  for  a  man  to  have  amassed  great  wealth,  to  have 
risen  to  a  high  station,  to  have  acquired  extensive  authority?  Or,  do  you  think 
it  necessary  to  inquire  what  use  he  has  made  of  these  advantages,  what  traces  he 
has  left  of  his  passage  through  the  world?  It  is  not  a  sufficient  title  to  glory  that 
our  name,  our  race,  our  possessions,  our  power,  our  influence  have  been  extended 
to  the  end  of  the  earth,  and  that  every  quarter  of  the  globe  has  yielded  its  tribute 
to  our  arms,  ova  industry,  and  our  commerce.  There  still  remains  the  question. 
What  use  have  we  made  of  all  our  gifts  and  opportunities?  What  are  the  things 
we  have  carried  with  us  abroad  in  exchange  for  those  which  we  have  brought 
home?  What  are  the  tokens  and  monuments  of  our  presence  in  the  land  where  we 
have  settled  and  borne  rule?  The  ampler  our  means,  the  greater  our  power, 
the  more  commanding  our  influence,  the  greater  is  our  responsibility  and  the 
stricter  the  accounts  which  we  must  render  at  the  bar  both  of  Divine  and  of  human 
judgment.     It  is  the  proper  object  of  a  Christian  State  to  encourage  all  efforts 


CHAP,  xux.]  ISAIAH.  631 

for  the  extension  of  Christ's  kingdom,  to  place  no  obstacles  in  the  way  of  that 
extension.     II.  But  how  is  it  as  regards  the  Church?     There  can  be  no  question 

that  THE  SENDING  FORTH  OF  THE  GoSPEL  BELONGS  TO  THE  PROPER  WORK  OF  THE 

Church.  It  may  truly  be  said,  in  a  certain  sense,  that  all  the  rest  is  a  light  thing  in 
comparison  with  this.  Let  us  suppose  a  Church  pure,  sound,  and  flourishing  in 
all  other  respects.  But  if  a  Church  thus  favoured  puts  forth  no  expansive  energies, 
if  she  is  content  merely  with  the  enjoyment  of  her  internal  prosperity,  then  the 
fulness  of  these  blessings  only  renders  the  deficiency  in  its  outward  action  the  more 
glaring  and  reprehensible.  Whatever  appearance  there  may  be  of  health  or  vigour 
in  a  motionless  Church,  all  such  indications  must  be  hollow  and  fallacious.  Such 
a  Church  deceives  herself,  like  that  of  Laodicea,  saying,  "  I  am  rich,  and  increased 
in  goods,  and  have  need  of  nothing";  being,  in  truth,  "  wretched,  and  miserable, 
and  poor,  and  blind,  and  naked."  And  lukewarmness  is  the  cause,  at  once,  of 
the  misery  and  the  self-delusion.  It  was  such  a  Church  that  received  the  warning, 
"  I  know  thy  works,  that  thou  hast  a  name  that  thou  livest,  and  art  dead."  Is 
that  too  much  to  say  of  a  Church  which,  so  far  as  regards  those  who  are  without, 
is  deaf  and  dumb  and  blind  and  palsied? — without  an  ear  for  her  Lord's  com- 
mission, without  a  voice  to  proclaim  His  message,  without  an  eye  for  those  whom 
He  came  to  seek  and  to  save,  without  hand  or  foot  to  stir  in  His  service — or  rather, 
to  speak  more  plainly,  without  faith  to  trust  His  Word,  without  hope  to  abide 
His  time,  without  love  to  spend  and  to  be  spent  for  His  cause.  {Ibid.)  The 
missionary  enterprise  : — 1.  To  look  at  the  question,  even  from  a  comparatively 
lower  plane,  is  there  not  something  elevating  in  the  whole  history  of  missionary 
enterprise  ?  Is  it  not  a  good  tiling,  an  inspiring  thing,  to  have  lifted  up  before  our 
eyes  the  noble  examples  of  the  men  who  have  gone  forth  sacrificing  their  earthly 
prospects  and  encountering  privation  and  suffering  and  the  martyr  death  that  they 
might  preach  among  the  nations  the  unsearchable  riches  of  Christ?  They  have 
gained  no  earthly  reward;  they  have  looked  for  none.  They  have  reformed 
men  sunk  in  the  lowest  depth  of  degradation,  misery,  and  crime.  They  have 
exhibited  the  Christian  graces  of  domestic  purity  and  truth  and  love.  They  have, 
indeed,  enriched  the  world;  they  have  been  the  pioneers  in  civilisation.  The 
splendid  heroism  of  our  missionary  martjTS  has  given  us  a  loftier  conception  of 
duty,  and  made  our  hearts  throb  with  holier  emotions,  and  put  to  shame  the 
weakness,  the  cowardice,  the  selfishness  of  our  Uves.  Surely  on  this  ground 
alone  we  may  say  that  the  work  of  the  Church  at  home  is  a  light  thing  compared 
with  the  mission  work  of  the  Church  abroad.  2.  This  mission  work  abroad  gives 
us  new  impulses  and  new  motives,  because  it  is  done  in  simple  obedience  to  the 
command  of  our  risen  Lord,  "  Go  ye  into  all  the  world,  and  preach  the  Gospel  to 
every  creature,"  and  a  simple  trust  in  His  promise,  "  Lo,  I  am  with  you."  3.  This 
mission  work  is  a  greater  work  because  of  the  grandeur  and  far-reaching  compass 
of  its  conception,  as  putting  no  limits  beyond  those  of  the  habitable  globe  to  its 
aims;  greater,  because  it  is  not  bounded  by  the  bounds  of  a  parish  or  Church; 
greater,  because  it  bears  in  its  bosom  the  inspiring  truth  that  the  kingdom  of  God 
is  one,  and  that  all  work  for  Christ  is  essentially  one  in  its  range,  and  power,  and 
objects,  however  manifold  it  may  be  in  the  forms  which  it  assumes,  or  in  its  applica- 
tion to  the  various  phases  of  society,  and  the  infinite  diversity  of  the  needs  which 
it  meets.  4.  It  is  greater  because,  as  all  experience  shows,  it  breathes  a  new  life 
into  all  the  work  at  home.  It  is  a  sovereign  antidote  to  that  selfishness  which  is  so 
often  a  canker  in  our  work.  5.  The  missionary  work  of  the  Church  is  a  greater 
work  because  of  its  regenerating  power  m  the  revival  of  the  whole  Chm-ch.  No 
one  can  question  this  who  has  watched  the  development  of  missions  and  the 
relation  of  that  development  to  the  work  of  the  Church  at  home.  It  must  often 
have  awakened  ova  surprise  that  at  the  great  Reformation  which  shattered 
the  fetters  of  superstition  and  brought  out  a  nation  beloved  of  God  into  the 
glorious  liberty  of  her  children,  and  gave  them  the  Word  of  life,  no  attempt 
was  made  to  carry  the  precious  treasure  to  the  rest  of  the  world.  It  may 
be  that  the  work  they  had  to  do  at  home  was  the  work  to  which  God  had 
called  them,  and  that  it  so  absorbed  all  their  thoughts  and  interest,  it  left  no  room 
for  anything  else.  There  is  no  more  striking  instance  of  the  reflex  action  of 
missionary  efforts  than  this;  that  it  has  been  made  in  God's  hand  the  instrument 
of  a  mighty  revival  in  the  Church  at  home.  Compare  it  with  that  other  revival 
which  dates  from  Oxford  some  sixty  years  ago.  The  earlier  Evangelical  revival, 
striking  as  were  its  results  in  the  awakening  of  souls,  and  turning  men  from  dark- 
ness to  light,  and  from  the  power  of  Satan  unto  Grod,  left  out  of  sight  the  corporate 


532  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  xlix^ 

unity  of  the  Church.  Its  weakness  was  there.  It  was  mighty  in  its  spiritual 
intensity,  but  it  forgot  that  Christ  came  not  to  convert  individuals  only,  but  ta 
establish  a  Church.  The  Oxford  Movement  on  the  other  hand  dwelt  too  exclusively 
on  this  aspect  of  the  truth.  Ritual  darkened  the  spiritual  life.  The  work  of  God 
the  Holy  Ghost  held  a  subordinate  place  in  its  teaching.  The  power  of  the  Great 
Commission  has  gone  forth.  The  Church  is  sending  forth  missions,  and  it  is  the 
reflex  action  of  missions  which  is  not  only  winning  fresh  victories  for  Christ  abroad, 
but  is  breathing  a  new  life  into  the  Church  at  home.  It  does  not  despise  sacra- 
ments or  ordinances,  but  it  puts  them  in  their  proper  place.  {Ibid.)  Redemp- 
tion, an  eternal  purpose : — A  capable  artist  can  find  no  worthier  exercise  for  the 
highest  order  of  powers,  than  in  depicting  the  scene  in  the  cabinet-council  of  some 
earthly  monarch,  at  the  moment  when  it  is  determined  to  risk  the  hazard  of  war, 
in  offence  or  in  defence,  to  unsheathe  the  sword,  with  the  consciousness  that  the 
earthly  fates  of  many  kingdoms  may  hang  upon  the  issue,  and  that  the  sword 
may  not  return  to  its  scabbard  until  it  be  bathed  red,  and  made  drunk  in  the  blood 
of  m5rriads  of  slain.  But  in  this  august  conference,  it  is  not  the  fate  of  one  or  twa 
kingdoms  that  is  at  stake,  but  of  the  world  in  all  its  extent,  and  in  all  its  generations, 
and  it  may  be,  of  far  more  than  this  world;  for  it  seems  probable,  that,  whilst 
Christ,  in  His  coming  into  this  world,  laid  not  hold  of  the  nature  of  angels  to  redeem 
them,  all  the  intelligent  creatures  of  God  have  had  their  condition  and  destiny 
modified  by  the  incarnation,  and  life,  and  sufferings,  and  death,  and  resurrection, 
and  ascension  of  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ.     (T.  Smith,  D.D.)         The  Gospel  for  all : — 

I.  The  fiest  clause  does  not  seem  to  us  to  decide,  one  way  or  another,  thb 

QUESTIONS  THAT  HAVE  BEEN  OFTEN  PUT  AS  TO  THE  FUTURE  DESTINY  OF  THE  JbWS. 

The  acceptance  of  the  Gospel  by  the  Jews  as  a  nation,  or  by  the  great  body  of  the 
people,  were  comparatively  a  small  matter,  if  it  were  placed  instead  of  the  diffusion 
of  the  Gospel  all  over  the  world,  and  the  gathering  of  the  elect  out  of  every  people. 
The  two  are  ever  to  be  viewed  as  great  and  important  parts  of  a  greater  and  more 
important  whole,  and  they  are  so  joined  together  by  the  appointment  of  God, 
that  the  one  could  not  be  effected  were  the  other  neglected.  The  times  of  the 
fulness  of  the  Gentiles  are  appointed  to   be  the  times   of  Israel's  gathering. 

II.  Although  it  seems  to  be  represented  as  if  God  had  made  the  offer  of  the  Gospel 
to  the  Gentiles  conditional  upon  its  rejection  by  the  Jews,  this  must  certainly  be 
understood  as  spoken  after  the  manner  of  men,  and  not  as  if  God  had  made  thb 

EVANGELISATION  OP  THB  WORLD  DEPEND  UPON  A  CONTINGENCY.      III.  ThE  TERMS 

IN  WHICH  Christ's  offer  to  the  Gentiles,  and  the  diffusion  of  His  Gospel 
AMONGST  them,  ARE  DESCRIBED.  He  is  to  be  " a  Ught"  and  "salvation"  to 
them.  This  implies  their  condition  without  Christ  as  one — 1.  Of  darkness.  2.  Of 
perdition.  IV.  The  adaptation  of  Christ's  Gospel  to  remedy  the  evils, 
and  supply  the  wants  op  the  Gentile  world.  The  perfect  catholicity  of  the 
Christian  system  is  one  of  the  grandest  guarantees  of  its  Divine  origin.  {Ibid. ) 
God's  salvation  a  light  to  the  Gentiles : — The  subject  of  this  chapter  is  "  Messiah 
God's  Light"  to  the  ends  of  the  earth  (John  viii.  12).  In  order  fully  to  enter 
into  our  text,  we  will  Ulustrate  its  meaning  by  St.  Paul's  own  words  (Acts  xxvi. 
18).  Comparing  both  these  passages,  we  find  the  design  of  God's  salvation  to 
be  that  the  Gentiles  should  be  fellow-heirs  (Eph.  iii.  6).  I.  The  purpose  of  God 
IN  this  salvation.  1.  To  make  men  to  inherit  the  kingdom  of  Cod  and  home 
of  the  Redeemer.  2.  To  offer  this  glory  to  the  Gentiles.  11.  The  ground  on 
WHICH  this  salvation  IS  OFFERED.  "  My  Salvation,"  or,  as  in  Acts  xxvi.  18, 
"  By  faith  that  is  in  Me."  1.  The  object  of  this  faith.  "In  Me."  Jesus  Him- 
self. 2.  The  nature  of  this  faith.  Believing  in  His  life  and  work ;  receiving  for 
our  own  salvation  His  offer  of  mercy;  trusting  Him  wholly.  III.  The  naturb 
OF  THE  salvation  THUS  OFFERED.  1.  "  To  turn  them  from  darkness  to  light," 
i.e.  conversion.  2.  Forgiveness  of  sins.  {H.  Linton,  M.A.)  Israel  Ood'a 
conduit-pipe: — "That  thou  mayest  be  My  salvation,"  &c.  That  thou  mayest 
be  the  conduit-pipe  of  My  salvation  to  convey  it  to  the  end  of  the  earth. 
{W.Day,  M.  A.) 

Ver.  7.  Thus  saith  the  Lord,  the  Redeemer  of  Israel — The  Redeemer 
of  Israel: — Israel  shall  be  raised  from  the  deepest  degradation  to  the  highest 
lionour.  The  verse  is  remarkable  as  anticipating  raie  main  idea  of  chap, 
iii.  13-liii.  15.  {Prof.  J.  Skinner,  D.D.)  Christ's  future  reign: — I.  The  de- 
scription GIVEN  OF  the  Messiah.  1.  As  despised,  rejected,  and  contemned 
by  men.     2.  As  abhorred  by  the  Jewish  nation.     3.  As  "a  servant  of  rulers." 


CHAP.  xLix.]  ISAIAH.  633 

Though  He  was  Ruler  of  all  worlds,  He  voluntarily  submitted  Himself  to  human 
power,  and  yielded  obedience  to  human  rulers — the  constituted  authorities  of 
His  day.  He  conformed  to  the  institutions  of  His  country  (Matt.  xvii.  27,  xxvi. 
52,  53).  He  submitted  to  an  unjust  trial  and  verdict.  II.  The  PtrBPOSB  op 
God  respecting  the  Messiah's  reign.  1.  He  is  chosen  of  God  to  accomplish 
the  world's  salvation.  2.  AU  shall  bow  to  His  sceptre.  Kings  shall  see  the 
fulfilment  of  the  Divine  promise,  by  which  He  is  destined  to  be  the  Light  of  the 
nations,  and  they  shall  rise  up  with  demonstrations  of  respect  and  reverence; 
they  shall  render  Him  honour  as  their  Teacher  and  Redeemer.  They  shall  do 
homage  to  the  great  King-Saviour.  3.  God,  in  His  faithfulness,  will  accomplish 
His  gracious  purpose.     Conclusion — 1.  What  a  glorious  period  is  approaching! 

2.  What  encouragement  have  all  Christian  workers!  The  success  of  our  efforts 
is  certain.  3.  What  is  your  relation  to  this  great  King-Saviour?  {A.  Tucker.) 
Kings  rendering  homage  to  Jesus : — Kings,  being  usually  seated  in  the  presence 
of  others,  are  described  as  rising  from  their  thrones;  while  princes  and  nobles,  who 
usually  stand  in  the  presence  of  their  sovereigns,  are  described  as  falling  pros- 
trate.    (Hitzig.) 

Vers.  8-13.  Thus  saith  the  Lord,  In  an  acceptable  time. — The  world 
given  to  Christ: — The  prophet  was  looking  forward  to  the  Messiah  and  His  times. 
It  was  customary  for  some  kings  to  grant  to  favoured  ones  whatever  they  requested 
(Psa.  ii.  8).     God's  kingly  Son  is  represented  as  having  asked,  and  this  is  the  answer. 

1.  The  promised  universal  diffusion  of  the  Gospel.  1.  It  was  commenced 
in  the  apostolic  age.  2.  It  has  been  continuing  through  the  ages  to  the  present 
hour.  3.  It  will  be  fuUy  accomplished  in  "  the  fulness  of  time."  What  reasons 
have  we  for  believing  this?  (1)  The  faithful  and  unerring  promises  of  Jehovah. 
(2)  The  adaptation  of  Christianity,  above  all  other  forms  of  religion,  to  be  uni- 
versal. (3)  The  present  aspect  of  the  world  furnishes  much  reason  to  hope  that 
the  accompUshment  of  this  promise  is  drawing  nigh.  II.  The  blessedness 
of  those  who  shall  embrace  it  (vers.  9,  10).  The  promise  includes — 1.  Abun- 
dant provisions.  2.  Careful  protection.  3.  Unerring  guidance.  HI.  The  ex- 
ultant praise  which  such  glorious  prospects  should  awaken  (ver.  13). 
We  should  raise  this  song — 1.  Because  of  the  glory  which  the  fulfilment  of  this 
promise  will  bring  to  the  triune  Jehovah.  2.  Because  of  the  blessings  the  Gospel 
will  bring  to  humanity.  Conclusion — Has  this  Gospel  come  to  you  in  saving  power  ? 
(A.  Tucker.)  I  will  preserve  thee,  and  give  thee  for  a  covenant  of  the 
people. — Christ  the  covenant  of  His  people: — I.  What  this  covenant  touch- 
ing man's  redemption  is.  a  covenant,  in  the  general  acceptation  of  the  word, 
is  an  agreement  between  two  parties  in  any  thing,  or  end,  upon  certain  articles 
or  conditions,  which  both  freely  consent  to.  "  The  covenant  of  grace,"  or  "  of 
redemption,"  is  an  eternal  transaction  between  the  Father  and  Christ;  a  con- 
sultation and  agreement  between  these  two  glorious  Persons,  how  man  should 
be  saved  out  of  the  ruins  of  the  fall,  in  a  way  becoming  God  (Zech.  vi.  13). 
II.  Such  a  covenant  hath  passed  between  the  Father  and  the  Son  before 
ALL  worlds.  1.  There  were  terms  made,  or  work  demanded  of  the  Mediator. 
(1)  That  Christ  should  take  the  name  of  His  covenant-people  upon  Himself, 
and  become  their  representing  Head.  (2)  That  He  should  become  man.  (3)  In 
this  body  Christ  was  to  fulfil  God's  whole  law.  (4)  That  Christ  should  seal  all 
His  obedience  with  His  blood.  2.  There  were  promises  given,  Christ  thus 
firmly  and  freely  consenting,  and  binding  Himself  to  perform  these  terms  and 
conditions,  the  Father  makes  promises  to  Him.  (I)  That  He  would  fit  Christ 
for  His  work  (Isa.  xi.  1,  2;  John  iii.  34).  (2)  To  assist  Christ  in  His  work  (Psa. 
Ixxxix.  21,  22).  (3)  To  carry  Christ  safely  and  honourably  through  His  work 
(Isa.  xhi.  I,  4;  Psa.  Ixxxix.  26).  (4)  The  Father  promised  Christ  "  a  seed  to 
serve  Him";    and  great  glory  after  this  His  work  was  ended  (Isa.  hii.   10). 

3.  There  were  mutual  trusts  which  the  glorious  parties  reposed  in  each  other. 
in.  Who  are  the  people  for  whom  Christ  was  given  as  a  covenant.  1.  Such 
as  are  brought  to  seek  happiness  and  life  purely  upon  the  footing  of  this  covenant. 

2.  The  "  messenger  of  the  covenant"  is  their  delight  (Mai.  iii.  1).  3.  Such  as 
have  the  Spirit  of  the  covenant  in  their  hearts.  Wherever  the  Spirit  is  given. 
He  comes  as  a  Spirit  of  grace  and  suppHcation.  He  is  a  Spirit  of  liberty.  A 
Spirit  of  holiness.  IV.  What  are  the  blessings  redounding  to  the  people 
BX  THIS  covenant?  1.  Their  calhng  is  secured.  2.  All  grace  is  treasured  up 
for  them.     3.  Fellowship  and  communion  with  God.     4.  Eternal  life  is  givea 


634  TEE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xux. 

(Titus  i.  2).  V.  Uses  by  way  or  doctrine  and  practice.  1.  Christ  and  His 
seed  are  comprehended  in  one  and  the  same  covenant.  2.  That  which  is  a 
covenant  of  grace  to  us,  is  a  covenant  of  works  to  Christ.  3.  We  leam  the  mean- 
ing of  those  phrases  wherein  God  is  said  to  make  "  a  covenant  "  with  man.  4.  We 
see  the  ground  of  the  salvation  of  Old  Testament  saints.  They  were  justified 
and  saved  upon  the  foot  of  this  covenant.  5.  The  substance  of  the  covenant 
was  the  same,  under  both  testaments;  only  the  dispensation  of  it  varies.  The 
covenant  made  with  Abraham,  Jacob,  David,  &c.,  was  a  covenant,  not  of  works, 
but  of  grace.  6.  Why  Christ  is  called  the  "  covenant  "  of  His  people.  It  is 
because  He  is  all  in  all  in  this  covenant.  Practical  uses — (1)  Admire  the  love 
and  grace  of  this  covenant.  (2)  Look  more  at  Christ  in  every  covenant- blessing. 
(3)  This  may  be  improved  for  the  believer'.^  comfort,  whatever  his  wants  are; 
it  is  a  sure  covenant,  an  ordered  covenant,  a  full  covenant;  Christ  is  thy  cove- 
nant, therefore  in  all  thy  dangers,  weaknesses,  snares,  thou  art  safe;  in  all  thy 
wants  thou  art  provided  for;  in  all  thy  fears  thou  art  prevented.  (J.  Hill.) 
Christ  in  the  covenant: — We  believe  that  our  Saviour  has  very  much  to  do  Avith 
the  covenant  of  eternal  salvation.  We  have  been  accustomed  to  regard  Him  as 
the  Mediator  of  the  covenant,  as  the  Surety  of  the  covenant,  and  as  the  scope 
or  substance  of  the  covenant.  I  shall  dwell  on  Christ  as  one  great  and  glorious 
article  of  the  covenant  which  God  has  given  to  His  children.  I.  Here  is  a  great 
POSSESSION — Jesus  Christ  by  the  covenant  is  the  property  of  every  beUever. 

I.  Jesus  Christ  is  ours  in  all  His  attributes.  He  has  a  double  set  of  attributes, 
seeing  that  there  are  two  natures  joined  in  glorious  union  in  one  person.  He 
has  the  attributes  of  very  God,  and  He  has  the  attributes  of  perfect  man;  and 
whatever  these  may  be,  they  are  each  one  of  them  the  perpetual  property  of  every 
believing  child  of  God.  2.  In  all  His  offices.  Is  He  a  Prophet?  He  is  thy 
Prophet.  Is  He  a  Priest?  He  is  thy  Priest.  Is  He  a  King?  He  is  thy  King. 
Is  He  a  Redeemer ?  He  is  thy  Redeemer.  Is  He  an  Advocate?  He  is  thy  Advo- 
cate. Is  He  a  Forenmner  ?  He  is  thy  Forerunner.  IsHeaSurety  of  the  covenant? 
He  is  thy  Surety.  In  every  name  He  bears,  in  every  crown  He  wears,  in  every 
vestment  in  which  He  is  arrayed.  He  is  the  believer's  own.  3.  In  every  one  of 
His  works,  whether  they  be  works  of  suffering  or  of  duty,  they  are  the  property 
of  the  believer.  "  Circuqicised  in  Christ."  "  Buried  with  Christ  in  baptism  unto 
death."  I  die  in  Christ.  I  am  buried  with  Christ.  We  are  "  risen  together 
with  Christ."  He  hath  made  us  "  sit  together  in  heavenly  places."  4.  In  the 
person  of  Christ  "  dwelleth  all  the  fulness  of  the  Godhead  bodily."  "  And  of 
His  fulness  have  we  received,  and  grace  for  grace."  All  the  fulness  of  Christ 
to  restrain  thee,  to  preserve  thee;  all  that  fulness  of  power,  of  love,  of  purity, 
which  is  stored  up  in  the  person  of  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  is  thine.  5.  The 
very  life  of  Christ  is  the  property  of  the  behever.  "  Because  I  Uve  ye  shall  Uve 
also."  "  Ye  are  dead;  and  your  Hfe  " — where  is  it?  It  is  "  hid  with  Christ  in 
God."     6.  Best  of  all,  the  person  of  Jesus  Christ  is  the  property  of  the  Christian. 

II.  For  what  purpose  does  God  put  Christ  in  the  covenant?  1.  In  order 
to  comfort  every  coming  sinner.  2.  To  confirm  the  doubting  saint.  3.  Because 
there  are  many  things  there  that  would  be  nought  without  Him.  His  great  redemp- 
tion is  in  the  covenant,  but  we  have  no  redemption  except  through  His  blood. 
His  righteousness  is  in  the  covenant,  but  I  can  have  no  righteousness  apart  from 
that  which  Christ  has  wrought  out,  and  which  is  imputed  to  me  by  God.  My 
eternal  perfection  is  in  the  covenant,  but  the  elect  are  only  perfect  in  Christ. 
In  fact,  if  you  take  Christ  out  of  the  covenant,  you  have  just  done  the  same  as 
if  you  should  break  the  string  of  a  necklace  ;  all  the  jewels,  or  beads,  or  corals, 
drop  off  and  separate  from  each  other.     4.  Christ  is  in  the  covenant  to  be  used. 

III.  Here  is  a  precept,  and  what  shall  the  precept  be?  Christ  is  ours;  then 
be  ye  Christ's.  Show  the  world  that  you  are  His  in  practice.  When  tempted 
to  sin,  reply,  "  I  cannot  do  this  great  wickedness,  for  I  am  one  of  Christ's."  When 
wealth  is  before  thee  to  be  won  by  sin,  touch  it  not :  say  that  thou  art  Christ's. 
Are  you  exposed  in  the  world  to  difficulties  and  dangers?  Stand  fast  in  the  evil 
day,  remembering  that  you  are  one  of  Clirist's.  Are  you  in  a  field  where  much  is 
to  be  done,  and  others  are  sitting  down  idly  and  lazily  doing  nothing?  Go  at 
your  work,  and  when  the  sweat  stands  upon  your  brow  and  you  are  bidden  to 
stay,  say,  "  No,  I  cannot  stop  ;  I  am  one  of  Christ's."  When  the  syren  song  of 
pleasure  would  tempt  thee  from  the  path  of  right,  reply,  "  Hush  your  strains, 
0  temptress;  I  am  one  of  Christ's."  When  the  cause  of  God  needs  thee,  give 
thyself  to  it,  for  thou  art  Christ's.     And  now,  I  must  say  one  word  to  those  who 


CHAP.  XLix.]  ISAIAH.  635 

have  never  laid  hold  of  the  covenant.  I  sometimes  hear  it  whispered  that  there 
are  men  who  trust  to  the  uncovenanted  mercies  of  God.  Let  me  solemnly  assure 
you  that  there  is  now  no  such  thing  as  uncovenanted  mercy.  Mayhap,  poor, 
convinced  sinner,  thou  darest  not  take  hold  of  the  covenant  to-day.  "  I  dare 
not  come;  I  am  so  unworthy,"  you  say.  Hear,  then:  my  Master  bids  you  come, 
and  will  you  be  afraid  after  that?     (C.  H.  Spurgeon.) 

Ver.  9.  That  thou  may  est  say  to  the  prisoners.  Go  forth. — Out  of  darkness 
into  light : — When  Jesus  comes  to  the  soul,  He  delivers  us  from  that  direst  of 
all  bondages,  fetches  us  out  from  that  cruellest  of  all  slaveries,  the  bondage  of  the 
spirit,  the  slavery  of  the  heart.  Then  we  are  told  that,  if  there  are  any  who  are 
in  a  worse  state  than  that  of  mere  captivity,  namely,  in  darkness  as  well  as  in 
bondage,  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ  comes  to  them,  and  says,  "  Show  yourselves; 
rise,  and  come  out  of  the  darkness;  hide  away  no  longer,  come  forth  into  the 
light,  and  enjoy  it."  I.  I  have  to  try  to  find  out  the  chakactebs  mentioned 
in  the  text:  "  Them  that  are  in  darkness."  1.  They  were  not  always  in  darkness. 
She  was  a  bright  young  spirit  once,  after  a  fashion;  and  he, — I  know  him  very 
well, — he  seemed  to  be  everything  that  mirth  could  make  youth  to  be.  But, 
on  a  sudden,  there  came  a  cloud  in  the  sky,  both  to  her  and  to  him.  It  may 
be  that  a  death  happened  in  the  family,  or  sickness  came,  or  if  it  was  neither 
of  these  things,  at  any  rate,  the  mind  suddenly  grew  strangely  quiet,  and  a  stillness 
came  down  upon  the  spirit,  and  with  that  stillness  there  fell  a  gloom  over  the 
whole  being.  What  were  those  thoughts  that  brought  such  a  sobering  influence 
into  the  life  ?  I  can  tell  you  about  them  from  my  own  experience.  I  thought, 
"  I  have  not  lived  as  I  ought  to  have  lived.  God  made  me,  yet  I  have  never 
truly  served  Him.  He  is  my  mother's  God,  but  I  have  forgotten  Him;  my  father's 
God,  yet  I  have  never  sought  Him.  What  shall  I  do  ?  God  must  punish  me,"  &c. 
I  seemed  plastic  as  wax  towards  evil,  yet  hard  as  cast-iron  or  steel  towards  any- 
thing that  was  good.  Then  I  grew  sad  in  soul.  I  read  my  Bible  a  great  deal, 
and  the  more  I  read  it  the  more  the  darkness  thickened  about  me,  &c.  This 
is  the  gateway  into  a  joy  that  will  be  worth  yom*  having.  2.  Besides  this,  a  sense 
of  sin  has  settled  upon  you.  3.  The  soul  I  am  describing  is  in  the  dark,  and  the 
darkness  settles  down  in  conviction  of  sin.  You  have  no  hope.  4.  You  fear 
future  and  eternal  night.  It  is  to  people  in  such  a  state  that  the  Gospel  of  Christ 
is  sent.  II.  I  am  going  to  repeat  the  exhortation  of  the  text:  "  Show  your- 
selves." 1.  It  means  that  you  are  running  away  from  Divine  justice,  and  that 
your  wisest  course  will  be  to  go  and  deliver  yourself  up.  Do  you  not  know  that 
you  are  not  really  hidden?  God  sees  you  wherever  you  are;  there  is  no  hiding 
away  from  Him.  That  is  the  very  first  thing  for  you  to  do;  to  submit  yourself 
to  God,  to  lie  at  His  feet  pleading  for  mercy.  2.  The  next  way  of  showing  your- 
selves is  somewhat  different :  ' '  Say  to  them  that  are  in  darkness.  Show  yourselves" ; 
that  is,  you  are  very  lonely,  and  you  have  been  avoiding  yo\ir  best  friends.  Come 
out  of  your  retirement.  If  you  cannot  speak  to  any  mortal  man,  yet  speak  to 
the  Immortal  Man;  go  and  tell  out  all  your  sorrow  to  the  best  of  friends.  3.  This 
passage  may  be  applied  to  you  who  are  sick,  who  are  conceahng  your  disease. 
I  want  every  man  who  is  troubled  about  the  state  of  his  heart,  and  every  woman 
too,  to  come  and  show  themselves  to  Christ,  just  as  they  are,  in  all  their  sin.  4.  The 
next  thing  you  have  to  do  is  to  show  yourselves  as  healed  ones,  bound  to  confess 
Him  who  has  cured  them.  5.  But  I  am  going  to  carry  the  text  a  little  farther 
yet.  There  are  some  young  men,  perhaps  some  young  women  also,  who  have 
been  saved;  they  are  no  longer  in  the  dark,  and  God  has  given  them  grace,  and 
talents,  yet  still  they  are  hiding  themselves  away.  They  are  chosen  ones  loth 
to  take  their  place  of  serArice.  If  the  Lord  has  ^aved  you,  and  if  He  is  pleading 
for  you  in  heaven,  it  is  time  you  began  to  plead  for  Him  on  earth.  6.  Our  text 
applies  also  to  persecuted  ones  who  shall  be  owned  and  honoured  of  God.  There 
will  come  a  day  when  God's  people,  who  have  long  been  in  the  dark  through 
persecution,  slander,  and  misrepresentation,  shall  hear  the  Lord  speaking  to 
them  out  of  heaven,  and  saying,  "  Gather  My  saints  together  unto  Me;  those 
that  have  made  a  covenant  with  Me  by  sacrifice."  "  Say  to  them  that  are  in 
darkness.  Show  yourselves."  What  a  change  will  come  for  God's  poor  despised 
people  in  that  day !  7.  These  words  also  relate  to  dead  ones  called  to  resurrection. 
(C.  H.  Spurgeon.)  They  shall  feed  in  the  ways. — The  returning  captives  ;— 
This  is  part  of  the  prophet's  glowing  description  of  the  return  of  the  captives, 
Qnder  the  figure  of  a  flock  fed  by  a  great  shepherd.     We  have  seen  a  flock  o£ 


636  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xux. 

sheep  driven  along  a  road;  some  of  them  hastily  trying  to  snatch  a  mouthful 
from  the  dusty  grass  by  the  wayside.  Little  can  they  get  there;  they  have  to 
wait  until  they  reach  some  green  pasture  in  which  they  can  be  folded.  This 
flock  shall  "  feed  in  the  ways";  as  they  go  they  will  find  nourishment.  That 
is  not  all;  the  top  of  the  mountains  is  not  the  place  where  grass  grows.  There 
are  bare,  savage  cliffs,  from  which  every  particle  of  soil  has  been  washed  by  furious 
torrents,  or  the  scanty  vegetation  has  been  burnt  up  by  the  fierce  "  sunbeams 
like  swords."  There  the  wild  deer  and  the  ravens  live,  the  sheep  feed  down 
in  the  valleys.  But  "  their  pasture  shall  be  in  all  high  places."  The  literal 
rendering  is  even  more  emphatic:  "  Their  pasture  shall  be  in  all  bare  heights," 
where  a  sudden  verdure  springs  to  feed  them  according  to  their  need.  {A.  Madaren, 
D.D.)  Feeding  in  the  ways  : — Whilst  this  prophecy  is  originally  intended 
simply  to  suggest  the  abundant  supplies  that  were  to  be  provided  for  the  band 
of  exiles  as  they  came  back  from  Babylon^  there  lie  in  it  great  and  blessed  principles 
which  belong  to  the  Christian  pilgrimage,  and  the  flock  that  follows  Christ.  1.  They 
who  follow  Him  shall  find  in  the  dusty  paths  of  common  life,  and  in  all  the  small- 
nesses  and  distractions  of  daily  duty,  nourishment  for  their  spirits.  Do  you 
remember  what  Jesus  said?  "  My  meat  is  to  do  the  will  of  Him  that  sent  Me, 
and  to  finish  His  work."  We,  too,  may  have  the  same  meat  to  eat  which  the 
world  knows  not  of.  That  is  a  great  promise,  and  it  is  a  great  duty.  (1)  It  is 
a  promise,  the  fulfilment  of  which  is  plainly  guaranteed  by  the  very  nature  of 
the  case.  Religion  is  meant  to  direct  conduct,  and  the  smallest  aifairs  of  life 
are  to  come  under  its  imperial  control,  and  the  only  way  by  which  a  man  can 
get  any  good  out  of  his  Christianity  is  by  living  it.  (2)  But  this  is  a  great  duty 
as  well  as  a  great  promise.  How  many  of  us  Christian  people  have  but  little 
experience  of  getting  nearer  to  God  because  of  our  daily  occupations !  There- 
fore we  need  times  of  special  prayer  and  remoteness  from  daily  work;  and  there 
will  be  very  little  realisation  of  the  nourishing  power  of  common  duties  unless 
there  is  familiar  to  us  also  the  entrance  into  the  "  secret  place  of  the  Most  High," 
where  He  feeds  His  children  on  the  bread  of  life.  2.  Further,  my  text  suggests 
that  for  those  who  follow  the  Lamb  there  shall  be  greenness  and  pasture  on  the 
bare  heights.  Strip  that  part  of  our  text  of  its  metaphor,  and  it  just  comes  to  the 
blessed  old  thought,  that  the  times  of  sorrow  are  the  times  when  a  Christian  may 
have  the  most  of  the  presence  and  strength  of  God.  "  In  the  days  of  famine 
they  shall  be  satisfied."  Our  prophet  puts  the  same  thought,  under  a  kindred 
though  somewhat  different  metaphor,  in  another  place  in  this  book  where  he 
says:  "  I  will  open  rivers  in  high  places."  That  is  clean  contrary  to  nature. 
The  rivers  do  not  run  on  the  mountain-tops,  but  down  in  the  low  ground.  3.  May 
I  turn  these  latter  words  of  our  text  a  somewhat  different  way,  attaching  to  them 
a  meaning  which  does  not  belong  to  them,  but  by  way  of  accommodation?  If 
Christian  people  want  to  have  the  bread  of  God  abundantly,  they  must  climb. 
(Ibid.) 

Vers.  10-26.  They  shall  not  hung'er  nor  thirst. — Promises  of  Christ  to 
His  people  : — The  people  of  God  are  represented  as  a  flock  of  sheep  travelling 
under  the  care  of  their  good  shepherd,  in  the  heat  of  summer,  through  a  barren 
and  dry  wilderness,  towards  a  land  of  plenty,  security,  and  everlasting  rest.  Under 
such  circumstances,  what  would  this  flock  require?  What  might  they  expect 
from  the  hand  of  a  faithful  shepherd?  There  are  doubtless  three  things  which 
they  would  want  and  might  look  for — provision,  protection,  and  refreshment. 
Such  are  the  blessings  promised  by  Christ  in  the  text.  I.  Provision.  "  They 
shall  not  hunger  nor  thirst."  Christ  will  furnish  them  with  all  things  necessary 
both  for  life  and  godliness;  that  is,  with  a  sufficiency  of  all  temporal  and  spiritual 
blessings.  II.  Protectiox.  "  Neither  shall  the  heat  nor  the  sun  smite  them." 
His  people  are  exposed  to  the  fire  of  persecution;  but  by  His  almighty  power, 
by  providential  interpositions.  He  defeats  the  purposes,  restrains  the  malice, 
and  wards  off  the  stroke  of  their  persecutors.  They  are  exposed,  also,  to  the 
firry  darts  of  the  wicked  one;  but  here,  again,  the  Lord  protects  His  people. 
III.  Refreshment.  "  Even  by  the  springs  of  water  shall  He  guide  them." 
Springs  of  water  would  be  peculiarly  refreshing  in  the  sultry  deserts,  both  as 
allaying  the  thirst  of  the  flock,  and  as  also  furnishing  on  their  banks  fresh  and 
verdant  pasture,  in  which  the  sheep  might  repose  and  renew  their  wearied  strength. 
Such  and  similar  is  the  refreshment  which  Christ  vouchsafes  to  His  people.  {E. 
Cooper.)        The  love  that  will  not  let  us  go  : — This  chapter  is  strewn  with  assurances 


CHAP,  xux.]  ISAIAH.  637 

to  the  chosen  people  on  the  eve  of  their  return  from  Babylon.  Jehovah's  voice 
takes  on  a  tone  of  unusual  tenderness,  and  speaks  as  He  only  can.  Let  us  heed 
His  successive  assurances  of  comfort  and  compassion.  I.  He  wnx  lead  with 
A  shepherd's  care.  n.  He  will  make  obstacles  serve  His  pttrpose.  "  I 
will  make  all  My  mountains  a  way"  (ver.  11).  Mountains  are  prohibitory.  The 
student  of  the  geography  of  Palestine  cannot  fail  to  be  impressed  with  the  strong 
barricade  of  mountains  with  which  God  fenced  in  the  Land  of  Promise  on  its 
southern  frontier.  Similarly,  the  moimtains  of  Switzerland  have  sheltered  liberty 
and  those  of  Afghanistan  have  made  conquest  difficult  to  impossibility.  There 
were  great  mountains  between  Israel  and  home,  yet  God  does  not  say  that  He 
would  remove  them;  but  that  they  should  form  a  pathway,  as  though  contributing 
to  the  ease  and  speed  of  the  return.  "  I  will  make  all  My  mountains  a  way. 
We  all  have  mountains  in  our  lives.  There  are  people  and  things  that  threaten 
to  bar  our  progress  in  the  Divine  life.  Patience  can  only  be  acquired  through 
just  such  trials  as  now  seem  unbearable.  Submit  thyself.  Claim  to  be  a  par- 
taker in  the  patience  of  Jesus.  Meet  thy  trials  in  Him.  Thus  shall  the  mountains 
that  stand  between  thee  and  thy  promised  land  become  thy  way  to  it.  Note 
the  comprehensiveness  of  this  promise.  "  I  wiU  make  all  My  mountains  a  way." 
The  promise  is  in  the  future  tense.  When  we  come  to  the  foot  of  the  mountains 
we  shall  find  the  way.  ni.  God's  love  is  more  than  motherhood  (ver.  15). 
Many  devout  but  misguided  souls  have  placed  the  Virgin  Mother  on  a  level  with 
God,  and  worship  her,  because  they  think  that  woman  is  more  tender,  more  patient, 
more  forgiving  than  man.  "  The  love  of  woman  "  was  David's  high- water- 
mark of  love.  And  of  woman's  love,  none  is  so  pure,  so  unselfish,  so  full  of  patient 
brooding  pity,  as  a  mother's.  Such  love  is  God's.  Indeed  it  is  a  ray  from  His 
heart.  If  a  mother's  love  is  but  the  ray,  what  must  His  heart  be!  But  there 
is  sometimes  a  failure  in  motherhood.  "  They  may  forget."  But  God  can  never 
80  forget.  IV.  God  treasures  the  thottght  of  His  own  (ver.  16).  The  Orientals 
had  a  custom  of  tattooing  the  name  of  beloved  friends  on  the  hand.  That  is 
the  reference  here.  Thou  art  photographed  where  God  must  ever  behold  thee, 
on  His  hands,  on  His  heart.  Not  on  one  hand  only,  but  on  both.  Not  tattooed 
or  photographed,  the  marks  of  which  might  be  obliterated  and  obsciu-ed;  but 
graven.  The  graving  tool  was  the  spear,  the  nail,  the  cross.  Glass  will  not 
give  up  its  inscriptions,  nor  the  onyx  stone  its  seal,  nor  the  cameo  its  profile; 
but  sooner  might  they  renounce  their  trust,  than  the  hands  of  Christ.  Not  Zion's 
ruins,  but  Zion's  "  walls  "  were  ever  before  Him.  Our  ideal  self;  what  we  are 
in  Jesus;  what  we  long  to  be  in  our  best  moments;  what  we  will  be  when  grace 
has  perfected  its  work  and  we  are  comely  in  the  comeliness  He  shall  put  upon 
us — this  is  the  ineflFaceable  conception  of  us  that  is  ever  before  God.  What  a 
contrast  between  Zion's  wail  about  being  forsaken  and  forgotten,  and  God's 
tender  regard!  V.  God's  love  is  strong  enough  to  carry  out  its  purposh 
(ver.  24).  Such  is  the  question  of  despondency,  asked  by  Israel,  from  the  heart 
of  the  mighty  empire,  in  which  she  was  a  helpless  captive  But  Jehovah  had 
well  calciilated  his  resources  (ver.  25).  VI.  God's  love  will  not  put  away 
(chap.  1.  1).     [F.  B.  Meyer,  B.A.) 

Ver.  11.  And  I  will  make  all  My  mountains  a  way. — God's  mountains  : — Since 
the  world  was,  mountains  have  been  the  obstructors  of  ways,  the  natural  frontiers 
between  nations,  the  barriers  that  have  kept  people  separate,  disunited,  and 
hostile.  And  yet  even  in  the  natural  sphere  the  fact  of  the  existence  of  mountains 
has  ever  initiated  the  stimialus  required  to  surmount  them.  The  physical  and 
moral  strength  of  the  race  is  possibly  invigorated  by  the  very  opposition  of  moun- 
tains, and  man,  God's  vicegerent  in  the  work  of  subduing  the  earth  among  all  lands 
and  among  all  peoples,  has  made  the  mountains  a  highway  for  commerce  and 
travel  and  discovery,  until  at  last  the  inspired  utterance  comes  to  be  a  motto  in 
man's  re-creation.  There  is  a  fascination,  a  challenge  to  the  imagination,  in  mountain 
scenery,,  through  which  He,  who  is  always  appealing  to  the  Divine  secret  in  man, 
makes  His  mountains  a  way  to  gaze  into  His  face,  to  think  into  His  heart,  to  hope 
into  His  promises.  Those  eternal  up-pointing  fingers  challenge  you  against 
despondency.  None  but  the  soulless  or  the  blind  can  be  amongst  the  up-pointing 
fingers  of  the  everlating  hills  and  not  hear  what  the  moimtain  saith;  for  it  echoes 
the  voice  of  the  everlasting  God,  when  to  man's  poor  heart  He  repeats  His  splendid 
promise,  "  I  will  make  all  My  mountains  a  way."  Is  there  not  in  this  inspired 
prophecy  the  Divine  solution  of  a  mystery,  and  the  impregnable  assurance  of  a 


638  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xlix. 


victory?  The  greatest  moral  mountain  in  this  perplexing  world  is  the  existence 
and  permission  of  evil  The  silence,  the  awful  silence  of  God,  the  pitiable  failures 
in  the  best  hves,  the  crushing  heart- sorrows,  the  beds  of  suffering,  the  new-made 
graves,  the  occasional  irresistible  questioning  whether  such  a  world  as  this  can 
in  truth  be  under  the  control  of  a  Divine  and  omnipotent  Ruler — these  are  the 
moral  mountains  that  hem  us  in.  Against  them  we  hurl  ourselves  sometimes  in 
vain ;  they  hide  from  us  the  Fatherhood,  they  separate  us  from  one  another.  But 
mark!  God  says,  "  My  mountains."  I  care  not  how  black  they  seem,  they  are 
God's  mountains.  It  is  a  splendid  step  heavenward  when  you  are  first  able  to 
shake  yourself  free  from  the  miserable  pagan  dualism  which,  in  order  to  avoid  a 
difi&culty,  ascribes  half  the  creation  to  a  good  God,  and  half  to  some  malignant 
demiurge  whom  the  good  God  seems  powerless  to  destroy.  It  is  the  Lord;  let 
Him  do  as  seemeth  Him  good.  The  mountain  of  moral  evil  cannot  be  insur- 
mountable without  denial  of  the  truthfulness  or  obliteration  of  the  omnipotence 
of  our  Father,  who  is  greater  than  all;  and  when  we  tremble  at  the  hideous  misery 
in  the  world  and  the  dread  possibilities  of  evil  with  which  we  are  only  too  familiar 
in  our  own  hearts,  it  is  well  to  hear  the  message,  "  Fear  not,  child  of  earth,  only 
believe."  I  think  the  very  briefest  analysis  of  human  history  wiU  prove  that 
what  men  call  evil  has  ever  been  a  stimulus  of  social  action,  material  enterprise, 
aggressive  discovery.  Before  Copernicus,  people  believed  that  the  earth  was  the 
centre  of  the  solar  system,  and  they  had  to  learn  that  the  little  speck  of  star-dust 
which  they  thought  was  the  centre  of  the  universe,  was  only  one  of  the  thousands 
of  worlds  going  round  the  sun.  People  believed  in  geocentric  motion  when  they 
should  have  beUeved  in  heliocentric  motion.  Similarly,  conventional  reUgion, 
sometimes  very  religious  indeed,  is  in  danger  of  being  autocentric.  "  I  am  here 
to  save  my  own  soul."  Well,  it  has  to  be  converted  into  Theocentri<j.  You 
have  to  see  that  God  is  the  centre,  that  the  purpose  and  will  of  God,  as  it  has 
been  revealed  through  Christ  for  the  whole  race,  is  that  around  which  your  little 
life  is  to  revolve.     (Canon  Wilber force.) 

Ver.  12.  Behold,  these  shall  come  from  far. — Gathered  from  afar  : — Whatever 
bearing  this  prophecy  may  have  had  upon  the  time  of  Isaiah,  or  the  time  immedi- 
ately after  him,  it  has  an  important  bearing  on  the  time  of  the  Messiah,  and  the 
course  of  His  kingdom.  The  sentiment  is  that  the  redeemed  Church  of  Christ 
shall  come  from  every  part  of  the  earth.     This  sentiment  is  in  accordance  with — 

1.  The  genius  of  the  Gospel.  II.  The  spirit  of  prophecy.  III.  The  cotnasK 
OF  events.     Conclusion — 1.  This   subject  recognises   the  brotherhood  of  man. 

2.  It  imposes  a  stupendous  obligation  on  the  Church.  (J.  Rawlinson.)  The 
land  of  Sinim. — The  land  of  Sinim  : — As  coming  after  the  reference  to  the  west, 
it  is  naturally  looked  for  in  the  far  east,  and  so  has  very  generally  been  understood 
of  the  Chinese.  The  common  designation  of  China  among  nations  of  South  Asia 
outside  of  China  is  Tsin,  and  in  the  form  of  Sin  this  name  had  been  introduced 
among  the  Arabians  and  Syrians.  It  is  also  observed  that  the  Chinese  dynasty 
of  Tsin  began  to  reign  about  B.C.  255.  For  ten  centuries  before  Christ  the  Chinese 
had  commercial  relations  with  the  west.  (J.  Macpherson,  M.A.)  The  land 
of  Sinim  (the  Sinites): — The  last  word  is  a  hopeless  enigma.  As  the  only  proper 
name  in  the  verse  the  writer  must  have  had  some  special  reason  for  mentioning 
it;  and  the  only  reason  that  can  be  plausibly  imagined  is  that  Sinim  lay  on  the 
utmost  limit  of  his  geographical  horizon.  This  would  exclude  two  suggested 
identifications:  (1)  the  Canaanite  Sinites  of  Gen.  x.  17,  and  (2)  Sin  (Pelusium),  on 
the  nearest  border  of  Egypt.     {Prof.  J.  Skinner,  D.D.) 

Vers.  14-16.  But  Zion  said,  The  Lord  hath  forsaken  me. — The  more  than  -parental 
loveof  God  : — I.  Zion's  building.  "  Zion  "  here  signifies  the  true  Church.  Else- 
where she  is  called  Jerusalem;  and  very  frequently  is  she  spoken  of  as  a  city  or 
building.  1.  If  we  inquire  who  is  her  builder,  we  find  that  there  is  but  one  who 
can  properly  be  called  by  this  name.  The  founder  of  the  true  Church  is  He  by 
whom  God  made  the  worlds  ;  therefore  she  is  called  "  The  city  of  the  Lord,  the 
Zion  of  the  Holy  One  of  Israel  "  (Isa.  Ix.  14).  The  plan  of  Zion's  building  is  older 
than  the  world  itself.  The  Lord  buildeth  up  Zion,  and  He  alone.  Whenever  He 
uses  any  of  us  as  His  under-builders.  He  first  makes  us  sensible  of  our  own  weak- 
ness; the  excellency  of  the  power  is  of  Him,  and  not  of  us.  2.  If  we  inquire 
ooncerning  the  foundation  of  the  true  Church,  an  apostle  meets  us  with  an  answer: 
"  Other  foundation  can  no  man  lay  than  that  is  laid,  which  is  Jesus  Christ."     3.  If 


CHAP,  xux.]  ISAIAH.  539 

we  consider  the  building  itself,  it  consists  of  lively  stones.  4.  The  "  operations  " 
of  the  great  Master-builder  are  not  uniform,  but  marked  by  "  diversity."  Some 
stones  are  separated  from  their  quarry,  and  brought  off  by  a  preparatory  process, 
in  a  gradual  and  gentle  manner.  Others  again,  are  shivered  from  their  worldly 
holds,  as  by  the  explosion  of  rocks.  If  we  closely  inspect  the  building,  we  find 
the  lively  stones  admirable  for  their  unity,  evenness,  and  mutual  conformity. 
II.  Zion's  complaint.  We  have  heard  of  Zion,  the  city  and  dwelling-place  of 
our  God:  and  that  "  the  Lord  loveth  the  gates  of  Zion  "  (Psa.  Lxxxvii.  2).  But 
how  faithfully  and  ardently  He  loves  her,  she  herself  does  not  always  consider. 
Why  else  that  complaint  which  now  comes  under  our  notice  ?  It  is  acknowledged 
that  circumstances  may  arise,  under  which  nothing  may  appear  more  just  than 
this  complaint  of  Zion.  III.  God's  promise.  "  Can  a  woman  forget,"  &c.  (F. 
W.  Krummacher,  D.D.)  The  complainings  of  Zion  silenced  : — I.  What  there 
IS  US  OTTRSELVES  TO  MAKE  US  FEAR  LEST  GoD  SHOULD  FORSAKE  XJS.  Our  very  fears 
have  often  a  great  show  of  reason  in  them;  though  they  may  be  excessive,  they 
are  not  wholly  unfounded-  As — 1.  When  we  recollect  how  often  we  have  forgotten 
and  forsaken  Him.     2.  When  the  aspect  of  providence  is  dark  and  mysterious. 

3.  When  the  mind  appears  to  be  bereft  of  its  ordinary  supports  and  consolations. 

4.  When  a  great  and  prevailing  doubt  obtains  as  to  the  safety  of  our  state  af tei-  all. 
XL  What  there  is  in  God  to  convince  His  Chitrch  that  He  never  will  forsake 
HER.  I.  It  is  contrary  to  His  nature — as  contrary  to  His  nature  to  forget  and 
forsake  His  Church,  as  it  is  contrary  to  the  nature  of  a  kind  and  tender  mother  to 
forget  and  forsake  her  child.  Our  Lord  teaches  us  to  reason  from  the  less  to  the 
greater.  "  If  ye,  being  evil,  know  how  to  give,  how  shall  not  your  Father,"  &c. 
2.  It  is  contrary  to  His  promise.  "  Yet  will  I  not  forget  thee."  3.  It  is  contrary 
to  the  character  of  His  dispensations,  for  He  never  has  forsaken  His  Church.  4.  It 
is  contrary  to  His  people's  own  soljer  expectations.  For  Zion  does  not  in  her 
heart  believe  her  own  prophetic  forebodings.  She  stiU  speaks  of  Him,  not  only 
as  "  the  Lord  "  in  one  part  of  the  verse,  but  as  "  my  Lord  "  in  the  other — which 
she  would  never  do,  as  a  reasonable  person,  had  she  finally  forgotten  or  forsaken 
God,  or  beUeved  that  God  had  finally  forgotten  and  forsaken  her.  {S.  Thodey.) 
The  saints'  final  perseverance  secured  by  the  love  of  God  : — I.  There  are  many  things 
that  often  condttce  to  suspicions  on  the  part  of  the  children  of  God 
CONCERNING  THE  Lord's  GOODNESS.  1.  Times  of  deep  affliction;  of  dark  and 
mysterious  providences ;  days  in  which  there  is  no  light.  2.  These  are  seasons 
oftentimes,  in  which,  through  our  frailty,  imperfection,  sin,  and  sinfulness,  the 
weakness  of  our  faith  and  the  strength  of  unbelief,  the  believer  may  be  led  to  form 
some  suspicions  concerning  the  goodness  of  God.  3.  Besides  this,  there  may  be 
periods  of  deep  spiritual  temptation.  4.  Some  laxity  in  the  walk  will  oftentimes 
bring  strength  to  a  man's  suspicions  here.  5.  He  may  be  in  a  state  of  spiritual 
captivity.  II.  The  great  security  that  is  here  placed  before  us.  "  Can 
a  woman  forget  her  sucking  child,"  &c.  There  cannot  be  a  figure  more  tender, 
more  comprehensive.  It  is  the  figure  of  a  helpless  babe:  there  is  the  tenderness 
of  the  tie ;  there  is  the  helplessness  of  the  child ;  and  there  is  the  very  posture  of  the 
child;  and  they  are  all  full  of  great  and  important  truth;  and  yet  according  to 
those  last  words — "  they  may  forget ;  yetwill  I  not  forget  thee  " — this  is  not  enough. 
As  though  the  Lord  would  say.  If  My  love  were  not  more  than  this,  it  would  not 
be  enough  to  secure  thee.  III.  God  does  give  proof  that  this  tender  love 
DOES  not  forget.  "  They  may  forget;  yet  will  I  not  forget  thee."  He  does  not 
forget  their  persons.  "  Behold,  I  have  graven  thee  upon  the  palms  of  My  hands." 
They  are  borne  upon  the  heart  of  the  great  High  Priest.  He  forgets  not  the  work 
of  grace  that  is  in  them.  He  forgetteth  not  the  trials  of  His  saints.  He  forgetteth 
not  the  returns  of  His  people.  He  forgetteth  not  the  walk  of  His  saints.  He 
forgetteth  them  not  in  death.  («/.  H.  Evans,  M.A.)  A  mournful  complaint 
and  satisfactory  answer  : — What  a  difference  is  there  between  the  judgment  of 
God,  and  the  judgment  of  men!  We  have  a  very  striking  instance  of  this  in  the 
passage  before  us.  L  A  mournful  complaint.  "  Zion  said.  The  Lord  hath 
forsaken  me,"  He  exercises  no  care  over  me;  "  and  my  Lord  hath  forgotten  me," 
He  feels  towards  me  no  affection.  Let  us  look  into  this.  The  wicked  think  too 
much  of  the  goodness  of  God ;  they  mistake  the  evidences  of  His  general  bounty 
for  the  evidences  of  His  peculiar  friendship.  WhUe  they  hve  regardless  of  His 
praise,  they  yet  hope  in  His  mercy,  and  persuade  themselves  that  He  will  not  be 
rigorous  to  mark  what  they  have  done.  The  very  reverse  of  this  is  the  disposition 
of  all  the  subjects  of  Divine  grace.     They  know  that  self-deception  is  tremendous; 


540  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xlix. 

and  therefore  they  are  afraid  of  self-deception ;  and  they  often  carry  their  solicitudes 
here  beyond  the  point  of  duty,  and  in  reading  and  in  hearing  they  will  apply  to 
themselves  what  was  intended  only  for  others;  for,  as  an  old  divine  says,  There 
is  no  beating  the  dogs  out  without  making  the  children  cry."  Let  us  try  to  trace 
up  this  complaint  to  its  source;  and  to  see  the  wretchedness  that  conclusion  must 
produce  in  the  minds  of  all  God's  people.  There  is  a  philosophical  notion,  which 
18  of  a  semi-infidel  character,  which  supposes  that  the  providence  of  God  is  general, 
and  not  particular.  He  regards  the  whole,  and  therefore  must  regard  the  parts; 
for  the  whole  is  always  made  up  of  parts;  and  He  does  regard  the  most  minute 
parts.  It  is  a  religious  despondency  that  affects  Christians.  It  is  not  the  influence 
of  infidelity,  but  it  is  the  influence,  flrst,  of  unbelief,  or  weakness  of  faith.  It 
arises  also  from  ignorance.  It  springs  sometimes  from  the  suspension  of  Divine 
manifestation.  We  may  also  mention  conflicting  with  the  troubles  of  life.  We 
remark  once  more,  the  delay  of  God  in  the  accomplishment  of  prayer.  But  who 
can  find  language  properly  to  describe  the  wretchedness  that  such  a  conclusion 
as  this,  "  The  Lord  hath  forsaken  me,  and  my  God  hath  forgotten  me,"  must  ever 
produce  in  the  minds  of  the  godly?  The  misery  that  the  child  of  God  feels  from 
such  a  conclusion,  may  be  accounted  for  by  three  things.  1.  That  he  loves  God. 
2.  He  entirely  relies  upon  Him.  3.  He  has  enjoyed  Him  already.  He  has  tasted 
that  the  Lord  is  gracious,  axid  therefore  prays,  "  Evermore  give  us  this  bread." 
XL  Thb  satisfactoey  answer.  1.  The  improbabihty  of  the  fear.  This  is 
metaphorically  expressed:  "  Can  a  woman  forget  her  sucking  child,"  &c. 
There  are  two  supposable  cases  here.  She  may  be  bereft  of  reason,  or  not 
survive,  and  so  not  be  able  to  remember  it.  She  may  be  criminally,  unnaturally, 
led  to  hide  herself  from  her  own  flesh.  2.  The  certainty  of  the  assurance,. 
"  Yet  will  I  not  forget  thee."  3.  The  all-sufi&ciency  of  the  truth  estab- 
lished, i.e.  the  perpetual  regard  of  God  towards  us.  Conclusion — 1.  Distresses 
and  discouragements  are  not  incompatible  with  religion.  2.  How  concerned  God 
is,  not  only  for  His  people's  safety,  but  for  their  comfort  also.  3.  Let  His  people 
fail  in  with  His  designs.  Let  them  be  humbled,  and  mourn  over  their  ignorance, 
perverseness,  impatience,  and  unbelief;  that  they  have  entertained  such  hard 
thoughts  of  God;  that  they  have  so  often  charged  Ham  foolishly,  and  unrighteously, 
and  imkindly.  4.  Do  not  take  the  comfort  belonging  to  a  gracious  state,  \mles3 
you  are  the  subjects  of  a  gracious  character.  (W.  Jay.)  Unworthy  doubts  of 
Ood  : — How  common  is  this  weakness  of  unbelief  in  man;  how  natural  are  these 
unworthy  doubts  of  God  to  us.  Nor  is  it  difficult  to  perceive  the  sovtrces  from 
which  this  inability  to  trust  in  God's  goodness  springs.  1.  There  is  the  guilt  of 
which  we  are  conscious  in  our  own  hearts;  the  sense  of  evil  desert  in  ourselves. 
2.  Then  there  comes  in  the  undeniable  fact  of  suffering  in  himself  and  all  around 
him,  which  apparently,  at  first  sight,  justifies  this  attitude  of  mind,  and  certainly 
confirms  it.  3.  We  thus  discover  a  third  source  from  which  distrust  in  God  springs ; 
the  perversions  which  have  been  substituted  for  the  pure  Gospel  by  different 
branches  of  the  Christian  Church.     (J.  N.  Bennie,  LL.B.) 

Vers.  15,  16.  Can  a  woman  forget  her  sucking  child  7 — Unjorgetting  love: — 
1.  As  Jehovah  had  just  been  announcing  His  purposes  of  world-wide  mercy — 
salvation  "  to  the  ends  of  the  earth  " — we  may  take  these  words,  in  the  first 
instance,  as  the  plaint  of  literal  Israel:  "  The  Lord  has  chosen  the  Gentile,  and 
in  doing  so,  He  nas  forgotten  me.  The  wild  olive  has  been  grafted  in  ;  will  not 
the  natural  olive  be  rejected?  "  2.  Or  it  may  be  taken  as  the  wail  of  the  Church 
universal,  prompted  in  times  of  rebuke  and  blasphemy,  defection  and  apostasy, 
cruelty  and  persecution,  when  blood  is  flowing  and  martyr-fires  are  lighted; 
or  worse,  when  faith  is  weak,  and  love  is  waxing  cold,  and  knees  are  bowing  to 
Baal.  3.  Or  again,  the  utterance  may  be  regarded  as  the  exclamation  of  the 
individual  soul,  amid  frowning  providences  and  baffling  dispensations.  In  all 
the  three  cases  Jehovah's  reply  is  the  same — the  assurance  of  His  inviolable, 
unchanging,  everlasting  love.  This  He  enforces  by  two  arguments.  I.  The 
mothbe's  instinctive  fondness  for  her  babe.  II.  The  graver's  art  (ver.  16). 
(J.  R.  Macduff,  D.D.)  Maternal  love  and  tenderness  is  the  strongest  and  most 
enduring  of  instincts.  It  holds  potent  sway  even  in  the  brute  creation,  and 
among  the  lower  tribes  of  animated  being.  We  see  it  exemplified  in  the  timid 
bird  hovering  with  wailing  cry  over  the  threatened  or  despoiled  nest,  and,  despite 
its  feebleness  and  weakness,  ready  to  give  battle  to  the  invader.  We  see  it  in 
Uie  familiar  scriptural  emblem  of  the  hen  gathering  her  brood  of  chickens  under 


CHAP.  xLix.]  ISAIAH.  641 

her  wings  in  threatening  storm,  or  in  the  hour  of  danger.  We  see  it  in  the  bolder 
watch  the  mother  of  the  eaglets  keeps  over  her  young  in  the  eyry  on  cliff  or  moun- 
tain-side, as  she  disputes,  with  ruffled  plumage,  the  assault  of  the  plunderer. 
We  see  it  in  the  proverbial  fierceness  of  the  "  bear  robbed  of  her  whelps,"  or  in 
the  maddened  roar  of  the  lioness  bereaved  of  her  cubs,  as  she  lashes  her  sides 
with  her  tail,  and  makes  mountain  and  forest  "  ring  with  the  proclamation  of 
her  wrongs."  But  it  is  the  mother  and  her  infant  babe  (the  human  parent)  in 
whom  this  deep-seated  instinct  has  its  highest,  truest  illustration.  (Ihid.) 
Maternal    affection    the    most    appropriate     image    of    Divine     benevolence : — 

1.  Mark  some  stbikino  points  of  resemblance  between  the  compassion 
OP  A  MOTHER  AND  THE  COMPASSION  OP  GoD.  1.  The  first  distinctive  feature  in 
the  affection  of  a  mother  is,  that  it  is  coeval  with  the  maternal  character.  It 
springs  at  once  into  existence,  vigorous  and  perfect,  and  becomes  henceforth 
a  permanent  and  essential  part  of  her  constitution.  Other  afiPections  are  pro- 
duced, and  nourished  by  degrees.  Love  to  parents,  gratitude  to  benefactors, 
sympathy  with  the  afflicted,  and  benevolence  to  our  kind,  are  all,  in  a  very  con- 
siderable degree,  the  offspring  of  instruction  and  of  association.  But  of  maternal 
tenderness,  it  may  be  truly  said  that  it  is  an  instantaneous  creation;  the  stamp 
of  heaven,  impressed  upon  a  mother's  heart,  and  acting  in  all  its  vigour  the  moment 
she  hears  the  cry  of  helplessness.  Just,  but  fair,  representations  of  that  love 
of  God,  which  is  far  above  aU  similitude,  as  it  passes  all  understanding !  In  im- 
planting this  affection  in  a  mother's  bosom,  He  has  furnished  the  best  and  most 
winning  image  of  His  own  benignity;  and  by  interweaving  it  in  her  constitution. 
He  intends  to  show  that  His  own  love  is  not  a  feeling,  adventitious  or  fluctuating; 
but  an  unchangeable  attribute  of  His  being — that  predominating  principle,  of 
which  His  other  attributes  are  nothing  more  than  varied  ramifications.  A  mother, 
however,  is  frail  and  fallible.  She  may  forget  even  her  sucking  child.  But 
God  cannot  forget  to  love.  2.  The  next  quality  distinctive  in  the  love  of  a  mother 
is  that  of  all  affections  with  which  we  are  acquainted  it  is  the  purest  in  its  source, 
and  the  most  disinterested  in  its  exercise.  No  created  being  can,  in  any  way, 
be  profitable  unto  God,  for  He  is  independent  and  unchangeable,  both  in  nature 
and  in  happiness.  All  the  life  which  He  communicates;  all  the  means  of  en- 
joyment which  He  spreads  through  creation;  every  faculty  and  every  affection 
that  ennobles  and  blesses  the  rational  soul  in  its  highest  advances  to  perfection, 
springs  from  the  exhaustless  source  of  unmixed  and  unbounded  benevolence. 
3.  The  last  quality  I  shall  remark  as  peculiarly  striking  in  the  love  of  a  mother 
is,  that  its  exertions  and  sacrifices  are  not  only  disinterested,  but,  beyond  every 
other  example,  patient  and  persevering.  And  as  the  love  of  a  mother  is  not  over- 
come by  provocation,  neither  is  it  cmlled  by  absence.  Such  is  the  almost  un- 
conquerable patience  of  a  mother's  love.  StiU  it  may  be  conquered;  and  she 
may  cease  to  have  compassion.  But  God  cannot  forget  His  children.  How 
beautifully  do  the  temper  and  conduct  of  Jesus  display  the  riches  and  the  per- 
severance of  Divine  love !  It  is  said  of  Him  by  an  evangelist,  "  that  having 
loved  His  own.  He  loved  them  to  the  end  ":  and  the  remark  is  verified  by  His 
whole  life.  II.  Draw  from  the  subject  some  practical  conclttsions.  It 
is  impossible  not  to  advert  to  the  design  and  uses  of  this  wonderful  affection, 
as  indicating,  in  the  most  striking  manner,  the  unbounded  wisdom  and  benignity 
of  Providence.  If  we  had  but  this  one  evidence,  it  would  be  sufficient  to  con- 
vince a  reflecting  mind  that  a  paternal  care  is  exercised  in  the  government  of 
the  world,  and  that  the  tender  mercies  of  Grod  are  over  all  His  works.  Take 
away  the  strong  instinctive  feelings  of  a  mother,  and  what  becomes  of  the  living 
creation?  But  whilst  man,  in  common  with  other  animals,  owes  to  this  instinctive 
feeling,  the  preservation,  growth,  and  vigour  of  his  body,  he  owes  to  it,  what 
is  still  more  important,  the  commencement  of  those  moral  affections  which  con- 
stitute, in  their  progressive  development,  the  strength  and  the  glory  of  his  moral 
and  social  life.  It  is  in  the  bosom  of  a  mother  that  these  affections  are  generated. 
Accustomed  to  look  to  that  bosom  for  nourishment,  protection,  and  pleasiu-e, 
it  raises  thence  its  infant  smiles;  it  catches  answering  smiles  of  complacency 
and  joy;  its  heart  begins  to  dilate  with  instinctive  gladness;  its  sensations  of 
delight  are  gradually  modified  into  those  of  fondness  and  gratitude;  and  as  it 
continues  to  mark  the  love  of  a  mother,  it  learns  from  her  the  art  of  loving.  Re- 
flections— 1.  As  we  owe  everything  to  a  mother,  we  should  be  as  unwearied 
in  paying  the  debt,  as  she  was  in  the  acts  of  tenderness  by  which  it  is  contracted. 

2.  Let  us  learn  to  form  just  conceptions  of  the  Divine  nature,  and  of  the  great 


642  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xux. 

ends  of  the  Divine  government.  (J.  Lindsay,  D.D.)  Better  than  a  mother: — 
Our  subject  is  the  superiority  of  an  "  utter  "  over  an  "  almost "  impossibility. 
I.  Almost  an  impossibility.  If  it  is  not  an  impossibility  for  a  woman  to  forget  her 
sucking  child,  it  is  certainly  next  door  to  one,  and  the  Lord  could  not  have  obtained 
any  higher  earthly  illustration  of  His  tenderness  and  love.  In  order  to  show  it 
you  will  see  the  Lord  has  pressed  into  His  service  a  variety  of  words,  all  serving 
to  increase  the  beauty  of  the  simile.  1.  "  Woman."  God  who  made  the  heart 
of  woman  as  well  as  man,  knows  that  there  is  a  tenderness  in  her  disposition 
exceeding  that  of  man's,  and  therefore  He  chooses  the  highest  type  to  illustrate 
His  sympathy.  2.  It  is  not  merely  the  tenderness  of  the  woman,  but  the  tender- 
ness of  the  woman  who  is  a  "  mother."  God  not  only  employs  the  highest  type, 
but  the  highest  specimen  of  that  type.  Mother!  What  associations  of  loving 
tenderness  are  in  the  very  name.  The  word  touches  a  secret  spring  in  the  heart, 
and  conjures  back  scenes  of  the  past.  It  brings  to  view  in  the  dim  distance  a 
Bweet  face  that  used  to  bend  over  oiu-  little  cot  at  eventide,  and  impress  a  kiss 
upon  ovu:  brow.  It  reminds  of  one  who  used  to  smile  when  we  were  happy,  and 
weep  when  obliged  to  correct  us.  It  calls  to  remembrance  one  who  always  seemed 
interested  in  our  little  tales  of  adventure,  and  never  laughed  at  our  little  sorrows 
that  seemed  to  us  so  large.  It  was  her  face  we  gazed  last  upon  when  we  went 
away  to  school,  and  it  was  into  her  arms  we  first  rushed  when  the  holidays  brought 
us  home.  It  was  thought  of  her  that  kept  us  in  the  house  of  business,  and  held 
us  back  from  sin  with  unseen  silken  cords;  and  when  those  dark  locks  of  hers 
became  silvered  with  advancing  age,  we  only  thought  an  extra  charm  had  crowned 
her  brow.  You  forget  not  the  love  that  was  strong  as  death,  and  escaped  from 
her  dying  lips  in  words  you  treasure  to  this  day.  Her  name  has  still  a  magic 
power.  There  is  one  feature  in  a  mother's  love  that  must  be  mentioned,  as  it 
constitutes  the  chiefest  beauty  of  the  type.  Her  love  is  not  love  drawn  forth 
by  prosperity  or  dispelled  by  adversity.  She  loves  her  son  not  because  of  what 
he  has,  but  because  of  what  he  is.  3.  There  is  yet  one  other  delicate  touch  in 
the  picture  which  gives  to  it  the  perfection  of  beauty.  The  tenderness  described 
is  not  only  that  of  a  woman,  or  even  that  of  a  mother,  but  of  a  mother  towards 
her  "  sucking  child."  This  crowns  the  description,  and  should  drive  away  the  last 
remnant  of  unbelief.  I  can  imagine  a  mother  sometimes  forgetting  her  grown- 
up son,  who  has  long  since  attained  the  age  of  manhood,  and  is  himself  the  head 
of  a  family.  I  can  believe  that  the  daughter,  married  into  some  other  family 
and  well  provided  for,  is  not  always  in  the  thoughts  of  her  mother,  but  it  is  almost 
impossible  to  conceive  the  sucking  child  for  a  moment  forgotten.  Its  very  hfe 
is  dependent  on  the  mother's  thoughtfulness,  and  its  utter  helplessness  becomes 
its  security.  Yea,  she  could  not  forget  it  even  if  she  desired;  nature  itself  would 
become  a  sharp  reminder,  and  her  own  pain  would  plead  her  infant's  cause.  Be- 
hold, how  God  has  strengthened  His  illustration  by  every  possible  means.  Then 
comes  the  question,  "  Can  she  forget?  "  There  is  a  moment's  pause,  and  the 
answer  is  heard,  "  She  may."  Mothers  may  forget  their  sucking  children,  either 
literally,  or  by  acting  as  if  they  did.  II.  An  uttee  impossibility.  The  true 
magnitude  of  an  object  can  only  be  understood  by  comparison,  and  it  is  by  contrast 
the  mind  grasps  the  reality.  "  God  only  knows  the  love  of  God."  Its  height 
and  depth,  its  length  and  breadth  defy  all  measurement.  "  They  may  forget." 
"  Yet,"  and  it  is  this  word  that  shoots  aloft  beyond  all  human  sight,  "  will  I 
not  forget  thee."  1.  His  nature  forbids  it.  "  God  is  love."  Not  "  loving," 
poor  mortal  can  be  that,  but  love  itself.  2.  His  promises  forbid  it.  3.  The  travail 
of  the  Redeemer's  soul  is  alone  sufficient  argument,  that  they  for  whom  it  was 
endured  shall  be  remembered.  4.  His  honour  renders  it  an  utter  impossibility. 
{A.  0.  Brown.)         Ood's  love  greater  than  a  mothers  : — I.  A  mother's  love  foe 

HEE  CHILD  IS  BUT  A  FEACTION  DERIVED  FROM  God's  LOVE  FOE  MAN.  II.  ThB 
STEONGEST  AFFECTION  OF  A  MOTHER  IS  SUBJECT  TO  MUTATIONS.       1.  The  COnduct 

of  the  mother  may  cool  or  even  quench  this  spark  within  her.  In  some  cases 
debauchery,  intemperance,  and  vice  have  extinguished  this  sacred  fire,  and  the 
parent  has  become  unnatural  and  cruel  to  her  offspring.  2.  The  conduct  of  the 
child  may  cool  or  even  quench  this  spark  within  her.  But  the  affection  of  the 
Eternal  is  subject  to  no  such  mutation.  "  Who,  then,  shall  separate  us  from 
the  love  of  God,"  &c.  III.  The  object  of  the  mother's  love  is  not  so  near 
TO  her  as  the  object  of  the  Divine  affection.  1.  The  mother  is  not  the 
owner  of  the  child.  His  hmbs,  faculties,  being,  are  not  hers.  But  God  is  the 
absolute  proprietor  of  man.     "  All  souls  are  His."    2.  The  mother  is  not  the 


CHAP,  xux.]  ISAIAH.  643 

life  of  the  child.  Her  life  is  distinct  from  that  of  her  offspring.  But  God  is  the 
very  life  of  man.     IV.  The  failure  of  the  mother's  affection  towards  her 

OFFSPRING   WOUXD   NOT   BE   SO   TERRIBLE   AS   THE   FAILURE   OF   God'S   AFFECTION 

TOWARDS  THE  oooD.  If  God  forsakes  a  man,  he  is  ruined  inevitably,  and  for 
ever.  (Homilist.)  A  mothers  love: — The  following  touching  incident  was 
related  by  the  Rev.  Norman  Macleod,  of  Glasgow : — His  father  was  preaching 
on  the  love  of  God,  and  to  illustrate  his  subject,  referred  to  a  poor  widow  in  Scotland, 
who,  being  distressed  for  rent,  resolved  to  go,  carrying  her  helpless  babe  with 
her,  and  borrow  of  a  friend  that  lived  ten  miles  from  her  home.  The  journey 
lay  across  a  bleak  mountain,  and  the  day  was  rough  and  snowy.  Soon  after 
her  departiu:e,  the  neighbours  felt  it  would  be  impossible  for  her  to  reach  her 
destination,  and  feared  that  her  very  life  was  endangered  by  the  snowstorm  that 
was  rapidly  gaining  in  violence.  Twelve  strong  men  resolved  to  go  in  search; 
far  away  on  the  mountain  they  found  the  poor  woman  lying  in  the  snow,  sleeping 
the  sleep  of  death.  Where  was  the  babe  ?  In  a  sheltered  nook  in  the  rock,  close  by, 
warm  and  aHve,  because  wrapped  in  the  garments  of  which  the  mother  had  deprived 
herself.  A  mother^ a  love  unchangeable  : — As  I  was  walking  down  our  street 
the  other  day,  I  saw  a  woman,  good  and  pme,  refined  and  cultured,  walking 
with  a  man  whose  face  was  red  with  drink,  whose  form  and  look  bore  marks  of 
deepest  dissipation.  I  stepped  to  her  side,  and  said,  "  Woman,  why  are  you 
with  this  man?"  She  little  heeded  me  at  first,  as  she  supported  his  unsteady 
steps.  "  Woman,  why  do  you  not  hand  him  over  to  the  police?  "  She  drew 
herself  up,  and  with  a  righteously  indignant  anger,  mixed  with  pathos,  said, 
"  Sir !  I  am  his  mother."     (C.  S.  Macfarland,  Ph.D.) 

Ver.  16.  Behold,  I  have  graven  thee  upon  the  palms  of  My  hands. — OocTs 
loving  regard  for  His  people : — It  is  not  only  the  name  of  Zion  which  is  engraved 
on  His  hands,  but  her  pictiure.  And  it  is  not  her  picture  as  she  lies  in  her  present 
ruin  and  solitariness,  but  her  restored  and  perfect  state.  "  Thy  walls  are 
continually  before  Me."  {Prof.  0.  A.  Smith,  D.D.)  Reality: — This  is  faith's 
answer  to  all  the  ruin  and  haggard  contradiction  of  outward  fact.  Reality  is 
not  what  we  see:  reality  is  what  God  sees.  What  a  thing  is  in  His  sight  and 
to  His  purpose,  that  it  really  is,  and  that  it  shall  ultimately  appear  to  men's 
eyes.  To  make  us  believe  this  is  the  greatest  service  the  Divine  can  do  for  the 
human.  It  was  the  service  Christ  was  always  doing,  and  nothing  showed  His 
Divinity  more.  He  took  us  men  and  He  called  us,  unworthy  as  we  were.  His 
brethren,  the  sons  of  God.  He  took  such  an  one  as  Simon,  shifting  and  unstable, 
a  quicksand  of  a  man,  and  He  said,  "  On  this  rock  I  will  build  My  Church."  A 
man's  reality  is  not  what  he  is  in  his  own  feelings,  or  what  he  is  to  the  world's 
eyes;  but  what  he  is  to  God's  love,  to  God's  yearning,  and  in  God's  plan.  If  he 
believe  that,  so  in  the  end  shall  he  feel  it,  so  in  the  end  shall  he  show  it  to  the 
eyes  of  the  world.  {Ibid.)  The  ivriting  on  God's  hands: — These  words  are 
a  singularly  bold  metaphor,  drawn  from  the  strange  and  half-savage  custom, 
which  lingers  still  among  sailors  and  others,  of  having  beloved  names  or  other 
tokens  of  affection  and  remembrance  indelibly  inscribed  on  parts  of  the  body. 
Sometimes  worshippers  had  the  marks  of  the  god  thus  set  on  their  flesh;  here 
God  writes  on  His  hands  the  name  of  the  city  of  His  worshippers.  I.  Here  we 
have  set  forth  for  our  strength  and  peace  A  Divine  remembrance,  more  tender 
THAN  A  mother's  (ver.  15).  When  Israel  came  out  of  Egypt,  the  Passover  was 
instituted  as  "  a  memorial  unto  all  generations,"  or  as  the  same  idea  is  otherwise 
expressed,  "  it  shall  be  for  a  sign  unto  thee  upon  thine  hand."  Here  God  repre- 
sents Himself  as  doing  for  Israel  what  He  had  bid  Israel  do  for  Him.  They  were, 
as  it  were,  to  write  the  supreme  act  of  deliverance  in  the  Exodus  upon  their  hands, 
that  it  might  never  be  forgotten.  He  writes  Zion  on  His  hands  for  the  same 
purpose.  The  text  does  not  primarily  refer  to  individuals,  but  to  the  community. 
But  the  recognition  of  that  fact  is  not  to  be  allowed  to  rob  us  of  the  preciousness 
of  this  text  in  its  bearing  on  the  individual.  For  God  remembers  the  community, 
not  as  an  abstraction  or  a  generalised  expression,  but  as  the  aggregate  of  all  the 
individuals  composing  it.  We  think  of  '  the  Church,"  and  do  not  think  of  the 
thousands  of  men  and  women  who  make  it  up.  We  cannot  discern  the  separate 
stars  in  the  galaxy.  But  God's  eye  resolves  what  to  us  is  a  nebula,  and  every 
single  glittering  point  of  light  hangs  rounded  and  separate  in  the  heaven.  There 
is  no  jostling  nor  confusion  in  the  wide  space  of  the  heart  of  God.  They  that 
go  before  shall  not  hinder  them  that  come  after.     That  remembrance  which 


644  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xlix. 

each  man  may  take  for  himself  is  infinitely  tender.  The  echo  of  the  music  of 
the  previous  words  still  haunts  the  verse,  and  the  remembrance  promised  in  it 
is  touched  with  more  than  a  mother's  love.  "  I  am  poor  and  needy,"  says  the 
Psalmist,  "  yet  the  Lord  thinketh  upon  me."  But  do  not  let  us  forget  that  it 
was  a  very  sinful  Zion  that  God  thus  remembered.  II.  Thb  Divxne  bxubm- 
BBA:t7CB  ouiDES  THE  DiviNB  ACTION.  The  palm  of  the  hand  is  the  seat  of  strength, 
of  work;  and  so,  if  Zion's  name  is  written  there,  that  means  not  only  remembrance, 
but  remembrance  which  is  at  the  helm,  as  it  were,  which  is  moulding  and  directing 
all  the  work  that  is  done  by  the  hand  that  bears  the  name  inscribed  upon  it. 
For  His  Church,  as  a  whole.  He  does  more  amidst  the  affairs  of  nations.  You 
remember  the  grand  words  of  one  of  the  psalms.  "  He  reproved  kings  for  their 
Bakes,  saying.  Touch  not  Mine  anointed,  and  do  My  prophets  no  harm."  It  is 
no  fanatical  reading  of  the  history  of  earthly  politics  and  kingdoms,  if  we  recognise 
that  one  of  the  most  prominent  reasons  for  the  Divine  activities  in  moulding 
the  kingdoms,  setting  up  and  casting  down,  is  the  advancement  of  the  Kingdom 
of  heaven  and  the  building  of  the  City  of  God.  "  I  have  graven  thee  on  the  palms 
of  My  hands,"  and  when  the  hands  go  to  work,  it  is  for  the  Zion  whose  likeness 
they  bear.  But  the  same  thing  applies  to  us  individually.  "  All  things  work 
together "  ;  they  would  not  do  so,  unless  there  was  one  dominant  wiU  which 
turned  the  chaos  into  a  cosmos.  "  All  things  work  together  for  my  good." 
in.  The  Divine  bembmbbancb  wobes  all  things,  to  bealisb  a  gbbat  idbal 
END,  AS  yet  tJNBEACHED.  "  Thy  walls  are  continually  before  Me."  When 
this  prophecy  was  uttered,  the  Israelites  were  in  captivity,  and  the  city  was  a 
wilderness;  "the  holy  and  beautiful  house  where  the  fathers  praised  Thee  was 
burned  with  fire,"  the  walls  were  broken  down;  rubbish  and  solitude  were  there. 
Yet  on  the  palms  of  God's  hands  were  inscribed  the  walls  which  were  nowhere 
else!  They  were  "  before  Him,"  though  Jerusalem  was  a  ruin.  It  means  that 
Divine  remembrance  sees  "  things  that  are  not,  as  though  they  were."  In  the 
midst  of  the  imperfect  reality  of  the  present  condition  of  the  Church  as  a  whole, 
and  of  us,  its  actual  components,  it  sees  the  ideal,  the  perfect  vision  of  the  perfect 
future.  So,  the  most  radiant  optimism  is  the  only  fitting  attitude  for  Cmristian 
people  in  looking  into  the  future,  either  of  the  Church  as  a  whole,  or  of  themselves 
as  individual  members  of  it.  I  A.  Madaren,  D.D.)  Ood  remembering  His 
people: — This  figure  suggests — 1.  Constant  bembmbbancb.  It  is  impossible 
not  to  observe  that  which  is  written  on  the  hands.  If  writing  were  on  the  face, 
it  would  not  be  seen,  on  the  breast  it  would  not  be  observed.  But  the  hands 
are  always  before  us.  11.  Devoted  help.  The  hands  are  for  work,  and  the 
Almighty  wishes  us  to  infer  that  His  people  are  not  only  remembered,  but  helped. 
m.  Permanent  considebation.  I  have  graven  thee."  Writing  will  wear 
off.  That  which  is  graven  will  and  must  remain.  IV.  PAiNFUii  effobt.  To 
engrave  on  the  hands  evidently  refers  to  the  process  of  engraving,  which  causes 
pain.  Has  God  made  no  sacrifices  for  His  people  7  Is  not  every  redeemed  soul 
written  in  crimson  marks  in  the  palm  of  the  hands  and  the  feet  of  the  crucified 
Redeemer?  {Homilist.)  A  precious  assurance: — God's  promises  are  not 
exhausted  by  one  fulfilment.  They  are  manifold  mercies,  so  that  after  you  have 
opened  one  fold,  and  found  out  one  signification,  you  may  unfurl  them  still  more 
and  find  another  which  shall  be  equaUy  true,  and  then  another,  and  another,  and 
another,  almost  without  end.  I  believe  that  the  text  belongs  primarily  to  the  seed 
of  Israel ;  next,  to  the  whole  Church  as  a  body ;  and  then  to  every  individual  member. 
I.  I  intend  to  consideb  oub  text  vebballt,  pulling  it  to  pieces  word  by  word. 
Every  single  word  deserves  to  be  emphasised.  1.  We  will  begin  with  the  word, 
"  Behold.'  "  Behold,  I  have  graven  thee  upon  the  palms  of  My  hands."  "  Behold  " 
is  a  word  of  wonder;  it  is  intended  to  excite  admiration.  Wherever  you  see  it 
hung  out  in  Scripture,  it  is  like  an  ancient  sign-board,  signifying  that  there  are  rich 
wares  within,  or  like  the  hands  which  solid  readers  have  observed  in  the  margin  of 
the  older  Piuitanic  books,  drawing  attention  to  something  particularly  worthy  of 
observation.  Here,  indeed,  we  have  a  theme  for  marvelling.  "  Behold '  in 
our  text  is  intended  to  attract  particular  attention.  There  is  something  here 
worthy  of  being  studied.  2.  We  pass  on  now  to  the  next  word,  "  I."  The  Divine 
Artist  is  none  other  than  God  Himself.  Here  we  learn  the  lesson  which  Christ 
afterwards  taught  His  disciples — "  Ye  have  not  chosen  Me,  but  I  have  chosen 
you."  No  one  can  write  upon  the  hand  of  God  but  God  Himself.  Neither  our 
merits,  prayers,  repentance,  nor  faith,  can  write  our  names  there.  Nor  did  blind 
chance  or  mere  necessity  of  fate  inscribe  our  names;  but  the  living  hand  of  a  living 


CHAP,  xux.]  ISAIAH.  645 

Father,  unprompted  by  anything  except  the  spontaneous  love  of  His  own 
heart.  Then,  again,  if  the  Lord  hath  done  it,  there  is  no  mistake  about  it.  If 
some  human  hand  had  cut  the  memorial,  the  hieroglyphics  might  be  at  fault; 
but  since  perfect  wisdom  has  combined  with  perfect  love  to  make  a  memorial 
of  the  saints,  then  no  error  by  any  possibility  can  have  occtirred.  3.  Take  the 
next  word,  "  have."  Not  "  I  will,"  nor  yet  "  I  am  doing  it "  ;  it  is  a  thing  of 
the  past,  and  how  far  back  in  the  past!  Oh,  the  antiquity  of  this  inscription! 
"  From  everlasting  to  everlasting  Thou  art  God  "  ;  from  everlasting  to  ever- 
lasting Thou  art  the  same,  and  Thy  people's  names  are  written  on  Thy  hands ! 
Yet,  methinks,  there  may  be  a  prophetic  reference  here  to  a  later  writing  of  the 
names,  when  Jesus  Christ  submitted  His  outstretched  palms  to  those  cruel  graving- 
tools,  the  nails.  Then  was  it  surely,  when  the  executioner  with  the  hammer 
smote  the  tender  hands  of  the  loving  Jesus,  that  He  engraved  our  names  upon  the 
palms  of  His  hands.  4.  But  the  next  word  is  "  graven."  The  Rev.  John  Anderson, 
of  Helensburgh,  told  me  that  while  travelling  in  the  East  he  has  frequently  seen 
persons  with  the  portraits  of  their  friends  upon  their  hands,  so  that  wherever 
they  went,  as  one  in  this  country  would  carry  the  portrait  of  a  friend  in  a  brooch 
or  a  watch,  they  carry  these  likenesses  printed  on  their  palms.  I  said  to  him, 
"  Surely  they  would  wash  out."  They  might  by  degrees,  he  said,  but  they 
frequently  had  them  pricked  in  with  strong  indelible  ink,  so  that  there,  whilst 
the  palm  lasts,  there  lasts  the  memorial  of  the  friend.  Surely  this  is  what  the 
text  refers  to.  I  have  graven  thee  in;  I  have  not  merely  printed  thee,  stamped 
thee  on  the  surface,  but  I  have  permanently  cut  thee  into  My  hand  with 
marks  which  never  can  be  removed.  That  word  "  graven  "  sets  forth  the  per- 
petuity of  the  inscription.  6.  Shall  we  take  that  next  word?  "  Thee."  It 
does  not  say,  "  thy  name."  "  Tliee."  See  the  fulness  of  this!  I  have  graven 
thy  person,  thine  image,  thy  case,  thy  circumstances,  thy  sins,  thy  temptations, 
thy  weaknesses,  thy  wants,  thy  works;  I  have  graven  everything  about  thee, 
all  that  concerns  thee;  I  have  put  thee  altogether  there,  it  is  not  an  outline 
sketch,  you  see;  it  is  a  full  picture,  as  though  the  man  himself  were  there.  Darest 
thou  dream  that  God  forgets  thee?  6.  We  have  hitherto  taken  every  word, 
but  we  must  now  take  the  next  two  or  three.  We  are  engraven,  where?  Upon 
His  "hands."  We  are  not  graven  upon  a  seal,  for  a  seal  might  be  slipped  from 
the  finger  and  laid  aside,  but  the  hand  itself  can  never  be  separated  from  the 
living  God.  It  is  not  engraven  on  the  huge  rock,  for  a  convulsion  of  nature  might 
rend  the  rock  with  earthquake,  or  the  fretting  tooth  of  time  might  eat  the  inscrip- 
tion out;  but  our  record  is  on  His  hand,  where  it  must  last,  world  without  end. 
Not  upon  the  back  of  His  hands  where  it  might  be  supposed  that  in  days  of  strife 
and  warfare  the  inscription  might  suffer  damage,  but  there  upon  the  palms  of  His 
hands  where  it  shall  be  well  protected.  The  tenderest  part  shall  be  made  the 
place  of  the  inscription ;  that  to  which  He  is  most  likely  to  look,  that  which  His 
fingers  of  wisdom  enclose,  that  by  which  He  works  His  mighty  wonders,  shall 
be  the  unceasing  remembrance,  pledging  Him  never  to  forget  His  chosen.  It 
does  not  say,  "I  have  graven  thee  upon  the  palm  of  one  hand,"  but  "  I  have 
graven  thee  upon  the  palms  of  My  nands."  There  are  two  memorials.  His 
saints  shall  never  be  forgotten,  for  the  inscription  is  put  there  upon  the  palm 
of  this  hand,  the  right  Imnd  of  blessing,  and  upon  the  palm  of  that  hand,  the 
left  hand  of  justice.  I  see  Him  with  His  right  hand  beckon  me — "  Come,  ye 
blessed,"  and  He  sees  me  in  His  hand;  and  on  that  side  He  says,  "  Depart,  ye 
cursed,"  but  not  to  me,  for  He  sees  me  in  His  hand,  and  cannot  curse  me.  Oh, 
my  soul,  how  charming  this  is,  to  know  that  His  left  hand  is  under  Thy  head, 
while  His  right  hand  doth  embrace  thee.  11.  Consider  thb  text  as  a  whole. 
1.  God's  remembrance  of  His  people  is  constant.  The  hands,  of  course,  are  con- 
stantly in  union  with  the  body.  In  Solomon's  Song  we  read,  "  Set  me  as  a  seal 
upon  thiae  arm."  Now  this  is  a  very  close  form  of  remembrance,  for  the  seal 
is  very  seldom  laid  aside  by  the  Eastern,  who  not  being  possessed  with  skill  in 
the  art  of  writing  his  name,  requires  his  seal  in  order  to  affix  his  signature  to  a 
document;  hence  the  seal  is  almost  always  worn,  and  in  some  cases  is  never  laid 
aside.  A  seal,  however,  might  be  laid  aside,  but  the  hands  never  could  be.  It 
has  been  a  custom,  in  the  olden  days  especially,  when  men  wished  to  remember  a 
thing,  to  tie  a  cord  about  the  hand,  or  a  thread  around  the  finger,  by  which  memory 
would  be  assisted;  but  then  the  cord  might  be  snapped  or  taken  away,  and  so 
the  matter  forgotten,  but  the  hand  and  that  which  is  printed  into  it  must  be 
constant  and  perpetual.    Oh,  Christian,  by  night  and  by  day  God  is  always  thinking 

VOL.  II.— 35 


646  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [ohap.  xlix. 

of  you.  2.  This  recollection  on  God's  part  is  practical.  We  are  engraven  upon 
His  heart — this  is  to  show  His  love;  we  are  put  upon  His  shoulders — this  is  to 
show  that  His  strength  is  engaged  for  us;  and  also  upon  His  hands,  to  show  that 
the  activity  of  our  Lord  will  not  be  spared  from  us;  He  will  work  and  show  Himself 
strong  for  His  people;  He  brings  His  omnipotent  hands  to  effect  our  redemption. 
What  would  be  the  use  of  having  a  friend  who  would  think  of  us,  and  then  let 
his  love  end  in  thought?  The  faithfulness  we  want  is  that  of  one  who  will  act 
in  our  defence.  Do  you  see  the  drift  of  it  ?  If  He  moulds  a  world  between  His 
palms,  and  then  sends  it  wheeUng  in  its  orbit,  it  is  between  those  palms  which 
are  stamped  with  the  likeness  of  His  sons  and  daughters,  and  so  that  new  work 
shall  minister  to  their  good.  If  He  divides  a  nation,  it  is  always  with  the  hand 
that  bears  the  remembrance  of  Zion.  Scripture  itself  tells  us,  "  When  He 
divided  the  nations.  He  set  the  bounds  of  the  people  according  to  the  number 
of  the  children  of  Israel."  The  great  wheel  of  providence,  when  God  makes  it 
revolve,  works  for  the  good  of  His  people.  3.  This  is  an  eternal  remembrance. 
4.  This  memorial — how  tender !  We  have  heard  of  one,  an  eastern  queen,  who  so 
loved  her  husband  that  she  thought  even  to  build  a  mausoleum  to  his  memory  was 
not  enough.  She  had  a  strange  way  of  proAring  her  affection,  for  when  her  husband's 
bones  were  burned  she  took  the  ashes  and  drank  them  day  by  day,  that,  as  she  said, 
her  body  might  be  her  husband's  living  sepulchre.  It  was  a  strange  way  of  showing 
love,  and  there  was  a  marvellous  degree  of  strange,  fanatical  fondness  in  it.  But 
what  shall  I  say  of  this  Divine  sympathetic  mode  of  showing  remembrance, 
by  cutting  it  into  the  palms?  It  appeareth  to  me  as  though  the  King  had  said, 
"  Shall  I  carve  My  people  upon  precious  stones?  Shall  I  choose  the  ruby,  the 
emerald,  the  topaz?  No;  for  these  all  must  melt  in  the  last  general  conflagration. 
What  then?  Shall  I  write  on  tablets  of  gold  or  silver?  No,  for  all  these  may 
canker  and  corrupt,  and  thieves  may  break  through  and  steal.  Shall  I  cut  the 
memorial  deep  on  brass?  No,  for  time  would  fret  it,  and  the  letters  would  not 
long  be  legible.  I  will  write  on  Myself,  on  My  own  hand,  and  then  My  people 
will  know  how  tender  I  am,  that  I  would  sooner  cut  into  My  own  flesh  than  forget 
them."  5.  This  memorial  is  most  surprising.  Scripture,  which  is  full  of  wonders, 
yet  allows  a  "  Behold  "  to  be  put  before  this  verse — "  Behold!  "  6.  It  is  also 
!nost  consolatory.  When  God  would  meet  Zion's  great  doubt — "  God  hath 
forgotten  me,"  He  cheers  her  with  this — "  I  have  graven  thee  upon  thepalms 
of  My  hands."  There  is  no  sorrow  to  which  our  text  is  not  an  antidote.  lEf.  And 
now  we  come  to  excite  yotj  to  the  duty  which  such  a  text  suggests.  1.  Is 
it  not  your  duty  to  leave  your  cares  behind  you  to-day?  2.  If  you  must  not 
have  cares,  you  should  not  have  those  deep  sorrows  and  despairs.  3.  If  this  text 
is  not  yours,  how  your  mouths  ought  to  water  after  it.  (C  H.  Spurgeon.) 
Neither  forsaken  nor  forgotten : — I.  The  feab  expressed,  which  led  to  the  utterance 
of  our  text  (ver.  14).  1.  This  fear  has  been  felt  by  very  many.  2.  It  has  some- 
times been  very  plaintively  expressed.  3.  And  some,  too,  are  very  obstinate 
while  they  are  in  that  condition,  for  the  passage  contains  a  very  unreasonable 
complaint.  Read  verse  13,  "  Jehovah  hath  comforted  His  people,"  &c.  Yet, 
in  the  teeth  of  that  double  declaration  Zion  said,  "  Jehovah  hath  forsaken  me," 
&c.  4.  I  suppose  Zion  came  to  this  conclusion  because  she  was  in  banishment. 
5.  Yet  I  think  that  there  is  some  measure  of  grace  mingled  with  this  fear.  Let 
me  read  you  this  passage  straight  on:  "  Jehovah  hath  comforted  His  people,  and 
will  have  mercy  upon  His  afflicted.  But  Zion  said,  Jehovah  hath  forsaken  me, 
and  my  Lord  hath  forgotten  me."  She  did  not  say  that  till  God  had  visited  her. 
There  is  in  your  soul  a  longing  after  God.  This  is  the  work  of  His  Holy  Spirit! 
Besides,  although  the  text  is  a  word  of  complaint,  it  has  also  in  it  a  word  of  faith: 
"  my  Lord."  Did  you  notice  that?  Zion  calls  Jehovah  hers  though  she  dreams 
that  He  has  forsaken  her.  I  do  love  to  see  you  keep  the  grip  of  your  faith  even 
when  it  seems  to  be  illogical.  Hold  on  this  assurance  with  a  death-grip.  If 
you  cannot  hold  on  with  both  hands,  hold  on  with  one;  and  if  sometimes  you 
can  hold  with  neither  hand,  hold  on  with  your  teeth.  II.  The  comfoet  bestowed. 
"  I  have  graven  thee,"  &c.  What  is  it  that  makes  it  so  certain  that  God  cannot 
forget  His  people?  1.  God  remembers  His  eternal  love  to  His  people,  and  His 
remembrance  of  them  is  constant  because  of  that  love.  God's  suffering  love 
secures  His  memory  of  us.  2.  By  the  expression,  "  I  have  graven  thee  upon 
the  palms  of  My  hands,"  God  seems  to  say,  "  I  have  done  so  much  for  you  tnat 
I  can  never  forget  you."  3.  When  a  memorial  is  engraven  on  a  man's  hand, 
then  it  is  coimected  with  the  man's  life.     III.  An  inspection  invitbd.     "  Behold." 


GHAP.  XLix.]  ISAIAH.  647 

rv.  A  BETTJRN  stTGGESTED.  1.  Does  Christ  remember  us  as  I  have  tried  to 
prove  that  He  does?  Then  let  us  remember  Him.  "  This  do  ye  in  remembrance 
of  Me."  2.  Let  us  not  only  remember  Him  at  His  table,  but  let  us  remember 
Him  constantly.     Let  us,  as  it  were,  carry  His  name  upon  the  palms  of  our  hands. 

3.  Practically.  We  ought  so  to  wear  Christ  on  our  hands  that  whatever  we  touch 
should  be  thereby  Christianised.  4.  Let  the  name  of  Christ,  and  your  memory 
of  it,  become  vital  to  you.     (Ibid.) 

Vers.  18-23.  Lift  up  thine  eyes  romid  about. — Promises  for  the  Church : — 
I.  The  promised  inceease  of  the  Chtjbch.  1.  In  number.  2.  In  honour.  3.  In 
triumph.  II.  The  ENCOUKAGEirENT  it  affords  tjs  for  missionary  exertions. 
1.  God  is  able  to  effect  this  great  thing.  2.  He  has  engaged  to  effect  it.  3.  The 
beginnings  are  already  visible  before  our  eyes.  Apphcation — (1)  Let  our  expecta- 
tions of  it  be  enlarged.  (2)  Let  our  prayers  for  it  be  poured  forth.  (3)  Let  our 
exertions  be  used.     (C.  Simeon,  M.A.) 

Vers.  20,  21.  The  children  which  thou  shalt  have. — The  Church  a  mother : — 
I.  The  Chubch  is  a  mother.  1.  Because  it  is  her  privilege  to  bring  forth  into  the 
world  the  spiritual  children  of  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ.  2.  When  these  little  ones 
are  bom,  the  Church's  business  is  to  feed  them.  3.  It  is  her  endeavour  to  train 
up  her  children.  4.  She  will  be  always  ready  to  nurse  her  children  when  they 
become  sick.  11.  The  Church  is  sometimes  bereaved.  1.  Some  of  her  nominal 
children  she  loses  by  spiritual  death.  They  are  not  really  her  children  at  all.  They 
looked  so  much  like  hers  that  she  could  hardly  tell  them.  2.  She  loses  many  by 
death  temporal.  3.  Sometimes  by  a  trying  providence.  IIL  The  Chtjrc!H  has 
sometimes  to  be  carried  away  captive.  How  often  has  this  happened  to  the 
Church  of  God  in  the  olden  times!  The  Church  has  been  carried  into  foreign 
countries.  Sometimes  she  has  been  cruelly  persecuted.  Often,  too,  the  Church 
has  been  compelled  to  seek  a  refuge  in  foreign  countries.  Days  of  slumber  have 
come  over  the  Church,  and  days  of  heresy  too.  IV.  The  Church  has  had  a 
MARVELLOUS  INCREASE  AFTER  ALL  HER  CAPTIVITIES,  and  all  her  bereavements 
have  hitherto  always  worked  for  her  good.  Never  has  the  Church  lost  her  children 
without  obtaining  many  more.  1.  The  first  thing  which  astonishes  the  Church 
when  she  opens  her  eyes  after  her  captivity  is  to  notice  the  number  of  her 
children.  2.  Also  their  character —  these."  {C.  H.  Spurgeon.)  Church 
increase : — I.  There  is  a  decrease  going  on  in  the  Church  of  God  on  earth. 
Zion  is  represented  here  as  mourning  for  the  children  that  she  had  lost.  The 
Jewish  Church  in  the  olden  times  saw  her  sons  and  daughters  slain  with  the  sword, 
or  carried  away  captive.  Afterwards,  she  saw  the  great  majority  of  the  nation 
refusing  Christ,  and  turning  away  from  Him,  and  thus  the  Jewish  Church  was 
minished  and  brought  very  low.  The  same  thing  has  happened  in  many  other 
cases.  We  must  naturally  expect  to  see,  in  each  separate  Church  of  Jesus  Christ, 
a  certain  process  and  measure  of  decrease.  1.  Some  are  being  drafted  from  us  to 
supply  the  choirs  of  heaven  with  fresh  minstrelsy.  2.  Each  separate  Church  will 
also  have  a  measure  of  decrease  through  the  removal  of  God's  servants  from  one 
place  to  another.  3.  There  is  another  source  of  decrease  over  which  we  must 
greatly  grieve,  and  that  is  the  backsliding  of  many  professors.  4.  The  sifting 
process  by  which  the  chaff  is  removed  from  the  wheat.  II.  There  is  an  increasb 
to  be  expected  in  the  Church  of  God.  There  are  new  converts  yet  to  come 
in,  these  children  which  Zion  is  to  have,  after  she  has  lost  the  others.  1.  These 
new  converts  are  needful.  No  Church  can  be  healthy  without  the  constant  in- 
fusion of  fresh  blood.  2.  Therefore,  she  ought  to  have  every  preparation  for  their 
reception.     3.  AH  who  love  the  Lord  should  labour  earnestly  on  their  behalf. 

4.  When  we  are  all  pleading  and  labouring  for  an  increase  to  the  Church,  it  will 
come;  and  when  it  comes,  it  is  probable  that  we  shall  be  astonished  at  the  number 
of  those  that  come.  "  The  cluldren  which  thou  shalt  have,"  &c.  5.  The  next 
thing  that  was  a  subject  for  astonishment  to  Zion  was  how  those  converts  came 
to  be  bom  at  alL  "  Who  hath  begotten  me  these?  "  6.  But  what  Zion  wondered 
at  next  was,  how  they  had  been  nurtured,  for  she  says,  "  Who  hath  brought  up 
these?  "  7.  A  further  cause  of  wonder  was,  the  sudden  appearance  of  this  great 
increase.  Zion  inquires,  "  These,  where  had  they  been?  "  Shall  I  tell  you  where 
they  had  been?  Some  of  them  had  been  in  godly  families  with  fathers  and 
mothers  praying  for  them.  Some  of  them  had  been  in  the  Sunday  school,  in 
classes  where  brethren  and  sisters  love  their  children,  and  never  rest  till  they 


648  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  vt.tx 

bring  them  to  decision  for  Christ.  They  had  been  under  the  influence  of  Christian 
wives,  Christian  children,  sometimes  Christian  brothers  and  sisters;  and  so,  at 
last,  the  gracious  influence  took  effect  upon  them,  by  the  power  of  God's  Spirit, 
and  out  they  came.  There  are  great  numbers  still  under  those  sacred  influences, 
for  they  also  are  sure  to  come  in  due  time,  and  say,  "  We  are  on  the  Lord's  side." 
Then  there  were  some  others.  "  Where  had  they  been?  "  They  had  long  been 
listening  to  the  Gospel,  regularly  sitting  in  their  pews.  But  there  were  others 
about  whom  I  might  well  ask,  "  These,  where  had  they  been  ?  "  On  the  Lord's  day, 
at  home  in  their  shirt-sleeves;  on  week-nights,  at  the  theatre  or  the  music-hall, 
finding  enjoyment  in  the  lowest  form  of  amusement.  "  Where  had  they  been?  " 
Never  troubling  church  or  chapel;  but  God,  in  His  providence,  brought  them  for 
once  to  hear  the  Word,  and,  as  one  said  to  me,  "  I  laid  hold  of  something,  and 
something  laid  hold  of  me,  and  I  shall  never  part  with  it,  for  it  will  never  part  with 
me."  "  These,  where  had  they  been?  "  I  cannot  tell  you  where  they  had  all 
been;  some  had  been  at  death's  dark  door,  buried  in  sorrow  and  in  sin,  in  poverty 
and  in  vice.  III.  All  thtngs  should  encotjragb  the  Chtjech  to  seek  labqbb 
INCREASE.  L  There  is  the  same  power  to  convert  ten  thousand  as  there  is  to 
convert  one.  2.  We  ought  to  be  encouraged  by  the  fact  that  the  converts  come 
in  answer  to  prayer.  3.  Further,  since  the  converts  come  from  all  sorts  of  places, 
let  us  carry  the  Gospel  into  all  sorts  of  places.     (Ibid.) 

Ver.  23.  And  kings  shall  be  thy  nursing  fathers. — Princes  and  ruler  a  should 
promote  the  will  of  Ood: — I.  Princes,  or  rulers,  as  such,  are  the  posi- 
tive SERVANTS  OF  GOD,  AND  THEREFORE  ARE  BOUND  TO  PROMOTE,  ABOVB 
ALL    THINGS,    THE    INTERESTS    OF    HiS    REVEALED    WORD,    AND    THE    HONOUR    OF 

His  name,  in  the  welfare  op  His  Church  and  people.  It  must  be  a 
seK-evident  proposition,  that  all  who  are  entrusted  with  the  ruling  authority 
are  bound  to  promote  the  best  interests  of  the  people  over  whom  they  preside. 
But  the  question  is,  in  what  do  the  best  interests  of  a  people  consist?  Do  they 
consist  in  the  extension  of  territory;  the  multiplicity  of  resources;  the  advance- 
ment of  the  arts  and  sciences;  of  wealth  and  honour;  business  and  trade?  We 
deny  the  assertion.  As  our  Lord  speaks  of  a  man,  so  we  of  a  nation,  prince,  or 
ruler.  What  is  either  he  or  they  profited  if  they  gain  the  whole  world  and  lose 
their  own  soul?  Or  what  shall  a  man,  or  any  number  of  men,  give  in  exchange 
for  their  soul?  The  soul,  then,  in  all  its  vast,  interesting,  immortal,  and  eternal 
concerns,  is  the  chief  business  of  man.  1.  From  whence  does  the  kingly  office, 
or  ruling  authority  proceed  ?  Does  it  proceed  from  the  people  ?  No.  It  proceeds 
from  God.  2.  We  must  not  omit  to  notice  the  manner  in  which  the  Lord  speaks 
of  princes  and  rulers  in  His  Word.  They  are  always  spoken  of  in  reference  to 
their  accountability  to  Him,  and  as  bound  to  the  execution  of  His  will,  and  the 
promotion  of  His  glory.  3.  It  may  be  useful  here  to  adduce  what  is  the  estimate 
of  our  own  Church  on  this  subject.     11.  Such  a  discharge  or  disregard  of 

THIS  obligation  WILL  ALWAYS  YIELD  A  SURE  TEST  OF  THEIR  OWN  STATE  AND 
THE  CHARACTER  OF  THEIR  GOVERNMENT,  AND  WHERE  IT  PREVAILS  IT  WILL  BE 
VISIBLE,   MORE    OR  LESS,   IN  ALL   THHTP   W4V9    .«!)  WORKS.       We   are   tO  judge  of 

the  character  and  condition  of  pnnces  and  rulers,  as  such,  as  we  do  of  private 
individuals  and  professing  Christians,  as  such,  and  of  the  character  of  their  govern- 
ment as  we  do  of  the  general  tenor  of  a  man's  life.  1.  There  will  be  deep  humilia- 
tion before  God,  coupled  with  free  and  ingenuous  confessions  both  of  individual 
and  national  guilt  (2  Sam.  vii.  1-29).  2.  There  will  also  be  a  desire  to  seek  the 
guidance  and  acknowledge  the  hand  of  God  in  everything.  3.  There  will  also 
be  a  fixed  determination  to  banish  all  wicked  men  from  their  presence,  and  to 
exclude  them  from  their  councils.  4.  There  will  be  an  anxiety  to  fill  all  the 
offices  of  the  Church  and  State  with  men  that  fear  the  Lord,  love  the  truth,  and 
who  will  labour  with  heart  and  hand  in  the  same  cause  for  the  advancement  of 
true  godliness.  If  the  foregoing  statements  are  based  on  the  authority  of  Divine 
truth,  the  following  deductions  will  ensue  as  some  of  their  most  obvious  results — 
(1)  It  is  not  an  easy  office  to  be  exalted  to  a  throne,  or  to  be  entrusted  with  the 
affairs  of  a  kingdom!  (2)  How  obvious  is  the  connection  between  the  Church 
and  State!  An  established  religion,  nationally  considered,  is  nothing  more 
than  that  "  form  of  godliness,"  according  to  God's  revealed  will,  which  is  selected, 
supported,  and  maintained  by  the  State,  for  the  general  benefit  of  alL  (3)  How 
great  is  the  guilt  of  ungodly  princes  and  rulers,  and  how  earnestly  should  we 
pray  for  them  that  God  may  bless  and  direct  them  in  all  Hia  ways!     {R.  ShitUer.) 


OHAF.  zux.]  ISAIAH.  M9 

Tbey  sliaU  not  be  asliaiiied  tliat  wait  for  Me. — Waiiing  upon  Ood: — 
L  Waitino  TJFOy  God  signifies — 1.  A  patient  expectation  of  the  fulfilment 
of  His  Word,  whether  it  be  prophecy  or  promise.  2.  A  regular  attention  to  the 
means  of  grace.  IL  The  kbsult  op  waitino  upon  God.  Not  disappointment 
and  humiuation,  but  prayers  answered,  and  hopes  fulfilled.     1.  The  penitent. 

2.  The  Christian  reljdng  upon  the  providential  help  of  a  covenant-keeping  God. 

3.  The  believer  waiting  for  the  accomplishment  of  God's  purpose  in  his  sancti- 
fication.  4.  The  Christian  waiting  for  the  coming  of  Christ.  {T.  BlaeHey,  M.A.) 
"  Wait "  : — This  is  the  one  word  which  the  Divine  wisdom  often  seems  to  utter 
in  rebuke  of  human  impatience.  Man  is  eager,  hurried,  impatient,  but  Grod 
is  never  in  haste.  The  Divine  proceedings  are  dow — everywhere  slow.  L  We 
see  it  in  the  realms  of  natueb  asj>  Providbncb.  1.  The  history  of  the  earth. 
2.  The  movement  of  the  seasons.  The  changes  of  day  and  night,  &c.,  how  slow, 
how  gradual,  how  imperceptible!  3.  The  history  of  all  Ufe  and  growth. 
IL  Bbvealbd  bbligion  includes  much  in  harmony  with  these  facts.  1.  The  long 
interval  between  the  promise  of  a  Saviour  and  His  advent.  2.  The  manner 
of  His  coming  (Luke  xvii.  20).  3.  The  history  of  revealed  religion  since  the 
advent.  4.  The  spiritual  history  of  the  individual  believer.  5.  The  events 
which  make  up  the  story  of  a  life.  With  regard  to  much  in  our  history,  we  are 
expected  to  wait  for  the  revelations  of  the  world  to  come.     {R.  Vaugmn,  D.D.) 

Vers.  24,  25.  Shall  the  prey  he  taken  fi:om  the  mighty? — Deliverance 
from  bondage  and  death: — L  The  state  of  fallen  man  is  one  of  misebt 
AND  bondage.  1.  Misery  because  he  is  the  prey  of  a  mighty  tyrant,  the  deviL 
2.  Bondage  because  he  is  the  slave  of  a  terrible  master,  death.  11.  Jbstts  can 
SET  ITS  FBBB,  FOE  Hb  HAS  CONQUEEED.  Jesus  has  been  the  Great  Emancipator 
of  men.  (T.  Bates,  M.A.)  "  SJiaU  the  prey  he  taken  from  the  mighty  ?  " — I.  Who 
abb  "  THE  MIGHTY,"  AND  WHO  ABE  "  THE  PBBY  "  ?  The  immortal  souls  of  men 
are  the  prey,  and  all  the  combined  powers  of  darkness  are  "  the  mighty."    11.  How 

SHALL        THE   PBBY  "    BE  TAKEN   FEOM   "  THE   MIGHTY"?      NotMng   short  of  the 

almighty  power  of  God  is  calculated  to  effect  this  great  and  important  work. 
But  God  is  almighty,  and  God  is  infinitely  able  and  infinitely  willing  to  rescue 
the  helpless  sons  of  men.  Our  Lord  Jesus  Christ  is  that  great  and  glorious  Being 
who  gave,  whilst  here  below,  signal  manifestations  of  His  power  to  take  "  the 
prey  "  from  "  the  mighty."  IIL  A  most  delightfctl  and  encoubaging  pbo- 
MISE.  "  I  will  contend  with  him  who  contendeth  with  thee,  and  I  will  save 
thy  children."  At  all  times,  in  every  season  of  trial  and  difficulty.  Let  the 
enemies  of  God  learn  an  important  lesson:  "  Woe  to  him  that  stadveth  with 
his  Maker!  "  He  will  save  His  Church  under  all  the  trials  and  temptations, 
the  dangers  and  difficulties  of  human  life.  Are  the  immortal  souls  of  men  "  the 
prey  "  ?  and  are  the  powers  of  darkness  "  the  mighty  "  ?  What  does  the  ungodly 
man  think  of  this?  (T.  Freeman.)  The  adversary  and  his  defeat: — L  Thb 
weapons  and  besoubces  of  the  enemy.  1.  Idolatry.  2.  Imposture.  Moham- 
medanism. 3.  Papal  superstition.  4.  The  daspotic  governments  of  the  earth. 
5.  Crime  in  its  varied  forms.  6.  A  more  liberal  sort  of  religion  which  shall  keep 
the  opposition  in  countenance,  and  enable  them  to  wield  the  name  and  institutions 
of  Christianity  against  Christianity,  sustained  by  such  as  live  in  pleasure,  and  will 
not  bow  the  mee  to  Christ.  7.  The  corruption  of  the  purity  of  revivals  of  religion. 
8.  The  sword.  Can  such  varied  and  mighty  resistance  to  the  truth  be  overcome? 
Can  the  earth  be  enlightened?  Can  the  nations  be  disenthralled?  Yes!  II.  How 
shall  events  so  desieable  be  accomplished  ?  1.  By  the  judgments  of  heaven. 
2.  By  the  universal  propagation  of  the  GospeL  3.  By  frequent  and,  at  last, 
general  revivals  of  religion.  4.  By  the  special  influence  of  the  Holy  Spirit.  5.  By 
a  new  and  unparalleled  vigour  of  Christian  enterprise.  But  what  can  be  done  ? 
There  must  be  in  the  Church  of  God — (1)  More  faith.  (2)  More  intense  love 
for  Christ.  (3)  More  decided  action.  (4)  More  courage.  (5)  Efforts  to  increase 
the  number  and  power  of  evangelical  Churches.  (6)  Special  effort  to  secure 
to  the  rising  generation  an  education  free  from  the  influence  of  bad  example, 
and  more  decidedly  evangelicaL  (7)  The  vigour  of  charitable  effort  must  be 
greatly  increased.  (8)  The  jealousies  of  Christians  must  yield-  (9)  We  must 
guard  against  the  dangers  peculiar  to  a  state  of  religious  prosperity.  Conclusion — 
Will  any  take  side  against  the  cause  of  Christ?  It  will  be  a  fearful  experiment! 
(Lyman  Beecher,  D.D.)  The  prey  taken  from  the  mighty: — Apply  the  text — 
L  LiTEBALLY — to  Israel's  release  from  Babylon.    IL  Sfibitxtally — to  man's 


550  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xlix. 


redemption  by  Christ.  EEL  Expkeimkntallt — to  the  Christian's  deliveranoe 
from  sin.  IV.  Pbospbotivblt — to  the  blessed  resurrection  from  the  dead 
promised  to  the  people  of  God.     (5.  Thodey.) 

Ver.  26.  And  I  will  feed  them  that  oppress  thee  with  their  own  flesh. — Self' 
destruction: — Here  is  a  terrible  picture  of  retributive  justice.  But  the  worda 
represent  a  general  principle,  which  is  universal,  in  the  punishment  of  sin.  The 
sinner  is  his  own  avenger.  L  Take  the  dbuitkabd.  He  is  drinking  the  poison, 
but  is  he  not  at  the  same  time  drinking  his  own  life,  and  consuming  his  own  happi- 
ness and  peace?  EL  Take  the  spendthbtft.  He  spends  his  money,  but  at 
the  same  time  eats  and  drinks  his  existence,  his  fortune,  his  home,  his  happiness. 
III.  Take  the  ttbant.  He  who  wins  his  throne  with  blood  shall  lose  it  in 
blood.  No  one  who  fights  can  be  without  foes,  and  if  he  has  conquered  them  at 
first  they  will  only  await  their  opportiinity  and  in  turn  conquer  him.  How  few 
who  have  raised  themselves  by  the  sword  have  not  died  by  the  sword!  IV.  Taeb 
THE  OPPBESSOES  OF  THE  Chbistian.  They  think  they  injure  God's  people. 
How  does  God  avenge  His  elect?  By  causing  them  to  feed  on  their  own  selves — 
the  bitterness  of  conscience,  the  remorse  of  evil  doing.  These  are  the  portion 
of  the  oppressors.  {Homilist.)  All  flesh  shall  know  that  I,  the  Lord,  am  thy 
Saviour. — An  all-sufficient  Deliverer: — ^L  A  woeld-widb  itbbd.  IT,  Ak 
ALL-sxTTFiciBNT  Delivebbb.  (J.  Smith,  D.D.)  The  safety  of  the  Church: — 
1.  God  is  the  Protector  of  the  Church,  and  no  weapon  formed  against  her  ahall 
prosper.  2.  The  Church's  enemies  shall  be  distracted  in  their  counsels,  and  left 
to  anarchy  and  overthrow.  3.  The  Church  shall  rise  resplendent  from  all  her 
persecutions,  and  shall  prosper  ultimately,  juBt  in  proportion  to  their  effort* 
to  destroy  it.    {A.  Barnett  DJ)). 


\ 


lli'i'mi'iiiin^ii°p'M'.'f1i'  Sfminary-Speer  Library 


1    1012  01128  4942 


Date  Due 

■  'f\ 

« 

■ 1 

'         '    U 

.  ■  :vB^ 

' 

.8w22'5fA 

ITT  ?'  1   ■•■■^ 

rM»t!  i  Iff 

c 

■Ji' 

■^*fi    ..^''Tf 

l> 

'■'  i  ?  4 

7   p'ff^'^F'^' 

1^ 

"J     %           v^ 

^■ 

upe^-  '41 

^       - 

* 

JA5    *J^% 

m 

FACULTV; 

_^^^^^|^^J<^£^ 

teu. 

yi^  ^ ,  '♦^ ' 

'•t  13-50 

/ 

2  7  -50 

/ 

,i>r  -1  T-c.  i 

/ 

^ 

/ 

