CORNELL 
UNIVERSITY 
LIBRARY.^    I 


>   'v 


Cornell  University 
Library 


The  original  of  this  book  is  in 
the  Cornell  University  Library. 

There  are  no  known  copyright  restrictions  in 
the  United  States  on  the  use  of  the  text. 


http://www.archive.org/details/cu31924101104507 


THE 

PULPIT    COMMENTARY, 

EDITED   BY  THE 

VERY  REV.  H.  D.  M.  SPENCE,  D.D., 

DEAN  OF  GLOUCESTER; 
AND   BY  THE 

REV.  JOSEPH  S.  EXELL,  M.A. 

WITH 

INTRODUCTIONS 

BY  THE 


VEN.  ARCHDEACON  F.  W.  FARRAR,  D.D.,  F.R.S.— RT.  REV.  H.  COTTERILL,  D.D.,  F.R.S  E. 

VERY  REV.  PRINCIPAL  J.  TULLOCH,  D.D.— REV.  CANON  G.  RAWLINSON,  M.A. 

REV.  A.  PLUMMER,  M.A.,  D.D. 


FUNK    &   WAGNALLS    COMPANY 
New  York  and  Toronto. 


THE 


PULPIT    COMMENTARY, 

EDITED  BV  THE 

VERY  RET.  H.  D.  M.  SPENCE,  M.A., 

DEAN  OP  OLOnCESTER  ; 


AND  BY  THE 


REV.  JOSEPH    S.   EXELL,  M.A. 


ISAIAH. 

(£3E|iosition  arib  fotniletits: 
By  rev.   eEORGE  RAWLINSON,  M.A., 

C&NOK  OF  CANTERBURY;  AND  CAMDEN  PROFESSOR  OF  ANCIENT   HISTORY,  OZFOKO. 

fiomilics  bu  tJoriouB  ^tttliois: 

REV.  PROF.  E.  JOHNSON,  M.A.  REV.  W.  CLARKSON,  B.A, 

KEV.   W.   M.   STATHAM.  REV.   R.  TUCK.  B.A. 

VOL.  11. 


FUNK    &   WAGNAI/LS    COMPAQ  1 
New  York  and  Toronto. 


THE 


BOOK  OF  THE  PEOPHET  ISAIAH. 


PART  II.    HISTOEIOAL  SKETCH  OF  EVENTS  IN 
THE  REIGN  OF  HEZEKIAH  (CH.XXXVL— XXXIX  ) 

Section  L    Sknnaohbbib's  Attempts  to  Ebduce  Jud^ba,  and  his  OvsaTHBow 

(CH.  XXXVI.,   XXXVII.). 


EXPOSITION. 


CHAPTER  XXXVl. 


If  the  Book  of  leaiah  be  Tegarded  as  the 
result  of  a  gradual  accretion  (see  the  General 
Introduction),  whether  that  accretion  is  to  be 
ascribed  to  the  action  of  the  prophet  himself 
or  to  that  of  later  editors,  we  may  equally 
consider  the  present  chapters  (ch.  xxxvi. — 
xxxiz.)  to  have  been  originally  an  "  Appen- 
dix," attached  as  furnishing  illustration  to 
the  preceding  prophecies,  and  at  one  time 
terminating  the  book.  They  will  thus  stand 
to  the  preceding  chapttrs  in  much  the  same 
relation  as  that  in  which  the  last  chapter  of 
Jeremiah  stands  to  the  rest  of  that  pmphet's 
work,  differing  only  in  the  fact  that  they 
are  almost  entirely  the  prophet's  own  com- 
position. Isaiali  wrote  tlie  history  of  the 
reign  of  Hezekiah  for  the  general  "  Book  of 
the  Chronicles  of  the  Kings  of  Judah"  (2 
Chron.  zxxii.  32).  From  tliis  "book"  the 
account  of  the  reign  which  we  have  in 
2  Kings  (xvlii. — xx.)  is  almost  certainly 
taken  (2  Kings  xx.  20).  The  close  verbal 
resemblance  between  the  present  chapters 
and  those  in  Kings,  and  the  differences, 
which  are  chiefly  omissions,  are  best  ac- 
counted for  by  supposing  that  both  are  ab- 
I8ALA.H — a. 


breviations  of  a  more  extensive  narrative, 
such  as  that  composed  for  the  original "  Book 
of  the  Chronicles  "  probably  was.  The  ab- 
breviation here  inserted  may  have  been 
made  either  by  the  prophet  liimself,  or  by 
a  "  co-editor."  ■  The  point  is  one  which  is 
not  very  important,  and  which  it  is  quite 
impossible  to  determine,  unless  arbitrarily. 

Yer.  1. — It  came  to  pass  in  the  fourteenth 
year  of  King  Hezekiah,  There  is  an  irre- 
concilable difference  between  ttiis  note  of 
time,  in  the  passage  as  it  stands,  and  the 
Assyrian  inscriptions  The  fourteenth  year 
of  Hezekiah  was  B.C.  714  or  713.  Sargon 
was  then  King  of  Assyria,  and  continued 
king  till  B.C.  705.  Sennacherib  did  not 
ascend  the  throne  till  t!iat  year,  and  he  did 
not  lead  an  expedition  into  Palestine  till 
B.C.  701.  Thus  thu  date,  as  it  stands,  is 
eleven  or  twelve  years  too  early.  It  is  now 
the  common  opinion  of  critics  that  the  chro- 
nology of  the  Books  of  Kings,  speaking 
guncrnlly,  is  "  a  later  adilition  to  the  Hebrew 
narrative"  (Cheyne,  'Isaiah,'  vol.  i.  p.  199, 
note  1).  It  is  uncertain  when  the  dates 
were  added ;  but  it  would  not  be  long  from 
the  time  when  the  addition  was  made  before 
"  Isaiah  "  would  be  brought  into  accord  with 
"Kings."  Another  view  is  that  the  date 
belongs  to  the  original  writings,  but  that  it 
has  suffered  corruption,  "fourteenth  "  having 
been  inbetituted  for  "twenty-sixth,"  frou 


THE  BOOK  OF  THE  PROPHET  ISAIAH,    [oh.  xxxvi.  1—22. 


an  aventrict  rendering  of  the  expression, 
"  in  those  days,"  which  introduces  the  narni- 
tive  of  ch.  xxxviii.  That  narratire  un- 
doubtedly belongs  to  Hezekiah's  fourteenth 
year.  A  third  view  la  that  of  Dr.  Hineks, 
who  suggests  a  derangement  of  the  text, 
which  has  attached  to  an  expedition  of 
Sennacherib  a  date  originally  belonging  to 
an  attack  by  Sargon.  He  supposes  the 
original  text  to  have  run  thus :  "  And  it 
came  to  pass  in  the  fourteenth  year  of  King 
Hezekiah  that  the  King  of  Assyria  came  up 
(against  him).  In  those  days  was  King 
Hezekiah  sick  unto  death,  etc.  (ch.  xxxviii., 
xxxix.).  And  Sennacherib,  King  of  Assyria, 
came  up  against  aU  the  defenced  cities  of 
Judah,  and  took  them,"  etc.  (oh.  xxxvi., 
xxxvii).  The  subject  has  been  treated  at 
considerable  length  by  Mr.  Oheyne  ('Pro- 
phecies of  Isaiah,'  vol.  i.  pp.  196 — 204),  who 
has  accidentally  ascribed  to  Sir  H.  Bawliii- 
son  the  second  of  the  above  theories,  which 
really  originated  witli  the  present  writer. 
Sennacherib,  King  of  Assyria.  The  Hebrew 
rendering  of  the  name  is  Sankherib,  the 
Greek  Sanacbaribus  or  Senaeheribus.  In 
the  Assyrian  the  literation  is  Sin-ahhi-irib— 
and  the  meaning  "  Sin  (the  moon-god)  multi- 
plies brother!."  Sin-akhi-irib  was  the  son 
and  successor  of  Sargon.  His  father  was 
murdered,  and  he  ascended  the  throne  in 
B.C.  705  (G.  Smith, '  Eponym  Canon,'  p.  67). 
Came  up  against  aU  the  defenced  cities; 
rather,  all  the  fenced  dties,  as  in  2  Kings 
xviii.  13,  or  "  all  thefortified  cities  "  (Oheyne). 
And  took  them,  Sennacherib  tells  us  that, 
in  the  campaign  of  his  fourth  year  (b.o.  701), 
he  "captured  forty-six  of  the  strong  cities" 
belonging  to  Hezekiah,  King  of  Judah,  while 
of  the  "  fortresses  and  small  cities  "  he  took 
"  a  countless  number  "  ('  Eponym  Canon,' 
p.  131).  (On  the  causes  of  the  war  and  its 
general  course,  see  the  Introduction  to  the 
book.) 

Yer.  2. — ^And  the  King  of  Assyria  sent 
Babshakeh  .  ,  ,  vith  a  great  army  (comp. 
2  Kings  XTlii.  18 — 17,  where  we  find  suffi- 
cient ground  for  believing  that  this  expedi- 
tion is  entirely  distinct  from  that  of  ver.  1, 
which  was  conducted  by  Sennacherib  in 
person,  and  led  to  Hezekiah's  submission 
and  the  payment  of  a  large  tribute).  It  is 
inconceivable  that,  immediately  after  the 
grant  of  terms  of  peace  and  their  acceptance, 
Sennacherib  shoiUd  have  renewed  the  war ; 
there  must  have  been  an  interval,  and  a 
fresh  provocation.  The  interval  can  have 
been  only  a  short  one,  since  Hezekiah  died 
in  B.O.  697.  It  may  haye  been  a  couple  of 
years,  or  perhaps  no  more  than  a  year,  or 
possibly  only  a  few  months.  The  fresh 
provocation  probably  consisted  in  an  appli- 
( ation  for  aid,  made  by  Hezekiah  to  Tir- 
hiikah,  or  t<]  the  subordinate  Kgyptian  kings. 


which  is  glanced  at  in  ver.  6.  The  Assyrian 
annals,  which  never  record  any  reverse  oi 
defeat,  are  wholly  silent  as  to  this  second 
expedition.  The  only  jirofane  confirmation 
of  it  is  to  be  found  in  Herodotus  (ii.  141). 
From  LacMsh.  Lachish,  an  ancient  city  of 
the  Amorites  (Josh.  x.  5),  was  assigned  by 
Joshua  to  the  tribe  of  Judah  (Josh.  xv.  89), 
and  seems  to  have  been  still  a  Jewish  pos- 
session (2  Kings  liv.  19).  It  occupied  "a 
low  round  swell  or  knoll  "  in  the  Shefeleh, 
or  low  tract  between  the  Judwan  highland 
and  the  Mediterranean,  and  lay  near,  if  not 
directly  on,  the  direct  route  which  armies 
commonly  followed  in  their  march  from 
Syria  into  Egypt.  The  site  is  now  known 
as  Um-Lakis;  it  lies  between  Gaza  and 
Ajlan  (Eglon),  about  two  miles  west  of  the 
latter.  Sennacherib  represents  himself  as 
engaged  in  its  siege  on  a  bas-relief  in  the 
British  Museum  (see  Layard,  'Monu- 
ments of  Nineveh,"  second  series,  pi.  21), 
The  conduit  of  the  upper  pool  (see  the 
comment  on  ch.  vii.  3).  The  spot  was  that 
at  which  Isaiah  had  been  commanded  to 
meet  Ahaz  some  forty  years  previously.  It 
was  probably  on  the  north  side  of  Jerusalem, 
not  far  irom  the  Damascus  gate. 

Yer.  3. — £Iiakim,  Hilkiah's  son  (see 
above,  ch.  xxii.  20).  Eliakim  had  now 
taken  the  place  of  the  Shebna  who  was 
"over  the  house"  when  Isaiah  prophesied 
his  downfall  (ch.  xxii.  19)  and  Eliakim's 
advancement  (eh.  xxii.  21 — 23).  Shebna 
the  scribe.  It  is  not  quite  certain  that  this 
is  the  same  "  Shebna  "  as  the  former  prefect 
of  the  palace,  but  the  uncommonness  of  the 
name  is  a  stiong  argument  for  the  identity. 
The  post  of  "  scribe  "  or  "  secretary  "  (marginal 
rendering)  was  one  of  some  importance  (aee 
1  Kings  It.  3),  though  inferior  to  that  of 
palace  prefect.  Joah  .  .  .  the  leoordei 
(comp.  2  Kings  zvlii.  18,  where  the  same 
three  officials  are  mentioned  in  the  same 
order).  We  learn  firom  Kings  that  Senna- 
cherib sent  in  reality  three  envoys  (2  Kings 
xviii.  17)  to  Hezekiali— the  Tartan,  or  "  com- 
mander-in-chief;"  the  Eabsaris,  or  "chief 
eunuch;"  and  the  Eabshakeh,  or  "rab- 
sak,"  the  "  chief  captain,"  the  second  in  com- 
mand after  the  tartan.  Hezekiah  thought 
it  right  to  appoint  an  equal  number  of 
officials  to  meet  and  confer  with  them. 

Yer.  4. — ^And  Babshakeh  said.  Of  the 
three  Assyrian  envoys  Babshakeh  alone 
obtains  mention  in  Isaiah,  probably  beoanse 
he  was  the  spokesman  (comp.  2  Kings  xviii. 
19,  26,  27,  37;  xix.  4).  He  was  probably 
chosen  for  spokesman  because  he  could 
speak  Hebrew  fluently  (infra,  vers.  11,  13). 
The  great  king.  "The  great  king"  (sorrti 
rabhu)  is  the  most  common  title  assumed  by 
the  Assyrian  monarohs  in  tbeir  inscriptiona 
It  is  found  as  early  as  B.C.  1120. 


<3H.  XXXVI,  1—22.]    THE  BOOK  OP  THE  PROPHET  ISAIAH. 


Ver.  5.— I  say.  In  2  Kings  xvtii.  20  we 
read,  "  Thou  sayest "  for  "  I  say,"  which 
gives  a  better  sense.  Dr.  Kay  holds  the 
two  forms  to  be  "  complementary."  I  have 
eonnsel  and  strength  for  war.  Either  the 
words  of  Hezekiah  had  been  reported  to 
Sennacherib,  or  he  rightly  divined  Heze- 
kiah's  thoughts.  It  was,  no  doubt,  in  reli- 
ance on  the  "  counsel "  of  Eliakira  and  the 
"strength"  of  Egypt  that  tlie  Jewish  mon- 
arch had  a  second  time  provoked  his  suze- 
rain. 

Ver.  6. — This  broken  reed;  rather,  as  in 
2  Kings  xviii.  21,  this  bruised  reed  (comp. 
ch.  xlii.  3).  A  reed  may  be  "  bruised,"  and 
wholly  untrustworthy  as  a  support,  while  it 
appears  sound.  A  "broken"  reed  no  one 
would  lean  on.  Egypt.  There  had  been 
times  when  Egypt  was  a  strong  power,  feared 
and  respected  by  her  neighbours,  and  a 
terror  even  to  Assyria.  But  these  times 
were  long  past.  For  the  last  fifty  years 
the  country  had  been  divided  against  itself 
(see  the  comment  on  oh.  xix.  2),  split  up 
into  a  number  of  petty  principalities.  Re- 
cently the  neighbouring  kinffjom  of  Ethi- 
opia had  claimed  and  exercised  a  species  of 
sovereignty  over  the  entire  Nile  valley,  while 
allowing  tributary  princes  to  govern  different 
portions  of  it.  Of  these  princes  the  most 
important  at  the  time  of  Babshakeh's  em- 
bassy seems  to  have  been  Shabatok,  who 
reigned  in  Memphis,  probably  from  B.o.  712 
to  B.O.  698.  Egypt  is  likened  to  a  "  bruised 
reed  "  on  account  of  her  untrustworthiness. 
"  So "  (Sabaco)  had  given  no  substantial 
help  to  Hoshea.  Shabatok  was  little  likely 
to  imperil  himself  in  order  to  assist  Heze- 
kiah. Even  Tirhakah  would  probably 
avoid,  as  long  as  he  could,  a  conflict  with 
the  full  power  of  A^yria.  Pharaoh,  King 
of  Egypt.  Sennacherib  uses  the  generic 
term,  "  Pharaoh,"  instead  of  mentioning  any 
of  the  petty  princes  by  name,  because  he 
means  to  speak  generally.  The  King  of 
Egypt,  under  present  circumstances,  who- 
ever he  may  be,  is  no  better  than  a  bruised 
reed.  In  his  own  inscriptions,  Sennacherib 
about  this  time  uses  the  expression,  "the 
kings  of  Egypt "  ('  Epouym  Canon,'  p.  133, 
1.  47). 

Ver.  7. — If  thou  say  to  me,  "We  trust  in 
the  Lord.  "The  Assyrians,"  it  has  been 
observed,  "had  a  good  intelligence  depart- 
ment" (Cheyne).  It  was  known  to  Senna- 
cherib that  Hezekiah  had  a  confident  trust, 
which  seemed  to  him  wholly  irrational,  in 
Jehovah — the  special  God  of  his  people. 
It  was  also  known  to  him  that  Hezekiah,  in 
the  earlier  portion  of  his  reign  (2  Kings 
xviii.  4),  had  "removed  the  high  places" 
and  broken  down  the  altars,  where  Jehovah 
had  for  centuries  been  worshipped  through- 
out the  length  and  breadth  of  the  land. 


He  concludes  that,  in  ao  doing,  he  miut 
have  offended  Jehovah.  He  is  probably 
ignorant  of  the  peculiar  proviso  of  the 
Jewish  Law,  that  sacrifice  should  be  offered 
in  one  place  only,  and  conceives  that  Heze- 
kiah has  been  actuated  by  some  narrow 
motive,  and  has  acted  in  the  interests  of 
one  city  only,  not  of  the  whole  people.  Ye 
shall  worship  before  this  altar.  The  parallel 
passage  of  2  Kings  (xviii.  22)  has  "this 
altar  in  Jerusalem."  The  brazen  altar  in 
the  great  court  of  the  temple  is,  of  course, 
meant.  Hezekiah  had  cleansed  it  from  the 
pollutions  of  the  time  of  Ahaz  (2  Chron. 
xxix.  18),  and  had  insisted  on  sacrifice 
being  offered  nowhere  else  (2  Ohron.  xxix. 
21—35;  XXX.  15—24;  xxxi.  1,  etc.).  Such 
a  concentration  of  worship  was  unknown  to 
any  of  the  heathen  nations,  aud  may  well 
have  been  unintelligible  to  them. 

Ver.  8. — Now  therefore  give  pledget;  <.e. 
"bind  yourselves  under  some  penalty." 
Babshakeh  here  iaterrnpta  his  message  to 
introduce  an  offer  of  his  own.  Intent  on 
ridiculing  the  absurdity  of  Hezekiah's  re- 
sistance of  Assyria,  he  promises  to  make 
him  a  present  of  two  thousand  horses,  if  he 
(Hezekiah)  can  find  two  thousand  trained 
riders  to  mount  them.  It  is  quite  likely 
that  he  was  safe  in  making  this  promise, 
and  that,  notwithstanding  the  abundant  use 
of  chariots^  and  horses  by  the  Jews  of  the 
time  for  purposes  of  luxury  (ch.  ii.  7),  they 
were  destitute  of  a  cavalry  force  and  unac- 
customed to  the  management  of  war-horses. 

Ver.  9. — How  then  wilt  thou  turn  away 
the  face,  etc.  ?  i.e.  "  How  wilt  thou  be  able 
to  defeat,  and  cause  to  retreat,  a  single  As- 
syrian captain  at  the  head  of  his  sqiiadron  ?  " 
And  put  thy  trust  on  Egypt  for  chariots  and 
for  horsemen;  rather,  but  thou  trustest  in 
Egypt  for  chariots  and  for  horsemen.  Con- 
sciousness of  the  weakness,  with  which  Bab- 
shakeh had  just  reproached  them,  had  led 
to  their  application  to  Egypt  for  a  chariot 
and  a  cavalry  force.  Egypt  was  well  able 
to  furnish  both,  and  had  sent  a  large  force 
of  both  to  the  help  of  Bkron  a  short  time 
previously  ('Epouym  Canon,'  p.  133,  11. 
48—56).  That  force  bad,  however,  suffered 
defeat  at  the  hands  of  Sennacherib. 

Ver.  10. — The  Lord  said  unto  me.  Go  up 
against  this  land,  and  destroy  it;  literally, 
Jehovah  said  unto  me.  Go  up,  etc.  (comp. 
2  Chron.  xxxv.  21,  where  Necho  tells  Josiah 
that  "Grod  commanded"  his  expedition 
against  Carchemish).  The  heathen  mon- 
archs  frequently  represented  themselves  as 
directed  to  make  war  on  a  nation  by  God, 
or  by  some  particular  god.  Piankhi  Mer- 
ammon  says,  "I  am  bom  of  the  loini^ 
created  from  the  egg,  of  the  Deit^  ...  1 
have  not  acted  without  his  kaowing;  ht 
ordained  that  I  should  act"  ('Beoords  Ol 


THE   BOOK   OP  THE   PROPHET  ISAIAH,    [oh.  ixxvi.  1— 22. 


the  Past,*  vol.  U.  p.  91).  Mesha,  King  of 
Moab,  decIareB,  "  Chemoah  said  to  me,  Go 
and  take  Nebo  [in  war]  against  Israel" 
(ibid.,  voL  zi.  p.  J 66).  Asshur  is  generally 
represented  as  commanding  the  expeditions 
of  tbe  Assyrian  kings  (ibid.,  vol.  i.  pp.  21, 
48,  60,  etc.).  StiU,  it  is  surprising  that  Sen- 
nacherib shonld  mention  "  Jehovah  "  as  the 
God  from  whom  he  had  received  the  order 
to  attack  Eezekiah,  and  we  may  snsptet 
that  the  term  which  he  actually  emi'loyed 
was  Ilu, "  God,"  and  that  eithur  Eabsliakeh, 
or  the  reporter  of  the  speech,  subatituttd 
"Jehovah"  as  more  intelligible  to  the 
Jews. 

Ver.  11. — Speak  .  .  .  nnto  thy  senrants 
in  the  Syrian  language;  literally,  tn  &e 
Aramait}  language.  Aramaeans  were  widely 
spread  over  the  entire  region  between  the 
Lower  Tigris  and  the  Mediterranean ;  and 
their  language  seems  to  have  been  in  general 
use^  as  a  language  of  commerce.  "  Private 
contract  tablets  in  Aramaic  and  Assyrian 
have  been  found  in  the  remains  of  ancient 
Nineveh"  (Cheyne).  Kabshakeh  had,  per- 
haps, spoken  "  in  the  Jews'  language  "  with- 
out any  ill  intent,  thinking  that  it  was  the 
only  tongue  which  Jewish  envoy*  would 
underBtand;  but  his  so  doing  was  calculated 
to  affect  the  minds  of  the  common  people, 
and  to  shake  their  allegiance  to  Hezekiah. 
The  envoys,  therefore,  requested.liim  to  em- 
ploy a  foreign  tongue,  and  suggested  Ara- 
maic as  one  which  was  familiar  to  them, 
and  which  they  supposed  that  he  would 
understand.  His  employment  of  Hebrew 
had  shown  them  that  he  was  a  linguist. 
In  the  Jews'  language.  There  was  no  lan- 
guage peculiar  to  the  Jews  as  Jews,  that  is 
to  say,  different  from  the  ordinary  speech  of 
the  Israelites.  Both  alike  spoke  Hebrew. 
In  the  Old  Testament,  however,  this  com- 
mon language  is  never  called  "Hebrew," 
but  either  "  the  tongue  of  Canaan  "  (ch.  xix. 
lb)  or  "the  Jewish  language"  (2  Kings 
xviii.  26,  28;  2  Chron.  xxxii.  18;  Neh.  xiii. 
24).  Similarly,  our  own  tongue  is  called 
"  English,"  though  spoken  also  in  Scotland, 
Wales,  Ireland,  America,  and  Australia.  In 
the  ears  of  the  people  that  are  on  the  wall ; 
t.«.  of  the  soldiers  placed  on  the  wall  to 
defend  it.  We  must  suppose  that  the  con- 
ference took  place  immediately  outside  the 
fortifications,  so  that  some  of  those  on  the 
wall  could  hear. 

Ver.  12. — Hath  he  not  sent  me  to  the  men 
that  sit  upon  the  wall  t  Rabshakeh  was  con- 
travening all  diplomatic  usage,  and  no 
doubt  was  conioioDS  of  it.  But  the  pride 
and  arrogance  of  the  Assyrians  rendered 
them  as  careless  of  diplomatic  etiquette  as, 
at  a  later  date,  were  the  Bomans  (see  Poly- 
biui,  xxiz.  11,  §  6;  Liv.,  xlv.  12).  That 
the/  mail  mX,  ato.;  imther,  to  mU.    That  ia, 


with  no  other  result  than  that  of  being  i» 
duced,  together  with  yon,  to  the  last  ex- 
tremity of  famine,  when  the  siege  comes. 

Ver.  13. — Then  Babshakeh  stood;  t.a.  "rose 
from  a  sitting  or  reclining  posture" — ^to 
attract  attention,  and  the  better  to  make 
himself  heard.  He  coutinued  his  speech  in 
Hebrew,  and  at  the  same  time  purposely 
raised  bis  voice  to  a  luud  pitch.  The  envoys 
would  have  been  ju!>tified  in  ordering  the 
archers  to  shoot  him  from  the  wall.  But 
ihey  seem  to  have  been  struck  of  a  heap, 
as  Bpiphanes  was  by  the  audacity  of  PopU- 
lius  (see  the  comment  on  the  preceding 
verse). 

Ver.  14. — ^Thiu  salth  the  king.  It  is 
scarcely  probable  that  Sennacherib  had  ex- 
pressly empowered  Babshakeh  to  make  a 
speech  to  the  Jewish  people,  much  less  that 
he  had  dictated  its  words.  But  the  envoy 
regards  himself  as  having  plenary  powers  to 
declare  the  king's  mind.  Let  not  Eezekiah 
deceive  yon.  By  vain  hopes  of  resisting 
the  Assyrian  arms  sucoessiuUy  (comp.  vers. 
5-7). 

Yer.  15. — Neither  let  Hezekiah  make  yen 
trust  in  Jehovah.  There  is  nothing  impro- 
bable in  Babshakeh's  having  thus  spoken. 
Isaiah  had  long  been  encouraging  Hezekiah 
to  resist  Sennacherib  by  promises  of  Divine 
aid  (ch.  XXX.  31 ;  xxxi.  4 — ^9).  Hezekiah 
would  naturally  repeat  these  promises  to 
the  people,  and  could  not  give  their  effect 
in  simpler  words  than  by  saying,  "Jehovah 
will  surely  deliver  us:  this  city  shall  not 
be  delivered  into  the  hand  of  the  King  of 
Assyria."  Spies  and  deserters  would  natu- 
rally tell  the  Assyrian  envoys  what  he 
had  said. 

Yer.  16. — ^Kake  an  agreement  vith  me  by 
a  present ;  literally,  make  a  bUming  with  roe. 
Delitzsch  paraphrases,  "Bnter  into  a  con- 
^nection  of  mutual  good  wishes  with  me." 
Yanoe  Smith  translates  boldly, "  Make  peace 
with  me ; "  and  Mr.  Cheyne, "  Make  a  treaty 
with  me."  There  seems  to  be  no  doubt  that 
h'rakah,  besides  its  primary  sense  of  "bless- 
ing," had  two  secondary  senses,  "present" 
and  "treaty."  Here  "treaty"  is  no  doubt 
intended.  Come  out  to  me ;  i,e.  "  come  out 
of  Jerusalem,  and  surrender  yonrselTes" 
(comp.  1  Sam.  xi.  8 ;  Jer.  xzxviii.  17).  And 
eat  ye  .  .  .  drink  ye.  Peace  being  made, 
the  Jews  could  leave  the  protection  of  their 
walled  cities,  and  disperse  themselves  over 
their  lands,  where  they  could  live  in  plenty 
and  security  (comp.  1  Kings  iv.  25),  at  any 
rate  Jbr  a  time.  They  would  be  safe  firom 
the  terrible  extremities  hinted  at  in  ver.  12, 
and  miglit  confidently  await  the  great  king's 
ultimate  disposal  of  them,  which  would  M 
determined  when  the  war  in  these  parts 
was  over.  The  waters  of  his  own  eistem; 
rather,  of  Mi  own  msU.    AU  cultivatm  hM 


CH.  xxxvL  1—22.]    THE   BOOK   OF   THE    PROPHET  ISAIAH. 


wella  in  their  plots  of  ground.  Obterns, 
or  reservoirs,  in  which  the  rain-water  was 
stored,  were  comparatively  uncommon. 

Yer.  17. — TTutil  I  oome  and  take  you  away. 
It  WM  M  much  the  usual  pollby  of  Assyria 
to  lemoTe  to  a  new  locality  a  conquered 
people,  which  had  given  them  trouble,  that 
Babshakeh  felt  safe  in  assuming  that  the 
fate  in  store  for  the  Jews,  if  they  submitted 
themselves,  was  a  transplantation.  Sargon 
had  transported  the  Israelites  to  Oozan  and 
Media  (2  Kings  xviii.  11),  the  Tibareni  to 
Assyria,  the  Cummageni  to  Susiana  ('  An- 
cient Monarchies,'  vol.  ii.  p.  423).  Senna- 
cherib himself  had  transpoi  ted  into  Assyria 
more  than  two  hundred  thousand  Aramseans 
(ibid.,  p.  430).  It  might  be  confidently  pre- 
dicted that,  if  he  conquered  them,  he  would 
transplant  the  Jews.  Babshnkeh  tries  to 
soften  down  the  hardship  of  the  lot  before 
them  by  promises  of  a  removal  to  a  land 
equal  in  all  respects  to  Palestine.  To  a 
land  like  yonx  own  land.  This  was  certainly 
not  a  general  principle  of  Assyrian  adminis- 
tration. Nations  were  removed  from  the  far 
north  to  the  extreme  south,  and  vice  versS, 
from  arid  to  marshy  tracts,  from  fertile 
regions  to  comparative  deserts.  The  security 
of  the  empire,  not  the  gratification  of  the 
transported  slaves,  was  the  ruling  and 
guiding  principle  of  all  such  changes.  A 
land  of  oom  and  wine,  a  land  of  bread  and 
vineyards.  The  writer  of  Eingi  adds,  "a 
land  of  oil  olive  and  of  honey."  (On  the 
productiveness  of  Palestine,  see  Numb.  xiii. 
27;  xiv.  7;  Deut.  i.  23;  viii.  7—9;  xi. 
11, 12.) 

Yer.  18. — Beware  lest  Hezekiah  persuade 
yon;  rather,  seduce  you  (comp.  Deut.  xUi.  6; 
1  Kings  xxi.  25).  Sennacherib  claims  to  be 
entitled  to  the  people's  allegiance,  and  repre- 
sents Hezekiah  as  a  rebel,  who  seeks  to  draw 
them  away  from  their  duty.  Hath  any  of 
the  gods  of  the  nations  delivered  his  land  ? 
The  successes  of  the  Assyrians,  and  the 
religious  character  of  their  wars,  justified 
this  boast.  The  pervading  idea  of  the  in- 
scriptions is  that  wars  are  undertaken  for 
the  glory  of  the  Assyrian  deities,  particu- 
larly of  Asshur,  for  the  chastisement  of  his 
enemies,' and  with  the  object  of  establishing 
in  each  country,  as  it  is  brought  under  sub- 
jection, the  laws  and  worship  of  Asshur 
(see  'Ancient  Monarchies,'  vol.  ii.  pp.  822 — 
324  and  531).  The  nations  fight  under  the 
protection  of  their  own  gods,  and  thus  each 
uax  is  a  struggle  between  the  Assyrian 
deities  and  those  of  the  nation  with  which 
they  ore  contending.  Hitherto,  undoubtedly, 
Assyria  had  met  with  almost  uniform  suc- 
cess (see  ch.  x.  5 — 14). 

Yer.  19. — ^Wheie  are  the  gods  of  Hamathi 
(oomp,  ell.  X.  9V  Sargon  had  reduced  Ha- 
matli  in  Ua  third  year,  B.a  720.    He  had 


"swept  the  whole  land  of  Hamath  to  its 
extreme  limit,"  taken  the  king  prisoner,  and 
carried  him  away  ouptive  to  Assyria,  where 
he  flayed  and  burned  him;  removed  most 
of  the  inhabitants,  and  replaced  them  by 
Assyrians;  plunJereil  the  city  of  its  chief 
treasures,  and  placed  an  Assyrian  governor 
over  it  (see  '  Bponym  Canon,'  pp.  126 — 128). 
Among  the  treasures  taken  were,  no  doubt, 
the  images  of  the  Hamathite  gods,  which 
were  uniformly  carried  off  by  the  Assyrians 
from  a  conquered  city.  And  Arphad.  Ar- 
phad,  or  Arpad  (ch.  x.  9),  had  joined  with 
Hamath  in  the  war  against  Assyria,  and 
was  taken  by  Sargon  in  the  same  year 
('Eponym  Canon,'  p.  127).  Of  Sepharvaim. 
Sepharvaim,  or  Sippara,  wag  besieged  and 
captured  by  Sargon  in  his  twelfth  year, 
B.O.  710.  A  severe  example  was  made  of 
the  inhabitants  (G.  Smith,  'History  of 
Babylonia,'  p.  122).  A  discovery  made  by 
Mr.  HoriDUzd  Bassam,  in  1881,  is  thought 
to  prove  that  Sippara  was  situated  at 
Abu-Habbah,  between  Baghdad  and  the 
site  of  Babylon,  about  sixteen  miles  from 
the  former  city  (see  the  'Transactions  of 
the  Society  of  Bibl.  Archseology,'  vol.  viii. 
pp.  164,  173).  "  Hena  "  and  "  Ivah,"  joined 
with  Sepharvaim  by  the  author  of  Kings 
(2  Kings  xviii.  34),  seem  to  be  omitted  by 
Isaiah  as  unimportant.  They  are  thought 
to  have  been  towns  upon  the  Euphrates, 
not  very  distant  from  Babylon,  and  have 
been  identified  respectively  with  Anah  and 
Hit.  But  the  identification  is  in  both  cases 
uncertain.  Have  they  delivered  Samaria  ^ 
Delitzsoh  and  Mr.  Oheyne  translate, "  Bow 
much  less  have  they  delivered  Samaria?" 
Kay,  "  Verily  have  they  delivered,"  regard- 
ing the  sentence  as  ironical.  Sennacherib 
can  see  no  distinction  between  the  cities 
where  Jehovah  was  worshipped,  and  those 
which  acknowledged  any  other  tutelaiy  god. 
As  Samaria  fell,  why  should  not  Jerusdem 
fall? 

Ver.  21. — ^They  (<.«.  the  people,  as  in  2 
Kings  xviii.  36)  held  their  peace.  Bab- 
shakeh's  attempt  to  shake  their  fidelity 
had,  at  any  rate,  no  manifest  effect.  For  the 
king's  commandment  was,  saying.  Answer 
him  not.  Hezekiah  can  scarcely  have  antici- 
pated that  Eabshakeh  would  so  far  depart 
from  ordinary  usage  as  to  make  a  speech  to 
"  the  men  on  the  wall."  But  he  may  have 
been  in  the  immediate  neighbourhood,  and, 
when  apprised  of  the  envoy's  proceedings, 
may  have  sent  the  order.  We  are  not  to 
suppose  that  the  Jewish  king  was  at  a  loss 
for  an  answer.  He  did  not  choose  to  bandy 
words  with  an  envoy  who  had  behaved  him- 
self so  outrageously. 

Yer.  22. — ^With  their  clothes  rent.  Oar- 
ments  were  "rent,"  not  only  at  a  sign  of 
mourning,    but    whenever    persons    weM 


6  THE  BOOK  OP  THE  PROPHET  ISAIAH,    [oh.  xxxvi.  1— 22, 

shucked  or  horrified  (gee  Gen.  xxxvii.  29 ;  I  Jewish  officials  meant  to  mark  tfaeii  honoi 

1  Sam.  iv.  12 ;   2  Sam.  i.  2  ;   Ezra  ix.  3 ;      at  Babsbakeh's  blasphemiei. 

2  Chron.  xxxiv.  19 ;  Matt.  xxvi.  65).    The  ' 


HOMILETICa 

Veil.  4 — 9. — Wise  and  foolifh  trust.  Babshakeh  laughed  to  gcom  equally  all  the 
grounds  of  trust  which  he  regarded  Hezfkiah  as  entertaining.  His  ridicule  was  just 
with  respect  to  two  of  them,  wholly  unjast  and  misplaced  with  respect  to  the  third. 

I.  It  is  a  foolish  teust  to  put  confidence  in  wise  counsblloks.  Princes,  no 
doubt,  do  well  to  seek  advice  from  the  wisest  among  their  subjects,  and,  speaking 
generally,  cannot  do  better  than  foUow  such  advice  when  it  has  been  deliberately  given. 
But  to  place  absolute  confidence  in  the  wisest  of  human  counsellors  is  sheer  folly.  "  The 
wisdom  of  the  wise  is  foolishness  with  Grod "  (1  Cor.  iii.  19) ;  "  God  casteth  out  the 
counsel  of  princes."  The  wisest  of  men  are  liable  to  err,  to  misinterpret  the  past,  to 
misconceive  the  future.  The  best  of  counsellors  are  "  blind  guides,"  and  are  liable  to 
"  fall  into  the  pit "  with  those  who  are  guided  by  them.  It  is  the  truest  wisdom  to  mis- 
trust all  human  advisers,  and  to  look  elsewhere  for  an  infallible  guidance. 

II.  It  is  a  foolish  trust  to  put  confidence  in  an  armed  force,  however  strong  it 
may  seem  to  be.  "  It  is  nothing  to  the  Lord  to  help,  whether  with  many,  or  with  them 
that  have  no  power"  (2  Chron.  xiv.  11).  "It  is  no  hard  matter"  with  him  "for  many 
to  be  shut  up  iu  the  hands  of  a  few :  and  with  Heaven  it  is  all  one,  to  deliver  with  a  great 
multitude,  or  a  small  company :  for  the  victory  of  battle  standeth  not  in  the  multitude 
of  an  host;  but  strength  cometh  from  heaven"  (1  Maoo.  iii.  18,  19).  Even  a  heathen 
could  remark  that  "  ofttimes  a  mighty  host  is  discomfited  by  a  few  men,  when  God  in 
his  anger  sends  fear  or  storm  from  heaven,  and  they  perish  in  a  way  unworthy  of  them" 
(Herod.,  vii.  10,  §  6).  The  children  of  this  world  put  their  trust  in  "  big  battalions; " 
but  the  entire  course  of  history  testifies  to  the  frequent  triumph  of  the  weak  over  the 
strong,  of  small  over  large  armies — Platsea,  Cunaxa,  Issus,  Arbela,  Magnesia,  in  the 
ancient;  Soissons,  Mortgarten,  Cressy,  Poitiers,  Waterloo,  Inkerman,  in  the  modern 
world,  are  cases  in  point.  "  The  race  is  not  to  the  swift,  neither  the  battle  to  the 
strong."  At  any  rate,  it  is  foolish  to  trust  implicitly  in  "strength  for  the  war" 
(ver.  6),  since  such  trust  is  often  the  forerunner  of  a  dire  calamity. 

III.  But  it  is  a  wise  trust  to  have  confidence  in  the  Lord  G(od.  Babshakeh 
ridicules  this  trust  no  less  than  the  others  (vers.  7, 18 — 20);  but  wholly  without  reason. 
He  imagines,  indeed,  that  Jehovah  is  only  a  god — one  of  many.  He  has  no  conception  of 
one  Supreme  God,  "  Maker  of  heaven  and  earth,  and  of  all  things,  visible  and  invisible." 
For  want  of  this  fundamental  idea  his  whole  reasoning  is  confused  and  mistaken. 
Theists  know  that,  while  all  other  trust  is  vain,  absolute  reliance  may  be  placed  on 
God  (1)  to  perform  his  promises ;  (2)  to  succour  all  them  that  flee  to  him  for  aid  with 
faith  and  penitence ;  (3)  to  abase  those  that  proudly  lift  themselves  up  against  him,  if 
not  immediately,  at  any  rate  in  his  own  good  time.  Hezekiah's  trust  was  based  on  all 
three  grounds :  God  had  promised  to  deliver  Jerusalem  from  the  Assyrians  (oh.  xxxi. 
5 — 8) ;  Hezekiah  had  given  up  his  trust  in  Egypt,  and  turned  to  God  (oh.  xxxvi.  18)  in 
sincerity;  and  Eabshakeh's  own  boastings  had  placed  both  himself  and  his  master  in  the 
category  of  God's  open  enemies,  on  whom  judgment  was  almost  sure  to  fall. 

Ver.  10. — 2%«  fcdse  loastings  of  the  vncked  confuted  by  the  event.  The  Goliatha  and 
Sennacheribs  of  the  world  are  rarely  content  with  silent  endeavours  to  accomplish  the 
ends  that  they  set  before  them.  They  delight  in  boasting  beforehand  of  their  coming 
achievements,  and  are  not  very  scrupulous  as  to  the  language  they  employ,  so  that  it 
seems  to  exalt  them  above  their  fellows.  "  Come  to  me,"  said  the  Philistine  champion 
to  David,  "  and  I  will  give  thy  flesh  unto  the  fowls  of  the  air,  and  to  the  beasts  of  the 
field"  (1  Sam.  xvii.  44).  "With  the  multitude  of  my  chariots,"  said  Sennacherib,  *I 
am  come  up  to  the  height  of  the  mountains,  to  the  sides  of  Lel«non,  and  will  cut 
down  the  ts3l  cedar  trees  thereof,  and  the  choice  fir  trees  thereof:  and  I  will  enter  into 
the  lodgings  of  hia  borders,  and  into  the  forest  of  his  Garmel "  (2  Kings  xix.  2S) ;  aad 
again,  "  Shall  I  not,  m  I  have  done  to  Samaria  and  her  idols,  lo  do  to  Jerusalem  and  her 


OH.  xxxvL  1— 22.]    THE  BOOK  OF  THE  PROPHET  ISAIAH.  7 

idols  f  "  (ch.  X.  11).  It  was  of  a  piece  with  these  boasts  to  give  the  Jews  to  vinderstand 
that  the  voice  of  God  had  ordered  the  expedition,  which,  therefore,  was  certain  to  be 
successful.  In  all  probability  this  boast  was  a  purely  gratuitous  one,  not  grounded  upon 
«ny  even  supposed  oracle  or  announcement.  It  was  hoped  that  it  might  alarm  some  of 
the  Jews,  and  induce  them  to  go  over  to  the  enemy,  or  at  least  stand  aloof  from  the 
contest.  A  few  weeks — perhaps  a  few  days — showed  the  baselessness  of  the  assertion. 
Had  God  ordered  the  expedition,  he  would  have  prospered  it ;  had  he  "  given  the 
Assyrians  a  charge,"  he  would  have  caused  them  "  to  take  the  spoil,  and  to  take  the 
prey,  and  to  tread  Judah  down  like  the  mire  of  the  streets"  (ch.  x.  6).  But  the 
boast  was  wholly  false.  God  had,  in  fact,  declared  himself  against  the  expedition 
(ch.  xxxi.  8),  and  had  promised  his  protection  to  Jerusalem  (oh.  xxxi.  5).  The  event 
was  in  the  fullest  accord  with  these  announcements,  and  put  to  shame  the  Assyrian, 
with  his  vain  boasts  (ch.  xxxvii.  86).  In  all  ages,  boasters  have  declared  that  they 
would  destroy  the  Church.  Bpiphanes,  Galerius,  Julian,  Mohammed,  designed  and 
attempted  the  extirpation  of  true  religion.  They  boasted  beforehand  that  they  would 
succeed.  In  the  event  they  egregiously  failed.  So,  in  our  own  day,  pseudo-science 
declares  that  it  is  just  about  to  sweep  away  Christianity  from  the  earth.  The  wretched 
effete  religion  is,  the  scientists  maintain,  on  its  last  legs,  dwindling,  dying,  just  about  to 
disappear.  But  year  by  year,  month  by  month,  day  by  day,  facts  give  their  predictions 
the  lie.  The  Church  remains  firm  upon  its  Hock,  against  which  the  gates  of  hell  will 
never  prevail.  Christianity  declines  to  disappear  at  the  scientist's  bidding,  and,  as  time 
goes  on,  seems  continually  to  obtain  a  firmer  grasp  upon  the  mind  of  the  age.  Scientific 
extravagance  provokes  a  religious  reaction,  and  these  are  signs  in  various  quarters  of  a 
real  "  Nemesis  of  Faith."  If  the  tree  has  contracted  its  shadow,  it  has  struck  its  roots 
more  deeply ;  and  is  more  capable  of  resisting  storms  and  tempests  than  of  yore. 
Christians  may  calmly  await  the  verdict  which  events  will  pronounce,  and  meanwhile 
will  do  well  not  to  let  themselves  be  greatly  alarmed  by  the  proud  boasts  and  confident 
predictions  of  their  adversaries.     Sennacherib's  boasts  had  an  unsatisfactory  issue. 

Ver.  21. — Silence  tfie  test  answer  to  many  an  argument.  "  Speech  is  silvern,"  it  has 
been  said ;  "  but  silence  is  golden."  "  Answer  not  a  fool  according  to  his  folly,"  says  the 
wise  king  (Prov.  xxvi.  4) — an  injunction  no  doubt  balanced  to  some  extent  by  the 
counter-phrase,  "Answer  a  fool  according  to  his  folly" — which  immediately  follows 
(Prov.  xxvi.  5).  No  universal  rule  can  be  given.  "  There  is  a  time  to  speak,  and  a  time  to 
keep  silence  "  (Eccles.  iii.  7) ;  and  the  wisdom  of  the  wise  is  shown  in  few  things  more 
strikingly  than  in  their  faculty  of  discerning  the  right  time  for  each.  But  the  tendency 
to  err  is  on  the  side  of  speech,  and  the  practical  want  with  most  men  is  to  know  when 
they  should  refrain  from  uttering  the  words  which  rush  so  readily  to  their  lips ;  and 
keep  silence, "  though  it  be  pain  and  grief  to  them  "  (Ps.  xxxix.  2,  Prayer-book  version). 
A  few  suggestions  on  this  point  may  be  serviceable. 

I.  SiLBNCB  18  TO  BE  PBEFBRBED  TO  8PEE0H  WHEN  THE  "FOOL"  18  ALONE,  AND  IS 
EVIDENTLY  AWABE  OF  THE  WORTHLKSSNESS  OP  HIS  OWN  AEdUMENTS.      Great  numbers  of 

persons  argue  merely  for  the  sake  of  arguing,  having  no  care  for  truth,  and  no  belief  in 
the  validity  of  their  own  reasonings.  It  is  a  waste  of  time  to  argue  with  such ;  they 
have  no  real  convictions,  no  seriousness ;  and  it  is  impossible  to  impress  them,  however 
clearly  we  prove  them  to  be  in  the  wrong. 

II.  Silence  is  to  be  peefbrebd  to  speech  when  wb  have  eeabon  to  believe 

THAT  SPEECH  ON  OUE  PAST  WILL  ONLY  DEAW  FORTH  IMPIETY  AND  BLASPHEMY  FBOH  OUB 

opponents.  The  principle  here  is  that  involved  in  our  Lord's  injunction :  "  Give  not 
that  which  is  holy  unto  the  dogs,  neither  cast  ye  your  pearls  before  swine"  (Matt.  vii. 
6).  The  truth  is  desecrated  by  being  put  before  persons  wholly  unfit  for  it,  as  avowed 
infidels  and  blasphemers.  They  are  provoked  by  opposition  to  further  sins,  which  are 
an  offence  to  God,  injurious  to  themselves,  and  shocking  to  others. 

III.  Silence  is  to  be  prefeekeb  to  speech  when  we  feel  ouebklvbs  ill  equipped 

FOB  OONTBOVEEBY,  AND  KNOW  THE  GAINSAYEE  TO  BE  WELL  EQUIPPED.      It  is  difficult   tO 

estimate  the  injury  done  to  the  cause  of  truth  by  well-meaning  persons,  of  little  natural 
ability  and  less  acquired  learning,  who  attempt  to  answer  the  attacks  of  well-read  and 
clever  sceptics.  The  best  cawse  may  be  not  only  injured,  but  lost,  go  far  as  the  immediate 
ocoaaion  goes,  by  the  unskilfulneis  of  its  advocates.    Ordinary  unlearned  persons  shouM 


8  THE  BOOK  OP  THE  PBOPHET  ISAIAH,    [oh.  xxxn.  1— 22. 

decliiM  to  argue  with  educated  unbelievers,  and  refer  them  to  those  skilled  defenders  oi 
the  tenth,  who  have  never  been  lacking  in  any  age,  and  who  are  numerous  in  the  present. 
In  »  court  of  justice  a  man  is  regarded  as  a  fool  who  pleads  his  cause  in  person  against 
a.  professional  lawyer.  He  should  equally  decline  to  plead  the  cause  of  leligion  against 
a  profeaiional  impugner  of  it. 

HOMILIES  BY  VAEIOUB  AUTHOB& 

Yera,  1 — 22. — Eezekiah  and  ihe  Assyrian.  The  Assyrian  king  made  a  campaign 
against  Judah,  Lilchish  was  taken,  and  the  event  was  commemorated  on  bas-reliefs  in 
Sennacherib's  palace.  The  place  commanded  the  direct  road  from  Egypt  to  Judah. 
Hence  the  Babshakeh,  one  of  the  chief  o£ScerB  of  the  Assyrians,  was  sent  against 
Hezekiah,  and  by  the  "conduit  of  the  upper  pool" — the  very  spot  where  Ahaz  had 
spoken  with  Isaiah  (vii.  3) — he  took  up  his  quarters.  "  Unbelief  was  then  represented 
by  an  Israelite,  now  more  naturally  by  an  Assyrian  "  (Cheyne).  To  meet  him  there 
go  forth  Eliakim,  son  of  Hilkiab,  disciple  of  Isaiah ;  Shebna,  the  secretary  (cL  oh.  xxii. 
15 — 25) ;  and  Joah,  the  annalist. 

I.  The  fbide  and  powbe  of  the  Asstbian.  It  seems  to  be  the  very  type  of  worldly 
pride  and  power.  1.  His  title.  He  is  the  sarru  rdbu,  the  great  king,  or  the  strong 
king,  or  the  king  of  hosts.  The  ruler  of  Judah  is  no  king  at  a\l  in  his  thought,  but  a 
name  and  shadow,  or  a  mere  puppet  in  the  hands  of  a  giant.  2.  His  contemptuous  trrtst 
in  force,  Hezekiah  trusts  in  a  "  mere  word  of  the  lips,"  according  to  the  insolent  con- 
queror. What  of  the  alliance  of  Egypt  f  On  the  banks  of  the  Nile  grow  abundance  of 
reeds;  a  "cracked  reed"  is  the  symbol  of  that  alliance,  and  of  the  Pharaoh's  help  (cf. 
Ezek.  xxix.  6,  7).  The  Assyrian  predicts  that  the  alliance  will  be  broken  asunder,  and 
that  crushing  defeat  wiU  follow.  BntwhaX  of  the  protection  of  Jehovah  f  The  Assyrian 
taunts  Hezekiah  with  inconsistency,  and  turns  his  own  conduct  as  a  reformer  agunst 
himself.  The  latter  had  abolished  the  "high  places"  (2  Kings  xviii.  4;  2  Ohron. 
xxxi.  1),  and  had  centred  worship  at  Jerusalem.  To  a  superficial  observer  it  looked  as 
if  the  God  of  Israel  had  been  robbed  of  his  altars  and  a  part  of  his  due  rites.  How,  then, 
could  Judah  expect  the  countenance  of  Jehovah?  A  reformation  is  always  attended 
by  evils,  and  it  is  a  weapon  in  the  hands  of  the  enemy  to  charge  these  evils  upon  the 
reformation  itself,  instead  of  upon  the  human  passions  stirred  up  in  the  course  of  any 
great  change.  So  the  heathen  charged  the  calamities  of  the  Boman  em  pire  on  Christianity, 
and  the  disorders  attending  the  great  Reformation  of  the  sixteenth  century  were  laid  at 
the  door  of  the  reformers.  Against  these  weaknesses  in  the  position  of  Hexekiah,  as  the 
Assyrian  deems  them,  he  himself  opposes  hrute  force.  He  is  strong  in  cavalry,  and 
Judah  is  weak.  Judah  may  have  two  thousand  horses  if  she  can  find  riders  for  them. 
How  can  she  resist  the  attack  of  a  single  Assyrian  satrap?  She  may  well  look  to 
Egypt  for  chariots  and  horsemen. 

IL  His  appeal  to  the  weakness  or  doubtful  xikim.  1,  The  Assyrian  pretend* 
that  he  has  even  an  oracle  from  Jehovah  himself  to  destroy  the  land  of  Judah,  because 
of  the  violation  of  the  high  places.  Oar  spiritual  enemies  would  not  be  so  mighty,  if  we 
were  not  so  weak.  In  times  of  trial,  it  is  the  doubtful  conscience  which  makes  us  weak ; 
the  self-betraying  heart.  The  reaction  and  revival  even  from  righteous  efforts  may  be 
felt  by  good  men.  What  if  when  they  thought  to  serve  God  they  have  been  displeas- 
ing him  ?  And  now,  when  danger  and  opposition  have  to  be  encountered,  suppose  that 
these  assume  the  aspect,  not  of  obstacles  to  be  overcome  in  his  strength,  but  of  judg- 
ments sent  in  his  wiath,  to  be  withstood  ?  There  is,  after  all,  no  enemy  to  be  feared  like 
the  traitor  in  our  bosom,  no  force  against  us  so  formidable  as  that  which  is  cloudily 
projected  from  an  uneasy  imagination;  no  bulwark  so  strong  as  a  conscience  void  of 
offence  toward  God.  2.  He  endeavours  to  undermine  the  source  of  spiritual  confidtnee. 
Hezekiah  had  encouraged  the  people,  as  he  himself  was  encouraged  by  Isaiah — by  point- 
ing to  the  Divine  Saviour  of  the  nation :  "  Jehovah  will  surdy  deliver  «m,  and  the  oity 
shall  not  fall  into  the  Assyrian's  hands"  (cf.  ch.  isxvii.  35).  How  typical  this  of 
spiritual  temptation  I  If  the  devil  can  get  men  to  question  the  words  of  GK>d,  his 
victory  is  assured.  It  is  npt  so  much  the  open  warfare,  the  battles  about  the  outposts 
>nd  fortifications  of  the  &ith,  that  we  have  to  dread,  as  the  sapping  and  mining  opera- 


OH.  xxxvt  1— 22,]    THE  BOOK  OP  THE  PBOPHET  ISAIAH.  9 

tioiu  directed  at  the  rery  principle  and  seat  of  faitli  itself.  Is  this  world  governed  ? 
Has  it  a  righteous  constitution  and  administration?  Does  all  repose  upon  the  mind 
and  will  of  a  just  and  holy  Being  ?  Then  faith  may  live,  and  the  weakest  may  he 
strong.  Or  ia  all  the  effect  of  chance?  and  are  we  at  the  mercy  of  some  blind  and  fatal 
power,  which  neither  loves  nor  knows  ?  Then  the  stoutest  knees  will  be  loosened,  and 
the  bravest  heart  will  quail.  3.  He  holds  out  enticing  promises.  Let  the  people  make 
a  treaty  with  the  Assyrian.  Let  them  surrender  to  him,  and  he  will  secure  them  a 
happy  future.  They  will  be  removed  from  their  own  land,  it  is  true ;  but  they  shall 
find  another  home  in  a  land  equally  goodly,  abounding  in  com  and  grapes,  in  bread- 
corn  and  orchards.  There  each  family  shall  possess  its  vine  and  its  fig  tree  and  its 
cistern.  Here,  again,  worldly  hopes  are  made  to  take  the  field  against  the  instincts  of 
religious  faith.  Why  cling  to  Judah  ?  Because  it  was  sacred  soil — the  land  of  the 
fathers,  the  land  whose  holy  centre  was  Jerusalem,  the  altar  of  God,  the  meeting-place 
of  the  tribes,  the  earthly  mirror  of  heaven.  But  was  not  this  mere  charm  of  imagina- 
tion ?  Were  not  other  lands  as  fair  and  as  fertile  ?  Could  not  a  peaceful  and  a  happy 
home  be  found  in  distant  lands  ?  Perhaps  they  are  clinging  to  a  pleasing  illusion,  a  vain 
dream,  and  are  blind  to  the  good  which  lies  at  their  feet.  Perhaps  they  are  defending 
themselves  against  their  own  happiness.  4.  He  appeals  to  seeming  facts  of  history. 
The  "gods  of  the  nations"  appear  to  have  gone  down  before  the  victorious  Assyrian. 
They,  in  the  struggle,  had  not  manifested  a  power  to  save.  In  ancient  thought,  religion 
and  political  power  were  closely  connected.  If  a  dty  or  a  nation  stood,  it  was  because 
of  the  protecting  presence  of  the  national  god ;  its  wanderings  were  his  wanderings,  its 
victories  the  effect  of  his  prowess,  its  failures  the  signs  of  his  defeat.  Now,  the  gods  of 
Hamath  were  captive  in  Assyrian  shrines.  And  what  probability  was  there,  from  a 
heathen  point  of  view,  that  it  would  be  otherwise  with  Jehovah,  the  national  God  of 
Israel  ?  Such  a  rivalry  between  the  long-vanished  power  and  religion  of  the  Assyrian, 
and  that  of  the  living  God,  whom  we  at  this  day  own,  not  only  as  national  God  of 
Israel,  but  as  the  Eternal  himself — ^may  seem  strange.  To  the  eye  of  the  heathen, 
and  from  the  heathen  view  of  politics  and  history,  it  was  not  so.  Time  alone  can 
discover  the  short-sightedness  of  human  calculation,  and  expose  the  superficiality  of 
worldly  views  of  history. 

III.  Thb  answer  of  BiLEKoa.  It  was  by  Hezekiah's  command  that  no  answer  was 
returned.  "  For  they  had  nothing  that  would  seem,  from  an  Assyrian  point  of  view, 
a  satisfactory  answer."  And  the  rent  clothes  of  the  Jewish  ofScials  confess  the  last 
extreme  of  helpless  grief.  And  may  not  the  facts  of  this  situation  remind  us  of  spiritual 
situations  ?  There  are  hours  of  perplexed  thought  when  the  mind  turns  its  own  weapons 
against  itself.  All  circumstances  conspire  against  us,  or  seem  to  do  so.  We  seek  fur 
the  "  bright  side  "  of  the  situation,  but  there  is  no  bright  side  to  look  upon.  We  turn 
to  the  east,  hoping  for  a  rsy  of  light:  all  is  darkness.  The  known  is  distinct  and 
threatening ;  the  unknown  veiled  and,  to  the  depressed  imagination,  more  threatening 
still.  We  are  cowed  by  our  own  reason,  quelled  by  the  pressure  of  our  most  fixed 
habits  of  thinking.  The  problem  is  without  solution  to  the  intelligence.  But  there  is 
a  secret  sympathy  of  our  being  with  the  Unseen.  There  is  a  secret  channel  by  which 
we  may  communicate  with  the  Unseen,  and  pierce  behind  the  veil.  When  temptations 
close  around  us  like  the  serried  ranks  of  the  Assyrian  host,  shutting  out  from  view  every 
possible  way  of  escape,  we  may,  nevertheless,  believe  that  there  is  such  a  way — a  passage 
into  the  clear  light,  which  Jehovah  has  made,  and  which  he  will  presently  reveal. — J. 

Ver.  6. — The  broken  staff.  "Lo,  thou  trustest  in  the  staff  of  this  broken  reed, 
on  Egypt;  whereon  if  a  man  lean,  it  wiU  go  into  his  hand,  and  pierce  it."  Man 
must  han.  He  is  constituted  to  rest  on  some  object  outside  himself,  and  it  would  be  » 
wise  thotigh  painful  study  to  review  the  false  resting-places  of  the  human  heart.  Egypt 
stands  in  the  Scripture  for  the  world  outside  God — its  pleasure,  its  skill,  its  science,  its 
,  entire  wealth  of  means  and  appliances.  For  Egypt  was  once  the  repository  of  the 
world's  wealth,  and  skill,  and  science,  and  beauty,  and  glory. 

L  This  is  historical  truth.  How  eagerly  the  Jews  turned  from  the  true  God  to 
idok  I  Their  life  was  dishonoured  during  a  long  part  of  their  history  by  idolatry,  for 
which  they  were  punished  by  captivities,  and  against  which  they  were  warned  by 
prophets.     Still  they   rebellnd  against  God,  and  vexed  and  grieved  his  Holy  Spirit 


10 


THE   BOOK  OP  THE  PBOPHET  ISAIAH,    [oh.  xxxvi,  1— 22, 


DeliTered  from  Egypt  and  its  slaveries  and  wrongs,  as  their  fathers  were,  they  yet 
turned  in  heart  to  all  that  was  represented  by  Egypt. 

n.  This  is  symbolic  truth.  Men  lean  still  on  reeds,  that  in  time  become  broken 
reeds.  They  trust  in  wealth,  friendship,  fortune ;  and  these  at  last  give  way,  and  the 
reed  pierces  them  to  the  heart.  This  is  the  story  often  told  of  the  world's  disappointed 
conditions — broken  health  and  lost  fortunes.  Having  no  God  to  turn  to,  men  are  left 
desolate  and  deserted  in  the  hour  when  heart  and  fiesh  faint  and  fail.  We  see  all  this 
in  Byron  and  Shelley,  and  in  the  "  Midases  "  of  the  world,  who  love  wealth  and  all  that 
wealth  can  bring.  Nothing  in  the  world  answers  to  the  deep  necessities  of  man's 
immortal  nature,  and  the  "  rest  mider  the  shadow  of  Egypt "  is  not  broad  and  deep 
enough  for  the  soul  of  man. 

III.  This  is  subpbising  truth.  "  Lo !"  we  may  well  exclaim.  Is  this  world  a  Iimatic 
asylum,  after  all,  full  of  men  and  women  who  have  lost  the  fine  balances  of  judgment  ? 
or  is  it  a  blind  asylum,  where  they  have  lost  the  clear  vision  of  truth  ?  After  all  the 
records  of  observation  and  of  history,  has  it  come  to  this — that  each  succeeding  genera- 
tion takes  up  the  old  lie  and  forsakes  the  living  God  ?  Even  now  and  here,  where  the 
Saviour  says, "  Come  unto  me  and  rest,"  how  many  seek  "  rest "  out  of  God  1  Some  find 
human  love  itself ,  a  broken  reed,  and  in  their  hours  of  sad  discovery  turn  cynical  and 
despairing,  whilst  to  others  friendship  itself  has  proved  superficial  and  fickle.  Thi  re  are 
many  who  have  drawn  out  the  broken  reed,  and  dressed  the  wound  as  well  as  they  may ; 
but  it  remains  unhealed.  What  they  really  want  is  the  balm  of  Gilead  and  the  great 
Physician  of  souls. — ^W.  M.  S. 

Vers.  4 — 21. — ContemptumuntM,  An  air  of  intolerable  arrogance  breathes  in  almost 
every  sentence  of  this  "  railing  Eabshakeh."  It  comes  out  in  insolent  characterization 
(vers.  5,  6),  in  disdainful  challenge  (ver.  8),  in  haughty  self-confidence  (ver.  9),  in  con- 
temptuous disregard  of  the  conventionalities  of  war  (ver.  12),  in  a  reprehensible  vul- 
garity (ver.  12),  etc.  From  this  incident,  or  from  other  parts  of  Scripture,  we  conclude 
respecting  it — 

I.  That  it  is  apt  to  be  vert  ignoraht.  Rabshakeh  made  a  large  and  even 
ludicrous  mistake  respecting  the  action  of  Hezckiah  in  his  iconoclastic  policy.  He 
thought  the  Jewish  king  was  doing  that  which  would  excite  the  anger  of  Jehovah,  when 
he  was  reaUy  securing  his  Divine  favour  (ver.  7).  Contemptuous  men  are  often  found 
to  be  ignorant:  and,  naturally,  if  not  necessarily,  so;  for  they  imagine  themselves  to  be 
above  the  necessity  to  inquire  and  ascertain,  and  their  assumptions  are  soon  discovered 
to  be  false.  Those  who  are  too  proud  to  learn  must  be  content  to  be  numbered  with 
the  foolish. 

II.  That  it  sinks  into  impiety.  Rabshakeh  held  up  to  derision  the  idea  that 
Jehovah  could  preserve  Jerusalem  (ver.  15),  and  classed  the  Lord  of  heaven  with  the 
helpless  deities  of  Syria  (vers.  18 — 20).  The  arrogant  spirit  is  essentially  an  irreverent 
one.  Men  that  look  with  scorn  upon  the  human  soon  come  to  regard  themselves  as 
independent  of  the  Divine.  They  are  not  deified  in  the  daring  and  presumptuous  form 
which  was  once  known ;  but  they  assume  to  themselves  a  power,  a  control,  a  providence, 
which  belongs  only  to  the  Lord  of  our  hearts  and  lives.     Hence  we  find — 

III.  That  it  makes  fatal  blunders.  The  king  for  whom  Rabshakeh  was  speaking 
and  whose  haughty  determination  he  was  announcing  never  did  "  come  and  take  away" 
to  his  own  land  these  despised  Jews  who  were  on  the  walls  of  Jerusalem.  He  returned 
with  haste  and  humiliation  into  his  own  land.  The  scornful  will  find  that  events  do 
not  fill  up  their  bold  outlines;  on  the  contrary,  they  wiU  entirely  traverse  them:  their 
pretensions  will  be  overthrown,  and  their  promises  and  their  threats  left  unfulfilled. 

Expel  the  contemptuous  spirit  from  the  heart :  it  is  an  evU  thing  in  itself,  and  it  works 
evil  to  him  that  cherishes  it.  1.  It  is  exceedingly  unlovely ;  it  is  utterly  unbecoming 
in  any  child  of  man  who,  be  he  what  he  may,  stands  on  the  same  level  of  fallibility  on 
which  bis  fellows  stand.  2.  It  meets  with  the  deep  displeasure,  and  will  bring  down 
the  strong  rebuke,  of  God.  He  resists  the  proud  and  humiliates  them.  3.  It  is  orly 
worthy  of  the  disregard  of  man ;  all  wise  people,  when  they  are  treated  with  arrogance, 
return  a  rebuking  silence,  like  these  Benaible  sons  of  Jerusalem  (ver.  21). — 0. 

Ter.  9,~7'rwir-^e;otM  InuU.    Thu  arrogant  language  of  Babehakeh  was  fiiU  enouj;i 


OH.  XXXVI.  1—22.]    THE  BOOK  OF   THE  PKOPHET  ISAIAH.  IJ 


of  falsehood,  but  it  had  one  grain  of  truth.  Egypt  was  but  a  broken  reed  on  which  to 
lean,  and  any  trust  reposed  in  its  aid  wouH  be  attended  with  disaster  and  humiliation. 
The  imagery  which  is  here  used  is  forcible  enough,  and  it  admirably  describes  the 
character  and  the  consequences  of  an  ill-founded  confidence.  Of  these  treacheroua 
trusts  are — 

I.  Our  own  dnderstahdino.  1.  We  are  expressly  warned  of  God  not  to  lean  on 
this  (Prov.  iii.  5).  2.  Our  known  weakness,  our  incapacity  to  penetrate  the  hearts  of 
men  and  to  foresee  the  issue  of  events,  our  liability  to  make  deplorable  and  ruinous 
mistakes, — ^this  should  teach  us  to  forbear.  3.  And  the  many  lamentable  instances, 
recorded  in  histories  and  witnessed  by  our  own  eyes,  of  the  evU  consequences  of  men 
trusting  to  their  own  sagacity,  should  also  dissuade  and  deter  us. 

II.  Human  friendships.  The'  language  of  Scripture  on  this  subject  is  remarkably, 
is  significantly,  strong  (Jer.  xvii.  5).  When  we  considiT  how  often  it  liaB  happened,  as 
the  consequence  of  human  insufficiency,  not  only  that  men  have  failed  to  secure  what 
they  were  expecting,  but  that  they  have  been  thereby  plunged  into  the  deepest  distress 
and  even  into  irremediable  ruin  ;  that — to  use  the  image  of  Eabshakeh — the  stafi'  has 
not  only  broken  under  them,  but  pierced  the  hand  that  leant  on  it ; — ^we  may  well  feel 
that  this  scriptural  language  is  not  a  whit  too  strong.  Human  friendship  breaks  down 
and  wounds  us  by  its  fracture,  (1)  through  the  limitations  of  our  faculty ;  (2)  through 
inconstancy,  and  even  treachery ;  (3)  thiough  moral  or  spiritual  shipwreck. 

III.  Teufobal  advantages.  Riches,  rank,  official  position  and  the  power  it  confers, 
— these  are  things  on  which  we  are  prone  to  place  reliance.  But  woe  unto  the  man 
who  has  no  firmer  ground  on  which  to  build  1  In  the  day  of  his  calamity,  in  the  hour 
of  bereavement,  in  the  time  of  desolation,  in  the  hour  of  death,  those  things  will  fail 
him;  and  to  have  trusted  in  any  or  in  all  of  them,  to  the  negligence  of  a  hope  that  is 
surer  than  they,  will  add  unspeakable  bitterness  to  the  sense  of  failure  and  of  need. 
The  broken  reed  will  pierce  the  hand  that  holds  it. 

Only  in  •  Divine  Saviour,  whose  wisdom  will  never  be  found  wanting,  whose  faith- 
fulness will  never  fail,  whose  power  to  succour  and  befriend  in  the  saddest  sorrows  and 
darkest  hours  will  continually  suffice — only  in  him  will  be  tound  the  support  which 
"  cannot  be  broken."  "  Our  God  is  a  Bock ;  "  and  blessed  is  the  man  who  rests  all  the 
weight  of  his  joy  and  of  his  hope  on  his  inviolable  word,  on  his  irrefragable  power. — C. 

Vers.  16, 17. — The  invitation  of  the  enemy.  The  King  of  Assyria,  by  the  mouth  of 
his  general,  appeals  to  the  citizens  of  Jerusalem  to  abandon  their  allegiance  to  Hezekiah 
and  "  go  out  to  him,"  promising  them  great  advantages  for  their  disloyalty.  It  is 
closely  analogous  to  the  invitation  of  our  spiritual  enemy  to  go  over  to  him  and  receive 
the  wages  of  sin  which  he  offers  to  our  souls. 

I.  It  IS  A  VERY  PLAUSIBLE  OFFER.  1.  Under  the  circumstances  in  which  they  then  were, 
loyoHty  was  threatened  with  decided  disadvantage :  (1)  with  privation,  for  there  was  the 
probability  of  a  long  siege  and  its  attendant  scarcities  ;  (2)  with  suffering,  or  even  death, 
for  attacks  would  be  made  and  missiles  would  be  hurled  against  the  city.  2.  On  the 
other  hand,  surrender  promised  material  good :  (1)  present  exemption  from  exigency 
and  assault  (ver.  16) ;  and  (2)  abundance  of  comfort  in  future  days  (ver.  17).  So  is  it 
in  the'spiritual  realm.  Our  great  Adversary  seeks  to  allure  us  from  the  true  citizenship, 
and  he  has  a  plausible  proposal  to  make.  He  says  (1)  that  to  serve  God  is  to  suffer 
loss;  is  to  be  shut  out  from  many  sources  of  wealth  and  joy;  is  to  be  starved  and 
beggared ;  is  to  be  exposed  to  the  dislike,  the  derision,  the  hostile  action  of  those  who 
are  the  strongest  and  most  numerous  among  men.  He  says  also  (2)  that  to  be  on  the 
side  of  evil  is  to  be  in  the  way  of  prosperity ;  that  its  land  is  "  a  land  of  corn  and  wine," 
of  strength  and  joy,  of  material  prosperity  and  sensual  enjoyment:  be  selfish  and 
unscrupulous,  and  the  j)rizes  of  life  and  the  pleasures  of  sense  are  yours.  But  in  regard 
to  each  of  these  proposals,  the  historical  and  the  existing,  it  must  be  considered  that — 

II.  It  is  essentially  false.  1.  Eabshakeh  and  his  royal  master  were  both  mis- 
taken in  their  calculations.  Jerusalem  was  not  to  be  reduced  to  the  severe  straits  of 
a  protracted  siege,  was  not  to  be  taken  by  assault ;  neithi  r  want  nor  sword  was  to 
devastate  the  city.  And  they  left  the  most  important  consideration  out  of  their  account ; 
for  even  if  their  military  projects  had  succeeded,  and  if  the  Jews  had  been  defeated  and 
had  found  the  pladns  of  the  Tigris  as  fruitful  as  the  valley  of  the  Jordan,  yet  would 


12  THE  BOOK  OP  THE  PEOPHET  ISAIAH,    [oh.  xxxvi.  1— 24 

they  have  missed  and  mourned  the  liberty,  the  sacred  services,  the  natural  indepen- 
dence of  their  own  beloved  country, — they  would  have  hung  their  harps  upon  the  willows, 
instead  of  making  them  sound  the  joyous  strains  of  patiiotism  and  piety.  2.  Our 
spiritual  enemy  is  also  essentially  wrong  in  his  representations ;  he,  too,  leaves  the 
principal  cunsiderationi  out  of  his  reckoning.  (1)  All  that  we  lose  by  our  loyalty  to 
God  is  that  which  no  wise  man  would  accept—iniquitous  gain,  injurious  friendship, 
demoralizing  pleasure,  etc. ;  it  is  well,  indeed,  to  be  without  these.  (2)  All  that  we 
could  gain  by  subservience  to  his  unholy  will  would  leave  us  unblessed  with  the  true 
riches— with  the  favour  and  friendship  of  God,  with  a  sense  of  moral  and  spiritual 
integrity,  with  the  power  of  rendering  holy  service  to  our  kind,  with  the  joy  of  sacred 
intercourse  with  a  Divine  Redeemer  and  with  like-minded  fellow-servants,  with  the 
elevating  and  sustaining  hopes  that  "  enter  within  the  veU." — 0. 

Ver.  2. — Bight  attitude  in  times  of  threatening.  This  general  of  the  Assyrian  army 
seems  to  have  been  a  rude,  violent,  boastful  man,  who  thought  to  do  his  work  by  means 
of  great  swelling  words.  He  was  big  in  threatening ;  and  it  is  not  often  that  such  men 
prove  big  in  deeds.  Dean  Plumptre  says  that  "  his  words,  in  their  brutal  coarseness, 
have  hardly  a  parallel  in  history,  till  we  come  to  Bismarck's  telling  the  Parisians  that 
they  may  '  stew  in  their  own  gravy.' "  The  Rabshakeh,  it  should  be  observed,  stood  in 
the  position,  while  he  thus  threatened,  which  intimated  his  power  to  destroy  the 
aqueduct  which  supplied  the  city  with  water.  Times  of  threatening  are  to  be  clearly 
distinguished  from  times  of  actual  calamity.  Trouble  threatened  is  apt  to  relax 
our  natures  and  weaken  us  with  fears.  Trouble  actually  come  calls  out  our  powers 
of  endurance,  and  braces  us  for  hearing  and  battling.  And  so,  sometimes,  trouble 
threatened,  taking  bigger  shape  in  appearance  than  it  ever  can  take  in  reality,  has  a 
special  work  of  testing  to  do.  He  must  be  well  centred  in  God  who  holds  fast  his  calmness 
and  trust,  even  in  times  of  fright.  Society  is  peculiarly  liable — mora  especially  highly 
civilized  society — ^to  sudden  fears,  which  very  easily  become  helpless  panic.  A  few 
criminals  in  a  great  city  get  an  hour's  licence,  and  loot  the  shops  in  one  district,  and 
the  whole  city  goes  into  a  panic,  stops  its  business,  and  pours  its  wealth  into  a  fund  to 
quiet  the  people  who  had  little  or  nothing  to  do  with  the  looting.  So  it  has  been  again 
and  again  in  the  world's  history.  Threatenings  have  been  more  morally  mischievous 
than  actual  calamity.  The  godly  man  should  be  easily  master  even  of  such  circum- 
stances. 

I.  He  xsowb  well  the  diftebenoe  between  boast  and  febfobhanoe.  Observa- 
tion teaches  him  that  the  man  who  threatens  much  accomplishes  little ;  the  man  who 
swears  and  yields  to  passion  is  always  weak  in  action.  There  is  "  sound,  and  nothing 
more."  There  is  always  room  for  this  good  advice, "  Let  not  him  that  putteth  on  hu 
armour  boast  as  he  that  putteth  it  off." 

II.  He  knows  that  this  conditioh  apflieb  to  all  thbeatentnos  and  alabhb  : 
"Ir  THE  LoBD  WILL,"  Men  cannot,  any  more  than  tidal  waves,  go  beyond  their 
appointed  bounds.  Threats  may  do  the  Lord's  will,  but  they  can  do  nothing  beyond 
the  Lord's  will.  The  godly  man,  therefore,  waits  to  read  God's  will  behind  the  threats 
or  the  fears,  and  can  ^ord  to  be  quite  calm,  and  master  of  all  circumstances. 

III.  He  knows  that  God  is  alwats  on  the  bide  of  the  permanentlt  oood,  and 
IS  always  woeking  towards  it.  The  way  to  the  good  is  often  like  the  twisting  and 
winding  of  the  stream  of  Jordan ;  but  the  godly  man  does  not  make  too  much  of  the 
rushes  and  rapids  in  the  twists  and  falls — he  knows  Jordan  moves  steadily  on  to  the  sea, 
and  life,  however  ruffled  may  be  its  surface,  moves  on  to  fulfil  the  good  purpose  of  God. 
We  may  do  as  did  the  apostolic  company  when  its  leaders  were  threatened — we  may 
bend  before  our  Gkid,  and  pray,  "Now,  Lord,  behold  their  threatenings  "(Acts  It.  29, 
30).— K.  T. 

Ver.  6. — Satire  on  our  human  confidences.  Evidently  the  Rabshakeh  was  informed 
concerning  the  parties  that  divided  the  people  of  Jerusalem  at  this  time.  Hezekiah 
seems  to  have  been  so  far  persuaded  as  to  give  his  reluctaiit  assent  to  sending  the 
embassy  to  Egypt.  The  complaints  which  Sennacherib  had  to  make  against  Hezekiah 
were  (1)  that  he  had  refused  tribute  (2  Kings  xviii.  14);  (2)  that  he  had  opened 
negotiations  with  Babylon  and  Egypt  (2  Kings  iviii.  24),  with  a  view  to  *n  aluanca 


OH.  XXXVI.  1—22.]    THE  BOOK  OP  THE  PROPHET  ISAIAH.  IS 

againat  Assyria ;  (3)  that  he  had  helped  the  Philistines  of  Ekron  to  rise  against  their 
king.  The  second  of  these  is  dealt  with  in  this  verse.  The  Rahshakeh  satirizes  the 
helplessness  of  Egypt,  likening  that  nation  to  a  cracked,  not  broken,  reed,  which  hreaka 
suddenly,  and  pierces  the  hand  of  him  who  leans  bard  ou  it  as  a  supporting  staff.  The 
keenness  of  the  satire  lies  in  the  truth  of  it.  Of  the  hopelessness  of  leaning  on  Egypt 
Isaiah  had  already  warned  the  people  (ch.  xxx.  7,  see  the  true  reading).  Egypt,  in 
relation  to  Israel,  is  the  type  of  the  human  confidences  to  which  men  turn  so  readily 
in  their  distress,  forgetful  of  the  Divine  confidence  in  which  alone  they  can  he  secure. 

I.  The  satire  of  God's  ministers.  Illustrate  from  the  Prophet  Isaiah,  who  dealt 
so  vigorously  with  this  trusting  to  Egypt.  Sometimes  he  gave  serious  and  solemn 
warnings ;  sometimes  grave  reproaches ;  and  sometimes  keen  criticism  and  hiting 
satire,  as  if  he  would  shame  them  into  giving  up  the  foolish  and  hopeless  scheme.  He 
put  the  character  of  Egypt  into  a  word,  almost  an  offensive  word.  Cheyne  suggests  that 
he  wrote  this  word  Bahab,  "  utter  indolence,"  "  helpless  inaction,"  in  large  characters, 
and  set  it  up  In  a  puhlic  place.  That  was  his  idea  of  Egypt.  So,  still.  Christian 
ministers  must  not  hesitate  to  wither  up  men's  self-trusting  and  man-trusting  with  the 
keenest  satire.    It  is  a  fair  weapon  for  destroying  self-confidences. 

II.  Thk  satire  of  rivals.  Such  was  the  satire  of  Assyria,  through  its  Rahshakeh. 
At  this  time  Babylon,  Assyria,  and  Egypt  were  each  seeking  the  alliance  of  Judah,and 
the  jealousy  of  the  one  that  did  not  succeed  found  expression  in  descriptions  of  the  one 
that  did.  We  can  often  get  some  self-knowledge  through  the  things  our  rivals  say  of 
us  in  the  bitterness  of  their  disappointment.  It  is  often  surprising,  it  should  be  always 
helpful,  to  "  see  oursel's  as  ithers  see  us." 

UI.  The  satire  of  events.  Ridiculous  indeed  was  the  help  Egypt  afforded  to 
Judah.  The  strength' of  Egypt  at  this  time  was  one  of  appearance  only.  Egypt  never 
has  been  a  country  that  could  he  relied  on.  It  did  not  save  Judah.  Its  alliance  only 
hurried  on  the  fate  of  Judah.  The  cracked  reed  broke,  and  pierced  the  hand.  "  Experi- 
ence is  a  dear  school,  but  fools  will  learn  in  no  other."  The  logic  of  events  soon  shows 
up  the  folly  of  all  confidences  in  man.  Impress,  in  conclusion,  from  the  figures  of  the 
very  striking  passage,  Jer.  xvii.  6 — 8. — R.  T. 

Ver.  7. — Mittahet  eoneeming  him  whom  we  trust.  The  explanation  of  this  tannt  is 
well  given  by  Sayce  and  Cheyne.  "  Sennacherib  had  heard  of  the  reformation  of  wor- 
ship undertaken  by  Hezekiah.  This,  from  his  heathen  point  of  view,  waa  an  act  of 
gross  impiety  towards  Jehovah ;  for  had  not  Jehovah  from  time  immemorial  been  wor- 
shipped at  most,  if  not  all,  of  the  '  high  places '  ?  The  local  sanctuaries  designated  by 
the  latter  phrase  appear  from  the  inscriptions  to  have  been  known  in  Assyria  and  Baby- 
lonia, as  well  as  Palestine ;  indeed,  they  go  back  to  Accadian — that  is,  pre-Semitio 
times."  As  he  had  passed  through  the  country,  the  Rahshakeh  had  found  the  "  high 
places  "  desecrated ;  so  he  assumed  that  the  God  of  the  country  must  be  offended  with 
Hezekiah.  One  of  our  gravest  difficulties  in  witnessing  for  God  in  the  world  arises  from 
men's  mistakes  concerning  him.  They  do  not  understand  us,  or  feel  the  force  of  our 
pleadings,  because  they  do  not  apprehend  God  as  we  do.  This  subject  may  be  very 
practically  illustrated  and  enforced  from  three  spheres  of  modem  religious  activity  and 
service — missions,  apologetics,  preaching. 

I.  The  mistakes  of  the  heathen  coNOERNisa  oub  God  hinoeb  hissionb.  They 
have  notions  of  God,  or  the  gods,  and  attach  them  to  the  God  we  reveal  to  them. 
Much  missionary  labour  is  necessarily,  expended  in  correcting  the  mistakes  which  pre- 
vent the  acceptance  of  the  way  of  salvation  by  Christ  Jesus.  God  pure,  God  love,  God 
hating  sin,  God  a  Spirit,  God  our  Father,  God  in  sacrifice  that  he  might  save, — these  are 
all  most  strange  and  confusing  to  men  who  must  think  amidst  heathen  associations.  It 
is  eternal  life  to  know  the  only  true  God. 

n.  The  mistakes  of  the  offonentb  of  revelation  hinder  oub  abouuentb  from 
FRODUOiNa  DXTE  CONVICTIONS.  The  atheist,  infidel,  agnostic,  sceptic,  make  as  grave 
mistakes  about  our  God  as  the  Rahshakeh  did  about  Jehovah.  They  have  created 
figures  and  representations  of  him  which  we  can  join  them  in  declaring  make  him 
unworthy  of  trust.  Only  those  figures  do  not  represent  our  Qod.  We  cannot  acknow- 
ledge them.  If  the  mistakes  could  but  be  corrected,  and  our  God  be  known  as  he  is, 
they  would  "  preach  the  faiUi "  who  now  "  seek  to  destroy  it,"   Grave,  indeed,  is  the  sin 


U  THE  BOOK  OP  THE  PROPHET  ISAIAH,    [oh.  xxxn.  1— 24 

of  those  who,  professing  to  believe  in  God,  nerjrtheless  misrepresent  him,  and  so  give 
occasion  to  the  enemy  to  blaspheme. 

III.  The  mistakes  or  sects  and  obbbds  hinder  relioioub  wobk  among  fbofeb- 
80BB.  There  is  the  Calvinistio  God,  and  the  Arminian  God,  the  God  who  is  exacting 
Judge,  Moial  Governor,  august  King.  There  are  vastue,  repellent  notions  cherished  in 
ignorant  minds ;  and  the  preacher  often  speaks  of  a  G-od  who  is  really  to  the  pe^  ^ple  an 
"  unknown  God."  The  Lord  Jesus  Christ  came  to  earth  to  bring  the  full,  last,  all-satis- 
fying revelation  of  God  to  men.  We  are  still  making  hindering  mistakes  about  God, 
because  we  will  not  receive  his  revelation.  He  taught  men  to  lift  up  holy  hands,  ana 
say,  "Our  Father,  which  art  in  heaven." — B.  T. 

Ver.  10. — Claims  to  apeak  for  Ood.  "  The  Lord  said  unto  me.  Go  up  against  this 
land,  and  destroy  it."  The  inscriptions  of  Sennacherib  are  remarkable  for  similar  asser- 
tions to  this.  He  delights,  apparently,  to  claim  a  Divine  sanction  for  the  wars  in  which 
he  was  engaged.  Some  think  that  he  may  have  heard  of  Isaiah's  declaration,  that 
Jehovah  was  using  the  King  of  Assyria  as  his  instrument  (see  ch.  vii.  17, 18).  We  are 
bound  to  receive  the  messages  of  God,  in  whatsoever  form  they  may  come  to  us;  but  we 
are  bound  also  to  test  the  credentials  of  every  messenger  who  brings  them.  For  testing 
the  messengers,  adequate  provisions  have  been  made.  We  can  "  prove  all  things,  and 
hold  fast  that  which  is  good."  A  suggestive  illustration  may  be  found  in  the  narrative 
of  the  disobedient  prophet  (1  Kings  xiii.).  The  old  prophet  claimed  to  speak  in  the 
name  of  God,  and  so  over-persuaded  the  younger  man.  But  that  young  man  might 
reasonably  have  argued  thus:  "I  have  my  instructions  direct  from  God;  they  are 
definite  and  clear,  and  I  must  have  the  most  convincing  evidence  before  I  turn  aside 
from  fulfilling  the  instructions  given  me."  It  was  right  to  doubt  even  Chiist  so  far  as 
to  require  satisfactory  signs  and  proofs  that  he  had  come  from  God.  Men  may  make 
claims,  as  fanatics  and  enthusiasts  do  in  every  age ;  we  shall  not  heed  until  they  prove 
the  claim.  Illustrate  by  Johanna  Southcote,  Swedenborg,  Irving,  etc.  We  Buggest 
some  tests  for  judging  claims  to  speak  for  God. 

I.  Reasonable  pbobabihty.  We  suspect  many  things  because  they  are  not  likely. 
It  was  very  suspicious  to  assume  that  Jehovah  had  given  direct  and  audible  commands 
to  Sennacherib.  Many  of  the  visions  and  mysteries  of  Swedenborg  are  judged  by  their 
unreasonableness  and  improbability.  God's  ways  may  be  heyond  reason,  but  they  are 
not  foolish  to  the  view  of  reason.  The  test  of  reason  is  carried  too  far  when  a  full  and 
accurate  understanding  is  demanded,  but  It  may  fairly  be  applied  to  decide  what  is 
probable. 

II.  Book  op  the  Law.  The  Israelites  were  required  to  test  all  who  claimed  to  be 
prophets  by  the  harmony  between  their  spoken  word  and  the  existing  written  Word. 
"  To  the  Law  and  to  the  testimony :  if  they  speak  not  according  to  this  Word,  it  is 
because  there  is  no  light  in  them."  The  Scriptures  have  a  tone  and  character  which 
is  fcven  more  imporlant  than  their  precise  details.  Apply  these  to  claimants,  and  they 
will  test,  as  do  chemical  solvents.  All  who  know  and  love  God's  Word  become  sensitive 
to  that  which  is  in  harmony  with  it. 

III.  Response  op  conscience.  This  test  may  be  illustrated  by  Jonah's  mission  to 
Nineveh.  Jonah  had  no  credentials.  He  might  have  been  treated  as  an  impostor. 
But  the  conscience  of  Nineveh  responded  to  his  message,  and  conscience  guaranteed 
faith.  All  messages  from  God  that  come  as  warnings,  reproaches,  awakenings,  ihreaten- 
ings,  can  be  tried  by  conscience,  and  its  "  accusings  and  excusiugs."  So  none  of  us 
need  be  uncertain  whom  to  believe. — ^R.  T. 

Ver.  16. — Security  of  stable  government.  "The  fig  tree  affords  a  thick  shade,  and  ia, 
on  this  account,  a  favourite  resort  of  the  family,  where  they  may  often  he  seen  seated 
on  mats,  partaking  of  a  meal  or  entertaining  friends.  The  expression,  'to  sit  under 
one's  own  vine  and  fig  tree,'  denotes  at  once  security,  domestic  enjoyment,  and  compe- 
tence." The  expression  is  either  a  common  Eastern  proverb,  or  the  Rabshakeh  takes 
up  the  language  of  the  people  he  addresses,  in  his  chaffing,  taunting,  satirical  way.  The 
•entence  and  figure  are  found  also  in  1  Kings  iv.  25 ;  Zech.  iii.  10.  Mr.  Thomas  Jenner, 
writing  of  a  dwelling  just  outside  Jerusalem,  says,  "Mr.  Azam's  house  is  approached 
through  a  gateway  of  considerable  width,  from  which  to  the  door  a  broad  path  leadi 


CH.  xxxvL  1— 22.]    THE   BOOK  OP  THE   PROPHET  ISAIAH.  15 

through  the  garden.  This  path  is  spanned  by  a  wooden  trellis,  upon  which  a  rine  is 
train^,  and  at  the  time  of  our  visit  delicious  grapes  were  hanging  from  it.  As  I  con- 
templated this  scene  from  within  doors,  or  took  the  morning  and  evening  air,  sauntering 
between  gate  and  door,  I  could  but  recall  this  striking  figure  of  security  and  peace." 
The  point  before  us  is,  that  the  Rabshakeh  promises  the  people  that  safety  which  comes 
from  the  rule  of  a  strong  and  stable  government.  He  scarcely  veils  his  taunts  at  the 
parties  and  political  commotions  which  were  destroying  the  sense  of  security,  and 
making  foreign  complications,  for  the  people  of  Judah.  We  too  seldom  realize  the 
importance  of  strong,  stable  government  in  a  country.  It  may  be  illustrated  in  the 
following  directions. 

I.  Stable  government  checks  paett  feeling.  If  the  government  be  weak,  its 
enemies  are  active,  public  opinion  is  kept  agitated,  demagogues  appear  and  exaggerate 
public  disabilities  and  public  claims.  Men  are  diverted  from  their  proper  pursuits  to 
engage  in  political  wrangle ;  the  relationships  of  life  are  embittered  by  party  divisions ; 
and  valuable  national  time  is  lost  in  unprofitable  contentions.  If  the  government  be 
strong,  the  anarchical  forces  subside.  Blessed  is  the  land  that  is  generally  free  from 
political  strife. 

II.  Stable  government  viooeously  represses  bvil-doees.  And  on  this  the  security 
and  prosperity  of  a  country  most  directly  depends.  Business  can  only  be  carried  on 
where  there  is  security  for  property  and  security  for  rights.  Illustrate  from  the  con- 
dition of  Israel  when  "  there  was  no  king  iu  the  land,  and  every  one  did  that  which 
was  light  in  his  own  eyes." 

m.  Stable  government  can  encourage  the  arts  of  peace  and  accomplish 
JUDICIOUS  EKFORMS.  It  holds  foreign  relations  with  firm  hand,  and  so  preserves  peace. 
It  can  crush  the  agitator  and  heed  the  reformer.  Spared  from  contention,  it  has  time 
and  means  for  aiding  internal  development.  And  it  can  stand  by  and  preserve  the 
liberties  of  those  who,  in  a  thousand  ways,  would  spread  among  the  people  the  know- 
ledge of  the  true  God  and  the  eternal  life.  Therefore  every  good  Christian  and  good 
citizen  should  strengthen  the  government  of  his  day.  "  The  powers  that  be  are  ordained 
ofOod."— E.  T. 

Ver.  18. — Insult  offered  to  our  God.  It  is  an  insult  to  class  Jehovah  with  the  idol- 
gods  created  by  heathen  imaginations  and  presented  in  heathen  symbolic  figures. 
Jehovah  is  like  none  else ;  he  is  God  alone.  The  impertinence  of  this  Rabshakeh  is 
seen  in  that  he  sets  Jehovah  among  the  petty  and  inferior  gods  of  small  nations,  and 
assumes  that  Asshur  and  Ishtar,  the  gods  of  Assyria,  were  supreme  above  them  all. 
Cheyne  says,  "  The  Assyrian  is  inconsistent.  In  his  first  speech  he  had  stated  himseH 
to  be  the  obedient  instrument  of  Jehovah.  Here  he  represents  the  wars  of  the  Assyrians 
as  inspired  by  a  religious  hostility  to  all  the  gods  of  the  nations."  The  point  which 
may  be  illustrated  is — What  should  be  our  attitude  in  the  presence  of  such  insults  ?  For 
they  are  ofiered  now.  The  scoffer  still  lives.  The  sceptic  still  flings  over  God  the 
dark  shadow  of  his  doubtings.  Literature,  too,  often  thinly  veils  its  insults.  We 
should  variously  meet  the  occasions,  adapting  our  response  to  the  nature  of  the  insult 
and  the  character  of  him  who  offers  it.     Three  forms  of  response  may  be  considered. 

I.  Calm  indifference.  Very  many  of  the  bravely  uttered  scepticisms  of  oiu:  time 
are  only  designed  to  draw  attention  to  those  who  utter  them.  They  are  in  the  nature 
of  personal  advertisements.  Leave  them  alone,  'i'hey  are  nothing;  we  must  take 
care  not  to  swell  them  into  something  by  directing  attention  to  them.  Sometimes 
these  insults  are  petty  and  nagging,  but  continuous.  Again,  indifference  is  the  best 
treatment.  Those  who  have  faith  in  God  make  grave  mistakes  when  they  too  vigorously 
defend  God  against  the  arrows  of  mere  children.  Tonoisy  antagonism  we  may  calmly 
say,  "  It  doesn't  matter." 

n.  Noble  testimony.  There  is  a  time  to  speak.  When  insults  have  grown  to 
such  power  that  the  faith  of  the  young,  or  the  work  of  grace  in  the  world,  is  imperilled, 
we  must  speak  out.  The  Christian  apologist  has  his  time  and  his  spliere,  especially 
when  a  kind  of  mania  of  unbelief  seems  to  seize  upon  a  people.  Illustrate  from  the 
three  Hebrew  youths ;  the  apostles  before  the  Sanhedrim  ;  Paul  before  Agrippa ;  Luther 
at  the  Diet  of  Worms,  etc.  Firm  testimony  of  our  personal  convictions  will  often 
sileuce  the  scoffer. 


le 


THE  BOOK  OF  THE  PROPHET  ISAIAH,    [oh.  xxxvn.  1— 8& 


HI.  AonvB  viNDiOATioir.  By  reasonable  judgments  on  those  who  offer  the  insult. 
Blasphemy  ought  to  be  a  crime.  By  withdrawal  from  association  with  those  who  thug 
walk  disorderly.  The  man  who  has  no  reverence  for  God  has  no  basis  of  character 
which  makes  Mendship  with  him  safe.  And  by  using  all  available  means  for  clearing 
the  outraged  name,  and  upholding  the  imperilled  honour  of  him  who  is  our  "  All  and  in 
all."— R.  T. 

Ver.  21. — 2%e  itrength  o/silenot.  "They  held  their  peace,  and  answered  him  not 
a  word."  The  readiest  thing  is  to  meet  taunt  with  taunt,  and  rouse  each  other's  worst 
passions  with  mutual  recriminations.  The  noblest  thing  is  to  meet  undeserved  and 
unworthy  reproach  and  insult  with  the  dignified  silence  which  is  bom  of  trust  in  God 
as  our  Vindicator.  But  worthy  silence  must  be  carefully  distinguished  from  the  dumb- 
ness of  the  sulky  temperament,  which  is  a  sign  of  the  uncultured  and  ungovemed 
nature.  We  should  never  confuse  the  silence  of  stupidity  with  the  silence  of  self- 
restraint.  Matthew  Henry  quaintly  and  wisely  says,  "  It  is  sometimes  prudent  'not 
to  answer  a  fool  according  to  his  folly.'  These  Jews  had  reason  enough  on  their  side, 
but  it  would  be  hard  to  speak  it  to  such  an  unreasonable  adversary  without  a  mixture 
of  passion ;  and,  if  they  should  fall  a-railing  like  him,  Babshakeh  would  be  much  too 
hard  for  them  at  that  weapon."  Fixing  attention  on  the  two  facts — that  the  people 
kept  silence,  and  that  they  did  so  in  obedience  to  Hezekiah,  we  get  the  following  two 
points  for  illustration. 

I.  SiLENCK  IN  AH  EVIL  TiMB  INDIOATES  8ELF-MA8TBBT,  Remember  what  the  Apostle 
James  says  of  the  unruliness  of  the  tongue.  Observe  how  readily  we  are  excited  to 
answer  again.  Recall  the  anxiety  of  the  psalmist  about  keeping  the  door  of  his  lips. 
Notice  how  speakers  are  carried  to  the  utterance  of  imprudent  things  by  the  heat  of 
discussion.  Estimate  the  mischief  done  by  careless,  cruel,  or  passionate  words.  And 
see  the  sublime  example  of  our  Lord  when  on  his  trial.  "  He  answered  nothing."  "  He 
held  his  peace."  This  last  expression  suggests  that  silence  is  a  sign  of  strength  of  will ; 
the  man  who  can  keep  silence  is  master  of  his  actions,  and  master  of  himself.  Silence 
is  oftentimes,  in  its  effect,  the  truest  and  most  powerful  speech.  It  shames  men ;  it  quiets 
men ;  it  reproaches  men ;  it  conquers  the  opposition  of  men ;  it  shows  the  right  to  all 
bystanders  and  onlbokers.  It  has  been  said  that  there  is  such  a  thing  as  a  "Divine 
dumbness ;"  and  Carlyle  calls  "  speech  silvern,  silence  golden."  The  sublime  self-mastery 
of  Heaven  is  suggested  in  the  declaration  that  "  there  was  silence  in  heaven  about  the 
space  of  half  an  hour." 

II.  SiLRNCE  nr  A  FDBLIO  KTIL  TIHE  SHOWS  FOWEB  OF  OOHUAin)  OVEB  0TEEB8.      It  WaS 

a  great  thing  for  Hezekiah  to  keep  silence  himself;  and  it  was  a  great  thing  also  for 
him  to  command  silence  in  the  people.  Only  the  man  who  can  control  himself  can 
ever  have  the  power  to  control  others.  Illustrations  of  the  importance  of  this  power  of 
checking  speech  in  others  may  be  taken  from  family  life  and  Church  life.  It  is  of 
special  value  in  excited,  irritating,  quarrelsome  times. — B.  T. 


EXPOSITION. 


OHAPTEB  XXXVn. 

This  chapter  is  the  sequel  of  the  preceding, 
and  is  so  closely  connected  with  it  that  the 
two  really  constitute  but  one  narrative. 
Ver.  22  of  ch.  xxxvi.  is  more  closely  con- 
nected with  oh.  zxxvil.  than  with  the  posi- 
tion of  the  narrative  to  which  it  is  attached. 

Ver.  1. — When  King  Hezekiah  heard  it ; 
rather,  luard  them ;  ie.  the  **  words  of  Bab- 
shakeh," which  his  officials  reported  to  him. 
He  rent  his  clothes.  He  did  as  they  had 
done  (ch.  zzzvi.  22 ;  see  the  comment  on 
that  verse).  But  he  went  further,  showing 
a  deeper  sense  of  horror  and  aiSiction  than 


the  officials  had  shown  by  being  ooTered 
with  sackoloth  (on  the  combination  of  the 
two  modes  of  showing  grief  or  horror,  see 
Gten.  xxivii.  34 ;  2  Sam.  iii.  31 ;  1  Kings 
zxi.  27;  Esth.  iv.  1,  etc.).  And  went  into 
the  house  of  the  Lord.  The  temple  was  not 
only  a  place  for  offering  praise  and  sacrifice, 
but  also  a  "house  of  prayer"  (infra,  oh.  Ivi. 
7 ;  comp.  1  Kings  viii.  28 — 30).  Hezekiah 
can,  on  this  occasion,  have  gone  up  to  the 
house  of  the  Lord  only  to  pray, 

Ver.  2. — He  sent  Elialdm  .  ,  .  and  Shebsa 
.  .  .  and  the  elders  of  the  priests.  A  dig- 
nified embassy,  showing  how  much  Isaiah 
was  held  in  honour  (comp.  2  Kings  xxii, 
14  and  Jer.  xzxviii.  3 ;  and  contrast,  od  ths 


OH.  xcnm.  1— 38.]    THE  BOOK  OP  THE  PROPHET  ISAIAH. 


IT 


other  hand,  the  mdeness  of  Ahab  in  sending 
a  single  ennnoh  to  bring  Mioaiah  into  his 
presence,  1  Kings  xxii.  9).  The  prophets, 
as  representatives  of  Jehovah,  were  en- 
titled to  respect  snd  observance  even  from 
kings. 

Yer.  3. — A.  day  .  .  .  of  rebuke;  rather,  of 
reproof,  m  punishment  (oomp.  Fs.  oxiix.  7  and 
Hob.  v.  9).  That  Qoi  should  have  allowed 
such  an  insulting  embassy  to  come  and  go 
in  safety  was  a  mode  of  reproving  his  people, 
and  to  some  extent  punishing  them  for  their 
sins.  Even  Hezekiah  himself  deserved  re- 
proof for  having  go  long  placed  his  reliance 
upon  Egypt  (ch.  zx.  5,6;  ixx.  1 — 4;  xxxvi. 
6,  9),  tliough  now  apparently  he  had  turned 
to  Jehovah,  and  relied  on  him  only  (oh. 
xxxvi.  7,  15).  Blasphemy.  So  Delitzsch. 
Mr.  Oheyne  suggests  "  contumely,"  and  Dr. 
Kay  "  contempt."  But  the  meaning  "blas- 
phemy," which  Mr.  Cheyne  confesses  to 
"suit  the  context,"  is  required  in  all  the 
other  passages  where  (substantially)  the 
same  word  occurs  (Neh.  ix.  18,  26;  Bzek. 
XXXV.  12).  Hezekiah  calls  the  day  one  "of 
blasphemy,"  on  account  of  Babshakeh's 
impious  utterances  (ch.  xxxvi.  15,  18,  20). 
The  children  are  oome  to  the  birth,  etc. 
This  was  a  proverbial  phrase  for  a  time  of 
extreme  difficulty  (see  Hos.  xiii.  13),  and  is 
not  to  be  pressed  as  embodying  at  all  a  close 
analogy.  Judah  was  in  sore  trouble,  and 
was  expecting  deliverance.  It  seemed  now 
as  if  she  would  not  have  strength  to  go 
through  the  crisis,  but  would  perish  through 
weakness. 

Ver.  4. — It  may  be  the  Lord  .  .  .  will 
hear ;  i.e. "  will  notice,"  or  "  will  punish."  If 
Isaiah  laid  the  matter  before  God,  and  prayed 
earnestly,  it  was  possible  that  Grod  would 
intervene  to  save  Judah,  and  punish  the 
blapshemous  words  uttered.  The  living  Ood. 
In  opposition  to  the  dead  idols  of  the  heathen, 
which  had  neither  life,  nor  breath,  nor  per- 
ception (see  Ps.  oxT.  4 — 8;  cxxxv.  15 — 
18).  The  remnant  that  is  left.  It  is  usual 
to  explain  this  of  Judah  generally,  which 
still  survived,  although  Israel  had  been 
carried  away  captive.  But  perhaps  the  con- 
trast is  rather  between  the  numerous  Judeean 
captives  who  had  been  taken  and  conveyed 
to  Assyria  by  Sennacherib  when  he  took  the 
"fenced  cities"  (ch.  xxxvi.  1),  and  the  por- 
tion of  the  nation  which  still  remained  in 
the  land.  Sennacherib  says,  in  his  annals, 
that  he  took  "  forty-six  "  cities,  and  carried 
captive  to  Asiyiia  above  two  hundred  thou- 
sand persons  ('  Records  of  the  Fast,'  vol.  i. 
p.  38). 

Ter.  6. — The  servants  of  the  King  of  As- 
syria. Mr.  Oheyne  translates,  "  the  minions 
of  the  King  of  Assyria,"  remarking  truly 
that  the  word  used  is  not  the  ordinary  one  for 
"  nrvants,"  but  «•  a  disparaging  expression." 

I8AIAB— H. 


Perhaps  the  best  translation  would  be 
lacheys. 

Yer.  7. — ^Behold,  I  will  send  a  blast  upon 
him ;  rather,  I  will  put  a  spirit  within  Mm ; 
i.e.  I  will  take  away  from  him  the  spirit  ol 
pride  and  arrogance  by  which  he  has  been 
hitherto  actuated,  and  I  will  infuse  into  his 
heart,  instead,  a  spirit  of  hesitation  and  fear. 
He  shall  hear  a  rumour;  literally,  as  De- 
litzsch translates,  he  shall  hear  a  hearsay, 
i.e. "  a  report,"  or  "tidingfs."  It  is  uncertain 
what  "tidings"  are  intended.  Some  sup- 
pose "tidings  of  the  movements  of  Tir- 
hakah;"  others,  "tidings  of  the  destruction 
of  his  host ; "  a  few,  "  tidings  of  an  insurrec- 
tion in  some  other  part  of  the  Assyrian 
empire."  This  last  supposition  is  wholly 
gratuitous,  since  we  have  no  indication, 
either  in  Scripture  or  in  the  inscriptions,  of 
any  such  insurrection.  The  choice  lies  be- 
tween the  other  two,  or  between  one  or  other 
of  them,  and  the  two  combined.  The  vague- 
ness is  owing,  not  to  the  time  at  which  the 
present  narrative  took  shape,  but  to  the  fact 
that  a  vague  promise — quite  sufficient  for  its 
purpose — was  given  at  first,  the  filling  in  of 
the  details  being  reserved  for  a  later  period 
(see  vers.  22 — 35).  I  will  cause  him  to  fall 
by  the  sword  (see  ver.  38). 

Yer.  8. — Babshakeh  .  .  .  found  the  King 
of  Assyria  warring  against  Libnah.  Libnah 
was  a  town  at  no  great  distance  from  Lachish 
(Josh.  X.  31 ;  XV.  39 — 42).  It  was  also  near 
Maieshah  (Josh.  xv.  42 — 44),  and  must 
therefore  liave  belonged  to  the  more  southern 
portion  of  the  Shefeleh,  and  probably  to  the 
eastern  region,  where  the  hills  sink  down 
into  the  plain.  The  exact  site  is  very  un- 
certain, and  still  remains  to  be  discovered. 
Sennacherib's  object  in  moving  upon  Libnah 
is  doubtful;  but  it  would  seem,  from  his 
monuments,  that  he  had  captured  Lachish 
(Layard,  'Nineveh  and  Babylon,'  pp.  149 
— 152),  and  had  gone  on  to  Libnah,  as  the 
next  stronghold  on  the  way  to  Egypt. 

Yer.  9.— Tirhakah,  King  of  Ethiopia.  Tir- 
hakah  is  among  the  most  famous  of  the 
monarchs  belonging  to  this  period.  The 
Greeks  called  him  "Tearohon,"  the  As- 
syrians "  Tarkn  "  or  "  Tarqn."  His  name, 
as  represented  on  his  own  monuments,  is 
"  Tahark  "  or  "  Tahrak."  According  to  the 
Egyptian  remains,  he  bad  a  reign  of  at  least 
twenty-six  years  in  Egypt — from  B.O.  693  to 
B.O.  667.  He  would  seem,  however,  to  have 
been  King  of  Ethiopia,  and  lord  paramount 
of  the  lower  valley  of  the  Nile,  from  about 
B.0,  700,  Shabatok  for  some  years  ruling 
Egypt,  or  a  portion  of  it,  as  his  deputy 
(Bawlinson,  '  Hist,  of  Ancient  Egypt,'  vol. 
ii.  p.  450).  Hezekiah's  negotiations  had,  it 
is  probable,  been  with  Tirhakah  (oh.  xtx. 
13;  XX.  5;  zxx.  1 — 6).  This  monarrh, 
haying  engaged  to  help  Um,  now  put  his 


18 


THE  BOOK  OF  THE  PROPHET  ISAIAH,    [oh.  xxxvu.  1— 38 


forces  in  motion,  and  began  to  descend  the 
Nile  valley  to  his  relief.  His  movement 
rather  provoked  than  alarmed  Sennacherib, 
who,  having  defeated  one  Egyptian  army  in 
B.O.  701  ('Eponym  Cannn,'  pp.  133,  134), 
was  confident  of  success  against  another. 
He  sent  messengers.  It  is  not  very  clear 
what  advantage  Sennacherib  expected  from 
this  second  embassy.  He  hail  no  fresh  argu- 
ment to  bring  forward,  unless  it  were  a 
suggestion  that  Hezekiah's  God  was  endea- 
vouring to  deceive  him.  In  the  main,  vers. 
10 — 13  are  a  mere  expansion  of  ch.  xxxvi. 
18—20. 

Ver.  10. — Let  not  thy  God,  in  whom  thou 
trustest,  deceive  thee.  Sennacherib  recog- 
nized Jehovah  as  a  god,  the  God  of  the 
Jews,  but  put  him  on  a  par  with  the  other 
"  gods  of  the  nations  "  (ver.  11),  and  did  not 
believe  in  his  being  able  to  contend  with 
Asshur.  If  he  were  really,  through  his 
priests  or  prophets,  giving  Hezekiah  assur- 
ances of  protection  and  deliverance,  he  could 
only  be  "  deceiving  "  him. 

Ver.  11. — Thou  hast  heard  what  the  kings 
of  Assyria  have  done  to  all  lands  (compare 
the  Assyrian  inscriptions,  passim).  Tiglath- 
Pileser  I.  calls  himself  "the  conquering 
hero,  the  terror  of  whose  name  has  over- 
whelmed all  regions"  ('Kecords  of  the  Past,' 
vol.  V.  p.  8);  Asshur-izir-pal,  "  the  king  who 
subdued  all  the  races  of  men  "  (ibid.,  vol.  vii. 
p.  11);  Shalmaneser  II.,  "the  marcher  over 
the  whole  world  "  (ibid.,  vol.  v.  p.  29) ;  Sha- 
mas-Vul,  "  the  trampler  on  the  world  "  (ibid., 
vol.  i.  12).  Sargon  says  that  "the  gods  had 
granted  him  the  exercise  of  his  sovereignty 
over  all  kings"  (ibid.,  vol.  ix.  p.  4),  and  that 
he  "  reigned  from  the  two  beginnings  to  the 
two  ends  of  the  four  celestial  points"  (ibid., 
vol.  xi.  p.  33),  i.e.  from  the  furthest  north  to 
the  furthest  south,  and  from  the  extreme  east 
to  the  extreme  west.  Sennacherib  himself 
says,  "  Asshur,  father  of  the  gods,  among  all 
kings  firmly  has  raised  me,  and  over  aU  that 
dwell  in  the  countries  he  caused  to  increase 
my  weapons  "  (ibid.,  vol.  xi.  p.  49).  From 
first  to  last,  in  their  inscriptions,  the  mon- 
archs  claim  a  universal  dominion. 

Ver.  12  — My  fathers.  The  Assyrian 
monarchs  call  all  those  who  have  preceded 
them  upon  the  throne  their  "fathers,"  with- 
out intending  to  claim  any  blood-relation- 
ship. Sargon,  Sennacherib's  father,  though 
a  usurper  and  the  first  king  of  a  new 
dynasty,  frequently  speaks  of  "the  kings 
his  fathers"  ('Records  of  the  Past,'  vol. 
vii.  pp.  39,  SI,  eto.).  Gozan  .  .  .  Haran  .  .  . 
Bezeph  .  .  .  Telassar.  "  Gozan  "  is,  beyond 
all  doubt,  the  region  known  to  the  Greeks 
as  Gauzanitis,  which  was  the  eastern  por- 
tion'of  Upper  Mesopotamia,  or  tlie  country 
about  the  sources  of  the  Eha1>our  river. 
The  AMyriMi  oonquett  o(  ibis  tract  is  in- 


dicated by  the  settlement  of  the  Israelitet 
in  the  region  (2  Kings  xvii.  6 ;  xviii.  11 ; 

1  Chron.  v.  26).  "Haran"  is  the  well- 
kniwn  "city  of  Nahor"  (Gen.  xxiv.  10), 
called  in  Acts  vii.  2  "Charran,"  and  by 
the  Greeks  and  Romans,  Carrhse.  It  has 
now  recovered  its  old  designation,  and  is 
known  as  Harran,  "Rezeph'|  was  in  the 
neighbouroood  of  Haran,  and  is  mentioned 
as  belonging  to  Assyria  as  early  as  B.c.  775 
('  Eponym  Canon,'  p.  82).  It  had  probably 
revoltei  and  been  reduced  at  a  later  date. 
"Telassar,"  "the  Hill  of  Asshur,"  is  not 
mentioned  in  the  Assyrian  inscriptions,  but 
was  probably  the  Assyrian  name  of  a  town  on 
or  near  the  Euphrates,  in  the  country  of  the 
Beni-Eden,  which  was  not  far  from  Carohe- 
mish  (see  '  Records  of  the  Past,'  vol.  iii.  pp. 
90—92).  The  children  of  Eden.  The  As- 
syrian inscriptions  mention  a  "Bit-Adini" 
(oomp.  Amos  i.  5),  and  a  chief  who  is  called 
"  the  son  of  Adini ;"  both  belonging  to  the 
Middle  Euphrates' region.  The  "children 
of  Eden"  (Beni-Eden)  were  probably  the 
people  of  the  tract  about  Bit-AdinL 

Ver.  13. — Eamath  .  .  .  Arphad  .  .  .  8e- 
pharvaim  (see  the  comment  upon  ch.  xxxvi. 
19). 

Ver.  14. — ^Hezekiah  received  the  letter. 
Sennacherib  sent  his  present  message  in  a 
written  form.  The  communications  between 
kings  were  often  carried  on  in  this  way  (see 

2  Kings  V.  5;  xx.  12).  The  Hebrews  use 
the  same  word  for  "letter"  and  "book;" 
but,  when  a  letter  is  intended,  employ  gene- 
rally the  plural  number  (compare  the  Greek 
iirurToKal  and  the  Latin  litterse).  And  spread 
it  before  the  Lord.  Mot  that  God  might  see 
it  and  read  it,  in  a  material  sense,  but  still 
that  he  might  take  note  of  it,  and,  if  he  saw 
fit,  punish  it.  Compare  the  exhibition  of  the 
Books  of  the  Law,  painted  with  idolatrous 
emblems,  at  Masphai  "  over  against "  the 
temple,  by  Judas  Maccabseus  and  his  com- 
panions (1  Mace.  iii.  46 — 48).  The  act  in 
both  cases  implied  the  referring  of  the  whole 
matter  to  God  for  his  consideration.  It  was, 
as  Delitzsch,  says,  a  sort  of  "  prayer  without 
words." 

Ver.  16.-0  Lord  .  .  .  that  dwellest  be- 
tween the  oherubims;  literally,  that  sittest 
upon  the  eherulnm.  The  allusion  is  scarcely 
to  the  poetic  imagery  of  God  riding  on  the 
cherubim  in  the  heavens  (Ps.  xviii.  10),  as 
Mr.  Cheyne  suggests;  but  rather  to  his 
dwelling  between  the  two  cherubic  forms  in 
the  holy  of  holies,  and  there  manifesting 
himself  (comp.  Numb.  vii.  89 ;  1  Sam.  iv. 
4;  2  Sam,  vi.  2;  1  Chron.  xiii.  6;  Ps.  Ixxx. 
1 ;  xcix.  1).  Thou  art  the  God,  even  thon 
alone,  of  all  the  Mngdoms  of  the  earth.  It 
has  been  questioned  whether  Hezekiah  was 
really  as  pronounced  a  monotheist  as  these 
expressions  would  imply,  and  auggetted  tlut 


CH.  xxxvn.  1— 38J     THE  BOOK  OF  THE  PROPHET  ISAIAH. 


19 


his  actual  words  received  "  a  coloming  "  from 
a  later  writer.  Hezekinh's  contemporarieB, 
it  is  said,  Isaiah  and  Micah,  make  no  such 
strong  statementB  of  their  belief  in  one  only 
God  as  this  (Kuenen,  Cheyne).  But  it  is 
difficult  to  Bee  what  can  be  a  clearer  revela- 
tion of  monotheism  than  ch.  vi.  1 — 5,  or  what 
truth  more  absolutely  underlies  the  whole 
of  Isaiah's  teaching  than  the  unity  of  the 
Supreme  Being.  The  same  under-current  is 
observable  in  Micah  (i.  2,  3;  iv.  5;  vi. 
6 — 9;  vii.  17, 18).  Sennacherib's  belief,  that 
each  country  has  it8  own  god  (ch.  xxxvi. 
18 — ^20),  is  not  shared  by  the  religious  Jews 
of  his  time.  They  are  well  aware  that  the 
lieathen  gods  are  "vanity"  (ch.  livi.  3j 
Hob.  iv.  15 ;  Amos  i.  5;  Jonah  ii.  8),  "wind" 
and  "confusion"  (ch.  xli.  29,  etc.).  Thou 
hast  made  heaven  and  earth  (comp.  Gen. 
i.  I;  Ps.  cU.  25:  ch.  xL  26—28;  xlu.  5, 
etc). 

Ver.  17. — ^Incline  thine  ear . . .  open  thine 
eyes.  This  is  a  conscious  pleading  of  the 
promise  made  to  Solomon  (2  Chion;  vii.  15). 

Ver.  18. — Of  a  truth,  lord,  the  kings  of 
Assyria  have  laid  waste  all  the  nations.  Thii 
was  a  stubborn  fact,  which  it  was  impos- 
sible to  deny.  From  the  time  of  Asshur-izir- 
pal  at  any  rate,  about  B.o.  880,  Assyria  had 
pursued  for  nearly  two  centuries  a  steady 
career  of  conquest,  reducing  the  nations 
which  were  lier  neighbours^  almost  without 
exception,  and  gradually  spreading  her 
power  from  the  tract  immediately  about 
Nineveh  to  the  Persian  Gulf  on  the  south, 
the  great  plateau  of  Iran  on  the  east,  the 
Armenian  Mountains  (Niphates  and  Taurus) 
on  the  north,  and  on  tjie  west  to  Cilicia  and 
the  Mediterranean.  Her  progress  towards 
the  west  alone  is  marked  in  Scripture,  since 
there  alone  she  came  in  contact  with  God's 
people.  Under  Pul  (about  B.o.  760)  she  at- 
tacked Samaria  (2  Kings  xv.  19);  under  Tig- 
lath-Pileser  II.  she  carried  off  a  portion  of 
the  ten  tribes  (2  Kings  xv.  29) ;  under  the 
same  monarch  she  subjugated  Damascus  (2 
Kings  xvi.  9);  under  Sbalmaneser  she  be- 
sieged (2  Kinga  xvii.  5),  and  under  Sargon 
took,  Samaria  (2  Kings  xvii.  6);  under 
Sargon  also  she  invaded  Philistia  and  cap- 
tured Ashdod  (ch.  XX.  1).  Now  she  was 
bent  on  subduing  Judsea,  and  so  preparing 
the  way  for  the  reduction  of  Egypt.  Hu- 
manly speaking,  it  was  most  unlikely  that 
the  small  and  weak  state  of  Judsea  would 
be  able  to  resist  her.  But  God  was  all- 
powerful,  and  might  be  pleased  to  cast 
down,  as  he  had  been  pleased  to  exalt  (ch. 
i.  5—19).    Hence  Hezekiah's  appeal. 

Yer.  19. — And  have  cast  their  gods  into 
the  fire.  The  more  valuable  of  the  foreign 
idols  were  usually  carried  off  by  the  As- 
syrknB,  and  placed  in  the  shrines  of  their 
own  fods  M  (rophiei  of  lioUtzj;  bat  no 


doubt  great  nnmbers  of  the  inferior  idols, 
which  were  of  wood,  not  even  coated  with 
metal — the  {<(oto  of  the  Greeks — were  bnmt. 
For  they  were  no  gods  (comp.  Jer.  ii.  11 ;  v. 
7;  xvi.  20,  etc.).  Isaiah's  favourite  word 
for  "  idols"  is  elilim,  which  is,  etymologically, 
"not-gods"  (ch.  ii.  8,  18,  20;  x.  10,11;  xix. 
1,  3 ;  xxxi.  7).  The  work  of  men's  hands 
(see  ch.  ii.  8;  xl.  19;  xli.  7,  etc).  The 
absurdity  of  men's  worshipping  as  gods  what 
their  own  hands  had  made  is  ever  increas- 
ingly ridiculed  by  the  religious  Jews  (comp. 
Ps.  oiv.  4—8;  ch.  xliv.  9—20;  Jer.  x.  3— 
15 ;  *  Bp.  of  Jeremy,'  8—73). 

Yer.  20. — Save  us  ,  ,  .  that  all  the  king- 
doms .  ,  .  may  know,  etc.  God's  true  servants 
desire  deliverance  and  triumph  over  enemies, 
not  alone  for  their  own  sakes,  not  even  for 
the  sake  of  the  country  or  people  whose  fate  is 
bound  up  with  their  own,  but  for  the  glory 
of  God,  that  his  honour  may  be  vindicated 
in  the  sight  of  the  world  at  large.  It  is 
a  large  part  of  the  satisfaction  of  Moses  at 
the  passage  of  the  Bed  Sea,  that  "  the  peoples 
would  hear . . .  the  dukes  of  Edom  be  amazed 
.  .  .  the  mighty  men  of  Moab  tremble,"  eto. 
(Exod.  XV.  14,  15).  David  would  have  his 
foes  "consumed"  in  order  that  they  might 
know  that  "  God  ruled  in  Jacob,  and  unto 
the  ends  of  the  earth"  (Ps.  lis.  13),  and 
again,  in  order  "  that  men  may  know  that 
thou,  whose  Name  alone  is  Jehovah,  art  the 
Most  High  over  all  the  earth "  (Ps.  Ixxxiii. 
18).  It  bag  been  well  said  that  "tlie  object 
of  all  the  judgments  which  the  true  prophet 
desires  is  to  bring  all  nations  into  subjec- 
tion to  God." 

Yer.  21. — Then  Isaiah  .  .  .  sent  to  Heze- 
kiah,  saying.  It  seems  most  natural  to  un- 
derstand that  the  prophet  was  at  once  super- 
naturally  informed  of  Hezekiah's  prayer,  as 
Ananias  was  of  Saul's  (Acts  ix.  11),  and 
instructed  what  reply  to  make  to  it.  But 
still,  it  is  no  doubt  possible  that  some  of  the 
facts  have  been  omitted  for  the  sake  of 
brevity. 

Yer.  22. — ^The  virgin,  the  daughter  of  Zion  j 
i.e.  Jerusalem  (comp.  ch.  i.  8 ;  x.  32 ;  xvi  1 ; 
Hi.  2;  Ixii.  11).  The  expression,  "virgin 
daughter,"  ia  used  also  by  Isaiah  of  Zidon 
(ch.  xxiii.  12)  and  of  Babylon  (ch.  xlvii.  1). 
The  personification  here  ia  very  effective, 
since  it  represents  Jerusalem  as  a  tender 
maiden,  weak  and  delicate,  yet  still  bold 
enough  to  stand  up  against  Sennacherib  and 
all  his  host,  and  bid  him  defiance.  Confident 
in  Jehovah,  her  Protector,  she  despises  him, 
and  laughs  him  to  scorn;  nay,  "shakes  her 
head  at  him,"  or  rather,  "  after  him,"  pur- 
suing him  with  scornful  gestures  ai  he 
retreats  before  her.  (On  shaking  the  head 
as  a  gesture  of  acorn,  lee  Ps.  xxii.  7;  cix. 
25 ;  Malt,  xxvii.  39.) 

Yer.  23.— Even  against  the  Holy  On*  •( 


20 


THE   BOOK  OF  THE    PROPHET  ISAIAH,    [oh.  xxxvn.  1— 88 


Israel.  A  Bpecially  Isaian  phrase,  employed 
by  Isaiah  twenty-eight  times,  and  only  five 
times  in  all  the  rest  of  Scripture.  A  strong 
proof,  If  auy  proof  beyond  tiie  unmistakable 
Isaian  spirit  of  the  entire  prophecy  were 
needed,  of  the  genuineness  of  the  present 
passage. 

Yer.  24. — ^Ey  fhy  servants  hast  then  re- 
proached the  Loid  (see  ch.  xxxvi.  15 — 20). 
And  hast  said.  Bennacherib  had  not  actually 
uttered  these  words  with  his  mouth ;  but  the 
prophet  clothes  in  his  own  highly  poetic 
language  the  thoughts  which  the  Assyrian 
king  had  cherished  in  his  heart.  He  had 
regarded  "  the  multitude  of  his  chariots  "  as 
irresistible;  he  had  considered  that  the 
mountains  which  guarded  Palestine  would 
be  no  obstacle  to  his  advance ;  he  had  con- 
templated ravaging  and  despoiling  of  its 
timber  the  entire  country ;  he  had  meant  to 
penetrate  into  every  region  that  was  lovely 
and  fertile.  The  emphatic  "I"  of  the 
original — ani — twice  repeated,  marks  the 
proud  egotism  of  the  monarch.  By  the  mul- 
titude of  my  chariots  am  I  come  np  to  the 
height  of  the  mountains;  rather,  vjith  the 
muUitude  ;  or,  according  to  another  reading, 
with  chariots  upon  chariots.  The  Assyrian 
kings  contrived  to  cross  with  their  chariots 
mountain  chains  of  great  difficulty,  and  fre- 
quently boast  of  the  achievement.  Tiglath- 
Pileser  I.  says,  "I  assembled  my  cljariots 
and  warriors.  I  betook  myself  to  carts  of 
iron  in  order  to  overcome  the  rough  moun- 
tains and  their  difficult  marches.  I  made 
the  wilderness  thus  practicable  for  the  pas- 
sage of  my  chariots  and  warriors  "  ('  Becords 
of  the  Past,'  vol.  v.  pp.  9, 10).  Asshur-izir- 
pal,  "  The  rugged  hill  country,  unfitted  for 
the  passage  of  chariots  and  armies,  with 
instruments  of  iron  I  cut  through,  and  with 
metal  rollers  I  beat  down ;  the  chariots  and 
troops  I  brought  over"  (ibid.,  vol.  iii.  p.  58). 
Shahuaneser  II.,  "  Trackless  paths,  difficult 
mountains,  which  like  the  point  of  an  iron 
sword  stood  pointed  to  the  bky,  on  wheels  of 
iron  and  bronze  I  penetrated.  My  chariots 
and  armies  I  transported  over  them  "  (ibid., 
p.  85).  In  the  less  rough  parts,  while  the 
warriors  dismounted,  the  horses  drew  the 
chariots,  which  were  assisted  over  obstacles 
by  attendants  ('Ancient  Monarchies,'  vol. 
ii.  p.  74) ;  but,  in  regions  of  greater  difficulty, 
they  were  conveyed  across  the  mountain 
ranges  in  waggons  of  rude  and  strong  con- 
struction ('  Becords  of  the  Past,'  vol.  v.  p. 
13).  The  chariot-force  was  regarded  as  so 
important  that  the  Assyrians  never  made 
any  distant  expedition  without  it.  To  the 
sides  of  Lebanon.  It  was  not  necessary  to 
cross  either  Libanus  or  Anti-Libanus  in 
order  to  invade  Judaea,  since  the  natural 
zonte  WM  along  the  Cosle-Byrian  valley  and 
•cross  tJie  spurs  of  Eermon  to  the  Jordan ; 


but  an  Assyrian  army  was  intent  on  plundei 
and  devastation,  no  less  than  upon  conquest, 
and  would  ascend  mountain  regions  that  did 
not  lie  on  its  direct  line  of  march  for  either 
or  both  of  these  objects.  It  was  customary 
for  the  soldiers  to  cut  down  the  tall  cedars 
and  choice  fir  trees  of  Lebanon  on  their 
Syrian  campaigns,  in  order  to  transport  the 
timber  to  Nineveh  and  other  great  cities, 
where  it  was  used  for  building  (see  the 
comment  on  oh.  ziv.  8,  and  compare 
Layard,  'Nineveh  and  Babylon,'  pp.  356, 
357,  and  '  Becords  of  the  Past,'  vol.  ill  pp. 
40, 47, 83,  90 ;  vol.  v.  p.  119 :  vol.  ix.  p.  16, 
etc.).  It  was  also  customary  to  destroy  the 
trees  in  an  enemy's  country,  simply  in  order 
to  inflict  injury  npon  the  foe.  ('  Ancient 
Monarchies,'  vol.  ii.  p.  84).  I  will  enter 
into  the  height  of  his  border ;  rather,  J  toiU 
enter  into  its  tUtermost  Jieight;  i.e.  I  will 
penetrate  through  the  entire  mountain  region 
of  Palestine,  called  roughly  "  Lebanon,"  to 
the  fui-thest  height  of  any  importance— that 
on  which  Jerusalem  stood — and  thus  occupy 
the  whole  land.  The  parallel  passage  of  2 
Kings  has  "lodging"  for  "height,"  in  ap- 
parent allusion  to  the  palace  of  Hezekiah. 
And  the  forest  of  bis  Caimel ;  or,  the  forest 
of  its  pleastire-garden ;  i.e.  the  rich  planta- 
tion tracts,  covered  with  vines,  olives,  and 
fig  trees,  which  formed  the  special  glory  of 
Judma  (see  ch.  xzxvi.  16,  17). 

Yer.  25.—  I  have  digged,  and  drank  water. 
Sennacherib  notes  three  natural  obstacles  to 
his  advance — the  forces  of  his  opponents  he 
does  not  appear  to  account  an  obstacle— viz. 
mountains,  deserts,  rivers.  Mountains  do 
not  stop  him — he  crosses  them  even  with  his 
chariot-force  (ver.  24).  Deserts  do  not  stop 
him — he  digs  wells  there,  and  drinks  their 
waters.  Bivers  will  not  stop  him — ^he  will 
dry  them  up,  trample  them  into  puddles. 
Note  the  contrast  between  the  past  tenses,  "I 
have  come  up,"  "  I  have  digged,"  "  I  have 
drunk,"  and  the  future,  "1  wiU  dry  up." 
He  had  crossed  the  mountain  ranges  Sinjar, 
Amanus,  Lebanon ;  he  had  passed  waterless 
tracts,  where  he  had  had  to  dig  wells,  in 
Mesopotamia  and  Northern  Syria.  He  was 
about  to  find  his  chief  obstacle,  rivers,  when 
he  invaded  Lower  Egypt.  The  livers  of  the 
besieged  places ;  rather,  the  rivers  of  Egypt 
Mazor,  the  singular  form  (compare  Assyrian 
Muzr,  and  modem  Arabic  Misr),  is  used  here 
(as  in  Micah  vii  12,tind  perhaps  in  ch.  xix. 
6),  instead  of  the  ordinary  dual  form,  Miz- 
raim,  probably  because  Lower  Egypt  is 
especiaUy  iiitended.  Sennacherib  was  look- 
ing especially  to  the  invasion  of  Lower 
Egypt,  where  the  Nile  had  "seven  branches" 
(Herod.,  ii.  17),  and  the  .conntiy  was  also 
cut  ap  by  numerous  eamls,  which  woald 
naturally  constitute  a  great  difficulty  to  a 
foroa  depending  mainly  on  ita  olutfiota.    H« 


,  xxxTH.  1— 38.]    THE  BOOK  OP  THE  PBOPHBT  ISAIAH. 


21 


believed,  however,  in  his  heart,  that  he  would 
find  a  way  of  "  drying  up  "  these  "  rivers." 

Ver.  26. — ^Hast  thou  not  heard,  etc.?  An 
abrupt  transition,  such  as  is  common  in 
Isaiah.  From  speaking  in  the  person  of  Sen- 
nacherib, the  prophet  without  warning  breaks 
"^j  and  returns  to  speaking  in  the  person 
of  Jehovah,  as  his  mouthpiece.  "Hast  thou 
not  heard,"  he  says,  long  ago ;  or  rather, 
''that  from  long  ago  I  have  done  this?" 
Art  thou  so  ignorant,  so  devoid  of  that  light 
of  nature,  which  should  "lighten  every  man 
that  Cometh  into  the  world"  (John  i.  9),  as 
not  to  know  God's  method  of  governing  the 
world  ?  How  that  "  from  long  ago,"  in  his 
eternal  counsels,  he  designs  the  rise  and  fall 
of  nations,  and  the  mode  in  which  their 
destruction  is  to  be  brought  about?  Art 
thou  not  aware  that  conquerors  are  mere 
instruments  in  Ood's  hands — "the  rods  of 
his  anger"  (ch.  x.  5) — to  work  his  will,  and 
then  to  have  his  will  worked  upon  them  in 
turn  (see  oh.  z.  6 — 19)  ?  Sennacherib  seems 
to  be  reaUy  reproached  for  not  knowing 
what  he  ought  to  liave  known,  and  might 
have  known,  if  he  had  listened  to  the  voice 
of  conscience  and  reason.  How  have  I 
bronght  it  to  pass,  etc.  All  that  Sennacherib 
had  done,  he  had  done  as  God's  instrument, 
by  his  permission — nay,  by  his  aid.  He  had 
been  the  axe  in  the  hand  of  the  hewer  (ch. 
z.  15),  the  saw,  the  rod,  the  staff,  of  God's 
indignation  (ch.  z.  5),  the  executer  of  his 
vengeance.  The  very  purpose  of  his  being 
was  that  he  should  "lay  waste  (certain)  de- 
fenced  cities  into  ruinous  heaps." 

Yer.  27. — ^Therefore.  The  original  is  not 
BO  emphatic,  but  still  eontains  the  idea,  not 
merely  of  sequence,  but  of  consequence. 
God,  having  decreed  the  sucoesses  of  the 
Assyrians,  effected  them  (in  part)  by  in- 
fusing weakness  into  the  nations  that  were 
their  adversaries.  They  were  as  the  grass  of 
the  field  (comp.  oh.  zL  6, 7).  The  compari- 
son is  one  constantly  used  by  the  Hebrew 
psalmists  (Ps.  zzxvii.  2 ;  zc.  5 ;  zcii.  7 ;  ciii. 
15),  and  was  not  unknown  to  the  Assyrians 
('  Becords  of  the  Fast,'  vol.  iii.  p.  41 ;  vol.  v. 
p.  14).  The  delicate  grass  of  spring  in  the 
East  vrithers  within  a  few  weeks,  and  the 
fresh  and  tender  herbage  becomes  yellow, 
parched,  and  sapless.  The  grass  that  springs 
upon  the  earthen  roofs  of  houses  fails  even 
more  rapidly  (comp.  Fs.  ozzix.  6).  As  com 
blasted  before  it  be  grown  up;  literally, 
lihe  a  field  he/ore  the  stalk.  Our  translators 
seem  to  have  rightly  preferred  the  reading  of 
2  Kings  ziz.  26  {th'dSphah,  equivalent  to 
« blasting")  to  that  of  Isaiah  (ih'dSmah, 
equivalent  to  "  field  ")  in  this  place.  Their 
rendering  brings  out  the  true  sense. 

Ver.  28.— I  know  thy  abode ;  literally,  thy 
imm-tiUing  (eomp.  Fi.  cxxxlx.  2).     The 
ja  that  <3od  has,  and  has  had,  hia 


eye  on  Sennacherib  throughout  all  his  career, 
seeing  to  and  watching  over  his  performance 
of  his  wUL  The  phrase,  going  out,  and 
coming  in,  is  a  Hebrew  idiom  for  a  man's 
doings  (see  Numb,  xivii.  17 ;  Dent,  xxviii. 
6;  zxxi.  2;  1  Sam.  xviii.  13, 16;  2  Sam.  iii. 
25 ;  1  Kings  iii.  7,  etc.).  Thy  rage  against 
me.  As  shown  in  the  message  sent  by  Bab- 
shakeh  (ch.  zzzvi.  7),  in  Kabshakeh's  speech 
to  the  "  men  on  the  wall "  (ch.  xxxvi.  15 — 
20),  and  in  the  letter  sent  to  Hezekiah  firom 
Lachish  (oh.  zxxvii.  10). 

Ver.  29. — l^erefore  will  I  put  my  hook  in 
thy  nose  (comp.  Ezek.  zxix.  4 ;  xzzviii.  4 ; 
2  Chron.  xxxiii.  11).  The  Assyrians  were  in 
the  habit  of  parsing  "hooks"  or  "rings" 
through  the  noses  or  lips  of  their  more  dis- 
tinguished prisoners,  and  attaching  a  thong 
to  the  hook  or  ring,  by  which  they  led  the 
prisoners  into  the  royal  presence  ('  Ancient 
Monarchies,'  vol.  i.  p.  301 ;  vol.  iii.  p.  436). 
The  expressions  used  derive  their  force  from 
these  practices,  but  are  not  in  the  present 
place  to  be  understood  literally.  G  od  "  turned 
Sennai'herib  back  "  and  reconducted  him  to 
Nineveh,  not  with  an  actual  "hook"  or 
"  thong,"  but  by  the  "  bridle  "  of  necessity. 

Ver.  30. — Thu  shall  be  a  sign  unto  thee ; 
rather,  the  sign.  The  prophet  now  turns  to 
Hezekiah,  and  makes  an  address  to  him. 
"This,"  he  says,  "shall  be  the  sign  unto 
thee  of  Sennacherib's  being  efieotually 
'  bridled,'  and  the  danger  from  Assyiia  over. 
In  the  third  year  from  the  present  the  land 
shall  have  returned  to  its  normal  condition, 
and  you  shall  enjoy  its  fruits  as  formerly. 
Meanwhile  you  shall  obtain  sufBcient  nou- 
rishment from  the  grain  which  has  sown 
itself."  The  "third  year,"  accorcUng  to 
Hebrew  reckoning,  might  be  little  more  than 
one  year  from  the  date  of  the  delivery  of  the 
prophecy.  The  entire  withdrawal  of  all  the 
Assyrian  garrisons  from  the  country,  which 
no  doubt  followed  on  Sennacherib's  retreat, 
might  well  have  occupied  the  greater  part  of 
a  year.  Till  they  were  withdrawn,  the  Jews 
could  not  venture  to  till  their  territory. 
Plant  vineyards.  The  Assyrians  had,' no 
doubt,  cut  down  the  vines  (see  *  Becords  of 
the  Past,'  vol.  iii  pp.  40,  62,  79 ;  vol.  vii.  p. 
43,  etc. ;  Layard,  '  Monuments  of  Nineveh,' 
second  series,  pi.  40). 

Ver.  31. — ^Ihe  remnant  that  is  escaped  (see 
the  comment  on  ver.  4).  Take  root  down- 
ward, and  bear  fruit  upward;  i.e.  "spread 
over  the  land,  and  became  firinly  rooted  in 
it,  and  Sourish  as  in  the  former  time."  We 
must  conceive  of  the  Assyrians  having,  in 
their  two  recent  invasions,  completely  de- 
populated the  country  districts.  Numbers 
had,  no  doubt,  been  slain ;  more  than  two 
hundred  thousand  had  been  carried  into  cap- 
tivity; a  portion  had  fonnd  refuge  in  t£s 
capital    On  the  withdrawal  of  tlM   A» 


22 


THE  BOOK  OF  THE  PROPHET  ISAIAH,     [oh.  xxxvii.  1— 38. 


syriana,  these  last  "  went  forth,"  reoccupied 
theii  lands,  and  rebuilt  their  towns  and  vil- 
lage*. The  blessing  of  God  was  upon  them, 
and  in  a  short  time  Judsea  recovered  her 
ancient  vigour,  so  that,  under  Josiali,  she 
was  able  to  extend  her  dominion  over  almost 
the  whole  of  the  old  Isiaelite  territory  (2 
Cliron.  xxxiv.  6, 18). 

Ver.  32. — The  zeal,  etc.  (comp.  ch.  ix,  7). 
The  phrase  is  very  emphatic,  marking  the 
greatness  of  the  thing  to  be  done,  and  at  the 
same  time  bringing  the  strophe  to  an  end 
with  an  asseveration  beyond  which  nothing 
could  go. 

Ver.  33. — Therefore,  etc.  A  new  clause 
is  commenced — the  concluding  clause  of  the 
prophecy.  For  Hezekiali's  satisfaction  and 
consolation  something  more  definite  is  needed 
than  the  vague  assurances  that  "  the  daugh- 
ter of  Jerusalem  shook  her  head  at  Sen- 
nacherib" (ver.  22),  and  that  God  would 
"  put  a  bridle  in  Sennacherib's  mouth  "  (ver, 
29).  Accordingly,  it  is  now  declared,  in  the 
plainest  terms,  that  he  shall  not  even  lay 
siege  to  the  city,  but  shall  return  by  the 
way  by  which  lie  came — the  coast  route  — 
leaving  Jerusalem  untouched,  nay,  unat- 
temptra.  He  shall  not  come  into  this  city ; 
rather,  unto  the  city.  He  was  at  Libnah,  in 
the  Shefeleh,  thirty  or  forty  miles  from 
Jerusalem,  when  we  last  heard  of  him  (ver. 
8) ;  and,  liaving  then  been  just  informed  of 
the  advance  of  Tirhakah,  he  is  likely  to 
have  proceeded  on  towards  Egypt.  There 
is,  at  any  rate,  not  the  slightest  intimation 
of  his  having  made  a  retrogra'le  movement 
towards  the  Jewith  capital.  Nor  shoot  an 
arrow  there,  nor  come  before  it  with  shields, 
nor  oast  a  bank  against  it.  The  main  points 
of  an  Assyrian  siege  are  happily  seized.  The 
first  assailants  were  the  archers.  They 
boldly  approached  in  large  bodies,  and  strove 
to  clear  the  battlements  of  the  defenders. 
Then  shields  were  brought  into  play. 
Under  their  cover  the  archers  drew  nearer ; 
the  scaling  parties  brought  up  their  ladders; 
the  miners  attacked  the  foundations  of  the 
walls ;  and  the  torch-bearers  endeavoured  to 
flre  the  gates.  Finally,  if  these  tactics  did 
not  avaU,  banks  were  raised  against  the 
walls,  which  were  then  assailed  witli  batter- 
ing-rams till  they  were  breached  ami  the 
assailants  could  enter.  God  promises  that 
Jerusalem  shall  experience  none  of  these 
thuigs  at  Sennacherib's  hands. 

Ver.  34.— By  the  way  that  he  oame.  It  is 
clear  that  Sennacherib  on  this  occasion  had 
marched  by  the  usual  coast  route,  through 
Shartm  and  the  Shefeleh,  upon  Lachish, 
leaving  Jerusalem  far  to  his  left.  From 
l.achidi  he  sent  Rabshakeh  to  Hezekiah 
with  a  threatening  message,  and  (as  our 
version  has  it)  "  with  a  great  army ; "  rather, 
"  with  •  atiMg  fotoa."    Bsbshakeb,  liaving 


delivered  his  message,  returned  to  his 
master  (ch.  xxxvii.  8),  doubtless  with  his 
escoi-t.  Sennacherib  then  sent  a  letter  by 
messengers,  but  without  an  army,  so  far  aa 
we  are  told,  to  renew  his  threats.  Mean- 
while from  Lachish  he  went  to  Libnah,  after 
which  we  know  nothing  of  his  movements, 
unless  we  accept  the  Egyptian  account, 
which  was,  that  he  advanced  to  Pelusium. 
The  declaration,  "  By  the  way  that  he  came, 
by  the  same  shall  he  return"  (comp.  ver. 
29)  was  the  most  comforting  that  Hezekiah 
could  possibly  receive.  It  assured  him  that 
he  would  not  even  be  confronted  with  his 
enemy.  Into  this  city;  rather,  tnUo  this 
city  (as  in  ver.  32). 

.  Ver.  35.— I  will  defend  this  city  ...  for 
mine  own  sake;  literally,  J  wiU  cover  met 
this  city,  as  a  bird  covers  its  young  with  its 
wings  (comp.  ch.  xxxi.  5;  Matt,  zziii.  37). 
God  would  do  this  "for  his  own  sake;"  t.e. 
because  his  own  honour  was  concerned  in 
the  defence  of  his  people.  He  would  also 
do  it  for  his  servant  David's  sake ;  t.fl.  be- 
cause of  the  promises  made  to  David,  that 
his  children  should  sit  upon  his  throne  (2 
Sam.  vii.  16;  Ps.  Ixxxix.  29—37;  cxxxii. 
11 — 14,  etc.),  which  involved  the  continued 
in<Iependence  of  Judtea  and  Jerusalem. 

Ver.  36. — ^Then  the  angel  of  the  Lord  went 
forth.  The  parallel  passage  of  Kings  (2 
Kings  xix.  35)  has,  "It  came  to  pass  that 
night,  that  the  angel  of  the  Lord  went  out." 
The  word  of  Isaiah  had  its  aooomplishment 
within  a  few  hours.  On  the  camp  of  fht 
Assyrians,  wherever  it  was,  whether  at  lib- 
nah, or  at  Pelusium  (Herod.,  ii.  141),  or  be- 
tween the  two,  in  the  dead  of  night,  the 
destroying  angel  swooped  down,  and  silently, 
without  disturbance,  took  the  lives  of  a 
hundred  and  eighty-five  thousand  men. 
The  camp  was  no  doubt  that  in  which 
Sennacherib  commanded.  It  is  contrary 
to  the  whole  tenor  of  the  Assyrian  in- 
scriptions to  imagine  that  a  mere  eorpt 
d'armie,  detachrd  to  threaten,  not  to  besiege, 
Jerusalem,  could  have  been  one-half,  or  one- 
quarter,  so  numerous.  It  was  Sennacherib's 
host,  not  the  Tartan's,  that  was  visited.  So 
the  Egyptian  tradition ;  so  ver.  37,  by  im- 
plication. That  in  later  times  the  Jews 
should  have  transferred  the  scene  of  the 
slaughter  to  the  vicinity  of  their  own  capital, 
as  Josepbus  does  ('  Ant.  Jud.,'  x.  2,  §  5),  is 
not  surprising,  especially  as  the  Bgyptians 
claimed  the  glory  of  the  discomfiture  for 
their  own  gods,  and  the  completion  of  the 
victory  for  their  own  soldiers.  The  nature 
of  the  destruction  is  not,  perhaps,  very  impor- 
tant, if  it  be  allowed  to  have  been  super- 
natural ;  but  the  "  simoom  "  of  Prideaux  and 
Milman,  the  "  storm"  of  Yitringa  and  Stan- 
ley, the  "  noeturnal  attack  hj  Tirhakah  "  oi 
Uaher,  Preiss,  and  MicluwUi,  and  the  "  pe*t»< 


CH.  xxxvii.  1— 38.]    THE  BOOK  Of  THE   PROPHET  ISAIAH. 


23 


lence  "  of  most  other  commentators,  seem  to 
be  alilse  precluded  by  tlje  terms  of  the  narra- 
tive, which  imply  the  Bilent  death  in  one 
night  of  a  hundred  and  eighty-five  thousand 
persouB  by  what  English  juries  call  "the  visi- 
tation of  God."  The  neai  est  parallel  which 
Holy  Scripture  offers  is  the  destruction  of 
the  firstborn  in  Egypt;  but  that  was  not,  as 
this,  without  disturbance  (see  Exod.  xii.  KO). 
There  a  "great  cry"  broke  the  silence  of  the 
night;  here  it  was  not  till  morning,  when 
men  woke  from  their  peaceful  slumbers,  that 
the  discovery  was  made  that  "  they  were  all 
dead  corpses." 

Ver.  37.— So  Sennacherib  .  .  .  departed ; 
rather,  hrohe  up  his  camp.  The  word  used 
for  all  the  removals  of  the  children  of  Israel 
in  the  wilderness  (Numb,  xxxiii.  3 — 48). 
The  loss  of  even  an  entire  eorpa  XarmiSe 
would  not  have  caused  an  Assyrian  king,  at 
the  head  of  an  intact  main  army,  to  break 
up  his  camp  and  abandon  his  enterprise. 
Jjid  dwelt  at  Nineveh.  Sennacherib  lived 
some  eighteen  or  twenty  years  from  the  prob- 
able date  of  his  discomfiture,  dying  in  B.C. 
681.  His  ordinary  residence  was  at  Nineveh, 
which  he  greatly  adorned  and  beautified 
(' Records  of  the  Past,'  vol.  xi.  pp.  55—57). 
His  father,  Sargon,  on  the  contrary,  dwelt 
commonly  at  Khorsabad  (Diur-Sargina),  and 
bis  son,  Esarhaddon,  dwelt,  during  the  latter 
part  of  his  reign,  at  Babylon.  We  must  not 
suppose,  however,  that  Sennacherib  was  shut 
up  in  Nineveh  during  the  remainder  of  his 
life.  On  the  contrary,  he  made  frequent 
expeditions  towards  the  south,  the  east,  and 
the  north.  But  he  made  no  further  expedi- 
tion to  the  aonth-west,  no  further  attack  on 
Jerusalem,  or  attempt  on  Egypt.  The  Jews 
had  peace,  so  far  as  the  Assyrians  were  con- 
cerned, from  the  event  related  in  ver.  36  to 
a  late  date  in  the  reign  of  Esarhaddon. 

Ver.  38. — Nisrooh  bis  god.  The  name 
Nisroch  has  not  been  found  in  the  Assyrian 
inscriptions,  and  is,  in  fact,  read  only  in  this 
place  and  the  parallel  passage  of  Kings  (2 


Kings  six.  37).  It  has  been  supposed  to 
represent  Nusku,  an  Assyrian  god  of  a  some- 
what low  position,  who,  however,  does  not 
obtain  mention  in  the  historical  inscriptions 
until  the  time  of  Asshur-bani-pal.  Probably 
the  name  has  suffered  corruption.  Asshur 
was,  in  fact,  Sennacherib's  favourite  deity, 
and  it  is  remarkable  that  the  LXX.  give 
in 'this  place,  not  Nisroch,  but  Ataraeh,. 
"Aaaraih"  would  seem  to  be  "Asshui" 
with  u  guttural  suffix.  Adrammeleoh  and 
Sharezer  his  sons  smote  him.  The  murder 
of  Sennacherib  by  a  son,  whom  he  called 
"  Ardumazanes,"  was  related  by  Polyhistor 
(ftp.  Euseb., '  Chron.  Can.,'  i.  5,  §  1).  Esar- 
haddon's  annals  are  imperfect  at  the  com- 
mencement, but  show  that  his  authority  was 
at  first  contested,  and  that  he  had  to  establish 
it  by  force  of  arms  ('Eecords  of  the  Past,'  vol. 
iii.  pp.  103,  104).  Adraramelech  seems  to 
have  assumed  the  title  of  king  (Abyden.  ap. 
Euseb., '  Ohron.  Can.,'  i.  9,  §  1),  and  to  have 
been  put  to  death  by  his  brother.  Sharezer 
is  not  elsewhere  mentioned.  The  name  is 
Assyrian,  as  far  as  it  goes,  but  is  incomplete. 
Its  full  form  was  probably  Nabu-sar-nzur  or 
Nergal-Bar:uzur  (see  'Eponym  Canon,'  p. 
63,  B.C.  682  and  678).  And  escaped  into  the 
land  of  Armenia.  So  Mosei  of  Chorene 
('  Hist.  Armen.,'  i.  22).  The  Hebrew  word 
is  J)-ara<(Assyrian  fZrardu  or  Drorte),  which 
was  the  more  eastern  portion  of  Armenia, 
and  lay  beyond  the  sphere  of  Assyrian  in- 
fluence. Esarhaddon  his  son  reigned  in  his 
stead.  Esarhaddon  (Asshur-akli  iddina)  ap- 
peals to  have  ascended  the  throne  in  B.0. 681. 
It  is  higlily  improbable  that  Isaiah  was  then 
living,  and  therefore  the  verse  can  scarcely 
be  from  his  pen.  It  has  probably  been  trans- 
ferred from  2  Kings  (xix.  37)  in  order  to 
finish  off  the  narrative.  Esarhaddon  out- 
lived Hezelriah  many  years,  and  was  brought 
into  contact  with  Manasseh  ('Eponym 
Canon,'  p.  139),  whom  he  reckoned  among 
his  tributaries  (corap.  2  Chion.  xxxiii.  11). 


H0MILETIC3. 

Yerg.  1 6. — Spiritual  advice  in  time  of  need  not  to  he  despised  even  ly  great  kings. 

The  great  of  the  earth — kings,  princes,  nobles,  statesmen,  generals — are  too  apt  to  rest 
upon  their  own  internal  gifts  of  wisdom,  talent,  sagacity,  cleverness,  and  to  place  little 
reliance  upon  others.  Esjecially  are  they  apt  to  feel  a  jealousy  towards  "the  spiri- 
tualty," and  to  hold  themselves  above  the  necessity  of  seeking  aid  from  persons  whom 
they  view  as  unpractical,  ignorant  of  worldly  business,  flighty,  enthusiastic,  fanatical. 
Ahab,  when  he  determined  to  renew  the  Syrian  war,  and  to  attempt  the  recovery  of 
Eamoth-Gilead,  took  no  counsel,  so  far  as  appears,  with  any  one  but  himself,  and 
certainly  neglected  to  ask  the  advice  of  the  only  true  prophet  of  Jehovah  living  within 
reach  (I  Kings  xxii.  3 — 8).  Josiah  failed  to  take  the  advice  of  Jeremiah  before  going 
out  to  meet  Neoho  (2  Ohron.  xxxv.  20—24);  Jehoiakim,  Jehoiachin,  and  Zedekiah 
went  against  hi«  advice  in  resisting  Nebuchadnezzar.  It  has  become  almost  a  principle 
of  moiiKU  poUtict  tiiai  the  spiritualty  are  not  to  advise  except  on  matters  closely  con- 


24  THE  BOOK  OP  THE  PEOPHET  ISAIAH,    [oh.  xxivn.  1— 3a 

nected  with  religion  or  morals,  and  even  on  such  matters  their  advice  is  looked  upon 
with  suspicion.  The  cuokoo-cry  of  "  priestcraft "  is  raised,  and  the  spiritualty  is  bidden 
to  confine  itsulf  strictly  to  its  own  sphere,  ami  not  to  intermeddle  in  the  ordinary 
politics  of  a  nation.    Hezekiah's  conduct  suggests  a  contrary  lesson,  seeming  to  teach — 

I.  That  the  spibitualtt  abb  the  best  advisers  even  is  temporal  matters. 
For,  first,  they  have  a  less  direct  interest  in  such  matters,  and  so  are  likely  to  give  more 
unbiased  counsel  Secondly,  they  are  accustomed  to  take  into  account  remoter  eventu- 
alities,  as  well  as  immediate  results,  and  are  therefore  likely  to  entertain  broader  views 
than  others.  Thirdly,  they  are  more  keenly  alive  than  laici  to  the  moral  aspect  of 
political  i|uestions,  which  is  often  a  most  important  aspect,  and  one  that  deserves  to 
have  a  iireponderating  weight  in  determining  action. 

II.  That  in  consulting  them  it  is  well  to  show  them  due  besfect.  Disrespect 
is  the  ordinary  rule  when  the  politicians  of  the  world  condescend  to  make  any  reference 
at  all  to  the  spiritualty.  "Hasten  hither  Micaiah,  the  son  of  Imlah,"  strikes  the  key- 
note of  their  utterances  (1  Kings  xxii.  9).  It  is  not  uncommon  for  them  even  to  dictate 
what  the  spiritualty  shall  say  (1  Kings  xxii.  13).  Hezekiah  was  more  respectful,  and  more 
wise.  He  sent  his  highest  officers  of  state  to  the  house  of  the  prophet,  and  humbly 
asked  his  prayers  and  his  advice.  No  doubt  there  is  a  wide  dlflference  between  such  a 
prophet  as  Isaiah  and  a  modern  bishop,  or  archbishop,  or  conclave  of  bishops.  Still,  if 
there  is  to  be  consultation  of  these  last,  a  show  of  respect  for  them  should  at  least  be 
maintained.  It  cannot  be  expected  that  otherwise  they  will  regard  their  advice  as  of 
importance,  or  apply  their  minds  very  carefully  to  give  the  best  advice  in  their  power. 

IlL  That  in  the  worst  stbaits  they  can  give  valuable  help,  if  not  bt  advice, 
YET  BY  PRAYER.  "  Wherefore  lift  up  thy  prayer,"  said  Hezekiah,  "  for  the  remnant 
that  is  left "  (ver.  4).  God  might  not  have  thought  fit  to  "  reprove  the  words  of  Senna- 
cherib." His  patience  might  have  been  exhausted,  and  he  might  have  been  about  to 
allow  the  conquest  of  Judaja  by  Sennacherib,  as  he  afterwards  allowed  its  conquest  by 
Nebuchadnezzar.  Hezekiah  could  not  be  sure  that  there  was  any  escape.  But  in  the 
worst  case,  "  the  effectual  fervent  prayer  of  a  righteous  man  would  avail  much."  It 
would  avail  to  mitigate,  if  not  to  prevent,  the  sufferings  of  the  people,  to  support  them 
under  misfortune,  if  not  to  save  them  from  it.  In  times  of  national  need  and  distress, 
wise  kings  and  governments  do  well  to  ask  the  prayers  of  the  Church,  not  that  God 
wiU  not  hear  them  if  they  address  themselves  directly  to  him,  but  that  he  may  be 
besieged,  as  it  were,  on  all  sides  by  prayer,  and  so  prevailed  upon  to  have  mercy.  The 
force  of  prayer  is  greatly  augmented  by  the  prayer  being  multiplied.  "  Where  two,"  or 
more, "  agree  on  earth  as  touching  anything  that  they  shall  ask,  it  shall  be  done  for  them 
of  my  Father  which  is  in  heaven  "  (Matt,  xviii.  19). 

Yers.  14 — ^20. — Taking  our  cross  to  Ood,  and  casting  aU  oar  care  upon  him.  Deep 
afilictioni  seem  to  pa^s  beyond  the  reach  of  human  aid.  Whether  it  be  bereavement,  or 
sense  of  sin,  or  coming  trouble  of  any  heavy  kind,  the  profoundly  afflicted  soul  for  the 
most  [lart  feels  human  help  vain,  human  sympathy  impertinent,  and  finds  no  refuge,  no 
consolation,  except  in  pouring  itself  out  before  God.  We  know  that  "  he  careth  for  us" 
(1  Pet.  vi.  7) ;  we  know  that  he  can  understand  us.  It  is  true  wisdom  to  fly  to  him, 
and  put  our  griefs  before  him.  Only  let  us  be  sure  that,  like  Hezekiah,  we  "  spread  " 
the  whole  before  the  Lord  (ver.  14),  that  we  keep  nothing  back — no  dark  corner  of  our 
heart,  no  "  secret  place  "  of  our  complex  nature,  no  hidden  act  of  our  life.  Unless  we 
be  honest  with  God,  we  have  no  claim  to  his  help.  He  hates  such  as  "  dissemble  in 
their  hearts  "  (Jer.  xlii.  20)  before  him.  The  best  human  counsellor  can  give  us  little 
aid  unless  we  "make  a  clean  breast"  of  our  diffictilties  to  him.  So  God  will  have  us 
"  itiake  a  clean  breast " — ^not  for  his  information,  since  he  "  understandeth  our  thoughts 
long  before  "  (Ps.  cxxxix.  2),  but  that  we  may  be  fit  recipients  of  his  grace — that  his 
healing  balms  may  have  power  to  work  on  us  and  comfort  us  and  effect  our  cure. 

Vers.  18,  19. — Faith  neither  Hind  to  seemingly  advtrse  facts,  nor  chary  of  admitting 
them.  Sennacherib  thought  to  destroy  Hezekiah's  trust  in  Jehovah  by  an  array  of  facts 
which  he  regarded  as  having  the  force  of  an  induction.  Hezekiah  fiilly  admitted  the 
facts  ("  Of  a  truth,  Lord,  the  kings  of  Assyria  have  laid  waste  all  the  nations,  and  their 
(ountries  '^  b«(  did  not  sufler  his  faith  to  be  skaken  by  tbesu    Hit  ditb  resttd  i^wq 


OH.  XXXVII.  1—38.]    THE  BOOK  Or  THE  PEOPHET  ISAIAH.  25 

tnotlier  distinct  set  of  facts,  which  ScDnacherib's  did  not  and  could  not  invalidate.  The 
truth  is  that  inductions,  being  never  complete,  are  never  demonstrative— they  do  but 
establish  a  probability,  and  the  first  adverse  fact  that  can  be  adduced  against  them 
upsets  them,  or  rather  upsets  the  general  conclusion  that  has  been  drawn  from  them. 
Faith,  therefore,  has  no  need  to  be  afraid  of  any  anioimt  of  seemingly  adverse  facts, 
drawn  from  the  region  of  the  sensible.  For  faith's  facts  lie  mainly  in  a  different  sphere, 
and  are  untouched  by  the  facts  of  sense,  however  numerous.  The  miracle  of  our  Lord's 
resurrection  rests,  for  instance,  first  upon  prophecy,  secondly  upon  testimony,  thirdly 
upon  vision  (Eev.  i.  18).  No  amount  of  ascertained  facts  that  others  have  not  risen, 
can  touch  the  su£Sciently  established  fact  that  our  Lord  did  rise.  There  is  no  even 
seerning  clashing  or  contradiction,  until  the  physicist  proceeds  to  draw  from  his  array 
of  facts  the  general  conclusion :  "  Therefore  no  men  rise."  But  this  conclusion  it  one 
that  he  has  no  right  to  draw;  it  is  illogical;  the  data  do  not  entitle  him  to  infer  more 
than  that "  Most  men  do  not  rise,"  or  rather,  "  have  not  yet  risen."  And  so  generally 
with  the  facts  that  are  adduced  against  the  dicta  of  faith.  They  are  no  disproof  of  that 
which  they  are  alleged  to  disprove.  Faith,  real  faith,  is  always  ready  to  admit  the  facts, 
when  once  they  are  established  as  facts.  It  disputes  the  illogical  conclusions  drawn 
from  the  facts,  and  the  ingenious  hypotheses  projected  from  the  brains  of  scientists  to 
account  for  then. 

HOMILIES  BY  VARIOUS  ATJTHOBS. 

Vers.  I'^IS. — EaehiaKs  resources.  The  conduct  of  the  king  on  hearing  the  haughty 
message  of  the  Assyrian  is  that  of  a  man  of  habitually  religious  mind  and  religious 
practice.  1.  Ee  rends  Ai$  garments  and  covers  himxdf  wifh  sackcloth.  This  was  sig- 
nificant of  sorrow  and  of  self-humiliation :  "  Humble  yourselves  beneath  the  mighty 
hand  of  God,  and  he  will  exalt  you  in  due  time."  Instead  of  searching  far  and  wide 
for  the  causes  of  our  distress,  it  were  well  to  look  first  into  our  own  hearts,  and  that 
closely.  There,  where  the  mischief  has  begun,  tiie  remedy  and  the  hope  may  be  revealed. 
2.  He  sends  a  deputation  to  the  minister  cf  Qod;  also  clothed  in  sackcloth.  They  give 
the  king's  message  to  Isaiah,  "  This  day  is  a  day  of  trouble,  punishment,  and  con- 
tumely."  The  outward  forms  and  shows  of  grief  could  not  denote  them  truly.   They  had 

"  That  within  which  passed  show, 
Beneath  the  trappings  and  the  suits  of  woe." 

The  mourning  garb  expresses  the  need  of  the  rending- of  the  heart,  and  the  bowing 
down  of  its  pride  before  the  judgments  of  God.  Human  extremity  is  confessed :  "  There 
is  no  strength  to  bring  forth."  The  toil  over  insoluble  problems — the  matchirjg  of  one's 
strength  against  a  superhuman  enterprise,  the  comparison  of  one's  idea  of  what  should 
be  with  one's  sense  of  the  absence  of  resources  for  its  accomplishment,  brings  utter 
exhaustion.  It  is  under  such  conditions  that  men  learn  that  whatever  strength  they 
had  at  any  time  is  from  God,  that  whatever  help  is  needed  must  come  from  him  now. 
In  the  house  of  God,  in  the  attitude  of  humility  and  penitence,  in  communion  with  men 
of  God,  let  us  be  found  in  the  day  of  distress. 

I.  The  human  intbbcessob.  In  common  life  we  recognize  the  principle  of  inter- 
cession. We  shelter  ourselves  behind  the  worth  of  another;  we  seek  to  gain  interest 
with  the  powerful  and  the  good.  To  carry  things  by  personal  interest  and  partiality 
doubtless  opens  the  door  to  abuses ;  but  after  all  it  is  founded  itself  upon  love.  Logic 
says, "  Let  every  case  be  judged  by  its  merits,  every  man  stand  or  fall  by  merit  or  demerit 
of  his  person."  Love,  softening  down  the  hard  lines  of  logical  principle,  or  concealing 
them  with  fiowing  ornament,  says,  "  Let  fellow-feeling  and  pity,  kinship  of  blood  or  of 
mind,  have  their  influence  on  the  decision."  The  great  truth  of  the  mediation  of  Christ 
-is  reflected  in  a  weaker  but  still  emphatic  way  in  the  office  of  an  Abraham,  a  Moses,  a 
Samuel.  Scripture  expressly  recognizes:  "The  prayer  of  a  righteous  man  availeth 
much"(cf.  Jer.  XV.  1).  Our  objection  to  the  Romish  doctrine  of  the  intercession  of 
saints  should  not  carry  us  too  far.  It  might  lead  us  to  a  cold  denial  of  the  influence  of 
loving  thought  upon  one  another's  weal.  What  limit  is  there  to  the  far-reaching  influ- 
ences of  love  ?    Becaoa*  some  assurfie  to  know  too  much  of  those  influences  and  tha 


26  THE  BOOK  OF  THE  PEOPHET  ISAIAH,    [ch.  xxxvn.  1— 3a 

manner  in  which  they  may  be  secured,  that  is  no  reason  why  we  should  ignore  them. 
"  An  interest  in  the  prayers  of  good  men,"  it  is  natural  to  seek,  and  blessed  to  have 
secured.  The  belief  in  the  intercession  of  good  men  rests  on  the  belief  that  some  men 
stand  nearer  to  God  than  others.  They  have  a  firmer  faith,  a  steadier  insight  into  the 
methods  of  Providence,  and  therefore  a  clearer  outlook  into  the  future,  and  a  courage 
which  is  inspiring  to  others.  On  this  occasion  Isaiah  is  found  to  be  calm  and  undis- 
turbed by  the  revilings  of  the  Assyrian.  He  can  speak  of  his  officers  with  contempt 
as  the  "  minions  of  the  King  of  Assyria."  He  can  foretell  that  a  "  spirit "  will  be  put 
in  the  enemy— an  impulse  quite  contrary  to  that  now  animating  him ;  he  will  hear  ill 
news,  will  return  to  his  own  land,  and  will  fall  by  the  sword.  The  prophet  sustains  the 
king;  Hezekiah  leans  on  Isaiah;  true  policy  finds  its  inspiration  in  religion.  The 
ministers  of  state,  if  wise,  will  own  the  worth  of  the  service  of  the  ministers  of  God. 

II.  Business  laid  before  God.  The  threat  of  the  Assyrian,  the  taunting  argu- 
ments on  which  he  had  before  relied,  are  repeated.  Let  Hezekiah  beware  of  trusting 
in  Jehovah,  for  he  may  prove  no  better  resource  than  the  "  gods  of  the  nations  "  which 
hare  been  subdued  by  the  Assyrians.  Hezekiah  takes  the  letter,  goes  up  into  the  house 
of  Jehovah,  and  spreads  it  open  before  Jehovah.  We  may  be  reminded,  as  we  read,  of 
the  prayer-machines  of  the  Buddhists;  or  of  the  waxen  tablets  hung  upon  the  statues 
of  the  gods  by  the  Komans,  inscribed  with  prayers,  as  alluded  to  by  Juvenal  in  his 
tenth  Satire.  But  where  the  outward  act  is  similar,  the  intention  may  be  widely 
different.  If  we  look  to  the  essence  of  the  act,  there  is  nothing  in  itself  more  super- 
stitious in  laying  open  a  written  letter  before  God,  than  in  addressing  him  orally  on  its 
contents.  If  the  spreading  out  is  a  "  prayer  without  words,"  the  prayer  with  words 
follows.  There  is  no  external  form  which  we  may  not  fill  out  with  the  life  of  our  spirit 
and  make  vital  and  real;  none  from  which  we  may  not  withdraw  that  life,  and  so  leave 
dead  and  cold.  It  is  idle  to  suppose  that  the  mere  abandonment  of  certain  forms  will 
remove  the  foundations  of  superstition,  which  is  certain  to  spring  up  in  a  mechanical 
wid  lifeless  state  of  mind. 

IIL  Hezkkiah's  peateb.  Eis  thoughts  of  God.  He  is  revealed  in  nature  and 
in  human  life.  He  is  enthroned  upon  the  cherubim — those  mysterious  creatures  of 
poetic  and  plastic  fancy,  representing  spiritual  power.revealed  in  strong  wind  and  cloud, 
and  figured  in  the  ark.  Analogous  figures  are  common  in  Oriental  art.  Jehovah  is  the 
God  of  nature,  the  Creator  of  heavens  and  earth.  He  is  the  only  true  Ruler  of  the 
kingdoms  of  the  earth.  The  heathen  believed  that  their  gods  swayed  in  the  sphere  both 
of  nature  ami  of  human  life — ^that  their  glory  and  power  was  revealed,  not  only  in  gun, 
and  moon,  and  stars,  and  wind,  but  in  the  might  of  warriors  and  the  ascendency  of 
kings.  But  the  contrast  is  that  these  pretensions  were  imreal,  that  of  Jehovah  alone 
founded  on  truth  and  facts.  Those  "gods  of  the  nations"  who  had  been  put  into  the 
fire  by  the  Assyrian  were  no  genuine  gods,  as  the  result  has  proved.  When  the  idol 
was  destroyed,  the  visible  imago  of  the  god,  the  faith  of  the  worshipper  lost  its  visible 
support,  and  his  hope  fled.  There  was  no  Saviour  here.  True  faith  is  not  dependent  on 
such  visible  props ;  they  may  fail — it  remains.  The  symbols  of  religion  may  change ; 
old  sanctuaries^  may  fall  into  decay ;  Jerusalem  may  be  taken ;  the  Shechinah-glory  may 
fade  from  the  hallowed  spot;  but  Jehovah  remains.  In  superstition,  when  the  idols  are 
broken,  the  false  faith  dies;  in  true  religion,  when  the  idols  are  broken,  the  true  faith 
rises  into  new  life.  Adversity,  fatal  to  imposture,  brings  the  genuine  tiadition  to  light. 
The  true  God  is  bound  by  his  very  nature  to  be  the  Saviour,  the  Deliverer  of  men.  The 
cry  for  salvation  must  sooner  or  later,  in  one  or  another  way,  be  answered  from  him. 
If  the  cry  be  not  answered,  it  is  a  proof  that  we  have  not  directed  it  to  the  true  Object- 
not  to  Jehovah,  the  Alone,  the  Eternal,  but  to  some  creature,  the  fabrication,  if  not  of 
our  hands,  of  our  sensuous  and  tmspiritual  fancy. — J. 

Ver.  6. — Caution  against  fear.  "  Be  not  afraid  of  the  words  that  thou  hast  heard." 
We  are  often  afraid  of  whispers;  we  often  suffer  severely  through  words.  It  is  not 
surprising.  Words  are  winged,  and  fly  across  oceans.  Words  are  penetrating,  and 
enter  into  the  secret  places  of  the  heart.  Words  are  indestructible,  and,  once  uttered 
who  but  God  can  restrain  their  power  ?  ' 

L  These  wbee  wobds  agakbt  God.  Alas  I  there  have  been  many  such  in  every  age. 
This  ia  part  of  the  perils  of  moral  government,  which  leaves  the  creature  "frae."  But  God 


DH.  xxxTn.  1— S8.]    THE  BOOK  OF  THE  PROPHET  ISAIAH.  27 

has  set  in  order  a  universe  of  men,  and  not  of  machines,  and  he  is  too  wise  not  to  hare 
ordered  all  things  wisely  and  well.  Man  is  evidently  a  heing  bom  to  the  perils  which 
beset  all  freedom.  Thus  he  can  speak  against  the  Most  High.  "  I  am  equal  to  the  sad 
occasioDi"  says  in  effect  Jehovah  to  Isaiah.  "  The  servants  of  the  King  of  Assyria  have 
blasphemed  me,  but  I  will  send  a  blast  upon  them."  No  more  solemn  thought  can 
occupy  our  minds  than  the  consideration  how  every  day  blasphemous,  false,  and  base 
words  are  spoken  against  our  Father  in  heaven. 

II.  These  words  abb  often  designed  to  huet  his  childben.  "  Pear  them  not,'' 
says  God  ;  "  they  cannot  hurt  you."  We  are  thankful  for  this  revelation  of  the  impo- 
tence of  evil.  If  your  character  is  falsely  traduced,  God  can  "bring  forth  thy  righteousness 
as  the  light,  and  thy  judgment  as  the  noonday."  If  your  influence  is  injured  for  a  time, 
Qod.  has  so  ordered  the  world  that  evil  men  reveal  their  true  character.  They  are  not 
good,  and  they  know  it ;  "  and  they  that  be  otherwise  cannot  be  hid."  Let  not  the 
friends  of  God  tremble  in  the  presence  of  infidel  insinuation  or  sceptical  scorn.  God's 
nature  has  been  revealed.  His  wondeiful  works  attest  his  power  and  goodness.  Christ 
and  the  cross  are  the  revelation  of  his  love. 

IIL  These  wobds  abe  snBE  to  be  heabd.  We  cannot  at  times  help  the  entrance 
of  evil,  but  we  can  help  the  entertainment  of  it.  We  must  treat  all  the  evil  surmises  of 
wicked  men  with  the  disdain  that  they  deserve.  We  can,  as  Solomon  suggests,  "  turn 
from  it  and  pass  away."  Besides,  just  as  there  is  in  love  what  Dr.  Chalmers  calls  "  the 
expulsive  power  of  a  new  affection,"  so  there  is  in  love  to  God  a  power  to  banish  all 
that  old  love  of  the  world  which  makes  men  mingle  with  the  irreverent  and  undevout. 
The  syren  voice  of  evil  whisperings  will  have  no  charm  for  us  when  we  hide  God's 
Word  in  our  heart.  The  great  lesson  is  not  to  be  afraid  of  the  wickedness  of  the  wicked, 
or  to  make  their  words  of  account  by  taking  too  great  note  of  them.  Many  malignant 
words  would  have  perished  at  their  birth  if  they  had  not  been  made  much  of  by 
argument  and  reply.    The  best  answer  is  to  trust  in  God  and  do  the  right. — ^W.  M.  S. 

Yen.  1 — i. — Ow  highest  solicitude.  A  very  graphic  scene  is  here  sketched.  The 
highest  personages  in  the  realm  are  moved  to  the  strongest  feelings  of  indignation  and 
concern.  Dignity  is  entirely  forgotten;  the  profound  agitations  which  have  stirred 
their  souls  are  expressed  in  actions  which,  to  less  excitable  and  imaginative  people, 
seem  violent  and  unbecoming.  But  the  rent  garments  and  the  coarse  sackcloth  best 
uttered,  for  them,  the  distracted  heart  and  a  deep  sense  of  shame.  It  was  eloquence  in 
action,  and  was  more  forcible  than  the  most  impassioned  speech.  Doubtless  many 
feelings  mingled  in  this  strone  emotion,  but  we  prefer  to  think  (and  by  the  fourth 
verse  are  justified  in  thinking  that  what  most  kindled  the  indignation  of  king,  of 
statesman,  and  of  priest,  was  the  "  blasphemy  "  which  had  been  spuken  against  the 
Lord ;  the  earnest  solicitude  on  their  part  that  the  Name  of  Jehovah  should  not  be 
shamefully  dishonoured  among  men.    There  are — 

I.  Solicitudes  which  abe  good,  but  not  high.  We  do  well  to  be  solicitous  to 
discharge  our  pecuniary  obligations,  to  take  and  to  hold  an  honourable  position  among 
our  feltews,  to  enjoy  a  good  reputation  among  men,  to  see  that  which  is  most  beautiful, 
to  hear  that  which  is  most  harmonious,  and  to  read  that  which  is  most  delightfuL 
But  this  appeals  to  those  instincts  and  ambitions  which  are  common  to  all  but  the 
lowest  among  men ;  they  are  desires  or  anxieties  which  are  good  but  not  h^h. 

II.  Solicitudes  which  are  high,  but  not  the  highest.  It  is  in  a  very  high 
degree  desirable,  it  is  indeed  urgent,  that  we  should  show  a  patiunt,  practical  solicitude 
(1)  to  gun  the  forgiveness  of  our  sin,  and  acceptance  with  God  ;  (2)  to  maintain  our 
Christian  consistency  and  conformity  of  conduct  to  the  will  of  Christ ;  (3)  to  attain  to 
the  nobler  ran -res  of  Christian  excellency,  to  reach  the  goal  which  is  set  before  us  ;  (4) 
to  serre  our  generation  to  the  height  of  our  ability  and  opportunity ;  (5)  to  be  ready 
for  the  last  hour  of  Itfe  and  the  fiiat  hour  of  immortality.  These  are  high  and  worthy 
aspirations,  but  they  are  not — 

IIL  Tbs  80UOITUDB  WHICH  18  THE  HIGHEST  OF  ALL.  It  is  that  commanding  and 
consuming  desire  for  the  glory  of  God  which  filled  the  hearts  of  Hezekiah  and  his 
people,  an«  which  called  forth  such  powerful  and  even  passionate  emotion  when  his 
Name  was  blacphemed.  1.  The  evidence  that  this  is  the  highest  solicitude  is  found  in  : 
(1)  The  fiwt  that  it  is  our  supreme  obligation.   We  are  bound,  first  and  most  of  all 


28  THE  BOOK  OF  THE  PROPHET  ISAIAH,    [oh.  xxxvn.  1— 88. 

things,  to  be  concerned  for  the  honour  of  our  heavenly  Father,  for  the  glory  of  our 
Divine  Redeemer :  that  he  is  revered,  and  that  his  will  is  done  on  earth  should  be  our 
first  consideration.  (2)  The  fact  that  it  is  an  unselfish,  and  therefore  pre-eminently 
Christian  and  Divine  inspiration.  (3)  The  fact  that  it  is  an  enlarging  and  ennobling 
sentiment.  They  whose  hearts  are  filled  and  whose  lives  are  fashioned  by  this  pure  an« 
holy  solicitude  will  be  lifted  up  in  soul  by  its  elevating  influence ;  they  will  rise  above 
all  that  is  mean  and  small;  they  will  attain  to  loftiness  of  view  and  dignity  of 
character.  2.  The  manifestations  which  it  will  assume  are  (1)  great  pain  and  shame 
when  the  Name  of  God  is  dishonoured  (text) ;  (2)  great  joy  when  his  kingdom  is  seen 
to  be  advancing  and  himself  being  honoured  in  the  world ;  (3)  earnest  and  lifelong 
effort  to  bear  witness  to  his  presence,  his  power,  his  holiness,  hi»  love,  and  the  blessed- 
ness of  his  great  salvation.— C. 

Ver.  10. — The  God  tn  whom  we  trust.    To  trust  in  God — 

L  Ought  to  beem  to  us  the  most  simple  and  natubal  thino.  1.  All  power  is 
his.  We  shrink  from  weakness  as  a  support,  but  we  lean  our  whole  weight  on  strength 
with  perfect  willingness  and  readiness :  and  it  is  Almighty  God ;  it  is  he  to  whom  "  all 
power  is  given  in  heaven  and  on  earth,"  who  invites  our  confidence.  2.  All  wisdom  is 
his.  Power  without  wisdom  may  lead  astray,  may  work  more  harm  than  help :  it  is 
the  only  wise  OtoA  "  who  asks  us  to  put  our  trust  in  him.  3.  AU  kindness  is  his. 
Power  with  wisdom  but  without  love  might  be  arrayed  against  us,  might  overwhelm 
us  with  confusion :  it  is  the  God  whose  "  new,  best  Name  is  love,"  that  offers  us  the 
shelter  of  his  wing.  i.  All  fail  hfulneis  is  his.  Love  that  might  last  but  a  little  while 
is  of  little  worth ;  it  might  change  into  indifference  or  even  into  hatred  and  hostility : 
it  is  the  "  Father  of  lights  with  whom  is  no  variableness,"  it  i«  "  Jesus  Christ,  the 
same  yesterday,  and  to-day,  and  for  ever,"  who  says  to  us,  "  Come  unto  me,"  "  Trust  in 
me,"  "  Abide  iu  me,"  "  Cast  all  your  care  on  me."  Surely  it  should  be  the  simplest, 
the  most  natural,  thing  to  yield  instant  and  eager  response  to  the  Divine  invitation,  and 
to. put  our  heart's  whole  trust  in  "  the  Lord  our  God."    Yet  to  trust  in  him — 

II.  Is  MtroH  MOBG  BABE  THAN  IT  SHOULD  BE.  Do  We  find  men  leaning  on  God, 
and  so  leaning  on  him  that  their  hearts  are  full  of  peace,  of  spiritual  rest,  of  hope,  of 
heavenly  joy  7  Is  "  the  God  in  whom  we  trust"  a  phrase  that  has  as  large  and  full  a 
meaning  to  our  minds  as  it  should  have?  Is  not  a  living,  sustaiuing,  rejoicing  trust  in 
Gh)d  a  comparatively  rare,  rather  than  a  constant  and  universal  thing,  even  in  Christian 
hearts?  And  why  is  it  so,  if  so  it  be?  Is  it  not  because  we  allow  ourselves  to  be  so 
sadly  imposed  upon  by  the  temporal  and  the  superficial  ?  We  persist  in  representing  to 
ourselves  that  the  visible,  the  audible,  the  tangible,  the  material,  is  the  real,  the  true, 
and  the  substantial.  We,  who  walk  by  faith  and  not  by  sight,  whose  life  is  spiritual, 
who  are  citizens  of  heaven,  ought  to  understand  that  it  is  this  which  is  illusive, 
evanescent,  unreal,  and  that  the  invisible,  the  intangible,  the  eternal,  is  the  real  and  the 
reliable ;  we  ought  to  know  and  to  realize  that  he,  whom  not  having  seen  we  love,  the 
invisible  but  ever-present,  the  almighty  and  never-failing  Saviour,  is  the  One  who  is 
worthy  of  our  confidence,  and  in  the  deepest  and  fullest  sense  it  should  be  true  that  it 
is  ihe  Lord  tn  whom  we  trust. 

ni.   Is  A  PMVILBGB   OF  WHICH  WE  KEED    TO  AVAIL    OXTBBBLVEB    OONTINUALLT.      1. 

In  prosperiti/,/0r  Ood^s  sake.  For  Quid  wills  that  we  should  be  ever  trusting  in  bim, 
"  in  whom  are  all  our  springs,"  and  from  whom  we  derive  everything  we  enjoy.  T© 
trace  our  well-being  to  ourselves,  and  to  trust  in  the  arm  of  flesh  instesd  of  referring  all 
to  the  living  God,  brings  down  his  deep  displeasure  (see  Deut.  x.  8 — 18).  2.  In  adver- 
sity, for  our  ovm  sake.  For  then  God  alone  can  help  and  save  us.  We  ourselves  shall 
have  failed ;  misfortune,  disaster,  will  have  baffled  and  beaten  us ;  our  friends  will  fail 
us ;  human  sympathy  and  succour  will  avail  somewhat,  but  it  will  leave  much  more 
undone  than  it  will  do.  Divine  interposition  alone  will  supply  our  need — ^the  pity  of 
the  Divine  Friend ;  the  help  of  the  heavenly  Father ;  the  ministry  of  the  Holy  Ghost, 
the  Comforter  and  the  Sanctifier  of  the  hearts  of  men. — C. 

Vers.  14 — 20. — Righteousness  in  praytr.  Hezekiah's  was  the  effectnal  prayeJ  of  % 
righteous  man.  It  was  effectual  because  it  was  right-minded.  Had  he  gone  to  the 
Lord  in  an  nnacceptable  spirit,  he  would  have  met  with  a  very  different  response.     Our 


OH.  xxxvn.  1— 38.]    THE  BOOK  OP  THE  PROPHET   ISAIAH.  2!* 

prayers  may  Im  unexceptionable,  so  far  as  time,  place,  demeanour,  and  even  language 
are  concerned,  and  yet  they  may  be  fruitless,  because  our  mind  is  not  attimed  to  the 
ti  ue  spirit  of  devotion.  We  have  here  five  features  which  should  always  characterize 
uiir  approach  to  God. 

I.  A  DEEP  SENSE  OF  THE  DiviNE  PRESENCE.  "  That  dwellest  between  the  cherubim ; " 
i.e.  the  God  that  has  come  down  and  has  taken  up  his  abode  in  the  midst  of  us — a  God 
at  hand  and  not  afar  off.  Hezekiah  spread  the  letter  before  the  Lord  (ver.  14),  before 
•■-he  Present  One.  It  is  a  point  of  the  first  imiportance  that  we  should  feel,  in  prayer, 
ibat  God  is  with  us  in  very  deed  and  truth  ;  that  we  stand  in  his  near  presence ;  that 
the  angels  who  inhabit  the  heavenly  kingdom  are  not  more  truly,  \hough  they  may  be 
more  consciously,  before  him  than  are  we  as  wj  take  his  Name  on  our  lips  and  breathe 
our  petitions  into  his  ear. 

n.   A  BEVERENTIAL  BEMEUBRANOB   OF   HIS    HAJESTT.        "  ThoU   art    the    God,    CTen 

thou  alone,  of  all  the  kingdoms  of  the  eartb  ''  Our  boldness  in  prayer  (Heb.  iv.  16) 
must  stop  short  of  anything  like  irreverence.  Our  Lord  himself  was  "  heard  in  that  he 
feared "  (Heb.  v.  7) ;  much  more  does  it  become  us  to  think  and  to  speak  with  holy 
awe  when  we  address  the  Majesty  of  heaven ;  we  must  ever  have  in  mind  that  it  is  the 
one  only  God,  the  Lord  of  hosts,  the  Infinite  and  Eternal  Oae,  to  whom  we  are  addressing 
ourselves  (see  Gen.  xviii.  23 — 32). 

III.  Fou.  CONFIDENCE  IN  HIS  DiviNB  POWEB.  "  Thou  hast  made  heaven  mnd  earth." 
To  doubt  God's  power  to  interpose  on  our  behalf,  by  whatever  restraints  we  imagine 
that  power  to  be  limited,  must  be  ppi«ful  to  him,  and  must  invalidate  our  prayer.  To 
have  a  firm  assurance  that  God  is  able  to  sustain,  to  supply,  to  deliver  us ;  to  feel  that 
w>  obstacles  of  any  kind  can  prevent  his  interposition  on  our  behalf,  if  he  only  sees  it  to 
be  wise  and  right  to  intervene,  is  to  be  right-minded  in  devotion. 

rV.  A  HOLY  CONPIDENCB  IN  HIS  DiviNE  INTEREST  IN  US.  Hezekiah  addressed 
Jehovah  as  the  "  God  of  Israel "  (ver.  16)  ;  i.e.  the  God  who  had  a  peculiar  interest  in 
Israel,  "  the  chosen  peojde,"  his  own  "  inheritance,"  "  a  people  near  unto  him  "  (Ps. 
cxlviii.  14).  We  place  ourselves  in  accord  with  God's  will  concerning  us,  not  when  we 
presuppose  that  the  most  urgent  entreaties  have  to  be  made  to  secure  liis  interest  in  us 
and  in  our  affairs,  but  rather  when  we  assume  the  fact  that  we  are  the  objects  of  bis 
deep  solicitude,  that  we  are  near  to  his  heart,  and  that  he  is  disposed  to  do  all  that  is 
needful  for  our  present  well-being  and  future  blessedness. 

V.  Unselfishness  of  spirit.  Hezekiah  pleaded  with  the  Lord,  not  his  own  and 
his  people's  extremities,  but  the  dishonour  which  bad  been  cast  on  the  Name  of  Jehovah, 
and  the  need  there  was  for  that  Name  to  be  glorified  before  the  nations  (vers.  17 — ^20). 
We  may  plead  with  God  our  own  necessities,  both  temporal  and  spiritual;  but  we  are 
in  the  true  mood,  in  the  right  spirit,  when  we  rise  above  all  sellish  considerations.  1. 
We  do  well  to  pr«y  for  our  suffering  and  necessitous  fripnds.  2.  We  do  better  to  pray 
for  our  lost  and  perishing  race.  3.  We  do  best  to  pray  for  the  extension  of  our 
Saviour's  kingdom  and  the  exaltation  of  his  holy  Name.  The  prayer  which  the  Lord 
taught  his  disciples  may  teach  us  the  "  order  of  merit "  in  regard  to  our  desires  when 
we  bow  down  at  the  throne  of  grace. — G. 

Ten.  21—29. — The  intoxication,  of  success,  ete.  The  first  thing  of  which  this  passage 
Speaks,  and  of  that  it  speaks  very  forcibly,  is — 

L  The  intoxication  of  unholy  success.  The  tone  of  this  Assyrian  monarch  was 
one  of  insolent  arrogance.  His  military  achievements  had  implanted  in  his  mind  the 
notion  that  he  had  done  much  greater  things  than  he  had  actually  accomplished,  and 
had  exerted  the  idea  that  he  could  achieve  other  things  which  were  wholly  out  of  his 
power.  He  magnifies  his  victories  and  over-estimates  his  capacity  (vers.  23 — 25).  This 
is  the  common  consequence  of  success — even  of  success  which  is  not  unholy,  which  is 
not  obtained  regardless  of  the  power  and  will  of  God;  it  is  sometimes  the  unhappy 
result  of  success  in  sacred  niinistries ;  how  much  more  so  must  it  be,  and  is  it  found  to 
be,  the  result  in  the  case  of  thow  who  "  fear  not  God,  nor  regard  man  " !  Unholy  suc- 
cess intoxicates.  It  makes  mefl  imagine  that  they  have  done  far  greater  things  than 
Ihey  have  achieved,  and  that  tkey  have  become  far  greater  people  than  they  are.  It 
often  rears  its  head  so  high  tliat,  as  with  Sennacherib,  arrogance  passes  into  blasphemy 
(ver.  23)  or  into  presomptuous  impiety.     1.  Shrink  from  all  success  that  is  not  gained 


30  THE  BOOK  OF  THE  PROPHET  ISAIAH,    [ch.  xxxvn.  1— 88 

by  righteous  means  and  in  the  fear  of  the  Lord.  2.  Take  earnest  heed  that  honourable 
and  even  sacred  success  does  not  delude  and  corrupt  the  soul. 

II,  The  attitude  or  God  towards  akbooant  men.  1.  Continual  regard.  (Ver.  28.) 
"  I  know  thy  abode,"  etc.  God's  presence,  his  observant  eye,  is  in  the  dwelling,  is  in 
the  chamber  of  the  guilty ;  it  follows  their  steps  whithersoever  they  go ;  it  witnesses 
their  actions  with  whatsoever  cunning  they  may  be  hidden  from  human  eyes.  2.  Keen 
iispleasure.  The  entire  passage,  particularly  ver.  23,  is  indicative  of  stern  disapproval. 
Undevout  and  godless  men,  still  more  impious  and  flagrantly  wicked  men,  should  be 
made  to  understand  that,  though  they  may  be  congratulating  themselves,  and  though 
like-minded  neighbours  may  be  approving  and  even  applauding  them,  the  God  in  whose 
hand  their  breath  is,  and  to  whom  they  are  accountable  for  everything  they  do,  regards 
them  with  deep,  Divine  displeasure.  His  awful  anger  rests  upon  them — that  righteous 
resentment  which  the  Divine  Buler  mttst  feel  towards  those  who  are  spoiling  and 
degrading  the  subjects  of  his  rule.  8.  T/ie  infliction  of  appropriate  penalty.  (Ver.  29.) 
Jehovah  would  make  the  arrogant  conqueror  "  go  back  by  the  way  by  which  he  came." 
Gk>d  always  visits  those  whom  he  has  to  punish  with  penalties  suited  to  their  tins. 
The  haughty  are  humbled  to  the  dust ;  those  who  partake  of  unlawful  pleasure  will 
suffer  corresponding  pain ;  they  who  rob  others  of  their  reputation  will  fall  into  utter 
disrepute;  the  rogue  that  preys  on  society  will  be  impoverished,  etc,  4.  A  Divine 
use  of  their  lives  and  actions.  (Vers.  26,  27.)  Little  as  it  imagined  it,  the  Assyrian 
power  was  an  instrument  in  Jehovah's  hand.  God  will  make  sinful  men's  lives  serve 
as  beacons  to  warn  others  if  they  cannot  be  used  in  a  worthier  and  more  acceptable  way. 

III.  Thb  tbtomph  of  holt  trctstfulnbss.  The  virgin  daughter  of  Jerusalem  had 
been  greatly  despised,  but  she  trusted  in  the  Divine  Deliverer,  and  her  hour  of  rescue 
and  of  triumph  was  at  hand  (ver.  22).  The  children  of  QtoA  may  have  to  pass  through 
a  period  of  sore  trial,  of  bitter  anguish ;  their  redemption  may  be  long  delayed ;  it  may 
seem  as  if  God's  band  were  shortened  (ch.  L  2;  Bev.  vL  10);  but  the  time  of  deliver- 
ance will  certainly  arrive ;  whether  it  be  from  distracting  anxieties,  or  consuming  doubt, 
or  protracted  pain,  or  weary  loneliness,  or  cruel  oppression,  or  the  shadow  of  death,  the 
days  of  darkness  are  numbered,  and  the  hour  of  triimiph  is  drawing  near.^O. 

Ver.  3L — Root  and  fruit,  or  dutracter  i»  its  completeness.  The  text  speaks  of  two 
necessities  for  the  plant  in  its  perfection — ^root  and  fruit ;  it  may  speak  to  ua  of  the 
complete  human  character. 

I.  Chabaoteb  is  often  found  in  IIANIFE8T IKCOMPLETENEBS.  1.  We  have  character 
deficient  in  fruitfvlness.  Some  men  are  intelligent,  acquisitive,  contemplative ;  they 
have  solid  knowledge ;  they  have  reached  clear  and  strong  convictions ;  they  have 
formed  admirable  private  and  domestic  habits.  But  they  bring  forth  very  little  fruit ; 
they  exert  very  little  influence ;  they  are  inconmiunicatlve ;  they  have  nothing  to  say 
when  something  needs  to  be  said ;  they  have  no  tact  or  couri^e  for  action  when  some- 
thing demands  to  be  done.  These  men  contribute  little,  or  nothing  appreciable,  to  the 
Rdvancement  of  truth  and  righteousness ;  they  are  not  the  forcible  factors  they  have 
had  the  means  of  becoming  in  the  society  in  which  they  move.  2.  We  have,  also, 
character  deficient  in  root.  Some  men  are  exuberant  in  expression ;  they  communicate 
freely ;  they  are  forward  to  speak  and  to  act  on  every  possible  occasion ;  they  are  con  • 
stantly  efflorescent.  But  they  lack  knowledge,  judgment,  wisdom;  they  have  not 
trained  their  minds ;  they  have  not  compared  their  thoughts  with  those  of  others,  and 
come  to  sound  and  settled  conclusions;  they  have  not  acquired  fixed  habits  of  mind 
and  of  life ;  they  are  uncertain  and  unreliable  quantities,  on  whom  you  cannot  safelj 
reckon  in  the  day  of  trial.  Of  these  two  orders  of  human  character  neither  is  without 
excellency,  but  both  are  manifestly  incomplete. 

II.  IhOOMPLBTENBSS  of   OHARAOTEB  is   REOBETTABLB    IN   God'b  BIOHT  AND  nr  OURS. 

1.  It  ii  unbeautiful.  For  it  lacks  symmetry ;  it  is  one-sided,  and  therefore  offensive  te 
the  q>iritual  eye.  2.  U  is  a  state  of  insecurity.  The  man  that  has  root  without  fruit, 
knowledge  and  experience  without  action  and  influence,  is  a  man  who  "  has  not "  his 
own  possessions  (see  Matt.  xxt.  29),  for  he  is  making  no  serious  practical  use  of  them, 
and  from  him  who  "  hath  not "  will  be  taken  away,  by  the  constant  penalty  which 
attends  neglect,  "  even  that  which  he  hath  "—viz.  his  unused  capacity.  And  the  man 
who  has  fruit  without  corresponding  root  will  find  that  bis  influenoe  will  soon  wane 


OH.  xxxm.  1—38.]    THE  BOOK  OF  THE  PROPHET  ISAIAH.  31 

his  power  mod  wither  away.  Speech  without  knowledge,  action  without  thought, 
outward  activity  without  inward  growth,  will  soon  reach  its  limit  and  disappear.  3.  /( 
leave$  a  large  part  of  taand  duty  undone.  (1)  To  the  meditative  man  who  has 
exhausted  his  time  and  strength  in  self-culture,  and  left  his  brethren's  state  uncared  for, 
will  be  presented  the  solemn  and  startling  question — What  haue  yon  done  f  And  he  will 
have  to  confess  that  he  has  hidden  his  talent  in  the  earth.  (2)  Ol  the  man  who  allowed 
his  powers  of  usefulness  to  run  out  and  be  lost  in  precocious  activities,  or  exhausting 
excitements,  it  will  be  required — Why  did  you  neglect  yourself  1  And  he  will  have  to 
lament  that  he  was  content  with  being  a  short-lived  gourd  instead  of  a  long-lived  tree 
in  the  garden  of  the  Lord. 

in.  COUPLETENEBS  OF  0HABA2TBB  KAT  BE  AITD  SHOULD  BR  ATTAINED.      Assuming 

that  we  are  bound  to  employ  our  powers  in  the  direction  in  which  our  own  preferences 
lead  us,  and  granting  that  it  is  well  for  human  character  to  partake  of  much  variety, 
it  remains  true  that  we  should  make  an  earnest  effort  to  attain  to  some  completeness  of 
character  by  attention  to  those  elements  which  we  are  tempted  to  neglect.  In  every 
department  of  human  action  we  recognize  the  duty  of  bestowing  special  care  on  the 
weakest  point — the  candidate  for  literary  honours  on  the  subject  with  which  he  is  least 
familiar;  the  buildef  on  that  part  of  the  ground  where  the  foundation  is  least  substan- 
tial ;  the  general  on  that  outpost  which  is  least  defensible,  etc.  The  defects  of  character 
are  subject  to  repair;  earnest  effort  is  sure  to  be  rewarded.  They  who  have  "the  root 
of  the  matter  in  them"  can  bring  forth  fruits  of  usefulness  by  patient,  prayerful  endea- 
vour. They  who  are  quick  to  bear  fruit  upward  can  strike  their  root  downward  and 
enrich  their  spiritual  resources  by  study,  by  thought,  by  painstaking  acquisition,  by 
prayer. — 0. 

Yer.  34. — Returning  on  owr  vny.    "  By  the  way  that  he  came,  by  the  same  shall  he 

return." 

L  Ths  bitubh  which  is  impossible.  Our  departure  from  this  world  is  often  spoken 
of  as  a  return.  We  "  return  to  the  grave."  We  ascend  and  descend  the  hill  of  life ;  but 
we  go  down  that  hill  on  the  other  side.  Old  age  is  indeed  "  a  second  childhood ; "  but 
how  different  a  childhood  it  is ! — with  the  experience,  and  the  carefulness,  and  the  sad 
consciousness  of  failure  which  childhood  has  not,  but  without  the  eager-heartedness, 
buoyancy,  simplicity,  trustfulness,  which  childhood  has.  It  may  be  said  of  every  part 
and  passage  of  our  human  experience,  "  Thou  hast  not  gone  this  way  heretofore."  We 
never  live  over  again  even  a  single  day  of  our  life. 

IL  The  beturn  with  which  we  are  threatened.  Gh>d,  in  his  holy  and  wise  pro- 
vidence, may  defeat  our  purpose,  as  he  did  that  of  Sennacherib,  and  in  this  sense  may 
cause  us  to  return  on  our  way.  Again  and  again  is  this  the  case  with :  1.  Unrighteous 
aggression,  or  some  other  design  which  is  positively  sinful,  2.  Unhallowed  ambition ; 
when  men  set  themselves  to  achieve  some  great  thing  for  their  own  eniicbment  or 
aggrandizement,  and  God  breaks  their  schemes.  He  sends  them  back  to  the  starting- 
point  of  emptiness  or  poverty  from  which  they  set  out.  When  God  thus  interposes, 
men  may  well  ask  what  it  is  that  he  means  them  to  learn.  3.  Unwise  endeavour ;  as 
when  men  offer  themselves  for  the  work  of  teaching,  or  preaching,  or  labouring  in  the 
field  of  foreign  missions,  when  they  are  unfitted  lor  the  post. 

III.  The  eetubn  which  is  our  duty.  1.  That  which  awaits  the  Christian  man, 
(1)  when  he  has  entered  on  a  business  which  he  finds  he  cannot  conduct  with  a  clear 
conscience;  (i;  when  he  has  adopted  a  course  of  training  his  family  or  directing  his 
establishment  which  he  finds  inefficient  and  disappointing ;  (3)  when  he  has  associated 
himself  with  a  company  of  men,  or  with  a  Church  of  Christ,  which  he  finds  ungenial 
and  unsatisfactory.  2.  That  which  belongs  to  the  unchristian  man.  To  him,  in  the 
"  far  country "  of  estrangement,  comes  ever  the  comrnanding,  but  yet  the  entreating 
voice  of  the  heavenly  Father,  saying,  "  Return  unto  me,  and  I  will  return  unto  you." 
Well  is  it,  indeed,  when  the  heart's  response  is  found  in  the  heaven-gladdening  words, 
"  I  will  arise,  and  go  to  my  Father."— 0. 

Yer.  1. Carrying  troubles  to  God.    The  silence  which  Hezekiah  kept,  and  oom- 

manded,  represents  only  the  negative  side  of  his  dealing  vidth  the  Assyrian  insults  and 
threatening!.    The  earnest  man   can  seldom   be  satisfied  with  the  weak  policy  of 


32  Jta  BOOK   OF  THE   PROPHET  ISAIAH,    [oh.  xxxvn.  1—88. 

"  doing  nothing."  It  may  be  one  side  of  meeting  difficulty,  but  it  needs  to  be  matched 
with  another  and  a  positire  side.  The  earnest  man  wants  to  do  something.  Yet  his 
circumsiances  may  make  personal  action  questionable  and  almost  impossible ;  but  this, 
at  least,  he  can  always  do,  and  this  he  would  be  wise  always  to  do  first — ^he  can  carry 
his  trouble  to  Cbd;  he  can  "cast  his  care  on  God."  There  is  a  posiUveness  and 
a  definiteness  of  action  about  so  doing,  which  meets  the  anxiety  of  the  earnest  man ; 
there  is  a  sense  of  propriety  in  so  doing  which  satisfies  the  higher  feeling  of  the  pious 
man.  From  the  conduct  of  Hezekiah  on  this  occasion  we  learn  four  ways  in  which 
our  troubles  may  be  carried  to  God. 

L  Bt  cherished  moods  of  mind.  There  is  a  thought  of  God;  a  dependence  on 
God ;  a  heart-appeal  to  God ;  a  purposed  meditating  on  the  Divine  relations  with  the 
troubled ;  a  recalling  of  God's  ways  in  past  experience ;  and  an  assuring  of  the  heart, — 
which  are  all  voiceless  cryings  after  God,  which  he  knows  and  heeds.  Tennyson  gives 
this  view  exquisite  expression  when,  describing  Mary  of  Bethany,  he  says— 

"Her  eyes  weK  homes  of  silent  prayer.** 

There  are  times  when  we  are  "  so  troubled  that  we  cannot  apeak,"  but  at  such  timet 
the  trouble  speaks,  the  afflicted  soul  lies  open  to  God. 

II.  Bt  attitudes  and  bodily  states.  The  appearance  of  a  man  may  be  a  prayer. 
This  is  more  developed  in  Eastern  than  in  Western  lands.  Rent  clothes,  neglected  hair 
and  beard,  rough  sackcloth,  ashes  cast  on  the  person, — were  signs  of  distress,  and  mule 
appeals  for  comfort  and  help.  But  we  often  say  of  persons,  "  His  face  was  a  prayer ;  " 
"  The  miserable  neglected  state  was  an  appeal."  The  widow's  crape  is  a  casting  of  trouble 
on  God.  Attitudes  of  body  naturally  express  moods  of  mind ;  and  dress  follows  suit. 
Even  thus  we  can  pray. 

in.  Bt  beekino  audieiice  of  God.  Hezekiah  made  the  effort  to  go  to  the  place 
where  God  revealed  himself.  It  is  carrying  our  trouble  to  God  simply  to  resolve  that 
we  will  go  to  God's  house.  A  psalmist,  with  a  burdened  heart,  says,  "  I  went  into  the 
sanctuary  of  God."  The  worshippers  are  really  this — companies  of  men  and  women 
who  are,rolling  their  burdens  off  upon  God. 

IV.  By  nNBUBDENiKO  THE  SOUL.  It  is  often  thought  strange,  and  called  foolish, 
for  men  to  tell  God  in  prayer  what  be  well  knows.  But  the  free  unburdening  is  the 
best,  and  often  the  only,  relief  a  eonl  can  find.  Child  to  mother,  friend  to  friend, 
creature  to  God, — nothing  helps  us  so  much  as  being  permitted  to  tell  out  all  that  is  in 
our  souls,  bad  and  good,  worthy  and  unworthy. — R.  T. 

Ver.  4. — Responsibility  of  prayer-leaders.  The  message  sent  to  Isaiah,  the  prophet 
of  God,  was  this :  "  Pray  for  us ;  be  our  leader,  our  intercessor."  "  Wherefore  lift  up 
thy  prayer  for  the  remnant  that  is  left."  Scripture  singles  out  Samuel  and  Moses  as 
great  pi'ayer-leaders,  or  intercessors,  but  we  can  add  Joshua,  David,  our  Lord  Jesus 
Christ,  and  the  Apostle  Paul,  drawing  further  illustrations  from  each  of  these.  The 
Prophet  Jeremiah  has  a  very  striking  sentence,  which  indicates  the  power  that  prayer- 
leaders  have  with  God :  "  Then  said  the  Lord  unto  me.  Though  Moses  and  Samuel 
stiwd  before  me,  yet  my  mind  could  not  be  toward  this  people"  (Jer.  xv.  1).  Isaiah, 
iu  our  text,  was  sought  by  Hezekiah  in  his  trouble,  because  he  was  a  prayer-leader,  an 
intercessor.  We  note  that  the  things  about  men  which  are  really  most  important 
are  not  the  thi?igs  which  most  readily  attract  attention.  We  need  to  get  the  view  of 
men  which  God  takes,  if  we  would  get  the  true  view.  Some  of  the  best  gifts  bestowed 
on  the  Christian  Church  are  undervalued ;  the  endowments  which  give  men  public 
prominence  are  thought  much  moro  of  than  those  spiritual  powers  which  are  men's 
best  possessions.  To  some  men  God  gives,  in  unusual  measure,  the  power  of  prayer. 
There  is  a  remarkable  difference  between  good  men  in  this  gift  and  power  of  prayer. 
We  see  the  difference  in  onr  children.  Some  of  them  are  able  to  move  and  persuade 
us  so  that  we  find  it  most  difficult  to  refuse  them  anything.  And  men  and  women 
seem  to  have  a  like  power  in  their  relations  with  G^od — a  most  responsible  power. 
Some  of  us  can  never  rise  above  the  orderly  habit  of  prayer,  and  treat  it  as  a  matter 
of  dutj;  bat  others  have  such  praying  frames  of  mind  that,  at  any  moment,  they  seem 

able  to  go  In  to  God.    There  are  men  among  us  who  are  true  prayer-leaders ^whose 

utterance  is  full  of  petition,  who  are  able  to  seize  the  souls  of  their  fellow-worshippers, 


OH.  xxxvn.  1— 38.]    THE  BOOK   OF   THE   PROPHET  ISAIAH.  33 

be  their  mouthpiece,  and  carry  their  desires  within  the  veil ;  while  other  good  men  can 
only  pray  before  us,  and  fail  to  awaken  responsive  prayer-feelings  in  our  hearts. 

I.  Thk  greatness  of  FRAfEB  THAT  RISES  TO  BE  iNT^ERCESsioN.  Man's  power  of 
prayer  is  a  faculty  full  of  high  possibilities.  It  may  rise  even  to  this — it  may  go 
beyond  all  .gelf-spheres,  and  become  intercessory.  While  prayer  keeps  in  the  self- 
iphere  there  is  a  certain  narrowness  and  even  meanness  about  it.  It  is  all  concerned 
with  what  we  want,  and  what  we  feel,  and  we  are  greatly  comfurted  if  we  have  any 
fervour  of  emotion  in  such  prayer.  But  we  feel  that  a  course  of  daily  prayer  from 
which  the  interceding  element  is  removed  would  be  most  injurious  to  the  spiritual  life. 
It  lacks  the  generous,  sympathetic,  unselfish  element,  and  it  will  very  soon  lack 
fervour  and  faith.  No  one  can  long  keep  up  a  prayerful  life,  and  persist  in  praying 
Altogether  about  himself.  Power  comes,  love  grows,  when  prayer  includes  inter- 
cession. Limitations  of  earnestness  and  importunity  pass  away;  the  soul  is  free  to 
urge  its  pleas  with  persevering  instancy;  we  can  ask  for  another  what  we  dare  not 
fashion  into  a  prayer  for  ourselves.  The  prayers  of  Scripture  are,  for  the  most  part, 
intercessory.  Illustrate — Abraham's  for  Sodom ;  Moses',  Joshua's,  Samuel's,  for  the 
people  of  Israel  in  their  distresses.  Daniel  prays  with  his  window  open  towards 
desolate  Jerusalem,  that  he  may  be  reminded  of  the  captive  people.  Our  last  sight  of 
Job  finds  him  in  the  attitude  of  the  mediator,  praying  for  God's  mercy  ou  his  mistaken 
and  cruel  frieuds.  And  the  Apostle  Paul  writes  again  and  again  of  the  constancy  of 
his  intercessions.  We  may  learn  the  secret  of  the  poverty  and  formality  of  much 
Christian  praying.  It  has  so  little  intercession  in  it.  When  some  beloved  friend  is 
smitten  down  with  imperilling  sickness,  our  prayer  suddenly  gains  strength,  and 
becomes  a  thing  full  of  fervour  and  pathos.  All  our  souls  then  go  out  in  strong 
crying  and  tears.  But  this  power  might  be  in  our  praying  always.  We  might  be  not 
only  prayerful  men,  but  also  prayer-leaders,  carrying  the  burdens  of  others  to  the  throne 
of  grace,  and  ourselves  sanctified  through  the  carrying. 

IL  The  power  of  intercession  that  may  be  nr  a  single  individual.  Any  one 
of  us  may  have  the  gift  of  intercession.  One  man,  one  woman,  even  one  child,  may 
bring  down  the  Divine  benedictions  as  refreshing  rains  upon  us.  We  may  kneel  for 
others  before  God.  We  may  win  the  blessing,  prevailing  with  God,  for  men.  Illustrate 
from  the  life  of  Moses.  Note  three  great  interceding-times :  (1)  at  Bephidim ;  (2) 
matter  of  golden  calf;  (3)  return  of  spies.  Or  from  the  life  of  Samuel,  who  may  be 
regarded  as  the  most  consistently  beautiful  character  in  the  Bible.  Note  two  cases : 
(1)  battle  with  Philistines ;  (2)  matter  of  asking  for  a  king.  But  what  responsibilities 
rest  on  such  men  I  On  such  men  living  amongst  us  now !  Who  can  tell  what  the 
Church  of  God  would  become,  if  interceders  would  but  intercede  ?  Plead  that,  in  these 
times,  we  need  to  be  often  recalled  to  the  power  of  prayer.  "  We  have  not,  because  we 
ask  not."  The  Prophet  Isaiah  has  a  wonderful  conception.  He  represents  God  as 
looking  out  upon  men  in  their  sin  and  sorrow  and  shame,  and  saying,  "  I  saw  that 
there  was  no  man,  and  I  wondered  that  there  was  no  intercessor."  It  may  be  so  still. 
God  may  look  into  our  family  lives,  and  wonder  that  there  is  no  intercessor.  He  may 
look  at  our  Churches,  and  wonder  that  there  is  no  intercessor.  Oh  for  a  multiplying  of 
men  and  women  who  say,  "  I  can  pray,  I  can  intercede.  I  can  plead  for  Jerusalem  "! 
-R.T. 

Vers.  6,  7. — Ood^s  message  to  the  trotihled.  "  Thus  saith  Jehovah,  Be  not  afraid." 
We  have  here  the  Divine  response,  through  Isaiah,  as  the  national  intercessor.  The 
circumstances,  the  boastings,  the  threatenings,  were  eminently  calculated  to  produce 
fear,  both  in  Isaiah  and  in  the  people.  There  was  such  a  show  of  material  strength  as 
Elisha's  servant  saw  at  Dothan,  which  sent  him  to  his  master  full  of  fears.  The 
answer  is  such  as  Elisha  gave  when  he  made  the  servant  see  what  it  was  to  have  God 
on  their  side.  God  in  the  city  was  abundant  security  against  Assyria  outside  the  city, 
and  Hezekiah  need  not  be  afraid.  Good's  message  to  those  who  seek  him  in  their 
troubles  is  always  this :  "  Be  not  afraid ; "  "  I  am  with  you."  Our  fears  only  stay  with 
us  when  our  eyes  are  so  dim  that  we  cannot  see  God.  Fear  goes  when  he  "  lifts  the 
light  of  his  countenance  upon  us."  Matthew  Henry  says,  "  Those  who  have  made  Gkid 
their  enemy  we  have  no  reason  to  be  afraid  of,  for  they  are  marked  for  ruin ;  and 
though  they  may  hiss,  they  cannot  hurt."  Dr.  A.  Raleigh  remarks  that  every  creaiurt 
ISAIAH — n.  o 


34  THE  BOOK  OF  THE  PROPHET  ISAIAH,    [oh.  xxxvn.  1— 8a 

is  liable  to  fear ;  there  can  only  be  one  Being  in  the  universe  absolutely  and  for  ever 
free  from  that  liability — he  who  knows  everything  and  controls  everything.  1.  The 
great  mysteries  of  existence  have  a  tendency  to  produce  fear.  There  are  few  thoughtful 
persons  who  do  not  feel  the  shadow  of  them  on  their  path.  They  are  such  things  aa 
the  existence  of  evil,  sin,  misery  in  the  universe,  under  the  government  of  an  infinitely- 
powerful  and  infinitely  benevolent  Being.  There  is  great  mystery  about  the  plfin  oi 
Divine  providence  in  the  world.  Job,  David,  Jeremiah,  were  all  perplexed  and  appalled 
by  the  sight  of  the  afiSiotions  of  the  riuhteous  and  the  prosperity  of  the  wicked. 
2.  There  are  certain  possibilities,  the  thought  of  which  has  a  tendency  to  darken  the 
spirit  with  fear.  The  most  sanguine  and  cheerful  can  hardly  ever  imagine,  far  less 
expect,  a  wholly  uncheckered  future.  The  worst  of  all  earthly  calamities  is  the 
possibility  of  spiritual  failure,  ending  in  a  final  exclusion  from  the  presence  of  God  and 
the  joys  of  the  blessed.  Whatsoever  form  our  fear  may  take,  whatsoever  may  be  the 
trouble  or  the  alarm  out  of  which  it  grows,  if  the  fear  drives  us  to  God,  we  shall  always 
be  sure  of  getting  this  response,  "  Be  not  afraid."  The  one  answer  to  all  mysteries  is 
this :  "  God  is,  God  lives;  and  I  can  trust  him."  The  one  strength  with  which  to  meet 
all  the  possibilities,  and  bear  all  the  calamities,  of  life  is  this,  "  He  inaketh  all  things 
work  together  for  good."  Fully  unfolded,  the  response  of  God  is  given  in  ch.  xli.  10. 
"  Fear  thou  not ;  for  I  am  with  thee :  be  not  dismayed ;  for  I  am  thy  God." — R.  T. 

Ver.  16. — The  God  of  all  kingdoms.  This  expression  indicates  Hezekiah's  convic- 
tion of  the  uniqueness  of  God.  He  is  the  one  great  Over-Lord.  He  cannot  be  classed 
with  other  gods  or  other  kings.  But  Hezekiah  surely  went  beyond  himself  in  this  hour 
of  pre.ssure  and  anxiety.  The  Jewish  idea  of  the  supremacy  of  Jehovah  included  the 
speciality  of  his  relation  to  the  Abrah»mic  race,  and  the  Jew  was  in  danger  of  making 
God  to  be  a  mere  local  deity.  And  we,  in  these  latter  days,  find  it  difficult  to  admit 
that  God's  rule  over  all  kingdoms  involves  the  moral  training  and  even  the  redemption 
of  all  the  races.  We  limit  all  the  best  of  God  to  ourselves,  in  just  the  .spirit  of  exclu- 
sive Jews.  Only  our  great  thought-leaders  seem  able  to  see  what  is  inyolyed  in 
recognizing  God  as  the  God  of  all  the  kingdoms  of  the  earth. 

I.  If  God  is  Otod  of  all  einqdoms,  he  has  supreme  claims  on  u8.  Most  distress- 
ing to  men  who  can  create  an  ideal,  and  want  to  put  trust  in  one  who  is  absolutely 
good,  must  be  the  division  of  their  confidences  among  gods  many  and  lords  many.  The 
unrest  of  pagan  intellect  and  heart  was  unspeakably  painful.  With  gods  in  every 
street,  Athenians  pined  for  something  more,  and  more  satisfying ;  so  raised  an  altar  to 
the  "  Unknown  God."  Here  is  rest  from  all  rival  claims — we  yield  to  one  will ;  all  who 
would  command  us  must  express  that  will. 

II.  If  God  is  God  of  all  kingdoms,  he  must  reveal  hiuself  to  all.  To  be  unre- 
vealed,  in  adapted  relations  to  each  kingdom,  is  not  to  le  so  far  as  each  kingdom  is 
concerned.  St.  Paul  is  firm  in  declaring  God  has  revealed  himself  to  all,  at  least  in 
"  rain  from  heaven  and  fruitful  seasons."  And  we  have  yet  to  recognize  that  he  has 
spoken  in  gracious  adaptations,  differing,  it  may  be,  from  the  voices  that  we  have  heard, 
in  every  age  and  every  clime.  Very  probably  on  this  point  there  is  "  yet  more  light 
and  truth  to  break  forth  from  his  Word." 

ni.  If  God  is  God  of  all  EotaDOMS,  he  overrules  them.  Their  magistracies, 
and  their  so-called  divinities,  when  they  do  not  rival  him,  are  his  agencies,  everywhere 
they  are  the  "  powers  that  be  ordained  of  God  " — under-rulers  practically  carrying  out 
the  will  of  the  great  Over-Ruler,  who  fits  in  together  man's  obediences  and  wilfulnesses, 
guiding  all  towards  the  fulfilment  of  his  gracious  ends  for  the  whole  race. 

IV.  If  God  is  God  of  all  kingdoms,  he  presides  over  the  relations  of  the 
NATIONS  TO  EACH  OTHER.  This  brings  us  to  the  case  of  Hezekiah.  If  God  is  the  God 
of  Assyria,  he  knows  all  the  scheraings  and  the  ambitions  of  that  nation.  Assyria  is 
not  acting  in  any  self-strength,  or  in  the  inspirations  of  any  rival  god.  Jehovah 
presides  over  the  relations  between  Israel  and  Assyria.  For  nations,  as  for  individuals, 
it  is  true,  but  it  is  most  perplexing  truth,  difficult  to  grasp ;  our  God  is  workuig  alike 
in  what  we  call  evil  and  what  we  call  good. — B.  T. 

Ver.  28.—"  Holy  One  of  Israa."  It  U  singular  to  find  the  Mines$  of  Ood  intro- 
duced here  rather  than   his  nu^jesty  or  his  povotr.     Yet   It  b  significant.     The 


OH.  XXXVII.  1—38.]    THE  BOOK  OP   THE   PROPHET   ISAIAH.  35 

■ublime  greatness  of  God  is  his  character,  and  this  is  expressed  in  the  word  "  Holy 
One."  The  insults  of  Assyria  are  not  levelled  so  much  against  God's  throne,  or  God's 
rule,  as  agaiust  God  himself.  It  is  the  insult  ofi'ered  to  tlie  Divine  Name.  The  con- 
trast between  Jehovah  and  the  gods  created  by  heathen  imaginations  is  very  striking 
in  this  particular — they  are  embddiments  of  powers  ;  he  is  a  moral  Being.  They  imply 
force  ;  his  Name  involves  character.  Our  security  lies  in  this.  The  possibility  of  a 
reasonable  trust  lies  in  this.  Our  conviction  of  Jehovah's  sensitiveness  to  what 
troubles  us  lies  in  this.  The  full  suggestions  of  this  most  suggestive  name  for  God  may 
be  drawn  out  under  these  divisions. 

I.  The  God  who  always  does  the  morally  bioht. 

II.  The  God  who  always  kesponds  to  trust. 

IIL  The  God  who  is  ever  faithful  to  his  promise. 

IV.  The  God  who  is  jealous  op  his  personal  honour. 

V.  The  God  who  requires  to  be  served  with  our  goodness. 

On  the  jealousy  of  the  Divine  Name,  see  Ezek.  xxxvi.  2'2,  23 ;  and  show  how  the 
views  of  God,  thus  unfolded,  become  the  basis  for  the  great  atonement,  whereby  the 
world  is  redeemed.    The  "  just  God  "  is  also  the  "  Saviour." — R.  T. 

Vers.  28,  29. — Ood's  agents  are  never  beyond  his  restrainings.  He  used  Assyria,  but 
he  holds  Assyria  in  with  bit  and  bridle.  'Phe  horse  may  plunge,  and  rear,  and  trample, 
and  seem  to  be  bgyond  all  restraint ;  but  God  never  looses  the^  rein,  and  draws  it  in 
when  he  pleases.  The  figures  used  are  even  more  striking.  He  puts  "  a  hook  in  the 
nose,"  which  Michaelis  explains  in  this  way :  "  The  Orientals  make  use  of  a  contrivance 
for  curbing  their  work-beasts,  which  is  not  adopted  among  us.  They  bore  the  nose 
through  both  sides,  and  put  a  ring  through  it,  to  which  they  fasten  two  cords.  When 
a  beast  becomes  unruly,  they  have  only  to  draw  the  cord  on  one  side,  wliich,  by  stop- 
ping his  breath,  punishes  him  so  effectually  that,  after  a  few  repetitions,  he  fails  not 
to  become  quite  tractable,  whenever  he  begins  to  feel  it.  To  this  contrivance  the 
Arabian  poets  often  alludte."    It  illustrates  two  points. 

I.  The  anxieties  we  suffer  when  we  fix  our  gaze  on  second  causes. 

IL  The  restfulness  we  gain  when  wk  look,  behind  and  within,  to  the  obeat, 

OVBREULINO  PiRST  CaUBE. — B.  T. 

Ver.  32. — "The  zeul  of  the  Lord."  Cheyne  renders, "  The  jealousy  of  Jehovah-Sabioth 
shall  perform  this;"  and  he  suggestively  says,  "  'Jealousy,'  being  the  affectional  mani- 
festation of  the  Divine  holiness,  is  a  'two-edged  word,'  implying  the  destruction  of  all 
that  opposes  the  Divine  covenant,  and  the  fnrth<rance  of  all  that  promotes  it."  Zeal 
also  expresses  "  earnest  desire,"  and  that  vigorous  and  persistent  activity  in  which  such 
desire  finds  expression.  In  this  sense  we  may  treat  Jihu's  boast  of  his  "zeal  for  the 
Lord."  This  word  seems  a  favourite  one  with  Isaiah,  as  applied  to  Jehovah.  He 
employs  it  in  ch.  ix.  7  ;  lix.  17  ;  Ixiii.  15  (see  also  Ezek.  v.  13).  The  two  sides  of  it 
may  be  illustrated  from  the  narrative  of  the  chapter. 

I.  The  zeal  of  the  Lord  regarded  as  a  sacred  jealousy  of  the  Divine  Naub 
and  honour. 

II.  The  zeal  of  the  Lord  regarded  as  an  earnestness  of  purpose  and 
endeavour,  which  assures  the  discomfiture  of  the  enemies  of  his  people. 

It  is  an  incentive  to  trust  that  we  are  thus  assured  that  our  God  wants  no  rousing  to 
action  on  our  behalf,  as  does  the  heathen  Baal  on  Mount  Garmel.  This  is  our  confidence 
—he  is  jealous  for  himself  and  his  Word,  and  therefore  is  ever  working  for  us. — R.  T. 

Ver.  36. — Humiliating  jvdgmentt.  After  such  boastings  and  threatenings  as  the 
Rabshakeh  had  uttered,  it  was  utterly  humiliating  to  lose  his  army  without  fighting  a 
battle,  to  be  compelled  to  take  a  miserable  remnant  home,  as  a  circumvented,  disgraced 
general,  it  was  all  the  more  humiliating  if  Sennacherib  himself  headed  the  army  at 
the  later  stage.  "  The  greatest  men  cannot  stand  before  God.  The  great  King  o( 
Assyria  looks  very  little  when  he  is  forced  to  return,  not  only  with  shame,  because  he 
cannot  accomplish  what  he  had  projected  with  so  much  assurance,  but  with  terror  and 
fear,  lest  the  angel-that  had  destroyed  his  army  should  destroy  him  ;  yet  he  is  made  to 
look  still  less  when  his  own  sons,  who  should  have  guarded  him,  killed  huM." 


36 


THE   BOOK  OF    THE    PROPHET   ISAIAH,     [oh.  xixviu.  1—22 


I.  God's  jddombnts  often  take  suspRisiNa  forms.  Anything  bo  overwhelming  ai 
thi»  even  his  people,  with  all  their  experience,  could  not  have  imagined.  God's  ways 
of  judgment  are  never  exhausted. 

II.  God's  judgments  always  have  a  peeoisb  fitness.  This  humiliation  v^aa 
exactly  the  thing  for  a  people  so  proud,  boastful,  and  over-confident  as  the  Assyrians. 
The  high  looks  of  the  jiruud  God  will  abase. 

III.  God's  judqmknts  cabby  solemn  warnings  to  those  who  hear  of  them. 
They  say,  "  Who  art  thou  that  repliest  against  God?"  "  Except  ye  repenf,  ye  shall 
all  likewise  perish." — R.  T. 


Section  IL    Hezekiah's  Illness,  and  thb  Embassy  of  Mebodaoh-Baladan 
(ch.  xxxviii.,  xxxix.). 


EXPOSITION. 


CHAPTER  XXXVIII. 


The  present  chapter  is  parallel  with  2 
Kings  XI.  1 — 11,  but  contains  some  marked 
differences  from  that  passage,  both  in  what 
it  omits  and  in  what  it  inserts.  Th»  general 
narrative  (vers.  1 — 8,  and  21,  22)  is  greatly 
condensed,  and  in  part  disarranged,  vers. 
21,  22  being  aililcd,  as  it  wuuld  seem,  by  an 
after-thought.  On  the  other  hand,  the  psalm 
of  Hezukiah  (vers.  9 — 20)  is  additional, 
having  nothing  corresponding  to  it  in  the 
Book  of  Kings.  There  is  every  appearance 
of  2  Kings  XX.  1 — 11  having  been  composed 
previously  to  the  present  chapter,  and  of  the 
present  chapter  having  been,  in  its  narrative 
portion,  abridged  from  2  Kings. 

Ver.  1. — In  those  days.  The  illness  of 
Hezekiah  is  iixed  by  ver.  5  (and  2  Kings 
XX.  6)  to  the  fourteenth  year  of  his  reign,  or 
B.0. 714.  The  entire  narrative  of  this  chapter 
and  the  next  is  therefore  thirteen  or  fourteen 
years  earlier  than  that  of  oh.xxxvi.,  xxxvii., 
which  belongs  to  Hezekiah's  closing  years, 
B.C.  701 — G!J8  (see  the  coiuinent  on  ch. 
xxxvi.  1,  2).  Siok  unto  death ;  i.e.  attacked 
by  a  malady  which,  if  it  had  run  its  natural 
course,  would  have  been  fatal.  Isaiah  the 
prophet  the  son  of  Amoz.  This  double  desig- 
nation of  Isaiah,  by  liis  office  and  by  his 
descent,  marks  the  original  independence  of 
this  narrative,  which  was  not  intended  for  a 
continuation  of  ch.  xxxvii.  Thou  shalt  die, 
and  not  live.  Prophecies  were  often  threats, 
and,  when  suuh,  were  conditional,  announcing 
results  which  would  follow  unhss  averted 
by  prayer  or  repentance  (compare  Jonah's 
prophecy, "  Yet  forty  days,  and  Nineveh  shall 
be  overthrown,"  Jonah  iii.  4). 

Ver.  2. — Hezekiah  turned  his  face  toward 
the  wall.  The  action  resembles  that  of  Ahab 
(1  Kings  xxi.  4);  but  the  spirit  is  wholly 
different.    Ahab  tamed  away  in  suUenness, 


Hezekiah  that  he  might  pray  undisturbed. 
Bed.-i  seem  to  have  been  placed  in  the  corners 
of  rooms,  with  the  head  against  one  wall  of 
the  room,  and  one  side  against  another. 

Ver.  3. — Remember  now,  0  Lord.  Hezekiah 
was  in  the  full  vigour  of  life — thirty-nine 
years  old  only.  He  had  probably  as  yet  no 
son,  since  Manasseh,  who  succeeded  him, 
was  but  twelve  (2  Kings  xxi.  1 ;  2  Ohron. 
xxxiii.  1)  when  Hezekiah  died  at  the  age  of 
fifty-four.  It  was  a  grievous  thing  to  a  Jew 
to  leave  no  male  offspring;  it  was  viewed 
as  a  mark  of  the  Divine  displeasure  to  be 
cut  off  in  the  midst  of  one's  days  (Job  xv. 
32;  xxii.  15,  16:  Ps.  Iv.  23;  Prov.  x.  27; 
Eccles.  vii.  17).  Hezekiah  asked  himself — 
Had  he  deserved  such  a  sentence?  He 
thought  that  he  had  not.  He  knew  that, 
with  whatever  shortcomings,  he  had  endea- 
voured to  serve  God,  had  trusted  in  him 
(2  Kings  xviii.  5),  cleaved  to  him  (2 
Kings  xviii.  6),  "departed  not  from  fol- 
lowing 1dm,  but  kept  his  commandments  " 
(2  Kings  xviii.  6).  He  therefore  ventured 
upon  an  expostulation  and  an  earnest 
prayer ;  and  God  was  pleased  to  hear  the 
prayer  and  to  grant  it.  I  have  walked 
before  thee  in  truth  and  with  a  perfect  heart. 
Compare  the  unbiassed  testimony  of  the 
authors  of  Kings  and  Ghrouieles  (2  Kings 
xviii.  3— 6;  2  Ohron.  xxi.i.  2  ;  xxxi.  20, 21). 
Under  the  old  dispensation,  there  was 
nothing  to  prevent  men  from  pleading  their 
righteousness  before  God  (oomp.  Job  xxxi. 
4  —  40;  Ps.  vii.  3  —  8;  xviii.  20  —  24; 
xxvi.  1  —  8,  etc.).  Hezekiah,  however, 
does  not  really  regard  himself  as  sinless 
(comp.  ver.  17).  And  Hezekiah  wept  sore. 
In  the  East  feelings  are  but  little  restrained. 
Joy  shows  itself  in  laughter  and  shouting, 
grief  in  tears  and  shrill  cries.  Xerxes  wept 
when  he  thought  of  the  shortness  of  human 
life  (Herod.,  vii.  46) ;  the  Persians  rent  the 
air  with  loud  cries  at  the  funeral  of  Masistiu* 
(ibid.,  ix.  24) ;  on  the  news  of  the  defeat  at 
Salamis  all  Susa  "cried  aloud,  and  wepi 


CH.  xxxvm.  1— 22.]    THE   BOOK  OF   THE   PROPHET   ISAIAH. 


37 


and  wailed  without  stint "  (ibid.,  viii-  99)- 
So  David  wept  for  Jonathan  (2  Sam.  i.  12) 
and  again  for  Absalom  (2  Sam.  xix.  1 ) ;  Joa'-h 
wept  when  he  h(  ard  the  words  of  the  Law 
(2  Kings  xxii.  19);  Nehemiah  wept  at  the 
desolation  of  Jerusalem  (Neh.  i.  4) ;  the  am- 
bassadors of  Hezekiah,  when  disappointed  of 
the  object  of  their  embassy, "  wept  bitterly  " 
(oh.  xxxiii.  7).  No  king  in  the  East  puts 
himself  under  any  restraint,  if  he  has  an 
inclination  for  either  tears  or  laughter. 

Ver.  4. — Then  came  the  word  of  the  lord 
to  Isaiah,  saying.  The  author  of  Kings  de- 
scribes graphically  how  Isaiah,  after  deliver- 
ing his  message,  had  gone  out,  but  had  not 
reached  the  middle  court  of  the  palace,  when 
his  footsteps  were  arrested,  and  the  Divine 
voice  baile  him  "turn  again  and  relieve 
Hezekiah's  fears  by  a  fresh  announcement" 
(2  Kings  XX.  4).  So  swiftly  does  God  answer 
"  the  prayer  of  faith." 

Ver.  5. — Thus  saith  the  Lord,  ...  I  have 
heard  thy  prayer.  According  to  the  author 
of  Kings,  the  full  message  sent  to  Hezekiah 
was,  "  I  have  heard  thy  prayer,  I  have  seen 
thy  tears :  behold,  I  mil  heal  thee :  on  the 
third  day  thou  shalt  go  up  unto  the  house  of 
the  Lord.  And  I  will  add  unto  thy  days 
^fifteen  years;  and  X  will  deliver  thee  and 
this  city  out  of  the  hand  of  the  King  of 
A  ssyria ;  and  I  will  defend  this  city  for  mine 
own  sake,  aTid  for  my  servant  David's  sake  " 
(2  Kings  XX.  5,  6).  The  words  in  italics  are 
additional  to  those  here  reported  by  Isaiah. 
Fifteen  years.  This  was  doublinfr,  or  rather 
more  than  doubling,  the  length  of  Hezekiah's 
reign,  and  allowing  him  a  length  6f  life  ex- 
ceeding that  of  the  great  majority  of  the 
kings  of  Judah,  who  seldom  attained  the  age 
of  fifty.    Hezekiah  lived  to  be  fifty-four. 

Ver.  7. — And  this  shall  be  a  sign  unto  thee 
from  the  lord.  It  was  the  day  of  the  free 
offering  of  "  signs  "  by  God  to  those  whom 
his  providence  had  placed  at  the  head  of 
his  people.  Ahaz  had  been  offered  a  sign 
(ch.  vii.  11),  but  had  refused  the  offer 
made  him  (ch.  vii.  12);  the  Lord  had  then 
"himself  given  him  a  sign."  Hezekiah 
received  a  sign  to  assure  him  of  the  com- 
plete discomfiture  of  Sennacherib  (ch.xxxvii. 
30);  an  offer  was  here  made  him  of  a 
sign  of  a  peculiar  kind,  and  it  was  offered 
under  peculiar  coni  iitions.  We  learn  from 
2  Kings  that  a  choice  was  submitted  to  him 
— he  was  to  determine  whether  time,  as 
measured  by  a  certain  timepiece  or  clock, 
which  was  known  as  "  the  dial  of  Ahaz," 
should  make  a  sudden  leap  forward — the 
shadow  advancing  ten  degrees  upon  the  dial 
(2  Kings  XX.  9),  or  whether  it  should  retire 
backwards,  the  shadow  upon  the  same  dial 
receding  ten  degrees.  Hezekiah  determined 
in  favour  of  the  latter  sign,  from  its  appear- 
ing to  him  the  more  difficult  of  accomplish- 


ment ;  and  on  his  declaring  his  decision,  the 
shadow  receded  to  the  prescribed  distance. 
Time  was  rolled  backward,  or  at  any  rate 
appeared  to  be  rolled  backward;  and  the 
king,  seeing  so  great  a  miracle,  accepted 
without  hesitation  the  further  predictions 
that  had  been  made  to  liim.  The  Lord  will 
do  this  thing  that  he  hath  spoken.  By  the 
nexus  of  this  verse  with  the  preceding,  it 
would  naturally  be  concluded  that  "the 
thing  "  to  be  done  was  the  defence  of  Jeru- 
salem ;  but  ver.  22,  which  belongs  properly 
to  this  part  of  the  narrative,  shows  the  con- 
trary. Hezekiah  had  asked  for  a  sign  "  that 
he  should  go  up  to  the  house  of  the  Lord." 

Ver.  8. — The  sun-dial  of  Ahaz.  We  are  in- 
formed by  Herodotus  that  the  sun-dial  was 
an  invention  of  the  Babylonians  (Herod., 
ii.  109),  from  whom  it  would  readily  pasa  to 
the  Assyrians.  Ahaz  may  have  obtained  a 
knowledge  of  it,  or  an  actual  specimen,  when 
he  visited  Tiglath-Pileser  at  Damascus  (2 
Kings  xvi.  10),  and,  on  his  return  to  his 
capital,  have  caused  one  to  be  erected  there. 
Sun-dials  are  of  several  kinds.  The  one 
here  spoken  of  seems  to  have  consisted 
of  a  set  of  steps,  with  a  perpendicular 
gnomon  or  pole  at  the  top,  the  shadow 
of  which  receded  up  the  steps  as  the  sun 
rose  in  the  heavens,  and  descended  down 
them  as  the  sun  declined.  We  must  sup- 
pose that  the  sign  was  given  in  the  forenoon, 
when  the  shadow  was  gradually  creeping 
up  the  steps.  Hezekiah  thought  that  a 
sudden  jump  in  the  same  direction  would  be 
BS  nothing  compared  with  a  reversal  of  the 
motion,  and  therefore  required  that  the 
shadow  should  go  back,  which  it  did.  How 
the  effect  was  produced,  whether  by  an 
eclipse  as  argued  by  Mr.  Bosanquet  ('  Trans- 
actions of  Society  of  Bibl.  Archaeology,'  vol. 
iii.  pp.  34^40),  or  by  refraction,  or  by  an 
actual  alteration  of  the  earth's  motion,  we 
are  not  told ;  but  there  is  reason  to  believe 
that  the  cause,  whatever  it  was,  was  local, 
not  general,  since  the  King  of  Babylon  sub- 
seqiiently  sent  ambassadors,  to  inquire  con- 
cerning "  the  wonder  that  was  done  in  the 
land"  (2  Chron.  xxxii. ;-!  1 ).  The  sun  returned 
ten  degrees.  We  must  not  press  this  ex- 
pression as  indicating  a  real  alteration  of 
the  sun's  place  in  the  heavens.  The  mean- 
ing is  that  the  thadoui  cast  by  the  sun  re- 
turned. 

Ver.  9. — The  writing  of  Hezekiah ;  rather, 
a  u)riting.  After  he  had  recovered  from  his 
illness,  Hezekiah,  it  would  seem,  retraced 
his  feelings  as  he  lay  upon  his  sick-bed,  and 
embodied  them  in  this  monody.  It  has  been 
well  termed,  "  a  peculiarly  sweet  and  plain- 
tive specimenofHebrewpsalmody"(Cheyne). 
Four  stanzas  or  strophes  of  unequal  length 
are  thought  to  be  discernible  :  (1)  from  th» 
beginning  of  vex.  10  to  the  end  of  ver.  12; 


3d 


THE  BOOK   OF  THE  PROPHE'l.'  ifciAIAH.    [oh.  xxxvni.  1— 2a 


(2)  from  the  beginning  of  ver.  13  to  the  end 
of  ver.  14;  (3)  from  the  beginning  of  ver. 
15  to  the  end  of  ver.  17 ;  (4)from  tlie  begin- 
ning of  ver.  18  to  the  end  of  ver.  20.  In  the 
first  two  the  monarch  is  looking  forward  to 
death,  and  his  strain  is  mournful ;  in  the 
last  two  he  has  received  the  promise  of  re- 
covery, and  pours  out  his  thankfulness. 

Ver.  10. — In  the  cutting  off  of  my  days ; 
literally,  in  the  pausing  of  my  day» — which 
is  taken  by  some  to  mean  "  the  noon-tide  of 
my  life" — when  my  sun  had  reached  its 
tenith,  and  might  have  been  expected  to 
begin  to  decline ;  by  others  to  signify  "  the 
still  tranquillity  of  my  life,"  when  it  was 
gliding  quietly  and  peacefully  along  without 
anything  to  disturb  it.  Ver.  6  is  against 
thu  latter  view.  I  shall  go  to  the  gates  of 
the  grave ;  rather,  I  iliaU  enter  in  at  the 
gates  of  hell  (or,  Eades) — ^the  place  of  de- 
parted spirits  (see  the  comment  on  ch.  xiv. 
9).  Hezekiah  bewails  his  fate  somewhat  as 
Antigone :  'AA.V  en'  i  irayKoiras  'AiSrjs  fairoi' 
&yet  T^v  'Ax^povros  iutrdy  (Soph., '  Ant.,'  11. 
810—813). 

Ver.  11. — I  shall  not  see  the  Lord  (comp. 
Ps.  vi.  5, "  In  death  there  is  no  remembrance 
of  thee ;  in  the  grave  (Shedl)  who  shall  give 
thee  thanks?"  and  see  also  Ps.  xxx.  9; 
Ixxxviii.  10—12 ;  cxv.  17).  The  Jews  had 
not  yet  attained  the  conception  of  a  blissful 
region  in  Hades,  where  God  manifested  him- 
self, and  the  saints,  who  were  awaiting  the 
resurrection,,  saw  him  and  praised  him. 
Even  the  Lord.  (For  examples  of  repetition 
for  the  sake  of  emphasis,  see  ch,  xxix.  1  ; 
xxxiii.  22;  xxxviii,  19;  xl.  1;  li  17,  etc.) 
In  the  land  of  the  living ;  «.&  "  a>  J  (Jo  now 
in  the  land  of  the  living"  (comp.  Ps.  xxvii. 
13;  cxvi.9). 

Ver.  12. — Mine  age  is  departed;  rather, 
my  dwelling  is  plucked  up.  The  body  seems 
to  be  viewed  as  the  dwelling-place  of  the 
soul.  Hezekiah's  is  to  be  taken  from  him, 
and  carried  far  away,  like  a  shepherd's  tent, 
while  he,  his  true  self,  i.e.  his  soul,  is  left 
bare  and  naked  (comp.  2  'Cor.  t.  1—4).  I 
have  out  off  like  a  weaver  my  life ;  rather, 
I  hare  rolled  up,  like  a  weaver,  my  life.  The 
careful  weaver  rolls  up  the  web,  as  it  ad- 
vances, to  keep  it  clean  and  &ee  from  dust. 
Hezekiah  had  been  equally  careful  of  his 
life;  he  had  about  haK  finished  it,  when 
lol  "Jehovah  takes  up  the  fatal  scissors" 
(Cheyne),  and  severs  the  unfinished  cloth 
from  the  loom  (compare  the  Greek  myth  of 
,Olotho,  Lachesis,  and  Atropos).  With  pining 
siokness;  rather,  as  in  the  margin,  from 
the  thrum.  The  "  thrum"  is  the  portion  of 
the  waip  which  adjoins  the  upper  bar  of  the 
loom. 

Ver.  13. — I  reckoned  till  morning,  etc ;  f  e. 
"  Ilay  thinking  till  the  morning,  thai  God 
woold  emah  me  m  a  lion  eruahea  his  prey — 


I  expected  him  all  day  long  to  make  an  end 

of  me." 

Ver.  14. — Like  a  crane  or  a  swallow.  The 
««8,here  translated  "  crane,"  is  probably  "the 
swift,"  which  has  a  loud,  shrill  note.  The 
'dgur  is,  perhaps,  "  the  crane ;  "  but  this  is 
very  uncertain.  The  two  words  occur  as  the 
names  of  birds  only  here  and  in  Jer.  viii.  7. 
So  did  I  chatter ;  rather,  so  did  I  scream 
(Oheyne).  I  did  mourn ;  rather,  I  did  moan. 
Mine  eyes  fail  with  looking  upward ;  rather,' 
mine  eyes  are  weak  to  look  upward;  Le.  I 
have  scarcely  the  courage  or  the  strength 
to  look  to  Jehovah ;  yet  still  I  do  look  to 
him  falteringly,  and  make  my  appeal :  0 
Lord,  I  am  oppressed;  undertake  for  me 
(comp.  Job  xvii.  3);  literally,  be  Sturety/or 
me.  '*The  image,"  as  Mr.  Cheyne  says, 
"  is  that  of  a  debtor,  who  is  being  dragged 
to  prison  "  at  the  suit  of  an  exacting  creditor, 
and  for  whom  there  is  but  one  hope  of  relief, 
viz.  if  he  can  obtain  a  sufficient  surety. 
Hezekiah  calls  on  God  to  be  the  Surety ;  but 
God  is  the  Creditor !  Still,  there  is  an  appeal 
from  God's  justice  to  God's  mercy — from 
Jehovah  who  punishes  to  Jehovah  who  for- 
gives sin  ;  and  this  appeal  Hezekiah  seems 
to  intend  to  make  when  he  beaeeohes  God  to 
"  undertake  for  him." 

Ver.  15.— What  shall  I  say?  The  strain 
is  suddenly  changed.  Hezekiah's  prayer 
has  been  answered,  and  he  has  received  the 
answer  (vers.  6 — 8).  He  is  "at  a  loss  to 
express  his  wonder  and  his  gratitude" 
(Cheyne) ;  comp.  2  Sam.  vii.  20.  God  has 
both  spoken  onto  him — i.e.  given  him  a  pro- 
mise of  recovery — and  also  higiself  hath  done 
it;  2. e.  has  performed  his  promise.  Already 
he  feels  in  himself  the  beginnings  of  amend- 
ment— ^he  is  conscious  that  the  worst  is  past, 
and  that  the  malady  has  taken  a  turn  for  the 
better.  I  shall  go  softly  all  my  years.  De- 
litzsch  renders,  "  1  shall  walk  quietly ;  "  Mr. 
Cheyne,  "  I  shall  walk  at  ease ; "  both  ap- 
parently understanding  the  expression  of  a 
quiet,  easy  life,  made  the  more  pleasant  by 
contrast  with  past  pain.  But  it  seems  better 
to  understand  the  "soft  going,"  vrith  Dr. 
Kay,  of  a  hushed  and  subdued  spirit,  con- 
sequent upon  the  crisis  past,  and  thenceforth 
continuing — the  king  walking,  as  it  were, 
perpetually  in  God's  presence.  In  the  bitter- 
ness I  rather,  after  the  bitterness  (Delitzsch), 
when  it  has  departed ;  and  "  because  of  it " 
(Nagelsbach),  through  its  remembrance. 

Ver.  16. — By  these  things ;  i.e.  "  the  thing! 
which  thou  apeakest  and  doest"  (ver.  15). 
Man  does  not  •'  live  by  bread  alone,  but  by 
every  word  that  proceedeth  out  of  the  mouth 
of  the  Lord  "  (Dent.  viii.  3).  And  in  all  these 
things.  This  rendering  is  against  the  lawa 
of  giammar.    Translate,  andwhoUy  in  thewt. 

Ver.  17. — Behold,  for  peace  I  had  great 
bittemesa;  rat^r,  behold,  it  laoa  far  a^ 


OH.  xxxviii.  1—22.]    THE  BOOK  OF  THE  PROPHET  ISAIAH. 


39 


peace  Oiat  I  had  each  hittemess,  luch  bttier- 
neu.  The  pain  that  I  underwent  was 
for  the  true  peace  and  comfort  of  my 
soul  (comp.  Pb.  loiT.  12;  cxix.  75;  Prov. 
iii.  12;  Heb.  xii.  5—11).  Thou  hast  in 
love,  etc. ;  literally,  thou  hast  loved  my  soul 
hack  from  the  pit  of  destruction — as  If  God's 
love,  beaming  on  tlie  monarch's  soul,  had 
drawn  it  back  from  the  edge  of  the  pit 
(comp.  Hob.  xi.  4,  "  I  drew  them  with  cords 
of  a  man,  with  bands  of  love ").  For  thou 
hast  oast  all  my  sins  behind  thy  haok.  Where 
they  could  be  no  more  seen,  and  therefore 
would  be  no  more  remembered  (comp.  Mioah 
vii  19 ;  Ps.  xxv.  7 ;  Ixxix.  8 ;  oh.  xliii.  25 ; 
IxiT.  9,  etc.).  Hezekiah,  though  lately  he 
protested  his  integrity  (ver.  3),  did  not  mean 
to  say  tliat  he  was  sinless.  He  knew  that 
he  bad  sinned;  he  regarded  his  sins  as 
having  brought  down  upon  him  the  sentence 
of  death ;  as  God  h£is  revoked  the  sentence, 
be  knows  that  he  has  pardoned  I  lis  sins  and 
put  them  away  from  his  remembrance. 

Ver.  18. — The  grave  cannot  praise  thee(com- 
pare  the  comment  on  ver.  11).  It  is  avoid- 
ing the  plain  force  of  these  passages  to  say 
that  Hezekiah  only  means  that  those  who  go 
to  Hades  in  a  state  of  condemnation  cannot 
be  expected  there  to  praise  God  (Kay).  He 
speaks  broadly  and  generally  of  all :  "  The 
living,  the  living,  shall  praise  thee;  Shedl 
cannot  praise  thee ;  Death  cannot  celebrate 
thee,"  Manifestly,  though  he  believes  in  a 
future  state,  it  is  one  in  which  there  is  either 
no  energy  at  all,  or  at  any  rate  no  devotional 
energy.  He  may  think,  with  Jsaiah,  that 
"  the  righteous  man,"  when  he  is  "  taken 
away,"  will  "  enter  into  peace "  (oh.  Ivii. 
1 ,  2) ;  but  absolute  "  peace "  precludes 
energy  (see  Arist.,  'Eth.  Nio.,'  i.  x.  §  2). 
Hezekiah  shrinks  from  losing  all  his  activi- 
ties, including  his  sense  of  personal  com- 
munion with  God.  He  does  not,  perhaps, 
"look  on  the  condition  of  the  faithful  de- 
parted as  one  of  comfortless  rjloom;"  but  he 
views  it  as  one  of  deprivation,  and  is  unwill- 
ing to  enter  into  it.  It  was  by  the  coming 
of  Christ  and  the  preaching  of  his  gospel 
that  "  life  and  immortality  "  were  first  truly 
"  brought  to  light"  (2  Tim.  i.  10). 

Ver.  19. — The  living.  Those  who  still 
enjoy  the  light  of  day.  The  repetition  is 
emphatic,  and  has  the  force  of  "  the  living, 
and  the  living  only."  The  father  to  the 
children.  Hezekiah  may,  or  may  not,  have 
had  children  himself  at  the  time.  Manasseh 
waa  not  bom ;  but  he  may  have  had  daugh- 
len,  V  wen  other  aaoM,  who  did  not  suivin 


him.  He  is  not,  however,  perhaps,  thinking 
of  his  own  case. 

Ver.  20. — The  lord  was  ready  to  save  me  ; 
rather,  came  to  my  rescue ;  came  and  saved 
me.  Therefore  we  will  sing  my  songs  to  the 
stringed  instruments  ;  rather,  therefore  trill 
we  play  my  stringed  instruments.  Hezekiah 
calls  the  stringed  instruments  his,  because 
he  had  recalled  their  use,  nnd  re-established 
them  as  a  part  of  the  temple  service  after 
the  suspension  of  that  service  by  Ahaz 
(2  Chron.  xxix.  30).  His  intention  now  is 
to  take  continual  part  with  ttie  Levites  in 
the  choral  praises  of  God,  which  were  a  part 
of  the  daily  worship  of  the  temple.  This 
is  to  him  the  natural  mode  of  expressing  his 
thankfulness  to  God  for  the  meiey  vouch- 
safed him. 

Ver.  21.— For  Isaiah  had  said;  literally, 
and  Isaiah  said.  It  seems  as  if  this  verse 
and  the  next  had  been  accidentally  omitted 
from  their  proper  place  in  the  narrative, 
which  WHS  between  vers.6  and 7,and  had  then 
been  appended  by  an  after-thought.  They 
reproduce  nearly,  but  not  exactly,  the  words 
of  2  Kings  xix.  7,  8.  Let  them  take  a  lump 
of  figs.  This  remedy  is  said  to  be  one  still 
employed  in  the  East  for  the  cure  of  ordi- 
nary boils ;  but  it  must  have  been  quite  in- 
sufScient  'for  the  cure  of  such  a  dangerous 
tumour,  or  carbuncle,  as  that  from  which 
Huzekiah  was  suffering.  In  miraculous 
cures,  both  the  Old  Testament  prophets  and 
our  Lord  himself  frequently  employed  a 
means,  insufScient  in  itself,  but  supema- 
turally  rendered  8u£Scient,  to  effect  the  in- 
tended  purpose  (see  1  Kings  xvii.  21 ;  2  Kings 
iv.  34,  41 ;  v.  14;  John  ix.  6;  Mark  vii.  33; 
viii.  23,  etc.).  TTpon  the  boil.  The  term  here 
translnted  "boil"  is  used  in  Exodus  (ix. 
9 — 11)  for  the  affliction  which  constituted 
the  sixth  plague,  in  Leviticus  (xiii.  18 — 23) 
for  an  ulcer  accompanying  one  of  the  worst 
forms  of  leprosy,  in  Deuteronomy  (xxviii. 
27, 35)  for  "  the  botch  of  Egypt,"  and  in  Job 
(ii.  7)  for  the  last  of  the  visitations  from 
which  he  suffered.  It  is  not  unlikely  that 
it  was  of  a  leprous  character. 

Ver.  22. — Hezekiah  also  had  said ;  literally, 
and  Hezekiah  said.  Our  translators,  both 
in  this  verse  and  at  the  commencement  of 
ver.  21,  have  endeavoured  to  conceal  the 
awkwardness  of  the  nexus,  or  rather  want  of 
nexus,  with  what  precedes,  by  a  modification 
of  the  rendering.  The  true  sense  is  brought 
out  by  the  proceeding,  which  i%  however,  a 
little  arbitrary. 


40  THE  BOOK  OF  THE  PROPHET   ISAIAH,    [ch.  xxxviii.  1— 22 


HOMILETICa 

Ver.  1. — 2%e  duty  of  men,  in  viexu  of  death,  to  set  their  home  in  order.  Nothing  ii 
more  manifest  than  the  duty  of  all  men,  in  view  of  that  departure  which  they  know  to 
impend  over  them  as  an  absolute  certainty,  only  doublfnl  in  respect  of  its  date,  to 
arrange  their  worldly  affairs  as  prudence  requires,  and  not  \e:ive  them  in  confusion. 
In  complicated  societies,  and  in  states  where  civilization  is  advanced,  the  duty  presses 
more  espc  cially,  since  the  greatest  care  constantly  requires  to  be  taken  lest,  if  affairs  are 
not  arranged,  the  most  undesirable  results  should  arise. 

I.  It  is  most   convenient   that   the  house   should   BB  bet  IK  ORDER   BEFORE  AKT 

IMMEDIATE  PROSPECT  OF  DEATH  APPEARS.  The  circumstances  of  a  dangerous  illness  are 
generally  such  as  to  render  it  extremely  inexpedient  that  the  arrangement  of  a  man's 
worldly  affairs  should  be  put  off  to  such  a  time.  The  time  is,  for  the  most  part,  all  too 
short  for  the  consideration  of  a  man's  spiritual  affairs — for  repentance,  confession, 
restitution,  exchange  of  forgiveness,  and  the  like,  which  often  occupy  a  considerable 
space,  and  need  much  thought  and  attention.  Worldly  affairs  distract  the  mind  from 
the  things  which  most  vitally  concern  it,  and,  if  they  are  not  arranged  until  the  last 
illness  sets  in,  the  result  too  commonly  is  that  "  to  the  mercy  of  a  moment "  are  left 
"the  vast  concerns  of  an  eternal  scene."  Further,  in  sickness  the  mind  is  far  less  fit 
to  make  judicious  arrangements  than  in  health-;  it  is  soon  fatigued,  often  not  clear, 
sometimes  altoiiether  confused  and  incapable  of  sound  judgment — not  to  mention  that 
It  may  wholly  fail,  or  be  quite  unequal  to  any  exertion.  Men  need  to  be  reminds  d 
continually,  while  they  are  in  health,  of  the  duty  of  arranging  their  worldly  affairs  at 
once,  and  not  waiting  till  the  fiat  has  gone  forth — till  their  hours  are  numbered,  and 
whatever  has  to  be  done  must  be  done  in  haste. 

II.  Still,  if  the  duty  has  been  neglected  ik  bealth,  the  immediate  prospect 

OF   DEATH    IS    A    PEREMPTORY    CALL    ON    US    TO    DISCHARGE   IT.      "Set    thine    houSe    in 

order,"  is  Isaiah's  first,  nay,  his  sole,  charge  to  Hezekiah,  when  he  warns  him  that  he  is 
to  die  shortly.  The  interests  of  others  are  involved;  and  our  neglect  of  them  hitherto 
gives  them  a  claim  on  lis  which  is  more  binding  than  any  interests  of  our  own.  "  If 
a  man  provide  not  for  .  .  .  those  of  his  own  house,  ...  he  is  worse  than  an  infidel" 
(1  Tim.  V.  8).  The  neglected  duty  must  first  be  attended  to ;  the  rights,  interests,  fair 
claims  of  others  must  be  considered,  and,  so  far  as  possible,  secured;  and  then  our  own 
advantage  may  occupy  us,  but  not  before.  No  man,  we  may  be  sure,  will  be  made  to 
suffer  in  another  world  for  having  postponed  his  own  advantage  to  that  of  others  in  this. 

Vers.  2 — 6. — The  power  of  prayer.  The  story  of  these  chapters  (xxxvL — xxxviii.) 
is  remarkably  illustrative  of  the  power  of  "  effectual  fervent  prayer."  Pour  points  may 
be  noted. 

I.  PrAYEB    is    potent    to    DESTROY   THE    ADVERSARIES   OF   GOD    AT    THE    GREATEST 

HEIGHT  OF  THEIR  GLOKY  AND  BOASTING.  Assyria  had  reached  the  acme  of  her  might. 
She  had  destroyed  nation  after  natii  n ;  she  had  "  gone  up  and  overflowed."  All 
Western  Asia  was  hers,  and  now  she  threatened  to  effect  a  lodgment  in  Northern  Africa 
and  to  add  the  rich  lands  of  the  Nile  valley  to  the  productive  regions  along  the  Tigris 
and  the  Euphrates.  She  had  measured  her  strength  against  that  of  every  military 
p«wer  existing  at  that  day,  and  in  all  her  struggles  had  come  off  victorious.  What  was 
to  stop  her,  or  prevent  her  colossal  form  from  dominating  the  whole  earth?  A  short 
,)rayer  offered  by  a  petty  potentate  in  a  distant  city.  It  is  the  prayer  of  Hezekiah 
"against  Sennacherib"  that  overthrows  him.  "Wliereas  thou  hast  prayed  to  me 
against  Sennacherib,  King  of  Assyria :  this  is  the  word  which  the  Lord  hath  spoken 
concerning  him :  The  virgin,  the  daughter  of  Zion,  hath  despised  thee,  and  laughed  thee 
to  scorn"  (ch.  xxxvii.  21,  22). 

II.  Prayer  is  potent  to  bav«  a  nation  at  the  last  extremity.  It  may  well 
have  seemed  to  Sennacherib  ridiculous  that  the  Jews  should  think  to  withstand  him. 

He  or  his  predecessors  had  conquered  every  other  country  of  Western  Asia Babylonia 

and  Media,  Armenia  and  Gozan,  Syria,  Pheenlcia,  Damascus,  Samaria,  Philistia,  Bdom; 
they  had  contended  with  the  hosts  of  Egypt  and  overcome  them ;  how  should'  a  petty 
nation,  forty-six  of  whose  towns  they  had  taken  in  one  .campaign,  and  two  hundred 


CH.  xxiviii.  1—22.]    THE  BOOK  OP  THE  PROPHET  ISAIAH.  41 

thousand  of  whose  inhabitants  they  had  carried  into  captivity  ('Eponym  Canon,'  p. 
134),  conceive  it  possible  to  resist  for  long  an  enemy  so  vastly  superior  to  them  ?  They 
were  open  to  invasion  on  every  side.  Tiglath-Pileser  had  subdued  the  trans-Jordauic 
region,  Sargon  had  reduced  I'hilistia  and  Samaria,  Sennacherib  himself  had  for  tributaries 
the  kings  of  Zidon,  Arvad,  Gebal,  Ashdod,  Ammon,  Moab,  and  Edom  (ibid.,  p.  132), 
How  was  Hezekiab,  cooped  up  in  Jerusalem  "  as  a  bird  in  a  cage  " — how  were  his  people, 
a  mere  "remnant"  (ch.  xxxvii.  4) — to  t scape  the  subjection  that  had  come  on  all 
their  neighbours?  The  last  extremity  seemed  to  be  reached.  Humanly  speaking,  there 
was  no  prospect  of  deliverance ;  the  jaws  of  the  monster  that  had  swallowed  all  the 
other  countries  must  crush  Judsea  also.  There  was,  however,  still  the  resort  to  prayer. 
Hezekiab,  Isaiah,  doubtless  the  faithful  Israelites  generally,  betook  themselves  to  God, 
besought  his  aid,  besieged  him  with  their  supplicaiions,  and  the  nation  was  saved — 
saved  from  extinction — saved,  for  a  long  term,  even  from  invasion — allowed  a  century 
more  of  independent  life  and  a  recovery  under  Josiah  of  almost  pristine  ylory.  Suoti 
power  has  prayer  at  the  extremity  of  a  nation's  need — a  power  the  force  of  which, 
measured  against  ordinary  mundane  forces,  is  quite  incalculable. 

III.  PbATEK    18    POTENT    TO     OBTAIN    FBOM     GOD    LENGTH     OF    DATS    AKD    BVEEY 

TGHFOBAL  BLESSING.  HezekJah's  prayer  for  himself  prolonged  his  life  for  fifteen  years. 
Christiana,  under  sentence  of  death,  given  up  by  their  physicians  and  their  Iriends,  are 
entitled  to  pray,  if  they  so  choose,  for  an  extension  of  the  term  of  their  probation, 
a  respite  from  the  doom  pronounced  on  them.  In  God's  hands,  and  in  his  hands  only, 
are  the  issues  of  life  and  death.  He  can,  if  he  will,  prolong  our  life,  and  restore  us  to 
health,  even  when  we  seem  at  the  last  gasp.  It  may  not  be  often  suitable  that  we 
should  ask  this  boon  for  ourselves ;  we  have  not  the  reasons  to  wish  for  long  life  that 
the  Jews  had.  But  for  others  we  do  well  to  ask,  when  they  are  in  danger,  that  God 
will  spare  them  to  us ;  and  "  the  prayer  of  faith  "  will  often  "  save  the  sick,  and  the 
Lord  will  raise  them  up  "  ( Jas.  v.  15),  and  give  them  back  to  us,  as  from  the  very  edge 
of  the  pit,  if  our  prayer  be  faithful  and  fervent. 

IV.  Prater  is  potent  to  obtain  FOKaivENBSS  of  sdjs,  and  remission  op  the 
PENALTIES  OF  SIN.  Hezekiah  felt  that,  in  revoking  the  sentence  of  death  which  he  had 
I  assed  upon  him,  God  had  also  forgiven  the  sins  which  had  provoked  that  sentence 
(ver.  17).  He  had  been  sensible  of  those  sins,  even  while  he  had  pleaded  his 
general  faithfulness  (ver.  3).  He  had  doubtless  begged  to  be  forgiven  them.  Such 
prayer  God  will  in  no  wise  oast  out.  It  is  his  high  prerogative  to  pardon  sin  (Mark  ii. 
7),  and  it  is  also  his  delight.  He  bids  us  ask  his  forgiveness  daily  (Matt.  vi.  12) ;  he 
promises  his  forgiveness  to  all  but  the  unforgiving  (Mark  xi.  25,  26);  he  assures  us 
that,  if  we  will  return  to  him,  he  will  "abundantly  pardon"  (ch.  Iv.  7).  And  his 
pardon  includes  within  it  remission  of  the  true  penalty  of  sin,  which  is  his  displeasure, 
his  alienation,  and  its  consequence — eternal  death.  The  pardoned  sinner  has  his  sins 
"  blotted  out."    He  "  enters  into  the  joy  of  his  Lord." 

HOMILIES  BY  VARIOUS   AUTHORa 

Vers.  1 — 8. — Sickness  and  recovery  of  Hezekiah.  All  pathos  ultimately  turns  upon 
contrast,  and  the  greatest  of  all  contrasts  is  that  between  death  and  life.  AH  who  have 
passed  through  a  dangerous  illness,  and  have  been  brought  nigh  unto  the  gates  of 
death,  will  feel  touched  by  this  narrative,  which  hints  meanings  that  lie  below  the 
surface. 

I.  The  warning.  The  king  falls  into  deadly  sickness;  and  the  prophet's  voice 
assures  him  that  his  days  are  numbered.  "Thou  shalt  die,  and  not  live."  The  king, 
under  the  wi-ight  of  his  grief,  turns  his  face  to  the  wall.  So  Ahab,  under  the  influence 
of  another  consuming  passion  (1  Kings  xxi.  4).  It  is  a  sign  of  sorrow  that  admits  not 
of  society.    How  seldom  do  men  recuive  such  a  warning  with  calmuessl    How  true 

isit^ 

"Oh  our  life's  sweetness  I 
That  we  the  pain  of  death  would  hourly  dia 
Rather  than  die  at  once  "  1 

"  What  are  pains  and  aches,  and  the  torments  of  the  gout  and  the  stone,  wUch  H# 


42  THE  BOOK  OF  THE  PROPHET  ISAIAH,    [oh.  xxxvra.  1—22, 


pulling  at  our  earthly  tabernacle,  but  so  many  ministers  and  under-agents  of  death  ? 
What  are  catarrhs  and  ulcers,  coughs  and  dropsies,  but  so  many  mementoes  of  a  hastening 
dissolution,  so  many  foretastes  of  the  grave  ?  Add  to  these  the  consuming  cares  and 
troubles  of  the  mind  ;  the  toil  and  labour  and  racking  intention  of  the  brain,  whichas 
really,  though  not  as  sensibly,  impair  and  exhaust  the  vitals  as  the  most  visible  bodily- 
diseases  can  do,  and  let  death  into  the  body,  though  by  another  door."  But  there  is 
an  instinct  within  us  which  refuses  to  listen  to  these  argumentations.  Some  noted  lines 
of  the  Roman  noble  Maecenas  have  come  down  to  us,  in  which  he  depicts  himself  as 
shaken  with  palsy,  attacked  from  head  to  foot  with  disease,  still  Vita  dum  superut, 
hene  est.  Such  experiences  put  to  rout  the  fallacies  of  the  pessimist,  and  convince  iu  of 
the  love  we  bear  to.  life. 

"Whatever  crazy  sorrow  saith, 
No  soul  that  breathes  with  human  breath 
Hath  ever  truly  longed  for  death. 
'Tis  life  whereof  our  nerves  are  scant ; 
For  life,  and  not  for  death,  we  pant ; 
More  life  and  fuller  that  we  want," 

The  experience  of  such  a  deadly  sickness  may  be  the  needed  lesson  to  teach  ns  the 
worth  of  our  days,  to  stir  us  up  to  the  useful  employment  of  them. 

II.  The  prater.  We  must  bear  in  mind  that  in  antiquity  generally  death  is  viewed 
as  the  effect  of  Divine  visitation,  especially  sudden  and  untimely  death.  The  belief  was 
that  the  days  of  the  good  would  be  prolonged,  the  years  of  the  wicked  would  be 
shortened  (Prov.  x.  27) ;  that  men  of  deceit  and  blood  would  not  live  out  half  their 
days  (Ps.  Iv.  23).  Hezekiah,  conscious  of  his  integrity  and  faithfulness,  appeals  to  the 
justice  of  God.  "His  heart  had  been  "perfect"  with  Jehovah,  in  the  sense  in  which 
David's  had  been,  and  Solomon's  had  not  been  (1  Kings  xi.  4).  He  had  not  divided 
his  affections  with  the  gods  of  idolaters.  He  had  been  a  reformer — he  had  done  what 
was  good  in  the  eyes  of  Jehovah.  After  the  manner  of  Oriental  lamentation,  he  loudly 
weejis  (cf.  Judg.  xx.  23  ;  1  Sam.  x'ii.  16).  There  is  a  childlike  simplicity  in  the  scene. 
What  are  we  all  but  children  iu  the  great  hours  of  life's  trials  ?  But  we  see  here  that 
calm  conscience  which  is  the  result  of  a  pious  life,  and  which  gives  confidence  tn  prayer. 
"Conscience  is  the  great  repository  and  magazine  of  all  those  pleasures  that  can  afford 
any  solid  refreshment  to  the  soul ; "  and  of  that  solace  which  is  needed  in  the  moments 
of  weakness.  "  When  this  is  calm  and  serene  and  absolving,  then  properly  a  man 
enjoys  all  things,  and,  what  is  more,  himself;  for  that  he  must  do  before  he  can  enjoy 
anything  else.  It  is  only  a  pious  life,  led  by  the  rules  of  religion,  that  can  authorize 
a  man's  conscience  to  speak  comfortably  to  him;  it  is  this  that  must  word  the 
sentence  before  the  conscience  can  pronounce  it,  and  then  it  will  do  it  with  majesty  and 
authority ;  it  will  not  whisper,  but  proclaim,  a  y«6i7ee  to  the  mind ;  it  will  not  drop,  but 
pour  in,  oil  upon  the  wounded  heart.  The  pleasure  of  conscience  is  not  only  greater 
than  all  other  pleasures,  but  may  also  serve  instead  of  them.  They  only  please  and 
affect  the  mind  in  transitu,  in  the  pitiful  narrow  compass  of  actual  fruition ;  whereas 
that  of  conscience  entertains  and  feeds  it  a  long  time  after  with  durable,  lasting  reflec- 
tions" (South). 

III.  The  dbath-waebant  cancelled.  "And  it  came  to  pass,  afore  Isaiah  was  gone 
out  into  the  middle  court,  that  the  word  of  the  Lord  came  to  him,  saying.  Turn  again" 

$2  Kings  XX.  4).  The  doom  of  death  is  recalled;  a  res]ite  of  fifteen  years  granted. 
)eliverance  is  promised  from  the  Assyrian,  and  Jehovah  will  throw  his  protecting  shield 
over  the  city ;  and  a  physical  phenomenon  is  to  occur  as  a  sign  or  guarantee  of  the 
fulfilment.  Prophecy,  then,  is  conditional;  Divine  judgments  are  conditional.  "It 
does  not  always  follow,"  says  Jerome,  "  that  because  the  prophet  predicts,  that  which 
he  has  predicted  shall  come  to  pass.  For  he  predicted,  not  that  it  should  come  to  pass, 
but  that  it  might  not  come  to  pass."  Here  repentance  or  prayer  may  "avail  much." 
We  should  hesitate,  therefore,  to  speak  of  absolute  decrees,  and  of  irreversible 
judgments,  in  connection  with  human  life.  Always  there  is  an  '•  if  "  or  an  "  unless  " 
to  b«ak  the  fall  of  the  severest  sentence ;  and,  in  fact,  the  dealings  of  the  merciful  Ck)d 
with  men  are  more  lenient  than  they  can  ever  be  represented  in  words.  How  often 
hM  the  opinion  of  the  physician  doomed  the  invalid,  who  has  nevertheless  recovered! 


OH.  XXXVIII.  1—22.]    THE  BOOK  OF  THE  PROPHET  ISAIAH.  48 

And  the  like  dusappointment  of  expectations  occurs  in  spiritual  things.  All  combine 
to  remind  us  of  the  cheering  saying,  "  While  there  is  life,  there  is  hope  1 "  So  long  as 
we  entrust  ourselves  in  the  hands  of  a  gracious  God,  we  need  never  despair. — J. 

Vers.  9 — 22. — The  song  of  Hezekiah.  It  is  a  song  of  peculiar  sweetness — from  a 
literary  point  of  view,  characterized  by  great  elegance ;  from  a  spiritual  point  of  view, 
unfolding  some  deepest  elements  of  Hebrew  and  of  human  pathos. 

I.  The  contemplation  of  death.  It  was  in  middle  life,  in  the  "  noon-tide  of  his 
days,"  that  he  had  to  face  the  dark  gates  of  Sheol.  "  Midway  in  life,  as  to  Dante,  camf 
his  peril  of  death."  It  has  been  said  that  there  is  a  peculiar  melancVioly  in  middle  life. 
Perhaps  so ;  every  age  has  its  peculiar  melancholy.  It  is  the  contra'<t  between  the 
"  noon-tide  of  consciousness,"  and  the  sudden  sunset  which  seems  at  hand,  that  shocks 
the  imagination.  It  is  the  very  acme  of  the  lifelong  struggle  of  will  and  necessity. 
Here,  the  glow  of  intellectual  vigour,  the  full  fruit  of  ripened  knowledge,  the  educated 
and  matured  taste  for  life ;  yonder,  pale  nothingness,  decay,  disappointment.  A  «en«e 
of  injustice  seems  here  to  shock  the  mind.  The  man  feels  as  if  he  were  being  robbed  of 
his  property,  "  mulcted  of  the  residue  of  his  days."  That  life  which  nature  has  kindly 
nourished,  which  manifold  experience  has  enriched  and  adorned,  around  which  law  has 
thrown  its  protection,  for  which  all  else  has  been  willingly  foregone,  must  now  itself 
become  a  sacrifice  to  stern,  unreasoning,  unpitying  destiny.  Death  appears  to  the 
natural  man  in  the  light  of  a  bondage,  ah  imprisonment.  He  is  going  down  to  the 
gates  of  Sheol  (Ps.  ix.  13;  cviii.  18;  Job  xxxviii.  19).  In  the  lore  of  ancient  nations 
similar  ideas  appear :  the  place  of  the  departed  is  a  strong  fortress,  a  Taitaros,  an 
Acheron,  surrounded  by  strong  walls  and  a  moat ;  or  an  inaccessible  island.  In  the 
house  and  folk  lore  of  the  peoples  abundance  of  such  ideas  are  to  be  found.  Every- 
where the  like  pathcs  and  the  like  ideas  meet  us ;  and  death  remains  the  "standing 
dire  discouragement  of  human  nature." 

II.  Life  inseparable  from  the  goodness  of  Gk)D.  To  see  Jehovah  is  to  see 
Jehovah's  goodness — it  is,  in  the  best  and  richest  sense,  to  enjoy  life  (Ps.  xxvii.  13). 
And  with  this  is  connected  the  joy  of  society — the  beholding  of  the  face  of  one's  fellow- 
man — communion  with  the  inhabitants  of  the  world.  To  die  is  to  be  uprooted  from 
all  these  sweet  associations,  to  have  one's  habitation  plucked  up,  like  the  tent  of  the 
nomad  shepherd  (Job  iv.  21;  Ps.  lii.  5;  2  Cor.  v.  1,  4;  2  Pet.  i.  13, 14).  It  is  to 
depart  into  exile.  It  is  to  have  the  life-web  cut  and  left  unfinished.  It  is  to  be  cut 
off  and  made  an  end  of.  These  melancholy  strains  depict  one  side  of  human  feeling. 
They  are  paralleled  in  the  Psalms  (vi.  5 ;  xxx.  9  ;  Ixxxviii.  10 — 12  ;  xciv.  17  ;  cxv.  17) 
and  Job  (xiv.).  Nevertheless,  the  representation  of  the  effect  of  death,  hopeless  as  it 
seems,  does  not  exclude  those  vague  hopes,  those  implicit  beliefs,  which  mingle  with 
such  lamentations,  in  a  better  side  to  the  future,  which  found  not  distinct  expression  in 
words.  The  connection  is  strong  in  Hebrew  thought  between  life  on  the  earth  and  the 
goodness  of  Jehovah.  But  the  goodness  of  God,  however  lenient,  is  learned  once  for  all ; 
and  it  is  impossible  to  believe  in  it  as  manifested  in  the  gift  of  life  without  the  rise  of 
hope  in  the  continuance  of  life.  The  belief  in  the  continuance  of  life  is  here  expressed ; 
only  the  sensuous  imaginations  overpower  the  mind  with  sadness.  Hope  cannot 
conquer  it  upon  its  own  ground ;  but  hope  nevertheless  remains  what  it  is — an  anchor 
of  the  soul,  and  it  enters,  though  gropingly,  into  that  within  the  veil. 

III.  Prayer  and  hope.  "  The  sick  man  appeals  against  the  fate  which  threatens  him 
to  God — to  God  against  himself;  to  the  essential  mercy  against  the  apparent  cruelty 
of  Jehovah."  It  is  "  the  characteristic  irony  of  faith."  He  is  in  hourly  expectation  of 
death.  His  cries  are  like  the  plaintive  notes  of  birds.  He  looks  up  with  languid  and 
half-despairing  expression  to  the  height  where  Jehovah  dwells.  He  is  like  a  debtor 
being  carried  to  prison,  and  prays  Jehovah  to  become  Surety  for  him.  But  Jehovah  is 
at  the  same  time  the  Creditor.  It  is  the  "  irony  of  the  believer "  (Cheyne).  "  The 
apparent  doubt  only  expresses  the  more  strongly  the  real  faith — the  protest  against 
injustice  and  harshness,  the  sense  of  absolute  goodness  and  ineffable  mercy  "  (Mozley). 
Prayer  may  be,  in  moments  of  the  sorest  agony,  nothing  but  a  child's  cry— which  has 
"  no  language  but  a  cry."  Yet  that  cry  must  "  knock  against  the  heart "  of  the  Father 
of  all.  It  is  God  himself  who  wrings  the  cry  from  the  distressed  heart ;  God  himsell 
who  loves  to  be  called  upon,  and  to  make  his  children  feel  their  need  of  him. 


M  THE  BOOK  OP  THE  PROPHET  ISAIAH,    [oh.  xixvm.  1— 22 

IV.  The  answer  of  peace.  It  has  come  suddenly,  swiftly,  unexpectedly.  And  the 
restored  one  is  at  a  loss  how  to  render  thanks.  His  night  has  been  turned  into  morn- 
ing; and  against  the  darli  background  of  remembered  grief,  the  picture  of  a  serene 
future  shines.  He  looks  forward  to  a  "walk  at  ease"  through  all  his  future  years. 
And  not  iu  vain  has  he  suffered,  for  lasting  lessons  have  been  wi-onglit  into  his  spirit. 
He  has  learned  his  need  of  Ood  and  of  God's  Word.  By  that  Word  men  really  live 
(Deut.  viii.  3).  Altogether  in  them  is  the  life  of  his  spirit.  Goil  is  the  Sonrce  of 
existence  and  of  salvation.  He  brings  to  the  gates  of  death ;  he  recovers  and  makes 
alive.  He  has  been  brought  near  to  God  by  the  very  experience  which  seemed  tc 
remove  him  so  far.  He  has  learned  that  affliction  wsisfor  his  good.  The  bitter  medi- 
cine has  been  swallowed  once  for  all.  He  has  looked  death  in  the  face,  has  trembled  at 
its  terrors;  but  has  seen  that  thei'e  is  a  greater  fact  than  death,  namely,  the  life  and 
love  of  the  eternal  God.  "  The  sting  of  death  is  sin,"  and  tliis  has  been  taken  out.  He 
has  learned  the  secret  of  the  Divine  forgiveness,  the  immense  possibilities  in  the  heart 
of  God.  His  sins  have  been  flung  behind  the  back  of  God — have  been  banished  into 
oblivion.  Lastly,  he  has  learned  anew,  and  in  a  deeper  way,  what  the  hlessing  of  life 
is.  All  is  contrast.  And  the  contrast  of  death  and  the  under-world,  its  pale  and  cold 
existence,  throws  into  relief  the  consciousness  of  life,  in  its  full  conscious  richness  in 
body,  soul,  and  spirit.  "  The  dismay  with  which  he  contemplates  departure  from  the 
world  is  a  measure  of  the  value'  he  sets  on  personal  communion  with  God."  Lifci,  then, 
should  be  one  long  act  of  praise.  From  father  to  child  the  pure  tradition  should  go 
down :  "  God  is  good ;  his  mercy  endureth  for  ever."  He  is  constant,  faithful ;  and  that 
constancy  is  revealed,  not  only  in  the  course  of  nature's  laws,  but  in  the  laws  of  human 
nature — the  life  of  heart  and  conscience.  And  the  music  of  each  spirit  shall  swell  into 
a  magnificent  harmony  in  the  house  of  Jehovah.  He  is  "  ready  to  deliver "  in  the 
future  as  he  has  actually  delivered  in  the  past.  "  Glory  to  thee  for  all  the  grace  I  have 
not  seen  as  yet." — J. 

Ver.  5. — EezekiaKs  prayer  heard.  "  Thus  saith  the  Lord,  the  God  of  David  thy 
father,  I  have  heard  thy  prayer,  I  have  seen  thy  tears."  These  words  were  spoken  to  a 
heart  riven  with  grief,  and  a  life  seemingly  "  sick  unto  death."  At  such  times  this  man 
wants,  above  all  else,  to  feel  that  he  has  been  sincere.  He  says,  not  boastingly  at  all, 
but  with  real  humility,  "Kemember  now,  0  Lord,  I  beseech  thee,  how  I  have  walked 
before  thee  in  truth  and  with  a  perfect  heart,  and  have  done  that  which  is  good  in  thy 
sight."  Words  must  be  judged  by  the  circumstances  of  the  life.  There  is  no  self- 
righteousness  in  them,  but  simple,  guileless  heart-speech. 

I.  God's  speedy  consolation.  "  Go,  and  say  to  Hezekiah."  For  the  Divine  heart 
meets  the  human  heart  according  to  its  moods.  And  there  was  no  need  to  intensify 
Hezekiah's  sorrow  or  to  test  its  sincerity.  Just  as  our  Saviour,  remembering  Peter's 
tears  after  his  denial,  and  knowing  that  the  memory  of  his  unlaithfulness  and  false- 
hood was  a  burning  shame  in  his  heart,  said  immediately  after  his  resurrection,  by  the 
month  of  the  angel,  "  Go  your  way,  tell  his  disciples,  and  Peter  "  (Mark  xvi.  7),  that 
Peter  might  know  that  the  "  look  "  which  struck  out  the  fountain  of  tears,  was  turned 
into  the  look  of  forgiving  grace  and  mercy.  So  here  God  would  comfort  Hezekiah  at 
once  in  his  true-hearted  contrition. 

II.  God's  tendee  kemembrance.  "Thus  saith  the  Lord,  the  God  of  David  thy 
father."  What  music  is  that !  'J'hen  there  is  something  in  a  iiious  ancestry — ^more 
than  we  think  of  at  times.  Your  father  was  a  man  of  God,  perhaps.  Then  there  are 
prayers  treasured  up  for  you  in  the  greater.  Father's  memory.  When  we  think  of  our 
Saviour,  we  remember  his  own  words, "  For  my  sake."  So  God  remembers  also  the  sake 
of  others:  "For  Zion's  sake;"  "For  Jerusalem's  sake."  And  as  conci ruing  Solomon 
God  says,  "  Notwithstanding  in  thy  days  I  will  not  rend  the  kingdom  from  thee,  for 
David  thy  father's  sake."  We  read  also  in  Genesis,  "  The  Lord  blessed  the  Egyptian's, 
house  for  Joseph's  sake."  This  is  as  touching  as  it  is  comforting.  "  The  God  of  David 
thy  father." 

IIL  God's  gbacious  speech.  "  I  have  heard  thy  prayer,  I  have  seen  thy  tears." 
The  prayer  that  is  heard  is  the  prayer  that  is  heartfelt.  None  need  be  ashamed  of 
tears.  They  are  not  unmanly.  "Jesus  wept."  When  a  man  weeps  we  are  accustomed 
to  wonder,  nay,  sometimes  to  scorn.    The  world  prefers  the  sternness  of  endurance  and 


OH.  xxxvm.  1— 22.]    THE  BOOK  OP  THE  PROPHET  ISAIAH.  4ft 

the  courage  of  despair.  God  hears  heavenly  eloquence  in  sighs,  and  beautiful  liturgies 
in  tears.  "  A  broken  and  a  contrite  heart,  0  God,  thou  wilt  not  despise."  And  the 
answer  came ;  "  I  will  add  unto  thy  days  fifteen  years.  ...  I  will  deliver  thee  and  this 
city  out  of  the  hand  of  the  King  of  Assyria."  So  God  will  save  nations  because  of 
righteous  souls,  and  will  deliver  us  from  worse  Assyrians  than  those  that  imperilled 
Israel— W.  M.  S. 

Vers.  11, 12.— 'Tfte  jrief  of  aid  age.  "I  said,  I  shall  not  see  the  Lord,  even  the 
Lord,  in  the  land  of  the  living :  I  shall  behold  man  no  more  wilh  the  inhabitants  of 
the  world.  Mine  age.  is  departed."  Then  it  is  not  so  strange  an  experience  to  love 
the  busy  city  or  the  rural  quietude.  "  Life,  we've  been  long  together."  This  is  what, 
at  Hezekiah's  time  of  life,  we  most  of  us  feel.  There  is  an  old  I'anniliar  friendship 
betwixt  us  and  the  world.  We  scarcely  think  things  can  go  on  well  without  us.  The 
old  village  stream  seems  to  look  up  and  know  us  when  we  visit  it  in  the  after-years. 
Yet  the  reflection  in  it  of  our  face  and  figure  is  very  changed. 

I.  Thb  siohi  he  wouiiD  MISS.  Not  nature,  but  nature's  King  and  Lord.  This  always 
characterizes  a  living  religion.  We  see  God  in  all — God  in  Christ.  For  by  him  God 
made  the  worlds.  He  is  the  Archetype  of  alL  beauty.  His  is  the  thought  which  has 
been  fulfilled  in  creation's  glory  i.nd  beauty.  His  the  harmony  which  has  found  voice 
in  the  music  of  the  woods  and  streams.  And  to  rise  to  higher,  even  to  human  spheres — 
all  the  loves  of  espousal  and  home — these  speak  of  him  who  ordered  their  joys  and 
uses,  and  made  them  parables  of  his  own  love  and  care.  "I  shall  behold  man  no 
more  with  the  inhabitants  of  the  world."  Then  this  is  cheerful  and  pleasant.  So 
wrote  Charles  Lamb,  when,  in  view  of  death,  he  said  he  should  miss  "  the  safe  security 
of  the  streets,"  as  well  as  the  sweet  rural  scenes.  And  apart  from  revelation  of  I  he  rest 
that  remaineth,  it  would  he  sad  indeed  to  lie  down  in  a  City  of  Sleepers,  who  will  never 
know  an  awakening  voice,  whilst  above  the  tomb  there  is  busy  life  in  the  mart,  the 
senate,  and  the  field, 

II.  The  mistake  he  made.  "  Mine  age  is  departed."  Not  quite  so  yet,  even  in 
relation  to  this  life.  He  was  to  continue  amongst  those  of  whom  he  said,  "  The  living, 
the  living,  he  shall  praise  thee,  as  I  do  this  day."  But  then  would  surely  come  the 
time  when(ver.  18)  he  would  go  down  into  the  pit.  The  lit^ht  on  immortality  burned 
dimly  then.  Here  and  there  we  trace  it,  like  light  that  lingers  on  the  higher  moun- 
tains, in  David  and  Isaiah  ;  but  to  the  mass  of  minds  it  was  not,  to  say  the  least,  a  very 
potent  influence  or  a  very  living  faith.  "Christ  has  brought  light  and  immortality  to 
light "  by  the  gospel,  and  we  need  never  say,  "  Mine  age  is  departed ; "  but  rather, 
"  Mine  age  is  transmuted "  into  immortal  youth,  and  unending  revelation  of  the 
Redeemer's  power  and  glory. — W.  M.  S. 

Ver,  20. — Music  in  the  heart.  "  The  Lord  was  ready  to  save  me :  therefore  we 
will  sing  my  songs  to  the  stringed  instruments  all  the  days  of  our  life  in  the  house 
of  the  Lord."  The  graver  question  is — Are  we  ready  to  be  saved  ?  God's  arm  is  not 
shortened,  that  he  cannot  save.  And  his  lore  to  us  is  the  same  through  all  the  long 
centuries.  Christ  touched  the  real  cause  of  distance  :  "  Ye  will  not  come  to  me,  that 
ye  might  have  life." 

L  The  beadinbbs  of  God.  "  All  things  are  now  ready,"  said  Christ ;  and  in  view  of 
the  Redeemer's  great  work  in  all  the  ages,  God  was  a  Saviour.  God  makes  affirmation 
concerning  this.  "  As  I  live,  saith  the  Lord,  I  have  no  pleasure  in  the  death  of  the 
wicked  ;  but  that  the  wicked  turn  from  his  way  and  live  "  (Ezek.  xxxiii.  11).  This 
reveals  the  gracious  disposition  of  God.  We  must  ever  remember  that  it  is  the  beautiful 
nature  of  God  that  is  revealed  in  the  parables  and  in  the  passion  of  our  Lord.  Like 
the  fountain  ever  ready  to  leap  forth,  he  is  ready  lo  forgive. 

n.  The  minstrelsy  of  the  Church.  Music  has  accompanied  devotion  in  all  agea 
It  awakens  the  slumbering  sensibilities  of  the  soul.  It  is  not  only  an  expression  of 
feeling,  it  is  a  quickener  of  it.  "  Therefore  we  will  sing  my  songs  to  the  stringed  instru- 
ments." These  songs  are  the  glorious  heritage  of  the  Church.  They  are  heard  every 
sabbath  day  in  cathedral  and  church,  in  city,  village,  and  hamlet.  The  great  revela- 
tion of  God  is  (me,  alike  in  the  old  and  the  new  dispensations.  In  all  ages  God  is  a 
Saviour.     Therefore  there  is  nothing  out  of  date  in  the  inspired  psalms.     They  belong 


16  THE  BOOK  OP  THE  PROPHET  ISAIAH,    [en.  xxxvm.  1-  22 

to  all  ages  of  history,  all  eras  of  time.  When  we  have  passed  away,  our  children  will 
still  lift  up  to  God  their  praises  and  thanksgivings  in  the  strains  of  the  sweet  singers  or 
Israel. 

III.  The  pbbpetuity  of  praise.  "  All  the  days  of  our  life.''  For  that  would  be  a 
strange  day  on  which  there  was  nothing  to  praise  God  for — no  new  mercy,  no  fresh 
deliverance,  no  special  bounty.  "  Every  day  will  I  bless  thee,  and  praise  thy  Name  foi 
ever  and  ever."  Yes ;  on  life's  last  day  it  may  be  like  the  veneiable  Dr.  Guthrie,  as  be 
lay  a-dying,  we  shall  say,  "  Sing  me  a  bairn's  hymn."  The  days  of  our  life  may  be  tew 
or  many,  but  in  them  all  we  shall  have  occasion  to  realize  the  fatherhood  of  God,  and 
the  redemption  which  is  in  Jesus  Christ. 

IV.  The  place  op  devotion.  "In  the  house  of  the  Lord."  This  will  ever  be 
sacred  to  the  true  Christian.  What  memories  of  sacred  vision  and  of  spiritual  emotion 
are  connected  with  the  sanctuary  1  What  fellowship  we  have  had  there  with  each 
other  and  with  God  1  The  best  part  of  our  nature  has  been  developed  there — the  part 
which,  like  God  himself,  "no  man  hath  seen  at  any  time,  or  indeed  can  see."  For, 
apart  from  the  associations  of  place,  there  is  the  inspiration  of  mutual  faith,  mutual 
hope,  mutual  service,  and  mutual  love.  Thus  we  meet  and  mingle  in  the  house  of  the 
Lord,  till,  clothed  with  white  robes  and  with  palms  in  our  hands,  we  join  the  victors  who 
utter  their  hallelujahs  around  the  throne  of  the  Lamb,  in  the  "  house  not  made  with 
hands,  eternal  in  the  heavens." — W.  M.  S. 

Veri,  1—3. — A  vision  of  death.  The  scene  is  one  of  true  pathos;  it  is  ons  of  those 
touches  of  nature  which  "  make  the  whole  world  kin."    We  have — 

I.  Death  suddenly  pbbsbntino  itself  to  man  in  his  prime.  (Ver.  1.)  Death  is 
very  common  in  infancy ;  it  must  be  near  in  old  age.  It  occasions  no  surprise,  and 
brings  comparatively  little  pain  or  grief  when  it  occurs  at  either  of  these  extremes. 
Infancy  does  not  understand  it,  and  age  accepts  or  even  welcomes  it.  But  occasionally, 
man  in  the  prime  of  his  powers,  woman  in  the  glory  of  her  days,  is  called  upon  to 
look  death  in  the  face  when  life  seems  to  stretch  out  far  into  the  future.  The  out- 
breaking of  latent  disease,  the  mysterious  and  totally  unanticipated  collapse,  the  fearful 
and  fatal  accident, — these  or  other  things  are  at  work,  saying  in  stern  tones  to  one  and 
another  of  our  race,  "  Thou  shalt  die,  and  not  live." 

II.  The  profound  hdman  beobbt  which  it  then  occasions.  "Hezekiah  wept 
sore."  We  differ,  according  to  our  individual  temperament  and  our  national  habits,  as 
to  the  exhibition  of  our  feelings.  The  Jewish  king  gave  vent  to  his  sorrow  in  hot  tears 
and  sore  lamentation.  An  Englishman  will  probably  command  both  voice  and  feature 
when  he  learns  that  he  must  die,  and  may  not  live.  But  no  one,  suddenly  taken  away 
from  the  niidst  of  beloved  relations  and  friends,  unexpectedly  torn  from  the  activities 
and  enjoyments  on  which  he  has  set  his  heart  and  spent  his  energy  and  centred  his 
hopes,  can  be  unmoved,  untroubled.  It  is  a  transcendently  solemn  moment  when  the 
human  heart  first  learns  that,  instead  of  blessed  communion  and  of  joyous  activity,  there 
must  be  hopeless  separation  and  the  silence  of  the  grave.  Sudden  death  in  prime  is  a 
wrench  sorer  and  sadder  than  any  which  life  has  known. 

ni.  The  refuge  of  the  human  spirit  in  the  last  resort.     "  Then  Hezekiah 

prayed  unto  the  Lord."  There  are  some  things  which,  when  everything  else  fails,  lead 
us  to  God — the  extremities  of  joy  and  sorrow,  a  crisis  in  our  career,  the  near  presence 
of  death.  When  human  art  has  failed,  and  man  can  do  no  more  for  us,  then  we  turn 
our  thought  to  Heaven — we  lift  up  our  face  unto  God.  God  can  intervene,  we  know,  in 
the  very  greatest  exigency ;  it  may  be  that  he  will ;  we  will  "  pray  unto  the  Lord." 
And  if  we  do  so  reverently  and  resigneilly,  we  do  so  rightly  ;  for  who  can  tell  how  or 
when  he  may  be  pleased  to  act  on  our  behalf,  to  "  see  our  tears,  to  hear  our  prayers," 
and  to  "  add  unto  our  days  "  (ver.  5)  ?  Or,  if  we  do  not  have  recourse  to  God  in  prayer 
for  deliverance,  we  can  fall  back  on  that  which  may  be  belter  still-  —on  a  cheerful  sub- 
mission to  his  holy  will. 

IV.  A  CONSOLATION  AT  THE  CLOSE  OF  LIFE.  If  WO  do  not  make  it  a  plea  with  God, 
M  Hezekiah  thought  it  right  to  do,  viz.  that  we  "  have  walked  before  God  in  truth  and 
with  a  perfect  heart,"  etc.  (ver.  3),  we  may  find  in  such  a  fact  a  very  precious  cof>4o2a- 
U»n  to  our  own  spirit.  To  have  to  look  back  from  the  dying  hour  on  a  course  «rf  f«)lly, 
goilt,  Md  mischief,  must  be  bitterness  itself.     To  be  able  to  survey,  from  that  Ui8< 


CH.  xxxTin.  1—22.]    THE  BOOK  OF  THE  PROPHET  ISAIAH.  47 

scene,  a  life  of  sincere  devotion  to  God  and  faithful  service  of  mankind,  must  be  a 

source  of  unspeakable  thankfulness  and  serenity. 

V.   A  DUTY  IN  DEATH  WHICH  IT  IS  THE  DUTY  OP  LIFE  TO  REDUCE  TO  ITS  LOWEST  POINT. 

"  Set  thine  house  in  order "  (ver.  1) ;  do  the  necessary  things  that  remain  undone — 
that  which  is  unfinished  in  the  sanctuary  of  the  soul,  in  the  inner  circle  of  the  family, 
in  the  relationships  which  are  outside.  But  how  excellent  it  is  to  live  with  all  these 
things  preserved  in  such  order  that,  when  the  end  comes,  there  will  be  the  least  possible 
left  to  do,  and  the  mind  can  turn,  untroubled,  to  rest  in  the  presence  of  the  (Saviour, 
eind  to  look  for  the  rest  that  is  so  soon  to  be  enjoyed ! — C. 

Vers.  4 — 6. — Human  life;  the  kindness  of  God  and  the  wisdom,  of  man.  In  the 
[iiovidential  ordering  and  in  the  human  direction  of  this  our  mortal  life,  we  see — 

I.  The  KINDNESS  OF  GoD.  1.  The  strong  links  by  which  God  has  connected  us 
together.  "  The  God  of  David  thy  father ; "  for  David's  sake,  in  part,  he  would  render 
deliverance.  Human  life  is  so  ordered  that  we  are  all  of  us  immeasurably  the  better 
for  the  piety,  the  virtue,  the  patient  and  faithful  labours  of  those  who  came  before  us. 
2.  His  tentitiveness  to  ow  suffering.  "  I  have  seen  thy  tears."  "  Like  as  a  father 
pitieth  his  children,"  etc. ;  "  When  he  saw  the  multitude,  he  was  moved  with  com- 
passion." 3.  His  attention  to  our  appeal.  "  I  have  heard  thy  prayer."  God's  ear  is 
open,  not  only  to  the  prayers  of  "  the  great  congregation,"  but  to  the  faintest  breath  of 
one  believing  soul;  though  he  may  sometimes  seem  to  be  deaf,  yet  is  he  always 
"  inclining  his  ear  "  unto  us.  4.  His  multiplication  of  our  days.  "  I  will  add  unto 
thy  days."  With  the  morning  light,  as  it  continually  returns,  we  should  say,  "  This  is 
the  day  which  the  Lord  hath  made,"  etc. ;  it  is  a  new  gift  from  his  giacious  hand. 
We  take  it  too  much  for  granted,  as  if  he  were  under  some  obligation  to  add  it  to  those 
he  has  given  ns  before.  But  it  is  all  "  of  grace  " — so  much  more  than  we  deserve  or  have 
any  right  to  expect  at  his  hand.     To  the 

"  Xx>rd  of  our  time,  whose  hand  has  set 
'Sen  time  upon  our  eoore," 

we  should  render  heartfelt  praise  for  his  daily  gift.  5.  His  compownding  our  cup  of 
hope  and «^ uncertainty.  God  told  Hezekiah  he  would  add  to  his  "days  fifteen  years." 
Is  it  not  a  yet  kinder  act  of  our  Father  that  he  holds  out  to  us  the  hope  of  future 
years,  without  letting  us  know  how  far  he  will  fulfil  our  wishes !  Without  the  hope,  we 
should  lose  all  the  inspiration  which  urges  us  to  fruitful  action;  without  the  wncer- 
tainty,  we  should  presume  on  the  continuance  of  our  life,  and  be  bereft  of  one  of  the  most 
potent  checks  on  folly  and  on  sin.  A  strong  hope,  with  an  element  of  uncertainty,  is 
the  most  favourable  condition  for  the  cultivation  of  wisdom  and  virtue. 

II.  The  WISDOM  of  man.  Our  wisdom,  under  those  conditions  in  which  we  find 
ourselves,  is :  1.  To  prepare  for  length  of  days.  By  patient  diligence,  by  prudent 
forethought,  to  be  ready  for  long  life,  in  case  God  should  give  us  that  blessing.  2.  To 
prepare  for  sudden  death  and  the  long  future.  By  faith  in  Jesus  Christ  and  by  fidelity 
in  the  "  few  things  "  of  time,  to  be  ready  at  any  hour  to  stand  at  the  judgment-seat,  tci 
pass  to  the  "  many  things  "  of  eternity. — C. 

Vers.  9—15. — Health  and  sickness.  This  touching  psalm  of  Hezekiah,  written  in 
I  he  day  of  returning  strength,  when  mental  effort  became  possible  and  perhaps  enjoy- 
iible  to  him,  may  teach  us  many  things. 

I.  That  oub  health  is  not  in  our  own  hands.  There  is  a  distinct  note  of  disap- 
jiointment  here.  The  king  had  evidently  set  his  heart  on  a  long  life,  and  was  hurt  in  his 
soul  that  his  days  were  cut  in  twain.  It  seemed  an  abrupt,  unnatural  termination.  He 
was  deprived  of  that  which  he  might  have  expected  to  enjoy  (vera.  10,  12).  Though  we 
know  well  it  is  not  so,  yet  we  harbour  the  thought  that  we  can  measure  our  days — can 
reckon  on  a  large  period  of  time  in  which  to  work  out  our  plans ;  we  are  apt  to  be 
surprised  and  even  hurt  in  our  heart  if  our  health  be  removed  and  our  life  be  threatened. 
But  we  ought  to  learn  that  God  is  the  length  of  our  days  (Deut.  xxx.  20),  and  that  it 
rests  with  him  to  say  when  our  strength  shall  decline  and  when  our  spirit  shall  return. 

n.  That  the  time  may  come  when  life  will  be  without  value  to  us  ;  when  we 
shall  be  ready  to  speak  in  the  strain  of  the  king  (vers.  14,  17).     Instead  of  song  is 


48  THE  BOOK  OF  THE   PROPHET  ISAIAH,    [on.  xxxvnr.  1— 22. 

silence  or  complaint ;  for  peace  is  bitterness  of  ioul.  Among  the  living,  at  any  time, 
there  will  be  found  a  large  proportion  of  those  to  whom  life  is  without  any  value,  and 
who  would  gladly  lay  it  down.  1.  Do  we  appreciate  the  value  of  our  health  wliile  we 
have  it?  2.  Are  we  laying  up  resources  on  which  we  can  draw  when  the  enjoyments 
of  life  will  be  gone,  and  the  season  of  privation  and  infirmity  has  arrived  ? 

in.  That  it  is  bight  to  ask  God  fob  eestobation  from  sickness.  "  0  Lord,  I 
am  oppressed ;  undertake  for  me  "  (see  2  Cor.  xii.  8 ;  Jas.  v,  14).  We  should  do  so, 
(1)  believing  that  God  hears  our  prayer,  and  that,  if  it  be  to  our  real  and  hi^thest 
interest,  he  will  grant  our  request;  (2)  leaving  it  with  him  to  determine  how  much  of 
bodily  evil  it  is  good  for  us  to  suffer.  Distrust  of  God's  promise  and  dictation  to 
his  will  are  the  two  opjiosite  evils  we  should  avoid.  A  living  faith  and  a  filial  sub- 
mission are  the  two  perfectly  consistent  graces  we  should  exhibit. 

IV.  That  the  period  op  oonvalesoencb  is  a  time  foe  thankfdlness  and  conse- 
cration. 1.  Thankfvlness.  "Himselfhathdoneit"(ver.  15).  Whatever  the  number  or 
the  nature  of  tlie  measures  we  adopt  (ver.  21),  we  trace  the  happy  issue  ultimately  to 
the  hand  of  the  Lord.  All  remedial  agencies  are  of  him.  2.  Consecration.  "  I  shall 
go  softly  [reverently]  all  my  years,  [remembering]  the  bitterness  of  my  soul."  When 
God  gives  back  his  life  to  any  one  of  his  children,  it  is  surely  a  time  when  that  soul 
should  form  a  profound  and  prayerful  resolutioa  that,  if  past  days  have  been  godless, 
future  years  shall  be  devout ;  that,  whatever  has  been  the  measure  of  piety  in  the  time 
that  has  been  spent,  there  shall  be  deeper  devoteduess  and  more  faithful  service  in  the 
span  that  may  remain, — 0. 

Vers.  11, 18, 19. — The  great  disclosure.  "If  a  man  die,  shall  he  live  again?  "  asks 
the  anxious,  hopeful,  human  spirit.  This  composition  of  Hezekiah  either  indicates  or 
suggests — 

L  The  lioht  which  the  Hebrew  saints  possessed.  They  believed  that  death  did 
not  terminate  man's  existence;  that,  after  death,  he  dwelt  in  Sheol  with  the  spirits  of 
the  departed,  with  "  the  iuhabitants  of  the  land  of  stillness ; "  in  a  region,  deep,  dark, 
shut  up  within  impassable  gates  through  which  they  that  have  entered  may  never 
more  return  (ver.  10). 

II.  The  painful  feebleness  of  their  light.  This  abode  of  the  dead  was  dismal 
in  a  high  degree  to  their  imagination ;  it  was  "  the  pit  of  corruption  "  (ver.  7);  it  was 
the  place  where  God  was  unapproachable  (ver.  11),  where  bis  praises  were  untold  and 
unsung  (ver.  18),  where  the  delights  of  human  fellowship  were  unknown  (ver.  11), 
where  the  opportunities  of  gaining  the  highest  wisdom  were  closed  against  the  soul, 
where  men  "cannot  hope  for  thy  truth"  (ver.  18).  Such  life  as  tliere  was  in  those 
sepulchral  regions  would  hardly  be  wOith  having,  where  privations  like  these  prevailed. 

III.  The  great  disclosure  by  Jesus  Christ.  He  did  not,  indeed,  for  the  first  time 
announce  that  there  was  a  life  beyond  death  for  men.  But  he  did  reveal  such  a  life  of 
lilessedness  and  glory  as  gave  a  new  meaning  to  immortality.  As  his  disciples,  we 
look  for  a  life  which  will  be  characterized,  not  by  the  rtmoval,  but  by  the  renewal  and 
the  immeasurable  enlargement,  of  all  the  higher  blessini;s  of  the  present  time.  As 
exactly  opposed  to  the  privations  here  lamented,  we  look  for:  1.  The  near  presence  q/ 
Qod.  (Ver.  11.)  To  depart  is  to  "  be  with  Christ,"  is  to  "  be  with  him  that  we  may 
behold  his  glory,"  is  to  be  at  home  in  "  the  Father's  house."  2.  A  life  of  holiest,  hap- 
piest worship.  (Ver.  18.)  Where  the  praises  of  God  will  never  tire  the  tongue.  Heaveji 
is,  to  our  hope,  the  very  home  of  praise  :  "  The  living,  they  that  live  indeeJ," — they  wii; 
praise  God  in  accents  to  which  our  fainter  and  feebler  life  is  unequal  now.  3.  Com- 
munion with  the  perfected  spirits  of  men.  (Ver.  11.)  We  hope  to  behold  and  to  have 
ennobling  fellowship  with  men  at  their  very  best,  when  they  and  we  shall  be  purged  of 
all  that  hinders  or  lowers  our  intercourse  on  earth.  4.  Access  to  Divine  truth.  (Ver.  18.) 
"  Then  shall  we  know  even  as  also  we  are  known  "  (1  Cor.  xiii.  12)  •,  then  shall  we  look 
"  face  to  face  "  on  many  truths  which  here  we  have  only  dimly  espied ;  then  shall  we 
grasp  with  firm,  rejoicing  hold  what  now  we  can  but  delicately  touch,  or  are  ineffec- 
tuallT  pursuing.  5.  Life  in  its  large  and  blessed  fidness.  (Ver.  19.)  It  is  they  who 
dwell  in  the  light  of  God  of  whom  we  rightly  speak  as  "  the  living,  the  living ; "  it  is 
they  who  "have  life  more  abundantly."  We  conclude  that:  (1)  This  language  of 
lamentation  does  not  suit  Christian  lips.     (2)  We  have  no  need  to  think  of  death  m 


CH.  xxxvni.  1— 22.]    THE  BOOK  OP  THE  PEOPHBT  ISAIAH.  it 

Hezekiab  thougbt.    (3)  We  who  have  Bach  high  hopes  In  n«  as  these  should  Ut*  Urea 
of  purity,  aud  so  of  preparation  (1  John  iii.  3). — 0. 

Yer.  16. — The  life  of  our  life.  This  yerse  is  pregnant  with  suggestive  truth,  and  finds 
fulfilment  in  Christian  as  well  as  in  Jewish  experience. 

L  That  thb  lite  of  oub  spirit  is  the  vekt  life  of  ourselves.  It  is  no  uncommon 
thing  for  ungodly  men,  wiien  they  are  pressed  to  give  attention  to  the  claims  of  their 
spirit,  to  excuse  their  negligence  by  contending  that  "  they  must  live."  By  this  they 
mean  that  the  necessities  of  the  body  will  excuse  their  want  of  concern  for  the  state  of 
their  spirit.  On  what  a  hollow  and  vain  assumption  do  these  thus  build  I  "  As  if  to 
breathe  were  life  1 "  As  if  to  eat,  and  drink,  and  sleep,  and  clothe  the  body  and  minister 
to  its  cravings  constituted  the  life  of  man  I  No  ;  "  man  does  not  live  by  bread  alone," 
and,  when  he  has  supplied  himself  with  abundance  of  such  things,  he  has  not  begun  to 
live.  The  life  of  man  is  in  the  life  of  his  spirit;  it  is  that  life  in  which  he  (1)  appre- 
hends and  appreciates  Divine  truth ;  (2)  approaches  unto  and  communes  with  the 
Divine  Father ;  (3)  engages  voluntarily  and  happily  in  his  holy  service ;  (4)  grows  into 
his  likeness  as  he  manifests  his  spirit  and  illustrates  his  principles ;  (5)  serves  the 
creatures  he  has  made  and  the  children  he  has  fashioned  in  his  own  image.  By  these 
things,  and  in  such  things  as  these,  does  the  life  of  his  life  consist. 

II.  That  DrvistE  acts  and  words  abe  the  subtbnancb  of  odb  sfibit'b  life. 
"  These  things "  refer  primarily  to  the  promise  and  the  providential  agency  of  God 
(see  ver.  15) ;  the  Divine  word  and  deed.  For  us,  we  find  this  in :  1.  The  truth  spoken 
by  Jesus  Christ.  All  that  he  has  told  us  concerning  God,  ourselves,  human  life,  the  way 
back  to  the  heavenly  Father  and  the  heavenly  home.  2.  The  life  and  death  of  the 
Saviowr.  His  life  devout,  courageous,  generous,  sympathetic ;  his  sorrows  borne  in 
patience  and  resignation ;  his  death  undergone  for  us.  "  In  all  these  things,"  in  their 
apprehension,  in  their  study,  in  their  appropriation,  is  the  life  of  our  spirit.— C. 

Ver.  19. — Partntcd  obligation.    "  The  father  to  the  children  shall  make  known  thy 

truth." 

I.  That  truth  is  the  common  heritage  op  the  race.  Of  all  open  and  common 
things  truth  is  that  to  which  our  right  is  most  indisputable.  The  air,  the  light,  the 
.sea,  the  sky,  the  beauty  of  the  landscape,  etc.,  are  open  to  us  all ;  but  truth,  above  all 
these  things,  is  common  property. 

II.  That  revealed  truth  is  peculiarly  precious  to  mankind.  All  truth  may  be 
said  to  be  "  thine" — ^to  be  God's.  For  it  would  never  find  illustration  or  apprehension 
without  his  action.  But  the  truth  which  he  has  specially  revealed  is  more  peculiarly 
his — the  truth  which  is  contained  in  his  Word,  and,  most  especially,  that  which  was 
revealed  in  (and  by)  his  Son.  This  is  the  truth  which  is  our  very  life  (ver.  16),  raising 
the  fallen,  bringing  peace  to  the  penitent,  calling  man  into  fellowship  with  God,  com- 
I'oi  tiug  the  afflicted,  arming  against  temptation,  preparing  for  the  battle  of  life  and  for 
the  hour  of  death  and  the  requirements  of  the  eternal  world. 

III.  That  it  is  the  pabt  of  evert  parent  to  communioate  and  to  enforce  this 
truth  of  God.  "  The  father  to  the  children  shall  make  known,"  etc.  1.  To  com- 
municate Divine  truth  to  the  young  is  the  parent's  work;  for  (1)  he  has  access  to 
his  children  which  no  one  else  can  gain,  in  the  time  when  they  are  docile  and  responsive ; 
(2)  he  can  exert  an  influence  upon  them  which  no  one  else  can  acquire ;  (3)  he  has 
a  responsibility  laid  upon  him  by  God  of  which  no  one  else  can  relieve  him ;  (4)  he  has 
an  interest  in  their  well-being  which  no  one  else  possesses, — the  joy  or  the  sorrow  of 
his  later  years  will  depend  very  largely  on  the  choices  they  make  and  the  courses  they 
pursue.  2.  To  instil  Divine  truth  into  their  minds  should  be  bis  daily^effort.  This  is  to 
be  efiiected  by  instruction,  by  example,  by  prayer. — C. 

Ver.  1. — ITie  strain  of  notice  to  die.  S«tan  is  represented  in  the  Book  of  Job  as 
poetically  describing  man's  clinging  to  life  thus :  "  Skin  for  skin,  yea,  all  that  a  man 
hath  will  he  give  for  liis  life."  Usually  death  creeps  on  us  with  so  slow  and  rtlent  a 
tread  that  we  grow  faniUiar  with  it ;  our  powers  fade,  and  passing  becomes  easy. 
But  sometimes  the  arrest  comes  in  the  very  midst  of  life,  when  hofe  smilea,  when 
the  future  makes  large  promises,  and  the  claims  upon  us  seem  so  great  th»t  we  cadsoi 

ISAIAB— II.  ■ 


50  THE   BOOK   OF   THE   PROPHET  'iSAIAH.     [en.  xxxviil  1—22 

be  spared.  Then  death  is  at  his  worst;  and  it  is  beyond  man's -power,  it  is  the 
triumph  of  Divine  gracp,  to  say,  "Thy  will  be  done."  This  is  seen  in  the  case  of 
Hezekiah,  to  wliom  death  seemed  an  expression  of  Divine  dissatisfaction  ;  a  terrible 
family  affliction,  seeing  be  had  as  yet  no  heir;  and  nothing  short  of  a  national  calamity. 
Compare  the  announcement  of  approaching  death  made  to  Aaron  and  to  Moaos.  But 
in  their  cases  life-work  was  done.  The  strain  on  Hezekiah  was  that  "  his  purposes 
were  broken  off."  We  think  this  to  be  the  severest  test  under  which  God  puts  his 
people.  We  are  searched  through  and  through  by  the  questions,  "Can  you  die?" 
"  Can  you  die  now  ?  "  Physicians'  work  is  often,  nowadays,  most  difficult  and  trying. 
They  must  break,  as  it  is  called,  to  their  patients  the  news  of  the  hopeless  character 
of  their  disease.     What  makes  this  strain  ? 

I.  Natural  dread  of  death.  For  all  creatures  on  his  earth  God  has  made  life  to 
be  the  supreme  treasure  which  they  dread  to  lose.  The  incentive  to  all  enterprise  is 
our  love  of  life,  and  passionate  clinging  to  life.  The  tear  of  death  is  the  common 
instinct  of  humanity.  The  Christian  cannot  fix  his  thoughts  quietly  on  dying;  he 
shrinks  as  much  as  any  one  from  putting  his  foot  down  into  the  cold  stream.  Divine 
grace  alone  can  overcome  this  natural  fear,  which  is  implanted  for  the  sake  of  the  due 
preservation  of  the  race. 

II.  DiSAPPOiKTMENT  OP  OUR  HOPES.  It  IS  80  hard  for  death  to  come  just  as  we  have 
"  Canaan's  ooodly  land  in  view."  It  may  be  that  we  have  toiled,  denied  ourselves,  per- 
severed, overcome  difficulties,  and  see  life's  ambition  just  within  reach,  when  the 
message  comes  that  we  must  die.  We  have  pulled  down  our  barns  and  built  greater ; 
we  are  just  ready  for  the  harvest ;  and  "  this  night  we  must  die." 

III.  Unoebtaintt  of  the  future.  For  the  disclosures  and  revelations  concerning 
it  are  made  in  such  large  poetical  figures,  rather  than  in  such  plain  statements,  that  even 
in  the  best  men  faith  and  fear  mingle ;  and  often  they  hardly  know  whether  faith  or 
fear  prevails.  Prom  the  future,  the  other  world,  no  traveller  has  ever  returned  with  a 
report.     It  is  to  us  all  a  terra  incognita,  a,  step  into  the  dark. 

IV.  Want  of  full  submission  to  God.  We  may  think  we  have  this,  but  news  of 
speedy  death  searches  us,  and  shows  our  submission  to  have  been  only  good,  but  weak, 
sentiment.  Many  a  man  finds  that  the  true  submission  haa  to  be  won  when  he  stands 
face  to  face  with  death. — H.  T. 

Ver.  2. — Private  and  personal  prayer.  It  should  be  noticed  that  Hezekiah  was  a 
man  who  so  believed  in  prayer"  as  to  immediately  resort  to  it  in  every  new  emergency 
of  life.  It  was  his  first  way  of  relief.  He  sought  God  at  once.  In  a  time  of  great 
national  distress,  he  went  into  the  house  of  the  Lord,  and  spread  the  insulting  letter  of 
his  enemies  before  the  Lord.  lu  a  time  of  personal  peril,  when  disease  was  gaining 
ground  and  vitality  was  failing,  and  it  was  made  evident  that  he  must  die,  he  sought 
privacy  that  he  might  pray,  wrestling  with  God,  if  so  be  he  could  win  restoring  mercies. 
Too  ill  to  go  to  the  sanctuary,  he  could  make  a  secret  place  of  the  corner  of  the  room 
where  his  royal  couch  was  laid,  turn  his  face  to  the  wall,  and  pray  to  the  "  Father  who 
seeth  in  secret,  and  rewardeth  openly."  Only  certaiii  points  of  so  large  a  subject  as 
"private  prayer"  can  be  dealt  with  in  one  discourse.  The  points  suggested  by  this 
action  of  Hezekiah  are — 

I.  What  abb  its  appbopriatb  conditions?  Absolutely  necessary  are  privacy,  the 
sense  of  privacy,  quiet-mindedness,  and  continuance  in  the  prayer-exercise.  It  is  the 
most  serious  evil  affecting  modern  religious  life,  that  household  arrangements  and 
business  claims  make  privacy,  quietness,  and  continuance  for  personal  devotions  so 
nearly  impossible.  Tlie  only  hopeful  revival  will  begin  with  the  home  place  of  prayer. 
Christian  parents,  by  example  and  skij  ful  management  of  family  life,  must  make  private 
prayer  possible  for  all  members  of  the  famUy.  They  cannot  make  others  prayerful ; 
but  they  can  make  suitable  prayer-conditions.  Christ  says  we  must  "shut  to  the 
ioor." 

II.  What  should  it  concern  ?  Everything,  small  or  great,  that  is  of  direct  personal 
interest,  whether  it  concerns  body,  mind, or  soul.  Efforts  are  made  to  limit  the  spherei 
of  prayer  to  matters  of  religious  life  and  feeling.  The  godly  man  cannot  be  so  limited. 
Fathers  care  for  children's  bodies  and  minds  and  relations,  as  well  as  for  their  characters. 
4.nd  our  hwranly  Father  surely  concerns  himself  about  our  sioknaaies,  aur  anxiatiei, 


OH.  xxxviii.  1— 22.]    THE  BOOK  OF  THE  PROPHET  ISAIAH.  51 

our  material  ciroum stances.  We  may  pray  fbr  life,  restored  bodily  life  and  health ;  then 
we  may  pray  for  everything  less  than  that,  but  included  in  it. 

IIL  What  shodld  be  its  spirit?  We  may  specially  dwell  on:  1.  Op«nn«M; 
frankness;  removal  of  n serve;  tone  that  convinces  of  sincerity.  Most  grieving  to 
G-od  is  our  "keeping  back  anything."  Worthy  parents  gladly  listen  to  both  the  bad 
»nd  the  good  in  their  children's  requests.  2.  Trustfulness ;  the  spirit  of  confidence  in 
God  as  Hearer  and  Ansvperer.  3.  Importunity;  the  sign  of  really  earnest  desire. 
Parents  often  delay  answering  children's  requests  because  they  have  asked  half-heartedly, 
IS  if  answering  did  not  much  matter. 

IV.  What  WILL  be  the  response?  Something  always.  No  sincere  cry  ever  rose 
to  G-od  unheeded  or  unanswered.  The  answer  may  be :  1.  Eefusal.  2.  The  call  to 
wait.  3.  The  ^ift  of  what  is  asked.  4.  The  gift  of  something  better.  6.  The  quieting 
down  of  our  desire  for  the  thing. — ^B.  T. 

Ver.  3. — Man's  fair  estimate  of  his  own  life.  Hezekiah  ventures  to  say  before  God, 
"  Ah,  Jehovah,  remember,  I  pray,  how  I  have  walked  before  thee  in  faithfulness  and 
with  a  whole  heart,  and  have  done  that  which  is  good  in  thine  eyes."  Can  a  good  man 
rightly  appeal  to  his  conscious  integrity?  David  did.  Hezekiah  may.  It  is  not  pious 
work  to  get  up  a  case  against  ourselves.  Confessions  are  too  often  utterly  insincere 
things.  It  is  right  to  keenly  criticize  self,  and  to  recognize,  and  humble  ourselves  before 
God  on  account  of,  our  sins  and  f'ailties ;  but  it  magnifies  the  grace  of  God  to  recognize 
the  good  in  our  lives,  the  established  will,  the  earnest  purpose,  the  persistent  endeavour. 
We  must  be  true  to  see  the  good,  as  well  as  the  evil,  and  seek  to  appraise  our  life  as 
God  appraises  it.  David  may  speak  of  his  "integrity."  Hezekiah  may  speak  of  his 
"perfect  walk,"  his  firm  resolve  to  obey  and  please  God.  But  can  such  terms  as 
"righteousness"  be  properly  applied  to  any  man?  It  has  been  i)ressed  upon  us  from 
our  childhood,  as  if  it  were  a  self-evident  truth,  and  needed  no  argument  or  proof,  and 
contained  the  whole  of  the  truth,  that  man  has  no  righteousness  of  his  own.  The  best 
things  in  man  are  bad.  "  All  our  righteousnesses  are  as  filthy  rags,  and  we  are  all  as  an 
unclean  thing."  Yet  there  must  be  some  sense  in  which  man  lias  a  personal  righteous- 
ness. We  have  known  men  and  women  of  integrity,  right-hearted,  sincere,  and 
righteous.  David  may  say,  before  the  heart-searching  G-od,  "  Judge  me  according  to 
my  righteousness  that  ia  in  me ; "  and  our  Lord  distinctly  assumed  that  there  is  a  sense 
in  which  man  can  have  a  righteousness,  when  he  said,  "  Except  your  righteousness 
shall  exceed  the  righteousness  of  the  scribes  and  Pharisees."  Such  a  term  will  not 
stiffen  into  one  rigid  meaning.  Sometimes  it  means  right-heartedness,  sincerity,  and 
describes  the  man  who  is  at  heart  centred  on  God  and  virtue.  A  man  may  be  right  at 
heart,  tAiough  there  may  be  twists  and  stains  in  the  conduct.  We  have  a  way  of  speak- 
ing of  men  as  being  "  good  at  bottom."  If  we  say  that  as  any  excuse  for  men's  sins,  we 
are  miserably  and  shamefully  wrong.  If  we  say  it  in  recognition  of  human  frailty,  and 
with  discernment  of  life  as  the  conflict  of  the  human  will  over  the  weakness  of  our 
bodies,  and  the  disabilities  of  our  circumstances,  then  it  is  a  true  and  worthy  speech. 
Many  men  around  us,  and  even  we  ourselves,  are  like  David,  "  good  at  bottom."  The 
desire  of  our  soul  is  to  the  Di.ine  Name.  We  are  pilgrims,  indeed,  though  men  may 
find  VIS  wandered  away  into  By-path  Meadows,  sleeping  in  arbours,  and  losing  our  rolls. 
Illustrate  by  the  difference  between  King  Saul  and  King  David.  Saul  failed  utterly, 
because  his  were  sins  of  vnll.  David  failed  only  temporarily,  because  his  were  sins  of 
frailty.  David  failed  in  the  body-sphere,  but  Saul  in  the  soul-sphere.  Learn  to  judge 
your  life  fairly,  and  be  willing  to  see,  to  rejoice  in,  and  to  thank  God  for,  what  has  been 
and  is  good. — B.  T. 

Vers.  7,  8. — Signs  far  the  help  of  faith.  Inthis  case,  as  in  that  of  Gideon,  God  granted 
signs.  For  the  people  of  Palestine,  and  for  his  disciples,  our  Lord  wrought  miracles, 
which  were  signs ;  but  he  utterly  refused  to  meet  the  demand  of  the  Pharisees.  "  There 
shall  no  sign  be  given  you."  Our  Lord,  however,  reproved  the  desire  for  signs  as 
showing  some  weakness  of  character  in  those  who  desired  them.  "  Except  ye  see  signs 
and  wonders  ye  will  not  believe."  Exactly  what  the  sign  granted  to  Hezekiah  was 
cannot  certainly  be  asceitained.  The  shadow  passing  back  on  the  dial  may  have  sug- 
g'sted  God's  putting  back  the  death-angel  for  a  while.     Probably  a  shadow  cast  on  • 


62  THE  BOOK  OF  THE  PROPHET  ISAIAH,    [oh.  xxxvui.  1— 22 

staircase  by  a  column  showed  the  height  of  the  sun  in  the  heavens.  This  shadow  would 
travel  upward  as  the  day  advanced,  and  its  return  down  ten  steps,  beheld  from  Hezekiah's 
sick-chamber,  would  be  the  most  impressive  emblem  of  the  new  lease  of  life  bestowed. 
Miracles  are  never  spoken  of  as  mere  wonders ;  they  are  signs,  and  have  for  their  object 
to  manifest  forth  God's  glory.  They  have  been  wrought  in  every  age  of  the  world. 
They  would  cease  to  do  their  work  if  they  became  ordinary.  Divine  operations.  We 
note  that — 

I.  Divine  signs  are  not  fob  the  convincbmeht  of  soeftics.  Thit  our  Lord 
declared  in  his  refusal  to  do  mighty  works  for  the  Pharisees,  and  illustrated  in  the 
parable  of  Dives  and  Lazarus.  Dives  wanted  one  from  the  dead  to  go  and  warn  his 
brethren.  Christ  plainly  intimated  that  the  man  who  can  put  away  ordinary  influences 
will  find  out  how  to  resist  special  ones.  No  miracle  could  be  wrought  which  a  man 
of  sceptical  disposition  could  not  explain  away.  We  should  speak  very  guardedly  Oi' 
miracles  as  Christian  evidences.     They  are  to  those  in  right  moods  of  mind. 

II.  Divine  signs  are  for  the  persuasion  of  the  willing  and  obedient.  "  If  a  man 
is  willing,  he  shall  know  of  the  doctrine."  In  some  places  our  Lord  "  could  not  do  many 
mighty  works  because  of  the  unbelief."  There  are  proper  relations  in  which  creatures 
should  stand  to  their  Creator,  children  to  their  parents,  and  men  to  God.  Out  of  rela- 
tions man's  wilfulness  may  resist  anything  and  everything.  The  teacher  demands  a 
teachable  spirit  in  the  scholars;  the  master  expects  a  willingness  to  learn  in  his 
apprentice ;  and  God  asks  for  "  willingness  and  obedience,"  proper  attitudes  of  mind 
and  feeling,  in  those  to  whom  he  reveals  himself.     There  is  a  proper  "  receptive  mood." 

III.  Divine  signs  are  fob  the  strengthening  and  cheering  of  G^d's  people. 
They  are  the  Divine  response  to  those  who  unite  firmness  of  will  with  frailty  of  body 
and  mind,  who  are  set  on  God,  but  battle  hard  with  flesh  and  blood.  "  To  will  is 
present  with  them,  but  how  to  perform  they  find  not."  Gideon  wanted  to  trust  God  and 
serve  him,  but  circumstances  made  the  commission  entrusted  to  him  most  perilous ; 
therefore  God  encouraged  him  \yith  a  sign.  Hezekiah  wanted  to  accept  the  Divine 
assurance,  but  the  pain  and  depression  of  disease  made  trust  nearly  impossible,  so  God 
strengthened  him  with  a  sign. — R.  T. 

Vers.  10 — 12. — Figures  of  life  and  death.  Some  of  the  Scripture  figures  of  death  are 
full  of  the  sweetest  poetry  for  sensitive  souls.  Illustrating  Hezekiah's  figure,  an 
Eastern  traveller  says,  "  It  was  in  the  bleak  season  of  a  cold  autumn,  by  the  side  of  a 
large  moor,  that  I  one  day  saw  a  shepherd's  tent.  It  was  composed  of  straw  and  fern, 
and  secured  under  the  warmer  side  of  a  hedge,  with  a  few  briars  and  stakes.  Thither, 
for  about  a  week,  he  took  shelter,  until  the  herbage  failed  his  flock,  and  he  removed 
I  knew  not  whither.  His  tent  was,  however,  left  behind.  A  few  days  after  I  rode  that 
way,  and  looked  for  the  shepherd's  tent,  but  it  was  all  gone.  The  stormy  winds  had 
scattered  its  frail  materials,  and  only  a  few  fragments  strewed  the  ground,  to  mark  out 
that  once,  for  a  brief  day,  the  tent  had  its  residence,  and  the  shepherd  his  solace,  there. 
And  such  is  this  life,  and  such  are  all  the  airy  expectations,  and  imaginary  felicities, 
and  hoped-for  ports  and  places  beneath  the  sun.  Time  scatters  them,  as  the  storm  did 
the  fern  and  straw  of  the  shepherd's  tent."  "  What  is  your  life?  It  is  even  a  vapour, 
that  appeareth  for  a  little  time,  and  then  vanisheth  away ; "  "  My  days  are  swifter  than 
the  post ; "  "  They  are  passed  away  as  the  swift  ships,  as  the  eagle  hasting  to  the  prey ; " 
"  My  days  are  swifter  than  a  weaver's  shuttle ; "  "  Oh,  remember,  that  my  life  is  wind." 
With  what  exquisite  pathos  it  is  said  of  wrestling,  crafty,  managing  Jacob,  "He 
gathered  up  his  feet  into  the  bed,  and  yielded  up  the  ghost,  and  was  gathered  unto  his 
people  "  1  In  view  of  his  long  and  passionate  affection  for  Rachel  the  beautiful,  how 
tender  is  that  last  expression !  Death  for  us  is  but  passing  from  the  fellowship  of  one 
company  of  beloved  ones  to  join  the  other  company  that  has  gone  on  before.  David 
»)eaks  of  the  dead  as  "going  down  into  silence."  Is  not  that  also  most  expressive? 
The  man  who  has  been  so' full  of  anxious  cares  and  worldly  troubles  just  steps  aside  to 
rest— passes  from  the  bustle  of  life  to  the  stillness,  the  silence,  of  death.  The  Apostle 
Paul  says,  "If  our  earthly  house  of  this  tabernacle  were  dissolved,"  broken  up,  the  pins 
removed,  the  ropes  loosened,  the  canvas  folded,  "we  have  a  building  of  God,"  no  mere 
tent,  a  substantial  building,  "  a  house  not  made  with  hands,  eternal  in  the  heavens." 
8o  th*  decay  of  our  body  is  only  our  removal  to  a  new  house,  built  for  ua,  fitted  for  us 


tH.  xxxvni.  1— 22.]    THE  BOOK  OP  THE  PROPHET  ISAIAH.  53 

and,  ag  we  pass  into  it,  the  old  tent-body  is  taken  down,  folded  up,  and  put  away.  Dr. 
A.  Raleigh  dwells  very  beautifully  on  one  of  the  most  familiar  figures  of  the  grave, 
"  There  the  wicked  cease  from  troubling,  and  there  the  weary  are  at  rest."  "  This  is 
man's  long  home.  Other  homes  are  but  calling-places,  in  which  a  wayfaring  man 
tarries  for  a  few  days  and  nights  in  pursuing  a  great  journey;  but  in  this  long  home 
'  man  lieth  down  and  riseth  not,  till  the  heavens  be  no  more.*  There  is  no  earth  quite 
so  profound  as  that  of  a  quiet  country  churchyard.  The  hills  stand  in  silence  watcliing. 
The  river,  as  it  flows  by,  seems  to  hush  its  waters  in  passing ;  and  the  trees  make  soft 
and  melancholy  music  with  the  evening  wind,  or  stand  in  calm,  voiceless  grief,  lest 
they  should  disturb  the  sleepers.  Quiet  is  the  dust  below — quiet  the  scarcely  moving 
grass  of  the  graves — quiet  the  shadows  of  the  tombstones — quiet  the  overarching  sky. 
It  is,  indeed,  a  quiet  resting-place,  where  we  may  lie  in  stillness  for  a  while,  uutil  Christ 
shall  bring  us  to  another  home,  the  last,  the  best  of  all — in  heaven,  the  quietest  resting- 
place  of  all."  And  Jesus  our  Lord  said, "  Our  friend  Lazarus  sleepeth."  That  is  all. 
Death  is  only  the  sleep  of  God's  beloved  ones;  over  it  he  watches  with  more  than 
motherly  care,  and,  one  wondrous  day,  the  sweet  morning  light  of  the  great  glory  shall 
stream  in  at  the  windows,  and  wake  the  sleeping  children.  After  showing  thus  the 
mingling  of  sadness  with  hope  in  the  Bible  figures  of  hurrying  life  and  masterful  death, 
illustrate  the  things  which  help  to  make  dying  and  death  seem  to  us  a  foe  so  greatly  to 
be  dreaded.    It  ia  s  foe — 

I.  Because  of  the  brbakino  down  ahd  corruption  of  the  body  which  it 
INVOLVES.  There  is  something  humiliating  and  revolting  even  in  the  change  through 
which  our  bodies  must  pass.  We  turn  away  from  the  sight  of  the  dead,  and  cannot 
bear  to  think  that  we  must  be  even  as  they. 

II.  Because  it  involves  the  ending  of  all  our  earthly  pleasures.  And  there 
are  pleasures  and  friendships  and  scenes  which  make  life  very  dear  to  us  all — rightly 
dear.  It  ia  no  way  of  honouring  God  to  call  this  earth  and  life  that  he  has  given  us  a 
"desert  land,  which  yields  us  no  supplies."  But  death  takes  the  cup  right  away  from 
our  lips,  and  bids  us  leave  all  the  playthings  on  the  board,  and  come  away. 

III.  Because  of  the  ciroumstanobs  attendino  it.  As  Bacon  long  ago  reminded 
us,  it  is  the  suffering  body,  the  darkened  chamber,  the  weeping  friends,  the  pangs  of 
separation,  the  trappings  of  woe,  that  make  so  much  of  the  bitterness  of  death. 

IV.  Because  of  the  untimeliness  of  its  coming.  And  it  is  almost  always 
untimely ;  oftentimes  painfully  so.  He  plucks  young  buds.  He  takes  opening  flowers. 
He  cuts  down  bearded  grain.  He  delays  until  the  grain  is  shed,  and  the  straw  is 
trembling  to  its  winter  fall.  Always  coming ;  almost  never  wanted.  Yet,  for  true  and 
trustful  hearts,  changed  into  an  angel  of  light,  the  Father's  messenger  calling  his 
children  home.  They  are  quiet  even  from  the  fear  of.  death  who  can  pray  with 
McCheyn©— 

"In  whatsoever  form  death  comes  to  me — 
In  midnight  storm,  whelming  my  bark,  or  in  my  nest 
Ctontly  dismissing  me  to  rest; 

Oh,  give  me  in  thy  Word  to  see 
A  risen  Saviour  beckoning  rue. 
My  Lamp  and  Light 
In  the  dark  night." 

R.T. 

Ver.  li,—Life  a  Imrden.  "  Jehovah,  I  am  hard  pressed ;  be  Surety  for  me  "  (Cheyne;. 
Life  has  its  shadow  as  well  as  its  sunshine ;  and  in  our  depressed  times  we  fancy  that 
the  shadow  almost  blots  out  the  shine.  There  is  a  poem  which,  with  the  touch  of 
"^enius,  pictures  the  shadow  that,  since  the  failure  of  our  race-parents  in  Eden,  lies  close 
against  everything  for  man.  GSo  where  he  may,  do  what  he  will,  man  cannot  get  away 
from  his  shadow.  It  tracks  his  feet.  This  side  or  that  it  is  found,  whichever  w«y  he 
may  stand  to  the  light.  It  lies  down  with  him ;  it  rises  with  him ;  it  goes  forth  with 
him;  it  comes  back  with  him ;  until  be  even  gets  to  fear  it,  and,  seeing  it  flung  eyery- 
where,  says,  "  Life  is  dark,  and  life  is  hard."  This  sentence  of  the  text  is  an  utterance 
of  genuine  feeling.  It  is  Old  Testament  feeling  rather  than  Christian  feeling ;  but  the 
poetieal  form  of  it  gives  it  largeness  enough  to  coyer  and  include  the  very  best  CbriBtiaa 


54  THE   BOOK  OF   THE   PKOPHET   ISAIAH,     [oh.  xxxvm.  1— 22. 

thoughts.  Hezekiah  expresses  what  he  felt  when  he  lay  on  the  "  border-land."  Hi« 
ioea  is  that  death  is  his  creditor,  and  pressing  for  immediate  payment,  and  he  calls  on 
God  to  be  Surety  for  him,  and  release  him  from  the  clutch  of  this  death.  Some, 
oppressed,  cry  against  advancing  death.  Others,  as  Tennyson's  "Mariana,"  ciy  for  it, 
saying— 

"Tm  aweary,  fm  aweary, 

I  would  that  I  were  dead  t " 

Can  it  be  profitable  for  us  to  dwell  on  this  despairing  mood  of  Hezekiah^  Perhaps,  as 
we  meditate,  the  clouds  may  part  a  little,  and  glints  of  glory  may  break  through.  Our 
soul  may  take  wing  and  fly  to  God,  and  find  rest  in  him. 

I.  Life  a  bdhdbn.  It  is  such  (1)  in  view  of  the  responsibilities  under  which  we 
come;  it  is  (2)  as  a  matter  of  feeling  and  sentiment  oftentimes.  No  man,  indeed,  ever 
comes  to  use  life  ariglit  until  he  regards  it  as  a  sacred  burden.  It  will  be  heavy  or  light, 
it  will  crush  or  it  will  ennoble,  according  to  the  spirit  in  which  we  accept  it,  and  deal 
with  it.  Too  readily  we  say  that  life  always  looks  bright  to  yuuth  and  maiden.  Is  it 
so?  We  could  find  some  of  the  saddest. poetry  ever  written  which  had  been  composed 
by  the  young.  Every  right-hearted  youth  loosens  the  home  ties,  stands  free,  and  stoops 
to  lift  up  his  own  life-burden  with  a  great  sigh  of  anxiety  and  fear.  What  does  the 
man  of  middle  age  say?  However  brightly  and  bravely  a  man  may  take  up  his  daily 
care,  still  he  feels  that  each  new  child,  and  each  lengthening  year  with  its  new  claims, 
adds  to  his  burden.  Business  life,  in  modern  times,  seems  a  heavier  burden  than  it 
ev«r  was — a  daily  bearing  and  struggling  to  win  daily  bread,  because  we,  and  those 
related  to  us,  want  so  much  more  than  bread.  Ask  the  old  men  what  they  think  of 
life.  The  very  best  among  them  will  reply,  "  I  thank  God  for  life,  but  he  only  knows 
what  a  burden  it  has  been  to  me.  His  grace  has  enabled  me  to  carry  it,  but  sometimes 
— oftentimes — it  has  crushed  me  down  on  my  knees."  Or  take  the  faculties  with  which 
we  are  endowed,  and  the  spheres  in  which  those  faculties  find  expression  and  operation. 
This  body :  what  a  constant  care  to  keep  it  in  health,  and  to  get  it  fed,  clothed,  and 

.  wisely  ruled  !  And  sometimes  it  lies  like  a  heavy  log  upon  our  souls,  and  from  under 
it  we  can  scarcely  get  our  breath  I  This  mind.  The  infinite  realms  of  knowledge 
stretch  out  on  either  side,  and  it  is  our  agony  that  life  will  only  let  us  touch,  with  a 
passing  foot,  the  mere  skirts  and  edges  of  one  or  two  of  them.  The  soul — our  very 
selves — what  a  prison-house  for  us  this  body  is  I  Wherever  we  go  we  must  carry  the 
body.  Our  souls  can  "  neither  fly  nor  go."  Quaintly,  but  effectively,  our  fathers  drew 
an  emblem.  The  skeleton  was  represented  as  the  cage  within  which  the  living  man 
was  imprisoned.  At  some  time  in  our  lives  we  all  have  thanked  God  for  the  Book  of 
Ecclesiastes,  which  is  precisely  this — a  man  who  felt  life  as  a  burden,  letting  his  heart 
out.    But  turn  to  consider — 

II.  God  IB  THE  ONLY  TRUE  BuKDEN-BEAEBR.  If  the  three  words,  "Undertake  for 
me,"  could  be  put  into  a  Christian  form  of  speech,  they  would  be  found  to  express  that 
"  full  surrender,"  that  "  perfect  submission,"  that  "  rest  of  faith,"  which  is  the  secret  of 
the  "higher  life,"  the  true  beginning  and  proper  foundation  of  Scripture  holiness. 
But,  practically,  how  can  the  man  who  feels  life  to  be  a  burden  commit  that  burden  to 
the  Lord  ?  If  you  do  not  believe  in  a  living  God,  in  the  living  Christ-God,  actually 
present,  ruling  and  overruling,  you  will  never  find  out  how.  If  God  ia  away  in  the 
heavens,  and  Christ  back  in  the  ce'nturies,  our  text  has  no  real  meaning ;  it  is  a  vague 
sentiment.  But  if  God  is  here,  and  Christ  is  with  us — in  us;  if  the  Father  does  see  in 
secret,  and  the  Son  abide  with  us  always ; — then  it  will  be  easy  to  unfold  the  secret  of  the 
rolled  burden.  One  idea  at  least  we  can  give.  If  we  have  a  heart-sorrow  we  can  relieve 
it  by  making  a  confidant.  Robert  Alfred  Vaughan  had  long  been  ill,  but  one  morning 
his  wife  saw  signs  which  struck  her  with  hopelessness.  In  her  grief  she  thought  of 
going  to  unbosom  her  trouble  to  her  friend  Mrs.  George  Dawson.  Ere  she  could  leave 
her  house,  that  friend  came  in,  she  had  come  to  open  a  new  sorrow  to  her  friend — her 
only  girl  had  been  seized  with  fits  of  a  kind  which  put  in  peril  intellect  and  life.  Those 
women  lifted  each  others'  burdens  by  opening  them  in  the  confidences  of  friendship. 
We  lose  our  burdens  by  freely  telling  God  all  about  them.  There  is  another  way  of 
rolling  burdens  on  God,  which  is  less  easy  to  put  into  words — which  is  a  matter  of  soul- 
feeling.  We  can  give  up  the  self-management  of  our  lives.  It  can  become  a  conscious 
raiing  thought  with  us  that  we  live,  not  for  self,  but  for  Qod ;  we  oan  inwardly  rsaliM 


OH.  xxxvin.  1—22.]    THE  BOOK  OP  THE   PROPHET  ISAIAH.  55 

that  God  takes  our  life-rule  into  his  hands ;  we  go  where  he  sends,  we  do  what  he  bids. 
Corae  to  the  simplicities  of  life.  How  does  a  wearied  child  roll  his  buiden  on  his 
mother?  How  does  the  hushand  lighten  his  life-care  by  rolling  it  upon  a  loyiny 
wife  ?  Verily,  the  little  things  of  man  will  help  us  to  understand  the  great  things 
of  God.— R.  T. 

Vers.  15, 16. — Going  softly  after  sickness.  We  usually  notice  in  persons  who  have 
passed  through  serious  illness  which  has  brought  them  to  the  "  border-land,"  and  made 
the  things  of  the  other  and  eternal  world  familiar,  a  gracious  loosening  from  this  world, 
a  maturing  of  character,  a  mellnwness,  a  sacred  seriousness,  which  mny  well  gain 
poetical  form  in  the  expression  of  Hezekiah,  "  going  softly."  We  ought  to  regard  all 
life  as  a  gift,  a  trust,  from  God ;  but  in  a  very  special  sense  it  comes  home  to  us  that 
the  years  of  renewed  life,  after  a  severe  illness,  are  a  jiracious  peimission,  a  special  favour, 
of  our  God.  His  hand  has  been  upon  us;  we  have  felt  it,  and  the  touch  makes  us  other 
men,  new  men.  The  Rev.  James  Hervey  wrote  to  a  friend  shortly  before  his  death  in 
this  way :  "  Were  I  to  enjoy  Hezekiah's  grant,  and  liad  fifteen  years  added  to  my  life, 
I  would  be  most  frequent  in  my  application  to  the  throne  of  grace ;  for  we  sustain  a 
mighty  loss  by  reading  too  much,  and  praying  too  little :  were  I  to  renew  my  studies, 
I  would  take  my  leave  of  those  accomplished  triflers,  the  historians,  the  orators,  the 
poets  of  antiquity,  and  devote  my  attention  to  the  Scriptures  of  truth ;  I  would  sit  with 
much  greater  assiduity  at  my  Divine  Master's  feet,  and  desire  to  know  nothing  but 
'  Jesus  Christ  and  him  crucified.'  To  have  this  wisdom,  whose  fruit  is  everlasting  salva- 
tion, after  deatli,  I  would  explore  through  the  spacious  and  delightful  field  of  the  Old 
and  New  Testaments."  The  verse  may  be  more  precisely  read,  '■  That  I  should  walk  at 
ease  in  spite  of  the  trouble  of  my  soul."  It  implies  that  Hezekiah  was  resolved  to  walk 
the  rest  of  the  journey  of  life  with  calm  and  considerate  steps.  The  several  meanings 
that  can  attach  to  "  going  softly  "  may  be  illusti-ated. 

I.  I  WILL   GO   SOFTLY,  AS  0KB  WHO  BEMEMBEES    THE  DISTRUST  AND  SINFUL   REPININGS 

OF  MT  TIME  OP  AFFLICTION.  It  must  always  be  a  regret  to  the  good  man,  a  shadow  on 
nis  life,  that  even  suffering  made  him  doubt  Cfod. 

II.  I   WILI.  00   BOFTLT,   AS  ONE   WHO   CHERISHES   THE   MEMORY   OF   QoT>'8   BEBTOBING 

MEBCY.     Grod's  special  grace  to  the  good  man  deepens  his  humility. 

HI.    I  WILL   GO   SOFTLY,  AS  ONE  WHO   HAS   LEARNT   A   NEW   LESSON   OF   THE   BREVITY 

AND  SBEiousNESS  OF  LIFE.     Hezekiah's  sickness  was  a  warning. 

IV.  I   WILL   GO   SOFTLY,  OR   PLEASANTLY,  AS  ONE  WHO   HAS   BEEN   BROUGHT   80   NBAS 

TO  God  THAT  HE  CANNOT  FIND  REST  AWAY  FROM  HIM.  Walking  with  God  iu  all  holy 
conversation,  as  having  tasted  that  he  is  gracious. 

V.  I  WILL  GO  SOFTLY,  AS  ONE  WHO,  AFTER  A  TIME  OF  TROUBLE,  STRIVES  TO  RETAIN 
THE  IMPRESSION  OF  IT,  AND   TO   CABBY  OUT  THE  RESOLVES   THEN   MADE,  AND  SHOW  THAT 

HE  HAS  WELL  LEARNED  THE  LESSONS  OF  AFFLICTION.  Compare  "  Before  I  was  afflicted 
[  went  astray,  but  now  will  I  keep  thy  Word." — E.  T. 

V«r.  17. — Ood's  way  with  sin.  "  For  thou  hast  cast  all  my  sins  behind  thy  back." 
To  cast  behind  one's  back,  in  Hebrew  and  Arabic,  is  a  figure  of  speech  meaning  "  to  forget, 
to  lose  sight  of,  to  exclude  from  view."  Roberts,  writing  of  Hindoo  life,  says,  "This 
metaphor  is  in  common  use,  and  has  sometimes  a  very  offensive  signification.  The 
expression  is  used  to  denote  the  most  complete  and  contemptuous  rejection  of  a  person 
or  thing.  '  The  king  has  cast  his  minister  behind  his  back,'  that  is,  fully  removed 
him,  treated  him  with  sovereign  contempt.  'Yes,  man,  I  have  forgiven  you;  all  your 
crimes  are  behind  my  back  ;  but  take  care  not  to  offend  me  again.' "  What  Hezekiah 
realized  was  that,  in  responding  to  his  prayer  for  renewed  life,  God  had  graciously 
removed  from  consideration  the  just  Judgments  for  which  transgressions  called.  He  put 
them  aside,  out  of  sight.  Matthew  Henry  sententiously  says,  "  When  we  cast  our  sins 
behind  our  back,  and  take  no  care  to  repent  of  them,  God  sets  them  before  his  face,  and 
is  ready  to  reckon  for  them ;  but  when  we  set  them  before  our  face,  in  true  repentance, 
as  David  did  when  his  sin  was  ever  before  him,  God  casts  them  behind  his  back."  Two 
other  very  striking  figures  of  God's  ways  with  sin  may  be  recalled.  1.  He  casts  them 
into  the  depths  of  the  sea,  where  they  are  lost,  out  of  sight,  and  out  of  reach,  for  ever. 
Lost,  as  ft  J«wel  dropped  in  mid-ocean.    2.  He  puts  them  from  us  far  as  east  ii  from 


5« 


THE  BOOK  OF  THE  PBOPHET  ISAIAH,    [oh.  xxxix.  1-8. 


west — a  figure  whose  fulness  of  suggestion  only  unfolds  to  meditation.  There  is  a 
north  pole  and  a  south  pole,  giving  limits  to  our  conception  of  north  and  south.  There 
is  no  east  pole  or  west  pole.  Bast  is  on  everywhere  one  way,  and  west  is  on  every- 
where the  other  way.    God's  way  with  sin  is — 

I.  To  KEEP  STRICTEST  ACCOUNT  OF  IT.  God  "  besets  US  behind  and  before."  "  All 
things  are  naked  and  opened  unto  the  eyes  of  him  with  whom  we  have  to  do."  There 
is  a  record.  Illustrate  by  the  idea  that  all  our  actions  are  photographed  on  the  waves 
of  air,  and  wafted  on  to  God's  keeping,  against  the  judgment-day.  This  is  sure — God  is 
never  indifferent  to  sin.     He  is  strict  to  behold  iniquity. 

II.  To  APPORTION  DUB,  CORREOTIVB  PUNISHMENTS  OP  IT.  Some  comiug  in  the  way 
of  ordinary  and  natural  results,  and  some  as  special  Divine  judgments.  Thank  God, 
his  judgments  wait  close  on  our  sins. 

III.  To  PARDON.  In  a  royal,  gracious  way,  whensoever  the  sinner  humbles  himself, 
and  with  penitence  and  confession  seeks  grace.  "  Though  your  sins  be  as  .  .  .  crimson, 
they  shall  be  whiter  than  snow." 

IV.  To  PUT   IT   FROM  CONSIDERATION  IN  MEETING  THE   DESIRES  AND  PRATERS  OF  HIS 

PEOPLE.  This  is  the  case  before  us.  This  is  the  marvel  of  grace.  God  treats  his  people 
as  if  they  were  not  sinners.  He  treats  them  as  if  standing  in  the  goodnew  and  the 
rights  of  his  ever-obedient  and  acceptable  Son,  Christ  Jesus. — ^B.  T. 


EXPOSITION. 


OHAPTBB  -TCTCTCIX. 


This  chapter  is  parallel  with  2  Kings  zx. 
12 — 19,  and  scarcely  differs  from  it  at  all. 
Yer.  1  has  the  additional  words,  "and  was 
recovered ; "  ver.  2,  the  phrase, "  was  glad  of 
them,"  for  "hearkened  nnto  them;"  ver.  5, 
"Lord  of  hosts,"  for  "Lord"  simply;  and 
ver.  8  makes  HezcMah's  last  utterance  an 
observation  instead  of  a  question.  Other- 
wise the  two  accounts  are  almost  word  for 
word  the  same.  Both  relate  the  novel  and 
important  fact  of  ambassadors  being  sent  to 
Hezekiah  by  the  King  of  Babylon,  shortly 
after  his  illness,  and  tell  of  the  reception 
which  he  gave  them,  of  the  message  which 
Isaiah  was  commissioned  to  deliver  to  him 
from  God  in  consequence,  and  of  Hezekiah's 
acquiescence  in  the  terms  of  the  message 
when  it  was  conveyed  to  him.  The  Isaianio 
authorship  of  the  chapter  is  much  disputed, 
but  solely  £rom  reluctance  to  admit  that  a 
prophet  could  predict  the  subjugation  of 
Judffia  by  Babylon  more  than  a  century 
before  the  event. 

Ver.  1. — At  that  time  (comp.  2  Ohron. 
zxzii.  31,  where  it  appears  that  a  part  of  the 
business  of  the  ambassadors  was  to  inquire 
concerning  the  astronomical  marvel  which 
had  recently  occurred  in  the  land).  The 
embassy  probably  followed  the  illness  of 
Hezekiah  within  u  year.  Merodach-Bala- 
dan.  This  is  a  more  correct  form  than  the 
"Berodach-Baladan"  of  2  Kings  xx.  12. 
The  name  it  one  common  to  several  Babylo- 


nian kings,  M  to  one  who  reigned  abont  b.g 
1325,  to  a  second  who  is  placed  about  B.C. 
900,  and  to  a  third  who  was  contemporary 
with  the  Assyrian  kings  Sargon  and  Sen- 
nacherib. It  is  this  last  of  whom  we  have 
a  notice  in  the  present  passage.  He  appears 
first  in  the  Assyrian  inscriptions  as  a  petty 
prince,  ruling  a  small  tract  upon  the  sea- 
coast,  about  the  mouths  of  the  Tigris  and 
Euphrates.  Tiglath-Pileser  takes  tribute 
from  him  about  b.o.  744.  In  b.o.  721  we 
find  him  advanced  to  a  more  prominent 
position.  Taking  advantage  of  the  troubles 
of  the  time,  he  shakes  off  the  Assyrian  yoke, 
and  makes  himself  King  of  Babylon,  where 
he  has  a  reign  of  twelve  years — from  B.C. 
721  to  B.o.  709.  This  reign  is  recognized 
by  Sargon  in  his  inscriptions  ('Eecords  of 
the  Past,'  vol.  ix.  p.  14),  and  by  the  Greek 
chronologist,  Ptolemy,  in  his  'Canon.'  In 
B.C.  709  Sargon  leads  an  expedition  against 
him,  and  drives  him  out  of  Babylonia  into 
the  coast-tract,  Chaldea,  where  he  besieges 
him  in  his  ancestral  town  Bit-Yakin,  takes 
the  city,  and  makes  him  prisoner  (ibid.,  p. 
15).  On  the  death  of  Sargon,  in  b.o.  705, 
Merodach-Baladan  escapes  from  confinement, 
and  hastens  once  more  to  Babylon,  where  he 
is  acknowledged  as  king,  and  has  a  second 
reign,  which  lasts  six  months  (Alex.Polyhist. 
ap.  Euseb.,  '  Ohron.  Can.,'  i.  v.  §  1).  He  is 
then  driven  from  the  country  by  Sennacherib, 
and,  after  various  vicissitudes,  obliged  to 
became  a  refugee  in  Elam  (G.  Smith,  '  Hist, 
of  Babylonia,'  pp.  125—128).  The  name  of 
Merodach-Baladan  is  composed  of  the  three 
elements,  Marodaeh  (eauivalent  to  "Mai- 
duk  "),  the  god,  6aIor  pat,  "  son,"  and  iddina, 
"has  given,"  aai  thai  ligniflei  "Mevodack 


CH.  xxxix.  1— 8.]    THE  BOOK  OF  THE  PROPHET  ISAIAH. 


67 


has  given  (me)  a  son."  The  Bon  of  Baladan. 
"  Baladan  "  is  scarcely  a  possible  Babylonian 
name.  "  Beladan  "  would,  however,  be  quite 
possible,  being  a  name  formed  on  the  model 
of  Ishtar-iddin  ('Eponym  Canon,'  p.  30), 
Ninip-iddin  (p.  35),  Ilu-iddln  (p.  57),  etc. 
And  the  corruption  of  Beladan  into  Baladan 
would  be  easy.  Merodach-Baladan  III.  is 
called  by  Sargon  "the  son  of  Yakin;  "  but 
this  is  perhaps  a  tribal  or  local  rather  than 
a  personal  name.  Compare  Jehu's  appella- 
tion of  "  son  of  Omri  "  (ibid.,  p.  1 14).  Sent 
letters  and  a  present  to  Hezekiah.  Heze> 
kiah's  fourteenth  year  was  B.O.  714.  Mero- 
dach-Baladan  had  then  been  King  of  Babylon 
for  eight  years,  and,  knowing  that  he  might 
at  any  time  be  attacked  by  Sargon,  was 
naturally  looking  out  for  •  alliances  with 
other  powers,  which  Assyria  equally  threat- 
ened. He  had  recently  concluded  a  treaty 
with  Khumbanigas,  King  of  Elam  ('  Becords 
of  the  Fast,'  vol.  ix.  p.  14),  and  had  obtained 
the  support  of  several  of  the  Aramaean  tribes 
on  the  Euphrates.  He  now  apparently 
thought  that  Judna,  which  Sargon  was  also 
threatening  (eh.  xxxviii.  6),  might  be  in- 
duced to  join  him.  Hezekiah's  illness  and 
"the  wonder  done  in  the  land"  (2  Chron. 
zxxii.  31)  furnished  him  with  pretexts  for 
an  embassy,  which  probably  had  more  serious 
objects  than  either  congratulation  or  scientific 
inquiry. 

Ver.  2. — Hezekiah  was  glad  of  them.  A 
more  pregnant  phrase  than  that  which  re- 
places it  in  2  Kings,  "hearkened  unto 
them."  Hezekiah,  like  Merodaoh-Balailan, 
was  looking  out  for  allies,  and  "was  glad," 
thinking  that  in  Babylon  he  had  found  one 
which  might  render  him  important  service. 
Sargon's  promptness,  however,  frustrated  his 
hopes.  In  B.o.  709  that  prince,  regarding 
Merodach-Baladan's  pruceedings  as  consti- 
tuting a  real  danger  to  his  kingdom,  made 
a  great  expedition  into  Babylonia,  defeated 
Herodach-Baladan,  and  took  him  prisoner, 
after  which  he  had  himself  crowned  King  of 
Babylon,  and  during  the  remainder  of  his 
life  (B.O.  709  to  705)  ruled  both  countries. 
Showed  them  the  house  of  his  precious 
things;  ie.  his  treasury,  or  store-house. 
The  treasuries  of  ancient  monarchs  were 
actual  store-chambers,  in  which  large  quanti- 
ties of  the  precious  metals  and  valuable 
objects  of  various  kinds  were  deposited 
(see  Herod.,  ii.  121 ;  Arrian,  '  Exp.  Alex.,' 
iii  16, 18,  etc.).  The  flourishing  state  of  the 
treasury  is  an  indication  that  the  events 
here  narrated  are  anterior  to  the  great 
surrender  of  treasure  to  Sennacherib  (2 
Kings  iviii.  15;  'Eponym  Canon,'  p.  135). 
AH  the  house  of  his  armour  (comp.  ch. 
xxii.  8).  If  a  warlike  alliance  was  con- 
templated, it  was  as  important  to  show  the 
posBeaaion  of  arms  as  of  treasures.     There 


was  nothing  in  his  house,  nor  in  all  his 

dominion,  that  Hezekiah  showed  them  not. 
We  must  allow  for  Oriental  hyperbole.  The 
meaning  is,  that,  without  any  reserve,  Heze- 
kiah showed  all  that  he  could  show. 

Yer.  3. — Then  came  Isaiah  the  prophet. 
Isaiah  comes,  unsent  for,  to  rebuke  the  king 
(comp.  2  Sam.  xii.  1 — 12;  xxiv.  11—14; 
1  Kings  xii.  22—24;  xiii.  2—5;  2  Chron. 
xii.  5—8;  xvi.  7—9;  xix.  2,  3,  etc.).  This 
bold  attitude  was  one  which  prophets  were 
entitled  to  take  by  virtue  of  their  office, 
which  called  upon  them  to  bear  testimony, 
even  before  kings,  and  to  have  no  respect  of 
persons.  A  similar  fearlessness  is  apparent 
in  oh.  vii.  1 — 17,  where  the  king  witli  whom 
Isaiah  has  to  deal  was  the  wicked  Ahaz. 
What  said  these  men?  "These  men"  is 
contemptuous.  Tke  demand  to  know  what 
they  said  is  almost  without  parallel. 
Diplomacy,  if  it  is  to  be  successful,  must  be 
secret ;  and  Isaiah  can  scarcely  have  been 
surprised  that  his  searching  question  re- 
ceived no  answer.  But  he  was  zealous  of 
God's  honour,  and  anxious  that  Hezekiah 
should  rely  on  no  "  arm  of  flesh,"  whether  it 
were  Egypt  or  Babylon.  Such  dependence 
would  stoiten  God's  arm,  and  prevent  him 
from  giving  the  aid  that  he  was  otherwise 
prepared  to  give.  The  desire  of  the  prophet 
is  to  warn  the  king  of  the  danger  which  he 
runs  by  coquetting  witli  human  helpers. 
From  whence  came  they  t  Isaiah  does  not 
ask  this  question  for  the  sake  of  information. 
Doubtless  all  Jerusalem  was  agog  to  see 
the  strange  envoys  "from  a  far  country," 
who  had  now  for  the  first  time  penetrated 
to  the  city  of  David.  All  knew  whence 
they  had  come,  and  suspected  why.  Isaiah 
asks,  to  force  the  king  to  a  confession,  on 
which  he  may  base  a  prophecy  and  a  warn- 
ing. And  Hezekiah  said,  They  are  come 
from  a  far  country.  Embassies  from  dis- 
tant lands  to  their  courts  are  made  a  con- 
stant subject  of  boasting  by  the  Assyrian 
monarchs  (see  'Records  of  the  Fast,'  vol. 
i.  pp.  28,  68,  95;  vol.  vii.  pp.  49,  51,  etc.). 
Hezekiah,  perhaps, is  "lifted  up"  (2  Chron. 
xxxii.  25)  by  tlie  honour  paid  him,  and 
intends  to  impress  Isaiah  with  a  sense  of 
his  greatness — "  The  men  are  come  all  the 
way  from  Babylon  to  see  me/" 

Ver.  4. — ^What  have  they  seen  ?  Isaiah 
had,  no  doubt,  heard  of  what  Hezekiah  had 
done  (ver.  2);  but  he  wished'  to  have  the 
confession  of  it  from  his  own  mouth  before 
delivering  his  sentence.  Hezekiah  tells  him 
the  truth,  since  he  is  not  ashamed  of  his 
act,  but  rather  glories  in  it.  He  has  shown 
the  ambassadors  everything,  and  has  thereby 
made  them  eager  to  secure  his  alliance. 

Ver.  5. — Hear  the  word  of  the  Lord  of 
hosts.  Either  the  prophet  had  been 
specially  charged  with  a  Divine  message  t* 


68 


THE  BOOK  OP  THE  PBOPHET  ISAIAH,    [oh.  xxxix.  1— a 


the  king  before  he  songht  hb  presmioe,  or 
the  prophetic  afflatus  now  came  on  him 
■nddenly.  The  former  is,  on  the  whole, 
more  probable. 

Ver.  6. — Behold,  the  days  come;  literally, 
the  dayt  [are]  coming,  or  [are]  approaching. 
Of  the  exact  "  times  am  1  Beaeons,  which  the 
Father  hath  put  in  his  own  power"  (Acts 
i.  7),  the  prophets  generally  knew  nothing. 
They  were  mouth-pieces,  to  declare  the 
Divine  will,  not  keen-witted  politicians, 
forecasting  results  by  the  exercise  of  sharp- 
sightedness  and  sagacity.  To  suppose  that 
Isaiah  foresaw  by  mere  human  wisdom  the 
Babylonian  conquest  of  Judsea,  as  Charles 
the  Great  did  the  ravages  of  the  Northmen 
(K.  Williams,  'Hebrew  Prophets,'  vol.  i. 
p.  ii'-i),  is  to  give  him  credit  for  a  sagacity 
quite  tiuezampled  and  psychologically  im- 
posaible.  The  kingdom  of  Babylon  wus  one 
among  many  that  were  struggling  hard  to 
maintain  independence  against  the  grasping 
and  encroaching  Assyria.  From  the  time  of 
Tiglath-Pileser  II.  she  had  been  continnally 
losing  ground.  Both  Sargon  and  Sennache- 
rib trampled  her  underfoot,  overran  her 
territory,  captured  her  towns,  and  reduced 
her  uncier  direct  Assyrian  government. 
Till  Assyria  should  be  swept  sway,  a  Baby- 
lonian conquest  of  Palestine  was  impossible. 
To  suppose  it  was  like  supposing  a  Eussiun 
conquest  of  Holland,  wtule  Germany  bars 
the  way.  Nothing  short  of  the  true  pro- 
phetic afflatus,  which  is  God  the  Holy  Ghost 
speaking  by  the  mouth  of  his  servants, 
could  have  made  such  an  anticipation.  And 
with  Isaiah,  as  Mr.  Cheyne  says,  it  is  "not 
a  mere  presentiment;  it  is  a  calm  and 
settled  conviction,  based  on  a  direct  revela- 
tion, and  confirmed  by  a  deep  insight  into 
the  laws  of  the  Divine  government."  All 
that  is  in  thine  house.  Not,  of  course,  exactly 
all  that  was  tliere  when  Isaiah  spoke,  but 
all  the  wealth  that  should  be  in  the  royal 
palace  when  the  time  of  the  Babylonian 
captivity  arrived.  (For  the  fulfilment,  see 
8  Chiiim.  xxxvi.  18.)    That  whidh  thy  fathers 


have  laid  up  in  store.  A  portion  of  this  was 
carried  off  by  Sennacherib  in  his  lirst  ex- 
pedition (2  Kings  xviii.  14 — 16);  but  the 
bulk  of  the  temple  treasures — the  gifts  of 
many  kings — remained  untouched  until  they 
were  removed  to  Babylon  by  Nebuchad- 
nezzar (Dan.  i.  2 ;  T.  2 ;  2  Kings  xxiT.  13 ; 
XXV.  13—17). 

Ver.  7. — Of  thy  sons  that  shall  issue  from 
thee.  Hezekiah  had  at  the  time,  prohably, 
no  son,  since  Manasseh,  who  sucuetded  him 
upon  the  throne,  was  not  bom  till  two  years 
later.  Besides  Manasseh,  he  appears  to 
have  had  a  son,  Amariah,  who  was  an 
ancestor  of  the  Prophet  Zephaniah  (Zeph. 
i.  1).  He  may,  of  course,  have  also  had 
others.  His  descendants,  rather  than  his 
actual  sons,  aeem  to  be  here  intended ;  and 
the  fulfilment  of  the  prophecy  is  to  be  found 
in  Dan.  i.  3,  where  certain  "of  the  king's 
seed"  are  mentioned  among  the  Israelites 
who  served  as  eimuchs  in  the  palace  of 
Nebuchadnezzar. 

Ver.  8. — Good  is  the  word.  While  there 
is  resignation,  there  is  no  doubt  something 
also  of  selfishness,  in  Hezekiah's  acceptance 
of  the  situation.  "Aprfes  moi  le  dflnge"  is 
a  saying  attributed  to  a  modern  Frenchman. 
Hezekiah's  egotism  is  less  pronounced  and 
less  cynioal.  He  thinks  with  gratitude  of 
the  "peace  and  steadfastness"  which  are  to 
he  "in  his  day;"  he  does  not  dwell  in 
thought  on  the  coming  "deluge."  The 
"word  of  the  Lord"  is  "good"  to  him  in 
more  ways  than  one.  It  has  assured  him 
of  coming  male  offspring — of  sons  to  sit  upon 
his  throne,  and  save  him  from  the  curse  of 
childlessness.  And  it  has  assured  him  of 
a  rest  for  his  nation — a  respite,  so  that  the 
Babylonian  struggle  shall  not  follow  im- 
mediately upon  the  Assyrian ;  but  there 
shall  be  a  "breathing-space"  (Ezra  ix.  8), 
a  tranquil  time,  during  which  Israel  may 
"dwell  in  a  peaceable  habitation,  and  in 
sure  dwellings,  and  in  ^uiet  lesting-pUces  " 
(ch.  xxxii.  18). 


HOMILETICa 

Vers.  2 — 8. — Carnal  foy  fkt  prelude  to  spiritual  sorrow.  The  Babylonian  embassy, 
a  grand  affair  doubtless,  comprising  envoys  in  their  rich  clothing  and  with  their  jewelled 
arms,  camels  bearing  valuable  gifts,  prancing  steeds,  and  a  vast  train  of  slaves  and  attend- 
ants, was  to  Hezekiah  an  inspiriting  fact,  a  circumstance  that  gladdened  and  excited  him. 
With  his  imperfect  knowledge  of  geography,  the  embassy  seemed  to  him  to  come  from 
the  furthest  limits  of  the  earth's  circuit — from  a  remote,  almost  from  an  unknovni,  region 
(ver.  8).  He  had  hitherto  not  thought  of  attempting  negotiations  with  any  ppwer 
further  distant  than  Egypt.  If  the  far-off  Babylon  courted  his  alliance,  where  might 
he  not  expect  to  find  friends  ?  from  what  remote  quarter  might  he  not  look  for  overtures  ? 
What  wonder  that  "his  heart  was  lifted  up  "  (2  Chron.  xxxii.  25)?  that  he  rejoiced, 
though  with  a  carnal  joy,  that  had  no  substantial  spiritual  basis?  Isaiah  had  warned 
him  against  all  "  arms  of  flesh."    Isaiah  had  bidden  him  "  trust  in  the  Lord  Jehovah,* 


OH.  xxxn,  1— 8,]      THE  BOOK  OP  THE  PROPHET  ISAIAH.  69 

and  in  Jehovah  only.  No  doubt  he  bad  been  especially  warned  against  Egypt ;  but  all 
the  reasons  that  were  valid  against  Egypt  were  valid  against  Babylon  also.  Babylon 
was  as  idolatrous  as  Egypt ;  Babylon  was  as  licentious  as  Egypt ;  Babylon  was  as  selfish 
in  her  aims  as  Egypt.  Hezekiah's  joy  was  thus  a  purely  carnal  joy,  a  rejoicing  in  his 
own  honour,  and  in  the  prospect  of  material  aid  from  a  tainted  source.  In  the  midst 
of  his  joy  the  prophet  announces  himself.  "  What  said  those  men  ?  "  he  sternly  asks. 
"Whence  came  they?  What  have  they  seen?  Ah!  they  have  seen  thy  treasures, 
have  they  ?  All  of  them?  Thou  thinkest  those  treasures  will  make  them  thy  friends. 
Nay ;  they  will  make  them  thy  bitterest  enemies.  It  will  not  be  forgotten  at  Babylon 
that  thy  temple  and  thy  treasure-house  are  worth  plundering.  The  days  will  come 
when  all  the  wealth  of  thy  house,  and  of  the  temple,  and  of  the  holy  city  will  be 
carried  off  to  enrich  that  city.  The  days  will  come  when  thou  wilt  have  disgrace 
from  Babylon  instead  of  honour.  Thy  desceudants — they  that  have  issued  from  thy 
loins — will  serve  the  King  of  I^abylon,  will  be  eunuchs,  doing  the  menial  offices  in  his 
palace."  In  a  moment  the  king's  joy  is  gone,  and  replaced  by  sorrow.  It  is  with  a  sad- 
dened spirit  that  he  submits,  and  acquiesces  in  his  punishment.  "  Good  is  the  word 
of  the  Lord  " — he  spares,  even  when  he  punishes ;  he  chastens  me  with  a  milder 
chastening  than  I  deserved  at  his  hands — "  in  his  wrath  he  remembereth  mercy  " 
(Hab.  iiL  2). 


HOMILIES  BY  VARIOUS  AUTHORS. 

Vera.  1 — 8. — The  dangers  of  prosperity.  I.  The  ostentation  of  Hezeeiah.  The 
Chronicler  passes  a  censure  upon  him.  After  his  recovery  he  "rendered  not  again 
according  to  the  benefit  done  unto  liim ;  for  his  heart  was  lifted  up :  therefore  was  there 
wrath  upon  him,  and  upon  Judah  and  Jerusalem  "  (^  Chron-.  xxxii.  25).  He  gives  a 
picture  of  his  treasuries,  and  store-houses,  his  cities,  his  flocks  and  herds.  An  embassy 
comes  from  Babylon,  partly  to  congratulate  him  on  his  recovery,  partly  to  inquire  con- 
cerning the  portent  of  the  sun-dial  or  step-clock.  Under  these  pretexts  political  views 
were  doubtless  concealed.  And  Hezekiah  delighted  to  receive  the  embassy,  and  dis- 
played to  them  the  whole  of  his  treasures  and  the  resources  of  his  armouiy,  his  palaces 
and  his  kingdom. 

II.  The  bebukb  op  the  peophbt.  The  prophet,  in  virtue  of  his  Divine  call  and  his 
insight  into  the  heart  of  things,  assumes  an  authority  over  the  monarch,  and,  coming  to 
him,  inquires,  "  What  have  these  men  said?  and  whence  came  they  to  thee?"  "  He 
challenges  the  king  to  explain  his  conduct.  Jehovah's  will  is  opposed  to  all  coquetting 
with  foreign  powers."  It  is  "weaving  a  web  without  his  Spirit"  (ch.  xxx.  1).  The 
answer  of  the  king  is  indirect,  perhaps  evasive :  "  They  have  come  from  a  far  country, 
from  Babylon " — ^as  if  hinting  that  hospitality  to  them  was  a  duty.  A  second  stern 
question  follows  :  "  What  have  they  seen  in  the  house  of  the  king?"  And  the  king 
replies  that  he  has  shown  them  all  his  treasures.  There  is  that  in  the  very  manner  and 
questions  of  the  prophet  which  implies  censure.  What  be  sees  in  the  act  of  the  king 
is  an  uplifting  of  the  heart ;  not  merely  pride  in  his  resources  and  wealth  as  such,  but 
reliance  on  worldly  resources — a  desire  to  match  himself  with  the  great  Eastern  power  on 
its  own  ground.  And  this  is  an  affront  to  the  Divine  King  in  Zion,  who  had  founded  it 
that  the  afflicted  of  his  people  might  find  refuge  therein  (ch.  xiv.  32).  "  Not  by  might 
nor  by  power,  but  by  the  Spirit  of  the  Lord  of  hosts  "  is  ever  the  word,  the  principle,  on 
which  the  kingdom  must  stand.  If  Hezekiah  has  violated  this,  there  must  be  retribu- 
tion, either  in  his.  person  or  in  the  persons  of  those  he  represents. 

in.  The  punishment.  It  was  to  coirespond  to  his  sin.  " He  thought  to  subscribe 
his  quota  to  a  profane  coalition,  and  his  treasures  should  be  violently  laid  hold  of 
by  wolves  in  sheep's  clothing."  Babylon  had  solicited  friendsidp;  she  would  end  by 
enforcing  slavery.  Calm  and  dispassionate  is  the  tone  in  which  the  prophet  speaks. 
Charles  the  Great  could  not  help  weeping  at  the  sight  of  the  Northmen's  vessels,  think- 
ing of  the  calamities  which  those  fell  pirates  would  bring  on  the  flourishing  coasts  of  the 
Franks.  Jeremiah  weeps  at  the  thought  of  the  cruelty  of  the  Babylonians.  In  Isaiah 
contentment  with  the  patent  will  of  God  overcomes  his  emotional  susceptibility.  All 
the  boasted  treasures  of  the  king  are  to  be  carried  away  to  Babylon.and  his  descendantf 


60  THE  BOOK  OF  THE  PBOPHET  ISAIAH,    [oh.  xxxix.  1— 8. 

are  to  become  servant*  in  the  palace  there.  The  king  bows  before  the  authority  of  the 
prophet,  recognizing  hig  word  as  the  word  of  Jehovah,  and  as  good.  And  further,  he  is 
thankful  for  the  respite  granted — for  the  promise  that  peace  and  steadfastness  shall  remain 
in  his  days.  The  chronicler  says  that  he  humbled  himself  for  the  pride  of  his  heart, 
both  he  and  the  inhabitants  of  Jerusalem,  so  that  the  wrath  of  Jehovah  came  not  npon 
them  in  the  days  of  Hezekiah.  The  picture  of  Hezekiah  is  that  of  a  king  who  pros- 
pered in  all  his  works.  But  the  incident  clearly  teaches  the  danger  prosperity  brings  to 
character  and  principle.  It  is  but  a  "bad  nurse  to  virtue;  a  nurse  who  is  like  to  starve 
it  in  its  infancy,  and  to  spoil  it  in  its  growth."  "  The  corrupt  affection  which  has  lain 
dead  and  frozen  in  the  midst  of  distracting  business  or  under  adversity,  when  the  sun 
of  prosperity  has  shined  upon  it,  then,  like  a  snake,  it  presently  recovers  its  former 
strength  and  venom.  When  the  channels  of  plenty  run  high,  and  every  appetite  is 
plied  with  abundance  and  variety,  so  that  satisfaction  is  a  mean  word  to  express  its 
enjoyment,  then  the  inbred  corruption  of  the  heart  shows  itself  pampered  and  insolent, 
too  unruly  for  discipline  and  too  big  for  correction.  Prosperity,  by  fomenting  a  man's 
pride,  lays  a  certain  train  for  his  ruin ;  Scripture  and  experience  teach  what  a  spite 
Providence  constantly  owes  to  the  proud  person.  He  is  the  very  eyesore  of  Heaven  ; 
and  God  even  looks  upon  bis  own  supremacy  as  concerned  to  abase  him.  Prosperity 
attracts  the  malice  and  envy  of  the  world ;  and  it  is  impossible  for  a  man  in  a  wealthy 
and  flourishing  condition  not  to  feel  the  stroke  of  men's  tongues,  and  of  their  hands  too, 
if  occasion  serves.  Stones  are  only  thrown  at  the  fruit-laden  tree.  What  made  the 
King  of  Babylon  invade  Judaea  but  the  royal  stores  and  treasures  displayed  and  boasted 
of  by  Hezekiah  before  the  ambassadors,  to  the  supplanting  of  his  crown  and  the 
miserable  captivity  of  his  prosperity  ?  "  (South).  In  the  day  of  prosperity  oonsider  I 
Let 

*OMiBideTation  like  an  angel  oome, 
And  whip  th'  offending  Adam  ont  of  us." 

J. 

Ver.  i.—Firi»hing  thing$.  "  Nothing  shall  be  left."  How  true  is  this  of  all  thing* 
of  earth,  as  contrasted  with  essential  beitig— with  the  life  of  our  own  souls  I  We  can 
look  at  nothing  material  without  being  able  to  say,  as  we  look  to  the  inner  world  of 
personal  consciousness,  "  They  shall  perish,  but  thou  remainest." 

I.  COMPREHENSIVE  LOSS.  "  Nothing  shall  be  left."  "  All  that  is  in  thine  house,  and 
that  which  thy  fathers  have  laid  up  in  store  until  this  day,  shall  be  carried  to  Babylon." 
Exactly.  There  is  always  a  Babylon  which  itself  becomes  a  ruin.  Grecian  art  is 
taken  to  Borne,  there  to  be  demolished  in  the  sacking  of  the  city.  Treasures  are  taken 
in  after  years  to  Paris,  there  to  be  lost  in  flames.  How  few  relics  of  any  time  or 
nation  remain  I  and  in  due  course  these  are  lost  to  the  possessors.  If  this  is  tme  on 
the  great  scale  of  nations,  how  manifestly  true  it  is  of  ourselves  I  Let  us  look  around 
on  all  the  present  possessions  of  earth,  and  remember  that,  so  far  as  we  are  concerned, 
"  nothing  shall  be  left."  "  Thou  fool,  this  night  thy  soul  shall  be  required  of  thee : 
then  whose  shall  those  things  be?" 

II.  Imuobtal  gain.  The  prophet  is  true  in  this  revelation  of  loss.  So  is  the  apostle 
true  when  he  says,  "  All  things  are  yours."  All  that  a  man  is  remains,  and  all  that 
a  man  does  in  loyal  service  remains.  So  there  is  permanence  amid  impermanence. 
The  tabernacle  totters,  but  the  tenant  lives.  "  The  outward  man  perisheth,  but  the 
inward  man  is  renewed  day  by  day."  All  that  is  in  thine  house  is  lost,  but  all  that  is 
in  thine  heart  is  immortal.  It  behoves  us,  therefore,  to  remember  that  the  true  jewels 
are  soul-jewels;  the  true  ornament  is  in  the  hidden  man  of  the  heart ;  the  imperishable 
wealth  is  in  the  sanctities  of  Heaven  and  the  smile  of  God.  "  Lay  up  for  yourselves 
treasures  in  heaven." — W.  M.  S. 

Ver.  8. — 2%e  hest  hlesnng*.  "  There  shall  be  peace  and  truth  in  my  days."  These 
are  Qod's  twin  blessings.  There  can  be  no  peace  without  truth.  There  is  veracity  in 
Qod's  nniverse  everywhere.  It  is  only  a  seeming  blessedness  which  exists  apart  from 
these  things,  for  the  flowers  have  no  root.  The  dancing  smile  is  only  Uke  phospho- 
resceno*  on  the  face  of  the  dead,  if  we  are  not  at  peace  with  Qod. 

I.  Omnr'B  iasaot  was  fbaoe.    "  Peace  I  leave  with  you,  my  peace  I  give  nnt» 


OB.  XXXIX.  1—8.]    THE  BOOK  OF  THE  PROPHET  ISAiAH.  61 

you."  This  is  not  peace  of  condition,  but  peace  of  conscience.  The  ocean,  like  Christ's 
life,  may  be  troubled  outwardly,  but  there  is  rest  at  the  heart  of  it.  We  cannot  judge 
by  the  surface-features  of  life.  We  must  enter  within  to  know  if  there  be  really  peace. 
We  must  see  the  man  in  trouble,  trial,  solitude,  and  death.  Then  we  shall  see  how 
true  the  acclamation  is,  "  There  is  no  peace,  saith  my  God,  to  the  wicked."  Bunyan 
had  peace  in  Bedford  Gaol ;  so  had  the  confessors  and  martyrs  of  olden  time. 

II.  Chbist's  atonement  gives  peace.  "  Having  made  peace  through  the  blood  of 
his  cross."  We  m  ly  be  unable  to  give  a  theory  of  the  atonement  that  can  cover  all  its 
meaning — ^from  tlie  days  of  Anselm  until  now  men  have  debated  about  that  ;  but  in 
depths  of  agony  about  sin  we  feel  the  need  of  a  Saviour,  and  rejoice  to  siug^ 

"  Nolhlng  in  my  hands  I  bring, 
Simply  to  thy  cross  I  cling." 

IIL  Ghbist  oiteb  nsAOK  thbough  tboth.  He  tells  the  truth  about  our  moral  state 
and  condition.  He  reveals  the  truth  concerning  the  nature  and  purposes  of  God.  He 
unveils  the  immortal  life,  not  only  as  a  doctrine,  but  in  himself,  in  heavenly  beauty  of 
the  earthly  life.  "  I  am  the  Way,  the  Truth,  and  the  Life."  How  comfortable  it  io  to 
reat  on  this  gracious  promise,  and  to  know  that  the  True  One  cannot  lie  I — W.  M.  S. 

Vers.  1—8. — Complacency,  rebuke,  and  acquiescence.  We  may  gather  the  preliminary 
truth  that  vie  need  to  look  well  before  we  decide  on  the  character  of  Divine  decisions  and 
of  human  actions.  Otherwise  we  shall  certainly  fall  into  serious  mistakes.  1.  It  would 
be  a  mistake  to  assume  that  the  calamities  here  foretold  were  consequent  on  Hezekiah's 
fault.  So,  at  first  sight,  they  might  appear  to  be ;  but  we  may  be  quite  sure  that  they 
were  not.  For  in  other  places  these  national  disasters  are  referred,  not  to  one  individual 
delinquency,  but  to  national  apostasy  and  disobedience.  It  was  simply  that  the  pride 
of  the  king  provided  a  suitable  occasion  for  intimating  the  sad  humiliations  which  were 
in  store  for  his  descendants ;  just  as  the  complacent  remark  of  the  disciples  called  forth 
the  prediction  that  those  great  stones  of  the  temple,  in  which  they  so  much  rejoiced, 
would  before  long  be  cast  down  to  the  ground  (Mark  xiii.  1,  2).  We  need  not,  as  indeed 
we  cannot,  suppose  that  God  would  visit  on  a  remote  generation  a  terrible  calamity  in 
punishment  of  one  comparatively  small  transgression.  2.  It  would  be  a  mistake  to 
suppose  t.jat  Hezekiah  was  indifferent  to  the  fate  of  his  posterity  so  long  as  he  and  his 
contemporaries  were  secure  (ver.  8).  So  selfish  a  spirit  is  inconceivable  in  so  good 
a  man.  "We  have,  of  course,  only  a  small  part  of  his  reply  to  the  prophet;  but 
we  may  assure  ourselves  that  he  meant  nothing  more  than  to  signify  his  thankful- 
ness that  the  judgments  of  God  were  to  be  mitigated  by  mercy  toward  himself  and 
his  people.    The  incident  may  speak  to  us  of — 

1.  The  febil  of  complagbnot.  It  seems  that,  after  his  recovery  from  sickness, 
gratitude  was  lost  in  self-gratulation.  Then  came  the  ostentation  which  met  with  the 
Divine  reproof.  Complacency  is  a  very  "slippery  place"  for  our  foot  to  tread.  Only 
the  steadiest  can  walk  there  without  a  stumble.  Whatever  may  seem  to  justify  it — 
even  if  it  be  successful  philanthropy,  religious  service,  or  delightful  devotion — it  is  a 
perilous  place,  in  which  it  is  easy  to  err  and  almo-st  impossible  to  keep  quite  straight 
with  God.  Our  occupancy  of  it  should  be  but  momentary ;  gratitude  is  much  safer  as 
well  as  much  more  acceptable  to  God. 

IL  The  Divine  bebdke.  God  reproved  Hezekiah  for  his  foolish  ostentation.  This  is 
a  sin  which  is  no  less  offensive  to  him  than  it  is  distasteful  to  us.  We  can  all  see  and 
do  all  feel  how  very  unbecoming  is  pride  in  man.  For:  1.  We  have  nothing  at  all 
which  we  have  not  ultimately  received  from  God.  2.  Whatever  we  possess,  whether 
of  strength,  beauty,  faculty,  honour,  riches,  etc.,  it  is  all  so  much  more  than  we  deserve. 
3.  At  any  moment  we  may  be  required  to  lay  it  down.  Of  the  house  of  our  power  and 
our  possession  we  are  but  "  tenants-at-will."  Who  can  tell  that  God  may  not  be  about 
to  say  to  us,  "  This  night "  thou  goest  forth? 

III.  HuMAM  aoqdiescbncb.  "  Good  is  the  word  of  the  Lord."  Ood's  rebuke  may 
be  met  with  (1)  a  sullen,  rebellious  resentment  (Gen.  iv.  9)  ;  (2)  or  with  a  stony  and 
(inful  indifference ;  when  he  humbles  men  in  his  providence,  and  they  take  no  note  at  aU 
of  the  humiliation  he  sends  them,  but  continue  in  ungodliness ;  (3)  or  with  an  ignorant 
uttonishment ;  when  men  know  not  their  own  spiritual  poverty  and  blindneu  (Bev.  iii. 


62  THE  BOOK  OF  THE   PEOPHET  ISAIAH,    [oh.  xxxix.  1— & 

17) ;  (4)  or  with  a  wise  and  reverent  acquiescence  (text) ; — then  God  is  pleased  with  ub, 
and  we  rise  to  higher  ground  in  our  Cluistian  pilgrimage. — 0. 

Ver.  4, — The  home,  seen  though  not  shown.  No  doubt  the  ambassadon  of  the  King 
of  Babylon  saw  many  things  in  the  palace  of  Hezekiah  which  he  did  not  exhibit  to 
them  ;  more  things  are  seen  than  those  which  are  displayed.  It  is  so  in  every  house ; 
and  it  may  be  that  the  visitor  goes  away  more  impressed  with  some  things  which  no 
one  pointed  out  to  him  than  with  anything  to  which  his  attention  was  called.  If  any 
one  were  to  ask  him  what  he  has  seen  in  the  house,  he  would  mention  that  which  its 
master  had  not  thought  to  show  him.  What  would  any  visitor  to  our  house  see, 
though  we  did  not  show  it  to  him  ? 

I.  Order  or  disorder  ?  The  manifest  presence  of  a  strong  hand  keeping  every  one  in 
order  and  everything  in  its  place  ;  or  the  p  linful  absence  of  it  ? 

n.  Obedience  or  disobedience  ?  Filial  readiness  and  even  eagerness  to  comply  at 
once  with  the  parents'  wish ;  or  the  lingering  step  or  even  the  entire  disregard  of  that 
desire? 

III.  Courtesy  oe  discoubtest?  Habitually  becoming  behaviour  at  the  table  and 
the  hearth ;  or  the  unwise  neglect  of  those  smaller  observances  which  minister  to  the 
beauty  and  the  sweetness  of  daily  life  ? 

rV.  Love  or  indifference,  or  positive  dislike  ?  The  presence  of  that  warm  affec- 
tion which  should  bind  husband  and  wife,  parent  and  child,  brother  and  sister,  in  the 
bonds  of  happy  and  enduring  fellowship ;  or  a  cold  and  sad  indifference  to  one  another's 
well-being ;  or  a  still  sadder  animosity  and  persecution  ? 

V.  Selfishness  or  sympathy  ?  The  confinement  of  thought  and  caie  to  the  four 
walls  of  the  home  establishment ;  or  a  considerate  and  generous  regard  for  the  wants  and 
wishes  of  neighbours  and  fellow-citizens  ? 

VI.  Piety  or  woeldliness  ?  Family  worship,  and — what  is  better  still — &  prevailing 
religious  tone,  as  if  parents  and  children  all  felt  that  temporal  success  was  a  very  small 
thing  in  comparison  with  spiritual  worth ;  or  the  language  and  habits  of  an  ignoble  and 
degrading  worldliness? — 0. 

Ver.  1, — Friendship  that  serves  its  oton  ends.  A  kind  of  friendship  only  too  common. 
Illustrated  in  the  motto  of  a  successful  Birmingham  tradesman,  "  Friendly  with  all, 
thick  with  none."  Which  in  full  means,  "  Friendly  with  all,  that  I  may  get  all  I  can 
out  of  everybody ;  thick  with  none,  lest  anybody  should  get  anything  out  of  me." 
This  is  surely  the  meanest  of  mottoes  ever  set  for  the  toning  of  a  life.  ButMerodach- 
Baladan's  offered  friendship  with  Hezekiah  was  much  of  the  same. kind.  The  only 
question  with  him  was,  what  advantage  he  could  gain  for  himself  by  it.  And  there 
is  no  possibility  of  noble  friendship  until  we  can  forget  self,  and  say,  "  What  can  this 
friendship  be  to  my  friend  ?  "  The  historical  facts  of  special  importance  to  us  are  these : 
The  family  of  Merodach-Baladan  ruled  in  Southern  Babylonia,  on  the  shores  of  the 
Persian  Gulf.  The  district  of  the  marsh-land  of  the  delta  formed,  for  a  period  of  many 
centuries,  the  place  of  refuge  for  fugitive  rebels  from  Assyria.  While  the  Assyrian 
armies  were  engaged  in  the  siege  of  Samaria,  Merodach-Baladan  seized  the  Babylonian 
throne,  and  naturally  tried  to  support  his  position  by  securing  alliances  with  distant 
nations,  especially  such  as  were  tributary  to  Assyria.  A  good  excuse  was  found  in  the 
case  of  Hezekiah,  in  the  report  of  his  serious  sickness.  In  our  day  the  illness  of  a 
sovereign  is  the  occasion  for  sending  all  sorts  of  telegrams  and  embassies. 

I.  OFFERED  friendship  MAT  FIND  GOOD  EXCUSES.  True  in  common  life  of  the 
individual ;  specially  true  in  the  relation  of  nations.  Diplomacy  is  the  art  of  working 
out  a  policy  under  the  shelter  of  the  deception  of  skilful  excuses.  It  seems  to  mean 
a  veiy  simple  thing ;  it  really  works  a  very  subtle  work.  Baladan  had  two  excuses. 
I.  Ills  )uessengers  honoured  Hezekiah  with  congratulations  on  his  recovery,  A  polite 
thing,  quite  likely  to  disarm  all  suspicions,  and  win  confidence.  2.  From  2  Qtron. 
xxzii.  81  we  learn  that  Baladan  also  framed  a  scientific  excuse,  and  desired  his  ambas- 
sadors to  inquire^  concerning  the  singular  astronomical  phenomenon  which  had  been 
reported.    All  this  kept  out  of  sight  Baladan's  political  sohcmings. 

n.    OfTKBBD   friendship  must  be   JUDGED   BT  THE   OHAEAOTBB  OF  THOSE  WHO  MAKX 

THE  OFFEB.     It  was  at  least  suspicious  that  Baladan  was  acting  as  a  rebel  against  hia 


OH.  xzxix.  1—8.]    THE  BOOK  OP  THE   PROPHET   ISAIAH.  63 

sovei^gn  lord,  Hezekiah  might  have  looked  for  some  schemes  of  his  own  in  this 
embassy.  Friendship  is  always  the  expression  of  character  and  the  test  of  character. 
The  friendship  of  one  who  is  unprincipled  is  full  of  peril.  "  Be  not  unequally  yoked 
together  with  unbelievers." 

III.  Offebbd  friendship  mat  propose  more  than  it  can  accomplish.  So  we 
should  distinguish  between  friendship  that  is  self-seeking  and  friendship  that  is  weakly 
gushing,  yet  sincere.  Our  friends,  in  their  love,  often  promise  more  than  they  can 
perform ;  and  we  must  learn  to  take  the  will  for  the  deed,  giving  credit  for  good  inten- 
tions.   God  never  disappoints. 

IV.  Offered  friendship  mat  hide  positively  malicious  designs.  This  will  lead 
to  references  to  the  offered  friendship  of  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  and  the  utter  baseness 
and  iniquity  of  Judas  in  coming  to  Jesus  as  a  friend  on  the  night  of  betrayal. — R.  T. 

Ver.  2, — Hie  ath  ^presuming.  "  And  Hezekiah  was  glad  of  them,  and  showed  them 
the  house  of  his  precious  things."  Presumption  is  taking  the  ordering  of  our  lives  into 
our  own  hands,  without  consulting  God  or  remembering  our  dependence  on  him.  It 
is  the  sin  to  which  kings  and  rulers  and  men  of  masterful  dispositions  are  specially 
exposed.  Therefore  David  prayed  so  earnestly,  "  Keep  back  thy  servant  also  from  pre- 
sumptuous sins ;  let  them  not  have  dominion  over  me."  The  singular  thing,  and  the 
suggestive  thing,  in  the  case  of  Hezekiah  is  that  he  took  the  insulting  Assyrian  letter 
and  at  once  spreaid  it  before  the  Lord.  Trouble  drove  him  at  once  to  God,  but  flattery 
disarmed  him,  and  he  acted  without  consulting  God.  Not  without  good  reason  is  it 
urged  that  prosperity  is  a  severer  test  of  character  than  adversity  ;  that  "  woe  is  unto 
us  when  all  men  speak  well  of  us ; "  and  that  added  years  after  a  serious  illness  are  often- 
times a  very  doubtful  blessing.  The  writer  of  the  Chronicles  (2  Chron.  xxxii.  25)  helps 
us  to  read  the  heart  of  Hezekiah.  He  says  that  Isaiah  was  displeased  with  him  because 
"  his  heart  was  lifted  up."  Vanity  is  indicated  in  this  exhibition  of  all  his  treasures. 
Cheyne  finds  all  the  excuse  that  can  be  found  for  Hezekiah.  He  says,  '  Was  it  merely 
vanity  which  prompted  the  king  thus  to  throw  open  his  treasuries?  Surely  not.  It 
was  to  satisfy  the  emissaries  of  Baladan  that  Hezekiah  had  considerable  resources,  and 
was  worthy  of  becoming  his  ally  on  equal  terms.  To  Isaiah,  as  a  prophet  of  Jehovah, 
the  king's  fault  was  principally  in  allowing  himself  to  be  courted  by  a  foreign  potentate, 
as  if  it  were  not  true  that  '  Jehovah  had  founded  Zion,'  and  that  '  the  afSicted  of  his 
people  could  find  refuge  therein.'"  Matthew  Henry  says  of  Hezekiah,  "  He  was  a  wise 
and  good  man,  but  when  one  miracle  after  another  was  wrought  in  his  favour,  he  found 
it  hard  to  keep  his  heart  from  being  lifted  up,  nay,  a  little  thing  then  drew  him  into 
the  snare  of  pride.  Blessed  Paul  himself  needed  a  thorn  in  the  flesh  to  keep  him  from 
being  lifted  up  with  the  abundance  of  revelations."  The  sin  of  presumption  is  a  more 
common,  and  a  more  serious,  sin  than  we  are  wont  to  consider  it.  It  is  one  that  finds 
frequent  illustration  in  Holy  Scripture.  The  sin  that  lust  Eden  was  presumption. 
Jacob's  grasping  at  the  birthright  was  presumption.  Moses'  smiting  the  rock  twice 
was  presumption.  Saul's  forcing  himself  to  sacrifice  when  Samuel  tarried  was  pre- 
sumption. David's  numbering  the  people  was  presumption.  Peter  striking  off  the  ear 
of  Malchus  was  presumption.  These  are  but  specimen  cases,  readily  recalled.  A  care- 
ful estimate  of  many  sins  will  reveal  presumption  at  the  root  of  them.  Still,  if  we  read 
our  lives  aright,  we  shall  find  that  we  are  constantly  presuming  on  what  God  would 
have  us  to  do,  and  acting  without  making  due  inquiries  of  him. 

I.  Temptations  to  presumption.  1.  These  come  partly  out  of  natural  disposition. 
There  is  an  evil  of  over-meekness ;  sometimes  we  find  a  lack  of  energy  and  self-assertion 
which  prevents  men  from  impressing  themselves  on  any  sphere  of  life  which  they  may 
be  called  to  occupy.  But  there  is  much  more  frequently  the  evil  of  over-assertion,  that 
belongs  to  energetic,  enterprising  natures,  that  take  life  with  a  strong  grip.  Many  men 
cannot  wait.  They  form  their  judgments  quickly,  and  want  them  immediately  acted 
on.  And  such  persons  are  constantly  tempted  to  presume.  If  good  men,  they  act  first, 
and  ask  of  God  the  approval  of  their  actions.  Oftentimes  this  strong  self-vvilludness  is 
a  hereditary  disposition,  which  the  Christian  spirit  has  to  battle  with  and  overcome. 
Oftentimes  it  is  sadly  fostered  by  the  nettings  of  childhood,  and  the  false  education  of 
youth ;  and  then  it  is  the  serious  coafirtned  evil  that  is  hardly  overcome  even  in  a  hfe- 
long  struggle.     2.  The  temptations  come  partly  out  of  circumstances.     In  the  dns- 


64  THE  BOOK  OP  THE  PBOPHET  ISAIAH,    [oh.  xxxix.  1— a 

peratdiess  of  businesa  pressnre,  the  almost  bankrapt  man  presumes  on  his  friends,  acts 
wilfully,  and  even  brings  others  down  in  his  ruin.  But  circumstances  of  success  prove 
even  greater  temptations.  Nebuchadnezzar  is  the  type  of  the  presumers,  as  he  stands 
in  the  midst  of  his  city,  saying,  "  Is  not  this  great  Babylon,  that  I  have  built  ?  " 

II.  Sin  of  presumption.  1.  It  is  sin  against  man's  ereatwehood.  Man  is  not  an 
independent  being.  He  cannot  stand  alone.  "  No  man  can  keep  alive  his  own  soul." 
He  has  nothing  of  his  own.  Then  he  has  no  right  to  presume.  2.  It  is  a  sin  against 
a  man's  childhood.  Parents  have  to  repress  this  spirit  in  their  children,  because  it  is 
subversive  of  true  home-life.  And  so  must  the  great  Father.  3.  It  is  especially  sin  in 
man  as  redeemed.  Because,  as  redeemed,  man  is  the  humbled  sinner,  who  is  made  a 
monument  of  grace,  and  ought  to  walk  humbly  with  God,  always  coming  after  him, 
and  never  pressing  on  before.  Theevil  of  this  sin.is  seen  in  the  deterioration  of  Christian 
character  which  follows  whenever  it  is  indulged. 

III.  PuKisHMENT  OF  PRESUMPTION.  Usually  this  comes  by  the  failure  of  the  self- 
willed  plans ;  or  the  sad  results  that  follow  the  self-willed  course  that  is  taken.  In  the 
case  of  Hezekiah  God  sends  a  vision  of  what  vrill  follow  out  of  that  embassy  of  which 
the  king  was  so  proud.  It  was  the  thin  end  of  a  wedge.  Driven  home,  by-and-by,  it 
meant  the  destruction  of  Jerusalem,  and  the  captivity  of  Judah,  by  those  very  Baby- 
lonians. Hezekiah  boasted  in  order  to  get  a  worldly  alliance.  His  boastings  excited 
cupidity ,  which  presently  led  to  the  carrying  away  of  the  exhibited  treasures.  "  Let  him 
that  thinketh  he  standeth  take  heed  lest  he  fall "  into  the  sin  of  presumption. — U.  T. 

Vers.  6,  7. — Shadows  projected  from  coming  trouble.  Almost  our  worst  troubles  are 
the  things  we  fear.  They  loom  so  large  and  seem  so  terrible,  like  distant  figures  in 
•  fog.  The  mind  is  so  long  occupied  with  them  before  it  can  do  anything  in  relation 
to  them.i  Our  Saviour's  life  was  darkened  with  the  shadows  of  his  coming  woe.  As 
he  talked  with  heavenly  visitants,  he  "  spake  of  his  decease  which  he  should  accomplish 
at  Jerusalem."  He  cried, "  Now  is  my  soul  troubled  .  .  .  Father,  save  me  from  this  hour." 
The  shadow  seemed  easier  to  bear  when  it  darkened  down  into  an  actual  present  con- 
flict and  woe.  Most  men  are  "  all  their  life  in  bondage  through  fear  of  death,"  and 
thousands  of  men  are  almost  hypochondriacal  in  their  anxieties  about  troubles  tiiat 
always  seem  to  be  coming,  but  seldom  really  come. 

I.  Future  things  that  flino  shadows  over  the  present.  1.  The  fear  of  the 
young  Christian  that  he  will  not  hold  out  to  the  end.  Often  a  morbid  fear ;  always  an 
unworthy  fear,  because  it  really  means  our  doubting  whether  God  can  keep  us  safely  to 
the  end.  2.  Fears  bom  of  the  difficulties  of  times  of  business  depression.  Parents 
often  talk,  in  their  homes,  about  the  workhouse,  in  a  joking  way,  which  nevertheless 
means  that  the  shadow  of  it  lies  upon  their  lives.  A  dread  of  failure  and  bankruptcy 
broods  over  many  a  business  man.  Unworthy  dread,  in  view  of  the  promise,  "  Verily 
thou  shalt  be  fed."  3.  Fears  growing  out  of  conditions  of  health.  The  exaggeration 
of  this  is  observed  in  cases  of  religious  mania  or  nervous  depression.  Then  all  the 
future  is  black  and  hopeless,  and  the  soul  immovably  accepts  the  idea  that  it  is  for 
ever  lost.  These  fears,  alasl  often  inspire  the  suicide  to  his  self-murderous  deed. 
4.  Fears  that  gather  about  the  certainty  of  judgment  when  the  conscience  bears  testi- 
mony to  guilt.  A  whole  life  may  be  shadowed  by  a  crime.  It  is  not  the  memory  of 
the  crime  that  flings  the  shadows ;  it  is  the  conviction  that  the  crime  must  come  up 
again  to  view  some  day,  and  make  its  appeal  for  vengeance.  In  one  way  or  another 
shadows  lie  on  aU  our  lives. 

n.    PliESENl  THINOS  THAT  BELIBTB  THE  SHADOWS  FLUNQ  BT  THE  FUTURE.      1.  Humail 

hope.  'I'he  most  indestructible  thing  in  human  breasts.  2.  RiglU  estimate  of  life}  as 
the  sphere  in  which  b  great  moral  purpose  is  being  wrought  out :  character  is  being 
moulded  by  the  mingled  influence  of  things  evil  and  things  good.  3.  The  evn^ortittg 
promieet  of  Ood ;  which  assure  us  of  Divine  overcomings  and  overrulings.  4.  And 
tht  asearance  of  the  abiding  Divine  presence,  which  is  a  constant  sweet  light  that,  falling 
on  the  very  shadows,  touches  them  with  golden  glowing,  even  as  dark  eveniiig  clouds 
are  kindled  into  glory  at  the  after-sunset. — B.  T. 

Ver.  8. —  Omr  submissions  may  be  nelfish.  "He  said  moreover.  For  there  ritall  b« 
p«aca  »nil  ♦rtith  in  wy  days."     "  Hezekiah  not  only  acquiesces  in  the  will  of  Jehovah, 


CH.X1. 1— 31.]      THE  BOOK  OF  THE  PEOPHBT  ISAIAH. 


66 


like  Eli  (1  Sam.  iii.  18),  but  congratulates  himself  on  his  own  personal  safety.  It 
would,  no  doubt,  have  been  the  nobler  course  to  beg  that  he  alone  might  bear  the  punish- 
ment, as  he  alone  had  sinned.  But  the  principle  of  the  solidarity  of  the  forefather  and 
his  posterity,  and  of  the  king  and  his  people,  prevails  almost  throughout  the  Old  Testa- 
ment."    Self-delusion  is  very  common  in  the  matter  of  submission. 

I.  Some  thine  thet  submit  when  they  have  only  okased  to  oabe.  The  two 
things  are  quite  distinct.  A  man  only  truly  submits  while  he  keepi  his  care,  and  has 
his  pergonal  desire  and  wish  still  vigorous.  True  submission  is  the  voluntary  giving 
up  of  one's  own  wish  because  we  accept  the  wish  of  another.  The  glory  of  it  is  that 
it  is  hard.    It  is  easy  enough  when  we  have  ceased  to  care. 

II.  Some  think  thet  submit  when  thet  only  lie  down  ukdeb  Gtod.  As  dying 
people,  if  asked  whether  they  submit,  will  often  say,  "  Oh  yes ;  there  is  nothing  else 
I  can  do."  God  is  too  big  for  them — ^that  is  all.  If  he  were  not,  they  would  still 
struggle  against  him.  This  is  the  Mohammedan  form  of  submission.  "  Allah  Akbarl" 
— "God  is  great!"  "Islam" — "We  must  submit  to  him."  The  exaggeration  of  this 
kind  of  submission  is  found  in  the  Eastern  doseh.  Men  lie  down  on  the  ground  side  by 
side,  and  let  the  king  ride  on  horseback  over  their  shoulders.  Our  God  asks  for  no 
such  submission  as  that. 

m.  Some  think  they  submit  when  the  bubden  is  lifted  fbom  them  to  but 
ON  othebs.  a  very  comfortable,  but  very  mean,  sort  of  submission.  A  selfish  sub- 
mission that  acquiesces  in  a  will  of  God  that  shields  ourselves,  whatever  others  may 
have  to  suffer.  This  was  Hezekiah's  submission.  "  Good  is  the  will  of  the  Lord  in 
judgment,  for  he  has  shifted  it  over  to  make  things  comfortable  for  me."  It  is  impos- 
sible to  give  Hezekiah  much  credit  for  ao  poor  a  submission  as  that. 

IV.  Teue  heabts  think  they  submit  only  when  they  lovingly  acokpt  the 
holy  will,  whatever  that  will  may  involve.  Submission  is  the  expression  of 
confidence,  the  breath  of  trust,  the  sign  of  perfect  love.  It  is  the  uttered  child-heart. 
It  cannot  make  any  qualifications.  Its  unceasing  refrain  is,  "My  Father  knows." 
The  one  sublime  example  of  submission  is  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  who,  though  the 
holy  will  involved  bitterest  personal  suffering,  could  sincerely  say,  "  Not  as  I  will, 
but  as  thou  wilt."  After  Christ  the  world's  great  figure  of  submission  is  the  venerable 
Moses,  ascending  Nebo  to  receive  the  kiss  of  God  and  die,  "  with  Canaan's  goodly  land 
in  view."— E.  T. 


PAET    III.      ISAIAH'S    LATER    PROPHECIES    (CH. 

XL.— LXVL). 

Sbotioh  L    The  Fkoflb  or  God  oomfobtkd  ur  Tbibulatiok  (oh.  xbX 

EXPOSITION. 


CHAPTER  XL. 

Pbefatobt  Eemabks. 
The  Assyrian  struggle  is  over.  The  prophet 
has  accepted  into  the  depths  of  his  spirit 
God's  announcement  that  the  ttue  spoiler, 
"  the  rod-  of  his  anger,  and  the  staff  of  his 
indignation,"  is  not  Assyria,  but  Babylon. 
He  has  accepted  the  sentence  that  his  people 
is  to  go  into  captivity.  Into  this  future  of 
his  nation  he  throws  himself  with  a  faith,  a 
fervour,  and  a  power  of  realization,  which 
tie  all  his  own.  "  The  familiar  scenes  and 
ISAIAH — n. 


CsiceB,  among  which  he  has  hitherto  lived 
and  laboured,  have  grown  dim  and  disap- 
peared. All  sounds  and  voices  of  the  present 
are  hushed,  and  move  him  no  more.  The 
present  has  died  out  of  the  horizon  of  his 
soul's  vision.  .  ,  .  The  voices  in  his  cars  are 
those  of  men  unborn,  and  he  lives  a  second 
life  among  events  and  persons,  sins  and 
suffering,  and  fears  and  hopes,  photographed 
sometimes  with  the  minutest  accuracy  on 
the  sensitive  and  sympathetic  medium  of 
bis  own  spirit;  and  he  becomes  the  denouncer 
of  the  special  sins  of  a  distant  generation, 


66 


THE  BOOK  OF  THE  PROPHET  ISAIAH.      [ch.  xl.  1— 31. 


aud  the  spokesman  of  the  faith  and  hope  and 
passionate  yearning  of  an  exiled  nation,  the 
descendants  of  men  living,  when  he  wrote, 
in  the  profound  peace  of  a  renewed  pros- 
perity" (Stanley,  quoted  by  Mr.  Cheyue, 
'  Prophecies  of  Isaiah,'  vol.  ii.  p.  213).  The 
primary  idea  which  occurs  to  him  is  that  of 
"comfort."  He  will  "comfort  his  people" 
in  their  affliction,  so  far  as  in  him  lies ;  and 
he  will  do  this  by  preaching  (1)  the  recovery 
of  Israel  &om  sin  by  faith  and  waiting  upon 
God ;  and  (2)  their  recovery  from  the  bondage 
to  Babylon,  wMch  was  the  consequence  of 
■in.  In  the  present  chapter  it  is  the  former 
topio  especially  which  he  urges. 

Ver.  I. — Comfort  ye,  comfort  ye  my  people. 
The  key-note  is  struck  at  once.  With  that 
iteration  which  is  his  favourite  mode  of  em- 
phasiziug  what  is  important  (see  the  com- 
ment on  ch.  xxxviii.  11),  the  prophet  declares 
that  lie  and  his  brethren  have  a  direct  mis- 
sion from  God  to  "  comfort "  Israel.  Note 
the  encouragement  contained  in  the  expres- 
sions, "  my  people,"  and  "  your  God."  Israel 
is  not  cast  off,  even  when  most  deeply 
afflicted. 

Ver.  2, — Speak  ye  comfortably  to  Jeru- 
salem; literally,  tpedk  ye  to  the  heart  of 
Jerusalem.  Address  her  inmost  feelings,  her 
very  spirit  and  soul.  Her  warfare  is  accom- 
plished ...  is  pardoned  .  .  .  hath  received. 
These'  perfects  can  only  be  viewed  as  "  per- 
fects of  prophetic  certainty."  According  to 
every  theory  of  the  authorship  of  ch.  xL — 
lxvi.,they  were  written  before  the  close  of  the 
Captivity,  when  Israel's  warfare  was  not  yet 
accomplished,  her  iniquity  not  yet  fully  par- 
doned. Isaiah,  however,  sees  all  as  already 
accomplished  in  the  Divine  counsels,  and  $o 
announces  it  to  the  people.  Israel's  war&re, 
her  long  term  of  hard  service  (comp.  Job 
▼ii.  1),  will  assuredly  come  to  an  end ;  she 
will  thoroughly  turn  to  God,  and  then  her 
iniquity  will  be  pardoned,  she  will  he  con- 
sidered to  have  suffered  enough.  Double. 
"It  was  the  ordinary  mle  under  the  Law 
that '  for  all  manner  of  trespass '  a  man  con- 
demned by  the  judges  should  pay  double  " 
(Eay ;  comp.  Exod.  xxii.  9).  Heathen  legis- 
lators adopted  the  same  rule  for  certain 
offences  (Arist.,  'Eth.  Nic.,'  iii.  5,  §  8).  It 
is  not  here  intended  to  assert  that  the  law 
of  Divine  judgment  is  to  exact  double ;  but 
only  to  assure  liirael  that,  having  been  amply 
punished,  she  need  fear  no  further  ven- 
geance (comp.  ch.  lii.  T). 

Yer.  3. — The  voice  of  him  that  crieth ; 
rather,  the  voice  of  one  that  crieth.  A  voice 
sounds  in  the  prophet's  ear,  crying  to  re- 
pentance. For  God  to  come  down  on  earth, 
for  his  glory  to  be  revealed  in  any  signal 


way,  by  the  restoration  of  a  nation,  or  the 
revelation  of  himself  in  Christ,  or  the  final 
establishment  of  his  kingdom,  the  "way" 
must  be  first  "prepared"  for  him.  The 
hearts  of  the  disobedient  must  be  turned  to 
the  wisdom  of  the  just.  In  the  wilderness; 
either,  "the  wilderness  of  tliis  world"  (Kay), 
or  "the  wilderness  separating  Babylonia 
from  Palestine"  (Delitzsch),  in  a  part  of 
whicli  John  the  Baptist  afterwards  preached. 
Prepare  ye  the  way  of  the  Lord.  The  "  way 
of  the  Lord  "  is  "  the  way  of  holiness  "  (ch. 
XXXV.  8).  There  is  one  only  mode  of  "  pre- 
paring" it — the  mode  adopted  by  John 
Baptist  (Matt.  iii.  2 — 12),  the  mode  pointed 
out  by  the  angel  who  announced  him  (Luke 
i.  17),  the  mode  insisted  on  in  the  Collect 
for  the  Third  Sunday  in  Advent.  The  voice 
enjoins  on  the  prophets  of  the  captive  nation 
to  prepare  the  hearts  of  the  people  for  the 
coming  manifestation  of  God. 

Ver.  4. — ^Every  valley  shall  be  exalted,  etc. ; 
rather,  let  every  valley  .be  exalted.  The 
prophets  are  to  see  that  the  poor  and  lowly 
are  raised  up ;  the  proud  and  self-righteous 
depressed;  the  crooked  and  dishonest  induced 
to  change  their  ways  for  those  of  simplicity 
and  integrity;  the  rude,  rough,  and  harsh 
rendered  courteous  and  mild.  "  In  general, 
the  meaning  is  that  Israel  is  to  [be  made] 
take  care  that  the  God  who  is  coming  to 
deliver  it  shall  find  it  in  such  an  inward 
and  outward  state  as  befits  his  .  . .  purpose" 
(Delitzsch,  '  Comment,  on  Isaiah,'  vol.  ii.  p. 
142> 

Yer.  5. — ^And  the  glory  of  the  Lord  shall 
be  revealed.  Then,  when  the  preparation  is 
complete,  there  shall  be  a  revelation  of  the 
glory  and  might  of  Jehovah.  The  nature  of 
the  revelation  is  for  the  present  shrouded  in 
darkness ;  but  it  is  a  revelation  which  is  not 
confined  to  Israel.  All  flesh  shall  see  it 
together.  It  shall  draw  to  it  the  attention 
of  the  human  race  at  large.  While  the 
restoration  of  Israel  to  Palestine  is  13ie  pri- 
mary fulfilment  of  the  prophecy,  that  restora- 
tion clearly  does  not  exhaust  its  meaning, 
which  points  on  to  the  restoration,  of  all 
mankind  to  God's  favour  in  Christ  by  the 
iTrupiveui  of  his  advent  in  the  flesh,  which 
has  drawn,  or  will  draw,  the  eyes  of  "all 
flesh."  For  the  mouth  of  the  Lord  hath 
spoken  it.  A  repetition  of  the  emphatic 
clause  wherewith  Isaiah  had  terminated  the 
third  section  of  his  flrst  prophecy  (ch.  i.  20). 
It  occurs  again  in  ch.  Iviii,  14.  No  other 
writer  uses  the  expression. 

Yer.  6. — The  voice  said,  Cry;  rather,  • 
voice  of  one  that  satjeth,  Cry.  It  is  a  second 
voice,  distinct  from  that  of  ver.  3,  that  now 
reaches  the  prophet's  ear — a  voice  responded 
to  by  another.  The  speakers  seem  to  be 
angels,  who  contrast  th^  perishable  nature 
of  man  with  the  enduringness  and  unchang- 


OH.  XL.  1—31.]      THE  BOOK  OP  THE  PROPHET  ISAIAH. 


6/ 


ingneaa  of  God.  The  point  of  their  dis- 
oourae  ie  that  "the  Word  of  the  Lord 
endureth  for  ever"  (ver.  8),  and  therefore  the 
preceding  promises  (vera.  2, 5)  are  sure.  And 
he  Baid;  rather,  and  one  said.  A  second 
voice  answered  the  first,  and  asked  what  the 
piocUimation  was  to  be.  In  reply  its  terms 
were  given.  All  flesh  is  grass  (com  p.  oh. 
xxxvii.  27 ;  an  I  see  also  Job  v.  25;  Ps.  xc. 
5;  xcii.  7;  ciii.  15).  The  goodliness  thereof 
is  as  the  flower  of  the  field.  So  Ephraim 
wag  compared  in  pli.  xxviii.  1  to  "a  fading 
flower."  The  similitude  is  found  also  in 
Job  xiv.  2  and  In  Ps.  ciii.  15.  Homer  ap- 
proaches the  idea  in  his  well-known  simile, 
OIti  »«p  ipiWuv  yeKsJ),  Toi^Sc  Kcd  avSpay 
('Iliad,'  vi.  146). 

Yer.  7. — The  flower  fadeth:  beoanse  the 
Spirit  of  the  Lord  bloweth  upon  it.  When 
the  hot  winds,  which  God  sends,  blow  in 
spring-time,  the  flowers  fade;  when  »  de- 
stroying breath  from  him  (see  ch.  xxx.  33) 
passes  over  the  generations  of  men,  they 
perish.  Surely  the  people  is  grass.  Either 
a  mere  repetition  of  "  all  fiesh  is  grass"  (ver. . 
6)  with  an  asseveration,  or  an  intimation  that 
"  the  people  "  of  Israel  is  not  exempt  from 
the  lot  of  mankind  in  general,  but  shares  it. 

Ver.  8.— The  Word  of  our  God  shall  stand 
for  ever,  Anjid  all  human  frailty,  shifting- 
nesa,  changefulness,  there  is  one  thing  that 
endures,  and  sliall  enduje — God's  Word  (see 
the  comment  on  the  first  part  of  ver.  6).  In 
the  Bureness  of  God's  promises  is  Israel's 
exceeding  comfort. 

Vers.  9 — 11. — The  time  of  Israel's  restora- 
tion has  drawn  nigh.  T1ir  preparation  has 
been  made.  The  voice  calling  to  preparation 
is  silent.  The  promises  are  now  on  the 
verge  of  receiving  their  accomplishment. 
It  is  fitting  that  some  one  should  announce 
the  fact  to  the  nation.  Isaiah  calls  on  the 
company  of  prophets  living  at  the  time  to 
do  so  (ver.  9).  They  are  to  take  up  a  com- 
manding position,  to  speak  with  a  loud 
voice,  and  to  proclaim  the  good  tidings  to 
Zion,  to  Jerusalem,  and  to  the  cities  of 
Judah  (comp.  ch.  xliv.  26).  The  terms  of 
the  proclamation  are  then  given  (vers.  10, 
11). 

Ver.  9. — 0  Zion,  that  bringest  good  tidings, 
etc. ;  rather,  as  in  the  margin,  0  thou  that 
tellett  goorl  tidings  to  Zion  (so  the  LXX., 
Gesenius,  Boscniniiller,  Slatirer,  Hitzig, 
Knobel,  and  Kay).  Get  thee  up  into  the 
high  mountain ;  rather,  into  a  high  mountain. 
Choose  an  elevated  spot  from  which  to  make 
proclamation.  0  Jerusalem,  that  bringest, 
etc.;  again,  as  in  the  margin,  0  thou  that 
tellett  good  tidings  to  JeruiaUm.  The  repeti- 
tion, with  a  slight. change,  is  quite  in  the 
manner  of  Isaiah.  The  cities  of  Judah. 
These  woidd  be  in  ruins,  no  less  than 
Jeruialem  herself  (see  oh.  zlvi.  26 ;  Uiv.  lOV 


Ver.  10.— The  Lord  God;  literally,  tht 
Lord  Jehovah.  With  strong  hand ;  or,  with 
strength.  His  arm  shall  rule  for  him.  Kay 
translates,  "His  arm  shall  get  him  rule;" 
i.e.  the  manifestation,  which  he  shall  make 
of  his  power,  shall  cause  his  kingdom  to 
be  extended  far  and  wide  upon  the  earth. 
"The  Lord's  arm,"  "the  Lord's  hand,"  are 
favourite  expressions  of  Isaiah's  (ch.  v.  25 ; 
ix.  12;  X.  4;  xi.  11 ;  xxxi.  3;  U.  9;  liii.  1 ; 
Ixii.  3,  etc.).  His  reward  is  with  him,  and 
his  work  before  him ;  rather,  his  wage  is  with 
him,  and  his  recomp-;rtse  b  fore  him — a  case 
of  synonymous  parnllelism.  The  phrase  is 
repeated  in  ch.  Ixii.  11.  Mr.  Cheyne  un- 
derstands "  the  reward  which  God  gives  to 
his  faithful  ones  "  to  be  meant.  But  perhaps 
it  is  better  to  undrr&tand,  with  Dr.  Kay,  that 
in  the  "little  flock"  which  he  restores  to 
Palestine  God  finds  his  own  reward  and 
recompense — the  compensation  for  all  his 
care  and  trouble. 

Ver.  11. — He  shall  feed  his  flook  like  a 
shepherd.  The  similitude  is  a  favourite  one 
with  the  psalmists  (Ps.  Ixxvii.  20;  Ixxviii.  52 ; 
Ixxx.  1 ),  and  occurs  again  later  on  in  Isaiah 
(xlix.  9, 10).  Its  beauty  and  sweetness  have 
been  widely  recognized.  He  shall  gather  the 
lambs ;  collect  them,  i.e ,  when  they  have 
strayed  from  the  fiock.  Shall  gently  lead 
those  that  are  with  young ;  rather,  those  that 
give  suck  (comp.  Gen.  xxxiii.  13,  where  the 
same  word  is  used).  Ewes  that  are  suckling 
their  lambs  require  specially  tender  treat- 
ment. 

Vers.l  2 — 31. — The  Might  akd  Greatness 
OF  God  contrasted  with  the  Weakness 
OF  Man  and  the  Futility  of  Idols.  If 
captive  Israel  is  to  be  induced  to  turn  to 
God,  and  so  hasten  the  time  of  its  restora- 
tion to  his  favour  and  to  its  own  land,  it 
must  be  by  rising  to  a  worthy  conception  of 
the  nature  and  attributes  of  the  Almighty. 
The  prophet,  therefore,  in  the  remainder  of 
this  chapter,  paints  iu  glorious  language  the 
power  and  greatness,  and  at  the  same  time 
the  mercy,  of  God,  contrasting  him  with 
man  (vers.  15—17,  23,  28—31),  with  idols 
(vers.  19,  20),  and  with  the  framework  of 
material  things  (vers.  21,  22,  26),  and  show- 
ing his  infinite  superiority  to  each  and  all. 
In  contraBtii]g  him  with  man,  he  takes 
occasion  to  bring  into  prominence  his  goou 
ness  and  loving-kindness  to  man,  to  whom  he 
imparts  a  portion  of  bis  own  might  and 
strength  (vers.  29—31). 

Ver.  12. — ^Who  hath  measured  the  waters! 
(comp.  Prov.  xxx.  4  and  Job  zxxviii.  4 — 6). 
The  might  of  God  is  especially  shown  in 
creation,  whicib  Isaiah  assume!  to  b*  God'f 


68 


THE  BOOK  OP   THE   PROPHET   ISAIAH.       [oh.  xl.  1—31. 


work.  How  infinitely  above  man  must  he 
be,  who  arraiigeri  in  snch  perfection,  "by 
measure  and  number  and  weight "  (Wisd.  xi. 
20),  the  earth,  the  waters,  and  the  heavens, 
BO  proportioning  each  to  each  as  to  pmduoe 
that  admirable  order  and  regularity  which 
the  intelligent  observer  cannot  but  note  in 
the  material  univert^e  as  among  its  chief 
characteristics  1  In  the  hollow  of  his  hand. 
The  anthropomorphism  is  strong,  no  doubt, 
but  softened  by  the  preceding  mention  (in 
ver.  10)  of  God's  "arm,"  and  by  the  com- 
parison of  God  to  a  shepherd  (in  ver.  11). 
Isaiah's  exalted  notion  of  God  renders  him 
fearless  with  regard  to  antliropoiiiorphism. 
And  meted  out  heaven  with  the  span ;  rather, 
with  a  spnn  (comp.  ch.  xlviii.  13,  '  Sly  right 
hand  liath  spanned  fie  heavens").  And 
eompreheuded  the  dust  of  the  earth  in  a 
measure;  literally,  in  a  tierce  (as  in  the 
margin).  The  measure  intended  is  pro- 
bably the  MoA,  which  waa  the  third  part  of 
an  ephah,  and  held  about  three  gallons.  The 
$eah  wai  **  the  ordinary  measure  for  house- 
hold purposes."  In  scales  ...  in  a  balance. 
The  peles,  here  translated  "  scales,"  is  pro- 
bably the  steelyard,  while  the  mdztSnaim 
is  "the  balance  "  or  "  pairof  scales"  ordinarily 
used  for  weighing.  God  metes  out  all 
things  with  measures,  scales,  and  balances 
of  his  own,  which  are  proportioned  to  bis 
greatness. 

Vor.  13. — Who  hath  direoted  the  Spirit  of 
the  Lord  i  Mr.  Cheyne  remarks,  that  "  in 
Isaiah  there  is  a  marked  tendency  to  hypos- 
tatize  the  Spirit;"  and  the  remark  is  un- 
doubtedly a  just  one  (see  ch.  xxxii.  15; 
zzxiv.  16 ;  xlviii.  16 ;  Ixi.  1,  etc.).  In  the  pre- 
sent place,  perhaps,  the  introduction  of  "  the 
Spirit  of  the  Lord  "  arises  out  of  the  remem- 
brance of  the  part  in  creation  which  is 
assigned  to  the  Spirit  in  Oen.  i.  2.  He 
"  moved,"  or  "  brooded,"  upon  the  face  of 
the  waters,  and  thence  began  the  change,  or 
series  of  changes,  by  which  order  was  pro- 
duced out  of  confusion.  The  Spirit  of  the 
Lord  "  directed,"  or  regulated,  these  changes; 
but  who,  Isaiah  asks,  "  directed,"  or  regu- 
lated, the  Spirit  itself?  Can  it  be  supposed 
that  be  too  had  a  director  over  him  ?  Isaiah 
does  not  seriously  doubt  on  this  point,  or 
"leave  it  an  open  question."  He  makes 
his  inqniiT  by  way  of  a  redwetio  ad  ab- 
$urdvm.  Is  it  not  absurd  to  suppose  that 
he  had  a  director  or  a  counsellor  ?  He  does 
not — ^here,  at  any  rate — so  far  "hypostatize 
the  Spirit "  as  to  view  him  as  a  Person 
distinct  from  the  Person  of  God  the  Father, 
working  under  him,  and  carrying  out  his 
wilL  Oi  being  his  counsellor  hath  taught 
bimt  "The  Lord  by  wisdom  founded  the 
earth"  (Prov.  iii  19);  but  he  was  his  own 
counsellor.  He  had  no  a^riser  external  to 
himaelf .    The  wisdmu  which  wrought  with 


him  was  his  own  wisdom,  an  essential  pan 
of  the  Divine  essence.  The  evangelical  pro- 
phet approaches  those  myst«ies  of  God's 
naturu  which  the  gospel  brought  to  light, 
but  cannot  penetrate  them. 

Ver.  It)  — Behold,  the  nations  are  as  a  drop 
of  a  bucket.  "  Prom  nature,"  as  Mr.  Cheyne 
says,  "  we  pass  to  history."  If  God  i^  so 
great,  isO  npart  and  by  himself  in  relation  to 
the  material  universe,  what  is  he  in  relation 
to  man?  What  are  nations,  oompared  to 
hiin,  but  "  a^  a  drop  from  a  bucket,"  which 
drips  from  it,  and  is  of  no  account  ?  What 
are  they,  but  as  the  small  dust  of  the  balance, 
which  lies  on  it  but  does  not  disturb  its 
equilibrium?  They  are  absolutely  "as  no- 
thing "  ( ver.  17) — vanity  and  emptiness.  He 
taketh  up  the  isles  as  a  very  little  thing ; 
literally,  he  taketh  up  islands,  or  perhaps 
lands  geuer.illy.  As  he  weighs  mountains 
and  hills  in  his  balance  (ver.  15),  so  he  can 
take  up  in  his  own  hands  "  lands,"  or  *•  coun- 
tries" (Cheyne).  with  all  their  inhabitants, 
and  do  with  them  as  seemeth  him  good 
They  are  no  burden  to  him. 

Yer.  16. — Lebanon  is  not  sufficient  to  bum. 
Man  may  think  that  he  must  be  of  some 
acconnt,  since  God  has  required  of  him 
sacrifice  and  burnt  offering,  from  which  he 
may  suppose  God  to  derive  some  satisfaction. 
But,  the  prophet  says,  even  if  man  were  to 
burn  all  Lebanon  as  firewood  on  God's  altar, 
and  offer  there  all  the  (clean)  beasts  of  the 
entire  tract,  still  God  would  be  put  under 
no  obligation.  Man  would  eTen  then  have 
paid  less  than  his  debt. 

Ver.  17.  —  AU  nations;  rather,  all  the 
nations  ;  i.e.  all  the  nations  of  the  earth  put 
together.  In  ver.  15  single  "nations"  had 
been  declared  to  be  of  no  account;  now  the 
same  is  said  of  all  the  nations  of  the  earth 
collectively.  They  are  accounted  of  God  as 
'ephes,  nothingness,  and  tohu,  chaos  or  con- 
fusion. 

Ver.  18  is  more  the  complement  of  what 
precedes  than  the  introduction  to  what  fol- 
lows (comp.  ver.  25).  If  God  be  all  that 
has  been  said  of  him  in  vers.  12  — 17, 
must  he  not  be  wholly  unique  and  incom- 
parable? Then,  out  of  this,  the  thought 
arises  of  the  strange,  the  poor,  the  mean 
"likenesses"  of  God,  whieJi  men  have  in 
their  folly  set  up  in  various  times  and  places. 
It  has  been  said  that  Israel  in  captiTity  did 
not  need  to  be  warned  agaiust  idolatry,  of 
the  inclination  to  which  the  Captivity  is 
supposed  at  once  to  have  cured  them  (Ur- 
wick,  'Servant  of  Jehovah,'  p.  15).  But 
there  is  no  evidence  of  this.  Bather,  con- 
sidering the  few  that  returned,  and  the  many 
that  remained  behind  (Joseph., '  Ant.  Jnd;,' 
xi.  1),  we  may  oonolude  that  a  large  number 
adopted  the  eastoms,  religios.  and  generaf 
mode  of  life  of  their  masters. 


en.  XV  1—31.]      THE  BOOK  OF  THE  PBOPHET  ISAIAH. 


69 


Ver.  19. — ^The  workman  melteth  a  graven 
image ;  rather,  the  workman  eaeteth  an  image 
(oomp.  oh.  xli.  7 ;  xliv.  9—17 ;  xlvi.  6,  7). 
leraera  tendency  to  idolatry  has  been  touched 
on  in  the  earlier  prophecies  once  or  twice 
(ch.  ii  8,  20;  xxxi.  7);  but  in  the  later 
chapters  idolatry  is  assailed  with  a  frequency, 
a  pungency,  and  a  vigour  that  are  new,  and 
that  imply  a  change,  either  in  the  prophet's 
circumstances  or  in  his  standpoint.  Per- 
haps it  is  enough  to  suppose  that,  placing 
himself  ideally  among  the  captives,  Isaiah 
sees  that  the  Babylonian  idolatry  will  be, 
or  at  any  rate  may  be,  a  snare  to  them,  and 
provides  an  antidote  against  the  subtle 
poison.  The  special  antidote  which  he  em- 
ploys is  ridicule,  and  the  first  ground  of  his 
ridicule  is  the  genesis  or  formation  of  an 
image.  It  is  made  by  man  himself,  out  of 
known  material  substances.  Either  a  figure 
is  cast  in  some  inferior  metal,  and  then 
coated  with  gold  and  finished  with  the  grav- 
ing tool,  or  a  mere  block  of  wood  is  taken 
and  cut  into  shape.  Can  it  be  supposed 
that  such  things  are  "  likenesses"  of  Ood,  or 
that  he  is  comparable  to  them?  Casteth 
silver  chains ;  as  ornaments  to  be  worn  by 
the  images,  which  were  often  dressed  (see 
Thucyd.,  ii.  13 ;  Baruch  vi.  9—12). 

Ver  20. — He  that  is  so  impoverished,  etc. ; 
rather,  he  that  can  only  make  a  poor  offering, 
i.e.  that  cannot  spend  much  on  religion. 
Chooseth  a  tree ;  rather,  chooteth  wood — goes 
to  the  carpenter,  and  selects  a  good  sound 
block  of  wood,  out  of  which  his  idol  shall  be 
made.  After  this  he  has  to  find  a  skilful 
workman,  who  will  carve  his  image  for  him 
and  set  it  up,  so  that  it  shall  not  shake.  As 
Delitzsch  observes,  "The  thing  carries  its 
own  satire  "  in  the  mere  plain  description  of 
it.    Is  such  a  thing  comparable  to  Ood  ? 

Ver.  21. — Have  ye  not  known  I  Hitherto 
the  prophet  has  restrained  himself,  and  con- 
fined himself  to  quiet  sarcasm.  Now  he 
bursts  out.  Is  there  any  one  so  insensate, 
so  devoid  of  natural  reason  and  understand- 
ing, as  not  to  know  what  has  been  known  to 
all  from  the  beginning — ^yea,  from  the  foun- 
dations of  the  earth— by  "  the  light  that  is  in 
them,"  viz.  that  GU)d  is  something  wholly 
different  from  this? — that  he  is  such  a  One 
as  the  prophet  proceeds  to  describe  in  vers. 
22 — 24,  alike  above  nature  and  above  man, 
Lord  of  heaven  and  earth,  and  absolute  Dis- 
poser of  the  fates  of  all  men  ?  Hath  it  not 
been  told  yon!  If  ye  have  not  known  the 
nature  of  God  by  the  light  of  nature,  has  it 
not  come  down  to  you  by  tradition  1  Have 
not  your  fathers  told  it  you?  Has  it  not  been 
handed  on  by  aire  to  son  from  the  very 
foundation  of  the  earth?  The  appeal  is  to 
men  generally,  not  especially  to  Israel.  Have 
ye  not  understood,  etc.  7  Borne  omit  the  pre- 
poaition  after  "  understood,"  and  render  the 


passage  thus :  "Have  ye  not  understood  the 
foundations  of  the  earth?"  i.e.  how  it  was 
founded,  or  created — that  its  creation  was 
God's  sole  act?  (so  tlie  LXX.,  the  Vulgate, 
Gesenius,  Hitzig,  Delitzsch,  Enobel,  Kay; 
but  Ewttld,  Henderson,Weir,  and  Mr.  Cheyne 
prefer  the  rendering  of  the  Authorized 
Version). 

Ver.  22. — It  is  he  that  sitteth  upon  the 
circle  of  the  earth;  rather,  above  the  vault  of 
the  earth;  above  the  vault  of  sky  which 
seems  to  arch  over  the  earth.  As  grass- 
hoppers ;  i.e.  minute,  scarcely  visible  (comp. 
Numb.  xiii.  33).  That  stretoheth  out  the 
heavens  as  a  curtain.  So  in  Ps.  civ.  2,  only 
that  here  the  "curtain"  is  represented  aa 
one  of  thin  gauze.  The  idea  is  common  to 
Isaiah,  with  Job  (is.  8),  Jeremiah  (x.  12;  Ii. 
15),  and  Zechariah  (xii.  1),  and  is  a  favourite 
one  in  these  later  chapters  (comp.  ch.  xlii. 
5;  xliv.  24;  xlv.  12;  U.  13).  As  a  tent 
(comp.  Ps.  xix.  4,  where  God  is  said  to  have 
set  in  the  heavens  a  "  tabernacle  " — 'oltel,  the 
word  used  here — for  the  sun). 

Ver.  23. — The  princes  .  .  .  the  judges; 
latheT,  princes,  judges.  The  entire  class  of 
such  is  meant,  not  any  special  individuals 
(comp.  Ps.  evii.  40;  Job  xii.  19—21).  As 
vanity ;  or,  cu  ehao$ — the  same  word  that  is 
used  in  ver.  17. 

Ver.  24.— They  shall  not  be  planted  .  ,  . 
shall  not  be  sown  .  .  .  shall  not  take  root. 
The  verbs  are  all  of  them  in  the  past  tenae. 
Translate,  have  not  been  planted, . . .  sovm,  etc. 
The  meaning  is  that  princes  and  judges  of 
the  earth  are  not  fixed  in  their  places,  have 
no  firm  root  in  the  soil,  are  easily  overturned. 
Even  if  the  case  were  different,  a  breath 
from  the  Almighty  would,  as  a  matter  of 
course,  dry  them  up  (see  ver.  7)  and  blow 
them  away.  As  stubble  (comp.  ch.  v.  24 ; 
Ps.  Ixxxiii.  13). 

Ver,  25. — ^To  whom  then,  etc.  ?  This  is  a 
summary,  to  conclude  the  section  (vers.  19 
— 24),  as  ver.  18  concludes  the  preeeding 
one.  If  God  is  paramount  over  idols  (vers. 
19,  20)  and  over  nature  (ver.  22)  and  ovec 
humanity  (vers.  23,  24),  to  whom  can  he  be 
likened  ?  Is  he  not  altogether  unique  and 
incomparable?  Saith  the  Holy  One  (comp. 
ch.  Ivii.  15).  Isaiah's  special  designation  of 
God,  at  once  pregnant  and  almost  peculiar 
(see  the  comment  on  ch.  i.  4),  is  "  the  Holy 
One  of  Israel."  This  is,  here  and  in  ch.  Ivii. 
15,  abbreviated. 

Ver.  26. — Lift  up  yonr  eyes,  etc.  Once 
more  an  appeal  is  made  to  creation,  as  prov- 
ing Ged's  greatness.  "Lift  up  your  eyes 
on  high,  and  see  who  hath  created  these 
(heavens),  bringing  out  their  host  (t.e.  the 
stars)  by  nnmber,  or  in  their  full  number 
(Oheyne),  and  calling  fhem  all  by  names " 
(comp.  Fa.  exlviL  4,  6,  "He  telleth  tho 
number  of  the  atars,  and  calleth  them  all  bj 


70 


THE   ROOK  OF  THE   PROPHET  ISAIAH.      [oh.  xl.  1—31 


their  names,"  which,  however,  is  probably 
later  than  Isaiah).  Onmipotence  alone  could 
have  created  the  starry  host.  Omniscience 
ii  required  to  know  their  number  and  their 
names.  The  Israelites  are  supposed  to  liave 
"  learned  that  the  constellation b  had  names, 
in  Babylon  "  (Cheyne,  ad  loc.') ;  but  a  special 
name  for  each  star,  which  the  Babylonians 
did  not  give,  seems  to  be  here  intended,  Not 
one  faileth;  i.e.  "not  one  star  neglects  to 
attend  the  muster  when  God  marshals  the 
host."    The  stars  are  viewed  as  his  army. 

Ver.  27.— 0  Jacob  ...  0  Israel.  (For  this 
plecmastic  combination,  so  characteristic  of 
Isaiah,  see  cli.  ix.  8;  x.  21,  22;  xiv.  1; 
xxvii,  6;  xxix.  23,  in  the  earlier  chapters; 
and  oh.  xli.  8 ;  xlii.  21 ;  xliii.  1,  22,  28 ; 
xliy.  1,  5,  23;  xlv.  4;  xlvi.  3;  xlix.  5,  6, 
etc.,  in  the  later  ones.)  Why  sayest  thon 
.  .  .  Vj  way  is  hid  )  The  prophet  has  gone 
back  to  tlie  time  when  Israel  is  suffering  all 
the  calamities  of  the  Captivity,  instead  of 
being  on  the  point  of  emerging  from  it,  as  in 
vers.  9 — 11,  and  he  now  hears  the  complaints 
of  the  exiles,  who  think  that  God  has  for- 
saken them — that  he  does  not  see  their 
"w»y"  of  life,  or  regard  their  sufferings 
My  judgment.  De^itzsch  and  Mr.  Cheyne 
translate  "my  right,"  and  understand  the 
"  right "  of  Israel  to  be  independent  of  its 
oppressors. 

Ver.  28.— Hast  thou  not  known?  Com- 
plaining Israel  is  bidden  to  stay  itself  npon 
God,  as  (1)  everlasting;  (2)  the  Creator; 
(3)  un weaned;  (4)  imseardiable ;   and  ia 


then  further  consoled  by  the  promise  that 
God  will  give  them  strength  to  endure; 
support  them,  refresh  them,  and,  as  it  were, 
renew  the  yuuth  of  the  nation  (vera.  29,  31). 
Creator  of  the  ends  of  the  earth;  •'.«. "  Creator 
even  of  the  remotest  ends,"  and  therefore  of 
the  whoh  earth.  Fainteth  not  (oomp.  Ps. 
cxxi.  3,  4).  If  God  were  for  •  moment  to 
"faint"  or  "be  weary,"  to  "slumber"  or 
"  bleep,"  the  whole  fabric  of  nature  would 
fail  and  disappear,  unlvirsal  chaos  would 
set  in,  all  moral  order  would  cease — pro- 
bably all  existence,  except  his  own,  sink  into 
nothingness.  God  is  wholly  free  from  what- 
soever is  weak  or  defective  in  man.  No 
searching  (see  Job  v.  9 ;  ix.  10 ;  xi.  7 ;  Ps. 
cxlvii.  5 ;  Eccles.  iii.  1 1).  God's  ways  being 
unsearchable,  his  servants  must  trust  him 
to  accomplish  their  deliverance  in  his  own 
good  time. 

Ver.  29. — He  giveth  power  to  the  taint. 
Su  far  is  he  from  being  "  faint "  himself, 
that  he  has  superabundant  energy  to  impart 
to  any  that  are  faint  among  his  servants. 

Ver.  30.— ShaU  faint .  .  .  shall  faU;  rather, 
^iwuld  even  the  youths  faint  and  be  weary, 
and  should  the  young  men  utterly  fall,  yet 
they  that  wait  upon  the  Lord  shall  rwneie 
their  strength,  etc.  The  two  clauses  of  ver. 
30  are  "  concessive." 

Ver.  31  — They  shall  monnt  up  with  wings 
as  eagles  (comp.  Ps.  ciii.  5;  and,  for  the  use 
of  the  eagle  as  a  metaphor  for  strength,  see 
Exod.  xix.  4;  Deut.  zzzii.  11> 


HOMILBTICa 

Vert.  1,  2. — Comfort  after  trotible.  Ood  "  has  no  pleasure  in  the  death  of  him  that 
dieth ; "  it  is  no  .<!atisractioQ  to  him  to  punish.  As  soon  as  ever  those  whom  he  is  forced 
to  punish  will  submit  to  the  chastening  rod  in  a  proper  spirit,  and  allow  the  staff  of  the 
Dirine  indignation  to  have  its  due  effect  upon  them,  God  is  ready  to  comfort.  God  the 
Holy  Ghost  is  the  One  True  Comforter.  He  and  he  alone  can  pour  balm  into  the 
heart,  quiet  the  conscience,  enable  the  stricken  soul  to  feel  that  it  is  once  more  at  one 
with  God.  A  few  words  may  be  said  on  (1)  the  conditions  of  comfort ;  (2)  the  methods 
of  comfort ;  and  (3)  the  proper  results  of  comfort. 

I.  The  conditions  of  comfobt.  As  trouble  comes  upon  us  to  punish  sin,  the  first 
condition  of  our  receiving  comfoit  is  that  sin  be  put  away.  The  next  is  that  we  implore 
Gkid's  pardon  for  our  past  trarj  agressions,  and  acknowledge  the  justice  of  his  chastise- 
ment. The  third  is  that  we  pray  to  him  of  his  great  goodness  to  remit  his  anger,  and 
speak  comfort  to  our  souls,  and  pour  his  peace  into  our  hearts.  If  we  neglect  any  of 
these  conditions,  we  have  no  right  to  expect  that  (Jod  will  bless  us  with  the  great 
blessing  of  his  comforting  grace,  which  is  not,  like  the  rain  and  sunshine,  an  ordinary 
blessing  of  his  providence,  but  is  a  special  boon  reserved  for  those  who  htm  pnpared 
themselves  to  receive  it. 

II.  The  methods  of  oojifost.  (}od  sometimes  comforts  us  through  the  tnitrn- 
mentality  of  our  fellow-men.  Job's  friends  were  "miserable  comforters,  all  of  them" 
(Job  xri.  2) ;  but  it  is  not  always  so  with  the  afflicted.  The  kind  sympathy  of  friends, 
the  wise  counsel  of  spiritual  guides,  is  often  blessed  by  Gk>d  to  the  relief  and  solitM  of 
those  who  are  in  trouble.  "  (Jonifort  ye,  comfort  ye  my  people,"  was  his  address  to  the 
pfophets  of  Israel  (ver.  1);  and  we  may  be  assured  that  hia  Spirit  went  with  th« 


CH.  XL.  1-^1.]      THE  BOOK  OP  THE  PROPHET  ISAIAH.  71 

moath  of  his  prophets,  and  made  the  comfort  which  they  strove  to  give  effectual. 
Again,  sometimes  he  comforts  us  hy  his  Word.  Many  a  time  has  the  despairing  soul 
found  peace  and  joy  in  the  promises  of  the  gospel,  which  are  indeed  potent  to  raise  up 
hope  in  the  most  despondent,  and  to  comfort  the  most  unhappy.  But  frequently — 
perhaps  we  may  say  mostly — God  gives  his  comfort  himself,  without  intermediary. 
The  stricken  soul  stays  itself  upon  liim,  leans  on  him,  makes  its  moan  to  him  ;  and  he 
"  comes  to  it,"  and  with  his  hlessed  presence  puts  an  end  to  the  soul's  trouble,  dispels 
the  darkness,  drives  away  despair  and  fear,  infuses  hope,  hreathes  peace,  imparts 
comfort  (see  Ps.  Ixxl.  2 ;  ch.  li.  3 ;  Ixvi.  13 ;  2  Cor.  i.  3,  4 ;  2  Thess.  ii.  17,  etc.). 

III.  The  bxsults  07  comfort.  The  immediate  result  of  comfort  is  peace  and  happi- 
oesB.  The  souf  comforted  by  God  is  at  least  contented,  blissful.  The  further  results 
should  be  (1)  gratitude  for  the  great  mercy  and  loving-kindness  showed  to  us;  (2) 
perseverance  in  well-doing,  the  fruit  and  necessary  result  of  gratitude,  the  chief  means 
which  creatures  have  of  showing  forth  their  thankfulness  to  God  for  any  and  every 
mercy  vouchsafed  to  them  ;  (3)  praise  and  thanksgiving,  the  natural  utterance  of  the 
mouth,  when  the  heart  is  really  touched  with  gratitude,  and  sensible  of  God's  goodness. 
As  David  says,  "  What  shall  I  render  unto  the  Lonl  for  all  his  benefits  toward  nie  ? 
I  will  take  the  cup  of  salvation,  and  call  v/pon  the  Name  of  the  Lord.  I  will  pay  my 
vows  unto  the  Lord  ...  in  the  presence  of  all  his  people  ...  7  will  offer  to  thee  the 
sacrifice  of  thanksgiving,  and  will  call  upon  the  Name  of  the  Lord  "  (Ps.  cxvi.  12 — 17). 

Vers.  4—8. — Ood^s  promises  sure.  With  Isaiah  it  is  enough  that  "  the  mouth  of 
the  Lord  has  spoken"  a  thing  (ch.  i.  20  ;  xl.  6).  "God  is  not  a  man,  that  he  should 
lie ;  neither  the  son  of  man,  that  he  should  repent "  (Numb,  xxiii.  19).  What  he  has 
promised,  he  will  perform ;  what  be  has  said,  he  will  do,  in  the  sense  in  which  he  said 
it.  It  is  true,  his  promises  are  of  two  kinds  (1)  unconditional,  and  (2)  conditional ; 
and,  though  both  kinds  are  sure,  they  are  not  sure  in  the  same  way. 

L   Gkto's  UNCONDITIONAL  FB0MI8ES  ABSOLUTELY  CBBTAIM  OF  ACCOMPLISHMENT.      God 

has  promised  that  he  will  never  again  destroy  mankind  by  a  flood  (Gen.  ix.  11).  He 
has  pledged  himself  that  "  while  tlie  earth  remaineth,  seedtime  and  harvest,  and  cold 
and  heat,  and  summer  and  winter,  and  day  and  night  shall  not  cease  "  (Gen.  viii.  22). 
By  his  Son  he  has  declared  that  "  the  gates  of  hell  shall  not  prevail  against  his  Church  " 
(Matt.  xvL  18),  that  he  will  send  his  Son  to  earth  a  second  time  to  judge  the  quick  and 
dead  (Matt.  xxv.  31 — 45),  and  that  then  the  wicked  "  shall  go  away  into  everlasting 
punishment,  but  the  righteous  into  life  eternal"  (Matt.  xxv.  46).  These  are  uncondi- 
tional promises,  and  are  absolutely  certain  of  fulfilment.  Nothing  can  come  in  their  way. 
Gtod's  veracity  is  pledged  to  them,  and,  as  he  is  true,  he  must  and  will  bring  them  to 
pass. 

n.   GklD'S   CONDITIONAL   FB0MISE8  ABB  OEBTAIN  OF  ACCOMPLISHMENT,  IF   THE   COKUI- 

TION  BE  FULFILLED.  The  bulk  of  God's  promises  to  mankind  are  "covenant  promises," 
and,  by  the  nature  of  a  "covenant  promise,"  they  depend  on  a  condition  pr  conditions 
which  have  to  be  fiilfiUed.  The  promises  to  the  Israelites  that  they  shovdd  possess 
Canaan,  to  David  that  his  seed  should  sit  upon  his  throne,  and  to  captive  Israel  that  it 
should  be  restored,  were  of  this  nature.  So  are  all  promises  of  temporal  and  spiritual 
blessings  to  individuals.  Even  where  the  condition  is  not  expressed,  it  is  understood. 
A  single  example  will  suffice  to  show  the  nature  of  this  kind  of  promise.  A  covenant 
was  made  with  Uavid  to  establish  his  seed  for  ever,  and  set  up  his  throne  to  all  genera- 
tions (Ps.  Ixxxix.  3, 4).  This  covenant  was  to  stand  fast,  so  long  as  his  children  walked 
in  his  ways.  If,  however,  they  forsook  God's  Law,  and  walked  not  in  his  judgments ; 
if  they  broke  his  statutes,  and  kept  not  his  commandments,  then  their  transgressions 
were  to  be  visited  with  the  rod,  and  their  iniquity  with  stripes.  The  Anointed  of  the 
Lord  was  to  be  cut  off  and  abhorred;  the  covenant  with  him  was  to  be  made  toSd^  and 
his  crown  to  he  cast  to  the  ground  (Ps.  Ixxxix.  30 — 39).  In  the-se  cases  God's  part  of 
the  covenant  remains  sure ;  it  is  man's  which  is  uncertain.  If  man  fails,  then  God  is, 
by  his  very  faithfulness,  bound  to  mark  his  sense  of  the  failure  by  non-fulfilment  of 
the  promises  which  were  made  conditional  on  a  certain  course  of  human  action.  Unlesi 
man  fails,  Qod's  promises  remain  firm.  No  one  can  pretend  to  point  out  any  case  in 
which  the  ooTenant  has  been  obserred  by  man,  and  God's  port  in  it  haa  been  that  of  • 
defaulter. 


72  THE   BOOK   OF  THE  PROPHET   ISAIAH,      [oh.  XL.  1—31 


Ver.  11. — Ood  the  Sliepherd  of  Ms  people.  This  favourite  image  is  "  full  of  figureB  and 
analogies  of  loving-kindness.  It  is  almost  sacramental  in  its  depth  and  power."  To 
exhaust  its  meaning  is  impossible;  to  draw  out  all  that  it  implies  is  hopeless;  even  to 
make  it  the  subject  uf  comment  may  seem  almost  impertinent.  Still,  in  an  exegetical 
work,  some  conunent  must  be  made  upon  a  passage  at  once  so  characteristic  and  so 
powerful ;  some  attempt  at  exposition  must  be  attached  to  the  declaration  of  a  truth  so 
precious.     Six  things  would  seem,  then,  to  be  especially  involved  in  the  declaration. 

I.  God  loyes  his  flock.  Love  is  at  the  root  of  even  an  earthly  shepherd's  care  for 
his  flock,  if  he  is  a  true  shepherd,  and  not  a  mercenary  hireling.  Without  love,  there  may 
be  care,  but  it  will  not  be  tender  care ;  there  may  be  guardianship,  but  it  will  not  be 
incessant,  unwearied,  jealous  guardianship.  The  heavenly  Shepherd  loves  the  sheep  of 
his  flock  with  a  deep,  true,  patient,  and  abounding  love,  surpassing  far  the  utmost  affec- 
tion whereof  man  is  capable,  surpassing  even  the  utmost  conception  that  man  can  form 
of  love.  His  flock  is  his  own  creation,  his  own  reflected  image,  his  own  purchased 
possession.  His  desire  is  toward  it  (Cant.  viL  10).  He  loves  it  with  a  love  which 
"many  waters  cannot  quench,  neither  can  the  floods  drown"  (Cant.  viii.  7). 

II.  God  cabes  fob  his  flocc.  It  is  God's  care  for  his  flock  on  which  Isaiah  especially  - 
insists  both  in  ver.  11  and  ch.  xlix.  9,  10.  He  "gathers  the  lambs  with  his  arm, 
carries  them  in  his  bosom,  and  gently  leads  those  that  suckle  their  young."  He  gives 
them  "  pastures  in  all  high  places,"  suffers  "  neither  the  heat  nor  sun  to  smite  them,  and 
leads  them  by  the  springs  of  water."  The  most  tender  care,  the  most  solicitous  vigi- 
lance, is  implied  in  all  that  is  told  us  of  his  treatment  of  his  flock,  so  that  we  may  well 
say,  that  "all  love,  care,  providence,  devotion,  watchfulness,  that  is  in  earth  or  in 
heaven,  in  the  ministry  of  men  or  of  angels,  is  but  a  reflection  and  participation  of  that 
which  is  thus  seen  to  be  in  him  "  (Manning). 

IIL  God  amsES  his  flock.  The  Oriental  shepherd  goes  in  front  of  his  sheep;  and 
so  God  is  represented  as  going  (Ps.  Ixxviii.  52  ;  ch.  xlix.  10 ;  John  x.  3).  He  points 
out  to  them  the  way  wherein  they  should  walk,  and  leads  them  in  it.  By  the  inner 
light  of  conscience, "  which  lighteth  every  man  that  cometh  into  the  world,"  and  by  the 
outward  light  of  revelation,  which  shines  on  many,  he  directs  their  paths.  By  the 
secret  motions  and  influences  of  his  Spirit  he  keeps  them,  for  the  most  part,  in  the  right 
way,  and  suffers  them  not  to  depart  from  it. 

IV.  God  auABDB  bis  flock.  God's  flock  has  enemies  as  powerful  and  as  dangerous 
as  the  flock  of  any  earthly  shepherd.  Many  a  wolf  in  sheep's  clothing  seeks  to  deTOur 
it;  one  lion,  at  any  rate,  is  ever  walking  round  the  fold,  longing  and  hoping  for  prey. 
But  God  is  always  on  the  watch  against  these  enemies,  baffling  their  attacks,  defeating 
their  designs,  causing  them  to  fall  into  their  own  snares.  True,  he  cannot  effectually 
guard  all,  if  they  will  not  listen  to  him,  will  not  obey  his  commands,  will  rush  madly 
into  danger.  But  he  is  a  sure  Defence  to  such  as  "  hear  his  voice  "  and  follow  his  direc- 
tions. No  wolf  can  snatch  his  faithful  ones  out  of  his  hand ;  no  lion  can  hurt  them, 
nor  any  roaring  beast.  God  guards  them  night  and  day.  "  He  that  keepeth  Israel 
slumbers  not  nor  sleeps." 

v.  God  feeds  his  flook.  God  is  said  to  "  lead  his  flock  into  green  pastures " 
(Ps.  zxiii.  2),  to  "  feed  them  in  a  good  pasture,  a  fat  pasture  "  f  Ezek.  xxxiv.  14).  Our 
Lord  declares  himself  "  the  Bread  of  life  "  (John  vi.  48) — the  "living  Bread  which  came 
down  irom  heaven,"  whereof  "  if  any  man  eat,  he  shall  live  for  ever  "  (John  vL  61). 
God  feeds  his  flock  upon  his  Word,  upon  bis  faithful  promises,  upon  himself  received 
sacramentally.  He  feeds  them  himself,  and  he  commands  the  shepherds  under  him, 
with  emphatic  iteration,  to  feed  them  (John  xxi.  15—17).  He  gives  them  "  angels' 
food  "  to  be  the  sustentation  and  support  of  their  souls ;  "  bread  of  immortality  "  to'  be 
their  life  here  and  hereafter ;  precious  manna,  far  beyond  that  which  he  gave  to  his 
people  in  the  wilderness,  sweet  at  once  and  satisfying.  "  Lord,  evermore  give  us  this 
bread  "  (John  vi.  34). 

VI.  God  seeks  akd  sates  the  wandebebb  of  hib  flook.  Isaiah  tells  us  that 
God  "  gathers  the  lambs  with  his  arm "  (ver,  11).  Our  Lord,  describing  the  good 
human  shepherd,  tells  us  that  if  he  have  an  hundred  sheep,  and  lose  one  of  them,  he 
straightway  "  leaves  the  ninety  and  nine  in  the  wilderness,  and  goes  after  that  which  is 
lost,  imM  h»find  ii ;  and  when  he  hath  found  it,  he  layeth  it  on  his  shoulders,  rejoicing  " 
(Luke  XV.  4,  5).    liie  Son  of  man  came  "  to  seek  and  to  save  that  which  was  lost* 


•H.  XL.  1—31.]      THE  BOOK  OF  THE  PROPHET  ISAIAH.  73 

(Matt,  xviii.  11).  The  sheep  of  God's  flock  perpetually  "  go  astray,"  turn  from  the 
right  way,  wander  into  strange  paths,  seek  pastures  that  are  not  good ;  if  God  were  not 
perpetually  checking  their  inclination  to  stray,  seeking  them,  recalling  them,  "gathe^ 
ing"  them,  bringing  them  back  to  him,  there  would  soon  be  no  flock  left.  "  AJl  we 
like  sheep  have  gone  astray ;  we  have  turned  every  one  to  his  own  way."  If  the  "  chief 
Shepherd"  (1  Pet.  v.  4),  "  the  great  Shepherd  of  the  sheep  "  (Heb.  xiii.  20),  had  not 
cared  for  ns  and  sought  us  and  brought  us  home,  we  had  been  lost  indeed  ;  but  now, 
through  his  great  mercy,  we  are  "  returned  unto  the  Shepherd  and  Bishop  of  our  souls ' 
(1  Pet.  ii.  25). 

Vers.  12,  22,  26. — Ood  in  creation.  Creation  tells  of  God  in  many  ways.  "  The 
heavens  declare  the  glory  of  God  ;  and  the  firmament  showeth  his  handywork :  day 
unto  day  uttereth  speech,  and  night  unto  night  showeth  knowledge  "  (Ps.  xix.  1,  2). 
"  The  invisible  things  of  him  from  the  creation  of  the  world  are  clearly  seen,  being 
understood  by  the  things  that  are  made,  even  his  eternal  power  and  Godhead  "  (Bom. 
i.  20).    Here  we  have  noted  especially — 

I.  God's  habvelloubness  in  obeation.  1.  The  very  act  of  creation  is  the  most 
marvellous  of  all  marvels.  For  what  is  creation  but  the  production  of  something  out 
of  nothing? — a  seeming  contradiction,  at  any  rate  a  strange  paradox.  Isaiah  affects 
strongly  the  use  of  the  word  Id/rA  (ch.  i v.  5 ;  xl.  26 ;  xli.  20;  xlv.  8, 12, 18,  etc.),  which, 
if  not  confined  to  the  sense  of  "  producing  out  of  nothing,"  at  any  rate  includes  that 
sense  (Gesenius, '  Lex.  Heb.,'  ad  voe.).  2.  And  the  marvellousness  of  creation  is  enhanced 
by  the  vattnes$  of  creation :  sun,  moon,  planets,  stars ;  the  incalculable  distances  of 
spoee-'the  nibuke,  either  unformed  stars,  or  infinitely  distant  solar  systems  like  that 
of  which  our  system  forms  a  part ;  the  Milky  Way,  or  outer  edge  of  our  own  system, 
set  so  thick  with  stars  that  they  seem  to  form  a  continuous  girdle  of  light.  3.  The 
perfed  order  of  creation :  all  things  weighed  out  and  measured  by  God's  hand  in  set 
proportions  one  to  another;  all  keeping  their  appointed  courses  without  cuUision  or  con- 
fusion; observing  their  respective  times  and  seasons;  displaying  an  infinite  variety,  which, 
however,  is  all  ordered  and  regulated.  4.  And  by  the  unity  of  creation :  all  of  it  from 
oiie  hand,  from  one  mind,  working  without  assistance,  without  counsel  (vers.  13,  14), 
firom  its  own  inexhaustible  stores  of  wisdom  and  knowledge ;  and  all  of  it  subject  to 
that  one  mind  and  obeying  its  every  behest  (ver.  26). 

IL  God's  Ooodnebb  in  obeation.  God  does  not  leave  his  creation  alone,  to  stand 
or  fall  by  its  own  inherent  strength.  Every  part  of  it  is  upheld  by  him,  maintained  in 
existence  by  him,  enabled  by  him  to  perform  the  task  which  he  has  set  it.  The  "way  " 
of  no  part  of  his  creation  is  "  hid  from  him  "  (ver.  27).  Bach  star  is  known  by  name, 
and  the  starry  hosts  are  marshalled  "  by  number,"  and  led  forth  in  tlieir  stately  march, 
so  that  "  not  one  faileth  "  (ver.  26).  So  with  his  moral  creatures.  They  too  are  upheld ; 
"power"  and  "strength"  are  given  to  them  continually  (ver.  29);  he  who  sustains 
them  is  "  never  faint,  never  weary ;"  a  way  is  contrived  for  them  by  which  they  may 
"renew  their  strength  "  (ver.  31).  Doubtless  there  is  this  difference.  Material  things 
are  absolutely  upheld,  and  prevented  from  failing ;  God's  moral  creation  is  not  absolutely 
upheld.  It  is  given  a  sufficiency  of  help  (2  Cor.  xii.  9),  but  is  not  compelled  to  accept 
the  gift.  If  man  wills  to  perish,  he  must  perish.  Though  God's  grace  is  "  sufficient 
for  him,"  he  can  reject  that  grace— he  can  thwart  the  will  of  God,  who  "  wouldeth  not 
that  any  should  perish,  but  that  all  should  come  to  repentance."  Were  it  otherwise, 
he  would  be  a  machine,  and  not  a  moral  being. 


HOMILIES  BY  VARIOUS  ATJTH0E3. 

Vera.  1 — ^11. — The  prophefs  commission.  He  is  to  unfold  a  theme  of  coniolation, 
which  runs  through  the  whole  of  the  book,  introduced  by  this  chapter.  He  speaks  to 
the  prophetB :  "  Ye  prophets,  prophesy  consolation  concerning  my  people  "  (Targum  of 
Jonathan);  or,  "0  priests,  speak  to  the  heart  of  Jerusalem,"  according  to  the  LXX. 
The  former  is  probably  correct.  The  prophets  were  numerous  both  in  Isaiah's  time 
(ch.  iii.  1;  xxix.  10, 20)  and  during  the  Babylonian  exile  (Jer.  xxix.  1).  Jehovah  is  now 
reconciled  to  his   erring  people,  and  calls  them  no  longer  by  names  expressive  of 


74  THE  BOOK  OP  THE  PEOPHET  ISAIAH.      [oh.  xl.  1—81 

rejection  or  contempt  (as  in  Eos.  i.  9 ;  ch.  vi.  9),  but  as  my  people.  "  Israel,  my  peoplq^ 
and  I  their  God,"  is  the  great  word  on  which  both  Judaism  and  Christianity  rest.  Now 
the  prophets  are  to  "  speak  to  the  heart  of  Jerusalem."  It  is  to  be  in  a  voice  clear  and 
distinct  and  penetrating.  "  Heart,"  in  Hebrew  use,  is  a  comprehensive  word ;  it  stands 
for  "  intelligence,  conscience,  feeling,"  in  one  (cf.  Gen.  xxxiv.  3 ;  1.  21,  where  the  Hebrew 
is,  "  to  their  hearts ").  Perhaps  chiefly  the  latter  here.  The  vocation  of  the  prophet 
is  now  especially  to  comfort  and  encourage.  And  so  ever  with  the  preacher.  We  may 
compare  with  these  words  the  scene  in  the  synagogue  at  Nazareth.  Christ  announces 
himself  as  the  Bearer  of  consolation  to  the  heart  of  his  people,  to  the  heart  of  man- 
kind, especially  to  the  poor  and  the  distressed  and  dejected.  And  surely  the  burden  of 
every  ministry  may  well  be  the  "  Christ  of  consolation." 

L  The  mbssaob  to  Jbbusalem.  1.  "  Her  warfare  is  fulfilled."  "  Warfare  "  standing 
for  "enforced  hardships.'  The  metaphor  "very  suggestive  of  the  peculiar  troubles  of 
military  service  in  ancient  times : "  "  Hath  not  man  a  warfare  [hard  service]  on  the 
earth?  "  (Job  vii.  1).  The  idea  of  an  appointed  time  of  service  enters  into  the  word — 
the  discharge  of  a  duty  for  which  a  man  has  been  enlisted,  or  solemnly  engaged,  as  that 
of  the  Levites  in  the  tabernacle  (Numb.  iv.  23 ;  viii.  24,  25).  Li/e  as  a  period  of 
enforced  service.  It  means  for  most  of  us,  perhaps  for  all  of  us,  toil,  danger,  suffering. 
Prom  this  enlistment  the  only  discharge  is  by  death  (Job  xiv.  14 ;  Dan.  x.  1).  Our 
times  are  in  the  hand  of  God.  A  period  is  fixed  to  all  suffering  and  trial.  It  may  calm 
the  apprehension  of  calamity  in  the  most  susceptible  heart  to  see  how  quick  a  bound 
has  been  set  to  the  utmost  infliction  of  malice.  We  rapidly  approach  a  brink  over 
which  no  enemy  can  follow  us.  "  Let  them  rave ;  thou  art  quiet  in  thy  grave."  2. 
"  Her  guilt  is  paid  off."  For  punishment  is  viewed  as  the  payment  of  a  debt,  and  so 
as  the  satisfaction  of  the  demands  of  Divine  justice.  In  the  Law,  the  sword  and  disper- 
sion among  the  heathen  are  threatened  against  the  disobedient  and  the  unreformed ; 
but  never  does  Jehovah  forget  the  covenant  between  him  and  the  people ;  he  is  ever 
ready  to  suspend  punishment  when  they  suspend  sin.  Here  the  people  are  represented 
"  as  having  suffered  what  God  had  appointed  them — endured  the  natural  punishment 
he  saw  to  be  necessary.  They  had  served  out  the  long  term  he  had  appointed.  Now 
he  is  satisfied,  has  pleasure  in  releasing  them  and  restoring  them  to  their  own  land." 
Happy  that  moment  in  the  personal  life  when  the  soul  can  be  assured  that  suffeiing 
has  done  it*  work,  and  that  it  may  be  self-forgiven,  because  God-forgiven. 

*  At  the  last,  do  as  the  heavens  have  done : 
Forget  yonr  evil ;  with  them,  forgive  yourself." 

3.  " '  She  hath  received  double  for  all  her  sins.'  The  expression  seems  to  denote  what 
is  amply  sufficient  (cf.  Jer.  xvii.  18 ;  Rev.  xviii.  6) "  (Uheyne) ;  "  As  much  as  God 
judged  to  be  sufficient "  (Grotius) ;  "  Double  to  be  received  for  large  and  abundant " 
(Crivin).  The  great  law  of  compensation  running  through  life,  we  must  believe,  is 
exact  in  its  operation.  God  makes  no  mistakes  in  his  reckonings.  Suffering  may  con- 
tinue long  after  sin  has  been  forgiven;  If  the  memory  of  guilt  be  still  poignant,  if  the 
consequences  of  sin  seem  stfll  "  ever  before  us,"  it  is  as  if  God  were  saying,  "  Not  enough 
hast  thou  suffered  yet  to  know  how  precious  is  the  peace  of  forgiveness."  And  when 
that  blessed  sense  of  forgiveness  steals  into  the  soul,  it  is  the  symptom  that  the  hand 
of  Otod  is  removed,  that  the  cup  of  sorrow  has  been  drained,  that  the  medicine  has  done 
its  work.  The  justice  of  our  God  will  exact  sufficient  from  us  in  the  way  of  suffering ; 
his  clemency  and  mercy  will  never  add  a  superfluous  stroke  from  the  scoittge ;  rather 
he  will  stop  short  of  the  fiill  exaction — thirty-nine  rather  than  the  full  forty  stripes. 

XL  The  mystebious  call.  Prom  what  is  to  be  believed  of  Jehovah,  we  pass  to 
what  is  to  be  done  for  Jehovah.  So  ever  does  faith  push  on  to  practice.  The  internal 
act  of  the  mind  realizes  itself  and  is  made  perfect  in  the  external  act  of  the  life.  1. 
Mysteriously  a  voice  bids  the  listening  heart  prepare  for  Jehovah.  It  is  a  "  non-Divine, 
yet  aupematural  voice."  The  poetic  effect  is  heightened  by  the  mystery  (cf.  ch.  li  9 ; 
uL  1;  IviL  14;  IziL  10\  Similar  voices  are  spoken  of  in  the  Book  of  Revelation 
(L  10, 12 ;  ir.  1 ;  z.  4,  8).  There  are  times  when  the  breath  of  coming  change  is  felt 
■tirriiig,  and  voices  are  heard  calling  to  men  to  welcome  it  in  and  to  help  it  on.  Whence 
come  they?  Who  knows?  A  spiritual  world  is  all  about  us.  It  has  music,  and 
words;  but  while  "  this  muddy  vesture  of  decay  doth  grossly  doae  us  in,  we  cannot 


OH.XI-.  1— 31.]      THE  BOOK  OP  THE   PROPHET   ISAIAH.  75 

hear."  But  at  times  they  pierce  through  our  sensuality  and  hreak  up  our  lethargic 
indolence.  "  Clear  ye  Jehovah's  way  in  the  desert."  The  Divine  monarch  is  ahout  to 
make  a  progress.  Let  the  heart  of  the  nation  be  as  a  highway  for  their  God  (Ps.  Ixxxiv. 
5).  So  the  Gospels  understand  the  cry  (Matt.  iii.  3 ;  Mark  i.  3 ;  Luke  iii.  4).  Prom 
another  point  of  view,  the  way  of  Jehovah  through  the  desert  is  symbolic  of  his  people's 
destinies.  Babylon,  as  the  scene  of  captivity,  reminds  us  of  the  scene  of  captivity 
of  yore  in  Egypt.  When  the  temple  was  destroyed  and  Israel  went  forth,  it  was  as  if 
Jehovah  had  departed — perhaps  to  his  sacred  seat  in  the  north,  where  Ezekiel  (i.  4) 
sees  the  cherubic  chariot.  His  coming  back  is  the  people's  coming  back  under  his 
leadership.  The  imagery  of  clearing  the  way  may  be  illustrated  from  the  practice  of 
Oriental  princes.  Diodorus  tells  of  Semiramis  that,  in  her  march  to  Ecbatana,  she  had 
precipices  digged  down,  and  hollows  filled  up,  so  as  to  leave  an  everlasting  memorial  of 
herself — the  "  road  of  Semiramis "  (cf.  Baruch  v.  7).  Then  the  glory  of  Jehovah, 
eclipsed  or  hidden  through  his  people's  suffering  and  exile,  will  shine  forth  in  its  splendour, 
and  all  mankind  shall  look  on.  2.  Again  the  voice  is  heard  saying,  "  Call  I "  And  the 
prophet  answers,  "What  shall  I  call?"  The  burden  of  the  cry  is  the  frailty  of  man 
and  <Je  eternity  of  the  truth.  Homer  compares  the  race  of  man  to  the  successive 
generations  of  the  leaves  of  the  wood ;  the  prophet  to  the  grass  and  the  flowers  (cf.  Ps. 
xc.  5,  6).  Israel  and  Assyria  are  both  politicsilly  extinct,  and  Babylon  is  hurrying 
to  its  end.  The  thought  is  suggested,  though  not  expressed,  that  if  Israel  is  to  rise 
again  from  its  ashes,  it  can  only  be  by  abstaining  from  all  attempts  at  secular  aggrandize- 
ment. The  new  Israel  will  be,  in  all  the  circumstances  of  its  growth,  supernatural. 
And  what  is  true  of  one  people  is  true  of  all.  Princes,  nobles,  and  monarchs,  armies 
and  magistrates,  are  feeble  like  grass  and  will  soon  pass  away.  On  the  one  hand,  they 
would  not  be  able  to  accomplish  what  was  needed  for  the  deliverance  of  the  people ;  on 
the  other,  their  oppressors  had  no  power  to  continue  their  bondage,  since  they  were 
like  grass  and  must  pass  away.  But  Jehovah  had  all  power,  and  was  ever-enduring, 
and  able  to  fulfil  all  his  promises,  especially  those  concerning  Israel  (ch.  xlir.  26; 
xlv.  19 ;  Iii.  6 ;  Ixiii.  1 ;  Jer.  xliv.  28,  29).  And  the  healing  results  are  to  be  known 
by  all  mankind. 

III.  The  inspibdio  vision.  The  prophet  is  carried  away  In  spirit  to  Palestine,  ana 
sees  the  fulfilment  of  the  promise  drawing  near.  He  personifies  Zion  and  Jerusalem, 
and  calls  upon  them  to  lift  up  their  voices  and  announce  to  the  cities  of  Judah  the 
approach  of  God.  Perhaps  he  idealizes  the  city,  or  is  thinking  of  the  city  out  of  sight 
— the  spiritual  commonwealth  of  which  the  earthly  and  visible  one  was  the  type.  Lo ! 
he  comes !  the  God  and  Leader  of  the  people  returning  to  the  city,  the  temple,  the  land. 
He  will  come  in  his  might;  the  arm  is  the  very  symbol  of  his  almightiness;  and  it 
rules  "  for  him,"  t.e.  for  the  peculiar  people,  the  people  of  his  possession.  He  comes  to 
recompense  his  friends  and  to  execute  vengeance  on  his  foes.  The  ruler  of  a  people 
is  fitly  imaged  as  a  shepherd,  and  they  as  his  flock.  And  now  he  has  sought  and 
found  his  sheep  again,  and  will  once  more  lead  them  to  green  pastures  (Jer.  xxxi.  10;  1. 
19 ;  Ezek.  xxxiv.  11 — 16),  and,  as  a  good  shepherd,  will  not  overdrive  the  suckling  ewes 
(Gen.  xxxiii.  13).  In  the  Syrian  plains  the  frequent  removal  to  fresh  pastures  is  very 
destructive  to  the  young,  and  shepherds  may  now  be  seen  in  the  Orient  carrying,  on 
such  occasions,  the  lambs  in  their  bosoms.  We  neerl,  by  any  means  in  our  power,  travel, 
and  observation,  to  realize  strongly  the  grave  responsibility,  the  constant  anxiety,  the 
patient  and  unwearied  tendance,  connected  with  the  shepherd's  life  in  the  East.  Com- 
pare such  a  life  with  that  of  the  hunter,  who,  from  watching,  pursuing,  outwitting  wild 
beasts,  comes  to  partake  of  their  fierce  and  cunning  nature.  The  life  of  the  shepherd 
draws  upon  the  fund  of  love  and  tenderness  in  his  heart ;  it  is  a  humanizing  life,  full 
of  a  fine  education;  elevating  by  means  of  condescension.  Then  how  rich  a  symbol  is 
the  pastoral  character  of  the  nature  of  the  redeeming  God !  And  how  do  the  numerous 
passages  in  the  New  Testament,  in  which  Jesus  is  so  described,  start  into  life  and  beauty, 
vhen  these  things  are  considered  (John  x. ;  Heb.  xiii.  20 ;  1  Pet.  ii.  25  ;  v.  4)1  There 
is  an  ineffable  union  of  might  with  tenderness  in  the  character  of  the  Redeemer-God, 
which  should  in  some  sort  be  reflected  in  the  pastoral  character  of  Christ's  servants 
(John  XTi.  15— 17).— J. 

Vera.  liS — ^18. — Jehovah  incomparable.     I.  His  powbb  ovbb  natub*      The  boldest 


T««  THE  BOOK   OP   THE   PROPHET   ISAIAH.      [ch.  h-  1—31, 

imagery  to  express  this  thought :  the  "  hollow  of  his  hand ; "  his  "  span  ; "  his  "  tierce,'' 
a  small  measure ;  his  scales,  with  which  he  weighs  the  volumes  of  sea  and  land,  and 
measures  the  vast  extent  of  heaven  without  an  effort, — as  we  use  the  hand  to  weigh  or 
to  span !  Far  from  taking  offence  at  such  figures,  we  feel  them  to  he  truthful,  appro- 
priate, suhlime.  The  Creator  is  icfinitely  superior  to  his  world.  Vastness  of  space  may 
overwhelm  our  imagination,  but  not  his.  His  thought  holds  with  ease  the  universe  as 
a  whole  and  in  all  its  parts.  "  Thou  hast  ordered  all  things  by  measure'  and  number 
and  weight"  (Wisd.  xi.  20).  Vain  the  "  materialistic  "  dreams  of  students  occupied  too 
much  with  the  physical  and  the  phenomenal.  The  physical  is  the  exprcssioB  of  the 
intellectual ;  the  phenomenal  but  the  "  appearance "  of  the  real ;  the  creatioo,  the 
"  garb  we  see  God  by."  How  much  truer  to  what  a  spiritual  religion  teaches  na  is 
this  view  than  that  which  would  direct  our  wonder  and  our  worship  to  the  mere 
splendours  of  the  material  world,  rather  than  to  the  great  creative  and  informing  spirit 
of  the  world  1  Istdah,  contemptuously  speaking  of  the  sea  as  held  in  God's  hand,  as 
one  might  hold  a  drop  of  water,  is  a  better  poet  than  Byron,  who  apostrophizes  the  sea 
as  a  living  being. 

II.  Thb  obioinalitt  of  his  unb.  a  theological  difficulty  is  supposed  to  be  alluded 
to.  "  Who  hath  regulated  the  mind  of  Jehovah  ?  "  "  Was  he  himself  absolutely  free  ? 
May  not  Omnipotence  itself  be  subject  to  conditions?  M.iy  there  not  he  an  equal  or 
superior  power  to  whose  counsels  he  must  defer?"  (Cheyne).  Distinctly  the  prophet, 
without  arguing  the  question,  denies  the  truth  of  such  an  hypothesis.  By  the  Spirit 
of  God  we  mean  the  mind  of  God,  which  is 

"  The  life  and  light  of  aU  this  wondrous  worid  we  mCl" 

The  world  is  not  "  dead  matter,"  but  the  creation  of  that  intelligence,  the  vast  poem, 
inspired  by  Divine  thoughts  that  breathe  and  burn.  Love  is  the  last  ground  of  all 
things,  and  conscienceand  intelligence  are  its  ministers.  God's  Being  is  simple,  unique, 
absolutely  original.  In  a  like  sense  to  that  which  we  say  the  works  of  a  gn  at  poet  are 
his  unassisted  productions,  does  the  prophet  say  the  world  is  the  work  of  God.  "  Con- 
trast the  Babylonian  myth  of  a  joint  action  of  Bel  and  the  gods  in  the  creation  of  man ; 
and  the  Iranian  of  co-creatorship  of  Ormuzd  and  the  Amshaspands ; "  or  the  crude 
cosmogonic  notions  of  the  Greeks.  All  parts  of  the  world,  all  habitable  lands  and 
nations,  are  dependent  on  him,  derived  from  his  will,  subject  to  his  power.  How,  then, 
can  earth's  noblest  products  add  anything  to  his  riches,  or  further  illustrate  the  glory 
of  One  to  whom  they  already  belong  ?  The  poverty  of  Judah  in  wood  may  be  con- 
trasted with  the  rich  forests  of  Lebanon ;  but  even  Lebanon  could  not  yield  enough 
for  his  honour,  if  that  honour  is  to  be  measured  by  the  extent  of  the  offerings.  The 
nations,  and  all  that  is  great  and  imposing  in  their  life,  are  nought  in  his  eyes ;  chaos 
may  designate  them  in  this  contemptuous  view.  In  short,  he  is  incomparable.  Ko 
illustration,  analogy,  similitude,  ever  thrown  forth  from  the  poet-soul  and  imagination 
in  mankind,  as  no  picture  of  painter,  image  of  sculptor,  will  here  avail.  Nay,  there 
must  be  moments  when  the  very  forms  of  thought  into  which  everything  must  be 
thrown  that  we  may  see  it  at  all,  and  even  last  of  all,  the  richest  and  purest  musical 
harmonies,  must  be  set  aside  as  inadequate. 

"  All  are  too  mean  to  epeak  bis  worth. 
Too  mean  to  set  our  Maker  forUt." 

Nothing  can  surpass  the  simplicity  and  the  sublimity  oi  this  view  of  €k>d.  Nothing 
less  lofty  will  satisfy  our  intelligence  or  meet  the  yearnings  of  our  heart.  The  idolatrv 
we  are  so  ready  to  lavish  upon  the  finite  object  is  the  poor  caricature  of  that  immense 
delight  which  God  demands  we  should  enjoy  in  the  thought  of  him,  and  which  we 
cannot  be  satisfied  until  ve  have  attained. — J. 

Vers.  19 — 26. — Iddatry  ridiculous.  A  strong  tone  of  irony  and  ridicule  runs  through 
the  description;  and  nothing  could  better  illustrate  by  contrast  that  sublime  faith 
which  has  just  been  presented  to  our  view. 

L  The  iiiAem  contbasted  with  Jehovah.  All  our  thought  is  composed  of  images ; 
but  what  a  deecent  from  that  image  in  the  mind  and  solely  there  on  which  we  have 
been  dwelling,  to   yonder  thing  of  metal,  which  the  craftsman  casts,  r|^  the  gol^ 


eH.zikl— 81.]      THE  BOOK  OF  THE  PROPHET  ISAIAH.  7» 

imitk  overlays  with  gold,  and  for  which  he  forges  chains  of  silver  1  Let  art  be  honoured ; 
let  artists  strive  their  best  to  give  distinctness  to  thoughts  that  must  otherwise  wander 
in  the  vague.  But  if  the  concrete  thing  be  thrust  into  the  place  of  that  spiritual  reality 
it  caa  but  faintly  suggest,  it  becomes  an  object  of  scorn  instead  of  admiration.  Have 
the  great  traditions  of  our  fathers  ended  in  this  f  What  has  that  thing  of  your  poor 
manufacture  to  do  with  the  great  scheme  of  things  ? 

II.  The  eternal  revelation.  The  prophet  is  astonished  that  men  are  blind  and 
deaf  to  that  eternal  truth  which  has  been  announced  from  the  beginning  of  the  creation 
— ^the  speech  poured  out  from  day  to  day,  the  declarations  of  every  starry  night.  The 
works  of  Qod  are  the  shadows  of  himself.  "  The  whole  system  of  the  world  is  but  a 
standing  copy  and  representation  of  the  Divine  goodness,  writing  Uttle  images  of  itself 
upon  every  the  least  portion  of  this  great  body."  "  The  night  itself  cannot  conceal 
the  glories  of  the  heaven ;  but  the  moon  and  stars,  those  lesser  lights,  then  show  forth 
their  lesser  beauties.  While  the  labourer  lies  down  for  his  rest,  the  astronomer  sits 
up  and  watches  for  his  pleasure."  When  men  were  talking  atheism  around  Napoleon 
on  the  passage  to  Africa,  the  great  man  exclaimed,  pointing  to  the  starry  sky,  "It 
is  all  very  well  for  you  to  talk,  gentlemen ;  but  who  made  all  that  ? "  Again  the 
prophet  rises  to  that  conception  of  the  sublimity  of  Jehovah  and  the  insignificance 
of  num'e  power  in  contrast  with  him,  which  may  be  called  contrast  in  Hebrew  thought. 
A  series  of  "  admiring  exclamations  "  follows.  Jehovah  sits  above  the  circle  that  over- 
arches the  earth  (Job  xxii.  14 ;  Prov.  viii.  27) ;  and  men  seem  as  insignificant  insects 
in  comparison  (cf.  Numb.  xiii.  83).  His  vast  hand  has  spread  out  the  heavens  like  a 
curtain  of  fine  cloth ;  they  resemble  a  habitable  tent — also  an  idea  frequent  in  Hebrew 
poetry  (ch.  xlii.  6;  xliv.  24;  xlv.  12;  li.  13;  Job  ix.  8;  Zech.  xii.  1).  Thus  the 
dimensiont  of  nature  suggest  the  majesty  and  infinitude  of  God.  So  the  revolutions 
of  the  nations  suggest  the  sovereignty  and  spiritual  might  of  God.  Men  of  weight  are 
by  him  brov^ht  to  nothing,  and  the  judges  of  the  earth  become  as  worthless  chaos. 
A  magnificent  city,  with  the  tombs  of  departed  and  the  palaces  of  living  kings,  is  an 
imposing  monument  of  hmnan  passion  and  htuuan  intelligence.  Nineveh  and  Babylon 
"  seemed  planted  for  eternity,  firmly  rooted  in  the  soil ;  but  to  the  prophets,  regarding 
them  from  the  point  of  view  of  the  future,  they  seemed  as  though  they  had  never 
been."  Profound  faith  in  the  Eternal  fills  the  mind  with  contempt  for  the  gloria 
mundi,  which  seems  to  be  withering  in  the  very  hour  it  most  proudly  flourishes.  The 
prophet  falls  back  upon  the  thought  of  the  holy  and  incomparable  One,  who  marshals 
the  starry  hosts,  who  is  Lord  of  the  physicid  imiverse  and  of  the  world  of  man's 
spirits.  We  need  to  rest  our  thought  upon  the  infinite  power  of  God.  Weak  our- 
selves, we  need  to  lean  upon  that  which  is  strong  and  enduring.  And  here  we  are 
liable  to  many  illusions — the  Ulusion  of  the  permanence  of  physical  systems,  the 
illumon  of  the  permanence  of  human  customs  and  institutions.  God  can  cause  the 
heavens  to  be  shrivelled  like  a  scroll,  can  efface  the  cities  of  the  nation  as  if  they 
were  so  many  rubbish-heaps  from  the  face  of  the  earth.  He  and  the  soul  alone 
abide. — J. 

Vers.  27—31. — Despondency  removed.  I.  The  complaint  op  the  people.  They 
feel  themselves,  or  are  tempted  to  feel  themselves,  forsaken  of  God.  Their  "  way " 
seems  to  be  hidden  from  him.  The  "  way  "  is  a  figure  lor  the  course  and  condition  of  life. 
And  is  it  not  said  in  the  first  Psalm,  "  The  Lord  knoweth  the  way  of  the  righteous  "  ? 
There  are  times  when  this  cannot  be  realized.  The  truth  of  a  providence  over  the 
national  and  the  personal  life — what  more  consoling  ?  "  Thou  art  with  me ;  "  "  Thou 
God  seest  me : "  what  might  is  there  not  in  such  thoughts  to  "  warn,  to  comfort,  to 
command"  ?  There  are  other  moods,  and  thoughts  of  another  complexion.  We  suffer, 
and  God  seems  indifferent.  There  is  a  sense  of  the  injustice  of  the  world,  and  God 
does  not  defend  us.  "  Our  right  has  been  let  slip  by  our  God."  He  has  living  oracles 
for  others,  not  for  us.  We  gaze  into  his  words ;  luminous  to  others,  they  ramate  not 
their  meaning  upon  us.  Who  and  what  is  that  God  in  whom  we  have  been  taught 
to  believe  ?  A  name,  and  nothing  more  ?  These  are,  indeed,  dark  moments.  "  Paued 
and  passed  my  turn  is,"  says  a  modem  poet,  in  describing  the  "  fears  and  scruples " 
of  tba  droopiBg  and  despondent  souL  Tne  worst  is  that  tiie  weakness  which  is  sub- 
jaotiva,  i*  nontelves,  we  are  t«mpted  to  throw  out  of  ouinelveH — to  project  on  God.     He 


78  THE  BOOK  OF  THli  PKOPHET  ISAIAH,      [ch.  xl.  1—31 

must   be  growing;   weary  and  faint,  and  something  less  than  God.      This  mood  the 
prophet  meets  (of.  ch.  xlix.  14 ;  Job  xxvii.  2). 

n.  The  reply  of  the  prophet.  1.  He  appeals  to  their  intelligence.  "  Hast  thou 
not  perceived  ?  "  Look  away  from  self  and  its  restriction  within  the  bonds  of  present 
distress ;  look  at  others  who  are  expatiating  on  the  "  large  places  "  of  Jehovah's  good- 
ness. Look  at  the  silent  heavens  with  their  "  goings  on ; "  the  march  of  the  seasons ; 
the  recurrence  of  seed-time  and  harvest ;  consider  the  breath  which  stirs  the  souls  of 
men  to  progress  in  wisdom,  culture,  peace,  civilization.  Contemplate  as  a  whole  and 
in  its  parts  the  marvellous  mechanism  of  the  human  world.  Divert  thy  thoughts  from 
the  little  self-world  to  the  immense  universe.  Listen  as  well  as  looh^ — ^to  the  imme- 
morial tradition ;  to  the  oracles  that  have  lived  and  cannot  die ;  to  the  deep  voice  of 
prophets  and  the  music  of  psalmists ;  to  the  simple  accents  of  the  babes  and  sucklings. 
One  immense  harmony  starts  upon  the  ear  and  the  heart ;  the  loving  and  eternal  Gtod 
its  central  theme.  "Oh,  my  brothers,  God  exists;  believing  love  -mH  relieve  xis  of  a 
load  of  care."  Intelligence  and  conscience  combine  with  the  sacred  unbroken  traditions 
of  the  race,  to  assure  us  that  he  is  what  he  was  and  where  he  was.  2.  Tlie  attributes 
of  Jehovah.  An  everlasting  God.  Mortality  means  fickleness  and  caprice.  His  Name 
means  constancy,  faithfulness.  His  covenants  are  irreversible.  In  the  English 
Testament  of  the  Jew.";,  that  grand  Name,  "  the  Eternal,"  is  preserved.  He  is  "  Creator 
of  the  ends  of  the  earth ; "  i.e.  of  the  "  whole  earth  from  end  to  end."  Babylonia,  then, 
the  seat  of  the  exile,  is  not  beyond  Jehovah's  empire,  as  if  he  were  only  "  the  god  of 
the  hills  of  Palestine  "  (Cheyne).  Creation  infers  providence.  If  God  made  the  world, 
he  governs  it  too.  Men  are  dependent  on  him,  and  in  their  dependence  is  safety  and 
bliss.  He  has  no  human  infirmities :  faints  not,  nor  is  weary.  He  works  for  his  world 
both  day  and  night  (Gen.  i.  5,  etc. ;  Exod.  xiii.  21 ;  1  Kings  viii.  29 ;  Ps.  cxxi.  4).  His 
unfathomable  intelligence.  (Cf.  Job  v.  9 ;  ix.  10 ;  cf.  ch.  xxxiv.  24 ;  xxxvL  26.)  There- 
fore there  was  a  "  wise  purpose  "  in  all  this  present  procedure  of  providence,  so  dark  as 
it  seemed.  We  look  apon  the  wavering  ripples  on  the  suiface  of  the  river;  but  the 
sunbeam  strikes  upon  them  with  directness  and  certainty.  And  "God's  hand  is  as 
steady  as  his  eye."  His  self-corr.munication.  "  Man's  weakness,  waiting  upon  God, 
its  end  can  never  miss."  For  he  is  self-imparting ;  and  if  there  be  a  void  in  us, 
it  is  that  he  may  fill  it;  a  weakness  in  us,  that  his  strength  may  be  seen  consummate 
in  it.  "  Unto  the.  powerless  he  maketh  strength  to  abound."  3.  The  wisdom  of 
waiting.  Waiting!  How  much  is  included  in  that  word  I  Faith,  and  hope,  and 
endurance,  and  strength.  Take  the  most  vivid  image  of  strength :  the  youth  in  his 
athletic  vigour — the  aiiile  wrestler,  the  nimble  runner.  Is  he  strong  ?  Nay,  he  shall 
stumble,  while  the  stationary,  waiting  one  "  gathers  fresh  force."  He  seems  to  be 
on  the  wane,  to  be  losing  the  dew  and  brightness  of  his  youth.  'Tis  but  the  moulting 
of  the  old  eagle  of  fable — he  will  put  forth  fresh  feathers.  With  "ages  on  his  plumes," 
he  will  still  be  travelling  on.  These  waiters  are  the  stayers  in  the  race.  They  may 
appear  as  stationary  as  earth  itself;  they  roll  on  by  the  same  momentum,  they  are 
the  agents  of  the  same  force.  Exertion  without  God :  what  more  impotent?  impotence 
touched  by  God's  breath,  Ghid's  hand:  what  can  it  not  do?  "  Wait,  I  say,  on  the 
Lord."— J. 

Veni.  1,  2. — Divine  consolations.  "  Comfort  ye,  comfort  ye  my  people,  saith  your 
God.  Speak  ye  comfortably  to  Jerusalem."  Here,  after  prophetic  revelation  of  danger 
and  warning  against  the  Nemesis  of  sin,  we  come  upon  the  evangel  of  love.  For  God 
delights  not  in  denunciation  or  death.  All  his  universe  testifies  that  he  loves  life,  that 
he  "  has  no  pleasure  in  the  death  of  the  wicked." 

I.  Hebe  is  eeitebatioh.  "  Comfort  ye,  comfort  ye.''  It  is  an  inspiration  ot  earnest- 
ness in  conveying  the  heavenly  message.  For  God  is  the  God  of  comfort.  Not  comfort 
in  sin,  but  comfort  to  all  who  seek  to  be  delivered  from  it.  This  is  like  the  "  Verily, 
verily."  It  gives  emphasis  to  hope.  For  love  deals  not  in  cold  aphorisms,  but  repeats 
itself,  that  the  heart  may  be  sure  of  the  message.'  To  convince  of  sin  is  not  enough. 
To  expose  evil  may  be  the  work  of  the  moral  dramatist.  To  scorn  it  may  be  the  work 
of  the  satirist.  But  Qod  is  more  than  a  Judge ;  he  is  a  Saviour.  The  Son  of  man  came 
(as  his  great  work),  "  not  to  condemn  the  world,  but  that  the  world  through  him  might 
be  saved." 


3H  XI,.  1—31.]      THE  BOOK  OF  THE  PROPHET  ISAIAH.  79 

IL  Hgrk  n  BEST.  "  Her  warfare  is  accomplislied."  The  weapons  to  be  put  into  the 
hands  of  the  faithful  suffice  to  secure  victory,  and  therefore  the  warfare  is  spoken  of  as 
accomplished.  Looking  forward  to  the  Redeemer's  days,  Isaiah  reminds  us  that  his 
sacrifice  is  to  be  complete,  as  we  read  in  Hebrews,  "Once  in  the  end  of  the  world 
hath  he  appeared  to  put  away  sin  by  the  sacrifice  of  himself."  Thus  Christ  spake 
of  his  own  death,  "  I,  if  I  be  lifted  up,  will  draw  all  men  unto  me."  This  is  the  apirit 
of  the  JSew  Testament.  "  Iniquity  is  pardoned."  All  who  believe  have  full  and 
free  reitiission  of  sins.  And  the  warfare  within  them  must  end  in  holy  conquest — 
every  rebel  flag  on  every  province  of  the  nature  will  be  hauled  down,  and  every  worldly 
enemy  will  be  laid  low.  "  This  is  the  victory  which  overcometh  the  world,  even 
our  faith." 

III.  Hebe  is  dependence.  We  receive  double  from  "  the  lord's  hand."  This  is 
the  theme  of  all  the  true  Churches  of  Christ.  Whether  we  express  our  gratitude  for 
redemption  in  the  words  of  Lyte  or  Watts,  Keble  or  Doddridge,  Paber  or  Wesley,  it  is 
still  the  same,  and  antedates  the  great  Church  worship  of  heaven  :  "  Unto  him  that 
loved  us,  and  washed  us  from  our  sins  in  his  own  blood,  and  hath  made  us  kings  and 
priests  unto  Ood,  ...  be  glory  and  dominion  for  ever  and  ever.     Amen." — W.  M.  S. 

Vers.  3 — 5. — The  golden  age.  "  Every  valley  shall  be  exalted,"  etc.  Everything 
depends  upon  how  we  view  the  future,  whether  with  the  horoscope  of  history  or 
prophecy.  History  says  the  old  evUs  return — war,  strife,  wrong,  selfishness.  Then 
the  heart  sinks,  and  inspiration  to  duty  is  weakened.  But  when  we  go  with  the  pro- 
phet to  the  mountain-tops,  we  see — 

I.  Paths  op  preparation.  "  Prepare  ye  the  way  of  the  Lord."  There  are  the 
ruins  of  the  old  military  roads  of  the  Caasars,  but  the  Caesars  are  gone.  There  the 
Ptolemies  of  olden  time  made  incursions,  but  their  sway  is  past.  But  the  highways  of 
commerce,  the  freer  intercourse  of  peoples  ;  the  more  humanizing  influences  of  equity 
in  law*  and  reformation  in  punishment,  the  kindly  workings  of  pity  and  charity  to  the 
neglected  and  forgotten ; — all  these  are  prejiaration-paths  for  the  great  King  who  is  to 
reign  in  righteousness.  Not  alone  through  the  royal  gates  of  olden  prophecies,  but 
through  the  triumphal  arches  of  redeeming  ideas  and  influences  which  he  has  set  at 
work,  the  Messiah  shall  come. 

II.  Obstacles  removed.  "  Every  valley,"  etc.  This  is  but  a  figurative  way  of 
stating  that  no  hindrance  can  affect  the  onward  march  of  the  Redeemer.  In  Eaistern 
countries  the  things  described  here  were  obstacles  suflScient  to  hinder  Solomon  in  his 
Eastern  journeys.  There  were  limits  to  his  progress  when  he  left  his  grand  basilica  to 
visit' his  wide  domains.    Not  so  will  it  be  with  One  greater  than  Solomon. 

III.  Glory  revealed.  It  is  hidden  now.  Men  are  dazzled  with  false  glory,  with 
meretricious  ideas  of  empire,  and  they  see  no  beauty  in  Christ  that  they  should  desire 
him.  But  one  day — as  the  aesthetic  student  realizes  in  time  what  is  true  art,  as  the 
musician  understands  the  majesty  of  Beethoven — the  moral  nature  of  men  being 
quickened  and  renewed  by  the  Spirit,  they  shall  see  the  glory  of  the  Lord  and  tlie 
excellency  of  onr  God.  Not  some  here  and  there,  but  man  everywhere ;  "  all  flesh  shall 
see  it  together."  What  a  vision !  and  what  a  day  of  jubilee  I  We  need  cherish  no 
doubt  about  it.  The  vision  is  not  imagination.  The  grand  climacteric  result  is  not 
predicated  from  a  mere  study  of  the  triumph  of  the  strongest  forces.  God  has  pledged 
his  own  word ;  "  For  the  mouth  of  the  Lord  hath  spoken  it." — W.  M.  S. 

Vers.  7,  8. —  TJie  imperithabU.  "The  grass  withereth,"  etc.  The  soul  of  man  is 
immortal,  and  the  Word  that  is  to  feed  it  is  immortal  too. 

I.  The  decat  of  nature.  "  The  grass  withereth  " — that  which  feeds  the  dying 
race  of  creatures  upon  earth.  "  The  flower  fadeth  " — that  which  resales  the  physical 
senses  of  man.  Bach  generation  learns  this  great  lesson,  and  it  is  interwoven  into  poem 
and  song  in  every  literature. 

II.  The  stmbolism  of  nature.  These  pictures  of  decay  are  to  teach  us  how  frail 
is  the  earthly  life  of  man :  "  He  cometh  up  atid  is  cut  down  like  a  flower."  "  AU  flesh 
is  as  gr&ss,  and  all  the  glory  of  man  as  the  flower  thertof."  So  that  his  best  life,  his 
soul,  will  dfinand  the  greater  care;  that  must  be  rooted  in  the  everlasting.  The 
inspiring  of  the  human  is  a  pensive  enough  consideration  at  times ;  we  can  only  be 


80  THE  BOOK  OF  THE  PROPHET   ISAIAH.      [««•  ^^-  J^31 

comforted  by  the  faith  which,  uniting  us  with  Christ,  enables  us  to  say,  "  Though  th« 
outward  man  perishes,  the  inward  man  is  renewed  day  by  day." 

III.  The  eternity  of  tbuth.  "  The  Word  of  our  God  shall  stand  for  ever.*  It  is 
blessed  to  be  able  to  say  "  our  God,"  because  that  implies  not  only  reconciliation,  but 
interest  in  his  kingdom,  and  that  kingdom  is  an  everlasting  kingdom.  There  is  the 
written  Word,  and  that  lives  and  is  translated  into  almost  every  language  and  dialect 
on  the  earth.  There  is  that  Word  as  it  lives  and  breathes  in  the  regenerated  hearts  and 
histories  of  the  saints  of  God.  There  is  the  eternal  "Word  hin)self,  the  Logos,  the  Lord 
Christ,  the  Inspirer  of  all  truth  in  all  the  ages,  the  Alpha  and  the  Omega,  the  Begin- 
ning and  the  End,  the  Lord  God  Almighty. — ^W.  M.  8. 

Ver.  10. — Present  n/ward.  "His  reward  is  with  him."  There  is  a  glory  to  be 
revealed.  There  is  a  day  of  the  manifestation  of  the  sons  of  God — a  day  of  august 
solemnity,  when  the  King  shall  say,  "Come,  ye  blessed."  But  the  Christian  dispen- 
sation is  not  fairly  represented  when  its  rewards  and  punishments  are  declared  to  be 
future  only.     These  words  speak  of  a  present  reward. 

I.  ChSist  Jesus  had  his  bewaed  hbee.  So  says  the  prophet,-  speaking  here  of 
Christ.  And  the  apostle  says,  "  For  the  joy  set  before  him  he  endured  the  cross ; " 
and  Jesus  gives  this  legacy  to  his  disciples :  "  My  joy."  We  are  apt  to  think  of  Jesus 
only  as  the  "  Man  of  sorrows."  And  so  our  artists  have  painted  him.  In  their  pictures 
there  is  often  no  light  of  triumph  in  his  eye !  How  he  went  about  doing  good !  What 
a  reward  it  was,  every  day  to  comfort  the  mourner  and  to  heal  the  broken-hearted! 
Think  of  all  that  Jesus  said  in  the  synagogue  of  Nazareth — that  he  came  to  do,  and 
you  will  understand  that  ht/neafh  this  sorrow  and  suffering  there  was  a  still  deeper  joy. 
His  reward  was  with  him.  So  it  was,  even  on  the  cross,  strange  as  that  may  appear. 
Still  the  prophet  says,  "  When  thou  shalt  make  his  soul  an  offering  for  sin,  he  shall 
see  his  seed, . .  .  the  pleasure  of  the  Lord  shall  prosper  in  his  hand.  He  shall  see  of  the 
travail  of  his  soul,  and  be  satisfied." 

IL  Christian  expbeiencb  endorses  this  truth.  The  Christian's  reward  is  with 
him.  True  duty  is  not  discharged  for  the  sake  of  reward.  Men  in  this  world  nevei 
get  happiness  by  seeking  for  it  alone.  It  must  come,  not  as  an  end,  but  as  an  accon^ 
paniment  of  duty.  Besides,  we  should  be  open  to  the  criticism  that  the  gospel  appealed 
to  selfishness  if  we  invited  men  and  women  to  become  Christians  for  the  sake  of 
heaven.  No ;  we  invite  them  to  take  up  their  cross  and  follow  him,  and  therein 
they  will  find  their  reward.  Strange  as  it  may  seem,  they  too  will  find  blessedness 
where  they  least  expected  it  in  doing  the  will  of  God ;  and  then  heaven  will  come  as 
the  culmination  and  perfection  of  sacrificial  and  spiritual  life. — W.  M.  S. 

Ver.  29. —  Weakniss  made  strong.  "He  giveth  power  to  the  faint,"  etc.  The 
pilgrim  to  Zion  is  oftto  weary.  Lassitude  and  faintness  steal  over  the  soul,  and  energy 
is  gone.  At  such  seasons  we  cannot  recover  ourselves.  No  effort  of  will  can  give  tone 
to  the  spirit  and  zeal  to  the  activities. 

L  Faintness  bbluived.  Our  principles  have  not  changed ;  nor  have  our  ideals.  To 
live  for  Christ  is  still  our  aim.  But  somehow  the  heart,  which  is  the  centre  of  the 
life,  beats  feebly.  God  has  varied  ways  of  relieving  our  weakness  and  restoring  our 
strength.  But  whatever  the  instrumentality,  it  is  God  that  does  it,  God's  Spirit  that 
fills  it.  Blessed  hours  are  those  when  the  heavenly  breath  revives  the  soul ;  when  the 
graces  lift  up  their  faded  heads  like  dew- bathed  flowers ;  when  courage  revives,  and  the 
soul  rejoices  in  God. 

II.  Strength  inobeased.  "  To  them  that  have  no  might."  Further  than  this  we 
cannot  go.  And  it  should  comfort  those  who  regard  their  experiences  of  feebleness  as 
indications  that  they  are  not  the  children  of  God,  that  such  a  state  is  recognized  in 
Holy  Scripture  as  possible  to  us.  "  No  might."  Patience  gone.  Endurance  gone. 
Perseverance  gone.  It  is  almost  like  moral  paralysis.  But  it  is  not,  indeed,  so.  The 
nerve  is  weakened,  but  not  snapped.  Divine  communication  can  and  will  come,  even 
10  the  most  enfeebled  and  dejected.  While  we  say  "  no  might,"  there  is  a  little  strength, 
or  it  could  not  be  "  increased."  And  this  increase  is  often  very  slow  and  imperceptible. 
When  We  are  physically  feeble,  we  cannot  measure  progress  as  we  inhale  the  air  of  sea 
•r  mountain;  only  steadily  does  the  tide  of  health,  like  the  ocean  tide,  return.     Bui  it 


aLii..l--8L]       THE  BOOK  OF  THE  PROPHET  ISAIAH.  81 

does  eome,  if  we  wait  apon  God;  for  God  is  fiuthful  who  Iwth  promised.    It  ii  all  of 

him.— W.  M.  S. 

Ver.  30. — Spiritual  faintneu.  "  Eyen  the  youths  shall  faint,"  eto.  Then  faintness 
is  not  a  matter  of  age.  Exhausted  power  may  belong  to  youth.  We  are  to  learn  that 
natural  spirits  are  not  enough  for  this  great  campaign.  Health  and  energy  will  do 
much  for  the  earthly  soldier,  and  for  the  young  mountaineer  on  the  Swiss  Alps.  But 
it  is  otherwise  here.  From  beginning  to  end  of  the  Divine  life  we  shall  faint  and  fail 
unless  God  be  with  us  to  inspire  and  strengthen  us. 

I.  ToiTNa  EXFBBIENCES.  It  is  perhaps  well  that  we  should  leam  the  great  lesson 
early,  so  that  we  may  never  think  of  ourselves  more  highly  than  we  ought  to  think. 
There  are  doubtless  joyful  experiences  in  our  first  love  to  Christ ;  but  Bunyan  was 
right  when  he  placed  the  Slough  of  Despond  so  near  the  starting-place.  We  soon  meet 
with  disappointments  and  disheartenments.  We  are  soon  face  to  face  with  temptations 
which  well-nigh  overcome  us.     The  Philistines  make  us  afraid. 

n.  Fallen  FOBTtn^ES.  Not  in  houses  or  estates,  but  in  hearts  and  lives.  We  fall 
— utterly  fall.  So  that  there  may  be  no  excuse,  no  palliation,  no  pretence  that  it  was 
only  a  stumble ;  we  cannot  gaily  pick  ourselves  up  and  go  on  our  way  as  though 
nothing  had  happened.  We  are  told  of  our  utter  failure.  Bat  to  fall,  even,  is  not  to 
be  lost.  We  may  be  maimed,  bruised,  broken,  but  God  can  lift  us  up.  "  Rejoice  not 
over  me,  0  mine  enemy,  for  when  I  fall  I  shall  arise."  This  is  the  victor-song  of  souls 
that  trust  not  in  themselves,  but  in  him  who  is  able  to  make  all  grace  abound  unto 
them.  Never  let  the  fallen,  whether  it  be  in  faith,  or  creed,  or  character,  be  treated  ai 
lost.— W.  M.  S. 

Ver.  31. — Eenewal  of  strength.  "  They  that  wait  upon  the  Lord."  Here  we  have 
revealed  to  us  the  secret  of  the  soul's  renewed  energy.  It  is  open  to  all.  We  are 
thus  "changed  men,"  for  the  Hebrew  word  here,  "to  renew,"  means  "to  change." 
Experiences  like  these  alter  alike  character  and  countenance.  God  restores  unto  us 
the  joy  of  his  anointed. 

I.  A  Divine  promise.  Written  in  the  book  of  inspiration  ?  Yes ;  and  embodied 
in  the  experience  of  a  great  multitude  of  souls.  So  attest  the  men  of  old,  like  Daniel 
and  Nehemiah,  who  had  each  religious  work  to  do  in  pagan  courts.  And  so  also  must 
we.  No  philosophy  of  prayer  may  be  possible  to  us,  save  that  best  of  all  philosophies, 
the  philosophy  of  experience.  And  this  we  cannot  set  aside.  As  the  Bible  is  its  own 
best  evidence  concerning  its  inspiration,  so  is  prayer  its  own  best,  argument.  They 
that  wait  upon  the  Lord,  in  every  age,  whether  in  the  patriarchy,  the  theocracy,  or 
the  Christian  age,  have  renewed  their  strength. 

IL  A  TBiPLE  experience.  "  They  shall  mount  up  with  wings  as  eagles."  True, 
there  is  a  higher  realm  into  which  as  we  rise  we  are  surprised  that  the  caret  and 
worries  of  this  lower  world  should  have  such  power  to  harass  and  overcome  us.  We 
do  see  light  in  God's  light.  The  nearer  we  get  to  Jesus,  the  Sun  of  Righteousness, 
the  more  we  feel  this  light  and  heat.  "  They  shall  run,  and  not  be  weary."  Progress 
is  made.  Elasticity  of  heart  is  felt.  We  renew  the  youth  of  our  souls.  "  They  shall 
walk,  and  not  faint."  For  we  cannot  always  be  in  the  enjoyment  of  swift  progress. 
We  have  hills  to  climb  and  waters  to  ford,  and  what  we  call  the  commonplaces  of  life 
to  attend  to.  Still,  there  is  room  for  heroism  here,  and  for  gracious  communion  with  God 
and  contentment  with  his  will.  To  walk  and  not  faint  is  vnetimes  more  difficult 
than  to  run  and  not  be  weaiy. — ^W.  M.  8. 

VerB,  1,  Z.—Fctrdon  and  penalty.  Israel  is  to  be  comforted  »»/  her  teachers  anc? 
pastors,  because  the  time  of  her  exile,  which  is  the  period  of  the  Divine  sentence 
has  nearly  expired,  and  the  hour  of  her  redemption  is  consequently  nigh.  If  we  aslt 
what  ground  of  comfort  we  find  here  for  the  Christian  Church,  or  for  the  chasteneu 
human  soul,  we  have  to  reply — 

I.  "That  comfort  is  not  to  be  found  in  the  supposed  leniency  of  God.    Nc 

thought  can  be  more  perilously  false  than  the  imagination  that  God  is  too  great  to 

concern  himself  with  our  misdeeds,  or  too  "  good "  to  take  offence  with  our  short- 

fomings.     Scripture,  providence^  and  a  Rniipd  philosophy  alike  protest  ^inst  that 

IBAIAH— II.  « 


82  THE  BOOK   OF   THE   PROl'HET  ISAIAH.       [oh.  xi,.  1— 31 

ruinous  doctiiue.  Sin  is  clcMiiy  a  most  serious  thing,  a  heinous  and  terrible  departure 
in  the  sight  of  God.  Let  no  man  comfort  his  soul  with  the  hope  that  "  le  bon 
Dieu '  will  overlook  his  life  of  impiety  or  his  various  acts  of  iniquity.  God  does, 
indeed,  pardon  sin  on  man's  penitence  and  faith ;  but  even  then  pardon  does  not 
absolutely  exclude  penalty.  We  may  not  press  into  our  service  here  the  word 
"pardoned"  (ver.  2),  as  it  may  perhaps  there  signify  expiated;  hut  elsewhere  the 
wilemption  of  Israel  is  treated  as  an  act  of  Divine  mercy.  Yet  here  we  have  judgment 
and  mercy  blended.  The  guilty  nation  is  not  to  be  restored  until  "  her  warfare  "  (the 
time  of  her  service)  has  been  "  aoconiplished,"  until  she  has  received  at  the  Lord's 
hand  "  double "  (full  and  ample  chastisement)  for  all  her  sins.  And  the  fact  is,  as 
we  find  in  our  daily  ex|  erience,  that  when  God  now  pardons  and  restores,  he  lets  his 
reconciled  children  feel  the  effects  of  their  past  folly  and  sin.  The  consequences  of 
a  vicious  youth  go  far  on  into  even  Christian  manhood.  The  penalties  of  an  unwise 
and  irreverent  fatherhood  follow  the  parent  to  the  very  loot  of  the  grave.  God's  mercy 
does  not  immediately  arrest  the  tide  of  suffering  and  sorrow  which  flows  froni'  a  long 
course  of  wrong-doing.  The  man  "  hears  his  penalty  until  his  warfare "  (his  time 
of  servitude)  "is  accomplished;"  and  that  is  often  a  long  time,  covering  many  years, 
extending  over  whole  periods  of  human  life. 

XL  That  comfokt  is  to  be  found  ru  the  fact  of  a  real  eestobation  to  the 
love  and  favour  of  God.  In  a  very  true  sense,  when  a  man  repents  and  seeks  the 
Divine  mercy  in  Christ  Jesus,  he  is  one  of  God's  "  people"  (ver.  1);  God  is  his  God, 
as  he  was  not  before  (ver.  1).  And  the  ills  that  he  now  suffers  lose  their  stem  aspect ; 
penalty  becomes  discipline — it  is  no  longer  the  sentence  of  the  Judge,  it  is  the  correc- 
tion of  the  Father. 

III.  That  comfoet  is  to  be  found  in  the  release  of  death  and  the  freedom 
of  the  heavenly  country.  When  the  end  of  life's  hard  service  comes,  and  the  note 
of  the  soul's  return  shall  be  sounded,  then  shall  there  be  a  glorious  deliverance  from 
evil,  and  eijtrance  on  the  highest  good. — C. 

Vers.  3 — 6. — Human  preparation  for  the  Divine  advent.  We  shall  find,  with  very 
little  seeking,  a  threefold  application  for  those  words :  (1)  a  primary  one  in  the  restora- 
tion of  the  Jews  to  Jerusalem ;  (2)  an  historical  and  human  one  in  the  advent  of  our 
Lord  and  the  founding  of  his  kingdom ;  (3)  a  future  one  in  the  restoration  of  the  race 
to  the  likeness  and  the  favour  of  God.  The  keystone  of  the  passage  we  find  in  the 
lifth  verse;  it  is  the  idea  of  the  manifestation  of  God's  glory,  wliich  all  mankind  is 
to  witness.     We  have,  then — 

L  The  manifested  glory  of  God.  This  was  to  be  displayed  and  has  been  shown 
in  two  illustrations  which  are  now  historical.  1.  The  faithfulntss  and  the  power  of 
Jehovah  in  the  accomplishment  of  his  people's  redemption  from  exile.  2.  A  more 
striking  instance  of  Divine  faithfulness,  wisdom,  and  power,  in  the  giving  of  the  gospel 
of  his  grace,  in  preparing  the  nations  of  the  earth  for  its  reception,  in  its  actual 
initiation  and  inauguration,  and  in  its  early  and  widespread  diBusion  among  men. 

II.  The  glory  which  waits  to  be  revealed.  Christ  has  come,  and  we  celebrate 
his  advent  with  joy  and  gratitude.  But  it  is  also  and  equally  true  that  he  is  coming. 
He  is  •  still  "  the  Coming  One."  Across  the  raid  wastes  of  indifference,  and  over 
mountains  of  opposition  and  gulfs  of  apparent  impossibility,  he  is  coming,  and  in  time 
we  shall  see  him — the  present,  reigning,  triumphant  Lord.  It  is  a  glorious  spiritual 
advance  he  is  to  make,  and  presence  he  is  to  confer,  and  power  he  is  to  exert ;  but 
it  vrill  be  none  the  less  glorious  or  gracitius  for  its  spiritualitj'.  That,  indeed,  will 
immeasurably  enhance  its  worth,  for  it  will  be  the  grander,  the  truer,  the  more  lasting 
achievement. 

in.  The  strength  or  our  asbubanoe  concebning  it.  "  All  flesh  shall  see  it :  for 
the  mouth  of  the  Lord  hath  spoken  it."  There  may  be  many  indications  that  Jesus 
Christ  will  one  day  secure  a  glorious  victory  over  the  disbelief,  the  vice,  the  super- 
stition, the  selfishness,  the  mdiflerence  of  the  world ;  but  the  strongest  assurance  we 
can  take  to  our  striving,  yearning,  sometimes  wondering  and  doubting  hearts  is  that 
"  the  mouth  of  the  Lord  hath  spoken  it : "  "  I,  if  I  be  lifted  up,"  etc. 

IV.  OuB  OONTKIBUTION  towards  ITS  oouiNG.  "  Prepare  ye  the  way,"  etc ;  "  mak* 
straight  •  kigbway,"  etc.    The  Cbtistian  Church  has  to  ask  itself  the  urgmt,  practical 


OH.  xu  1-  -31.]       THE    BOOK   OP   THE    PROPHET  ISAIAH.  83 


quegtion,  what  it  can  do  to  quicken  the  coming  of  its  Lord  in  his  redremiog  and 
regenerating  power.  And  it  may  find  its  answer  here.  1.  Fill  up  the  gulfs  of  unbelief ; 
let  not  lack  of  faith  on  the  part  of  Cbrist'an  men  hinder  the  I'Utting  forth  of  DiTiae 
power  (Matt.  xiii.  58).  2.  Remove  the  hills  nf  incon.sistency ;  let  not  profession  and 
exhortation  be  neutralized  by  immoralities  i^i  life,  by  wide  departures  from  the  will 
and  Word  of  God.  3.  Take  up  the  stones  of  blemish ;  make  a  patient  effort  to  cast 
aside  lesser  evils  which,  if  not  serious  obstacles,  do  yet  trouble  and  impede.  4.  Lay 
down  a  highway  by  prayer  and  zeal. — C. 

Vers.  6 — 8. — The  passing  and  tht  aUdmg.  We  are  so  little  afiected  by  that  with 
which  we  are  most  familiar,  that  we  need  to  hear  a  voice  crying  in  our  ear  and 
reminding  us  of  what  we  well  know  to  be  true.  To  nothing  is  this  more  applicable 
than  the  transitory  nature  of  our  human  life  and  our  earthly  interests.  We  want  to  be 
told— 

L  That  human  life  is  contdtoallt  passing.  We  do  well  to  walk  in  the  city  of 
the  dead,  and  let  the  gravestones,  with  their  names  and  dates,  speak  to  us  with  simple 
eloquence  of  the  passage  of  human  life.  We  are  wise  when  we  take  some  measures  to 
recall  to  our  thought  and  write  on  the  tablet  of  our  souls  the  fact  which  care  and 
pleasure  are  so  industriously  trying  to  conceal,  that,  when  a  few  more  years  have  come  and 
gone,  we  shall  be  numbered  with  the  dead,  and  that  the  objects  and  the  incidents  which 
are  everything  to  us  now  will  be  nothing  to  us  soon.  It  is  a  real  gain  to  us,  in  wisdom, 
to  be  reminded  that  we  are  but  passengers  to  the  unseen  world,  and  that  every  step  we 
take  leaves  us  less  of  the  journey  to  be  pursued.  Human  life  is  like  a  flower  of  the 
field,  a  little  while  ascending  to  its  perfection,  and  then  a  little  while  descending  to 
its  doom. 

IL  That  res  excellenot  rapidly  disappears.  "  All  the  goodliness  "  of  human 
life  disappears  still  more  quickly  than  life  itself.  The  most  exquisite  things  are  the  most 
evanescent ;  the  fairest  are  the  &ailest.  The  beauty,  the  strength,  the  glory  of  human 
life, — these  last  but  a  very  little  while ;  they  appear  above  the  surface  and  put  forth  their 
blossom ;  then  comes  the  killing  frost,  and  they  perish. 

m.  That  the  truth  of  God  is  f,verlastino.  1.  Enlightening  truth.  All  that  he 
has  told  us  of  himself  and  of  ourselves,  of  our  nature,  character,  destiny,  way  of  return, 
etCj  2.  Commanding  and  inviting  truth.  He  still  says  imperatively,  "  Return  unto 
me;"  invitingly,  "Come  unto  me."  3.  Comforting  irvtfih.  It  will  never  cease  to  be  a 
sustaining  and  mitigating  fact  that  "  God  is  our  Refuge  and  Strength,"  that  he  chastens 
us,  not  for  his  pleasure,  but  for  our  profit,  that  we  may  be  made  "  partakers  of  his 
holiness."  4.  Warning  truth.  It  is  as  certain  now,  as  it  was  in  the  earliest  era)  that 
"the  soul  that  sinneth,  it  shall  die."  5.  Hope-giving  truth.  Prom  generation  to 
generation  it  shall  be,  as  it  has  been,  declared  that  "  whosoever  believeth  in  him  hath 
everlasting  life." — C. 

Vers.  9,  10. — Ood ;  hit  presence,  power,  and  grace.  Such  good  tidings  are  to  be 
brought  to  Zion  that  the  language  used  is  that  of  exultation ;  the  messenger  is  to  stand 
upon  a  high  mountain,  to  lift  up  his  voice  with  strength,  to  proclaim  so  that  every  one, 
far  and  near,  shall  hear.  The  message  to  be  delivered  is  the  presence  of  Jehovah,  his 
everlasting  power,  his  grace  in  bringing  a  large  reward  in  his  bountiful  hand.  The 
primary  reference  is  obvious  (see  previous  homilies) ;  the  secondary  one  is  to  Messiah's 
kingdom,  and  the  glory  which  is  yet  to  be  revealed.  The  most  striking  applications 
are  to — 

.L  God's  presence  ik  Jesus  Christ  his  Son.  Then,  when  "  God  was  manifest  in  the 
flesh,"  when  "  the  Word  was  made  flesh,  and  dwelt  among  us,"  the  "  Brightness  of  the 
Father's  glory,  and  the  express  Image  of  his  Person,"  might  these  words  be  most 
appropriately  used,  "  Behold  your  God."  Then  One  was  present  who  (1)  while  he  had 
in  his  nature  and  his  character  all  Divine  attributes  (Divine  knowledge,  power,  truth, 
purity,  love,  etc.),  (2)  was  visible  to  the  human  eye,  audible  to  the  human  ear,  accessibk 
to  the  himian  race ;  then  he  that  waa  "  above  all "  was  "  with  us  "  all,  the  Immanuel. 

IL  God's  power  in  the  establishment  of  his  kingdom  of  righteousness.  No 
doubt  it  seemed  to  the  Jews  a  very  glorious  illustration  of  Divine  power  to  overcome  all 
Uie  obstacles  that  stood  in  the  way  of  their  return  from  exile — to  guide  them  into  and 


b4  THE   BOOK  OP  THE   PROPHET   ISAIAH.        [oh.  xjo.  1— 31 

establish  them  iu  the  land  of  their  fathers.  But  it  is  an  incalculably  greator  instanca 
of  Divine  powei  to  overcome  all  the  hindrances  in  the  way  of  a  spiritual  redemption  ol 
the  race,  and  to  secure  that  glorious  issue.  This  is  that  which  the  ruling  and  over- 
ruling arm  of  the  Almighty  is  now  accomplishing.  Well  might  such  a  work  be 
pubhshed  with  farthest-reaching  voice  from  the  highest  mountain  I  God  is  doing  that 
with  which  no  victories  that  human  monarchs  ever  won  will  for  one  small  moment 
compare.  He  is  triumphing  over  the  prejudices,  the  superstitions,  the  vices,  the 
selfishness,  the  individual  and  the  organized  iniquities  of  the  world ;  and  on  the  ruins 
of  sin  and  wrong  he  is  rearing  the  mighty  and  majestic  edifice  of  universal  righteousness 
and  peace. 

III.  God's  grace  in  confebbing  immortal  globt.  "His  reward  is  with  him." 
God  comes  to  us  in  the  gospel  with  a  very  large  reward.  On  them  who  seek  for 
honour  and  glory  in  his  appointed  way,  he  confers  "  eternal  life ; "  that  is  to  say,  (1) 
life  of  the  very  highest  kmd—Wie  that  is  spiritual  and  Divine,  spent  in  his  near  pri'sence 
ai;d  in  his  holy  service ;  and  (2)  life  that  never  fails,  hut  evermore  enlarges — ^life  that 
does  not,  as  dues  our  mortal  existence,  ascend  and  then  descend  till  the  end  is  reached, 
but  that  continually  and  eternally  ascends,  enlarging  and  expanding  as  the  centuries 
pass  away.  Well  is  it  for  these,  and  wise  is  it  ot  them,  to  rejoice  in  his  manifested 
presence,  to  take  a  sympathetic  and  active  share  in  the  outworking  of  his  great 
accomplishment,  to  have  for  their  chief  hope  a  share  in  that  heavenly  heritage. — 0. 

Ver.  11. — "  Uie  grace  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ."  Of  no  one  can  these  words  be  used 
with  such  exquisite  appropriateness  as  of  that  "  great  Shepherd,"  that "  good  Shepherd  " 
of  the  sheep,  whom  we  caU  Lord  and  Master.     They  express — 

I.  His  practical  edtdness.  "  He  shall  feed  his  flock  like  a  shepherd."  He  will  be 
to  them,  in  all  kindly  service,  what  the  shepherd  is  to  his  sheep.  1.  He  provides  with 
all-nourishing  truth.  2.  He  leads  in  the  paths  of  righteousness.  3.  He  defends  from 
spiritual  perils. 

II.  His  tenderness.  "  He  shall  gather  the  lambs  with  his  arm,  and  carry  them  in 
his  bosom."  He  is  tender  in  his  treatment  of :  1.  The  young.  They  may  well  sing, 
"Jesus,  tender  Shepherd,  hear  me,"  etc.  He  who  so  graciously  received  the  little 
children,  who  took  them  up  in  his  arms  and  blessed  them  (Mark  x.)  will  regard  with 
truest  tenderness  the  children  of  his  people  now.  2.  JTie  sick  and  suffering.  As 
tenderly  as  the  pitiful  mother  watts  upon  her  sick  child,  will  he  sympathize  with  those 
of  bis  disciples  who  are  afOicted  in  body.  3.  The  sorrowful.  He  is  the  "  High  Priest 
touched  with  a  feeling  of  our  infirmities,"  holding  and  healing  with  delicate  hand  the 
wounded  and  suffering  spirit. 

III.  His  00NSIDKRATENE8S.  "And  shall  gently  lead  those  that  are  with  young." 
He  will  suit  his  step  to  the  pace  of  those  who  have  to  fall  behind.  No  hard  Iron 
measure  has  he  in  his  hand;  he  requires  of  us  only  according  to  tlie  strength  we  have. 
The  shorter  and  slenderer  service  of  the  unprivileged,  of  the  burdened,  of  the  feeble,  of 
the  "little  ones"  of  his  flock  is  quite  as  acceptable  to  the  considerate  and  patient 
Saviour  as  the  longer  and  larger  service  of  the  privileged  and  the  strong. — 0. 

Vers.  12 — 17. — ZKe  greatness  of  Ood  and  the  littleness  of  man.  lliese  most  eloquent 
words,  so  impressive  as  they  stand  that  it  seems  undesirable  to  touch  them  in  the  way 
of  analyziug  them,  may  speak  to  us  of — 

I.  The  immeasurable  esEATNESs  of  God.  1.  Eis  Divine  majesty.  All  that  ia  most 
vast  and  powerful  in  the  universe — the  sea,  the  heavens,  the  land,  the  mountains,  etc. 
— is  small  and  slight  indeed  when  compared  with  him  ;  his  surroundings,  his  possessions, 
all  bespeak  his  unapproachable  majesty.  2.  His  Divine  power.  Such  is  his  boundless 
strength  that  he  can  hold  up  the  waters  in  the  hollow  of  his  hand,  can  "  take  up  the 
isles  as  a  very  little  thing.  What  cannot  he  accumplish  to  whom  this  is  easy?  3. 
ni$  Divint  knowledge.  Power  rests  on  knowledge ;  God  is  able  to  do  all  things  because 
he  knows  all  things.  He  can  tell  what  is  the  measure  of  "  the  dust  of  the  earth,"  He 
cannot  be  taught  anything  by  any  being,  for  all  knowledge  is  his  already  (vers.  13, 14) ; 
greatest  things  and  least,  the  weight  of  the  mountains,  the  number  of  the  grains  of  dnst, 
etc.,  are  known  to  him.  4.  Eis  Divine  wisdom.  "  Who  hath  taught  him  in  the  path 
of  Judgment?  "  (ver.  14).    Perfect  wisdom,  the  secret  of  right  action,  of  the  direction  o| 


ea.  xu  1—31.]        THE  BOOK  OF  THE  PROPHET  ISAIAH.  85 

greatest  affairs,  of  prevision  and  provision,  of  ruling  and  overruling,  ia  at  his  command 
His  wisdom  is  incapable  of  increase ;  it  is  absolutely  complete. 

II.  Human  littleness.  "  The  nations  are  as  a  drop  of  a  bucket "  (ver.  16).  We 
note,  as  corresponding  with  Qoi's  greatness:  1.  Ow  insignifieanee.  We  may  find 
ourselves  mean  and  Ijumble  enough,  when  compared  with  our  fellow-men;  most 
certainly  we  do  when  we  bring  ourselves,  our  circumstances,  our  authority,  into 
comparison  with  him.  2.  Our  impotence.  How  very  little  can  the  strongest  and  most 
influential  men  effect !  how  much  less  those  whose  lives  are  spent  in  lowly  spheres ! 
3.  Our  ignorance.  We  want  men  to  direct  our  spirit,  to  counsel  us,  to  teach  us 
knowledge.  There  are  few  men  from  whom  we  have  not  something  to  learn.  We  need 
to  be  acquiring  knowledge,  not  in  the  time  specially  devoted  to  study,  but  all  day  long 
and  all  life  through.  4..  Ow  foolishness.  We  do  not  know  how  to  conduct  our  own 
affairs  wisely,  and  are  continually  making  larger  or  smaller  mistakes :  how  much  more 
so  in  our  conduct  of  other  men's  affairs !  Therefore  we  do  well :  (1)  To  retain  truest 
and  deepest  reverence  of  spirit;  filial  confidence  and  joy  in  God  must  always  be  made 
consistent  with  profoundest  adoration.  (2)  To  accept  without  question  the  truth  he  has 
revealed  to  us  in  his  Word.  (3)  To  trust  his  guidance  in  the  direction  of  our  lives,  how- 
ever dark  and  inexplicable  some  passages  may  seem.  (4)  To  work  on  cheerfully  and 
hopefully,  though  a  successful  issue  appear  exceedingly  remote. — 0. 

Vers.  16 — 26. — Hu  hopelessness  and  the  simplicity  of  Divine  service.  "  Lebanon  is 
not  sufficient  to  burn,"  etc.;  "Not  one  faileth."  If  we  were  asked  whether  it  was  a 
very  difficult  or  a  very  simple  thing  to  serve  the  Lord,  we  should  say,  "  It  is  both  the 
one  and  the  other;  everything  depends  upon  the  way  and  the  spirit  in  which  we 
proceed."    We  learn — 

I.  That  mere  quantity  of  service  is  vain  and  futile.  "  Lebanon  ia  not  sufficient 
to  bum,  nor  will  [all]  the  beasts  thereof  suffice  for  a  burnt  offering,"  if  the  acceptable 
dement  in  worship  he  absent.  Great  hecatombs  are  heathenish  things ;  they  are  based 
on  the  essentially  false  idea  that  God  can  be  enriched  by  human  gifts — "as  though  he 
needed  anything,"  as  though,  "  if  he  were  hungry,  he  would  tell  us."  And  all  ideas  as 
to  quantity  in  service  are  erroneous.  It  is  not  by  "  thousands  of  rams  or  tens  of  thousands 
of  rivers  of  oil,"  that  he  is  to  be  placated.  It  is  a  hopeless  and  impossible  task  which 
so  many  set  themselves  to  accomplish — to  please  and  serve  the  living  God  by  a  multitude 
of  services,  of  celebrations,  of  privations,  of  prayers  ("much  speaking"),  of  acts  of 
outward  benevolence.  As  all  Lebanon  with  all  its  beasts  would  not  be  sufficient  for 
one  acceptable  sacrifice,  taken  of  itself  and  of  themselves,  so  millions  of  Masses  and 
multitudes  of  charities,  and  innumerable  acts  of  service,  whether  good  or  bad  in  them- 
selves, would  take  a  man  no  nearer  to  the  favour  of  God  and  the  kingdom  of  heaven,  if 
there  were  not  present  something  apart  from  these  things  and  of  more  intrinsic 
excellence  than  they.  Without  this  last,  service  is  either  formal,  or  superstitious,  or 
selfish ;  in  any  case  it  is  worthless. 

IL  That  the  suallest  service  bishtlt  bbndbbed  is  effectual  with  God. 
Not  one  of  the  vast  army  of  the  heavenly  hosts  fails  to  take  its  place  and  exert  its 
influence  and  do  its  appointed  work  in  the  vast  plans  of  the  Creator.  Every  smallest 
star  gives  its  light,  and  helps  to  keep  everything  in  the  sidereal  universe  in  equipoise 
and  in  orderly  movement.  Not  one  faileth.  So  may  this  be  true  in  the  great  army  of 
Divine  worshippers  and  of  Christian  workers.  With  a  reverent  and  a  loving  spirit, 
the  service  of  Gtod  is  the  simplest  thing  in  the  world.  1.  The  ejaculation  of  a  moment 
is  an  effectual  prayer.  2.  The  gift  of  two  mites  is  a  liberal  offering.  3.  The  cup  of 
cold  water  wiU  by  no  means  lose  its  reward.  4.  The  simple  sentence  of  encouragement 
to  the  tired  traveller  along  the  road  of  life,  or  of  comfort  to  the  wounded  soldier  in  the 
battle  of  life,  or  of  good  cheer  to  the  bafSed  workman  in  the  Master's  vineyard,  is 
eloquent  in  the  ear  of  the  Lord  of  love.  6.  The  household  duty  conscientiously  and 
devoutly  discharged  will  be  owned  and  blessed  by  him  who  observes  and  rewards  the 
"bond  and  free."  6.  The  simplest  act  of  magnanimity,  rendered  in  the  interchange  of 
our  homeliest  relations,  by  which  a  brother,  or  sister,  or  neighbour  is  frankly  forgiven 
the  hard  word,  or  the  inconsiderate  silence,  or  the  unloving  deed,  weighs  in  the  scales 
of  him  who  was  tiie  first  to  say,  "Love  your  enemies."  Every  soldier  among  the 
nok-andTfile  can  went  the  Divine  Captain.    With  love  in  the  heart  there  is  no  need  of 


86  THE   BOOK  OF  THE  PROPHET  ISAIAH.       [oh.  XL.  1—81, 

Lebanon  and  its  beasts  for  an  altar  or  a  sacrifice.  Kot  one  need  fail  to  do,  day  by  day, 
hotir  after  hour,  act  after  act,  that  which  is  well  pleasing  in  the  eyes  of  him  "  with 
whom  we  have  to  do,"  whose  good  pleasure  with  lu  is  the  gladness  of  our  heart  and  the 
music  of  our  life, — 0. 

Vers.  18 — 26. — 2^  degradation  of  (he  Divine,  The  holy  indignation  of  the  prophet 
is  aroused  as  he  sees  the  Godhead  so  pitifully  presented  to  the  mind,  so  shamefully 
represented  to  the  eyes  of  men.  He  has  in  view  the  power  and  majesty  of  the  Supreme 
One,  and  places  in  contrast  the  creatures  of  human  imagination,  the  fabrications  of  the 
human  hand.     We  have  the  degradation  of  the  Divine — 

I.  As  IT  APPEASED  TO  THE  Hebbew  PROPHET.  He  beheld :  1.  The  power  and  the 
majesty  of  Ood,  shown  in  (1)  his  immeasurable  exaltation  above  all  his  creatures 
(ver.  22);  (2)  the  perfect  ease  with  which  he  formed  the  most  wonderful  objects  in 
creation  (ver.  22);  (3)  the  absolute  control  he  exercises  over  the  mightiest  of  the 
children  of  men  (vers.  23,  24) ;  (4)  the  knowledge  and  wisdom  he  displays  in  ordering 
the  physical  universe  (ver.  26).  2.  The  utter  folly  of  the  heathen  in  their  way  of 
presenting  Deity  to  their  minds ;  attempting  to  fashion  an  image  which  should  liear  a 
resemblance  to  the  Lord  (vers.  18 — 20),  as  if  anything  that  the  hand  of  man  can 
fashion  could  bear  the  smallest  rpsemblanco  to,  or  be  in  any  way  fitted  to  suggest  the 
idea  of,  the  Majesty  of  heaven;  the  practical  and  the  common  issue  of  such  idolatry 
being  the  actual  acceptance  of  tliC  graven  image  as  constituting  the  very  object  of 
worship.     We  may  regard  the  degradation  of  the  Divine — 

n.  As  IT  APPEARS  TO  US  IN  OUR  OWN  TIME.  1.  We  havc  tKt  fotie  thought  of  Ood,  as 
revealed  to  us  by  Jesus  Christ — that  of  a  Divine  Father  conferring  on  us  our  being  and 
our  powers,  visiting  us  with  constant  loving-kindnesses,  divinely  interested  in  our  highest 
well-being,  interposing  to  restore  us  to  his  love  and  his  likeness,  giving  his  own  Son  to 
redeem  us  and  his  own  Spirit  to  renew  us,  disciplining  us  with  fatherly  care,  and 
rejoicing  in  our  filial  affection  and  obedience  with  parental  joy.  2.  We  have  Hu 
degraded  thought  of  God  which  men  still  entertain.  (1)  The  fetish  of  the  heathen 
world :  a  being,  ordinarily  represented  by  an  idol,  whose  malignant  hostility  is 
deprecated  and  averted  by  gifts  and  self-inflicted  penalties.  (2)  The  fiction  of  the 
philosopher :  an  impersonal  power,  an  abstraction  or  generalization,  an  ideal  humanity, 
etc. — something  in  which  a  few  trained  intellects  may  rest,  but  which  no  human  heart 
can  trust  or  love,  and  no  human  soul  strive  to  resemble.  (3)  The  god  of  the  ungodly : 
a  being  accepted  by  the  mind  but  banished  by  the  heart,  unrecognized  by  the 
conscience,  neglected  in  the  life.  This  last  is  the  guiltiest  degradation  of  the  Divine ; 
for  "  this  is  the  condemnation,  that  light  is  come,"  etc.,  and  "  He  that  knoweth  his 
Lord's  will  and  ioeth  it  not  shall  be  beaten  with  many  stripes." — 0. 

Ver.  26. — The  distinguishing  love  of  Ood.  "  He  calleth  them  all  by  names  by  the 
greatness  of  bis  might,  for  that  he  is  strong  in  power."  The  infinitude  of  Grod  is  no 
argument  at  all  against  his  observance  of  the  individual  and  the  minute ;  rightly  regarded, 
it  is  a  strong  inference  in  favour  of  it.  Because  he  is  infinite  in  wisdom  he  compasses 
all  that  is  most  vast  and  extensive;  and  for  the  tame  reason,  "  by  the  greatness  of  his 
might,  for  that  he  is  strong  in  power  " — he  has  a  perfect  mastery  over  all  the  particulars 
of  his  creation.  He  not  only  summons  the  mighty  armies  of  the  slries  and  marshals  the 
whole  host  of  heaven,  but  he  is  familiar  with  each  separate  star :  "  He  calleth  them  all  by 
names."  This  individual  attention  applies  to :  1.  The  inanimate  creation  (text).  2.  The 
sentient,  unintelligent  creation :  "  Not  a  sparrow  falls  to  the  ground,"  etc. ;  and  this  fiujt 
constitutes  a  strong  reason  for  forbearing  from  cruelty  towards  every  living  creature,  and 
for  treating  all  the  members  nf  the  animal  world  with  constant  kindness.  3.  The  whole 
human  world.  Even  if  this  doctrine  were  not  true  in  other  realms,  it  certainly  must  be 
in  this.  As  we  could  not  think  and  feel  as  we  wish  to  do  of  the  human  rather  who 
fiEuled  to  distinguish  his  children  from  each  other,  so  also  could  we  not  reverence  and  lore 
the  heavenly  Father  if  he  failed  to  distinguish  us.  But  he  does  not  faSl;  "he  calls 
us  all  by  names ; "  he  is  the  true  and  go<^  Shepherd,  who  "  calls  his  own  sheep  by 
name."  Each  one  of  us  is :  (1)  The  object  of  his  Divine  thought  and  care.  Every  child 
of  man  can  say,  "  The  Lord  tnmketh  on  me."  (2)  The  object  of  his  parental  yearning. 
Away  in  the  far  country,  each  prodigal  may  be  sure  that  there  is  a  wronged,  waiting, 


OH.  XL.1— 8L]        THE  BOOK  OF  THE  PROPHET  ISAIAH.  81 

expectant  Father,  who  Ls  griuved  concerning  him,  and  who  earnestly  remembers  him 
stilL  (3)  The  object  of  his  redeeming  and  self-nacrificing  love.  "  He  loved  me,  and  gave 
himself  for  me,"  we  can  all  say,  after  the  apostle.  (4)  The  object  of  his  disciplinary 
dealing.  •'  Whom  the  Lord  loves  he  chastens,  and  scourges  every  son,"  etc.  (5)  The 
object  othis  desire  that  we  should  share  his  work  and  his  gtory.  To  each  of  his  disciples 
he  says,  "  Follow  thou  me ; "  "  Go  [thou],  and  work  in  my  vineyard," — 0. 

Vers.  27,  28. — The  impiety  of  impatience.  Qoi  rebukes  Israel  for  its  impatience 
under  trial.  It  ought  to  have  "  remembered  the  years  of  the  right  hand  of  the  Most 
High ; "  it  ought  to  have  considered  that  its  Divine  Sovereign  was  one  whose  faithfulness 
did-  not  depend  on  a  few  passing  years,  that  the  action  or  the  iaaotion  of  "  the  ever- 
lasting God  "  was  not  open  to  the  criticism  which  condemns  the  short-lived  policy  of 
fiail  and  dying  men.    The  rebuke  is  full  of  practical  truth  applicable  to  ourselves. 

I,  OuK  DISPOSITION  TO  DOUBT  THE  FAITHFULNESS  OF  GoD.  Whatever  our  creed  may 
be,  and  however  unexceptionable  our  views  as  to  the  attributes  and  actions  of  God,  we 
find  ourselves  strongly  tempted  to  indulge  the  fretful,  distrustful  spirit  shown  by  the 
children  of  Israel ;  we  are  apt  to  think  that  God  has  "  forgotten  to  be  gracious  "  to  us, 
that  he  has  "  passed  us  by,"  that  our  wrongs  and  sufferings  are  disregarded  by  him  just 
as  if  they  were  actually  hidden  from  his  eyes.  This,  whether  we  are  suffering  from, 
(1)  continued  persecution,  inflicted  by  a  political  power  or  by  individual  men ;  or  (2) 
protracted  difficulties,  social,  or  domestic,  or  financial,  from  which  we  have  been  anxiously 
striving  to  escape,  but  from  which  there  seems  no  way  of  extrication ;  or  (3)  vnrelieved 
illness — ^pain,  weakness,  disease,  decay,  unrelieved  either  by  recovery  or  wished-for 
death ;  or  (4)  unsuccessful  seeking  after  God,  after  the  peace  and  joy  of  his  salvation, 
after  the  blessedness  of  conscious  friendship  with  Jesus  Christ;  or  (5)  unprofitihU 
labour  in  the  field  of  Christian  work. 

IL  The  impiety  of  such  complaint.  It  arisas,  not  from  a  pardonable  ignorance, 
but  from  a  culpable  forgetfulness,  an  inexcusable  disregard  of  the  nature  of  the  God 
whom  we  serve.  We  ought  to  remember :  1.  That  God  does  not  measure  time  by  our 
chronometry ;  with  the  "  everlasting  God  "  one  day  is  as  a  thousand  years,  etc.  He  is 
not  slack  as  we  count  slackness ;  length  and  shortness  of  time  are  not  the  same  thing 
to  him  that  they  are  to  us.  2.  That  it  is  impossible  for  him  to  be  unmindful  of  our 
necessities  or  our  sorrows.  He  "  faints  not,  neither  is  weary."  What  might  possibly 
prove  troublesome  to  men  will  not  be  wearisome  to  God.  He  does  not  withdraw  his 
notice  of  his  children's  needs  for  one  small  moment.  3.  That  we  cannot  enter  into  his 
reasons  for  delay  or  his  methods  of  interposition.  "  There  is  no  searching  of  his  under- 
standing." For  anything  we  know,  an  earlier  interposition  even  by  a  single  day  would 
be  a  precipitancy  tliat  would  do  us  harm ;  and  for  anything  we  can  tell,  God  may  have 
already  started  means  of  deliverance  whose  ultimate  outworking  will  realize  our  hearts' 
desire.  Wherefore  let  us  banish  dissatisfaction  and  distrust  as  ungodly,  and  cultivate 
a  devout  trust  in  the  Lord,  who  will  make  good  the  kindest  word  "  on  which  he  has 
caused  us  to  hope." — 0. 

Vers.  29 — 31. — The  need  and  the  gift  of  spiritual  power.  What  Israel  wanted  in 
captivity  the  Church  of  Christ  now  needs  in  its  present  situation,  surrounded  by  an 
unsympathizing  or  even  hostile  world.  It  lacks  power  to  do  that  which  it  was  created 
to  accomplish.  Potentially,  it  has  within  itself  all  that  is  required  to  complete  the 
great  work  of  regeneration  which  its  Divine  Master  began ;  in  simple  fact  and  in  sad 
reality,  it  has  failed  to  discharge  its  function.  Every  Church  should  be  a  great  power 
for  good  in  the  country,  in  the  neighbourhood  in  which  it  is  planted;  every  Christian 
man  should  be  a  real  power  for  piety  and  virtue  in  the  circle  in  which  he  moves.  We 
ought  to  have  power  to  "  witness  a  good  profession  for  Jesus  Christ,"  power  to  live  »n 
elevating,  influential  life,  power  to  execute  a  useful  and  abiding  work  for  our  Lord. 
Can  we  say  that  this  is  the  case  with  our  Churches,  with  ourselves  ?  Must  we  not 
regretfully  admit  that  it  is  not  so  ?    We  note — 

L  The  prevalence  of  human  weakness.  Probably  the  "  faint,  and  those  who  had 
no  might,"  among  the  exiled  Israelites  were  the  dispirited,  the  dissatisfied,  the  despair- 
ing— those  who  had  lost  hope  in  God  and  had  no  expectation  of  ever  seeing  again  th« 
land  of  their  fathen.    So  with  the  Israel  of  God ;  the  faint  and  the  weak  include; 


88  THE    BOOK   OP   THE  PROPHET   ISAIAH.      [oh.  xu  1—81 

1.  Joyless  souls,  who  have  no  gladness  in  God,  and  no  happiness  in  his  service^  who 
walk  even  in  the  "  path  of  life  "  with  no  hrightness  in  their  countenance  and  na 
elasticity  in  their  step.  But  they  include  also :  2.  Half-hearted  souls,  whose  devoted- 
ness  to  Christ  is  seriously  defective,  who  cannot  say,  "  With  my  whole  heart  have  I 
served  thee,"  who  seem  to  think  that  a  very  large  amount  of  selfishness  is  consistent 
with  loyalty  to  the  Lord,  and  who  are  often  falling  "  out  of  rank  "  when  they  should 
he  walking  on  in  the  march  or  actively  engaged  in  the  hattle.  3.  Faint-hea/rted  souls, 
who  have  no  courage  to  attempt  anything  for  their  Master  and  their  fellow-men,  and 
who  consequently  allow  their  lue  to  pass  on  and  away  without  achieving  anything  in 
the  field  of  sacred  usefulness.  4.  Souls  open  to  temptation ;  those  who  have  gained 
such  an  imperfect  control  over  themselves  that  they  lie  exposed  to  the  gusts  of  tempta- 
tion, and  their  hest  friends  are  continually  solicitous  lest  they  should  dishonour  them- 
selves and  the  Name  they  hear. 

II.  The  insufficiency  of  human  btbenoth.  There  were  those  in  Israel  from  whom, 
in  the  natural  course  of  things,  strength,  vigour,  fortitude,  might  have  heen  expected. 
Bnt  in  vain:  "Even  the  youths  shall  faint,"  etc.  There  are  those  in  the  Church  of 
Christ  whose  physical  constitution,  or  whose  natural  temperament,  or  whose  intellectual 
capacity  or  acquisition  might  give  them  the  appearance  of  strength ;  it  would  not  he 
expected  of  them  that  they  would  become  "  weary,"  still  less  that  they  would  "  utterly 
fall."  But  no  reliance  can  be  placed  on  such  natural  supports,  snch  unspiritual  resources. 
These  souls  are  not  strong  in  the  deeper  sense  in  which  the  Church  needs  strength. 
They  are  subject  to  the  inroads  of  pride ;  they  are  liable  to  fall  under  the  assaults  of 
passion ;  they  are  tempted  to  withhold  from  Gt)d  the  glory  which  is  due  to  his  holy 
Name;  they  may  do  nothing  to  commend  the  Divine  Saviour  himself  and  his  glorious 
gospel  to  the  hearts  of  men ;  and,  "  not  gathering  with  "  Christ,  they  only  "  scatter 
kbroad  "  the  seeds  of  error  and  of  wrong. 

in.  The  gift  of  Divine  power.  "  He  ^veth  power ...  he  increaseth  strength." 
OtoA  has  access  to  our  human  souls — direct  and  immediate  access.  He  can  "  lay  his  hand 
upon  us,"  and  touch  the  secret  springs  of  our  nature,  calling  forth  all  that  is  best  and 
worthiest,  "  strengthening  us  with  strength  in  our  souL"  He  can  communicate  to  us 
so  much  of  "  the  exceeding  greatness  of  his  power  *  that  we  can,  through  him  and  in 
him,  become  strong  indeed ;  can  attain  to  strength  of:  1.  Sesistance  ;  so  that  we  shall 
be  able  to  stand  in  the  evil  hour  of  temptation.  2.  Endurance ;  that  we  can  be  calm, 
peaceful,  acquiescent,  even  under  the  severest  and  the  most  lasting  trials.  3.  Steadfast 
piety ;  that  we  become  "  living  epistles  of  Christ,"  etc.  4.  Sacred  Joy.  6.  Fait^td 
utterance.  6.  Perseverance  in  evei-y  good  work.  God  gives  us  of  the  refreshing,  renew- 
ing, invigorating  influences  of  his  Holy  Spirit,  and  we  run  without  weariness,  we  walk 
without  fainting. 

IV.  The  condition  on  which  it  is  confebbed.  This  includes  (1)  a  patient  waiting 
for  the  exercise  of  God's  power  on  our  behalf;  and  also  (2)  an  earnest  appeal  to  him 
in  believing  prayer  that  he  would  fulfil  his  word.  The  truly  reverent  spirit  will  devoutly 
seek  the  IMvine  blessing,  and  confidently  look  for  its  bestowal.  To  expect  without 
seeking  is  presumption;  to  seek  without  expecting  is  unbelief;  to  do  the  one  and  not 
to  leave  the  other  undone  is  obedience  and  faith  in  happy  union.— Q. 

Ver.  1. — Z%e  comfort  of  Qodls  restored  favour.  The  question  of  the  authorship  of 
the  latter  half  of  Isaiah  resolves  itself  into  a  discussion  of  its  claim  to  be  prophetical. 
If  it  is  descriptive,  it  must  have  been  written  by  some  "great  imknown."  If  it  is 
prophetical,  and  a  vision  of  historical  events  covering  long  centuries,  but  grouped  for 
effective  representation,  then  it  may  have  been  written  by  Isaiah,  and  it  fittingly  com- 
pletes a  work  which,  revealing  Divine  judgments,  also  reveals  "  mercy  rejoicing  over 
judgment."  Isaiah  seems  to  be  among  the  wearied,  burdened,  disheartened  exiles  in 
Babylon,  towards  the  close  of  the  Captivity.  They  are  "  hanging  their  harpa  on  the 
willows,"  and  refusing  to  sing.  They  have  waited  so  long,  that  it  seems  quite  plain 
"  Gh>d  has  forgotten  to  be  gracious."  To  them  Isaiah  has  a  message  from  Grod.  He  is 
to  "  comfort  them ; "  and  this  is  to  be  the  comforting — God's  time  of  judgment  is  almost 
over,  Qod's  restoring  mercies  are  close  at  hand.  "  Where  sin  abounded,  grace  did  much 
more  abound"  (Bom.  t.  20).  "  Having,  in  ch.  xxxix.  6, 1,  pndioted  the  Captivi^, 
{saiab,  with  a  vi^w  to  console  bis  nation,  deliveis  the  prophenc  diicoTeriei  wbich,  fat 


OH.  XL.  1—81.]       THE  BOOK  OF  THE  PROPHET  ISAIAH. 


porspectire  vision,  he  obtained  of  the  remarkable  interposition  of  Divine  providence  for 
their  deliverance."  We  notice  that  the  comfortable  and  comforting  message  is  to  give 
assurance  of  three  things. 

I.  Warfabe  ended.  The  warfare  meant  is  that  struggle  to  bear  and  keep  heart 
which  had  been  so  trj'ing  all  through  the  long  years  of  captivity.  Or  it  may  mean  GJod's 
warfare  with  their  idolatry  and  iniquity,  the  Captivity  being  regarded  as  God's  fighting 
with  the  national  sins,  in  order  to  destroy  them  and  root  them  out.  There  can  be  no 
comfort,  no  rest,  for  us  until  sin  is  resisted  and  mastered.  Heaven  is  only  a  rest-time, 
becaitse,  then  and  there,  the  people  are  all  holy.  We  must  keep  the  warfare  so  long  as 
we  keep  the  sin.  The  discipline  will  be  ended,  the  pressure  of  our  military  service, 
only  when  the  victory  of  rigliteousDess  is  won. 

U.  GniLT  PAID  OFF.  This  seems  to  be  the  idea  of  the  original,  which  we  have  as, 
"  her  iniquity  is  pardoned."  Reference  is  rather  to  the  penalty  of  iniquity  being  effec- 
tively removed.  There  can  be  no  comfort  while  we  are  compelled  to  look  this  way  and 
that,  asking,  "Where  shall  iniquity  be  laid?  "  On  Israel  it  lay  as  a  burden  of  so  many 
years  of  national  humiliation  and  captivity.  To  us  the  mystery  of  the  "  Sin-bearer 
has  been  revealed;  and  we  know  that  God  has  "laid  on  him  the  iniquity  of  us  all." 
This  knowledge  is  comfort  indeed. 

IIL  Favoub  at  the  double.  The  sentence  is  variously  explained.  Some  refer  it 
to  the  sufficiency  of  the  sufferings  endured.  Others  think  it  suggests  abundance  of 
restored  grace  and  favour.  Treated  meditatively,  we  may  take  the  "  double  "  to  suggest 
the  temporal  restorations  under  Cyrus  and  the  spiritual  restoration  under  Messiah. 
When  God  restores,  he  does  it  in  such  a  gracious,  full,  superabounding  way,  as  to  be  an 
infinite  consolation  and  joy  to  us.  The  comfort  imspeakable  is  God's  restored  smile. 
— R.T. 

Ver.  3. — Needed  prepctrationa /or  Christ.  "  Prepare  ye  in  the  wilderness  the  way  of 
the  Lord."  The  figure  used  by  the  prophet  is  one  whose  force  could  only  be  fully 
apprehended  in  that  country  to  which  he  belonged.  Until  recent  years  there  were  no 
roads,  at  least  no  roads  on  which  vehicles  might  be  drawn ;  only  such  paths,  often  very 
rongh,  and  steep,  and  dangerous,  as  would  be  made  by  the  passing  to  and  fro  of  cattle 
and  of  men.  But  a  few  years  ago,  when  Ibrahim  Pasha  proposed  to  visit  certain  places 
in  Lebanon,  the  emirs  and  skeikhs  sent  forth  messengers  to  all  the  people  on  the  way 
the  pasha  was  coming,  with  a  proclamation  very  similar  to  this  of  Isaiah,  commanding 
them  that  they  should  gather  out  the  stones,  make  straight  the  crooked  places,  level 
the  rough  places,  and  so  prepare  the  way  for  his  grand  cavalcade  to  march  through. 
Applying  this  figure  to  Messianic  times,  we  note  that  the  world  wanted  Christ,  but  it 
was  not  prepared  for  him  when  he  came ;  and  it  is  still  true  of  many  human  hearts — 
thejr  do  really  want  Christ,  but  they  are  not  prepared  for  him  in  his  spiritual  comings. 

L  The  wobld  wanted  Christ.  There  is  no  word  which  so  exactly  describes  the 
condition  of  the  world  when  Christ  appeared  as  the  term  darkness.  "  Darkness  covered 
the  earth,  and  gross  darkness  the  people."  When  God  created  man,  or,  let  us  say,  set 
him  forth  as  the  Head  of  his  creation,  he  put  light  within  him,  and  was  light  unto  him. 
But  when  man  sinned  by  exalting  self-will,  God  took  his  light  away,  and  left  humanity 
to  work  out  the  problem  of  life  in  the  power  of  its  own  self-will.  That  problem  may 
be  stated  thus :  Man  is  satisfied  with  himself,  with  the  light  that  is  in  him :  then 
can  he  find  his  own  way  to  God  and  righteousness  ?  Can  he  answer  for  himself  this 
question,  "  How  shall  man  be  just  with  God?  "  You  cannot  understand  the  history  of 
Israel,  or  of  the,ancient  world,  save  in  the  light  which  this  representation  throws  upon 
them.  Each  nation  took  its  own  way  in  trying  to  solve  the  problem.  Egyptians,  and 
Persians,  and  iSyrians,  and  Grecians,  and  Romans,  all  were  working  at  it.  But  man, 
by  himself,  ha&  always  failed  to  discover  any  satisfactory  solution.  The  light  he  had 
faded.  Twilight  passed  into  night;  night  grew  blacker  and  darker;  the  stars  were 
hidden  by  low  overhanging  clouds ;  and  it  was  the  glooin  of  moral  midnight  over  all  the 
earth  when  Messiah  came.  But  the  heathen,  in  their  debasing  idolatries,  were  conscious 
of  bondage,  and  looked  for  a  Deliverer.  The  Jews,  though  corrupted  with  formalism, 
held  passionately  to  their  hope  of  Messiah.  The  sins  of  the  world  wanted  Christ.  The 
woes  of  the  world  wanted  Christ.  The  minds  and  hearts  of  men  wanted  Christ,  though 
they  could  not  put  into  shape  of  words  their  inarticulate  longings.     Humanity  had  ita 


90  THE   BOOK  OF   THE  PROPHET   ISAIAH.       [oh.  xu  1—31 

watchmen  at  eyery  point  of  advantage,  and  again  and  again  the  question  was  eagerly 
asked,  "Watchman,  whatof  the  night?  watchman,  what  of  the  night?"  It  is  interesting 
to  notice  that,  whilst  Christ  was  a  babe,  and  as  yet  no  sliame  had  gathered  about  him,  all 
humanity  offered  homage  to  him  by  its  representatives,  and  bade  him  welcome  to  the 
world  that  so  greatly  needed  him.  Shepherds,  representing  the  whole  Jewish  people, 
followed  the  angelic  sign,  and  welcomed  the  Messiah-Child.  Eastern  Magi,  star-directed, 
representing  the  whole  heathen  world,  offered  him  their  gold  and  frankincense  and 
myrrh.  And  Simeon  and  Anna,  representing  the  spiritual,  the  religious  classes,  hailed 
him  with  the  joyof  believing  and  loving  hearts. 

II.  The  wobld  was  not  keadt  foe  Christ.  They  had  made  no  room  for  him.  The 
inn  was  full.  He  must  find  a  place  for  himself,  where  he  could — some  strange  place, 
out  in  the  stable,  in  the  manger.  And  there  was  no  better  room  for  him  in  men's 
hearts.  Only  let  the  story  of  his  life  unfold  a  little.  Only  let  his  hands  begin  to  do 
deeds  of  charity;  only  let  his  lips  speak  words  of  spiritual  conviction;  only  let  him 
point  out  the  follies  and  sins  of  the  age ;  only  let  him  show  that  his  mission  was  to  the 
poor,  the  sorrowing,  and  the  sinning;  only  let  the  purity  of  his  perfect  life,  like  a 
Divine  light,  reveal  the  corruption  of  his  times; — and  then  he  is  the  ''despised  and 
rejected  of  men ; "  then  they  hurry  him  furth  out  of  the  synagogue  to  throw  him  over 
the  hanging  roCk ;  then  they  lead  him  forth,  bearing  his  cross,  and  crucify  him  between 
two  thieves.  How  is  this  ?  Why  does  the  world  want  Christ,  and  yet,  when  he  comes, 
he  finds  men  so  unprepared  that  they  reject  instead  of  receive  him  ?  The  answer  is 
a  very  simple  one,  but  a  very  painful  one.  Men  get  to  love  sin  for  its  own  sake. 
They  dislike,  indeed,  the  penalties  attached  to  it ;  they  tremble  at  the  consequences  of 
it ;  but  they  love  the  sin  and  cherish  it.  They  would  gladly  enough  have  welcomed 
a  Saviour  who  would  break  off  those  chains  of  bondage  to  Bome,  which  had  been  fixed 
on  them  as  a  judgment  for  their  national  sins;  but  they  did  not  want  to  part  with  their 
national  pride  and  exclusiveness.  They  would  gladly  have  welcomed  a  Christ  who 
could  bum  up  the  great  book  of  death,  which  so  surely  treasured  up  for  them  "  wrath 
against  the  day  of  wrath;",  but  they  (Ud  not  want  to  give  up  the  sins  that  led  to 
spiritual  death — ^the  hypocrisy,  the  sensuality,  the  multiplied  forms  of  moral  evil,  which 
they  loved  and  sought.  Therefore  who  can  wonder  that,  when  Chiist  came  as  a 
Saviour  from  tin,  men  were  not  prepared  for  him — men  refused  such  a  Christ?  It  is 
evident  that  the  world,  in  its  unpreparedness,  needed  the  intense,  arousing,  almost 
terrible,  preaching  of  John  the  Baptist.  The  work  given  to  John  was  to  try  and  alter 
the  views  of  men  in  respect  of  Messiah.  He  preached  "  Bepent ; "  change  your  minds  ; 
get  another  view  of  sin ;  see  the  essential  evil  and  hatefulness  of  it.  To  all  who  came 
he  spoke  directly  and  plainly  of  the  particular  sins  they  loved ;  he  demanded  the  giving 
up  and  putting  away  of  individual  and  social  sins  as  the  necessary  preparation  for 
lleisiab's  coming.  This,  then,  is  the  one  wrong  thing — sin  loved  for  its  own  sake. 
This  was  the  mountain  that  must  be  levelled,  this  the  crooked  place  that  must  be  made 
■traight,  this  the  rough  place  that  must  be  made  plain,  before  the  glory  of  the  Saviour 
from  sin  "  could  be  revealed,  and  all  flesh  see  the  salvation  of  our  God." 

III.  What  was  true  of  the  world  is  true  of  us.  Our  souls  want  Christ.  It 
is  sad,  indeed,  to  be  sinners,  living  without  God,  and  without  hope  in  the  world.  We 
have  often  felt  that  all  was  not  right  wi^th  us ;  dark  shadows  hung  all  around  us,  and 
all  before  us.  We  have  looked  and  longed  for  the  light.  When  we  have  thought  of 
God  and  sin  and  the  future  we  have  cried  out,  "  Oh  that  I  knew  where  I  could  find 
him  I  I  would  come  even  unto  his  seat."  Sin  in  us  wants  Christ  the  Saviour.  Con- 
scious separateness  from  God  wants  Christ  the  Reconciler.  Ignorance  -syants  Christ  the 
Teacher.  And  Christ  wants  us.  Then  why  is  the  old  fact  of  the  time  of  hia  first 
coming  repeated  among  «s  to-day?  They  wanted  him,  but  were  offended  at  him,  and 
eatt  him  out ;  cruel  hands  smote  him,  fierce  nails  pierced  him,  scorn  howled  around 
him,  and  a  violent  death  freed  him  from  a  world  that  was  not  prepared  to  greet  him. 
The  reason  for  our  rejecting  him-is  the  same  as  theirs.  We,  too,  are  unwilling  to  give 
up  our  sins  for  Christ.  We  want  a  Saviour  from  punishment,  from  consequences,  from 
fears,  from  death,  from  hell;  but  not  a  Saviour  from  w'ra,  from  self-confidence,  from 
pride,  from  independence  of  God,  from  our  I'ebelliousness,  our  lustings,  and  our  self- 
indulgences.  We  want  a  Saviour  who  will  give  us  a  secure  title  to  future  bliss;  but 
not  OB*  who  will  take  the  ttony  heart  away,  and  give  us  a  heart  of  flesh ;  not  a  SarioQi 


OH.  XL.  1—31.]       THE  BOOK  OP   THE  PROPHET  ISAIAH.  91 

who  can  deUver  us  from  the  very  love  of  sinning,  and  "  create  in  us  a  clean  heart." 
Is,  then,  your  path  full  of  the  stones,  the  crooked  ways,  the  rough  places,  of  loved  lins? 
remember  that  Christ  is  a  Saviour /rom  sin.  He  is  named  Jesus,  because  he  shall  save 
bis  people  from  their  sins.  He  will  not  save  you  at  all  unless  you  are  heartily  willing 
that  he  should  save  you  from  your  eyil  self,  from  your  loved  iniquities. — B.  T. 

Ver.  6. — Christ,  tu  the  Lord's  Glory.  The  glory  of  God  is  his  forgiving  and  redeem- 
ing. And  it  is  this  glory  that  was  dimly  revealed  in  the  raising  up  of  Cyrus  to  deliver 
Israel  from  the  bondage  of  Babylon,  and  brightly  revealed  in  "  raising  up  his  Son  Jesus, 
to  blew  men,  by  turning  them  from  their  iniquities."  It  may  be  shown  that  God,  as 
the  great  Spirit,  never  can  be  seen  or  known  by  any  creature,  because  all  creatures 
'  are  put  under  limitations  of  the  senses.  No  creature  can  apprehend  "  essences ; "  he  is 
limited  to  "accidents."  Nobody  has  seen  the  sun;  it  is  the  alory,  the  shining,  the  ray, 
of  the  sun  that  reveals  it  to  us.  So  "  no  man  hath  seen  God  at  any  time ;  the  only 
begotten  Son,  which  is  in  the  bosom  of  the  Father,  he  hath  declared  him."  Christ  is  the 
"Image"  of  God,  which  we  can  see;  the  "Word"  of  God,  which  we  can  hear;  the 
"Glory"  of  Gk)d,  making  a  holy  warmth  about  us,  which  we  can  feel.  He  is  "the 
Brightness  of  the  Father's  glory,  the  express  Image  of  his  Person."  His  revelation  is 
made  that  we  might  know  the  true  God,  and  in  the  knowledge  find  "  eternal  life." 
This  view  appears  to  be,  in  a  veiy  special  manner,  commended  and  enforced  by  the 
Apostle  John,  in  his  Gospel ;  and  from  this  Gospel  illustrations  may  be  taken. 

I.  God  bevealed  in  John's  prologue.  Explain  the  figure  of  the  "Word,"  as 
meaning  the  medium,  or  agency,  by  which  God  communicates  his  thought  to  men's 
minds.  It  is,  as  it  were,  God  translated  for  man's  apprehension.  But  the  "  Word"  is 
a  Person,  and  John  says,  "  We  beheld  his  glory,  the  glory  as  of  the  only  begotten  of 
the  Father." 

IL  God  bevealed  at  Cana.  Putting  forth  miraculous  power  to  provide  for  man's 
need,  Christ  showed  God's  constant  care  of  men,  and  led  men's  thoughts  to  the  mystery 
of  Gt)d  that  was  in  him,  for  John  says,  "  This  beginning  of  miracles  did  Jesus, .  .  . 
and  manifested  forth  his  glory." 

IIL  God  bevealed  at  Lazabds's  obatb.  Pleading  with  Martha,  our  Lord  spake 
thus:  "Said  I  not  unto  thee,  that,  if  thou  wouldest  believe,  thou  shouldest  see  the 
glory  of  God?" 

IV.  God  bevealed  in  the  voice  fbom  heaven.  In  a  moment  of  sore  trouble,  Jesus 
exclaimed,"  Father,  glorify  thy  Name ; "  as  if  he  felt  that  his  supreme  work  was  to  show 
the  Father  forth.  "And  there  came  a  voice  from  heaven,  saying,  I  have  both  glorified 
it,  and  will  glorify  it  again  "  (John  xii.  28). 

V.  God  bevealed  at  the  suppee-tablb.  When  Judas  left  the  table,  and  the 
beginning  of  the  end  had  evidently  come,  Jesus  said,  in  a  meditative,  but  most  revealing 
way,  "Now  is  the  Son  of  man  glorified,  and  Qod  is  glorified  in  him"  (John  xiii.  31 ; 
see  also  John  xiv.  13). 

VI.  Qod  bevealed  in  the  High-Pbiestly  pbateb.  This  is  our  Lord's  supreme 
desire:  "Father,  glorify  thy  Son,  that  thy  Son  also  may  glorify  thee."  And  this  is  his 
sublimest  thought,  as  he  looks  back  over  his  brief  life:  "I  have  glorified  thee  on  the 
earth."  Christ  is  the  Glory  that  reveals  Gtod  for  us,  "  who  by  him  do  believe  in  God, 
that  luied  him  up  from  the  dead,  and  gave  him  glory ;  that  our  faith  and  hope  might 
be  in  God."— B.  T. 

Vera.  6 — 8. — 2%e  transitory  and  the  permanent.  This  passage  is  brought  to  cut 
minds,  in  the  early  summer-time,  by  the  sight  and  the  smell  of  the  fields.  One  day 
they  shine  with  the  glory  of  the  golden  flowers,  and,  in  a  little  while,  th"  flowers  are 
fallen,  the  grass  is  withered,  and  we  are  freshly  impressed  with  the  mutability  of  all 
earthly  things.  Man  changes;  God  is  the  "same,  yesterday,  and  to-day,  and  for 
ever."  Man  removes ;  God  abides,  and  his  dwelling-place  is  as  the  everlasting  hills. 
Man  dies ;  Qod  lives  for  ever  and  ever.  From  changing,  passing,  transitory  earth,  we 
may  look  upward  to  God,  saying,  "  He  liveth,  ami  blessed  he  my  Rock."  Of  this  double 
truth  our  text  is  one  of  the  most  poetic  and  eloquent  expressions.  The  figure  is 
■uffiaently  impressive  to  us,  who  see  the  swathes  lying  in  the  path  of  the  mower ;  but 
tt  is  filll  of  force  and  suggestion  in  the  East,  where  sudden  blasts  of  scorching  wind 


92  THE  BOOK  OP  THE  PROPHET  ISAIAH.        [oh.  zu  1— 8L 

burn  up  the  vegetation  in  an  bonr,  and  change  freshness  and  flowers  into  banennen 
and  death.  The  Word  of  God  endures  for  ever.  It  cannot  be  likened  to  anything  on 
which  rests  the  earthly  stamp.  It  is  not  even  like  the  giant  trees,  which  grow  on  white 
the  grass  and  the  flowers  of  a  hundred  passing  summers  flourish  and  fade  beneatli 
them ;  for  at  last  even  the  trees  fail  to  respond  to  the  wakenihg  spring-breath,  and  th«, 
great  trunks  crumble  down  to  dust,  and  pass  away.  It  is  not  even  like  the  mighty 
hills,  which,  towering  high  over  us,  seem  to  have  their  foundations  in  the  very  centre 
of  the  earth,  and  to  outlast  the  generations;  for  they  too  are  wearing  down,  and  shall 
one  day  change  and  pass.  It  is  not  like  the  vast  firmament,  which  keeps,  through 
summer  and  winter,  its  broad  expanse  of  blue,  though  clouds  all  blackness  and  clouds 
eilver-tinged  sweep  in  ever-varying  shapes  across  it;  for  at  last  even  "the  heavens 
shall  pass  away  with  a  great  noise,  and  the  elements  shall  melt  with  fervent  heat,  the 
earth  also  and  the  works  that  are  therein  shall  be  burned  up." 

I.  The  tbansitoriness  of  all  earthly  things.  All  nature  echoes  the  message  of 
the  grass.  The  winter  snow  falls  lightly,  and  lies  in  its  white  purity — mystic,  wonder- 
ful— over  all  the  land ;  but  too  soon  it  soils,  and  browns,  and  sinks,  and  passes  all  away. 
The  spring  flowers  that  come,  responsive  to  the  low  sunshine  and  the  gentle  breath, 
are  so  fragile ,  they  stay  with  us  only  such  a  little  while,  and  then  they  pass  away. 
The  summer  blossoms  multiply  and  stand  thick  over  the  ground,  and  they  seem 
strong,  with  their  deep  rich  colouring ;  and  yet  they  too  wither  and  droop  and  pass 
away.  The  autumn  fruits  cluster  on  the  tree  branches,  andjgrow  big,  and  win  their 
soft  rich  bloom  of  ripeness;  but  they  too  are  plucked  in  due  season,  and  pass  away. 
The  gay  dress  of  varied  leafage  is  soon  stripped  off  with  the  wild  winds ;  one  or  two 
trembling  leaves  cling  long  to  the  outmost  boughs;  but,  by-and-by,  even  they  fall  and 
pass  away.  Down  every  channel  of  the  hillsides  are  borne  the  crumblings  washed  from 
the  everlasting  hills,  as  we  call  them,  that  yet  are  passing  away.  And  man — does  he 
differ  from  the  things  in  the  midst  of  which  he  is  set?  Nay;  he  is  but  flesh.  "  He 
fleeth  also  as  a  shadow,  and  continueth  not."  It  is  even  true  of  man's  work.  All  the 
glory,  all  the  goodliness,  ot  man's  genius  and  enterprise  and  effort— it  is  all  as  the 
"flower  of  the  field."  Man's  strength,  and  wisdom,  and  riches,  and  learning,  and 
beauty,  and  science,  and  art,  all  are  subject  to  decay ;  the  "  moth  and  the  rust  eat  into 
them,  and  the  thief  steals  them  away."  It  is  even  true  of  the  very  forms  and  modes 
in  which  one  man  strives  to  bless  and  help  another.  The  forms  are  not  the  principal 
things;  they  are  but  the  temporary  human  stamp;  and  QoA  may  remove  or  cluinge 
them  to  make  us  feel  our  entire  dependence  on  him. 

II.  The  pbrmasbncb  of  all  Divine  things.  More  especially  of  all  Divine  revela- 
tions and  declarations,  for  these  are  properly  gathered  up  in  the  term,  the  "Word  of 
God."  Everything  that  speaks  to  our  souls  of  God  is  a  revelation  to  us.  It  may  be 
a  touch  of  nature.  It  may  be  only  a  pure  white  flower.  It  may  be  the  pale  gold  and 
green  of  a  late  sunset.  It  may  be  the  snowy  crest  of  an  Alpine  mountain,  lying  soft 
and  pure  against  the  summers  deep  blue  sky.  It  may  be  the  weird  mist  of  the 
gloaming  creeping  over  the  landscape.  It  may  be  the  glimpse  "  down  some  woodland 
vale,  of  the  many-twinkling  sea."  It  may  be  the  thunder-voice  of  God  echoing  among 
the  hills,  or  it  may  be  the  voice  of  some  fellow-man,  translating  into  human  words  for 
us  the  mysteries  of  Divine  truth  and  love  revealed  to  him  for  our  sakes.  Howsoever 
the  Word  of  God  may  come  into  our  souls,  it  is  true  for  ever.  All  things  that  our 
souls  hear  and  feel  and  know  are  Divine,  are  permanent,  eternal  things.  When  Gted 
■peaks  to  our  souls  by  his  providence,  the  message  is  permanent.  The  revelation  of 
redemption  is  permanent.  Everything  that  pleads  in  us  for  c(uty  is  eternal,  because  it 
bears  on  the  culture  of  character.  All  God's  eom/ortings  abide  with  us.  And  when 
God  kindles  hope,  it  is  hope  that  cannot  disappoint,  that  will  never  make  ashamed. 
In  Dr.  Bushnell's  life  is  the  followint;  passage,  found  pencilled  by  him  on  a  stray  sheet 
ot  paper.  Referring  to  the  time  of  his  infancy,  when  he  "  came  out  in  this  rough  battle 
with  winds,  winters,  and  wickedness,"  he  says,  "  My  God  and  my  good  mother  both 
heard  the  cry,  and  went  to  the  task  of  strengthening  me,  and  comforting  me  together, 
and  were  able  ere  long  to  get  a  smile  upon  my  face.  .  .  .  Long  years  ago  she  vanished ; 
but  God  stays  by  me  still,  embraces  me  in  my  grey  hairs  as  tenderly  and  carefully  as 
th«  did  in  my  infancy,  and  gives  to  me,  as  my  joy  and  the  principal  glory  of  my  Me,  that 
be  lets  me  know  him,  and  helps  me  with  real  confidence  to  call  him  my  Father.*— B.  T 


aaxL.  1— 31.]       THE   BOOK  OP  THE  PEOPHET  ISAIAH.  93 

Ver.  11. — Ood,  in  Christ,  thepherding,  or  doing  shepherd's  work.  Here  also  the 
first  glance  seems  to  be  at  Cyrus,  who,  in  ch.  xliy.  28,  is  called  God's  shepherd ;  but 
the  after-glance  rests  on  him  who  could  say,  "I  am  the  good  Shepherd:  the  good 
shepherd  giveth  his  life  for  the  sheep."  "  The  change  in  the  fortunes  of  the  Jews  is 
compared  by  the  prophet  to  a  shepherd's  seeking  his  lost  sheep,  and  feeding  them  again 
in  green  pastures"  (comp.  Jer.  xxxi.  10;  1.  19;  Bzek.  xxxiv.  11 — 16).  No  doubt 
the  figure  in  the  prophet's  mind  was  that  of  a  flock  taken  such  a  long  and  wearying 
journey  as  that  from  Babylon  to  Canaan,  emblem  of  the  pilgrim-path  along  which  the 
good  Shepherd  leads  the  flock  of  his  Church.  The  important  distinctions  between 
Eastern  and  Western  shepherding  should  be  carefully  pointed  out.  Eastern  associa- 
tions alone  provide  effective  fi<;ures.  Yan  Lennep  says,  "  One  of  the  pleasantest  sights 
to  be  witnessed  under  the  clear  and  brilliant  sky  of  Western  Asia  is  a  flock  of  snow- 
white  sheep  scattered  over  the  surface  of  a  fine  green  meadow ;  the  lambs  skipping  and 
gamboling  in  frolic ;  the  shepherd  sitting  on  the  soft  turf,  playing  with  his  flute,  and 
his  shaggy  dog  by  his  side,  keeping  watch  in  all  directions."  An  Eastern  traveller  tells 
of  seeing  precisely  what  Liaiah  so  poetically  describes.  "  One  shepherd  led  his  flock, 
by  a  zigzag  path,  up  the  almost  perpendicular  bank  of  the  glen.  Behind  it  two  young 
lambs  trotted  gaily  along  at  the  feet  of  their  mother.  At  first  they  frisked  about,  and 
jumped  lightly  from  stone  to  stone ;  but  soon  they  began  to  fall  behind.  The  poor 
little  things  cried  piteously  when  the  path  became  steeper  and  the  rocks  higher,  and 
the  flock  more  and  more  distant.  The  mother  cried  too,  running  back  and  forth — now 
lingering  behind,  now  hasting  on  before,  as  if  to  wile  them  upwards.  It  was  in  vain. 
The  ascent  was  too  much  for  their  feeble  limbs.  They  stopped  trembling  on  the 
shelving  cliff,  and  cried ;  the  mother  stopped  and  cried  by  their  side.  I  thought  they 
would  certainly  be  lost ;  and  I  saw  the  great  eagles  that  soared  in  circles  round  the 
cliffs  far  overhead,  sweeping  lower  and  lower,  as  if  about  to  pounce  upon  their  prey. 
But  no  I  The  plaintive  cries  of  distress  had  already  reached  the  ear  of  the  good 
shepherd.  Mounting  a  rock,  he  looked  down,  and  saw  the  helpless  little  ones.  A 
minute  more,  and  he  was  standing  by  them.  Then  taking  them  up  in  his  arms,  he 
put  them — one  on  each  side — in  his  bosom,  in  the  ample  folds  of  his  coat,  which  was 
bound  round  the  waist  by  a  girdle."    Christ's  care  of  his  flock  includes — 

I.  BiTLE.  This  is  the  proper  idea  of  "feeding"  them.  In  the  East  feeding  involves 
daily  guiding  the  flock  to  its  pastures  and  watering.  So  it  includes  the  entire  control 
and  direction  of  daily  life.  Sheep  are  the  laost  helpless  of  creatures,  and  wholl.v 
dependent  on  the  vrisdom  and  kindness  of  the  shepherd.  "  His  arm  rules  for  laxsa," 
Se  restrains  the  wayward,  corrects  the  erring,  guides  and  provides  fur  all.  And  we  are 
as  helpless  as  sheep,  and  as  truly  need  to  be  ruled  and  provided  for.  Fiom  this  we 
may  unfold  the  authority  of  the  Lord  Jesus,  and  his  direct  control  of  our  life  and  ways. 
Happy  the  flock  that  is  willing  to  follow  the  good  Shepherd's  lead  1 

U.  Gentle  consideeatenbss.  Daniel  Quorm  is  made  by  the  Bev.  M.  Guy  Pearse 
to  express  this  very  quaintly  and  cleverly.  " '  But  that  be  not  all,  though  it  be  a  good 
deal,'  Dan'el  went  on  again.  'He  isarries  them  in  his  bosom — in  his  hosom.  You 
know  the  man  who  had  a  hundred  sheep,  and  lost  one  6f  them,  went  after  it,  and  laid 
it  on  his  shoulders — on  his  shoulders.  When  an  old  sheep  goes  astray — one  of  us 
old  'uns — the  good  Shepherd  has  his  watch-dog  to  fetch  us  back  again.  He  sends  n 
snappish  sorrow  to  bite  us,  or  a  sharp-toothed  loss  to  shake  us  up  a  bit,  and  to  drive  u^ 
out  of  the  ditch  into  which  we  had  wandered.  And  the  shepherd  lays  the  runaway  on 
his  shoulders.  It  wasn't  a  very  comfortable  position,  held  on  by  the  legs,  with  his 
head  danglin'  down.  That  be  the  way  the  Lord  carries  old  sheep  when  we  go  astray. 
But  the  lambs  be  carries  in  his  losom.  The  shoulder  is  not  for  them,  but  the  bosom. 
There  they  lie,  with  his  arms  folded  about  them — there,  where  his  kind  eye  can  keep 
its  glance  upon  them.  In  his  bosom,  where  they  can  feel  the  great  full  heart  beatin' 
in  its  love,  where  he  can  hear  the  first  mutter  o'  their  fear,  and  they  can  catch  the 
gentlest  whisper  of  his  lovin'  care.  He  carries  the  lanrbs  in  his  bosom.  Keep  close  to 
him— lie  down  in  his  arms,  an'  you're  safe  enough.' "  Of  this  we  may  be  quite  sure, 
Christ  takes  particular  care  of  those  that  most  need  it ;  of  lambs,  those  that  cannot 
help  themselves — young  children,  young  converts,  weak  believers,  sorrowful  spirits. 

UI.  Sblf-dentino  helpfulness.  We  must  never  think  that  the  wise,  gracious, 
faithful  shepherding  of  Jesus  costs  him  no  pain,  no  anxiety,  no  self-sacrifice.     This  is 


m  THE  BOOK  OF  THE  PROPHET   ISAIAH.       [oh.  xl.  1—31. 

as  much  the  suggestioa  of  the  shepherd-figure  as  the  previous  ideas  of  rule  and  gentle- 
ness ;  but  it  is  not  so  often  dwelt  on  or  realized.  He  who  rolls  over  us  the  "  tribulum  " 
of  discipline  and  trouble,  to  separate  the  chaff  from  the  wheat,  finds  the  rolling  to  be 
hard  and  trying  work.  Our  Shepherd  suffers  in  his  care  for  the  sheep,  and  it  keeps  our 
hearts  tender  to  be  reminded  of  his  sufferings  for  us.  Illustrating  this,  we  may  recall 
the  Eastern  shepherd,  who,  especially  in  the  early  months  of  the  year,  "  has  much  to 
endure.  Snow  falls  and  frosts  set  in,  which  kill  many  of  the  lambs,  although  he  seeks 
to  save  all  he  can  by  carrying  them  under  his  cloak,  and  '  in  his  bosom.'  This  period 
tries  liis  own  powers  of  endurance,  for  it  is  the  rainy  season.  He  cuts  small  branches 
of  trees,  and  lays  them  in  a  pile,  to  avoid  the  consequences  of  standing  in  the  wet.  The 
only  sleep  he  can  secure  is  by  lying  on  such  a  pile  of  branches  or  fagots,  enveloped  in 
his  heavy  cloak,  or  crouching  in  a  sitting  posture,  with  its  stiff  heavy  folds  set  up  over 
him  like  a  tent."  We  often  think  of  our  good  Shepherd's  care,  but  too  seldom  we 
remember,  lovingly  and  thankfully,  how  much  it  costs  him. — E.  T. 

Ver.  18. —  Wanted,  a  likeness  for  Ood.  "What  similitude  can  ye  place  beside 
bim?"  This  and  similar  appeals  in  the  later  portion  of  Isaiah  bear  directly  upon  the 
idolatries  with  which  Israel  was  surrounded  in  Babylon,  and  exerted  a  most  important 
influence  on  the  delivery  of  Israel,  once  and  for  ever,  from  idolatrous  sentiments  and 
sympathies.  Isaiah's  plea  is,  "  How  should  the  image-deities  of  idolatrous  Babylon  be 
compared  to  the  almighty  and  unsearchable  God  of  Israel  ?  "  The  iucomparablenesB 
and  uniqueness  of  God  are  in  the  prophet's  mind ;  and  his  plea  may  be  compared  with 
the  argument  of  the  Apostle  Paul  at  Athens  (Acts  xvii.  29,  "  Forasmuch  then  as  we 
are  the  offspring  of  God,  we  ought  not  to  think  that  the  Godhead  is  like  unto  gold,  or 
silver,  or  stone,  graven  by  art  and  man's  device  ").  The  Babylonian  gods  were  also  the 
gods  of  Assyria,  and  they  were,  for  the  most  part,  of  Accadian  or  pre-Semitic  origin. 
"The  Babylonian  lived  in  perpetual  dread  of  the  evil  spirits  which  thronged  about 
him ;  almost  every  moment  had  its  religious  ceremony,  almost  every  action  its  religious 
complement.  In  Babylon  we  find  the  remains  of  scarcely  any  great  buildings  except 
temples."  During  the  Captivity,  God's  people  were  closely  associated  with  a  most 
elaborate  idolatrous  system,  and  the  appeal  is  therefore  most  effective.  "  Look  aroimd 
you.  Notice  all  the  forms  in  which  deity  is  represented.  See  all  the  thought-figures 
of  God  which  men  can  fashion,  and  say,  is  there  any  one  of  them  to  which  you  can 
liken  your  God?"    We  may  let  the  appeal  take  its  widest  forms. 

I.  Can  you  find  a  likeness  for  God  in  his  cebation  ?  His  works  are  a  revelation 
of  himself,  but  no  one  of  them  is  a  picture  of  his  form.  They  are  no  more  like  him 
than  the  machine  which  a  man  makes  is  like  the  man.  The  machine  reveals  the  man, 
tells  us  of  his  skill,  his  thought,  his  patience.  And  so  God's  handiwork  reveals  the 
attributes  of  God ;  but  if  men  try  to  find  a  likeness  for  God  in  the  material  creation, 
they  will  do,  as  the  Egyptians  did — ^begin  with  the  sun  and  end  with  the  slimy  reptiles 
of  the  Nile-b  inks. 

II.  Can  you  find  a  likeness  fob  God  in  man's  cbeations  ?  They  may  vary,  from 
the  mere  upright  block  rudely  carved  to  represent  a  face,  to  the  splendid  Jupiter 
fashioned  by  the  highest  genius  of  the  Greek.  Art  may  paint  exquisitely;  but  no 
lirush,  no  chisel,  no  graving  tool,  in  civilized  or  uncivilized  lands,  ever  fashioned 
it  uy thing  worthy  to  be  likened  to  God.  Illtistrate  from  the  unsatisfactoriness  of  the 
best  faces  of  the  manifested  God  Christ  Jesus ;  and  by  the  painfulness  of  all  attempts 
to  paint  God  the  Father. 

III.  Can  you  find  a  likeness  for  God  in  man's  mental  creations  ?  For  he  thinks 
figures  of  God,  when  he  does  not  make  statues.  Philosophy  has  its  conceptions,  and 
now  men  say  law  is  such  a  name  as  may  henceforth  stand  for  God.  But  the  images  of 
men's  thoughts  are  no  better  than  the  idols  of  men's  hands.  Thus  we  are  brought  to 
face  the  question — How  can  God  be  known  ?  The  answer  is  this— He  cannot  be  known 
in  himself;  but  he  can  be  known  in  his  relations  to  us,  and  that  is  the  knowledge 
wherein  is  "  eternal  life." — R.  T. 

Ver.  27. — Darkness  breeding  doubt.  Here  is  a  question  which  is  full  of  surprisak 
"  How,  then,  can  Jacob  and  Israel  be  faint-hearted,  or  despair  of  their  restoration,  when 
this  uumatcbable,  all-powerful,  unwearying  God  is  their  Giod  ?  "   Yet  there  is -almost  aa 


BH.  XL.  1—31.]       THE  BOOK  OF  THE  PROPHET   ISAIAH,  06 


excuse  for  their  doubtings  aod  depresBiol.s  in  their  national  circumstances.  They  had 
been  bo  long  in  the  power  of  their  enemies,  and  their  outlook  was  so  utterly  dark  and 
hopeless,  that  they  concluded  they  were  quite  overlooked  by  the  God  of  their  fathers. 
And  We  cannot  wonder  at  this,  for  circumstances,  private  and  national,  can  make 
darkness  for  us  under  which  it  is  easy  enough  for  doubts  to  breed.     We  think  of  some. 

I.  Otbb-stddt.  There  is  a  fixed  limit  of  brain-power.  We  dare  not  go  beyond  it. 
And  the  usual  penalty  of  overdoinj;  is  a  darkness  which  nourishes  depressions,  needless 
fears,  doubts,  mistrusts,  and  even  despair  that  inspires  suicide.  It  is  needful  that  we 
should,  in  these  days,  be  warned  of  an  insidious  form  of  evil.  Educational  forcings  of 
children  make  darkness  brood  over  whole  lives.  Pressure  in  manhood,  under  ambitions 
or  necessities,  bring  black  clouds  to  shut  the  sunshine  out  of  many  a  life ;  and  much  of 
the  scepticism  of  our  time  is  no  more  than  the  diseased  questionings  of  overwrought 
brains.    Truth  only  appears  to  quiet  minds. 

II.  Disappointment.  When  our  way  is  closed  up,  our  schemes  fail,  or  our  friends 
prove  unworthy,  the  darkness  broods  over  us,  and  we  easily  say,  "  There  is  no  truth  or 
trust  anywhere ;  "  and  we  fiing  our  doubtings  against  the  very  throne  of  Gbd.  This 
was  the  secret  of  the'faintings  of  Israel.  They  were  disappointed.  Again  and  again 
great  national  changes  raised  high  hopes,  and  again  and  again  the  darkness  fell,  and 
seemed  to  shut  them  in.  Then  the  bitter  cry  arose,  "God  hath  forgotten  to  be 
graoiouB." 

III.  A  SCEPTICAL  ATMOSPHEBE.  One  man  breathes  out  his  suspicions,  another  his 
questionings ;  this  man  attacks  the  things  most  surely  believed  among  us ;  and  another 
man  writes  a  book  to  shift  the  old  foundations,  and  make  the  great  Christian  house 
tumble  about  our  ears;  and  the  very  air  is  charged  with  an  electricity  of  unbelief, 
which  all  must  breathe,  and  fe^v  have  spiritual  health  enough  to  resist.  Such  are  the 
times  in  which  we  now  live.     It  is  easier  to  doubt  God  than  to  trust  him. 

rV.  Illness  and  fkailtt.  The  class  of  diseases  characteristic  of  highly  civilized 
times  of  society  is  precisely  that  which  relates  to  the  nerves,  and  has  for  its  symptoms 
lowness  of  spirits,  distorted  vision,  gloomy  fears,  and  melancholia.  Many  and  many 
a  poor  burdened  body  cries  out,  "  God  has  forgotten  to  he  gracious,"  and  it  is  only  a 
body-cry  ;  the  heart  holds  fast  its  trust.  Whensoever  the  doubting  comes,  the  remedy 
is  the  same  ;  the  psalmist  expresses  it,  "  I  will  remember  the  years  of  the  right  hand  of 
the  Most  High."— P..  T. 

Ver.  29. — 17e  who  has  power  alone  can  give  it.  "  He  giveth  power  to  the  faint." 
"  The  fina^  verses  of  this  chapter  are  remarkable  for  the  frequent  occurrence  of '  fainteth ' 
and  '  is  weary.'  They  come  in  every  sentence,  and  if  we  note  their  use  we  shall  get 
the  essence  of  the  hope  and  consolation  which  the  prophet  was  anointed  to  pour  into  the 
wounds  of  his  own  people,  and  of  every  heavy-laden  soul  since  then.  Notice  how,  first, 
the  prophet  points  to  the  unwearied  Gkid;  and  then  his  eyes  drop  from  heaven  to 
the  clouded,  saddened  earth,  where  there  are  the  faint  and  the  weak,  and  the  strong 
becoming  faint,  and  the  youths  fading  and  becoming  weak  with  age.  Then  he  binds 
together  these  two  opposites — the  unwearied  God  and  the  fainting  man — ^in  the  grand 
thought  that  he  is  the  giving  God,  who  bestows  all  his  power  on-the  weary.  And  see 
how,  finally,  he  rises  to  the  blessed  conception  of  the  wearied  man  becoming  like  the 
unwearied  God.  'They  shall  run,  and  not  be  weary;  they  shall  walk,  and  not  faint '" 
(Maclat-en). 

I.  A  MAN  MUST  GIVE  WHAT  HE  POSSESSES.  He  Only  truly  enjoys  it  by  giving  it. 
The  miser  who  holds  is  miserable.  To  have  anything  is  simply  blessed  because  we  can 
share  it,  we  can  give  it.  This  is  more  true  than  we  think  it,  in  all  the  best  relations  of 
life,  even  under  our  present  depraved  conditions.  Ideally  it  is  the  only  noble  concep- 
tion of  life.  Mothers  only  care  for  possession  because  it  brings  power  to  give.  Thinkers 
only  acquire  truth  for  the  joy  of  imparting.  We  are  permitted  to  think  that  this  is 
true  of  God.  He  has  no  joy  in  possession.  His  joy  is  giving.  He  is  always  spending 
and  working ;  and  the  gift  of  his  Son  is  only  the  sublimest  instance  of  what  ho  is  always 
doing — giving  away  his  possessions. 

II.  A  MAN  CAN  only  oivb  WHAT  HE  POSSESSES.  We  scck  out  cach  man  for  the  skill 
be  possesses.  This  man  can  give  us  healing,  that  one  comforting,  and  this  one  teaching. 
Each  has  his  own  possession,  and  each  can  help  us  in  his  own  way.     No  one  man  can 


9(> 


THK  BOOK  OF  THE  PBOPHBT   ISAIAH,      [oh.  xu.  1—29 


do  dU  thing*  for  ns;  and  we  are  foolish  indeed  if  we  expect  of  a  man  what  he  has  no 
power  to  give. 

IIL  What  God  has  is  the  full,  abundant  supplt  of  all  our  wants.  "  My  God 
shall  supply  all  your  need  according  to  his  riches  in  glory  by  Christ  Jesus.*"  In  the 
passage  now  before  Us  the  provision  of  God  for  us  is  gathered  up  into  the  significant 
word  "  strength."  Paul's  great  want  is  also  our  great  want — the  great  want  of  every 
man  the  world  over,  in  whom  a  trace  of  the  Divine  image  is  left.  It  is  power — "power 
to  perform  that  which  is  good ; "  some  spiritual  force  to  act  on  our  souls,  and  make  us 
more  than  conquerors  over  self  and  sin.  And  that  is  within  God's  ability.  To  bestow 
it  is  the  purpose  of  his  good  will.  "  Giving  power  tc  the  faint "  is  his  Divinest  work. 
— B.T. 


Swrnoa  IL    Biootebt  of  thx  People  of  God  fbom  theib  Snr,  and  fbom  thxib 
Bondage  in  Babylon  (oh.  xli. — ^xlviii.). 


EXPOSITION. 


CHAPTER  XLL 


Vers.  1 — 7. — Announobment  of  the  De- 

LIVBBEB,  AND  EffBCT  ON  THE  SUBROTOJDINO 

Nations.  Isaiah  returns  to  the  standpoint 
of  oh.  xl.  9 — 11.  A  deliverer  of  Israel  is 
about  to  appear.  The  nations  are  therefore 
summoned  to  attend,  and  consider  the  facts 
(ver.  1).  He  will  carry  all  before  him 
(vers.  2,  3),  being  raised  up  by  God  (ver.  4). 
The  nations  will  tremble,  and  seek  the  pro- 
tection of  their  idol-deities  (vers.  5 — ^7). 

Yer.  1. — Keep  silence  before  me,  0  islands. 
God  is  the  speaker.  The  "islands,"  or 
maritime  lands  of  Western  Asia,  are  to  be 
silent  before  him,  pondering  the  facts  with 
a  view  to  future  argument.  "  Then  let 
them  speak"  (see  vers.  21 — 29).  Let  the 
people  renew  their  strength;  rather,  ffie 
peoples  or  the  natiotu ;  i.e.  the  inhabitants  of 
the  maritime  tracts.  To  judgment;  i.e.  to 
a  discussion,  which  shall  terminate  in  a 
right  Terdict. 

Ver.  2, — Who  raised  np  the  righteous 
man,  etc.  ?  rather,  who  raised  up  from  the 
Moat  one  whom  righteousness  teiU  eaU  to  hit 
foot.  It  is  generally  agreed  among  moderns 
that  the  reference  is  to  Cyrus,  whoisftirther 
referred  to  in  ver.  25,  in  ch.  xliv.  28 ;  xlv. 
1 — i,  13 ;  and  xlvi.  11.  Cyrus,  whether  we 
regard  him  as  King  of  Per.^ia,  or  as  King  of 
Elam  (Susiana),  would  come  from  a  land 
lying  east  of  Baliylon.  "Righteousness 
callM  him  to  his  foot"  when  Ood,  the 
Bighteous  One,  made  him  Ijie  minister,  and 
gave  him  a  certain  task  to  perform  (ch.  xliv. 
28).  Gave  the  nations  before  him;  rather, 
gives,  or  unll  give.  (On  the  rapid  conquests 
of  Cyrus,  see  Herod.,  i.  75 — 191 ;  and  comp. 
'Ancient  Monarchies,'  vol.  iv.  pp.  354 — 
377.)  That  he  was  God's  instrument  must 
be  admitted  by  all  who  allow  that  the 
course  of  history  is  determined  liy  a  super- 
intending Providea;e.    Made  him  rule  over 


kings.  Mr.  Cheyne  translates,  '*  makes  him 
trample  upon  kings,"  which  seems  to  give 
the  true  sense.  It  was  certainly  not  the 
general  policy  of  Cyrus  to  establish  under 
him  a  number  of  subject  kings,  but  rather 
to  rule  the  conquered  countries  by  means  of 
Persian  or  Median  governors  (see  Herod.,  i. 
153,  156;  'Transactions  of  the  Society  of 
Bibl.  ArchsBol.,'  vol.  vii.  p.  166).  He  gave 
them  as  the  dust  to  his  sword,  etc.;  or, 
according  to  some,  lie  maketh  their  moord  at 
dust,  and  their  bow  as  driven  stubble.  The 
result  is  the  same,  whichever  we  regard  as 
the  true  construction.  The  prophecy  tells 
of  the  ease  and  completeness  with  which 
Cyrus  vanquished  his  enemies. 

Ver.  3. — He  pursued  them,  and  passed 
safely ;  rather,  he  thaU  pursue  them,  and 
shall  pass  on  in  safety.  Even  by  the  way 
tiiat  he  had  not  gone  with  his  feet ;  rather, 
a  path  with  his  feet  he  shall  not  tread.  The 
meaning  seems  to  be  that  he  will  dispense 
with  customary  paths,  making  his  advance 
everywhere  over  all  obstacles,  by  untrodden 
ways.  Compare  the  frequent  boasts  of  the 
Assyrian  kings:  "To  the  recesses  of  the  deep 
forests  and  the  peaks  of  the  difficult  moun- 
tains, which  had  never  been  trodden  by  the 
foot  of  man,  I  ascended  "  ('  Becords  of  the 
Past,'  vol.  V.  p.  13).  "  Difficult  mountain 
chains,  and  inaccessible  hills,  which  none 
of  our  kings  had  ever  previously  reached 
— tedious  paths  and  unopened  roads — I 
travel sed"  (ibid.,  p.  16).  "The  lands  of 
Siliak,  of  Arda,  of  Ulayan,  of  AUuria,  in- 
accessible mountains,  impossible  for  the  horses, 
and  inaccessible  for  myself,  I  went  through  " 
(ibid.,  vol.  vii.  p.  36). 

Ver.  4. — Who  hath  wrought  and  done  it  ? 
i.e.  "by  whom  has  this  miglity  conqueror 
been  raised  up?"  Can  any  of  the  idol- 
gods  claim  him  as  tlieiv piotey^l  Assuredly 
not.  He  is  my  work ;  I,  Jehovah,  that  have 
called  (intn  being)  the  generations  (of  man) 
from  the  beginning  (of  the  world) — I, 
Jehovah,  the  First,  and  with  the  last,  am 


CH.  XM.  1— 29.]      THE  BOOK  OP  THE   PROPHET  ISAIAH. 


97 


he  that  he  has  done  this  thing.  By  "  the 
First,  and  with  the  last " — a  favovirite  phrase 
in  these  later  chapters  (see  cli.  xlv.  6  and 
zlviii.  12) — seems  to  be  meant  simply  "  the 
Eternal"  (eomp.  Kev.i.8,  II,  17;  ii.  8;  xxi. 
6;  xxii.  13). 

Yer.  5. — ^The  isles  saw  it,  and  feared,  A 
general  terror  seized  the  nations  on  the 
conquest  of  the  Medes  by  Cyrus.  Croesus  of 
Lydia,  Nabonidus  of  Babylon,  and  Amasis 
of  Egypt,  were  at  once  drawn  together  by 
the  common  danger,  and  made  alliance 
offensive  and  defensive  (Herod.,  i.  77).  The 
weaker  tribes  and  peoples  gave  themselves 
up  for  lost.  Scarcely  any  resistance  seems 
to  have  been  offered  to  the  Persian  arms  by 
the  tribes  between  the  Halys  and  Indus,  the 
Jaxartes  and  the  Indian  Ocean.  Lydia  and 
Bubylon  alone  made  a  stout  fight ;  but  even 
these  were  conquered  without  very  much  diffi- 
culty. The  ends  of  the  earth  . .  .  drew  near ; 
i.e.  distant  nations  held  (will  hold)  consulta- 
tion together  on  the  danger  which  threatens 
them.  The  league  of  Lydia,  Babylon,  and 
Egypt  is  the  only  known  instance  of  such 
"drawing  near"  (see  the  preceding  note). 
Isaiah  anticipates  marked  conaultations  and 
exhortations  with  respect  to  the  idol-gods, 
in  which  trust  should  be  put ;  but  perhaps 
he  is  scarcely  serious  in  vers.  6,  7.  Bather 
he  is  indulging  his  sarcastic  humour  at  the 
expense  of  the  idols  and  of  those  who  put 
their  trust  in  them.  (For  instances,  how- 
ever, of  actual  trust  in  particular  idols,  see 
*  Becords  of  the  Past,'  vol.  iv.  p.  58 ;  Herod., 
V.  67 ;  viii.  64.) 

Ver.  7. — The  carpenter,  etc.  (comp.  eh. 
xl.  19,  20  for  the  variety  of  workmen  em- 
ployed in  the  production  of  idols).  Each 
encourages  the  others  to  manufacture  a  right 
good  god.  When  all  is  done,  there  is,  how- 
ever, need  of  soldering,  and  of  nails,  that 
the  wretched  object  may  be  kept  erect,  and 
not  show  its  weakness  by  falling,  like 
Dagon,  upon  its  own  threshold  (1  Sam. 
V.4). 

Vers.  8 — 20. — ^A  Pbomise  to  Isbael  of 
God's  Peotection  and  Support  through 

THE  TbOUBLODS  PeRIOD  THAT  IS  APPKOACH- 

ING.  Israel  is  assured  (1)  of  God's  faith- 
fulness (vers.  8,  9);  (2)  of  special  divinely 
infused  strength  (ver.  10);  (3)  of  the 
infusion  of  weakness  into  their  enemies 
(vers.  11,  12) ;  (4)  of  external  Divine  aid 
(vers.  13,  14);  (5)  of  an  aggressive  vigour 
that  shall  enable  them  to  scatter  their  foes 
(vers.  15, 16);  and  (6)  of  spiritual  refresh- 
ment even  amidst  their  worst  sufferings 
(vers.  17 — 19).  The  eye  of  the  prophet 
travels  perhaps,  in  part,  beyond  the  period 
of  the  Captivity ;  bnt  he  is  mainly  bent  on 
UAIAH — u. 


giving  the  people  grounds  of  comfort  and 
trust  during  that  trying  time. 

Ver.  8. — ^Israel  ...  my  servant  (comp. 
ch.  xliv.  1,  2,  21;  xlv.  4;  xlviii.  20;  xlix. 
3—6,  etc.).  The  title  characterizes  these 
later  chapters,  and,  while  standing  no  doubt 
in  some  special  relation  to  the  "  Servant  of 
Jehovah "  who  is  the  subject  of  ch.  xlii. 
1 — 5;  xlix.  5 — 7,  etc.,  is  perhaps  mainly 
selected,  and  dwelt  on,  to  console  Israel  in 
captivity,  when  servants  of  tlie  King  of 
Babylon  (2  Chron.  xxxvi.  20),  by  the 
thought  that  their  true  Master  was  God 
himself,  and  that  to  him,  and  him  only,  did 
they  really  belong.  Jacob  whom  I  have 
chosen  (comp.  ch.  xliv.  1).  (On  this 
"  choice,"  and  the  love  which  it  implied,  see 
Deut.  vii.  6—8 ;  x.  15.)  Abraham  my  Mend ; 
or,  Ahraham  that  loved  me.  It  was  the 
special  privilege  of  Abraham  to  be  known 
as  God's  friend  (see  2  Chron.  xx.  7 ;  Jas.  ii. 
23)  among  the  Hebrews,  even  as  he  is  among 
the  Arabs  to  this  day.  The  "  friendship  " 
intended  comprised,  no  doubt,  both  an  active 
and  a  passive  element,  but  it  is  the  active 
element  which  the  word  principally  enforces. 
Abraham  loved  God,  and  showed  his  love 
by  his  obedience. 

Ver.  9. — Thou  whom  I  have  taken  from 
the  ends  of  the  earth ;  t.e.  from  Ur  of  the 
Chaldees  (Mugheir  in  Lower  Babylonia), 
and  again  from  Egypt,  another  "  end  of  the 
earth"  compared  with  Palestine,  The 
prophet  views  Palestine  as  Israel's  true 
kaiitat,  whatever  may  be  its  temporary 
abiding-place.  Trom  the  chief  men  thereof. 
Most  modems  translate  "from  the  eomeri 
thereof; "  but  atsilim  has  the  meaning  of 
"  chief  men  "  in  the  only  other  place  where 
it  occurs  (Exod.  xxiv.  11).  And  not  cast 
thee  sway.  Not  even  when  in  exile  was 
Israel  "cast  away."  God's  oare  was  still 
extended  over  them. 

Yer.  10. — rear  thon  not.  Thi*  verse  is 
most  closely  connected  with  the  two  pre- 
ceding. The  clauses  in  vers.  8,  9  are  one 
and  all  vocative ;  here  the  verb  follows. 
The  whole  passage  is  one  of  great  tender- 
new.  I  am  with  thee  (comp.  Deut.  xxxi.  6, 
8 ;  and  see  above  (vol.  i.,  p.  132),  on  the  force 
of  the  word  "  Immanuel ").  I  will  strengthen 
thee ;  ratlier,  I  have  strengthened  thee,  or  1 
hate  ehoien  thee  (Delitzsch,  Cheyne).  The 
two  other  verbs  are  also  in  the  past  tense. 
While  primarily  they  declare  past  favonrs, 
they  may  also  be  regarded  as  prophetic  of 
future  ones,  since  "  with  God  is  no  variable- 
ness." 

Vers.  II,  12. — As  Israel  would  grow 
strong  tiirough  God's  help,  so  her  enemies 
would  grow  weak  through  God's  disfavonr. 
That  enemies  of  all  kinds  may  be  seen  to 
be  included,  the  designation  is  four  timea 
varied — "they  that  are  angry  with  thee;" 


«8 


THE  BOOK  OP   THE  PROPHET   ISAIAH,      [ch.  xLi.  1— 29 


"that  are  at  tlrife  with  thee;''  "that  are 
t»  conflict  with  thee;"  "that  are  at  war 
^th  thee."  The  order  is  one  of  climax. 
Similarly,  with  each  augmentation  of  the 
hostility  there  is  an  augmentation  of  the 
sentence  of  punishment — "  shall  he  covei  eJ 
with  shame;"  "shall  perish;"  "shall  not 
be  found;"  "shall  become  as  nothingness." 

Ver.  13.— I  the  Lord  thy  God  will  hold  thy 
right  hand.  God  himself  will  be  their 
Strength,  will  personally  interfere  on  their 
behalf,  taking  them  as  it  were  by  their  right 
hand.  Saying  unto  thee ;  rather,  I  who  say 
to  thee. 

"Ver.  14. — ^Thou  worm  Taooh.  Though 
in  thyself  the  weakest  of  the  weak,  grovel- 
ling in  the  dust,  a  mere  worm  (Job  xxv.  6; 
Ps.  xxii.  6),  yet  thou  hast  no  cause  to  fear, 
since  God  sustains  thee.  Ye  men  of  Israel ; 
rather,  ye  handful,  Israel  (Df litzsch).  The 
term  used  "is  one  of  disparagement  corre- 
sponding to  the  "  worm "  of  the  parallel 
clause.  Few  and  weak  though  they  be, 
God's  people  need  uot  fear.  Thy  Eedeemer. 
The  word  goel,  here  used  for  the  first  time 
by  Isaiah,  is  frequent  throughout  the  later 
chapters  (xliii.  14 ;  xliv.  6,  24 ;  xlvii. 
4;  xlviii.  17;  xlix.  7,  26;  liv.  5,  8;  lix.  20; 
Ix.  16 ;  Ixiii.  16).  It  is  used  for  the  "  nearest 
of  kin,"  and  "avenger  of  blood,"  in  the 
Levitical  Law,  but  has  a  sense  similar  to 
tliat  of  the  present  passage  in  Job  xix.  25; 
Ps.  xix.  14 ;  Ixxviii.  35 ;  ciii.  4 ;  Prov.  xxiii. 
11;  and  Jer.  1.  34.  The  sense  "redeem" 
belongs  to  the  verb  of  which  goel  is  the 
participle,  in  Exod.  vi.  6;  xv.  13;  Lev.  xxv. 
25,  33,  48,  49 ;  xxvii.  13,  19,  21,  etc.  The 
Holy  One  of  Israel.  Isaiah's  favourite 
designation  .of  the  Almighty  in  his  cove- 
nant relationship  to  Israel,  used  eleven  times 
in  the  earlier  chapters  (i. — ^xxxv.),  once  in 
the  middle  or  historical  portion,  and  thirteen 
times  in  the  later  chapters  (xl. — Ixvi.) ;  only 
used  elsewhere  in  Pb.  Ixxi.  22 ;  Ixxviii.  41 ; 
Ixxxix.  18 ;  Jer.  1.  29 ;  and  li.  5  (see  Urwick, 
'  Servant  of  Jehovah,'  pp.  36,  37). 

Yer.  15. — I  will  make  thee  a  new  sharp 
threshing-instrument.  Israel  is  to  be 
more  than  sustained.  Strength  is  to  be 
given  her  to  take  the  aggressive,  and  to 
subdue  her  enemies  under  her.  She  is  to 
"  thresh  them "  and  "  beat  them  small,"  as 
with  a  threshing-instrument  (comp.  2  Kings 
xiii.  7;  Amos  i.  3;  Micah  iv.  13).  In  the 
literal  sense,  no  earlier  accomplishment  of 
this  prophecy  can  be  pointed  out  than  the 
time  of  the  Macoabean  war.  Metaphorically, 
it  may  be  said  that  Israel  began  to  conquer 
the  world  when  her  literature  became  known 
to  the  Greeks  through  the  expedition  of 
Alexander  the  Great,  and  completed  her 
conquest  when  the  Roman  empire  suc- 
cumbed to  the  teaching  of  Jesus  of  Nazareth. 
Having    teeth.      Threshing-instruments   of 


the  kind  described  are  still  in  use  in  Syria 
(Thomson,  'The  Land  and  the  Book,'  p. 
539)  and  Asia  Minor  (Fellows, '  Asia  Minor,' 
p.  70).  The  com  is  spread  out  on  the 
ground,  and  the  machine,  which  is  some- 
times armed  with  sharp  stones,  some- 
times with  saws,  is  dragged  over  it.  The 
Arabic  name  is  still  noreg,  a  modification 
of  the  Hebrew  moreg.  Thou  shalt  thresh 
the  mountains  .  .  .  the  hills ;  i.e.  "  thou 
shalt  subdue  proud  and  mighty  foes" 
(Delitzsch). 

"Vers.  17 — 20. —The  crowning  piomi»e  ii 
that  of  spiritual  support  and  refreshment 
through  the  dull  and  dreary  time  of  the 
Captivity,  during  which  Israel  dwells  as  it 
were  in  a  desert,  without  water,  or  shade,  or 
the  relief  to  the  eye  which  is  furnished  by 
the  greenery  of  tres  s  and  shrubs.  God  was 
able  to  make  of  this  "  wilderness  a  standing 
water,  and  water-springs  of  the  dry  ground" 
(Ps.  cvii.  35),  and  he  promises  to  do  so 
(ver.  18).  The  soul  that  longs  for  him, 
that  thirsts  after  him,  feeling  that  it  dwells 
"in  a  barren  and  dry  land,  where  no  water 
is"  (Ps.  Ixiii.  1),  shall  be  relieved  and 
satisfied  by  a  revelation  of  God's  presence, 
and  an  outpouring  of  his  grace  unusually 
copious  and  abundant.  God's  grace  is 
shadowed  out  under  the  two  similitudes  of 
water  and  verdure,  as  in  ch.  xxxv.  7,  and, 
to  some  extent,  in  ch.  xxx.  23 — 25. 

Ver.  17. — The  poor  and  needy;  t.«.  pri- 
marily, Israel  in  captivity ;  but  secondarily, 
also,  the  "poor  in  spirit,"  and  those  that 
feel  the  need  of  God's  grace,  everywhere 
and  at  all  times. 

Ver.  18. — I  will  open  rivers  in  high  places 
(comp.  ch.  XXX.  25).  If  even  the  "high 
places"  had  water,  much  more  would  the 
low  ground — the  valleys — ^be  abundantly 
supplied.  The  abundance  is  indicated  by 
the  fourfold  designation  of  the  water-supply, 
as  coming  from  (1)  rivers ;  (2)  fountains  (or 
wells);  (3)  pools;  and  (4)  springs  (comp. 
vers.  11,  12). 

Ver.  19.— I  will  plant  in  the  wilderness 
the  oedar,  etc.  The  "glory  of  Lebanon," 
the  "excellency  of  Oarmel  and  Sharon" 
(ch.  xxxv.  2),  shall  be  given  to  the  "  wilder- 
ness," wherein  Israel  dwells.  The  trees 
named  are  the  choicest  of  Syria  and  Pales- 
tine, viz.  the  cedar  (erez),  the  great  glory  of 
Libanus;  the  acacia  (shittah),  abundant  in 
the  Jordan  valley ;  the  myrtle  (hadas),  which 
grew  on  the  hills  about  Jerusalem  (Neh. 
viii.  15);  the  olive,  cultivated  over  the 
whole  country ;  the  flr  (MrdsK),  or  junipei^ 
a  product  of  Lebanon  (2  Chron.  ii.  8) ;  tk* 
plane  (tidhdr),  a  tree  far  from  uncommon  to 
C!oele-syria,  sometimes  growing  to  a  great 
size;  and  the  sherbin  (Wassfeiir),  a  sort  of 
cedar,  remarkable  for  the  upward  tendency 
oi  its  branches.    The  list  <^  >ames  shows  a 


TO.  auL  1—29.]      THE  BOOK  OF  THE  PROPHET  ISAIAH. 


99 


writer  familiar  with  the  Falestiniaii  region, 
but  not  familiar  with  Babylonia. 

Ver.  20.— That  they  may  see,  etc  The 
change  would  be  such  that  those  who  ex- 
perienced it  could  not  fail  to  recognize 
"  Jehovah,  the  Holy  One  of  Israel,"  as  its 
Author. 

\en.  21 — 29. — Jehovah's  Controvebst 
WITH  THB  Nations  and  their  Idol-Gods. 
The  argument  is  now  taken  up  from  vers. 
1 — 4.  Jehovah  and  his  worshippers  are  on 
the  one  side :  the  idol-gods  and  their  votaries 
on  the  other.  The  direct  challenge,  how- 
ever, is  given  by  Jehovah  himself  to  the 
idols:  1.  What  predictions  of  their  own 
can  they  bring  forward  as  proofs  of  su- 
pernatural knowledge?  2.  What  indica- 
tions can  they  give  of  power  either  to  do 
good  or  to  do  evil  (vers.  22,  23)?  If  they 
can  do  neither,  they  are  vanity  (ver.  24). 
Jehovah  has  both  reared  up  Cyrus — ^he 
and  he  only — and  has  announced  the  good 
tidings  to  his  people  (vers.  25 — ^27).  No 
■noh  announcement  has  been  made  by  the 
idol-gods;  they  are  therefore  mere  "wind 
and  confusion"  (vers.  28,  29). 

Ver.  21. — ^Frodnoe  your  cause.  Ths 
nations  had  been  told  to  "draw  near" — ^to 
"  keep  silence "  while  God  spoke — and 
"then  to  speak"  (ver.  1).  Now  the  time 
for  them  to  speak  is  come,  and  they  are 
.challenged  to  "produce"  and  plead  "their 
cause."  Your  strong  reasons ;  literally,  your 
bulwarki,  or  defeneei.  Saith  the  King  of 
Jaoob.  The  king  and  tutelary  god  of  the 
nation,  Israel,  really  holding  the  position 
that  the  idol-gods  were  regarded  as  holding 
towards  the  peoples  that  worshipped  them. 
The  "kingly"  character  of  the  idol-gods 
was  indicated  in  such  names  as  Moloch 
(equivalent  to  "king"),  Melkarth  (equiva- 
lent to  "Mug  of  the  city"),  Adrammelech, 
(equivalent  to  "glorious  king"),  Baal' 
(equivalent  to  "  lord  "),  Adonis  (equivalent 
to"my  lord"),  eto. 

Ver.  22. — Let  them  .  .  ,  show  us  what 
will  happen.  God  claims  that  the  power  of 
predicting  the  future  is  his  own  inalienable 
prerogative.  He  defies  the  idul-gods  and 
tbeii  votaries  to  give  any  clear  prediction 
of  future  events.  No  doubt  the  claim  to 
possess  the  power  was  made  very  generally 
among  the  idolatrous  nations,  who  almost 
universally  practised  divination,  and  in 
many  cases  possessed  oracles.  But  it  was 
a  false  claim,  based  upon  fraud  and  cunning, 
which  deceived  men  as  often  as  dependence 
was  placed  upon  it  (Herod.,  i.  53,  91)  and 
landed  them  in  misfortune.  The  former 
things  .  .  .  thing!  foz  to  ooma.    Some  com- 


mentators regard  "the  former  things"  as 
things  actually  past — "the  beginnings  of 
history,  for  instance,  which  to  the  heathen 
nations  were  wrapped  in  darkness"  (Kay); 
but  it  seems  better,  on  the  whole,  to  under- 
stand (with  Vitringa,  Stier,  Hahn,  Cheyne, 
and  Delitzseh)  by  "the  former  things" 
those  in  the  immediate  future,  by  "things 
for  to  come "  those  about  to  happen  in 
remoter  times.  The  .former  are,  of  course, 
much  the  easier  to  predict,  since  they  fall 
to  some  extent  within  the  domain  of  human 
foresight;  the  latter  are  more  difScult;  but 
the  idol-g.ids  are  challenged  to  produce 
either  the  one  or  the  other.  What  they  be. 
A  definite  and  clear  statement  is  required 
to  preclude  such  vague  and  ambiguous 
utterances  as  the  heathen  oracles  delighted 
to  put  forth.  That  we  may  consider  them 
(or,  lay  them  to  heart),  and  know  the  latter 
end  of  them;  {.e.  compare  them  with  the 
event,  when  the  time  comes. 

Ver.  23. — ^Yea,  do  good,  or  do  evil.  Here 
the  proof  required  of  the  idol-gods  is 
changed.  If  they  cannot  prophesy,  can 
they  effect  anything?  Can  they  do  either 
good  or  harm?  Let  them  show  this.  It  is 
a  plain  "abatement"  from  the  first  demand, 
and  therefore  properly  introduced  by  "yea" 
(aph);  comp.  1  Kings  viii.  27.  That  we 
may  be  dismayed;  t.s.  rather,  perhaps,  that 
we  may  look  to  it,  or  examine  it ;  i.e.  see  if 
yon  have  really  shown  a  power  of  doing  any- 
thing. 

Yer.  24. — A  pause  may  be  supposed 
between  vers.  23  and  24,  during  which  the 
idol-gods  are  given  the  opportunity  of 
"bringing  forth  their  strong  reasons,"  and, 
in  one  way  or  other,  proving  their  Divinity. 
But  they  are  stricken  dumb;  they  say 
nothing.  Accordingly,  "judgment  goes 
against  them  by  default"  (Cheyne),  ami 
Jehovah  breaks  out  upon  them  with  words 
of  contempt  and  contumely.  Behold,  ye 
are  of  nothing,  eto.  "Te  are  utterly  vain 
and  futile." 

Yer.  25. — It  remains  for  Jehovah  to  plead 
his  own  cause,  to  vindicate  his  own  Divinity. 
He  adduces,  as  proof  of  his  power  in  action, 
the  fact  of  his  raising  up  Cyrus ;  as  proof 
of  his  ability  to  predict,  the  fact  that  he  has 
announced  his  coming.  One  from  the  north 
...  from  the  rising  of  the  sun.  Both  as  a 
Persian,  and  as  King  of  Elam,  Cyrus  might 
be  considered  to  come  from  the  east.  In 
fact,  however,  when  he  attacked  Babylon, 
he  fell  upon  it  mainly  from  the  north. 
After  bis  conquest  of  Aetyages  (Istivegu), 
he  made  Ecbatana  his  capitol  (Herod.,  i. 
153);  and  it  was  from  this  comiuucatively 
northern  city  that  he  directed  bis  attack 
upon  Nabonidns.  His  march  lay  by  way  of 
Arbela  (■  Transactions  of  the  Society  of  BibL 
Arcliseol.,'   toL  to.  p.  159)  and   Sippara 


100 


THE  BOOK  OF   THE  PEOPHET   ISAIAH,      [oh.  xu.  1— 2a 


(ibid.,  p.  165),  through  the  district  called 
Akkad  to  the  Chaldean  capital.  Herodotus 
agrees  with  the  monuments  in  bringing  him 
to  Babylon  from  the  north.  Shall  he  call 
upon  my  Name ;  or,  shall  he  proclmm  my 
Name.  (For  the  actual  proclamation  of 
Jehovah's  Name  by  Cyrus,  see  Ezra  i.  3; 
and  note  especially  the  phrase,  "He  [i.e. 
Jeliovah]  is  the  God.")  Eecent  discoveries 
have  raised  the  suspicion  that  Cyrus  was  a 
syncretist,  who  was  willing  to  accept  the 
chief  god  of  any  nation  as  identical  with 
his  own  Ormuzd.  But  it  is  to  be  borne  in 
mind  that  the  document  which  has  pro- 
duced this  impression  is  one  issued  by  the 
priestly  authorities  of  Babylon  in  their  own 
language,  and  may  have  been  quite  un- 
known to  the  Persian  court.  Cyrus  may 
have  been  a  better  Zoroastrian  than  he  is 
represented  by  the  priests  of  Merodach. 
The  Zoroastrian  religion  was,  as  Delitzsch 
observes,  "nearest  to  the  Jewish  religion 
of  all  the  systems  of  heathenism"  (see 
'  Ancient  Monarchies,'  vol.  iii.  pp.  93 — 117 ; 
and  comp.  Pusey, '  Lectures  on  Daniel,'  pp. 
530—550).  He  shall  oome  upon  princes  as 
upon  mortar ;  t.e.  he  shall  tread  them  under- 
fckit,  mortar  being  commonly  mixed  with 
the  feet,  as  was  also  clay  for  bricks  and 
pottery  (Heiod.,  ii.  36).  The  chief  "  princes  " 
whom  Cyrus  is  known  to  have  conquered 
were  Astyages  of  Media,  Crcesus  of  Lydia, 
and  Nabonidus  of  Babylon.  He  was  stu- 
djooaly    mild   in   his  teeatment   of  royal 


captives,  but  naturally  deprived  them  of  all 

power. 

Ver.  26. — Who  hath  declared  trma  the 
beginning?  Which  of  the  idol-gods  has 
announced  the  coming  of  a  conqueror?  If 
any,  we  on  Jehovah's  side  are  quite  willing  to 
acknowledge  it,  and  to  say,  He  is  righteous; 
or  rather,  he  «»  riciht.  But,  in  fact,  there 
is  none  of  them  that  showeth,  none  that 
deolareth — no  one  has  heard  of  any  such 
announcement  as  deliverud  by  any  of  them. 

Ver.  27. — The  first  shall  say  to  Zlon, 
Behold,  behold  them;  rather,  the  first  hat 
said.  By  "the  first"  must  certainly  be 
meant  Jehovah — "the  First,  and  with  the 
last "  of  ver.  4.  He  has  already  announced 
to  Zion  her  deliverance  (see  oh.  xl.  9 — 11 ; 
xli.  2,  etc.).  I  will  give  to  Jerusalem  one 
that  bringeth  good  tidings.  Perhaps  Isaiah 
himself  (Grotius,  Stier,  Delitzsch).  Perhaps 
some  prophet  of  the  Captivity,  aa  Daniel, 
who  "  knew  by  books  "  when  the  Captivity 
was  drawing  to  a  close  (Dan.  ix.  2),  and 
may  be  supposed  to  have  announced  the 
good  tidings  to  the  other  exiles. 

Ver.  28. — For  I  beheld.  "  Jehovah  once 
more  looks  round  to  see  if  any  of  the  idols 
possess  an  ability  to  prophesy,  but  in  vain" 
(Cheyue).  He  finds  no  oouusellor,  i.».  no 
prophet,  among  them.  Hence  the  final 
"outburst  of  scorn  "  in  ver.  29,  which,  how- 
ever, is  directed  primarily  against  the  idol- 
worshippers,  and,  only  through  them,  againBt 
the  idols. 


HOMILETICS. 

Vem.  14 — 20. — Oodfs  strength  made  perfect  in  weakness.  It  is  when  Jacob  is  bnraght 
80  low  that  his  only  fitting  designation  is  "  thou  worm,"  and  Israel  is  so  reduced  as  to 
be  a  mere  "  handful  of  men,"  that  the  promise  is  made  of  the  triumphant  crushing  of 
enemies,  and  scattering  of  them  "like  the  chaff  of  the  summer  threshing-floor."  It  is 
when  the  nation  generally  feels  itself  to  be  "  poor  and  needy  "  (ver.  17),  when  it  is  as 
it  were  at  the  last  gasp,  actually  perishing  of  thirst,  that  it  is  raised  to  paradisaical 
bliss,  that  it  finds  itself  in  a  veritable  "  garden  of  Eden."  Exaltation  follows  abase- 
ment, not  however  by  any  mere  law  of  alternation,  as  if  men  having  reached  the  very 
bottom  of  the  wheel  of  fortune  must  begin  to  rise,  much  less  by  any  mere  caprice  of  the 
power  that  rules  the  universe,  but  by  the  law  of  moral  fitness.  "  He  that  would  be 
great  among  you  let  him  be  your  servant."  It  is  when  men,  chastened  by  Ck>d'8  afflict- 
ing rod,  abase  themselves  in  the  dust,  feeling  and  acknowledging  their  weakness,  and 
throwing  themselves  wholly  upon  God  for  strength  and  power,  that  they  are  most  fit  to 
become  his  instruments  for  the  chastisement  of  others,  and  to  occupy  a  high  position 
among  the  nations.  His  strength  is  made  perfect  in  their  weakness ;  and  this  for  two 
principal  leasona. 

I.  It  is  roB  Qon'a  olobt  that  hb  should  abbbbt  his  powbb  bt  wbak  ntsTBir- 
MKNTB.  The  poorer  the  instrument,  the  more  evident  that  it  is  the  workman  to  whom 
the  work  is  due.  Egypt  is  subdued  by  plagues  of  frogs  and  lice  and  locusts.  Sisera 
falb  by  the  hand  of  a  woman.  The  Midianites  are  smitten  by  the  three  hundred  who 
lapped  with  the  tongue  (Judg.  vii.  6—22).  David  slays  Goliath  of  Gath  with  a  sling 
and  •  stone.  Great  miracles  are  wrought  by  a  rod,  a  word,  some  spittle.  And  so  also 
with  the  events  that  revolutionize  the  world.  "Big  battalions"  do  not  always  carry 
tke  day.     The  host  of  Zerah  is  smitten  by  Asa  (2  Chron.  xiv.  9 — 12).    Ben-hadad  and 


OH.  xLLl— 29.]      THE  BOOK  OF  THE  PROPHET  ISAIAH.  101 

the  thirty-two  kings  are  repulsed  by  "  the  young  men  of  the  princes  of  the  provinces  " 
(1  Kings  XX.  1 — 20).  Cyrus,  with  a  handful  of  Persian  rustics,  defeats  Astyages 
(Herod.,  i.  126,  127).  Three  hundred  Greeks  decimate  the  myriads  of  Xerxes  at 
Thermopylae.  Judas  Maccabaeus,  with  a  few  thousands,  destroys  half  a  dozen  Syrian 
armies  three  or  four  times  aa  numerous  (1  Mace.  iv.  26—34: ;  vii.  40 — 47 ;  2  Mace.  xii. 
13 — 37 ;  XV.  20 — 28).  God's  hand  is  the  more  clearly  seen,  the  weaker  and  poorer  the 
means  that  he  uses. 

II.  It  18  FOB  iiAic'a  advantaqb  that  he  should  have  it  impbebsed  upon  him 
THAT  HIS  SUCCESSES  ARE  KOT  DUE  TO  HIMSELF.  As  man's  arrogance  is  one  of  the  chief 
causes  of  God's  judgments  upon  him,  it  is  well  that  success  should  be  given  him  under 
circumstances  which  make  it  almost  impossible  that  he  should  ascribe  the  meiit  of  it 
to  his  own  efforts  or  abilities.  Best,  far  best  for  him  to  know  that  it  is  "  when  he  is 
weak,  that  he  is  strong "  (2  Cor.  xii.  10).  So  long  as  we  are  conscious  that  we  are 
instruments,  we  are  less  inclined  to  exalt  ourselves,  to  be  puffed  up,  to  think  of  our- 
selves more  highly  than  we  ought  to  think.  We  feel  our  dependence  upon  God,  realize 
his  power  upholding  us,  lean  upon  him,  and  have  a  sweet  satisfaction  in  so  leaning. 
As  our  day  is,  so  we  feel  that  our  strength  will  be  (Deut.  xxxiii.  25).  His  grace  will 
be  always  sufficient,  just  sufficient,  for  us.  So  we  avoid  all  boasting  and  self-com- 
placency, and  are  able  to  "  rest  in  the  Lord,"  to  "  stay  upon  him,"  and  to  maintain  a 
perpetoal  consciousness  of  his  mighty  arm  supporting  us. 
• 

Vers.  21 — ^29. — The  futility  and  abaurdUy  of  false  systemt  do  not  prevent  them  from 
keeping  their  hold  on  men.  At  the  present  day,  men  are  apt  to  find  it  strange  that  the 
prophets  should  spend  so  much  time,  employ  so  many  words,  in  confuting  idolatry  and 
showing  it  to  be  utter  and  absolute  folly.  To  iis  of  the  present  age  the  absurdity  seems 
palpable  and  gross — therefore  not  worth  arguing  against.  But  systems  of  religion  or 
of  irreligion,  whenever  they  have  become  established  and  have  got  possession  of  men's 
minds,  are  very  hard  to  root  out.  Those  who  have  been  brought  up  in  them,  who  have 
been  accustomed  all  their  lives  to  hear  them  spoken  of  as  undoubtedly  true,  who  have 
found  all  those  about  them  of  one  mind  respecting  them,  can  with  diffictilty  be  per- 
suaded that  there  is  any  absurdity  in  notions  with  which  they  have  been  from  infancy 
familiar.  The  force  of  prejudice  is  in  most  minds  stronger  than  the  force  of  reason, 
and  often  renders  men  impervious  to  all  argument  which  runs  counter  to  their  long- 
cherished  opinions.  Still,  as  nothing  but_  argument  can  shake  such  opinions,  it  has  to 
be  used,  nay,  to  be  insisted  on,  to  be  reiterated,  to  be  dinned  into  people's  ears,  whether 
they  will  hear  or  whether  they  will  forbear.  Many  systems  quite  as  absurd  as 
idolatry  have  been  accepted  by  men,  and  have  stood  them  in  the  stead  of  true  religion 
for  centuries :  some  such  are  accepted  even  at  the  present  day.  An  instance  of  the 
former  kind  may  be  found  in  the  system  of  Democritus  and  Epicurus ;  instances  of  the 
latter  in  the  pantheism  of  India  and  the  more  fashionable  theory  of  evolution. 

I.  The  system  or  Epicubus  akb  Dehocbitus.  To_  suppose  the  universe  nothing 
but  a  congeries  of  minute  atoms,  existing  from  all  eternity,  and  moving  as  chance 
directs,  combining  accidentally  into  forms  more  or  less  permanent  and  after  a  while  fall- 
'ing  apart,  ungoverned  by  any  mind,  without  object,  intention,  or  cause ;  and  to  suppose 

life,  intelligence,  thought,  the  accidental  results  of  certain  positions  or  combinations  of 
the  atoms ; — is  a  theory  so  intrinsically  absurd  and  ridiculous,  that  it  might  have  seemed 
impossible  for  the  wildest  fancy  to  have  conceived  it,  much  more  of  any  man  of  sane 
mind  to  have  persuaded  himself  of  its  truth.  Yet  this  theory,  elaborated  by  Democritus 
and  Leucippus  about  B.C.  430—400,  embraced  by  Epicurus  about  B.o.  300 — 270,  and 
recommended  by  the  genius  of  Lucr<^tius  about  B.o.  75,  became  the  favourite  creed  of 
educated  Greeks  and  Romans  in  the  century  before  and  the  century  after  our  era.  St. 
Paul  found  two  sects  predominant  at  Athens — Stoics  and  Epicureans.  Epicureans 
preponderated  in  Italy,  where  their  treatises  are  found  to  have  been  the  favourite  read- 
ing of  the  rich  men  who  built  their  villas  on  the  soft  shores  of  the  bay  of  Naples,  at  the 
fashionable  watering-place  of  Herculaneum.  Among  the  adversaries  which  Christianity 
had  to  meet  and  subdue,  this  Epicurean  philosophy  was  one  of  the  most  formidable. 

II.  The  pantheism  of  India.  That  God  exists  and  nothing  else ;  that  he  is  "  the 
One  withont  a  second ; "  that  individual  men  are  God,  duplications  of  him,  imafpning 
themaelvei  separate;  that  the  material  world  is  absolutely  non-existent;  and  that  nil 


102  THE   BOOK  OF   THE   PROPHET  ISAIAH.      [cu.  xu.  1— 29 

sights  and  sounds  and  actions  are  "  illusions,"  cheats,  nonentities  viitli  a  semblance  ol 
being ; — this,  which  is  the  creed  of  the  educated  Hindoo,  is  another  belief  so  contradictory 
to  common  sense,  that  it  might  have  been  supposed  impossible  of  acceptance  by  any 
considerable  number  of  men.  It  is  held,  however,  by  thousands,  who  see  no  absurdity 
in  it,  and  are  convinced  that  it  is  the  only  rational  theory  of  existence ;  and,  so  far  ai 
present  appearances  go,  there  seems  to  be  no  probability  that  either  Christianity  or 
modem  science  will  succeed  in  shaking  the  belief,  however  absurd  it  may  be  and  how- 
ever Kiscbievous. 

III.  Thb  modebn  theoby  of  etolution.  The  spontaneous  origin  of  life  from  inor- 
ganic matter,  the  development  of  protoplasm  from  molecules,  of  vegetable  life  from 
protoplasm,  of  animal  life  from  vegetable  life,  and  of  humanity  from  advanced  animals, 
which,  though  a  pure  hypothesis,  has  been  accepted  almost  universally  by  physicbts  in 
the  present  day,  is  intrinsically  as  absurd  and  unthinkable  a  theory  as  either  Epicu- 
reanism or  Hindoo  pantheism.  But  its  absurdity  is  not  seen  by  those  who  have  been 
tavght  it  from  the  time  that  they  first  turned  their  attention  to  physical  science,  who 
find  it  accepted  by  all  their  teachers,  and  assumed  as  a  basis  by  every  book  that  is  put 
into  their  hands,  who  live  as  it  were  in  an  atmosphere  saturated  with  evolutionism,  and 
absorb  it  with  every  breath  that  they  inhale.  The  time  will  probably  come,  perhaps 
after  no  great  delay,  when  a  reaction  will  set  in,  and  the  ability  of  unintelligent  matter 
to  improve  itself  and  advance  to  perfection  will  be  seen  to  be  as  absurd  and  as  self- 
contradictory  as  the  ability  of  images  carved  out  of  wood  and*stone  to  affect  the  course 
of  events — to  "  do  good  or  to  do  evil."  Meanwhile,  however,  the  existing  false  system 
is  almost  as  impervious  to  argument  and  criticism  as  was  the  system  of  heathen 
idolatry.  It  has  possession  of  the  field  (the  so-called  scieotific  field),  as  that  had  of  the 
general  field  of  human  society;  it  supports  itself  by  a  number  of  interconnected  propo- 
sitions, no  one  of  which  rests  upon  any  sure  basis;  and  it  does  nut  even  perceive  the 
force  of  the  arguments  which  are  brougkt  against  it.  Thus  it  may  keep  its  hold  upon 
men  for  some  considerable  time,  before  it  takes  ita  final  place  as  "*  chapter  in  the 
history  of  homan  error." 


HOMILIES  BY  VARIOUS  AUTHORa 

Vers.  1 — 7. — Argument  with  the  nation*:  Jehovah  calls  the  countriei  to  "come 
silently  "  unto  him.  Let  the  people  pluck  up  what  strength  they  may  have,  and  let 
the  cause  between  them  and  Jehovah  come  to  the  tribunal  of  reason.  Have  the  idols 
any  spiritual  power  ?  or  is  Jehovah  only  the  true  God  ? 

1.  The  victorious  oabeeb  of  Cybub.  This  great  man  has,  in  the  prophet's 
thought,  a  vocation  from  God.  He  is  the  minister  of  the  Divine  righteousness 
(ch.  xlii.  6 ;  xlv.  13).  Cyrus  is  supported  by  the  unseen  might  of  Jehovah,  who  gives 
peoples  into  his  hands,  makes  him  tread  on  the  necks  of  kings,  whose  swords  turn  to 
dust,  whose  warlike  bow  becomes  as  powerless  as  stubble  driven  before  the  blast.  On 
the  hero  goes,  in  swift  pursuit,  penetrating  into  trackless  districts,  or  those  inaccessiblS 
to  the  ordinary  traveller,  where  he  cannot  be  followed.  Or  the  meaning  may  be,  his 
passage  is  swift  as  that  of  eagle  or  vulture  (ch.  xlvi.  11),  and  he  leaves  no  trace  of  his 
feet  behind.  Now,  "who  hath  produced  and  carried  out  this?"  "In  all  religions 
men  have  found  it  necessary,  in  any  great  action,  to  engage  some  other  agent  and 
principle  beside  the  man  himself.  The  god  becomes  coadjutor  in  every  noble  or  heroic 
aihievement.  Homer  brings  in  Diomed  and  Ulysses,  assisted  by  Mars  and  Pallas— one 
notable  for  acts  of  valour,  and  the  other  for  those  of  counsel  and  wisdom  j  and  the  like 
is  said  of  many  others."  And  now  which  of  the  heathen  gods  has  been  the  coadjutor 
of  Cyrus  ?  Why,  he  has  come  to  overthrow  the  worshippers  of  the  heathen  gods.  The 
deities  are  chiefly  bound  up  with  the  futures  of  their  peoples,  and  with  them  they  fall. 
Who,  then,  can  liave  raised  up  the  great  conqueror  and  destroyer,  but  he  who  alone 
aUdes — who  called  forth  the  generations  from  the  beginning  of  "  the  vanished  past 
and  the  vanishing  present,"  who  is  Alpha  and  Omega,  who  preceded  all,  and  wilfbs 
self-existent  in  the  ages  to  come.  The  expression,  "  I  am  he,"  briefly  and  suggestively 
conveys  this  idea  of  self-existence,  of  eternity  (ch.  xliii.  10, 13;  xlvL  4;  xlviii.  12 


OH.  XLU  1— 29.]      THE  BOOK   OP   THE  PROPHET  ISAIAH.  103 

Deut  xxxii.  39 ;  Pg.  oii.  28) :  "Thou  art  he,  and  thy  years  will  not  come  to  an  end." 
Alao  Ps.  xliv.  6. 

"The  imineleBs,  he  whose  nod  is  Nature's  birth." 

n.  The  anxiety  of  the  peoples.  The  decision  of  the  question  is  postponed ;  but 
»  ioene  of  alarm  among  the  peoples  is  depicted.  They  have  heard  the  news  of  Cyrus's 
conquests ;  the  world  is  shuddering  with  apprehension.  They  huddle  together  like  a 
frightened  flock  of  sheep,  trying  to  impart  to  one  another  a  courage  not  really  felt. 
The  carpenter  and  the  caster  and  the  goldsmith  are  all  busy  among  the  Western 
nations,  making  "  a  particularly  good  and  strong  set  of  gods."  A  significant  touch  i« 
the  last — one  is  strengthening  an  ido)  with  nails,  for  fear  it  should  fall,  which  would  be 
an  omen  full  of  dread,  as  the  fall  of  Dagou  of  the  Philistines  may  remind  us.  And  so, 
eyen  as  Elijah  with  the  worshippers  of  Baal,  the  prophet  employs  that  irony  and 
ridicule  which  is  the  test  of  truth,  against  the  idolaters.  And  the  scene  may  b» 
regarded  as  a  standing  satire  against  all  weak,  anxious,  fussy  resort  to  human  means 
and  devices,  and  to  idle  superstitions,  when  the  name  of  true  religion  has  been  para- 
lysed, when  faith  in  the  spiritual  and  eternal  is  extinct. — J. 

Vers.  8 — 13. — 2%e  blessed  condition  tf  Israel,  I.  Isbabl  IB  thb  bebtamt  of 
Jehovah.  There  can  be  no  higher  title  of  honour,  privilege,  affection,  than  son. 
Though  the  designation  reminds  us  of  the  infinite  distance  between  God  and  man,  in 
another  way  it  reminds  us  of  his  nearness.  The  Master  and  Lord  is -here  the  loving  and 
protecting  Patron  and  Friend ;  the  servant,  one  who  reciprocates  his  affection.  They 
are  the  descendants  of  Abraham,  who  "  loved  God."  The  title  "  reminds  the  Jews  that 
they  had  come  very  far  short  of  their  ideal,  but  at  the  same  time  inspires  a  well- 
grounded  hope  that  Abraham's  "  love  "  will  call  forth  the  Divine  mercy  towards  his 
seed." 

II.  The  people  is  chosen  of  God.  And  the  choice  of  God  is  irretractable  (Bom.  ii. 
29).  And  the  election  was  made  manifest  in  a  wondrous  history.  They  had  been 
fetched  from  the  ends  of  the  earth.  The  patriarch  from  Ur  of  the  Chaldees  in  Meso- 
potamia ;  Israel  from  Egypt.  And  what  are  the  consequences  of  this  Divine  choice  ? 
All  that  is  most  dear  and  precious  in  the  relation  of  marriage  or  in  that  of  friandship 
maybe  called  to  mind.  The  nation  is  wedded  to  an  all-powerfiil  Husband, is  linked  to 
a  faithful  Protector  and  Friend.  Then  she  may  enjoy  fearless  freedom  from  fear ;  the 
just  hand  will  uphold  her.  And  all  her  enemies  will  be  thrown  into  shame  and  con- 
fusion ;  those  that  strove  with  her  be  brought  to  nought.  Held  fast  in  the  right  hand 
of  God,  Israel  may  ever  hear  the  assuring  word,  "  Fear  not ;  I  do  help  thee."  He  is 
One  "  who  gives  salvation  to  kings ; "  with  one  hand  giving  the  Law,  with  the  other 
defending  the  obedient.  Omniscience  watches  over  the  chosen,  and  omnipotence  sup- 
ports them.  Among  other  "  gifts  and  graces  "  let  us  recognize  courage  and  resolutum. 
Timidity,  faint-hearted ness,  is  a  universal  weakness,  and  the  higher  or  sacred  courage 
one  of  the  rarest  possessions  of  the  soul.  Perhaps,  next  to  wisdom,  it  is  Heaven's  greatest 
gift.  It  "  gives  and  obt.nns  kingdoms,  turns  swords  into  sceptres,  crowns  the  valiant 
with  victory,  and  the  victorious  often  with  a  diadem."  Presence  of  mind :  what  can 
impart  it  like  the  feeling  that  God  is  ever  with  us,  that  our  feeble  hand  is  enclosed  in 
his?  "It  is  a  kind  of  ecstasy  and  inspiration,  a  beam  of  Divine  light  darting  in  upon 
reason,  and  exalting  it  to  a  pitch  of  operation  beyond  its  natural  and  accustomed 
measures.  Perhaps  there  was  never  any  person  in  the  world  remarkably  and  heroically 
great,  without  some  such  kind  of  enthusiasm — a  mighty  principle  which  at  certain  times 
raised  him  up  to  strange,  unaccountable  heights  of  wisdom  and  courage.  He  who  in 
the  strength  of  such  a  spirit  can  look  the  most  menacing  dangers  in  the  face,  and,  when 
the  state  of  all  things  about  him  seems  desperate,  can  yet  bear  his  great  heart  above 
despair — such  a  one  for  the  most  part  makes  fortune  itself  bend  and  fall  down  to  him, 
difficulties  vanish,  and  dangers  fly  before  him ;  so  much  is  victoiy  the  claim  of  the 
valiant,  and  success  the  birthright  of  the  bold." — J. 

Vers.  14 — 16. — Weakness  made  strong.  "A  fine  touch  is  lost  in  the  English  here 
la  the  Hebraw,  Israel  Is  addnssed  in  the  feminine  gender,  as  a  weak  and  suffering  woman. 
It  is  not  80  in  the  preceding  verses,  and  in  ver.  16  the  prophet  significantly  reverts  t« 
the  mascolin*  "  (Cheyne). 


104  THE  BOOK  OF  THE  PROPHET  ISAIAH.      [oh.  xu.  1—29 

L  HuMiLiTT  THE  CONDITION  OF  8TBEKOTH.  Jaoob  IS  a  worm,  Israel  a  "  petty  folk." 
ITiis  was,  we  know,  a  clear  historic  fact.  It  was  not  by  armies  or  by  navies,  by 
numerous  fortresses  and  serried  ranks,  and  an  impregnable  land,  that  she  was  strong. 
She  was  "  diminutive  Israel,"  as  the  LXX.  render.  At  this  moment  she  might  well  be 
thought  of  as  a  poor,  trembling,  defenceless  woman.  In  that  one  simple  oracle,  "  I  will 
help  thee,  saith  Jehovah,"  realized,  lay  her  might ;  and  all  possible  might  was  there.  It 
is  not  in  human  nature  to  depend  where  it  can  stand  alone.  It  is  when  we  feel  "  what 
worthless  worms  are  we,"  that  the  contrast  of  God's  almightiiiess  comes  upon  us,  and 
the  sense  that  we  may  connect  ourselves  with  it.  Thrown  upon  our  own  resources, 
and  finding  them  at  an  end,  we  "  catch  at  Gorl's  skirts,  and  pray."  Then  it  is  no  longer 
we,  but  our  enemies,  who  fear.  We  cannot  have  too  low  an  opinion  of  ourselves,  nor 
too  high  an  opinion  of  God.  He  is  here  described  as  the  Ooel,  the  Defender  of  the 
right,  the  Avenger  of  the  wrongs  of  his  people.  He  is  the  redeeming  God  (ch.  xlviL 
3,  4;  Jer.  1.  33,  34).  The  verbal  root  means  to  ransom  by  the  payment  of  a  price,  and 
to  deliver  firom  danger,  distre>s,  captivity. 

II.  Weakness  made  strong.  This  petty  nation  shall  become  a  power  against  which 
nothing  can  stand.  Israel  becomes  as  a  threshing-roller,  sharp,  new,  and  double-edged, 
which  shall  crush  the  mountains,  and  make  the  hills  as  chaff;  he  shall  winnow  the 
nations,  and  they  shall  be  scattered.  With  the  two-edged  sword  in  their  hand,  they  will 
execute  vengeance  on  the  heathen,  and  punishments  on  the  people,  binding  their  kings 
with  chains,  and  their  nobles  with  fetters  of  iron  (Ps.  cslix.).  Perhaps  the  allusion  is  to 
the  Maecabean  period,  and  to  the  glorious  wars  of  the  Jews  under  the  priests  Simon  and 
Hyrcanus,  against  the  kings  of  Syria.  The  oracle  which  begins  by  touching  the  chord 
of  humility  ends  with  the  note  of  boasting:  "  Thou  shalt  exult  in  Jehovah,  and  iu 
Israel's  Holy  One  shalt  make  thy  boast."  Thus  the  spirit  of  the  true  Israel  is  the  spirit 
of  true  religion,  the  spirit  of  Christ  exemplified  in  St.  Fbul :  "  I  will  glory  in  infirmities, 
that  the  power  of  Ohrist  may  rest  upon  me." — J. 

Vers.  17 — 29. — The  dainu  of  Jehovah.  The  thought  seems  to  resume  the  thread 
broken  off  at  the  beginning  of  the  chapter.  Jehovah  appeals  to  what  he  has  done  and 
to  what  he  is. 

I.  His  merciful  OEAUNas  with  his  people.  The  scene  and  state  of  exile  is  brought 
before  us.  They  are  dwelling  in  the  "  tents  of  Kedar."  They  are  in  the  midst  of  a 
flourishing  commercial  empire ;  yet  it  is  to  them  as  a  desert  where  no  water  is  (cf.  Ps. 
Ixiii.  1).  The  true  desert  is  the  soul  without  the  sense  of  God's  presence.  But  God  is 
not  limited  by  place ;  and  why,  in  lands  of  exile,  should  not  the  spiritual  be  as  near  as  at 
home  ?  The  mind  is  its  own  place,  and  can  be  made  happy  if  it  only  possesses  God. 
This  highest  happiness  is  figured  as  abundance  of  streams  among  the  bare  hills  and  the 
highland  plains.  In  the  Orient,  water  is  synonymous  with  relief  from  intense  suffering, 
deliverance  from  death — in  a  word,  with  gladness,  salvation,  life  itself;  and  the  tight 
of  lovely  Paradises  as  they  were  called,  t.e.  parks  of  trees — the  stately  cedar,  and  the 
brilliant  plane  and  others.  Such  scenery  enters  into  pictures  of  the  Greek  Elysium, 
and  probably  of  the  happiness  of  the  future  life  among  other  nations,  and  doubtless  with 
a  correspondence  to  the  truth.  Trees  and  living  water :  what  more  beautifiil  parable 
can  Nature  offer  of  the  eternal  energy  of  the  living  God  ?  what  better  hint  of  the  future 
state  reserved  for  his  chosen?  The  design  of  all  these  merciful  and  wonderful  deliver- 
ances is  that  Jehovah's  nature  may  be  unveiled,  and  that  the  nations  may  contemplate 
it  with  reverence  and  joy — "  that  they  may  at  once  see,  and  acknowledge,  and  consider, 
and  understand,  that  Jehovah's  hand  hath  performed  this,  and  Israel's  Holy  One  hath 
created  it." 

II.  Jehovah's  ohallenoe.  Let  the  gods  of  the  heathen  bring  forward  their  cause , 
let  them  point  out  the  bulwarks  of  argument  behind  which  they  entrench  themselves. 
The  "  King  of  Jacob  "  calls  these  daemonic  patrons  and  kings  of  other  peoples  to  con- 
front him.  Have  they  insight  into  the  future?  Can  they  predict  the  coming  event? 
Can  they  "  declare  the  roots  of  the  future  in  the  past,  or  give  a  direct  forecast  of  the 
future?  God  alone  can  reveal  the  secrets  of  the  past.  If  the  idols  can  do  this,  they  are 
Jehovah's  equals,  and  may  be  trusted  for  their  ability  to  predict  the  future  "  (according 
to  some,  this  it  the  meaning).  Or  let  them  do  some  signal  deed,  whether  of  good  m 
evil,  and  prove  at  least  that  they  are  alive.    Some  VKmkr  should  be  performed,  at  whiA 


CH.XU.  1— 29.]      THE  BOOK  OP  THE  PROPHET  ISAIAH.  105 


mwkind  msy  gaze,  and  hj  which  they  may  be  convinced.  But  judgment  must  go  by 
default.  The  gods  "  can  show  no  prophecies,  cannot  so  much  as  speak,  are  dumb,  not 
gods  (Hab.  ii.  IS)."  And  they  must  be  known  for  what  they  are — "  nothing  in  the 
world." 

III.  SmiHABT  OF  ETIDBNOE.  Jehovah  raised  up  Cyrus.  When  called  from  the 
north,  he  came ;  and  from  the  east,  he  shall  proclaim  Jehovah's  Name,  and  diffuse  his 
worship.  Some  see  (combining  this  oracle  with  that  in  ch.  Ixv.  3 — 7)  the  announcement 
of  a  spiritual  change  in  Cyrus.  He  is  made  to  say  that  Jehovah  gave  him  all  the  king- 
doms of  the  earth,  and  charged  him  to  build  a  house  at  Jerusalem  (Ezra  i.  2).  He  may 
have  come  to  believe  in  the  God  of  the  Jews,  and  so  to  be  their  brother.  The  Persians 
were  monotheists,  and  held  a  missionary  religion.  And  the  Jews  may  have  recognized 
such  a  religion  as  that  of  Jehovah  (cf.  Mai.  i.  11 ;  Acts  x.  35 ;  xvii.  23).  And  project- 
ing themselves  to  the  time  of  the  fulfilment  of  the  prediction,  Jehovah  and  his  wor- 
shippers point  to  it  as  evidence  of  the  truth  of  the  religion.  And  while  Jehovah 
announces  the  good  new*  of  his  return  to  Zion,  that  is,  of  Israel's  redemption,  the  idolfl 
are  dumb.  Hiey  have  no  help,  no  counsel,  to  give ;  for  they  are  vanity,  nothingness, 
wind  and  chaos.  Compare  with  this  nothingness  the  sentences  of  Jehovah  in  ch.  x. 
12 ;  Jer.  xxv.  12.  Such  is  the  conclusion  of  the  trial.  The  idols  are  utterly  destitute 
of  strength  to  aid  their  friends  or  distress  their  foes.  Jehovah  alone  is  worthy  of  con- 
fidence and  regard,  as  the  true  Gh>d,  Protector,  and  Guide.  In  times  of  deepest  distress 
he  can  raise  up  a  deliverer  like  Cynu,  and  in  his  own  way  and  time  rescue  his  people 
from  all  their  calamities. — J. 

Ver.  6. — Mutual  help.  "They  helped  every  one  his  neighbour;  and  every  one  said 
to  his  brother,  Be  of  good  courage."  The  subject  is — Helpfulness.  Not  mere  help,  but 
fulness  of  help.  There  may  be  a  help  that  is  tardy,  that  is  somewhat  sparse  and 
niggardly ;  and  there  may  be  help  which  is  not  helpful  in  the  best  sense.  1'his  help  to 
which  our  text  refers  was  accompanied  by  encouragement — that  truest  and  wisest  of  all 
help,  which,  by  giving  courage,  gives  strength.  Buildings  cannot  be  built  by  an  archi- 
tect alone.  The  inferior  hand  is  as  needful  as  the  superior.  Read  the  description :  "  So 
the  carpenter  encouraged  the  goldsmith,  and  he  that  smootheth  with  the  hammer  him 
that  smote  the  anvil,  saying.  It  is  ready  for  the  soldering."  Each  man  in  his  place,  and 
fit  for  his  pkce.  So  it  must  be  in  human  life ;  and,  as  civilization  develops,  each  man 
must  attend  more  and  more  upon  one  thing.  It  will  not  do  to  play  at  art,  or  archi- 
tecture, or  merchandise,  or  ministry.  Each  in  his  place.  So  it  must  be  in  the  Church.— 
there  must  be  mutual  help,  mutual  encouragement.  We  ought  to  feel  indebted  to  each 
other.     We  ought  to  be  inspirational  to  each  other. 

i.  Help  is  to  be  universal.  They  helped  "  every  one."  It  will  not  do  to  evade 
our  own  share  of  toil.  Work  cannot  be  done  by  command  or  contrivance,  but  by  the 
constraint  of  a  ready  mind.  Socialism  seems  to  be  disturbing  the  Continent.  It  may 
be  a  destructive  power,  but  never  can  be  a  constructive  one.  If  human  beings  were 
machines  to  be  set  in  order  by  one  hand,  it  might  be  so ;  but  they  are  not.  See  how 
Proudhon  and  Fourier  adjust  all  the  social  arrangements  to  a  nicety ;  the  Phalange,  or 
the  body  of  associated  labourers ;  the  Phalanstere,  or  the  habitation  assigned  to  each, 
where  the  four  great  departments  of  nature — the  material,  the  organic,  the  animal,  and 
the  social — are  provided  for.  What  a  scheme  !  How  philosophic  it  looks — on  paper ! 
But  what  madness  to  try  and  make  it  work,  when  the  deiangement  of  one  part  would 
be  the  derangement  of  the  complicated  whole !  Who  is  to  restrain  the  leaders  and 
organizers  from  craft  and  selfishness  and  guile  ?  Difficult  as  it  is  to  secure  good  govern- 
ment in  general  functions  in  society,  who  could  secure  it  in  a  ramified  system?  Then 
one  will  not  work,  and  another  will  drink,  and  another  will  laugh,  and  another  will 
sleep,  and  in  one  brief  day  some  will  be  better  off  than  others,  and  the  perfect  arrange- 
ments will  fly  to  piece*  before  the  touchstone  of  actual  life.  No;  God  meant  diversity. 
God  meant  diligence  to  be  rewarded.  Riches  and  honour  come  of  the  Lord,  and  if  there 
were  no  incentives  to  progress  and  culture  and  invention,  there  would  be  no  advancing 
Mvilization.  Socialism  cannot  make  men  work;  it  would  want  an  armt/  to  compel 
them.  The  right  way  is  Christ's  way.  Look  every  man  also  on  the  things  of  another. 
Use  ability,  genius,  education,  wealth,  honour,  well,  so  as  to  bless  others.  None  are 
more  despicable  than  those  who  look  alone  to  Jesray  helped.     Everything  must  be  ready 


106  THE  BOOK  OP  THE  PROPHET  ISAIAH.  .   [ch.  xli.  1—29 

for  them.  The  way  they  speak  to  servants  is  detestable.  They  complain  If  fhi 
physician  does  not  come  at  once — if  they  are  not  the^s*  considered  by  others.  Don't 
tbeypay?  Terrible  neglect;  <Ae^  are  not  helped.  Money  does  not  satisfy  their  indebted- 
ness. Let  us  see  whom  Me^  help — if  they  are  swift  to  speak  the  generous  word,  to  perform 
the  brave  and  noble  deed.  There  are,  however,  some  lives — and  they  must  be  dread 
histories — which  are  spent'  in  fashionable  gossip  and  superficial  pleasure-seeking,  vrith 
no  cat  e  for  otbers.  We  see,  then,  (1)  there  must  be  mutuality ;  (2)  there  must  be  energy. 
Not  the  help  which  is  mere  gifr,  perhaps  easy  and  costless,  but  the  help  which  costs 
service  and  sacrifice. 

II.  Help  is  to  begin  at  the  neabest  point.  "  His  neighbour  " — ^the  nearest  person 
to  him.  The  gospel  teaching  is  to  hegin  at  Jerusalem.  Home,  fw  instance,  is  to  be  a 
scene  of  help.  There  are  occasions  every  day  in  which  we  can  help  each  other's  comfort, 
growth,  education,  freedom  from  anxiety,  and  increase  in  the  pleasure  of  life  as  life. 
A  man's  character  is  judged  of  in  his  home,  his  Church,  his  village,  his  town,  his  neigh- 
bourhood.   The  eloquent  assailer  of  public  wrongs  may  be  other  than  a  patriot  at  home. 

1.  This  is  the  help  which  only  he  cam  render ;  being  the  neighbour,  he  is  the  nearest. 

2.  This  does  not  bind  him  by  religious  "views"  or  party  spirit.  He  is  to  help  in 
the  great  temple  of  humanity  as  well  as  the  temple  of  the  Lord  Q-od.  "  Behold,  the 
tabernacle  of  God  is  with  men,  and  he  will  dwell  with  them."  There  are  charities,  I 
find,  which,  not  content  with  being  Christian,  wish  to  know  what  people's  "  views " 
are  I  What  an  atmosphere !  No.  Christ  did  not  ask  who  were  Samaritans,  Syro- 
phoenicians,  Greeks,  or  Jews.     "  He  wont  about  doing  good." 

III.  Help  is  to  be  wspibational.  That  is  to  say,  it  is  not  to  asiitt  laziness  or  to 
excuse  mere  incompetence.  "Every  one  said  to  his  brother.  Be  of  good  courage." 
1.  Courage ;  /or  fear  is  weakness.  Those  who  expect  failure  court  failure.  I  am 
wonderstruck  at  Stanley's  courage  at  the  Falls,  especially  after  Pocock  was  dead.  It 
is  marvelloui  I  Think  of  that  poor  native  who  rushed  from  the  presence  of  the  dreadful 
roaring  river  into  the  wilderness.  2.  Courage ;  far  God  isyour  Helper.  Man  is  weak ! 
Yes ;  but  read  the  tenth  verse :  "  Fear  thou  not ;  for  I  am  with  thee :  be  not  dismayed ; 
for  I  »m  thy  God :  I  will  strengthen  thee ;  yea,  I  will  help  thee."  That  is  an  inspira- 
tion indeed — QkA  in  Christ  working  in  us  and  with  us.  He  who  gave  himself /or  us, 
now  working  tn  and  with  us.  What  courage  this  inspires  1  "la  me  is  thine  help 
found."  "Woe  to  them  that  go  down  to  Egypt  for  help!"  We  shall  find  all  worldli- 
nesi  to  be  weakness  in  the  end.  3.  Courage ;  for  no  work  is  so  ha/rd  as  it  looks.  There 
»re  creative  times.  What  is  the  dreamer  worth  when  difficult  duties  have  to  be 
done  ?  4.  Courage ;  for  cowards  make  cowa/rds.  Live  with  persons  constantly  a&aid 
of  fire,  of  midnight  marauders,  of  infection,  of  disease,  and  you  will  become  nervous 
yourself.  If  children  grow  up  amid  the  timorous,  they  become  timorous.  But  bom  in 
the  fishing-cove  on  the  beach,  how  they  pull  out  the  boat  into  the  wild  sea  I  accustomed 
to  scenes  of  courage,  they  learn  courage.  Never  dispirit  others.  Say  not,  "  This  sum 
will  never  be  raised.  These  schools  can  never  be  built.  This  class  will  never  prosper." 
But  say  rather,  "  Be  of  good  courage."  6.  Courage ;  for  hindrances  wiU  flee  before 
faitk.  Say  to  the  mountain,  "  Be  thou  cmst  into  the  sea."  Strange  that  it  should  obey 
thee  I  But  it  does,  for  it  was  a  mountain  of  the  mind.  Courage  is  not  quixotic ;  it  is 
founded  on  faith^n  the  Word,  and  cross,  and  throne  of  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ.  Mutiuil 
help  is  what  we  want.  Not  the  sentimental  grievance  from  some  that  they  are  not 
the  subjects  of  perennial  attention  and  ever-delicate  consideration,  but  the  help  which 
is  the  spirit  of  all  Christian  life,  because  it  was  the  law  of  his  life  "  who  came,  not  to 
be  ministered  unto,  but  to  miuister." — W.  M.  S. 

Ver.  18. — Water  in  the  wilderness.  "  I  will  make  the  wilderness  a  pool  of  water,  and 
the  dry  land  springs  of  water."  Theplaee  of  the  fountain  is  the  key-note  of  this  sermoh. 
We  are  not  surprised  to  find  a  fountain  in  the  grove  or  the  garden — there,  amidst  its 
diamond  spray  the  birds  brighten  their  plumage.  But  here  the  caravan  halts,  whilst 
men  and  women  fall  on  their  breasts  and  drink  in  the  living  nectar — ^the  sweet  water 
that  never  harms.  We  have  to  meditate  upon  this  subject,  however,  in  its  highest 
••pecta.  We  see  not  all  of  life.  In  nature  we  come  upon  unexpected  spots  of  verdure 
in  sterile  places ;  in  human  life  we  come  upon  a  true  friend  in  the  thorny  experiences 
of  adversity.    Best  of  all  we  have  hero— in  this  world,  wlui^  in  so  many  aspects  is  a 


jtt.MJ.1— 29.]      THE  BOOK  OF  THE   PROPHET  ISAIAH.  107 

wilderness — One  who  gives  us  the  testimony  coDceming  himself,  that  he  will  be  in  us 
"»  well  of  water  springing  up  into  everlasting  life."    We  have — 

L  Springs  ik  the  dby  land  of  sin.  What  depth  of  meaning  there  is  in  the 
promise,  "  The  Seed  of  the  woman  shall  bruise  the  serpent's  head  "  1  All  seemed  lost ; 
and  yet  at  his  very  feet  theie  sprang  up  for  man  "  a  fountain  opened  for  sin  and  unclean- 
ness."  This  is  God's  revelation  fulfilled  in  Jesus  Christ.  Often  revelations  are  left  to 
human  discovery.  There  have  been  hidden  beauties  in  the  universe — unknown  con- 
tinents which  man  must  search  out  and  explore.  Theie  are  hidden  adaptations  in 
nature  to  the  need  of  man,  which  will  reward  his  enterprise — medicami'nts  for  disease, 
ministrants  of  alleviation.  And  there  are  yet  "  hidden  fountains,"  which  the  discovering 
hand  of  man  will  lay  bare  in  the  wilderness.  But  sin  must  be  met  by  grace  at  once, 
that  man  may  be  saved — that  the  child  may  yet  say,  "  Father." 

II.  SPRiKas  IN  THE  DBT  LAND  OF  BOEuow.  Hagar  flies.  Not  the  first,  nor  the 
last,  that  the  east  wind  of  bitter  hatred  has  driven  from  the  protecting  doors.  The 
newspapers  record  crime.  We  shudder.  But  blows  at  the  heart,  deeds  never  reported, 
never  known,  borne  in  the  silence  of  suffering,  are  often  the  worst.  1.  In  solitude 
Beyar  finds  an  angel.  In  earliest  times  they  were  ministering  spirits,  and  we  are  dis- 
tinctly told  that  they  not  only  were,  but  are.  We  lose  much  comfort  from  forgetting 
that  they  are  ministers  to  us  1  How?  That  is  what  the  inquisitive  mind  is  always 
asking. '  It  is  the  "  how  ?  "  which  makes  such  piles  on  piles  of  useless  divinity.  The 
Word  of  God  is  inspired  !  How  ?  The  atonement  is  made !  How  ?  The  dead  shall 
arise!  How?  2.  In  want  she  finds  refreshment.  Weary  and  worn  and  sad,  GK)d 
does  not  allow  her  to  lack  refreshment.  Sarah  dealt  hardly  with  her,  and  she  fled  from 
her  face.  But  another  face  was  looking  down  upon  her.  How  kind  and  considerate 
ought  those  to  be  who  have  others  under  theml  Often  far  away  from  home  and  friends, 
there  should  ever  be  in  our  relationships  all  that  we  mean  by  kind  consideration.  3. 
In  misery  she  found  peace.  The  mind  filled  with  tumultuous  thoughts  was  calmed  1 
The  angel  tells  her  that  "  the  Lord  hath  heard  her  affliction."  What  a  sermon  in  a 
sentence!  Teach  and  preach  this,  brethren.  Ko  eloquent  words!  No  explanatory 
sentences  1  Sorrow  itse^  has  a  voice,  and  God  hears  that.  What  rest  comes  to  the 
heart  that  feels  God  has  seen  and  knows  all  I  "  She  called  the  Name  of  the  Lord  that 
spake  unto  her.  Thou  God  seest  me ;  for  she  said.  Have  I  also  here  looked  after  him 
that  seeth  me?  Wherefore  the  well  was  called  Beer-laha-roi ; "  that  is,  "  the  well  of 
him  that  liveth  and  seeth  me." 

III.  Sfbings  in  the  dry  land  of  bolitudb.  What  shall  I  do?  Where  shall  1 
go?  Am  I  to  leave  home ?  Am  I  to  enter  a  wilderness  that  I  knew  not  ?  Yes;  go 
anywhere,  everywhere ;  but  rememler  God  is  there.     "  Whither  shall  I  go  from  thy 

Eresence  ?  "  What  will  to-morrow  bring  ?  A  Father.  Whence  will  come  my  supply  ? 
>o  not  know — ^the  fountain  is  hidden.  But  it  is  there.  What  is  needful  for  me  to  do 
is  to  drink  and  live — to  taste  the  living  waters.  Many  analyze  them — admit  their 
purity, but  do  not  drink!  Our  solicitudes  are  natural.  Especially  so  when  life  is,  like 
Hagar's,  dependent  on  others.  Some  here  may  be  driven  out  into  the  wilderness  at  any 
time.  True ;  but  Christ  is  there !  You  will,  perhaps,  never  know  how  precious  this 
fountain  is  tUl  you  are  away  from  the  old  home. 

rV.  Springs  in  the  dry  land  of  separation.  Alas  1  other  fountains  dry  up.  That 
la  to  say,  they  are  sealed  to  us /or  a  time.  But  in  the  hours  of  bereavement  and  deso- 
lation I  call  on  you  to  witness :  1.  What  hidden  fountains  there  are  in  the  Bible.  How 
its  histories  live  when  we  read  our  own  experiences  into  them !  How  its  psalms  pulse 
with  life  when  we  too  are  panting  after  the  water-brooks !  2.  What  hidden  revelations 
in  Christ.  We  know  him  as  a  Saviour.  But  how  little  we  know  yet !  "  In  him  are  hid 
all  the  treasures  of  wisdom  and  knowledge."  We  "  grow  in  grace  and  in  the  knowledge 
of  OUT  Lord  Jesus  Christ."  Some  persons  we  need  to  know  less  of  to  preserve  our  respect 
luid  love.  Jesus  our  Lord  is  infinite  in  all  beauty,  purity,  and  glory  ;  and  the  more  we 
know  of  him  the  more  intense  will  be  our  devotion,  the  more  complete  our  trust,  the 
more  fervent  our  love.  Let  the  hidden  fountains  be  not  only  rejoiced  in  by  us,  but  let 
our  voice  be  heard,  "  Ho,  every  one  that  thirsteth,  come  ye  to  the  waters ! "  We  think 
little  of  water  tUl  we  are  feverish  with  thirst  on  shipboard  or  in  an  Eastern  wilderness. 
Some  of  you  perchance  may  have  known  what  thirst  iR,  and  how  much  less  precious 
if  the  jewelled  cup  than  the  water  it  contains.     Yet  from  the  beginning  God  has  sent 


108  THE  BOOK   OF  THE  PROPHET  ISAIAH,      [oh.  xu,  1—29. 


the  rivers  through  the  deserts  one  day  to  be  peopled,  and  the  springs  as  st  Damascus 
run  through  the  valleys.  Every  nation  under  heaven  can  bless  (jod  for  the  rain  from 
heaven  and  for  the  water-springs !  Soon  may  all  tribes  and  peoples  surround  "  the 
fountain."  We  drink  of  earthly  fountains,  and  thirst  again.  But  whoso  drinketh  of 
the  water  which  Christ  will  give  them  shall  never  thirst  again.  Witliin,  in  the  wilder- 
ness of  these  poor  hearts,  he  strikes  the  fountain  that  is  to  lift  up  its  pure  springs 
through  the  immortal  ages. — W.  M.  S. 

Vers.  1 — 7. — The  false  refuge  and  th»  true.  In  the  regulation  of  his  life,  a  wise  mu 
will  give  a  large  place  to  the  consideration  of  what  resources  he  will  have  in  the  times 
of  great  emergency.  For  he  knows  that  such  times  must  come  to  him  as  they  come  to 
•11  men,  and  when  they  come  there  is  urgent  and  even  terrible  need  of  a  refuge  to 
which  the  stricken  soul  may  flee.     We  are  here  reminded  of — 

I.  The  befcoe  which  is  false,  and  which  will  fail  ds.  (Vers.  6 — 7.)  We  smilp 
with  pity,  perhaps  even  a  contemptuous  pity,  as  we  read  of  the  carpenter  and  the  smith 
joining  their  labour  in  order  to  produce  the  well-made  idol,  before  which  the  offerings 
shall  be  presented,  etc.  But  may  it  not  be  that  those  who  watch  us  from  above,  and 
who  are  so  much  wiser  than  we,  sometimes  sigh,  not  contemptuously  but  sadly,  as  they 
see  us  putting  our  trust  and  finding  our  refuge  in  that  which  is  little  better  than  the 
carefully  manufactured  image  ?  When  trouble  has  come,  or  when  dangers  thicken,  when 
the  heart  is  agitated  or  concerned,  then  the  foolish  sometimes  resort  to  their  idols — to 
those  things  which  are  nearly  as  impotent  and  as  untrustworthy  as  these.  1.  To  the 
stimulant  or  the  drug.  2,  To  the  social  excitement  or  the  stress  of  business  engagement. 
3.  To  the  comfort  of  human  affection.  But  these  are  wholly  unsatisfactory,  because :  1. 
They  are  not  on  a  level  with  the  lieight  of  our  spiritual  nature ;  they  are  not  worthy  of 
us  who  are  created  in  the  image  of  God,  and  who  are  bound  to  find,  in  our  sorrows  and 
our  straits,  a  resource  which  answers  to  the  spiritual  powers  we  have  received  of  him. 
2.  They  are  transient  in  their  influence ;  they  gradually  become  less  efficacious,  and  at 
last  lose  all  power  to  soothe  and  to  sustain.  3.  They  themselves  are  temporary;  at  any 
moment  they  may  be  removed  from  our  sight  and  grasp. 

II.  The  EEFuaE  which  is  true,  and  on  which  wb  may  confidently  eely.  (Vers. 
2 — 4-.)  It  is  none  other  than  the  living  God  himself.  "  In  the  time  of  trouble  he  will 
hide  us  in  his  pavilion."  There  are  three  strong  assurances  of  Divine  succour.  1. 
Particular  instances  of  Divine  interposition.  (Vers.  2,  3.)  The  God  who  raised  up 
Cyrus,  who  constrained  him  to  answer  his  own  Divine  ends,  who  empowered  him  to 
do  such  great  things,  and  to  triumph  over  such  serious  obstacles,  is  One  who  evidently 
gives  heed  to  individual  souls,  and  who  both  can  and  will  select  the  very  instruments 
which  are  needed  to  work  out  the  redemption  for  which  we  are  waiting  and  hoping. 
He  who  similarly  raised  up  I^uther,  Zwingle,  Calvin,  Tyndale,  Knox,  etc.,  to  take  their 
place  and  do  their  work  when  such  men  as  they  were  wanted,  will  not  fail  us  in  our 
emergency  now.  2.  His  government  of  the  whole  human  race.  "  Who  hath  wrought 
and  done  it,  calling  the  generations  from  the  beginning?"  All  human  history  attests 
the  presence,  the  power,  the  righteousness,  the  providence,  of  the  Lord.  3.  His  Divine 
nature.  "  I  the  Lord,  the  First,  and  with  the  last,  I  am  he."  In  God,  our  Father  and 
our  Saviour,  we  have  (1)  One  who,  whatever  passes,  will  be  always  with  us  (Matt, 
xxviii.  20) ;  and  (2)  One  who,  whaterer  changes,  remains  constantly  the  same  (Jas.  i. 
17 ;  John  xiiL  1 ;  Heb.  xiii.  8). — C. 

Vers.  8,  9. — Sis  grace  and  our  heritage.  We  are  reminded  here  of— 
I.  The  sense  m  which  God  has  chosen  us.  "Jacob,  whom  I  have  chosen  .  .  . 
I  have  chosen  thee."  The  way  in  which  God's  ancient  people  were  chosen  of  Gbd  is 
familiar  biblical  history.  Abraham  was  called  out  of  Chaldea,  Israel  (the  people)  out 
of  Egypt,  the  Jews  out  of  Babylonia,  in  order  that  they  might  receive,  retain,  and 
reflect  the  truth  of  the  living  God ;  in  other  words,  this  nation  was  the  recipient  bi 
those  distinguishing  mercies  which  could  alone  account  for  their  national  redemption 
and  their  spiritual  condition.  We  are  now  the  subjects  of  God's  electing,  his  dis- 
tinguishing grace  in  these  respects ; — ^in  ways  which  are  not  common  to  the  whole  of 
our  race,  perhaps  not  even  to  the  generality  of  our  fellow-men,  we  have  been  (1) 
Bcquainted  with  his  redeeming  truth,  made  to  know  in/^  to  understand  i^  iw  it«  purity 


0H.ZU.1— 3*.]      THE   BOOK  OF  THE  PROPHET  ISAIAH.  lOJ 

and  fulness;  (2)  wrought  upon  by  kindly,  helpful,  winning  inSuences,  in  the  home  or 
in  the  Ohurch ;  (3)  affected  by  the  direct  and  immediate  influences  of  his  Divine 
Spirit.    Thus  has  God  chosen  and  called  us  to  himself. 

II.  The  iiirE  to  which  wb  hate  been  called.  A  life  of  holy  service.  "  Thou, 
Israel,  art  my  servant."  We  are  not  called  merely  to  enjoyment  or  to  privilege ;  we 
are  summoned  to  God's  presence  and  kingdom — "called  to  his  foot "  (ver.  2),  m  ordtr 
that  we  may  serve.  Our  Christian  life  is  that  most  honourable,  most  elevating,  most 
useful,  one  of  service.  It  is  the  life  (1)  of  sacred  worship ;  (2)  of  cheerful  obedience ; 
(3)  of  active  helpfulness. 

m.  The  intiuatb  and  honoubable  relationship  in  which  wb  abe  invited  to 
STAND.  "  The  seed  of  Abraham  my  friend."  Behold,  what  manner  of  love  and  of 
condescension  is  this,  that  we  should  be  called  the  friends  of  God !  All  that  Abraham 
was  to  Gx)d  it  is  certain  that  we  may  be, — ^we  who  are  brought  nigh  by  Jesas  Christ. 
And  what  his  disciples  were  to  him,  we  also  are  invited  to  be  (see  John  xv.  14,  15). 
We  are  Grod's  friends,  inasmuch  as :  1.  We  have  a  profound  sympathy  with  him  in  the 
principles  he  holds  and  in  the  work  in  which  he  is  engaged.  2.  We  are  trusted  by  him 
to  do  what  is  right  and  worthy,  and  are  entrusted  by  him  with  that  which  is  high  and 
arduous.  3.  We  are  admitted  to  his  near  presence,  and  are  invited  to  constant  fellofv- 
ship  with  him.    4.  We  are  the  objects  of  his  love  and  his  good  pleasure. — C. 

Vers.  10 — ^14. — Ood  ow  Strength,  Israel  in  captivity,  hoping  for  return  from  exile, 
but  fearing  lest  its  enemies  should  prevail  and  the  desire  of  its  heart  be  defeated,  might 
well  delight  in  such  reassuring  words  as  these.  In  the  battle  and  burden  of  our  life  we 
also  gladly  welcome  them  to  our  hearts. 

I.  Sources  or  DiSQUtBTUDE.  1.  The  strength  of  the  forces  which  are  against  us. 
"  All  they  that  were  incensed  against  thee ; "  "  they  that  strive  with  thee ; "  "  they  that 
war  against  thee."  We  may  say  as  Paul  said,  "  There  are  many  adversaries."  There 
are  the  evil  tendencies  of  our  own  nature  not  yet  extirpated;  there  are  the  vicious, 
the  ungodly,  the  half-hearted  men,  who  act  injuriously  upon  us ;  and  there  are  the 
"  principalities  and  powers  "  of  the  evil  spiritual  world.  2.  The  weight  of  the  hurden  of 
responsibility  laid  upon  us.  We  are  God's  servants,  his  children,  his  spokesmen,  his 
representatives.  He  is  our  God  (ver.  10),  and  we  owe  to  him  the  faithful  discharge  of 
varied  and  weighty  obligations.  3.  Ovr  personal  feebleness.  "  Thou  worm  .Jacob ; " 
"Te  men  [mortals]  of  Israel."  Who  is  sufficient  for  all  these  things  ?  With  our  bodily 
weakness,  our  mental  poverty  and  our  spiritual  failures,  with  the  limitations  of  our 
humanity,  we  look  forward  to  the  work  which  we  have  to  do,  to  the  sufferings  we  shall 
be  called  to  bear,  to  the  battle  we  shall  have  to  figbt,  with  serious  apprehension.  We 
are  inclined  to  give  way  to  "fear,"  to  allow  ourselves  even  to  "be  dismayed." 

IL  OuB  BTAT  IN  Gk»D.  1.  His  sympathizing  presence.  "I  am  with  thee."  The 
presence  of  a  friend  or  of  a  parent  in  the  time  of  trouble  is,  in  itself  and  independently 
of  any  expectation  of  help,  a  reassuring  thought.  That  God  our  Divine  Father,  that 
Christ  our  unfailing  Brother  and  Friend  is  with  us,  is  by  our  side,  with  purest  interest 
and  tender  sympathy  in  his  heart, — this  is  a  strength  and  a  stay  to  our  trembling  hearts. 
2.  Eis  strengthening  aid.  "I  am  thy  God :  I  will  strengthen  thee,"  etc.  God  helps  his 
people  (1)  by  making  their  difficulties  to  disappear,  so  that  "they  that  are  against 
them  are  as  nothing ; "  e.g.  the  drowning  of  the  Egyptian  host,  and  the  slaughter  of  the 
army  of  Sennacherib ;  or,  and  more  often,  (2)  by  imparting  courage  and  strength  to 
overcome  them.  He  "  holds  our  right  hand ; "  he  inspires  us  with  skill  and  energy  to 
act,  with  fortitude  to  endure,  with  patience  to  persist,  with  victorious  strength.  He 
•  always  causeth  us  to  triumph."  3.  His  faithful,  redeeming  word.  When  he  is  not 
actually  interposing  on  our  behalf  we  may  rest  on  his  sure  promise.  He  has  assured 
us  of  our  ultimate  triumph,  not  only  for  ourselves,  but  for  the  cause  of  truth  and 
righteonsness  in  which  we  are  engaged.  On  this  word  we  may  absolutely  build.  (1) 
It  is  a  Divine  word ;  "  he  is  our  God  "  (vers.  10, 13).  (2)  It  is  the  word  of  one  whose 
faithfulness  cannot  fail;  it  comes  firom  him'  whose  hand  is  "the  right  hand  of  his 
righteousness."  (3)  It  is  the  word  of  One  whose  compassion  is  well  proved.  He  is  "  the 
Lord,  our  Eedeemer." — 0. 

Vere.  16, 16. — The  triumph  of  the  truth.    I.  The  MotrNTArworrs  obstacmm  t«a« 


110  THE   BOOK  OF  THE  PROPHET  ISAIAH,      [oh.  xli.  1— 29. 

HAVB  TO  BE  OVERCOME.  These  are  not  kingdoms,  military  forces,  or  fortifications,  but 
tilings  which  are  far  mi<:l>tier  than  they — error,  prejudice,  passion,  pride,  habit  of  life, 
materialism,  self-will.  These  are  high  hills,  massive  mountains  in  the  way  of  the 
world's  welfare. 

II.  The  instrument  by  which  they  abb  to  be  surmounted.  This  is  none  othet 
than  o  living  Church.  "I  will  make  thef,"  etc.  The  Israel  which  is  to  "  thresh  " 
these  mountains  is  "the  Israel  of  God,"  the  Church  of  Jesus  Christ;  not,  indeed,  any 
one  organization  so  called  or  callinc;  itself  by  that  name,  bnt  the  whole  "  host,  ol'  God'a 
elect" — the  unnumbered  multit  de  of  souls  that,  under  every  sky,  accept  his  truth, 
trust  in  his  Name,  love  his  appearing,  toil  in  his  vineyard. 

III.  The  triumph  of  the  truth.  This  is  twofold.  1.  The  disappearance  of  all 
that  is  evil,  the  scattering  of  the  chaff  (ver.  16).     2.  The  exaltation  of  Christ :  "  Thou 

■  slialt  glory  in  the  Holy  One  of  Israel."  In  the  day  of  redemption  men  will  glory  in 
no  one  and  in  nothing  but  in  the  Lord  that  redeemed  them ;  they  will  enthrone  him 
ia  their  hearts  and  in  the  world. 

IV.  The  prize  of  victory.  "  And  thou  shalt  rejoice  in  the  Lord."  The  Church 
will  not  be  filled  with  a  perilous  comilacency ;  it  will  rejoice  in  the  Lord  its  God — 
in  the  honour  in  which  lie  is  universally  held ;  in  the  love  with  which  all  hearts  are 
filled  toward  him ;  in  the  service  which  every  human  life  is  paying  him.  These 
ingredients  will  fill  to  the  biim  its  pure  cup  of  joy. — 0. 

Vers.  17 — 20. — 7%e  pifi/  and  the  purpose  of  Christ  and  his  GhurtA:  a  missionary 
sermon.  With  what  different  eyes  do  we  look  out  on  to  the  world,  and  how  varied  a 
spectacle  it  presents,  according  to  our  views,  our  spirits,  our  aims!  To  the  geographer 
and  discoverer  it  appears  in  one  aspect,  to  the  statesman  and  the  historian  in  another. 
The  artist  sees  it  in  one  light,  the  man  of  science  in  a  different  one.  The  sportsman  and 
pleasure-hunter  has  his  view  of  it,  the  trader  has  his,  etc.  But  from  the  standpoint  of 
the  sanctuary,  and  so  far  as  our  minds  are  filled  with  God's  truth  and  our  hearts  with 
the  love  of  Christ,  we  shall  look  at  the  vast,  outlying  human  world  with  very  different 
eyes.    We  shall  see  before  us — 

I.  A  POOR  AN  D  NBKDY  WOBLD  ATHIRST  FOR  THE  TRUTH  AND  LOVE  OF  GoD.     1.  We  think 

of  those  multitudes  of  our  race,  beneath  every  sky,  of  every  hue,  of  every  clime  and 
tongue,  who  arc  utterly  dissatisfied  with  their  life,  their  creed,  or  their  character; 
the  many  millions  who  are  the  victims  of  human  oppressitm,  of  intolerable  tyranny, 
or  of  heartless  cruelty  (social  or  domestic),  or  abject  slavery;  those  who  are  the  heirs 
of  grinding  poverty,  seeking  for  the  bare  sufficiency  or  the  comfort  or  the  success 
which  they  never  gain,  which  perpetually  eludes  them;  those  who  are  vain  seekers 
after  happiness,  the  voice  of  whose  life  is  this,  "  Who  will  show  us  any  good?"  whose 
experience  is  one  long  sad  heart-ache ;  those  who  are  unsuccessful  inquirers  after  Ood, 
after  truth  and  righteousness,  who  say,  not  in  sarcasm,  but  in  sadness,  "  W  hat  is  truth  7  " 
"  Oh  that  we  knew  where  we  might  find  him  I "  "  What  shall  we  do  that  we  may 
inhtTit  eternal  life?"  and  to  whom  no  answer  comes  from  the  deep  void,  who  have 
to  go  groping  on  in  the  darkness.  These  are  the  poor  and  needy,  seeking  water  and 
there  is  none,  "  whose  tongue  faileth  for  thirst."  2.  We  include  in  our  view  that  other 
multitude  who  lack  the  water  of  life,  but  who  are  not  conscious  of  their  need. 
Did  it  enfeeble  the  argument  for  emancipation  that  so  many  of  the  slaves,  before  their 
liberty  was  given  them,  were  content  to  wear  their  bonds  and  to  be  deprived  of  the 
rights  of  manhood,  the  claims  of  womanhood?  Or  did  it  not,  on  the  other  hand, 
immeasuralily  strengthen  the  case  of  the  emancipators  and  the  cause  of  the  slave? 
And  does  it  relieve  the  situation  that  millions  of  Chinese  are  content  to  live  the  sordid, 
selfish,  godless  lives  ihey  are  living,  and  to  die  the  hopeless  deaths  they  are  dying? 
Does  it  make  less  pitifnl  and  pathetic  the  fact  that  millions  of  our  fellow-subjects  in 
India  are  content  to  bow  down  before  images  their  own  hands  have  carved,  and  to 
worship  gods  and  goddesses  to  honour  whom  is  to  he  dishonoured  and  degraded  in  and 
by  the  very  act  of  devotion  ?  Surely  this  fact  only  multiplies'  the  reasons  for  regret  and 
for  sympathy.  The  very  muteness  of  the  appeal  is  the  most  eloquent  plea  on  their 
behalf. 

II.  The  rrrr  and  the  purpose  or  Chribt  cm  its  behalf.  "  When  the  poor  and 
needy  seek  water,  and  there  is  none,  ...  I  the  Lord  will  hear  Uieot.  ...  I  will  not 


OH.  XLI.  1—29.]      THE  BOOK  OP  THE  PROPHET   ISAIAH.  Ill 

forsake  them.  I  will  open  rivers  ...  I  will  plant  trees,"  etc.  If  this  be  primarily 
applicable  to  the  Israelites  in  captivity  (or  on  their  way  home),  it  must  be  true  of  all 
Gocl's  children.  He  who  pitied  the  thousands  of  bodily  sufferers  will  much  more  pity 
the  millions  of  his  sons  and  daughters  who  are  in  the  last  extremity  of  spiritual  destitu- 
tion. When  Christ  "  saw  the  multitude,"  hungry  and  weary,  he  was  "  moved  with 
compassion"  for  them.  With  what  profounder  pity  and  intenser  feeling  does  he  look 
down  on  these  far  greater  multitudes,  who  are  pining  and  perishing  in  the  famine  of 
the  soul  r  And  then  does  the  Church  of  Christ  enter  into  his  spirit  and  rise  toward  his 
stature  when  it  also  is  stirred  to  strong,  deep  sympathy  with  these  poor  and  needy 
ones,  hungering  and  athirst  for  the  truth  and  love  of  God.  And  as  Christ's  purpose 
answered  to  his  pity,  and  he  came,  by  the  sacrifice  of  himself,  to  put  away  our  sin  and 
to  take  away  our  sorrow,  so  must  ours  also.  Pity  must  end  in  provision,  in  causing  the 
rivers  to  flow  and  the  fountains  to  spring  and  the  trees  to  bear  their  fruit.  Such  sources 
and  springs  of  health  and  life  are  our  mission  Churches.  Heathenism  is  a  desert  place, 
a  wild  wastp,  where  there  is  no  provision  for  human  need.  But  our  Christian  Churches, 
planted  in  the  midst  of  the  ignorant  and  idoktrous,  are  rivers  in  the  high  places, 
fountains  in  the  valleys,  trees  in  the  desert ;  there  is  bread  for  the  hungering,  water  for 
those  who  are  perishing  with  thirst,  life  for  dying  souls. — 0. 

Vers.  21 — 29. — A  true  U»t  of  Divinity.  When  these  words  were  written  the  question 
to  be  solved  was — ^Which  god,  of  all  the  rival  deities,  is  worthy  of  human  trust  and 
worship  ?  Tlie  question  now  is — ^What  is  the  authority  to  which  we  shall  submit  our 
judgment  and  in  which  we  shall  rest? — ^is  it  human  nature,  or  is  it  the  forces  of  the 
material  world,  or  is  it  the  Lord  God  ?  The  verses  before  us  suggest  to  us  that  one 
criterion  in  this  state  of  inquiry  is  to  be  found  in  the  consideration  that  we  cannot  find 
rest  in  anything  which  does  not  tell  us  what  we  most  want  to  know  as  dependent, 
struggling,  sorrowing,  sinning,  dying  men.  The  idols  of  the  heathen  were  valueless ; 
they  could  not  tell  "things  to  come  hereafter;"  they  were  utterly  ignorant;  they  had 
no  voice  to  answer  the  most  urgent  and'  pressing  questions  which  men  were  asking. 
Those  great  and  profound  inquiries  which  we  are  now  putting  are  beyond  the  reach  of 
nature  and  of  man.  Nature,  at  the  demand  of  science,  can  shed  no  light  at  all  on  the 
most  sacred  problems,  the  solution  of  which  is  everything  to  us.  It  makes  no  sign,  it 
leaves  us  as  we  were.  Its  teaching  is  as  consistent  with  one  conclusion  as  with  the 
opposite.  Man,  unaided  by  special  illumination,  can  reach  no  certainty,  can  attain  to 
nothing  like  assurance;  he  can  guess,  can  argue,  can  hope,  but  he  cannot  know. .  God 
alone,  the  Author  of  our  being,  the  Lord  of  our  life,  the  Arbiter  of  our  destiny,  can 
tell  us  whence  we  came  and  whose  we  are  and  whither  we  go.  He  can  tell  us 
"  things  to  come  hereafter,"  and  much  else  which  it  is  as  urgent  that  we  should  know. 
He  makes  plain  and  sure  to  us  the  truth  concerning — 

I.  The  origin,  sustenance,  and  government  of  the  wobld. 

II.  OuB  HUMAN  NATUBB.  That  it  is  not  what  it  was  when  it  came  forth  from  hia 
creative  hand  ;  that  it  has  fallen  through  sin ;  that  there  is  a  way  back  which  is  a  way 
up,  toward  himself  and  his  favour. 

III.  Himself — His  nature,  ohabacter,  and  will. 

IV.  The  futubb.  1.  Future  things  here.  2.  The  great  future — the  fiMt  of  another 
life,  of  a  day  of  accoUnt — eternal  life  through  faith  in  Jesus  Christ. — 0. 

Ver.  4. — The  eternal  Alpha  and  Omega.  The  idea  of  these  verses  seems  to  be  this^ 
look  back,  if  you  will,  to  the  very  beginnings  of  nations:  God  is  there.  Watch  the 
changes  of  nations,  the  uprising  of  great  kings  and  leaders :  God  is  presiding  over  all. 
Peer  into  the  dim  m\  steries  of  the  future,  and  still  God  is  controlling  and  overruling  all. 
The  thought  here  set  before  the  nation  finds  expression  in  the  private  meditations  of  the 
psalmist  (Ps.  cxxxix.).  Nowhere  can  he  get  away  from  the  sense  of  God's  presence, 
and  nowhere  would  he  if  he  could.  How  fully  the  Apostle  John  was  imbued  with  the 
spirit  of  the  great  prophets  is  well  illustrated  in  the  fact  that  his  thought  of  the  mani- 
fested GJod  is  the  old  prophetic  thought.  The  glorified  and  living  Christ  is  rerealed 
to  him  as  saying,  "I  am  Alpha  and  Omega;  the  Beginnin<j  and  the  Ending,  which  is, 
and  which  was,  and  which  is  to  come,  the  Almighty"  (Rev.  i.  8).  Some  think  the 
"  righteous  man,"  referred  to  in  ver.  2,  is  Abraham,  regarded  as  the  first  father  of  the 


112  THE  BOOK  OF  THE  PEOPHET  ISAIAH,      [ch.  xli.  1- 


Hebrew  nation ;  and  this  view  finds  some  support  in  the  expression  found  in  ver.  4, 
"  calling  the  generations  from  the  beginning ; "  but  it  is  evident  that  the  mind  of  Isaiah 
was  at  this  time  filled  with  the  return  from  captivity,  and  with  the  Divine  raising  up 
of  Cyrus  as  the  human  agent  in  effecting  that  return.  And  this  Cyrus  is  to  him  the 
suggestion  of  the  glorious  spiritual  Deliverer,  who  should  appear  later  on  to  redeem 
his  people  from  their  sins;  not  first  from  their  sorrows,  but  first  and  chiefly  from  their 
sins,  bo  we  may  cover  the  long  ages  in  our  thought.  Abraham  raised  up  by  God. 
Moses  set  forth  by  God.  Cyrus  called  out  by  God.  Messiah  the  Sent  One  of  God.  "  I 
the  Lord,  the  First,  and  with  the  last,  I  am  he."  This  view  of  our  God  may  be 
taken  as — 

I.  A  CONTKAST  WITH  ALL  MAN-MADB  GODS.  This  IS  the  prophet's  great  point.  A 
man-made,  or  man-conceived,  god  comes  second.  Man,  in  that  case  is  first ;  the  god  is 
his  creature,  and  the  creation  of  a  being  involves  that  it  is  inferior  to  its  creator.  God 
comes  first ;  he  is  before  man.    Man  is  liis  creature,  and  set  under  his  conditions. 

IL  A  HOPE  WHEN  MAN  CAN  MAKE  NO  MORE  GODS.  That  time  comes  by  dissatisfaction. 
N^one  of  his  gods  bring  him  rest,  and  at  last  he  will  try  to  make  no  more.  Then  God 
Uvea,  and  may  be  the  soul's  Rest.  That  time  comes  by  the  ending  of  the  earth-life ;  but 
even  then  God  lives,  and  we  may  live  in  him. 

IIL  A  SATISFACTION  FOB  ALL  BETWEEN  TIMES.  If  he  is  first,  and  is  last,  then 
surely  he  covers  and  includes  all  the  space  between,  and  we  may  well  turn  from  all 
self-trusts  and  idol-trusts,  and  seek  now  the  rest,  the  joy,  of  his  love  and  favour 
and  service.  "This  God  is  our  God  for  ever  and  ever;  he  will  be  our  Guide  unto 
death."— R.  T. 

Vers.  6,  7. — Man's  device*  to  do  without  God.  A  curious  and  interesting  fact  is  con- 
nected with  the  reference  in  this  passage  to  hctmmering  an  idol  into  shape.  Ancient 
hammers  had  no  handles ;  the  workman  held  in  his  hand  the  metal  piece  with  which 
he  worked.  In  all  the  copies  of  Egyptian  figures  engaged  in  various  arts,  there  does 
not  appear  to  be  one  representation  of  a  handled  hammer.  Mr.  Osburn,  remarking  on 
this,  says,  "  The  jar  occasioned  to  the  nerves  of  the  hand  by  this  violent  contact  of 
metal  with  metal,  without  the  interposition  of  a  wooden  handle,  or  other  deadening 
substances,  would  be  intolerable  to  a  modern  workman,  or,  if  he  had  resolution  to 
persevere,  would  probably  bring  on  tetanus.  Long  practice  from  an  early  age  had 
habituated  the  robust  frames  of  the  ancient  mechanics  to  these  rude  concussions."  This 
passage  is  of  a  satirical  character ;  the  folly  of  idolaters  in  trusting  to  gods  made  by 
common  workmen,  and  dependent  on  the  most  trivial  mechanical  operations  for  their 
form  and  their  stalHlity,  is  vigorously  presented.  We  regard  all  this  idol-making  as 
man's  device  to  do  without  the  one  living  and  true  God ;  and,  so  regarded,  it  is  sug- 
gestive of  applications  which  may  be  made  to  our  own  times.  Now  men  try  to  do 
without  God  because — 

L  The  conception  of  him  is  too  spibitual.  We  are  not  permitted  to  think  of  him 
through  any  material  associations,  or  to  image  him  in  any  creaturely  shapes.  He  is  to 
be  to  us  a  Spirit.  But  that  sets  him  out  of  reach ;  and  since  men  will  not  cultivate 
their  spiritual  faculties  for  the  apprehension,  they  put  him  aside,  and  try  to  find  what 
they  may  put  in  his  place  in  art-creations,  art-ideals.  This  is  their  device — ^let  us 
create  the  "beautiful,"  and  make  it  do  for  us  instead  of  the  spiritual  God.  The 
"  beautiful "  is  their  idol. 

II.  The  bequikembnts  of  God  abb  too  stbiot.  He  gives  no  chance  to  self-willed- 
ness,  no  opportunity  for  the  pleasantness  of  doing  wrong.  So  their  device  is  to  arrange 
a  training  of  the  body,  a  system  of  rules  and  restraints,  by  which  they  may  regulate 
themselves  and  their  relationships.  Because  religion  is  too  severe  they  try  to  be  satis- 
fied with  a  morality  which  reaches  no  higher  than  a  man's  idea  of  goodness.  Morality 
is  their  idol. 

III.  The  atmosphere  of  God  is  too  pure.  "  Nothing  entereth  his  presence  that 
defileth ; "  and  it  is  characteristic  of  him  that  he  "  desireth  truth  in  the  inward  parts." 
There  man  finds  the  demand  too  great,  and  is  set  on  the  endeavour  to  satisfy  himself 
with  a  ceremonial  purity,  which  does  not  disturb  the  inward  corruptions.  Ceremonies 
may  exfilress  heart-piety ;  but  they  may  be  put  instead  of  heart-piety.  Ceremonies  and 
ritual  too  often  become  men's  idols,  whose  worship  is  easier  and  more  comfortable  to  the 


CH.  xij,  1— 29.]      THE  BOOK  OP  THE  PROPHET  ISAIAH.  11? 

natural  man.    So  men  help  one  another  to  make  their  own  idols,  and  shift  the  one  tn.c 
God  into  the  baoltground. — B.  T. 

Ver.  8. — TJie  Divine  choices  are  wise  selections.  Abraham  and  Jacob  are  God's 
chosen  ones  as  founders,  and  first  fathers,  of  the  Israelite  race.  By  this  we  are  to  under- 
stand that  they  were  selected,  in  the  Divine  wisdom,  as  having  just  the  qualities  which, 
developed  in  a  race,  would  mal^e  a  people  precisely  fitted  to  carry  out  his  purposes.  We 
are  not  to  understand  that,  in  a  way  of  accident,  or  in  a  way  of  mere  sovereignty,  thesr 
first  fathers  were  picked  out.  God's  choices  are  never  arbitrary ;  they  are  always 
judicious  selections.  "  The  race  is  described  as  God's  servant  and  his  elect,  or,  combining 
the  two  characters,  his  chosen  servant,  chosen  to  be  his  servant."  This  special  relation 
to  Jehovah  is  the  thing  which  distinguishes  the  people  of  Israel  from  the  heathen 
nations  around  them.  "  What  advantage  then  hath  the  Jew  ?  .  .  .  Much  every  wa}'^ : 
chiefly,  because  that  unto  them  were  committed  the  oracles  of  God  "  (Rom.  iii.  1,  C). 
The  truth  that  the  Divine  choices  are  selections,  on  the  ground  of  recognized  fitness, 
may  gain  illustration  from  three  distinct  spheres. 

L  Feom  the  sphere  of  the  sacred  Soriptubbs.  These  cover  long  spaces  of  the 
earth's  history,  and  the  most  marked  feature  of  them  is  the  way  in  whicli  individuals 
are  set  forth  prominently;  we  are  shown  the  precise  work  they  did,  and  then  it  i.- 
impressed  on  us  that  these  are  the  Lord's  chosen  ones.  In  the  light  of  that  view  wt- 
read  again  their  story,  appraise  their  qualities  and  gifts,  set  their  endowments  alongsi<le 
their  life-mission;  and  then  we  can  see  clearly  that  they  were  ^elected  because  they 
were  precisely  fitted  for  their  particular  work.  If  we  think  that  subtle  laws  of  heredity 
have  gone  to  the  making  and  endowing  of  men,  we  may  also  think  of  God  as  watching 
t\e  fitnesses  of  men,  and  taking  them  out  for  the  doing  of  certain  parts  of  his  work. 
Illustration  may  be  taken  from  Moses,  who  was  characterisiic.illy  patriotic  and  disin- 
terested ;  or  David,  whose  poetical  genius  sanctified  song  for  Divine  worship ;  or 
Paul,  whose  natural  impetuosity  adapted  him  for  his  service  as  the  first  Christian 
missionary. 

II.  From  the  sphere  of  common  life.  For  Scripture  is  but  the  illustration  "  in 
the  small"  of  what  God  is  ever  doiug  "  in  the  large."  The  mistake  is  so  o''ten  made  of 
thinking  that  God  exhausted  himself,  or  limited  himself,  to  the  spheres  dealt  with  in 
Scripture.  The  true  view  is  that  God  illu4ruted  himself  there.  Cyrus  is  the  man  i.i 
common  life  of  whom  God  says,  "  I  girded  thee,  though  thou  hast  not  known  me."  We 
see  Go  I's  selections  in  the  fitting  of  men  to  places,  men  of  genius  and  comm'in  men,  the 
Tennysons  and  ourselves. 

III.  From  the  sphbeb  of  the  Christian  CHnBOR.  Here  too  there  are  evidently 
elect  men  and  women ;  but  we  need  to  see  that  God  has  no  "  pets,"  only  "  servants  " — 
men  whose  fitnesses  are  recognized,  and  who  are  consequently  selected  for  ofiSce  to 
praise,  to  preach,  to  pray,  or  variously  to  minister  to  the  Church's  needs. — B.  T, 

Ver.  10. —  The  supreme  promise.  "I  am  with  thee."  This  assurance  is  the  applica- 
tion of  that  truth  of  God's  infinite  superiority  to  all  idols  on  which  the  prophet  has  been, 
sometimes  so  seriously,  and  sometimes  so  scornfully,  dwelling.  Here  is  the  argument- 
God  is  God  alone.  He  is  your  God.  He  is  with  you.  It  is  a  promise  specially  adapted 
to  the  apparently  helpless  and  hopeless  condition  of  Israel  in  Babylon.  There  was  no 
relief  to  the  darkness  that  hung  about  them,  but  there  was  this  comfort  in  the  darkness— 
the  almighty,  all- wise,  all-creating,  all-controlling  God,  was  with  them,  and.  their  trusi 
in  him  was  security  for  their  safety,  and  for  their  coming  out  into  the  light  by-and-by, 
for  he  was  their  Ood.  Matthew  Henry  paraphrases  the  text  in  this  way,  "  Fear  thou 
not,  for  I  am  with  thee,  not  only  within  call,  but  present  with  thee ;  be  not  dismayed 
at  the  power  of  those  who  are  against  thee,  for  I  am  thy  God,  and  engaged  for  thee. 
Art  thou  weak  ?  I  will  strengthen  thee.  Art  thou  destitute  of  friends  ?  I  will  keep 
thee  in  time  of  need.  Art  thou  ready  to  sink,  ready  to  fall  ?  I  will  uphold  thee  with 
the  right  hand  of  my  righteousness,  that  right  hand  which  is  full  of  righteousness,  in 
dispensing  rewards  and  punishments."  The  verse,  setting  before  us  sucli  varied  assur- 
ances of  Divine  help,  upholding,  and  strengthening,  seems  to  bid  us  think  of  all  that 
the  presence  of  God  with  us  may  be  thought  to  include.  If  he  is,  indeed,  oar  God, 
then— 

UAIAB— IL  I 


114  THE  BOOK  OF  THE   PROPHET  ISAIAH,      [oh.  xu.  1—29. 

L  He  KirowB  vb.  We  often  distinguish  between  the  outside  person,  who  is  interested 
in  us  and  knows  about  us,  and  the  friend  in  intimate  personal  relations,  who  knowB  tu. 
We  are  permitted  to  think  of  God  as  the  Friend  in  close  fellowship,  from  whom  none  of 
our  secrets  are  hid.  He  is  the  safe  Friend,  of  whose  wise  help  we  are  always  assured, 
and  in  whom  we  may  fully  trust,  because  of  the  knowledge  which  his  love  brings. 

IL  He  pbovideb  fob  us.  This  is  the  work  of  him  who  is  our  Ood,  and  on  whom 
we  are  dependent.  But  it  is  precious  to  be  assured  that  he  Ib  in  gracious  relations  with 
us,  and  will  do  for  us  his  good  work. 

III.  He  defends  vs.  If  with  us,  then  "  greater  is  he  who  is  with  ns  than  all  who 
can  be  against  us."    "  What  terror  can  confound  me,  with  God  at  my  right  hRnd  ?  " 

IV.  He  coekects  us.  When  we  know  ourselves,  and  our  own  frulties  and  inability 
to  walk  alone,  we  find  that  God,  who  can  chasten  and  will  chasten,  who  "corrects  in 
measure,"  and  "  scourges  every  son  whom  he  receives,"  is  the  God  in  whose  constant 
presence  we  can  rejoice. 

v.  He  ouideb  us.  If  with  us,  he  must  go  first,  for  he  is  our  God.  And  the  darkness 
does  not  matter  if  he  is  first — on  before,  only  just  before.  It  must  be  a  plain  path,  and 
a  safe  path,  when  we  simply  follow  his  footsteps. 

YI.  He  BEDEEM8  US.  This  is  the  large  word  which  embraces  all  the  material  and 
spiritual  needs  we  can  know.  Israel  wanted  redemption  from  captivity :  God  gave  that. 
Israel  wanted  redemption  from  idolatry :  God  gave  that.  Israel  even  wanted  redemption 
from  "bad  sel^"  and,  if  they  would  have  it  so,  God  would  give  even  that. — B.  T. 

Vers.  13, 14. — 3!%«  supreme  prayer.  "  Lord,  help  me ; "  responded  to  by  God  in  the 
gracious  assurance,  "  I  will  help  thee,  saith  the  Lord,  and  thy  Bedeemer,  the  Holy  One 
of  IsiaeL"  Likening  Israel  to  a  worm,  reminds  us  of  its  despised  and  depressed  con- 
dition in  captivity.  "  However  weak  and  despised  and  trodden  underfoot  thou  mayest 
be,  in  thy  captivity  and  exile,  yet  fear  not,  I  will  help  thee."  It  is  a  painful  suggestion 
of  hopelessness  and  helplessness  that  no  cry  can  now  rise  but  the  brief,  intense,  "  Lord, 
help  me."  And  yet  it  is  full  of  hope  that  any  cry  at  all  can  rise,  and  that,  even  in 
despair,  men  are  turning  yearning  eyes  toward  God.  Of  this  we  may  be  assured,  when 
man  cries,  out  of  the  depths,  his  cry,  "  Lord,  help  me,"  God  will  answer,  out  of  hit 
heavens,  "  I  will  help  thee."  The  associations  of  the  ancient  goSl,  or  family  avenger, 
may  be  used  in  illustration,  as  the  word  translated  "  Bedeemer"  is  in  the  original  Ooel. 
And  the  certainty  of  response  to  prayer  by  him  who  liveth,  and  is  our  Grod  and  Father, 
may  be  illustrated  by  an  incident  in  the  life  of  Luther.  Usually  he. was  of  a  cheerful 
temperament,  but  he  was  subject  to  occasional  fits  of  severe  depression.  Once,  when 
nothing  seemed  to  avail,  he  was  induced  to  leave  home  for  a  few  days,  in  the  hope  that  he 
might  recover  his  cheerfulness;  but  he  returned  with  a  cloudy  and  dejected  countenance. 
How  great  was  his  surprise,  on  entering  the  house,  to  find  his  wife  seated  in  the  middle  of 
the  room,  attired  in  black  garments,  and  with  a  mourning  cloak  thrown  over  her,  while 
she  pressed  to  her  eyes  her  handkerchief,  as  if  weeping  bitterly  1  He  eagerly  inquired  the 
canse  of  her  distress,  which  she  seemed  loth  at  first  to  communicate ;  but  on  his  again 
imploring  her  to  speak,  she  answered,  "Only  think,  dear  doctor,  our  Father  in  heaven 
is  dead !  Judge  if  I  have  not  cause  for  my  grief."  Upon  this,  immediately  compre- 
hending her  riddle,  he  laughed,  and  embracing  her,  said,  "You  are  right,  dear  Kate; 
I  am  acting  as  if  there  were  no  God  in  heaven ; "  and  from  that  hour  his  melancholy 
left  him.    Only  two  points  are  suggested  for  elaboration  and  illustration. 

L  PbATEB   never  BEACHES  ITS  FULL  INTENSITY   WHILE  IT  CAN   BE   SET  IN  HUHAM 

WOBDS.  We  say  the  same  of  grief.  It  never  hurts,  or  imperils  reason  or  life,  while  It 
can  find  expression.  Silent  grief  hurts.  A  man  is  not  utterly  broken  down  while  ha 
can  make  a  prayer  and  express  his  wants. 

II.  Peatbb  beaches  its  intensitt  when  rr  can  bi  ho  kobb  than  a  toioeless 
OET.  A  simple  "  Lord,  help  me."  When  the  loul  is  quite  full  there  can  be  no  utter- 
ance. A  man  must  go  into  the  presence  of  God,  and  leave  him  to  read  heart,  thought, 
and  desire.  Such  experiences  only  come  at  timet  into  any  life.  Yet  they  ara  the  timea 
when  we  are  most  really,  most  wholly,  cast  on  God.  Here  is  a  sacred  paradox— <mr  baM 
timea  of  prayer  are  the  times  when  we  cannot  pray. — ^B.  T. 

Jm.  U.—IMitg  tur/rMng  thtngt  in  tk*  itrength  of  God.    Oompan  wMi  ih«  jmj 


n.xu.  1—29.]      THE  BOOK  OF  THB  PBOPHBT  ISAIAH.  115 

striking  figure  of  this  text,  2  Oor.  z.  4,  5,  "  The  weapons  of  our  warfare  ai«  not  carnal, 
but  mighty  through  God  to  the  palling  down  of  strongholds;  casting  down  imagina- 
tions, and  every  high  thing  that  esaltetb  itself  against  the  knowledge  of  Qoi."  While 
there  may  he  designed  prophetical  allusion  to  the  mastery  of  Babylonian  evils,  to  the 
triumphs  of  the  Maccabean  era,  and  to  the  spiritual  victories  of  Messiah,  the  general 
meaning  of  the  figure  is  that  Israel,  in  the  strength  of  Jehovah,  shall  overcome  all  the 
obstacles  to  the  fulBlment  of  hisdestiny.  Porter  describes  the  "  threshing-instmmente" 
as  "  flat,  heavy,  wooden  slabs,  some  five  feet  long  by  three  wide,  slightly  turned  np  in 
front.  The  under  surface  is  thickly  studded  with  nobs  of  hard  stone  or  iron.  A 
massive  prison  door,  with  its  rows  of  projecting  nail-heads,  will  give  the  best  idea  of  a 
movrrej,  as  the  instrument  is  now  called.  Each  is  drawn  by  a  '  yoke  of  oxen.'  IRie 
driver  stands  on  the  mowref,  urging  the  oxen  on  with  his  formidable  ox-goad.  The 
oxen  advance  in  front, '  treading  out  the  grain,'  and  the  mowrej  follows,  crushing  and 
cutting  the  straw  with  its  '  teeth,'  till  it  is  reduced  almost  to  dust."  With,  this  instm- 
ment  the  Roman  tribulwn,  from  which  we  get  our  suggestive  word  "  tribulation,"  should 
be  compared.  There  is  a  marked  poetical  exaggeration  in  the  association  of  a  threshing- 
instrument  with  hills  and  mountains,  designed  to  impress  on  us  that  "nothing  is  too 
hard  for  the  Lord,"  or  for  his  people  when  they  are  strengthened  by  him.  Making 
application  of  the  text  to  our  own  circumstances,  we  note — 

I.  Life  as  a  whole  often  beehs  beyond  vb  ;  out  of  our  control ;  we  fear  to  enter 
on  it — we  feel  we  cannot  make  the  best  of  it.  It  is  so  with  only  such  expectatiouB  as 
we  can  form,  on  the  basis  of  what  is  known  of  other  men's  lives.  It  would  indeed  be 
so,  if  God  were  to  show  us  beforehand  the  scenes  through  which  we  were  to  be  led.  Yet 
let  us  but  lay  hold  of  the  strength  of  God,  and  our  whole  life  shall  be  a  mountain  which 
we  shall  thresh  and  beat  smalL  It  shall  not  master  na ;  we  will  master  it,  and  make  it 
yield  ite  best. 

II.  The  special  demands  of  life  often  beeh  betond  ub.  Face  to  fece  with  duty, 
we  anxiously  say,  "Who  is  sufficient  for  these  things?"  For  us  to  undertake  these 
duties  seems  as  absurd  as  for  a  mowrej  to  think  of  threshing  a  mountain.  And  yet 
experience  abundantly  confirms  the  fact  that,  when  a  man  is  called  of  Ghxl  to  do  any- 
thing, God  surely  gives  him  strength  for  the  doing.  What  is  "  Bnpossible  with  men  is 
possible  with  God,"  and  with  all  those  whom  God  aids.  For  things  that  are  right  ikere 
is  no  such  word  as  "impossible"  in  a  Christian's  vocabulary.  Compare  Jonathan 
defeating  the  Philistines,  David  overcoming  Goliath,  and  the  Apostle  Paul  saying,  ".I 
can  do  all  things  through  Christ  that  strengtheneth  me."  We  have  often  seen  the 
marvel  of  God's  overcomings  when  the  pressure  of  circumstances  was  extreme,  and  the 
thwarting  of  enemies  painful.  "  Who  art  thou,  O  great  mountain  ?  Before  Zerubhahel 
[the  God-helped  man]  thou  shalt  become  a  plain." — B.  T. 

Ver.  23. — The  helplessness  of  idols.  Before  QoA  can  hopefiilly  intervene  on  behalf  of 
man,  man  must  have  become  thoroughly  convinced  of  his  own  helplessness,  and  of  the 
insufficiency  of  all  on  whom  he  is  disposed  to  rely.  In  the  time  of  the  Babylonish 
'  captivity,  many,  surrounded  day  by  day  with  idolatrous  sentiments  and  associations, 
would  incline  to  reliance  on  these  idols,  and  to  seeking  help  and  deliverance  fix>m  them. 
Therefore  the  prophet,  by  solemn  warnings,  by  satire  and  taunt,  strives  to  break  Gbd's 
people  away  from  all  such  vain  confidences.  We  have  some  idea  of  the  boastings  of  the 
Assyrians  in  the  power  of  their  idol-gods  given  in  the  Kabshakeh's  messages  to  Hezekiah. 
He  glories  in  the  superiority  of  the  Assyrian  gods  over  all  the  gods  of  the  conquered 
nations ;  and  the  discouraged  exiles  might  be  tempted  to  say,  "  Even  our  God,  Jehovah, 
could  not  stand  against  these  Assyrian  gods ;  then  let  ns  seek  to  them  for  help  and 
deliverance."  And  if  such  formal  idolatries  belong  to  the  past,  answering  spiritual 
idolatries  belong  to  the  present ;  and  we  also  are  lemj  enough  to  turn  away  from  Gh>d, 
when  he  does  not  let  things  be  "  according  to  our  mind,"  and  we  easily  take  up  with 
idol-devices  of  our  own  hearts.  So  Israel  and  we  may  profitably  be  reminded  that  all 
self-made  idols  are  vanity,  and  must  utterly  faU  all  who  put  their  trust  in  them  when 
the  testing-day  comes.  In  our  text  the  idol-daimants  are  put  to  a  test.  Let  them  tU 
something.  Helpless  things !  A  great  deal  is  done  for  them  ;  now  let  things  be  turned 
about,  and  let  them  do  something.  We  need  not  be  over-particular.  If  it  is  incon- 
renient  for  them  to  do  something  good,  let  them  do  something  evil— <mly  let  it  be 


U6 


THE   BOOK  OF   THE  PEOPHET   ISAIAH,    [ch.  xlii.  1— 2& 


something.    But  they  cannot.    "  They  are  of  nothing,  and  their  work  of  nought "  (gee 

1  Cor.  viii.  4).  Cheyne  says,  "  The  Divine  Speaker  waives  the  question  of  foreknowledge, 
and  makes  the  least  requirement  possible.  '  Prove  that  you  are  alive,  by  performing 
some  act  whether  good  (for  your  friends)  or  bad  (for  your  foes).'  Or,  we  may  empty 
the  terms  'good'  and  'evil'  of  their  moral  meaning,  and  suppose  them  to  be  used 
proverbially  to  express  the  one  simple  notion  of  anything,  exactly  as  the  two  wordi 
'  right  and  left'  merely  conveyed  the  idea  of  anywhere."  Matthew  Henry  paraphrases 
thus:  "Let  them  do,  if  they  can,  anything  extraordinary,  thai  people  may  admire  and 
he  affected  with.  Let  them  either  bless  or  curse,  with  power.  Let  us  see  them  inflict 
such  plagues  as  God  brought  on  Egypt,  or  bestow  such  blessings  as  God  bestowed  on 
Israel.  Let  them  do  some  great  thing,  and  we  shall  be  amazed  when  we  see  it,  and 
frightened  into  a  veneration  of  them,  as  many  have  been  into  a  veneration  of  the  true 
God."  The  point  suggested  for  illustration  is  that  it  would  be  well  to  put  nineteenth- 
century  idols  also  to  the  test,  and  see  whether  they  are  worthy  of  confidence  because 
they  have  power  to  do  either  good  or  evil.  What  may  be  regarded  as  idols  must  be 
decided  by  each  teacher  of  men  for  himself.  We  can  only  venture  to  hint  that  the 
following  may  come  under  the  denomination.  Indeed,  an  idol  is  anything  which  so 
occupies  the  interest  of  man  as  to  push  God  out  of  his  supreme  place  in  man's  affection 
and  service. 

I.  The  idol  of  scienoe.  Worshipped  by  many  in  our  day.  What  can  it  do? 
What  can  it  do  towards  meeting  the  spiritual  need,  the  sense  of  sin,  the  soul-cry,  of 
man  ?    And  it  can  do  nothing  if  it  can  bear  no  relation  to  them. 

II.  The  idol  or  luxury.  Pleasure  has  numberless  votaries,  who  delight  in  her 
service.  Yet  is  she  but  the  syren,  who  floats  on,  just  a  little  in  front,  luring  her  wor- 
shippers into  heedlessness  of  the  black  storms  that  are  gathering  in  the  sky.  What  can 
she  do  in  the  day  of  calamity  ?  Then  her  votaries  find  she  is  "  all  vanity,  and  her  works 
are  nothing." 

III.  The  idol  of  self.  Taking  often  very  interesting  shapes,  as  socialistic  theories 
of  man's  regeneration  by  man.  Very  attractive  is  the  notion  that  all  earth-woes  would 
fade  away  if  only  men  would  bind  themselves  together  in  a  universal  "  Help-M.yself  * 
Society.  And  yet  the  story  of  the  ages  is  the  ever-fresh  illustration  of  the  fact  that  it 
is  not,  and  it  never  has  been,  in  "  man  that  walketh  to  direct  his  steps."  Ask  "  Self" 
what  it  can  do  for  our  best  and  highest  interests,  and  it  is  as  dumb  as  any  idol-block. 
None  hear,  and  theie  is  no  one  to  answer.  Only  when  the  claims  of  idol  Self  had  been 
thoroughly  worked  out,  and  "  man  by  his  wisdom  evidently  knew  not  God,"  did  Divine 
love  intervene  and  send  the  Son.  The  "  fulness  of  times  "  was  precisely  the  time  when 
helpless  "  Self  "  was  proved  to  be  of  nothing,  and  his  works  of  nought.  And  yet  round 
these  and  other  idol-shrines  men  crowd  to-day,  and  need  to  hear  the  solemn  appeal  of 
the  last  of  Christ's  apostles,  "  Little  children,  ^eep  yowselvesfrom  idols."— R.  T. 


EXPOSITION. 


OHAPTEB  XLH. 


Vers,  l-j-8.— Annodnoembnt  of  the  Ser- 
vant OF  THE  Lord,  and  the  Work  which 
HE  will  perform.  There  are  comparatively 
few  who  deny  that,  in  this  place  at  any  rate, 
the  "  Servant  of  the  Lord  "  is  the  Messiah. 
(So  the  Tiirgum  on  the  passage  r  so  Abar- 
bamel;  so,  among  moderns,  Otehler,  De- 
litzseh,  and  Mr.  Cheyne.)  The  portraiture 
has  "bo  strong  an  individuality  and  such 
marked  personal  features,  that  it  cannot 
possibly  be  a  mere  personified  collective ; " 
and  it  goes  so  "infinitely  beyond  anything 
of  which  a  man  waa  ever  capable  that  it  can 


only  be  the  fnture  Christ"  (Delltneh),    It 

may  be  added  that  St.  Matthew  (xii.  17 — 21) 
distinctly  applies  the  passage  to  our  Lord. 

Ver.  1.  — Behold,  "Behold,"  as  Mr. 
Cheyne  says,  "  invites  the  attention  of  the 
world — both  of  the  Jews  and  of  the  nations 
— ^to  a  new  revelation."  It  looks  bade  to 
the  similar  expression  of  vers.  24  and  29 
of  the  preceding  chapter,  which  draw  down 
the  curtain  upon  the  idol-gods,  while  this 
"  behold  "  reveals  One  who  is  to  occupy  their 
place,  and  to  be  a  worthy  object  of  the  wor- 
ship of  mankind.  My  Servant ;  i.e.  my  true 
and  perfect  servant,  utterly  obedient  (John 
Iv.  34;  Heb.  iii.  2);  not,  like  Israel,  my 
robellious  and  faithless  servant ;  not,  even, 
like  my  prophets,  yielding  an  imperfect  ob*' 


.XLiLl— 25.]    THE  BOOK  OF  THE  PROPHET  ISAIAH. 


117 


dience.  Whom  I  uphold,  "  As  the  Father 
hath  life  in  himself,  so  hath  he  given  to  the 
Son  to  liave  life  in  himself"  (John  v.  26). 
As  the  fount  or  origin  of  Divinity  {irrryh 
@e6TriTot),  the  Father  supports  and  sustains 
even  the  Son  and  the  Spirit.  Mine  Elect 
(comp.  1  Pet.  ii.  6).  Christ  was  "  chosen  " 
from  all  eternity  in  God's  counsels  to  the 
great  work  of  man's  redemption,  and  to  be 
the  Mediator  beween  God  and  man.  I  have 
put  my  Spirit  upon  him  (see  ch.  xi.  2 ;  Ixi. 
1;  and  for  the  fulfilment,  comp.  Luke  ii. 
40;  iii.  22;  iv.  18—21;  iii.  34).  He  shall 
bring  forth  judgment  to  the  Gentiles;  t.«. 
"he  sliall  publish,"  or  "cause  to  be  pub- 
lished, to  the  Gentiles,  the  true  Law  of  God — 
religion  on  its  practical  side,"  The  publica- 
tion of  Christianity  throughout  all  the  world 
has  abundantly  fulfilled  this  promise  or  pro- 
phecy. The  call  of  the  Gentiles  had  been 
already  declared  by  Isaiah  in  hi^  earlier 
preaching  (ch.  ii.  2;  zi.  10;  zix.  22 — 25; 
XXV.  6 ;  xxvii.  13,  etc.). 

Ver.  2. — He  shall  not  ory,  nor  lift  up. 
Supply,  after  "lift  up,"  "his  voice"  from 
the  next  clause.  His  methods  sliall  be  quiet 
and  gentle.  He  shall  not  siek  to  recom- 
mend bis  teaching  by  clamour  or  nnisy 
demonstrations.  There  shall  be  a  marked 
unobtrusiveness  in  all  his  doings  (comp. 
Matt,  viii  4;  ix.  30;  sii.  15;  xiv.  13;  John 
V.  13;  vi  15;  vii  3,  4;  viii.  59;  x.  40, 
etc). 

Ver.  3. — A  bruised  reed  shall  he  not  break. 
Egypt  was  compared  to  a  "  bruised  reed " 
by  Sennacherib  (oh.  xxxvi.  6),  as.  being 
untrustworthy  and  destitute  of  pliysioal 
strength;  but  here  the  image  represents 
the  weak  and  depressed  in  spirit,  tlio  lowly 
and  dejected.  Christ  vrould  deed  tenderly 
with  such,  not  violently.  Smoking  flax  shaU 
he  not  quench;  rather,  the  wick  which 
burnt  dimly  (margin)  he  shall  Twt  quench. 
Where  the  flame  of  devotion  bums  at  all, 
however  feebly  and  dimly,  Messiah  will 
take  oaie  not  to  quench  it.  Bather  he  will 
tend  it,  and  trim  it,  and  give  it  fresh  oil, 
and  cause  it  to  burn  more  brightly.  He 
shall  bring  forth  judgment  unto  truth.  But 
with  aU  this  tenderness,  this  "economy," 
this  allowance  for  the  shortcomings  and 
weaknesses  of  individuals,  he  will  be  uncom- 
promising in  his  itBsertion  of  absolute  justice 
and  absolute  truth.  He  will  sanction  nothing 
short  of  the  very  highebt  standard  of  moral 
purity  and  excellence.  (For  an  instance  of 
the  combination  of  extreme  tenderness  with 
unswerving  maintenance  of  an  absolute 
standard,  see  John  viiL  8 — 11.) 

Ver.  4. — He  shall  not  fail  nor  be  dis- 
oouiaged;  literally,  he  will  not  bum  dimly 
nor  be  bruited.  He  will  himself  show  no 
signs  of  that  weakness  which  he  will  com- 
passionate !■  otben.    As  a  "  Light "  (Luke 


ii.  32 ;  John  i.  4—9),  he  will  bum  brightly 
and  strongly ;  as  a  Beed,  or  Bod,  he  will  be 
firm  and  unbroken.  Till  he  have  set  judg- 
ment in  the  earth;  i.e.  till  lie  has  succeeded 
in  establishing  true  religion  upon  the  earth 
(compare  the  last  clause  of  ver.  1).  The 
isles;  or,  the  countries  (comp.  ch.  xli.  1,  5). 
ShaU  wait  for  his  Law ;  or,  shall  long  for 
his  Law.  I'dkhal  is  "to  wait  longingly." 
It  is,  as  Delitzsch  observes,  "an  actual  fact 
that  the  cry  for  redemption  runs  through 
the  whole  human  race."  They  are  possessed 
by  "  an  earnest  longing,  the  ultimate  object 
of  which  is,  however  unconsciously,  the  Ser- 
vant of  Jehovah,  and  his  instruction  from 
Zion  "  ('  Comment,  on  Isainh,'  vol.  ii.  p.  177). 

Ver.  5. — Thus  saithQod  the  lord;  literally, 
thus  saith  the  (fine)  God,  Jehovah.  The 
entire  utterance,  vers.  1 — 4,  is  the  utterance 
of  God ;  but,  as  that  fact  is  gathered  by  in- 
ference, not  asserted,  the  prophet  suddenly 
stops,  and  mukes  a  new  beginning.  It  must 
be  made  perfectly  clear  that  the  announce- 
ment of  the  "  Servant  of  the  Lord  "  and  his 
mission  are  from  the  Almighty ;  and  so  we 
have  the  solemn  announcement  of  the  present 
verse.  He  that  created  the  heavens,-  etc. 
(comp.  ch.  xl.  12,  22).  The  earth,  and  that 
which  Cometh  out  of  it;  i.e.  all  that  the 
earth  produces — gold,  and  silver,  and  pre- 
cious stones,  and  corn,  and  wine,  and  luscious 
fruits,  and  lovely  flowers— all  that  sustains 
life,  and  all  that  makes  life  delightful — nay 
more,  life  itself— the  breath  and  the  spirit 
that  make  men  living  beings. 

Ver.  6, — I  the  Lord  have  called  thee  in 
righteousness.  The  "  Servant  of  Jehovah  " 
is  addressed.  God  has  "  called  "  him ;  i.e. 
appointed  him  to  his  mediatorial  office 
"  in  righteousness,"  in  accordance  with  the 
righteous  purpose  which  he  has  entertained 
towards  his  fallen  creatures  from  the  be- 
ginning of  the  world.  And  will  give  thee  for 
a  Covenant  of  the  people  (comp.  ch.  xlix.  8). 
The  covenant  between  God  and  his  people 
being  in  Christ,  it  is  quite  consistent  with 
Hebrew  usage  to  transfer  the  term  to  Christ 
himself,  in  whom  the  covenant  was,  as  it 
were,  embodied.  So  Christ  is  called  "our 
Salvation"  and  "our  Peace,"  and  again, 
"our  Bedemption "  and  "our  Life."  This 
is  the  ordinary  tone  of  Hebrew  poetry,  which 
rejoices  in  personification  and  embodiment. 
A  prose  writer  would  have  said  that  the 
Servant  of  the  Lord  would  be  given  as  the 
Mediator  of  a  covenant  between  Jehovah 
and  his  people.  For  a  Light  of  the  Gentiles 
(comp.  ch.  xlix.  6 ;  Ii,  4). 

Ver.  7.— To  open  the  blind  eyes.  The 
Messiah  was  to  oure  both  physical  and 
spiritual  blindness  (see  oh.  xxix.  18 ;  xxxii, 
3;  XXXV,  5,  etc.).  Here  it  is  spiritual  blind- 
ness that  is  specially  intended,  as  appears 
both  b^  the  symbolic  language  of  the  two 


118 


THE  BOOK  OF  THE  PROPHET  ISAIAH,    [ot.  xlil  1— 2£i 


coDJoined  clauses,  and  by  the  oomment  of 
Tera.  16 — 19.  To  bring  out  the  prisoners 
from  the  prison;  ratlier,  to  bring  out 
priianers.  To  deliver  from  the  bondage  of 
sin  such  as  are  its  slaves,  and  shut  up  in  its 
prison-houses.  The  promise  is  general,  but, 
like  all  spiritual  promises,  conditioned  by 
the  willingness  of  those  who  are  itd  objects 
to  ayail  themselves  of  it.  Them  that  sit  in 
darkness  (comp.  ch.  is.  2). 

Yer.  8. — I  am  the  Lord;  rather,  I  the 
Lord.  The  sense  runs  on  from  the  preceding 
verses :  "  I,  the  Lord,  will  do  all  this,  I  who 
am  all  that  the  Name  '  Jehovah '  signifies — 
self- existent,  eternal,  self-8u£9cing,  inde- 
pendent, omnipotent,  and  therefore  unique, 
one  whose  glory  cannot  be  shared  with 
•ny  other  being  that  exists — ^least  of  all 
with  images,  which  are  mere  vanity  and 
nothingness." 

Vers.  9— 17.— Aknocnobment  of  the 
CoHiNO  Deuteranoe  of  Isbael  prom  Babt- 
liON,  AST)  Gall  on  tbe  Nations  fob  a  Sono 
or  Pbaibe  and  Jubilation.  Jehovah  is  still 
the  ipeaker.  He  begins  by  promising  a  new 
leveUtion  (ver.  9).  Then,  before  tlie  reve- 
lation is  made,  he  calls  upon  the  nations — 
especially  those  in  the  vicinity  of  Palestine 
— to  rejoice  at  what  is  about  to  happen 
(Ten.  10 — 12).  After  this  he  proceeds  to 
make  the  announcement  promised  in  ver.  9 
— «n  announcement  that  he  is  about  to  de- 
liTer  hia  people  (ver.  16)  and  to  execute 
vengeanoe  on  their  enemies  (vers.  13 — 15 
mi  IT). 

Ver.  9. — Behold,  the  former  things  are 
oome  to  pass;  i.e.  former  prophecies  have 
been  folfilled.  Israel  has  been  led  into 
captivity,  and  in  her  captivity  has  suffered 
gnevoiu  things.  The  reference  is,  perhaps, 
especially  to  such  prophecies  as  ch.  xxxix. 
5—7.  Kai  new  things  do  I  declare  (comp. 
oh.  xliii.  19).  The  voluntary  restoration  of 
a  eaptive  people  to  their  own  lend  by  the 
power  to  which  they  were  subject,  and 
which  could  compel  their  services,  was  em- 
phatically a  "new  thing"  in  the  world's 
history.  How  unwilling  the  sovereign 
power  was  ordinarily  to  lose  such  services 
may  be  seen  l^  the  narrative  in  Exodus 
(v. —  xiv.),  and  again  by  the  account 
which  Herodotus  gives  (i  73,  74)  of  the 
nonnd  of  quarrel  between  Alyatteg  and 
Cyaxare*.  Before  they  spring  forth;  or, 
moot  forth.  The  metaphor  is  one  taken 
fiom  the  vegetable  world  (oomp.  ch.  xliii. 
If:  ilT.  8). 

Tot.  10. — Siag  unto  the  Lord  a  new  long. 
Tha  eall  for  a  "new  song"  ia  based  upon 
ft*  ground  that  the  mercy  ronchsafed  was 
»  "  MW  "  «M  (iM  Tfr.  0>.    Tbe  exprewion 


is  frequent  in  the  Paalma  (xxxiii.  3 ;  xevL 
1 ;  xoviii.  1 ;  cxiiv.  9 ;  oxlix.  1).  Hia  praiis 
from  the  end  of  the  earth;  it.  "let  his 
praise  be  snug  by  all  the  inhabitanta  at  the 
earth  to  its  remotest  bounds."  The  aea.  Sea 
and  land  are  called  upon  equally  to  proclaim 
God's  praise;  the  sea,  "and  its  fulness" 
(margin) — those  who  frequent  it  in  ships, 
and  those  who  dwell  on  ita  ahores  and 
isLinds.  The  last  clause,  "the  ialea  and 
the  inhabitants  thereof,"  is  exegetioal  of 
the  preceding  one — "all  that  is  therein." 

Yer.  11. — The  wilderness  and  the  eitiea 
thereof.  The  desert  had  its  cities,  built  on 
aome  more  or  less  fertile  oases,  where  at 
any  rate  water  was  procurable.  Instances 
of  such  cities  are  Tadmor,  Petra,  Kadesh 
(Numb.  XX.  1).  Its  villages  were  probably 
colleutions  of  tents,  which  were  moved  from 
time  to  time,  since  the  Beni-Kedar  were 
nomads  (ch.  xxi.  16;  Ps.  cxx.  5).  The  call 
is  upon  both  the  stationary  and  the  wander- 
ing inhabitants  of  the  Syro-Arabian  desert  to 
join  in  the  song  of  praise.  The  inhabitanta 
of  the  rook;  rather,  the  irihabitantt  of  Sela, 
or  Petra,  the  rock-city,  which  waa  the  capital 
of  Idumeea,  or  Edom  (see  the  comment  on  ch. 
xvi.  I ).  It  is  assumed  that  the  return  of  the 
Israelites  to  their  land  ought  to  be  a  subject 
of  rejoicing  to  all  their  neighbours. 

Ver.  12. — Let  them  give  glory  unto  the 
Lord  ...  in  the  islands;  i.«.  "let  those 
who  are  in  the  islands,"  or  the  maritime 
tracts,  "  give  glory  to  God" — a  repetition  of 
the  last  clause  of  ver.  10.  The  persistency 
with  which  the  islands,  or  tbe  maritime 
tracts  of  the  west,  are  mentioned  (ch.  xli.  1, 
5;  xlii.  10, 12;  xlix;  I,  etc.)  may  perhaps  be 
accounted  for  by  the  fact  that  Christianity 
was  to  obtain  its  earliest  and  its  moat  en- 
during triumphs  in  these  regions. 

Yer.  13. — ^The  Lord  shall  go  forth.  The 
exhortation  to  "  sing  unto  the  Lord  a  new 
aong  "  ends  with  ver.  12,  and  now  the  reason 
or  groundwork  for  the  exhortation  has  to 
be  declared.  God  is  about  to  make  one  of 
the  great  manifestations  of  hia  power  upon 
the  earth — ^to  "  go  forth  "  againat  his  enemies, 
and  destroy  and  devour,  and  easily  prevail 
against  tliem — ^not,  however,  simply  in  the 
way  of  punishment  and  vengeance,  but  with 
a  further  merciful  object.  He  will  pnnish 
Babylon,  that  he  may  deliver  Israel.  He 
has  promised  not  to  forsake  his  people  (ch. 
xli.  17).  He  ia  now  about  to  give  effect  to 
his  promise  by  a  "new"  and  strange  de- 
liverance. He  "  will  bring  his  people  by  a 
way  that  they  knew  not,  and  lead  them  in 
paths  that  they  have  not  known  "  (ver.  16). 
It  has  been  said  that  "in  effect  it  ia  tk* 
day  of  judgment  which  is  here  described  " 
(Oheyne);  but  this  seems  to  be  only  so  bx 
true  as  every  manifestation  of  Ood'a  wtath 
towards  his  eneuiM  if  •  fereabadowinf  «( 


OLXLiLl— 26.]    THE  BOOK  OF  THE  PROPHET  ISAIAH. 


119 


the  gieatand  awful  day.  The  event  directly 
in  view  is  the;  destriiotioii  of  the  Babylonian 
power  by  tlie  ineaistible  arms  of -Cyrus. 
Hence  the  allu<iiou  to  idolaters  and  images 
in  ver.  17.  As  a  mighty  man  .  .  ,  like  a  man 
of  war.  (For  similar  anthropomorphisms, 
see  Exod.  xt.  3;  Ps.  xxiv.  8.)  He  shall  stir 
up  jealousy;  i.e.  his  own  jealousy.  God  is 
"a  jealous  God"  (Exod.  ix.  5),  so  much 
BO  that  his  very  "  name  is  Jealous  "  (Exod. 
xxxiv.  14).  He  is  jealous  for  his  own  honour 
(supra,  ver.  8),  and  jealous  also  for  his 
people's  honour  and  reputation  and  happi- 
ness. Occasionally  lie  allows  his  jealousy  to 
slumber  (comp.  Acts  xii.  30,  "The  times 
of  this  ignorance  God  winked  at ") ;  aud 
this  he  had  now  done  for  some  fifty  or  sixty 
years,  since  his  people  were  cai-ried  into 
captivity.  But  the  time  of  acquiescence 
has  gone  by — he  is  about  to  waken  up  his 
"smouldering  jealousy,  and  stir  it,  till  it 
burns  up  into  a  bright  flame "  (Delitzsch). 
He  shall  cry,  yea,  roar ;  rather,  yea,  shout ;  i.e. 
utter  his  battle-cry  with  a  clear,  loud  voice. 

Ver.  14. — I  have  long  time  holden  my 
peaoe ;  literally,  for  an  eternity.  God's  love 
for  his  people  is  forcibly  expressed  by  his 
saying  that  he  has  felt  it  "  an  eternity  " — 
though  it  was  but  some  five  or  six  decades — 
while  he  was  waiting  for  his  chastisement  to 
have  such  due  effect  as  would  allow  of  his 
bringing  it  to  an  end,  and  showing  tliem 
mercy.  He  has  chafed,  as  it  were,  under 
the  necessity  of  inaction,  and  has  with  diffi- 
culty refrained  himself.  Now  he  will  refrain 
no  longer.  A  travaiUng  woman.  A  woman 
in  her  travail,  after  long  endurance,  at  last 
gives  free  vent  to  her  natural  feelings,  and 
utters  loud  cries  (oompare  the  preceding 
verse).  I  will  destroy  aud  devour  at  onoa 
(so  Gesenius,  Kay,  and  the  ancient  versions). 
But  the  bulk  of  modern  commentators  render, 
"I  will  pant  and  gasp,"  as  does  a  travailing 
woman. 

Ver.  15. — ^I  VTiU  make  waste  mountains 
and  hills.  Tiie  result  of  God's  "  stirring  up 
his  jealousy,"  and  giving  a  free  vent  to  his 
feelings;  will  be  the  destruction  of  tlie  great 
and  mighty  ones  of  the  earth  (comp.  oh.  ii. 
14).  These  are  probably,  in  this  place,  the 
Babylonian  king.^  and  nobles.  Dry  up  all 
their  herbs ;  i.e.  turn  Babylonia,  temporarily, 
into  a  desert.  Make  the  rivers  islands,  and 
dry  np  the  pools.  Invert  the  established 
order  of  things — ^tum  the  rivers  into  dry 
land,  and  empty  the  reservoirs.  There  is, 
perhaps,  some  allusion  to  those  dealings  with 
the  river-beds,  which  the  Greek  historiana 
ascribe  to  Cyrus  (Herod.,  i.  189, 191 ;  Xen., 
'Oyrop.,'  vii.  5,  §  10),  and  which  are  not 
dispioTed  by  the  fact  that  the  one  native, 
account  of  the  capture  of  Babylon  by  Cyrus, 
which  has  come  down  to  0%  mkei  bo  men- 
tJMltftlMBlu 


Ver.  16.— 1  will  bring  the  blind  by  a  way 
that  they  knew  not.  "  The  blind  "  here  can 
only  be  captive  Israel,  still  dim-sighted  from 
the  effect  of  its  old  sins  against  light,  and 
therefore  greatly  needing  God's  guidance. 
God  promises  to  "bring  them"  out  of  cap- 
tivity "by  a  way  not  hitherto  known  to  them  " 
— ^the  way  of  voluntiiry  release  by  the  favour 
of  a  new  king  (ste  the  comment  on  ver.  9). 
I  will  make  darkness  light  before  themj 
either,  I  will  illuminate  with  rays  of  light 
and  hope  the  dark  and  cheerless  life  that  they 
have  been  leading  (Delitzsch),  or,  twill  throw 
light  upon  that  dark  future  which  has  hitherto 
stretched  before  them,  and  allmo  them  to  pene- 
trate its  obscurity,  and  see  wlial  is  about  to 
happen.  Crooked  things;  rather,  rough 
plaees;  i.e.  difficulties  of  any  and  every 
kind.  Straight;  rather,  nnootA,  level,  ^2atn. 
These  things  will  I  do  nnto  them,  and  not 
forsake  them.  Dr.  Kay  translates,  "  These 
things  haoe  I  done,  and  have  not  forsaken 
them ;  "  Mr.  Oheyne,  "  These  are  the  things 
that  I  will  do,  and  will  not  let  them  slip;  " 
Delitzsch,  "These  are  the  things  that  I 
carry  out  aud  do  not  leave."  According  to 
the  two  latter  renderings,  the  clause  is  a 
mere  solemn  confirmation  of  the  previous 
promises. 

Ver.  17. — They  shall  be  turned  back,  ete. 
While  the  people  of  God  are  led  by  God's 
hand  through  new  paths,  and  are  illumined 
with  abundant  light,  and  have  their  diffi- 
culties smoothed  away  from  before  them, 
their  idolatrous  oppressors  will  be  "  turned 
back  "  or  suffer  defeat,  and  be  put  to  shame, 
finding  no  help  from  their  idols,  whose 
powerlessness  will  be  opsniy  shown,  to  the 
uttei  confusion  of  their  votaries. 

Vers.  18  —  25.  —  Address  to  Captive 
Israel,  caixinq  ufok  them  to  turn  tu 
God,  and  reminding  them  that  they 
have  deserved  their  ArrLtoTiONS.  By 
some  critics  the  earlier  verses  of  this 
passage  (vers.  19  —  21)  are  regarded  as 
having  reference  to  the  "Servant  of  the 
Lord "  depicted  in  vers.  1 — 7,  and  as  call- 
ing on  the  captive  Jews  to  consider  his 
voluntary  humiliation,  and  the  object  of  it. 
But  this  view  seems  to  be  strained.  It  re- 
quires "  deaf ''  and  "  blind  "  to  be  taken  in 
completely  different  senses  in  the  two  con- 
secutive verses,  18  and  19.  Probably  De- 
litzsch and  Mr.  Cheyne  are  right  in  taking 
the  whole  passage  of  captive  Israel,  and 
especially  of  that  "outer  circle"  which 
was  least  deserving  of  God's  favour  and 
most  open  to  rebuke  and  reproaeh.  These 
"blind"  and  "deaf"  ones  are  warned  that 
it  is  high  time  for  them  to  uncloN  their  eyt  i 


120 


THE   BOOK  OP  THE   PROPHET  ISAIAH,    [oh.  xlii.  1— 95 


and  open  their  eaT8,  and  are  reminded  that 
all  their  recent  and  prepent  sufferings  arise 
from  their  former  "blindness"  and  diso- 
bedience. 

Ver.  1 8.— Hear,  ye  deaf.  The  "  deaf  "  are 
not  absolutely  without  hearing,  nor  the 
"  blind "  absolutely  without  sight.  They 
can  "  hear  "  and  "  see,"  if  they  choose  to  do 
bO.  When  they  do  not  see,  it  is  because 
they  "wink  with  their  eyes"  (Matt.  xiii. 
15);  when  they  do  not  hear,  it  is  because, 
like  the  deaf  adder,  they  "  stop  their  ears  " 
(Ps.  Iviii.  4).  This,  at.any  rate,  is  the  case 
with  the  majority.  There  may  be  some  who 
have  deadened  their  moral  vision  altogether, 
and  have  no  longer  any  "  ears  to  hear."  God, 
liowever,  addresses  the  mass  of  Israel  as  still 
possessed  of  moral  discernment,  if  they  will 
but  use  it,  and  calls  upon  them  to  wake  up 
out  of  sleep — to  "  hear  "  and  "  see." 

Ver.  19. — Who  is  blind,  but  my  servant? 
•r  deaf,  as  my  messenger  ?  Ood's  original 
"servant"  and  "messenger"  to  the  nations 
was  his  people  Israel.  It  was  only  through 
their  default  that  he  needed  to  send  onother 
and  truer  inessenger.  He  now  asks,  having 
regard  to  their  opportunities,  who  are  so 
blind  and  deaf  as  they  are  ?  The  object  of 
the  qaestion  is  to  wake  a  feeling  of  shame 
in  the  hearts  of  those  who  are  not  shameless 
among  the  Israelites.  That  I  sent ;  rather, 
tohom  I  will  send.  Israel's  mediatorial  ofSce 
was  not  yet  over.  They  were  still,  for  above 
five  hundred  years,  to  be  God's  messenger  to 
the  nations.  As  he  that  is  perfect;  rather, 
0$  he  that  receives  reward  from  me  (see  ProT. 
xi.  31;  xiii.  13).  The  word  used  is  connected 
etymologically  with  the  Arabic  muslim  (our 
"Moslem");  but  it  does  not  appear  to  have 
had  the  sense  of  " surrender "  or  "submis- 
sion "  in  Hebrew. 

Yer.  20. — Seeing  many  things,  but,  etc. 
Israel  had  "  seen  many  things ; "  i.e.  passed 
through  a  long  experience,  but  not  profited 
by  it— not  been  "  observant,"  as  they  should 
have  been.  They  had  had  their  ears  open 
in  a  certain  sense,  and  heard  the  words  tliat 
the  prophets  addressed  to  them,  but  had  not 
taken  in  their  true  import.  (The  mixture 
nf  persons  is  like  that  in  ch,  i.  29  and  xiT. 
300 

Ver.  21. — The  Lord  is  well  pleased ;  rather, 
the  Lord  was  pleased,  or  it  pleased  the  Lord. 
For  his  righteousness'  sake ;  "  because  of  hie 
own  perfect  righteousness."  He  will  mag- 
nify the  Law ;  rather,  to  magnify  the  Law — 
to  «at  it  forth  in  its  greatness  and  its  glorj 


before  his  people.     It  fi  not  the  original 

giving  of  the  Law  at  Sinai  only  that  It 
menut,  but  also  its  constant  inculcation  by  a 
long  series  of  prophets.  Israel's  experience 
(ver.  20)  had  included  all  this ;  but  they  had 
not  profited  by  the  instruction  addressed  to 
ihem. 

Yer.  22. — Bnt  this  ia  •  people,  eto.;  i.e. 
yet,  notwithstanding  all  that  has  been  done 
for  it,  see  the  condition  into  which  this 
people  has  brought  itself.  For  their  sins, 
here  they  are  in  Babylonia,  robbed  and 
spoiled — i.e.  suffering  oppression  and  wrong 
— snared  in  holes,  or  taken  in  their  enemies' 
pits  (Ps.  cxix.  85),  and,  some  of  them,  hid  in 
prison-houses  (see  2  Kings  xxv.  27),  ex- 
piating by  their  punishments  the  long  series 
of  their  offences. 

Yer.  23. — Who  among  yon  will  give  ear  ? 
Surely  there  are  some  among  you,  less 
hardened  than  the  rest,  who  wUl  take  ad- 
vantage of  my  warning,  and  repent  at  this, 
the  eleventh  hour.  God's  arm  was  strait- 
ened ;  the  people  oonld  not  be  delivered  out 
of  captivity  unless  they  ceased  in  large 
numbers  to  be  "  blind  "  and  "  deaf" — ^unless 
they  listened  to  the  prophet's  words,  and 
profited  by  them. 

Yer.  24. — Jaeob .  .  .  Israel  (comp.  eh.  xl. 
27;  xli.  8,  14;  xliii.  1,  etc.).  He  against 
whom  we  have  sinned.  The  prophet  identi- 
fies himself  with  his  people  in  loving  sym- 
pathy, just  as  Daniel  does  in  ch.  ix.  5 — 15, 
and  Ezra  in  oh.  ix.  6 — 15,  of  their  respective 
books  (comp.  also  ch.  lix.  9 — 13), 

Yer.  25. — ^Therefore  he  hath  poured  npon 
him  ...  the  strength  of  battle;  i.e.  for 
this  cause,  on  account  of  their  iniquities, 
did  God  bring  upon  his  people  the  scourge 
of  foreign  war,  and  allow  the  Babylonians 
to  waste  Judssa,  to  destroy  Jerusalem,  and  to 
lead  into  captivity  the  entire  nation  (comp. 
2  Chron.  xxxvL  14—17).  It  hath  set  hhn 
on  fire ;  rather,  it  (i.e.  the  war)  set  Mm  on 
fire.  The  reference  is,  perhaps,  especially 
to  the  burning  of  Jerusalem  by  Nebuzar-adan 
(2  Kings  xxv.  9) ;  bnt  the  phi-ase  will  cover 
also  the  general  devastation  of  the  land  both 
before  and  after  this  event  (Jer.  xxxix. — 
xiii.).  He  knew  not;  rather,  he  took  no 
notice;  he  did  not  change  his  ways  on 
account  of  the  chastisement.  The  prophet's 
view  is  that  Israel,  as  a  whole,  was  not 
greatly  bettered  by  the  Captivity,  at  any 
rate  up  to  the  time  which  he  takes  for  hit 
standpoint,  and  at  which  he  anpposes  liim- 
■elf  to  Im  addressing  them. 


HOMILETIO& 

Yen.  1 — 7. — The  servants  of  God,  and  the  one  true  Servant    It  must  Iw  admitted 
by  all  that  the  expression  "  Servant  of  Qtoif"  or  "  Servant  «f  JehoTah,"  la  uiad  iq 


OH.  aau  1— 26.]    THE  BOOK  OF  THE  PBOPHBT  ISAIAH.  121 


Scriptura  in  Tarious  iense8.  All  who  work  out  Gkid's  purposes,  however  unconsciously 
or  even  unwillingly,  are  called  by  the  sacred  writers  "  God's  servants,"  in  respect  of  the 
service,  albeit  unconscious  or  unwilling,  which  they  render  him.  Thus  Jeremiah  calls 
Nebuchadnezzar  "God's  servant"  (xxv.  9;  xxvii.  6,  etc.),  anH  Ezekiel  speaks  of 
the  "  wages "  due  to  him  because  he  and  his  army  "  served  a  good  service  "  on  God's 
behalf  against  Tyre  (xxix.  18).  In  quite  a  different  sense,  the  Israelites  generally 
are  called  God's  servants,  not  as  actually  rendering  hira  any  service  at  all,  but  as  bound 
by  covenant  to  be  his  servants,  engaged  in  his  service  by  contract,  however  they  might 
break  the  contract,  reject  his  service,  rebel  against  him,  and  choose  for  themselves 
"  other  lords  "  (ch.  xxvi.  13).  Jn  a  third  sense,  different  from  both  of  these,  the  faithful 
Israelites,  those  who  earnestly  endeavoured  to  serve  God,  are  called  his  servants,  partly 
as  bound  by  covenant,  like  the  unfaithful  servants,  but  mainly  as  consciously  and 
intentionally  working  for  God,  and  doing  him  "true  and  laudable  service."  Such 
service,  however,  must  always  have  been,  at  the  best,  imperfect,  falling  very  far  short 
of  that  entire  fidelity  and  complete  obedience  which  God  requires  and  which  man 
ought  to  render.  Hence,  when  a  servant  is  spoken  of  with  whom  no  fault  is  found — 
•  lervant  who  never  "  fails "  (ver.  4),  whom  God  holds  always  by  the  hand  (ver.  6), 
who  is  to  give  a  law  to  the  nations  (ver.  4),  and  to  "  bring  forth  judgment  unto  truth  " 
(ver.  3),  in  whom,  moreover,  "God's  soul  deligbteth"  (ver.  1), — we  may  be  sure  that  it 
is  not  Kuthful  Israel  that  is  intended.  Of  faithful  Israel — even  of  the  faithfuUest  in 
Israel,  whether  prophet,  priest,  or  king — none  of  these  things  could  be  predicated. 
Isaiah  would  not  speak  of  any  prophet,  least  of  all,  of  himself,  in  the  terms  wherewith 
he  describes  "  the  Servant  of  Jehovah  "  in  this  passage.  No ;  One  is  proclaimed  to  us 
greater  than  the  sons  of  men — ^the  perfect  model  of  a  "servant  of  God,"  obedient  in 
all  things,  unceasingly  active  in  Gkid's  service,  never  fainting,  never  wearying.  "  My 
Father  worketh  hitherto,  and  I  work,"  said  Jesus  (John  v.  17);  "My  meat  is  to  do 
the  will  of  my  Father  which  sent  me,  and  to  finish  his  work"  (John  iv.  34);  "Wist 
ye  not  that  I  must  be  about  my  Father's  business  ?  "  (Luke  a,  49). 

Vers.  10 — 12. — Th»  duty  of  §ympaihizing  with  the  Joys  of  others.  Compasrion  for 
those  who  suffer  is  a  strong  and  powerful  feeling,  well  developed  in  human  nature,  and 
widely  spread  among  all  classes  and  conditions  of  men.  A  real  feeling  of  glad  sympathy 
with-  those  who  are  exceptionally  prosperous  is  a  far  rarer  emotion,  and  seldom  attains 
any  great  intensity.  Yet,  in  the  nature  of  things,  the  two  duties  would  seem  to  be 
co-ordinate  and  to  balance  each  other.  "  Bejoice  with  them  that  do  rejoice,  and  weep 
with  them  that  weep "  (Bom.  xii.  15).  In  the  present  passage  of  Isaiah  the  whole 
world  seems  to  be  called  upon  to  sympathize  with  Israel's  deliverance  from  captivity, 
and  its  consequences,  which  were  the  re-establishment  of  a  visible  Church  (.>f  God  upon 
the  earth — a  Church  which  would  be  a  perpetual  witness  for  him,  and  out  of  which,  in 
a  certain  sense,  would  be  developed  that  "  Church  of  Christ,"  against  which  the  gates 
of  hell  would  not  prevail,  and  which  would  continue  "  even  to  the  end  of  the  world." 
No  doubt  the  whole  world  was  interested  in  these  results,  and  might  thus  be  regarded 
as  having  reason  to  rejoice  for  their  own  sake ;  but  the  call  made  upon  them  is  not 
rested  on  any  such  grounds.  It  bases  itself  simply  on  the  general  duty  of  good  will 
which  men  owe  to  their  fellows.     Here  we  may  note  two  forms  of  the  duty. 

I.  As    INDIVIDnALS,    WE    SHOULD    BEJOICE    IN    THE     JOT    AKD    PBOSFERITT    OF     OUB 

NEloaBOUBS.  Condolence  is  common ;  congratulation  is  less  frequent.  Our  neighbours' 
successes  and  triumphs  too  often  raise  in  us  a  certain  feeling  of  jealousy  and  discontent, 
which  prevents  us  from  offering  congratulations,  or  makes  those  that  we  offer  insincere. 
"  Why  are  they  so  much  more  favoured  than  ourselves  ?  What  have  they  done  to 
deserve  their  advancement?"  All  such  thoughts  ought  to  be  put  aside.  "It  is  God 
that  Tuleth  in  Jacob,  and  unto  the  ends  of  the  earth."  All  prosperity  is  from  God  -at 
the  least,  allowed  by  him.  We  are  bound,  by  the  love  that  we  ought  to  bear  to  our 
fellow-men,  to  he  glad  when  good  befalls  them — to  put  ourselves  and  our  own  claims 
and  deservings  out  of  sight,  and  simply  to  rejoice  in  their  joy. 

II.  As  nvBEBS  OF  A  NATION,  WE  SHOULD  BEJOICE  IN  THE  JOT  AND  PBOBPEBITT  OF 

NdGHBOUBiNa  NATIONS.  The  indifferent  Beni-Eedar,  the  hoetile  Idumseans,  are 
required  by  God  to  sing  a  song  of  praise  for  Israel's  restoration  to  their  own  country. 
The  isles  aad  maritime  traoti  of  the  West  are  to  do  the  aksam.    Nations  are,  all  of 


121  THE  BOOK  OF  THE  PROPHET  ISAIaH.     [oh.  xul  1—26 

them,  members  of  the  one  himian  fomily,  intimately  connected  one  frith  uiother,  and 
bound  to  have  friendly  feelings  one  towards  another.  Petty  quarrels  and  differences, 
such  as  crop  up  between  near  relations,  and  still  more  between  neighbouring  peoples, 
should  not  be  allowed  to  overpower  the  general  sentiment  of  good  will,  or  to  prevent 
the  exhibition  of  sympathy  when  occasion  arises.  National  enmities  would  be  greatly 
softened  if  nations  generally  would  show  satisfaction  in  each  other's  successes  and 
]>ros|ierity,  even  if  such  an  exhibition  of  satisfaction  were  limited  to  cases  where  the 
success  gained  by  the  one  in  no  way  interfered  with  the  interests  of  the  other. 

Vers.  18 — 26. — The  Kindness  of  Israel.  The  "blindness"  of  Israel  is  a  subject  of 
continual  remark  in  Sciipture  from  the  time  of  Moses  (Deut,  zzviii.  28,  29)  to  that 
of  St.  Paul  (Bum.  xL  25).    Four  things  may  be  noted  of  it. 

I.  It  is  self-caused.  The  Israelites  "  blinded  themselves,"  and  so  became  blind 
(ch.  xxix.  9,  with  the  comment).  They  "winked  with  their  eyes,"  closed  them 
•gainst  the  light  which  shone  on  them  from  on  high,  and  thus  gradually  by  disuse  lost 
the  power  of  spiritual  discernment  (see  the  homiletics  on  ch.  xxix.  9,  10).  The 
process  is  a  natural  one.  It  is  a  law  of  nature  that  every  disused  part  of  an  organism 
shall  dwindle  away  and  decay.  "  There  are  certain  burrowing  animals — the  mole,  for 
instance — which  have  taken  to  spending  their  lives  beneath  the  surface  of  the  ground. 
And  Kature  has  taken  her  revenge  u)ion  them  in  a  thoroughly  natural  way — she  has 
closed  up  their  eyes.  If  they  mean  to  live  in  darkness,  she  argues,  eyes  are  obviously 
a  superfluous  function.  By  neglecting  them,  these  animals  made  it  clear  that  they  did 
not  want  them.  And  as  one  of  Nature's  fixed  principles  is  that  nothing  shall  exist  in 
vain,  the  eyes  are  presently  taken  away,  or  reduced  to  a  rudimentary  state.  There  are 
ti>hes  which  have  had  to  pay  the  same  terrible  forfeit  for  having  made  their  abode  in 
dark  caverns,  where  eyes  can  never  be  required.  And  in  exactly  the  same  way  the 
spiritual  eye  must  die  and  lose  its  power  by  purely  natural  law,  if  the  soul  choose  to 
walk  in  darkness  rather  than  light"  (see  l&c.  Henry  Drummond's  'Natural  Law  in 
the  Spiiitual  World,'  pp.  110,  111). 

II.  It  is  NEVBRTHELB88  A  DivDiE  JUDOMENT  ON  THEM.  NatuTc's  law8  are  GM's 
decrees.  In  making  it  a  law  of  nature  that  destruction  of  an  organ  or  a  function 
should  follow  disuse,  Gtod  was  passing  a  sentence  on  those  who  wilfully  scorned  any  of 
his  gifts.  Hence  he  is  constantly  said  in  Scripture  to  "  blind  men's  eyes  "  and  "  harden 
their  hearts "  (Exod.  iv.  21 ;  ix.  12 ;  Deut.  xxviii.  28 ;  Matt.  xii.  16 ;  John  xii.  40 ; 
Rom.  xi.  8,  etc.),  and  Israel's  "blinchiess"  is  distinctly  ascribed  to  him  in  ch.  vi.  10; 
xxix.  10.  "  Because  they  did  not  like  to  retain  Gh>d  in  their  knowledge,  Gbd  gave  them 
over  to  a  repiobate  mind  "  (Rom.  L  28). 

III.  It  IB  PARTIAL.  " Blindness  in  part  is  happened  unto  Israel"  (Bom.  xL  26). 
At  no  time  did  God  leave  himself  without  a  witness.  At  no  time  did  the  whole  of 
Israel  become  blind.  At  the  worst  period  of  the  Phoenician  idolatry,  there  were  yet  in 
Samaria  seven  thousand  who  had  not  bowed  the  knee  to  Baal  (1  Kings  xix.  18).  In 
Isaiah's  time,  God  had  still  left  him  in  Judah  a  "remnant"  (ch.  i.  9;  x.  20;  xlvL  3). 
When  our  Lord  came,  it  was  from  among  the  Israelites  that  he  gathered  his  "  little 
flock"  (Luke  xii.  32).  Since  then  in  every  age  there  have  been  converts — many  of 
them  "shining  lights" — to  Christianity  from  Judaism.  Even  now  the  Christian  will 
not  lightly  let  fall  the  hope  of  an  ultimate  great  in-gathering  of  Israel  into  the  one 
fold.  ''  The  veil  shall  be  taken  away  "  some  day  {2  Cor.  iii.  16),  and  then  shall  Israel 
"  turn  to  I  he  Lord"  and  worship  his  Christ. 

IV.  It  IS,  TO  soMB  IXTENT,  CURABLE.  Isalah  calls  upon  the  blind  to  "look,  that 
they  may  see  "  (ver.  18).  There  are  infinite  intermediate  conditions  between  perfectly 
healthy  sight  and  absolute  blindness.  Comparatively  few  of  the  Israelites  were  at  any 
time  absolutely  blind.  The  great  majority  were  more  or  less  dim-sighted.  So  long  as 
thb  is  the  case,  whether  physically  or  morally,  there  is  a  possibility  of  recovery.  The 
organ  is  not  destroyed;  it  may  by  care  and  use  be  rendered  capable  of  once  mors 
{ I'uperly  pei-forming  its  function.  Isaiah  speaks  of  a  time  when  "  the  eyes  of  the  blind 
would  see  out  of  obscurity  and  out  of  darkness  "  (ch.  xxix.  18).  May  it  not  be  hoped 
that  the  time  is  approaching  for  the  Jewish  people — ^the  time  when  "  Israel  after  Ui« 
licsh"  will  once  more  become  an  important  portion  of  the  "Israel  of  God"? 


aH.nn.1— 26.]    THE  BOOK  OF  THE  PBOFUET  ISAIAH.  123 


HOMILIES  BT  VABIOUS  AUTHOB& 

Tan.  1 — 7. — The  Servant  tjf  Jthovdh.  "  Behold  I "  Let  all  the  world  hearken  and 
attend  to  the  new  reyelation.  It  is  admitted  that  the  conception  is  substantially  that 
of  Christ  in  the  Gospel*.  According  to  one  critic,  indeed,  the  prophetic  passage  springs 
from  the  time  of  Herod  II.    Let  us  think,  then,  of  Jesas  and  his  mission. 

L  Tbb  EhBcr  or  God.  Six  times  does  the  word  occur  in  this  portion  of  Isaiah  ; 
it  ia  found  also  in  Ps.  Ixxxix.  3;  ov.  6,  43;  cyi.  6,  23.  He  has  been  endowed  with 
God's  Spirit,  anointed  for  a  special  mission,  for  a  high  and  arduous  task ;  and  this  ii 
to  publish  the  Law,  the  practical  rel^ion  of  Jehovah,  to  the  nations  of  the  earth.  "  All 
religions  claim  to  be  laws;  biblical  religion  dwells  with  increasing  earnestness  on  the  ' 
moral  a*  opposed  to  the  ritual  law." 

n.  His  mbthuJM.'  They  are  gentle,  quiet,  spirituaL  He  speaks,  not  in  the  loud 
voice  of  passionate  debate  and  contention,  but  with  the  still  small  voice  of  reasonable 
penuasion.  He  does  not  come  to  crush  life,  but  to  develop  it ;  not  to  despise  the  weak, 
but  to  encourage  and  raise  them.  The  crushed  reed  is  the  very  type  of  helplessness ; 
the  dimly  burning  wick  of  ignorance  of  the  best.  It  has  been  designated  as  the  religion 
of  condescension.  When  it  came  into  the  world,  it  found  the  multitude  crushed  beneath 
the  yoke  of  political  oppression,  exhausted  by  the  demands  of  heathen  ritualism,  yet 
longing  for  health  and  salvation ;  it  stooped  to  them  and  blessed  them.  He  himself  is 
as  a  brightly  burning  Lamp,  and  a  Beed, "  a  humble  Plant; "  unlike  others, "  covered  with 
leaves,  or  hardened  in  their  stalk."  In  a  spirit  of  strict  truthfulness,  for  this  end  bom 
and  brought  into  the  world,  he  shall  proceed  to  establish  justice  and  true  religion  on 
the  earth.  He  shall  be  the  nations'  Desire ;  and  they  shall  wait  in  longing  upon  him 
(of.  Matt.  xiL  17 — ^21).  Such  is  Ohristianity,  as  it  exists  in  the  mind  of  its  Author,  and 
as  it  appears  in  the  world,  pursuing  its  beneficent  way,  in  spite  of  all  reTolutions,  and  of 
all  religious  changes  and  controverues. — J. 

Yan.  6 — 9. — Mission  of  JehovaKt  Servant.  "  A  new  revelation  defines  the  mission 
of  the  Servant  with  greater  precision.  The  plan  of  the  mission  requires  an  exhibition 
of  the  Divine  wisdom  and  power  on  as  large  a  scale  as  in  creation  and  preservation 
(fit  Zeoh.  xiL  1)"  (Cheyne). 

L  'Snx  BBLATioK  OF  GoD  TO  THE  woBLD.  He  u  the  God — the  only  God  (of.  Ps. 
Ixxxv.  9).  He  can  admit  no  rival ;  he  stands  in  a  unique  relation  to  the  world — is 
alone  to  be  worshipped.  He  is  the  Creator:  his  work  is  the  heaven  and  the  earth,  and 
the  people.  The  breath  of  life  is  by  him  breathed  into  his  creatures.  The  universe 
is  entirely  subject  to  him,  and  he  has  the  right  to  appoint  whom  he  will  to  be  the 
minister  and  chtmnel  of  his  favours  to  men.  To  the  appointed  Messiah,  then,  due 
revennce  is  to  be  paid. 

n.  His  covenant  with  Isbaxl  ahd  uaneino.  There  is  a  covenant  with  the 
chosen  people,  and  through  them  all  nations  are  to  own  him  as  God.  Generally  the 
righteousness  of  God  stands  for  the  goodness  of  God,  manifested  to  his  world  in  the  whole 
scheme  and  agency  of  salvation.  "  I  have  done  this  as  a  righteous  and  just  God,  and 
in  accomplishment  of  my  righteous  purposes.  I  am  the  just  moral  Governor  of  the 
universe,  and  have  designated  thee  to  this  work,  in  the  accomplishment  of  those 
purposes." 

IIL  The  Mediator  or  THB  COVENANT.  God  holds  his  hand  in  his.  What_  strength, 
then ;  what  grace  and  Divine  communication  must  there  not  be  with  the  Mediator,  who 
will  be  guided  and  guarded,  will  be  visibly  in  the  enjoyment  of  the  Divine  favour  I  And 
so  the  Mediator  himself  is  called  a  Covenant — the  personal  realization  of  God's  thought 
and  purpose  to  the  people — the  embodiment  of  that  spiritual  relation  announced  in 
ven.  30^  31,  etc.  Another  of  his  names  is  Light.  Being  Intelligence  in  himself,  the 
Wisdom  of  God,  he  will  diffuse  it  among  the  nations :  bringing  men  out  of  their  spiritual 
blindnew  and  the  prison-house  and  confinement  of  spiritual  distress  (Ps.  cvii.  10 ;  Job 
xxxvL  8).  "  Such  is  the  freedom  the  gospel  imparts ;  nor  can  there  be  a  more  striking 
description  of  its  happy  effects  on  the  minds  and  hearts  of  darkened  and  wretched 
meft"  (1  Pet  ii.  9).  .  ,         :. 

nr.  The  bolihh  assubancb,    Jehovah  now  turns  to  the  people,  and  assures  tnem 


124  THE  BOOK  OF  THE  PBOPHET  ISAIAH,    [oh.  xlu.  1— 26. 

that  he  ia  the  only  true  God,  and  jealously  claims  a  sole  and  undivided  homage.  He  is 
**  the  Eternal."  The  name  includes  "  the  unique  reality,  and  power  to  confer  reality, 
of  the  Bivine  Being."  His  glory  he  will  not  give  to  another ;  for  were  such  a  God'i 
prediction  to  fail,  he  would  sink  to  a  lower  level  than  the  imaginary  deities,  who  have, 
at  any  rate,  not  deluded  their  worshippers.  But  the  earlier  predictions  have  been  ful- 
filled— those  against  the  Babylonians  or  Assyrians;  and  the  new  things,  later  and  more 
splendid — the  deliverances  of  the  Jews — wiU  in  like  manner  be  fulfilled.  The  plant  ia 
contained  in  the  seed;  the  event  in  the  mind;  the  fulfilment  in  the  Word  of  Jehovah 
(oh.  ix.  8;  Iv.  10, 11 ;  Amos  iii.  7).— J. 

Vers.  10 — ^25. — A  new  song  to  Jehovah.  Caught  up  in  his  ecstasy  to  a  high  place  of 
virion,  the  prophet  sees  all  the  nations  of  mankind  deriving  blessing  from  the  ministry 
of  Israel,  and  calls  upon  them  to  join  in  a  song  of  praise.  God's  goodness  in  providing 
a  Redeemer  demands  the  thanksgiving  of  all  the  world. 

I.  Tmt  Bona  AiTD  THE  siNQEBB.  The  ucw  soug  is  named  in  the  Psalter  (zcvi.  1 ; 
xcviii.  1),  meaning  a  song  inspired  by  the  sense  of  new  mercies.  All  parts  of  the  earth 
are  to  join  in  the  chorus :  the  sailors,  and  even  all  the  finny  inhabitants  of  the  deep 
(Ps.  xxsiv.  1) ;  the  nomads  and  the  dwellers  in  cities  and  among  the  rocks, — shall  join 
to  swell  the  volume  of  this  mighty  song. 

n.  The  obeat  deeds  of  the  ALHianTT.  It  is  a  great  and  terrible  day  of  Jehovah. 
He^  breaking  his  long  silence  and  reserve,  will  march  forth  like  a  mighty  hero,  with  a 
loud  battle-shout,  and  put  forth  all  his  prowess.  (For  similar  pictures  of  the  God  of  war, 
see  ch.  xxviii.  21 ;  xxxi.  4;  lix.  16, 17;  Zech.  ix.  13, 14;  xiv.3.)  The  whole  imagery 
bespeaks  the  most  intense  emotion.  God  may  be  silent,  may  seem  to  disregard  the  prayers 
of  his  people;  but  he  is  not  dead,  nor  is  he  sleeping,  like  a  Bftal.  He  is  waiting;  he  is 
ripening  his  purposes.  He  is  looking  for  his  opportunity.  When  he  comes  forth  his 
progress  will  be  marked  hy  judgment  and  by  r^emptiom.  These  are  the  two  sides,  the 
dark  and  the  bright,  of  his  work.  As  Judge  and  Avenger,  he  will  devastate  the  moun- 
tains and  hills — the  high  places  of  heathendom ;  and  the  fertile  vineyards  On  their  slopes, 
and  all  the  temples,  fanes,  and  altars,  will  be  demolished.  Under  the  figures  is  expressed 
the  coming  of  a  great  spiritual  revolution.  The  old  corrupt  order  and  custom  of  the 
world  must  first  give  way  before  the  new  and  holy  can  come  in.  And  then,  amidst  the 
dismay  of  the  false  worshippers,  light  will  at  the  same  time  appear  to  the  righteous. 
"  I  will  lead  the  blind  by  a  way  which  they  knew  not;  through  paths  they  have  not 
known  I  will  make  them  to  go :  I  will  turn  darkness  into  light  before  them,  and  rough 
places  into  a  table-land.  Those  things  I  will  surely  do,  and  I  will  not  let  them  slip." 
By  the  "  blind  "  appears  to  be  meant,  not  so  much  the  spiritually  ignorant  as  the  per- 
[dexed,  distressed,  desponding — those  who  "  walk  in  obscurity  "  (ch.  lix.  9, 10).  It  is 
the  language  of  tenderness,  and  the  language  of  strong  assurance,  founded  on  superior 
knowledge.  What  more  common  than  the  experience  of  the  Christian,  "  Darkness  is 
about  me;  my  way  is  hedged  in ;  there  is  no  outlook,  no  prospect "?  Yet  suddenly — ^it 
may  be  while  he  is  on  his  knees,  it  may  be  in  some  moment  of  refreshing  sleep — a 
ehange  comes.  The  clouds  lift ;  the  hosts  of  the  enemy  fall  back ;  the  "  large  place  " 
is  reached.  Then  he  sees  how  blind,  how  "  faint-hearted,  incredulous,  and  undiscem- 
ing  "  he  has  been.  Let  us  tread  the  path  of  duty,  which  is  the  path  of  faith ;  it  will 
surely  lead,  before  our  journey  closes,  out  to  those  "  shining  table-lands  to  which  onr 
God  himself  is  Sun  and  Moon."  And  let  us  lay  the  reproach  of  the  "  blind  and  deaf 
servant "  to  heart.  We  are  among  the  fttint-hearted  and  the  incredulous — despite  all 
our  experience  of  God's  goodness — whom  he  here  addresses.  We  are  like  "  the  man 
«f  mature  years  and  experience,  by  which  he  has  failed  to  profit,"  And  thus  we  are 
reduced  to  that  mood  of  humility  in  which  there  is  every  hope.  Why  this  contrast 
between  the  design  of  Qoi  to  exalt  his  law  of  righteousness  by  means  of  Israel,  and 
Israel's  despoiled  and  captive  estate  ?  Clearly  it  is  because  of  Israel's  sins — because, 
though  chosen  of  God,  they  would  not  walk  in  God's  ways.  So  let  every  argument  end 
between  ourselves  and  God  "  that  thou  mightest  be  justified  when  thou  Sj^sakestt  and 
be  clear  when  thou  judgect"    Let  ua  Mtum  unto  him  and  ho  saved^— J. 

Yer.  3. — The  tenderness  of  God.  "A  bruised  reed  shall  he  not  break."  Them  he 
(i  very  unlike  ua.     We  are  often  over-indignant  with  wrong  done  tn  ourselves.     We 


OH.  XLO.  1—26.]    THE  BOOK  OF  THE  PROPHET  ISAIAH.  125 

6nd  that  there  is  an  imperioas  temper  in  humanity,  and  that  even  parents  sometimes 
"  break  "  the  spirit  of  their  children.  How  many  are  discouraged  and  disheartened  in 
life  through  a  want  of  sympathy,  through  the  coldness  and  hauteur  of  others  I 

L  There  abe  BmnsiNas  of  bin.  Christ  will  heal  these.  He  never  drives  to  despaii 
He  might,  indeed,  condemn  j  for  he  knows  all  the  subtle  intricacies  of  evil  in  our  hearts. 
But  the  Son  of  man  is  not  come  to  condemn  the  world,  but  that  the  world  through  him 
might  be  saved. 

n.  There  abe  bbuisinqs  of  doubt.  St.  Thomas  felt  these,  and  he  expresses  hia 
doubts  with  startling  emphasis  and  boldness.  But  Christ  is  sympathetic  even  then — 
shows  Thomas  his  hands  and  his  side,  and  tells  him  to  reach  hither  his  hand.  Alas ! 
many  have  been  driven  into  infidelity  because  their  doubts  have  been  treated  as  sins, 
and  the  bruised  minds  have  been  broken  1 

III.  There  abe  bbuisings  of  sohbow.  But  God  knows  when  godly  sorrow  has  worked 
repentance  not  to  be  repented  of.  He  knows  when  the  poor  heart  is  weU-nigh  crushed 
with  grief  at  its  departure  from  him.  He  does  not  delight  in  pain.  The  Roman 
emperors  did.  But  he  whose  throne  was  a  cross,  and  whose  sceptre  is  love,  he  loves 
to  heai. 

In  sin  and  doubt  and  sorrow,  let  us  go  to  Christ  alone. — W.  M.  8. 

Ver.  4. — Ohrisfs  awe  conquest.  "  He  shall  not  fail  nor  be  discouraged."  We  study 
this  text  in  relation  to  our  Saviour.  We  may  be,  and  often  are,  discouraged ;  but  the 
Son,  he  in  whom,  says  Jehovah  (ver.  1),  "my  soul  delighteth,"  he  never  is.  He  must 
reign.  All  the  infinite  forces  of  love  and  righteousness  are  on  his  side.  In  God's  world 
error  can  never  be  supreme  over  truth.  "  The  pleasure  of  the  Lord  shall  prosper  in 
his  hand." 

I.  The  Savioub  and  Divine  certainty.  He  is  expecting.  All  the  true  triumphs 
of  the  ages  have  been  victories  for  him.  What  elevation  to  humanity  has  come  with 
his  truth  I  What  beneficent  enterprises  have  all  had  their  inspiration  from  his  cross ! 
What  fetters  he  has  snapped  1  What  prisons  he  has  opened  1  All  the  vital  forces 
of  to-day  are  the  forces  he  started  in  Judaea  eighteen  centuries  ago.  "He  shall  not  fail ;" 
for  he  lives  to-day  in  ever-growing  influence  over  the  hearts  of  men.  Madagascar  has 
recently  even,  been  won  for  his  crown.  We  must,  of  course,  take  time  into  our  estimate. 
"  A  thousand  years  are  with  the  Lord  as  one  day."  It  is  a  great  woi  k.  His  empire  is  the 
world.  His  kingdom  is  everlasting.  The  law  of  preparation  seems  related  to  the  law 
of  duration.  A  gourd  springs  up  in  a  night  but  it  lasts  only  for  a  day ;  whereas  the  oak 
that  monarch  of  the  centuries,  attains  its  perfection  throuj;h  the  long  course  of  years. 
We  need  not  wonder  that  an  "  immortal  kingdom  "  is  of  steady  growth. 

II.  The  Saviour  and  triumphant  endurance.  "He  sliall  not ...  be  discouraged." 
There  is,  indeed,  much  that  might  discourage — the  slow  victories  of  goodness,  the  enmity 
of  the  curnal  mind  I  But  Christ  sees  of  the  travail  of  his  soul.  He  is  not  like  us.  We 
have  need  of  the  counsel,  "Judge  nothing  before  the  time ; "  but  he  sees  the  end  from 
the  b(  ginning. 

What  comfort  this  should  be  to  all  Christians !  Why  should  we  be  discouraged  ?  If 
the  Leader  is  consciously  invincible,  how  valiant  and  constant  ought  his  followers  to  be ! 
Discouragement  means,  on  our  part,  unbelief. — W.  M.  S. 

Ver.  4. — 2%e  Christian's  conquest.  "  He  shall  not  fail  nor  be  discouraged."  We 
study  this  next  in  relation  to  ourselves.  The  words  suggest  difficulties  that  task 
strength  and  patience.  He,  our  blessed  Lord,  has  a  work,  not  only  of  Divine  impulse, 
but  Divine  patience.  The  second  verse  describes  the  quiet  work  of  Christ ;  the  third 
describes  the  solicitous  heart  of  Christ ;  the  fourth  describes  the  spirit  which  sustains  him. 

I.  This  prophecy  suggests  a  difficult  path  of  progress.  Why  say  this?  1. 
There  will  be  much  that  looks  like  failure  judged  hy  appearances.  2.  There  will  he 
mudt  that  would  exhaust  human  reso'irces.  The  strongest  man  would  say, "  I  feel  that, 
if  left  to  myself,  I  could  not  continue." 

II,  The  prophecy  states  the  sufficiency  of  Christ.  "  He  shall  not  falL"  1. 
Preparative  processes  are  related  to  pei-manent  work.  2.  Preliminary  hindrances  are 
nothing  to  the  eye  that  lees  th*  end.  3.  Ditowragemtntt  are  overmastered  by  the 
infinite  power  tff  love. 


126  THE  BOOK  OF  THE   PROPHET  ISAIAH,    [oh.  xmi.  1— 26 

m.  The  pkophecy  teachbb  us  that  there  will  be  ah  enthronement  of  the 

SPIRIT  OF  Chbistianitt.    Judgment.    1.  Christian  Judgment  concerning  sin.    Aright 

estimate  of  its  heinousness  aud  its  inflnences.     2.    Christian  judgment  concerning 

icUvation.    What  we  mean  by  the  power  of  Christ,  not  only  to  pardon,  but  to  redeem 

•e  from  evil. 

lY.  The  fbopheot  is  suggestive  or  wabnihg  to  ub.    1.  Sow  toon  our  energies  get 

^eebled !  2.  Eow  soon  our  hearts  get  discouraged  t  3.  Sow  soon  we  lose  the  spirit  of 
Hstl 

Y.  The  peofhect  closes  vith  the  waiting  of  the  islbb.  Yes;  they  wait.  1. 
Unconsciously  seeking.  2.  Can  find  no  other  Saviour,  3.  Ultimately  to  le  toon  to 
Christ.— Vf.  M.  8. 

Yer.  16. — Light  and  right.  "  I  will  make  darkness  light  before  them,  and  crooked 
things  straight."  These  words  are  prophecy  and  history  also ;  for  Christ  has  fulfilled 
these  words. 

I.  Darkness  ILLUIONED.  There  was:  1.  Darkness  over  the  face  of  Ood.  2.  Dcwk- 
nes$  over  the  destiny  of  man.  But  Christ  has  revealed  the  Divine  fatherhood,  and 
brought  life  and  immortality  to  light. 

IL  Wrong  rightened.  Crooked  or  warped  things  have  been  twisted  or  "  wrung  " — 
from  which  our  word  "  wrong"  comes ;  and  Christ  Jesus  has  brought  in  an  everlasting 
righteousness.  1.  Man's  way  was  wrong.  2.  Man's  ideal  was  wrong,  it  was  self 
instead  of  Ood.  3.  Man's  heart  was  wrong.  And  there  are  "crooked"  things  in 
experience,  in  addition  to  crooked  tastes  and  tempers.  And  Christ  makes  the  path  of 
duty  clear  to  us,  and  removes  the  mountains  from  our  paths. — W.  M.  S. 

Yers.  19,  20. — Spiritual  blindness.  "  Who  is  blind,  but  my  servant  ?"  It  Is  said, 
"  None  are  so  blind  as  those  that  won't  see."  Can  any  be  so  blind  as  those  who  have 
been  illumined  of  the  Spirit,  and  who  have  seiu  the  beauties  of  holiness,  and  the 
deformities  of  siiD,  whilst  yet  they  turn  back  to  their  old  paths? 

I.  The  blindness  of  indifff.bence.  ^he  heart  has  lost  its  first  love,  and  the 
King  is  not  "  beautiful "  now.  Like  human  love  sometimes,  which  does  not  know  how 
blessed  it  is  in  its  estate  of  home,  until  it  is  aroused  by  accident,  danger,  or  death  to  a 
sense  of  the  value  of  the  heart  it  has  slighted.  So  at  times  even  the  Christian  becomes 
indifferent.     "  I  have  somewhat  against  thee,  because  thou  hast  left  thy  first  love." 

II.  The  blindness  of  inattention.  (Yer.  20.)  "  Seeing  many  things,  but  thou 
ohservest  not."  1.  Christians  do  not  always  see  the  value  of  their  principles.  2.  Nor 
do  they  mark  the  privileges  and  comforts  which  are  the  outcome  of  &ith.  3.  Nor  do 
they  olsenle  the  misery  of  the  men  of  this  world.  4.  Nor  do  they  see  the  slave's  fetters 
beneath  the  false  liberty  of  the  sinner.  Others  are  blind  by  nature  and  haUt.  But  who 
so  Hind  as  the  Lord's  servants  ? — W.  M.  & 

Vers.  1 — 4. — The  characteristics  of  the  true  Leader.  Taking  these  words  as  applicable 
to  the  Anointed  of  the  Lord,  and  then,  secondarily,  to  every  one  who  is  equipped  and 
sent  of  him  to  lead  and  save  men,  we  liave  the  following  features  indicated. 

I.  The  spirit  of  obedience.  "  My  Servant  "(ver.  1).  Jesus  Christ  was  the  Servant 
of  Jehovah ;  he  was  "  about  his  Father's  business  "  from  the  beginning.  He  came  "  to 
work  the  w  ork  of  him  that  sent  him."  It  was  his  "  meat  to  do  the  Father's  will,  and 
to  finish  his  work."  It  was  his  joy  to  know,  at  the  end  of  his  career,  that  he  had 
"  finished  the  work  which  the  Father  had  given  him  to  do."  The  spirit  of  obedience, 
of  active  conformity  to  the  known  will  of  "him  that  sent  him,"  possessed  and 
characterized  our  Lord  in  a  very  marked  degree. 

II.  The  excellency  which  attracts.  "  Whom  I  uphold ;  my  Chosen,  in  whom  my 
soul  delighteth;"  in  other  woids,  that  One  "in  whom  I  am  well  pleased."  "There  was 
in  our  Lord  everything  which  satisfies  and  attracts.  Excellency  is  often  found  in  con- 
junction with  chaiacteiistics  which  are  so  uninviting  and  even  repelling  that  there  is 
a  measure  of  admiration  felt,  but  no  delight,  no  good  pleasure ;  the  soul  is  not  drawn 
in  affection  and  attachment.  Jesus  Christ  was  One  in  whose  spirit,  attitude,  behaviour, 
was  everything  that  called  forth  the  pleasure  of  the  Father,  and  that  now  evokes  the 
love  and  the  delight  of  his  disciples. 


OH.  XML  1—26.]     THE  BOOK  OF  THE  PROPHET   ISAlAH.  VM 

IIL  Ekoipienot  of  thk  hiohi8T  gift.  "  I  have  put  my  Spirit  upon  him."  God 
"gave  not  the  Spirit  bj  measure"  unto  him  (John  iiL  34),  because  he  had  an  immea- 
surable capacity  of  receiving  it.  God's  liighest  gifts  to  us  depend,  not  on  his 
willingness  or  ability  to  bestow,  but  on  our  readiness  and  capacity  to  receive.  God 
dwelt,  by  his  Spirit,  perfectly  in  his  Son,  our  Saviour,  and  according  to  our  faith  and 
purity  lie  will  dwell  in  us. 

IV.  QniBTKESs  OF  METHOD.    "He  shall  not  cry,"  etc.  (vide  next  homily). 

V.  Patiekt  HOPEFUliKESs.     "  A  bruiscd  reed,"  eto.  (vjWs  next  homily). 

VL  Persistent  enekot.  "  He  shall  bring  forth  judgment  unto  truth  ; "  " He  shall 
not  fail,"  etc.  1.  I%e  disregarded  and  despised  Son  of  man  did  not  fail  to  speak,  to 
suffer,  to  work,  until  his  ta^k  on  earth  was  complete.  2.  The  neglected  and  unknown 
Son  of  God,  dwelling  in  the  heavens,  will  not  be  discouraged  until  the  race  has  been 
regenerated  and  renewed.  Through  the  instrumentality  of  his  Church  he  will  work  on 
this  sin-distracted  world  until  its  ignorance  be  displaced  by  knowledge,  its  iniquity 
yield  to  holiness  of  heart  and  life,  its  indifference  give  place  to  earnest  interest  and 
all-constraining  love. — 0. 

Vert.  2,  3. — Quietnest  of  method  and  hopefulness  of  spirit.  That  these  words  are 
rightly  referred  to  our  Lord  we  have  the  assurance  of  Scripture  (Matt,  xii.),  as  well  as 
the  evidence  of  their  perfect  applicability.     They  remind  us  of — 

I.  The  quietkebs  of  his  method.  With  a  task  before  him  the  surpassing  greatnesi 
of  wlich  completely  dwarfs  every  human  enterprise,  it  wasa  matter  of  vital  consequence 
that  our  Lord  should  adopt  the  method  which  would  be  permanently  effective.  He 
might  have  chosen  the  loud  and  violent  method.  He  might  have  taken  (1)  the  way  of 
the  wariior,  wlio  seeks  to  secure  his  ends  by  the  clash  of  arms  and  thunder  of  canrjon ; 
or  (2)  the  way  of  the  vehement  and  noisy  agitator,  of  the  tempestuous  rhetorician,  of 
the  man  who  terrorizes  over  his  audience  by  threats  and  denunciations.  But  "  he  <!id 
not  strive,  nor  cry,  nor  cause  his  voice  to  be  heard  in  the  streets."  He  chose  the  quiet 
and  spiritual  method.  He  adopted  the  way  of  God  in  nature  and  in  man — the  way  by 
which  God  built  the  mountains  and  laid  down  the  soil,  by  which  he  makes  the  spring 
to  succeed  the  winter  and  the  summer  to  replace  the  spring,  by  which  he  makes  the 
grass  to  grow  in  our  meadows  and  the  flowers  to  unfold  in  our  gardens  and  the  corn  to 
ripen  in  our  fields.  It  is  the  way  by  which  God  constructs  the  human  mind,  building  it 
up  from  the  opening  intelligence  of  the  child  to  the  full  strength  and  ripe  wisdom  of 
manhood ;  the  way  by  which  he  develops  human  character  and  national  strength — by 
quiet,  silent,  gradual  processes  that  no  eye  can  see,  no  ear  can  he-tr,  no  hand  can 
measure.  Jesus  Christ  deliberately  adopted  (1)  a  peaceful  method ;  he  emphatically 
declined  and  even  severely  forbade  the  use  of  force  in  his  service  (Matt.  xxvi.  52).  He 
thus  discouraged  and  disallowed  compulsion  and  constraint  in  the  furtherance  of  his 
kingdom.  (2)  He  also  decided  upon  a  quiet  method.  He  shunned  rather  than  sought 
notoriety  (Matt.  xii.  16).  He  did  not  believe  that  a  tempest  of  applause  or  that  the 
fresh  breeze  of  fame  would  carry  his  vessel  of  righteousness  and  peace  to  her  harbour. 
He  wanted  to  persuade,  to  convince,  to  win  men ;  to  prevail  over  their  judgment,  to 
subdue  their  will,  to  hallow  their  mind,  to  gain  their  conscience,  to  conquer  them, 
themadves.  So  he  went  quietly  to  his  work,  speaking  golden  truths  to  obscure  and 
unlearned  men,  opening  rich  stores  of  heavenly  treasure  to  one  man  who  stole  to  see 
him  imder  the  shadow  of  the  darkness ;  to  one  woman  whom  he  chanotd  to  meet  and 
talk  tc  at  the  uell.  Shunning  the  crowd,  disliking  noise  and  tumult,  the  incarnation 
of  quiet  strength,  the  Son  of  man  did  his  work,  lived  his  life,  spake  his  truth,  bore  his 
sorrows, 

XL  The  patient  hopefulness  of  his  spirit.  At  what  point  must  we  give  a  man 
up?  Begarding  his  physical  nature,  there  is  a  point  where  medical  skill  can  do  no 
more  ami  " gives  him  up "  to  die.  Is  there  such  a  point  in  his  spiritual  course?  1. 
In  nations.  Men  have  contended  that  some  races  have  been  reduced  to  such  a  depth 
of  demoralization  and  brutality  that  they  are  irrecoverably  lost  to  virtue  and  piety. 
But  Christian  missions  nave  effectually  and  finally  disposed  of  this  contention.  2.  In 
individual  men.  The  idea  of  the  restoration  of  fallen  and  degraded  men  is  essentially 
Christian.  The  most  pious  and  charitable  Jew  never  thought  of  praying  for  the 
redemption  of  the  publican  be  saw  at  the  counter  or  the  harlot  he  met  in  the  street; 


128  lUE  BOOK  OP  IHB  PROPHET  ISAIAH,      [on.  xui.  1— 25. 

he  wai  astonished  and  indignant  that  the  great  Teacher  should  address  himself  to  such 
as  these.  But  as  there  was  no  one  too  far  gone  in  sickness  for  the  Lord  to  heal,  so  wag 
there  no  one  too  foul  or  too  guilty  for  him  to  save  and  to  restore.  He  did  not  break  the 
bruised  reed,  nor  quench  the  smoking  flax.  To  the  repenfant  publican  he  said,  "This 
man  i=  a  sou  of  Abraham ; "  to  the  weeping  woman,  "  Daughter,  thy  sins  are  forgiven  thee : 
go  in  peace."  This  spirit  of  patient  hopefiilne*  is  to  be  our  spirit :  (1)  In  our  treat- 
ment of  utheri.  Tempted  to  abandon  those  to  whom  wo  have  long  made  our  a|.p  al  in 
vain,  inclined  to  regard  them  as  hopelessly  deaf,  hard,  unresponsive, — we  must  break 
away  frujii  our  despondency  and  enter  into  the  patient  hopefulness  of  our  Lord  and 
Leader.  (2)  In  thf  view  we  take  of  ourselves.  No  man  need  despair  of  liim.self,  for 
Christ  does  not  despair  of  him.  He  hopes  good  and  even  great  things  of  those  who  ar* 
ready  to  abandon  themselves  to  sin  and  ruin.  Look  not  in,  but  up.  Above  is  a  patient 
hopeful  Saviour,  who  still  says  to  you,  "  Wilt  thou  be  made  whole  ?  "—0. 

Vers.  6 — 8. — Ood  and  man :  refuaal,  retribution,  restoration.  L  The  Dttinb 
COMMAND.  God  demands  the  glory  which  is  his  due  (ver.  8).  His  claim  is  based  on: 
1.  What  he  is  in  himself.  "I  am  the  Lord  (Jehovah);  that  is  my  Name."  As  the 
Eternal  One,  who  only  hath  immortality,  the  Underived  and  Everlasting  One,  who  in 
the  very  fullest,  deepest,  and  highest  sense  is  God  over  all,  he  rightly  demands  our 
reverence,  our  homage,  our  worship.  2.  What  he  has  done  for  our  race.  He  has 
"created  the  heavens,"  etc.  (ver.  5).  He  is  the  Divine  Author  of  our  own  human 
spirits,  the  Divine  Originator  of  all  material  things,  the  Divine  Giver  of  all  surrounding- 
comforts.  As  the  Father  of  our  souls  and  as  the  Source  of  all  our  good  of  every  kind, 
God  ri.ihteously  demands  our  thought,  our  gratitiiJe,  our  love,  our  service. 

II.  Oipi  GUILTY  Kepusal.  Of  whatever  crimes,  or  vices,  or  follies  we  are  gu'ltless, 
there  is  one  sin  which  we  must  all  acknowledge — we  have  not  rendered  unto  our  GvA 
"  the  glory  due  unto  his  Name."  "  The  God  in  whose  hand  our  breath  is,  and  whose  are 
all  our  ways,  we  have  not  glorified  "  as  we  might  have  done  and  should  have  done.  In 
this  matter  all,  even  the  best,  have  "come  short"  (Bom.  iii.  23).  The  great  multi- 
tudes of  mankind  have  been  sadly  and  guiltily  negligent,  and  we  have  had  to  pay— 

III.  The  penalty  of  odb  odilt.  This  penalty  is  very  severe ;  it  is  manifold ;  it 
comprises :  1.  Forleiture  of  the  Divine  favour.  2.  Fear  of  final  condemnation  and 
banishment  from  the  Father's  presence.  3.  The  various  ills  and  evils,  including  sick- 
ness, and  sorrow,  and  death,  which  befall  us  here.  4.  Spiritual  deterjoriation.  This  is, 
jjerhaps,  the  saddest  and  most  serious  part  of  our  penalty.  He  that  sins  against  God 
"wrongs  his  own  soul;"  he  does  that  which  inflicts  on  himself  most  grievous  wounds; 
his  own  soul  suffers  harm,  the  extent  and  the  pitifulness  of  whicli  uo  mind  can  measure, 
no  words  express.  The  text  (ver.  7)  points  to  two  of  these  spiritual  evils.  (1)  Mental 
Kindness.  The  commission  of  any  sin  has  a  far  worse  result  than  that  of  enfeebling 
bodily  health  or  injuring  the  circumstances  of  a  man.  It  clouds  his  mind ;  it  dulls 
his  spiritual  apprehension;  he  gradually  loses  his  power  of  distinguishing  between 
what  is  right  and  wrong,  pure  and  impure,  reverent  and  profane,  kind  and  unkind,  true 
and  false.  Ultimately  his  vision  is  confused,  and  mental  obliquity  takes  the  place  ot 
clear  perception.  "  His  eye  is  evil,  and  his  whole  body  is  full  of  darkness ;"  he  "calls 
good  evil,  and  evil  good ; "  he  has  "  blind  eyes  "  (ver.  7).  (2)  Bondage  of  the  soul.  Sin 
leads  down  to  servitude — to  a  bondage  of  which  all  bodily  slaveries  and  imprisonments 
are  only  types  and  shadows.  For,  to  be  held  in  the  bars  of  a  spiritual  captivity,  of  an 
unholy  lust,  of  a  depraved  habit,  of  an  irresistible  tendency  of  mind,  to  strugj^le  mora 
and  more  feebly  and  inefiectually  against  this,  and  at  last  for  the  soul  to  suireuder  itsell 
a  hopeless  captive, — this  is  a  degradation  beyond  and  beneath  which  it  is  impossible  for 
man  to  pass.    But  we  have  the  promise  of — 

IV.  DrviNB  BE8T0EATI0N.  "I  have  called  thee  ...  to  open  the  blind  eyes,  to 
bring  out  the  prisoners,"  etc.  (vers.  6, 7).  Jesus  Christ  came  "  to  preach  deliverance 
to  the  captives  "  (Luke  iv.  18).  This  he  doea  by  (1)  his  enlightening  truth ;  (2)  his 
renewing  and  redeeming  Spirit, — 0. 

Ver.  U, — Hie  unrecognized  path.  "  I  will  bring  the  blind  by  a  way  that  they  knew 
not ;  I  will  lead  them  in  paths  that  they  have  not  known."  The  general  truth  here  is 
that  the  all-wiae  God  ia  working  on  our  behalf  in  ways  which  are  mysterious  at  the 


«3H.  ILH.  1— 26.J    THE  BO(!K  OF  THE   PROPHET  ISAIAH.  IZS 


time.  If  we  consiiler  our  finiteness  and  his  infinity,  our  ignorance  and  his  omniscience, 
we  shall  see  that  this  must  be  so.  If  we  consider  how  little  we  can  understand  of  the 
great  designs  of  the  wisest  of  mankind  when  we  have  hut  a  partial  view  of  them,  we 
shall  cea-'e  to  wonder  at  the  mystery  which  attends  the  providence  <if  God.  How  can 
we  be  otheiwise  than  "blind"  to  the  large  and  long  purposes  ol  him  "  wliose  way  is  in 
the  sea,"  and  to  whom  "a  thousand  years  are  as  one  day"?  The  thought  of  the  prophet 
is  illustrated  in — 

I.  GtOd's  dealings  with  his  people  Ibbaeii.  At  one  period,  when  languishing  in 
captivity,  it  was  black  night  to  the  people  of  God.  It  was  dark  twilight  to  Isaiah, 
looking  on  and  down  from  the  peaks  of  prophecy.  It  was  early  morning  when  the 
Israelites  entered  Jerusalem  on  their  return.  It  was  later  morning  jet  when  Paul 
caught  a  glimpse  of  God's  large  purposes  in  all  the  way  he  led  them  (Rom.  xi.  33). 
But  all  along  he  was  leading  the  blind  by  a  way  they  knew  not. 

II.  His  dealings  with  mankind.  Through  what  dark  days  has  the  Church  of 
Christ  passed  as  it  has  come  through  the  centuries !  How  many  times  has  God  seemed 
to  have  forsaken  it,  when  it  has  undergone  a  threatening  eclipse  from ;  1.  Sa-Mge  attack 
from  outside;  the  trials  and  perils  of  unrelenting  pers(Cution.  2.  Chilling  coldness 
within ;  spirituality  of  worship,  consistency  of  life,  evangelizing  zeal,  having  declined 
and  almost  expired.  3.  Depressing faithle  sness  around;  a  dark  shadow  of  scepticism 
surrounding,  and,  at  points,  invading  and  infecting  it.  Yet  out  of  these  miseries  and 
temporary  defeats  God  has  brought  it,  turning  darkness  into  light  and  making  the 
crooked  things  straight. 

III.  His  leading  of  oub  iNDivionAL  life.  Dark  days  come  to  us  all ;  we  fail 
where  we, counted  on  success;  they  become  unfriendly  on  whose  faithfulness  we  had 
confidently  reckoned  ;  the  road  which  promised  to  lead  up  to  prosperity  and  joy  takes 
a  sudden  turn  down  into  adversity  and  sorrow.  We  have  been  seeking  Divine 
directidn,  but  the  guiding  hand  seems  to  have  been  withheld ;  God  seems  to  have 
forsaken  us.  But  we  must  not  "  speak  thus,  or  we  should  ofiend  against "  the  truth 
of  God's  word  and  the  ultimate  experience  of  his  children.  Others  before  and  beside 
us  have  gone  down  into  the  darkness  and  come  up  into  the  light.  Once  the  Master 
himself  went  a  way  he  knew  not;  the  Divine  Father  seemed  to  have  forsaken  him. 
And  many  a  one,  since  that  scene  at  Calvary,  has  been  inclined  to  cry  out,  "  My  Ghxi, 
my  Gorl,  why  hast  thou  forsaken  met"  It  is  for  us  to  remember  that  we  are  as  blind 
men  before  the  all-seeing  God,  discerning  but  a  mere  speck  of  all  that  has  to  be 
surveyed.  God  is  leading  us  by  a  way  that  we  cannot  recognize  now ;  but  soon  the 
darkness  will  be  light  and  the  crooked  straight.  It  is  the  hour  for  trusting.  Any  one 
can  trust  God  in  the  sunshine  ;  we  have  to  show  our  sonship  by  trusting  him  wholly 
in  the  deep  shadows. 

"  When  we  in  darkness  walk, 

Nor  feel  the  heavenly  flame, 
Then  is  the  time  to  trust  our  God, 

And  rest  upon  bis  Name." 

a 

Vers.  19 — 25  (latter  part). — The  hidden  hurt,  I.  There  abe  penalties  W5Ioh  ark 
palpable  to  every  eye.  When  vice  or  criijie  leads  down  to  poverty,  or  to  serious 
sickness,  or  to  desertion  and  consequent  loneliness,  or  to  confinement  in  prison,  there 
is  no  possibility  of  mistake.  God  is  "  pouring  out  his  anger  "  against  the  transgressors 
of  his  Law ;  he  is  "  magnifying  his  Law,  and  making  it  honourable  "  (ver.  21).     But — 

II.  There  are  penalties  which  are  undetected  even  by  those  who  sat  them. 
As  bodily  privations— deafness,  blindness,  feebleness, — come  on  and  sometimes  reach  even 
an  advanced  point  before  their  subjects  will  allow  it  to  be  true,  so  is  it  with  mental  and 
moral  evils,  which  are  the  righteous  penalties  of  sin.  1.  Mental.  The  gradual  but 
serious  decay  of  the  intellectual  powers — of  memory,  of  judgment,  of  the  creative 
faculty.  2.  Moral  tmd  spiritual.  Loss  of  self-control ;  an  increased  absorption  in  self; 
a  growing  eagerness  for  fleshly  enjoyments  or  worldly  advantages;  withdrawal  of 
interest  from  those  things  which  are  spiritual  and  Divine;  in  fact,  deterioration  of  soul. 

III.  This  undetected  penalty  is  decidedly  the  most  serious.  For:  1.  It  is  the 
most  inward.    It  atlects  our  very  selves  j  it  means  that  we,  ourselves,  are  "  set  on  fire," 

ISAIAH — n.  « 


130  THE   BOOK  OF  THE   PROPHET  ISAIAH,    [oh.  xlii.  1—25. 

an  being  consumed,  are  perishing.  2.  It  is  likely  to  be  the  most  lasting.  What  evil 
thing  a  man  sees  and  recognizes  he  takes  care  to  expel;  that  which  escapes  his  notice 
he  leaves  to  itself,  and,  left  undisturbed,  it  spreacis  and  grows,  it  becomes  rank,  ruinous, 
fatal. 

IV,  It  IS  A  PENALTY  PAID   BY    THE  APPABENTLT   GOOD   AS   BY   THE   AVOWEDLY    EVIL. 

•Who  is  blind,  but  my  servant?"  etc.  (vers.  19,  20).  The  sons  of  privilege,  the 
members  of  the  visible  Ohuieh,  are  sometimes  found  to  be  sadly  deceived  respecting 
their  own  condition;  they  are  on  the  bordersof  bankruptcy  when  they  think  themselves 
rich  and  strong  (Rev.  iii.  17).  Pride,  or  worldliness,  or  indulgence,  or  covetousnesa,  has 
eaten  into  their  soul,  and  made  them  degenerate  and  unworthy  before  God,  and  they 
*'  know  it  not." 

V.  It  IS   A   CASE   WHICH   CALLS  FOB   IMMEDIATE    AND   EARNEST   BFFOBT.      When   the 

truth  is  discovered,  or  even  suspected,  it  becomes  us  (1)  to  strive  with  all  strenuousness 
to  escape;  and  (2)  to  entreat  Divine  help  in  our  great  spiritual  peril:  "Search  me, 
0  God,"  etc.  (Ps.  cxxxix.  23,  24),— 0. 

Ver.  1. — TTie  LorcPs  Servant.  Various  suggestions  have  been  made  by  way  of 
explanation  of  this  term.  Some  regard  the  Lord's  servant  as  the  Hebrew  nation, 
distinguished  from  the  heathen ;  or  as  a  new  Israel  opposed  to  the  old ;  or  as  the 
righteous  part  of  the  Hebrew  nation ;  or  as  the  Israel  which  suffered  for  its  religious 
testimony  to  the  heathen ;  or  as  an  ideal  Israel ;  or  as  the  order  of  the  Hebrew  prophets. 
Bishop  Wordsworth  says,  "  The  '  Servant  of  Jehovah,'  as  represented  by  Isaiah,  is  a 
Person ;  he  is  a  Prophet,  Priest,  and  King.  He  is  more  than  a  prophet,  as  teaching  the 
world;  he  is  more  than  a  priest,  as  offering  himself  for  all;  he  is  King  of  kings,  and 
Lord  of  lords ;  he  is  God."  Dean  Stanley  finely  says, "  In  the  foreground  of  the  'future 
stands,  not  the  ruler,  or  conqueror,  but  the  Servant  of  God,  gentle,  purified,  suffering — 
whether  it  be  Cyrus  whom  he  had  anointed ;  or  Jacob  whom  he  bad  chosen ;  his  people 
with  whom  after  all  their  afBiction  he  was  well  pleased ;  or  Jeremiah  and  the  piophetic 
order,  the  victim  of  their  country's  sins,  led  as  a  lamb  to  the  slaughter;  or  One,  more 
sorrowful,  more  triumphant,  more  human,  more  Di'trine,  than  any  of  these,  the  last  and 
true  fulfilment  of  the  most  spiritual  ho|)es  and  the  highest  aspirations  of  the  chosen 
people."  Delitzsch  says,  "  The  conception  of  the  Servant  of  Jehovah  is,  as  it  weie,  a 
pyramid,  of  which  tbe  base  is  the  people  Israel  as  a  whole,  the  central  |>art  Israel 
'according  to  the  Spirit,'  and  the  summit  the  Person  of  the  Mediator  of  salvation  who 
arises  out  of  Israel."  Cheyne  says,  "  In  the  sublimest  descriptions  of  the  Servant  I  am 
unable  to  resist  the  im[)ression  that  an  historical  Person  is  intended,  and  venture  to  think 
that  our  general  view  of  '  the  Servant '  ought  to  be  ruled  by  those  passages  in  which 
the  enthusiasm  of  the  author  is  at  its  height.  '  Servant  of  tfehovah '  in  these  passages 
seems  about  equivalent  to  '  Son  of  Jehovah '  in  Ps.  ii.  7  ('  son '  and  '  servant '  being, 
in  fact,  nearly  equivalent  in  the  Old  Testament),  viz.  the  personal  instrument  of  Israel's 
regeneration,  or  the  Messiah."  The  whole  ])assagp,  vers.  1 — t,  is  applied  to  Christ  in 
Matt.  xii.  17 — 21,  as  illustrating  Christ's  mild,  silent,  and  uncontentious  manner  of 
working.  We  shall  come  again  upon  the  representation  of  Christ  as  "Servant,"'  when 
we  reach  the  great  chapter  of  this  prophecy,  the  fifty-third.  The  passage  now  before  Ui 
directs  attention  to  three  points  in  relation  to  this  "  Servant  of  the  Lord,"  the  Christ. 

I.  His  ENDOWMENT.  "I  havc  put  my  Spirit  upon  him."  The  expression  calls  to 
mind  the  endowments  of  the  Spirit,  as  a  Spirit  of  rule  and  judgment,  which  fallowed 
the  anointing  of  Saul  and  David.  In  precise  adaptation  to  work  required,  God  gives 
spiritual  endowment.  The  scene  of  the  baptism  of  Christ  has  been  misunderstood,  as 
the  time  when  the  special  endowment  of  the  Spirit  came  upon  him  for  his  life-ministry. 
It  is  a  truer  and  deeper  view  of  that  scene  of  the  descending  dove  and  heavenly  witness 
that  sees  in  it  only  an  outward  manifestation  and  expression  of  a  fact  which  already 
existed — the  Spirit  already  dwelt  in  Christ  beyond  measure.  The  outward  expression 
in  symbol  was  graciously  accommodated  to  the  comforting  of  his  humanity,  and  tlie 
conviction  of  those  who  believe  in  his  Divine  mission.  It  may  be  shown  that  every 
endowment  of  the  Divine  Spirit  is  (1)  a  seal,  testifying  that  he  on  whom  it  rests  ii 
under  commission  of  God ;  and  (2)  a  fitness,  ensuring  the  highest  adaptation  to  that 
precise  work  which  is  given  the  agent  to  do.     It  involves  efficiency  and  authority. 

IL.  His  COMMISSION.     To  "bring  forth  judgment  to  tbe  Gentiles."     "Judgment" 


OH.  TLH.  1— 25.]     THE  BOOK  OP  THE  PBOPHET  ISAIAH.  131 

here  is  not  used  in  its  magisterial  sense.  It  is  the  equivalent  of  "  righteousness,"  or, 
more  precisely,  of  the  "  truth  that  makes  for  righteousness."  That  truth  is  conceived 
as  having  been  for  a  time  the  special  possession  of  Israel ;  but  by  Messiah  it  is  to  be 
opened  to  the  whole  world.  "Everyman  that  doeth  rij^hteousness  is  accepted  of  him." 
The  point  that  Isaiah  sets  in  such  clear  light  is,  that  the  commission  of  the  great 
"Servant  of  Jehovah  "  is  a  distinctly  moral  one.  It  is  only  in  a  secouilary  or  derived 
sense  anything  but  moral.  It  concerns  righteousness.  It  glorifies  righieousness.  It 
breaks  soul-bondages.  It  dispels  prejudices  and  errors.  It  proposes  to  bring  men 
together  in  a  brotherhood  of  common  goodness,  of  which  the  bloom  will  be  mutual  love 
and  helpfulness.  The  world's  separations  and  woes  can  never  be  mastered  until  men  are 
made  right,  and  that  is  Christ's  work. 

m.  HiB  oHABACTERisTics.  Unpretentious,  uncontentiims,  trusting  wholly  to  moral 
influences  for  securing  moral  ends.  "He  shall  not  strive  nor  cry."  As  Matthew 
Arnold  well  expresses  it,  "He  shall  not  damour,  shall  not  speak  with  the  high 
vehement  voice  of  the  men  who  contend.  God's  Servant  shall  bring  to  men's  hearts 
the  word  of  Ood's  righteousness  and  salvation  by  a  oentle,  inward,  and  spiritual 
method."  Illustrating  the  parable  of  the  leaven.  Dr.  Marcus  Dods  says,  "  According  to 
the  Head  of  the  Church,  his  religion  and  Spirit  are  to  be  propagated  by  an  influence 
which  operates  like  an  infectious  disease,  invisible,  without  apparatus  and  pompous 
equipment,  succeeding  all  the  better  where  it  is  least  observed.  Our  Lord  bases  Ms 
expectation  of  the  extension  of  his  Spirit  throughout  the  world,  not  upon  any  grand 
and  powerful  institutions,  not  on  national  establishments  of  religion  or  on  any  such 
means,  but  on  the  secret,  unnoticed  influence  of  man  upon  man."  The  characteristic 
silences  of  the  great  "Servant"  may  wisely  become  the  characteristics  of  his  servants. 
Moral  forces  make  no  noise. — B.  T. 

Tar.  3. — The  adaptations  of  Divine  jrroce.  This  verse  describes  the  general  spirit 
and  tone  of  the  Divine  dealings  with  men;  bHt,  as  it  takes  distinctly  personal  form,  ve 
are  justified  in  seeing  in  Christ  the  type  and  specimen  of  such  dealir)g8.  As  God  mani- 
fest, he  illustrates  the  graciousness  of  God's  ways.  And  this  aspect  of  Christ  is  of 
special  concern  to  us  now.  The  time  is  coming  when  we  shidl  think  most  of  the  glory 
of  the  Lord ;  in  the  time  that  now  is  we  think  most  of  his  grace.  We  are  still  journey- 
mg  under  the  clouds ;  we  are  still  in  the  land  of  the  fainting,  the  struggling,  and  the 
weeping.  The  night  is  passing,  but  it  is  not  past ;  the  victory  is  neaiing,  but  it  is  not 
won ;  and  therefore  it  is  so  precious  to  us  that  we  may  hear  of  the  tender,  compas- 
sionate, sympathizing  Redeemer.  We  are  little  better  than  bruised  reeds  and  smoulder- 
mg  flax ;  therefore  it  is  good  to  hear  of  him  who  will  not  break  the  bruised  reed,  nor 
quench  the  smoking  flax. 

I.  Christ's  way  of  DEALiNa  with  bruised  beedb,  oe  huubled  sinners.  The  reed 
fittingly  represents  the  sinner.  It  stands  so  straight,  apparently  so  strong,  and  yet  it  is 
one  of  the  weakest  things  that  grow.  It  cannot  endure  the  least  rough  usage.  The 
passing  storm  will  bend  and  bruise  and  spoil  it.  Of  aU  the  helpless  things,  perhaps  a 
bruised  reed  is  the  most  helpless.  There  is  much  confidence  and  apparent  strength  in 
the  sinner,  at  least  so  long  as  life  goes  smoothly  and  blue  sky  is  overhead.  But  let  the 
clouds  lower,  let  the  burden  of  life  press  heavily,  let  God  touch  with  the  afSicting 
hand,  let  God  try  him  with  sore  bereavements,  and  then  the  poor  reed  is  bruised 
and  hanging.  And  it  is  God's  way  to  bruise  such  reeds.  The  beginning  of  hope  for 
sinners  Ues  in  their  humbling  under  God's  mighty  hand.  See  some  of  the  ways  in 
which  this  humbling  work  is  done.  1.  Sometimes  God  lets  men  run  themselves 
.tired  and  work  themselves  weary  in  the  efibrt  to  gain  a  righteousness  for  themselves. 
Men  are  permitted  to  hurry  after  the  flickering  light,  over  moor  and  bog,  until,  faint- 
ing, they  lose  sight  for  ever  of  "the  vain  hope.  Men  are  permitted  to  build  the  house 
of  their  morality  upon  the  sands  of  self-confidence,  and  then,  just  as  they  would  enter 
and  dwell  in  peaces  they  find  the  foundations  sinking  and  the  storm-floods  over- 
whelming. Men  are  permitted  to  grasp  at  world-success  and  worldly  wealth,  and 
then  they  are  led  to  ask  all  these  things,  "What  can  you  buy  for  my  soul's  good?" 
And,  sick  at  heart,  they  must  hear  the  answer,  "Not  one  word  of  peace;  not  one 
sun-glint  of  hope ;  not  one  cheer  for  the  dark  river  and  the  darker  beyond."  Many 
a  num  has  oome,  since  the  dqys  of  Solomon,  out  of  the  trial  of  all  human  offers  of 


132  THE  BOOK  OF  THE  PROPHET  ISAIAH,    [oh.  xm.  1—25 

happiness,  to  cry,  bruised  and  humbled  before  God,  "  Vanity  of  vanities,  all  is  vanity.* 
2.  Sometimes  God  directs  his  providences  to  the  humbling  of  men  by  heavy  sorrows 
and  cares.  He  lets  their  boasted  strength  bear  the  biunt  of  severe  and  subtle  tempta- 
tions. He  finds  the  joints  in  the  armour,  and  sends  there  the  arrows  that  pierce.  But 
he  only  bruises ;  he  does  not  break.  He  may  hold  back  awhile ;  he  never  utterly 
forsakes.  He  may  hide  behind  a  cloud,  but  he  keeps  on  looking,  even  through  the  veil 
of  the  cloud,  waiting  until  the  response  to  his  gracious  dealings  comes, "  We  will  return 
unto  the  Lord :  for  he  hath  torn,  and  he  will  heal  us." 

II.  Christ's  wat  of  dealing  with  smoking  flax,  or  feeble  believers.  The 
best  explanation  of  this  figure  is  that  flax  was  used  in  the  East  for  the  wicks  of  oil- 
lamps,  and  these  wicks,  unless  well  cut  and  constantly  trimmed,  gave  but  a  flickering, 
smoky  light.  A  striking  illrotiation  of  feeble  Christians,  whose  life  is  a  smoke  rather 
than  a  fire,  a  spark  rather  than  a  light,  a  glimmer  rather  than  a  glow,  a  name  to  live 
rather  than  a  life.  1.  The  beginnings  of  Christian  life  are  often  very  feeble;  the 
smoking  flax  needs  raising  to  a  flame.  In  the  case  of  Nicodemus  there  was  a  little 
desire,  a  little  spiritual  anxiety,  a  little  longing  after  high  and  holy  things,  a  little 
smoking  of  the  flax.  And  most  tenderly  did  the  Lord  breathe  upon  it,  and  blow  upon 
it,  and  try  to  raise  the  flame.  The  rich  young  ruler  had  a  little  smoking  of  the  flax,  a 
little  yearning  after  the  "  eternal  life."  And  Christ  sought  to  tan  it  into  a  flame  that 
should  consume  even  his  love  for  his  "great  possessions."  2.  The  figure  also  repre- 
sents those  conditions  of  spiritual  decline  to  which  we  are  all  exposed,  and  which  make 
sad  places  here  and  there  in  the  story  of  our  Christian  lives.  Happy  indeed  is  that  man 
who  does  not  know  what  it  is  for  his  spiritual  light  to  become  only  a  smoking  wick. 
And  he  who  has  wrought  so  great  a  work  in  us  must  be  sorely  grieved  when  the  flame 
grows  dim,  the  oil  of  grace  is  not  renewed,  and  no  good  atmosphere  of  trust  and  prayer 
nourishes  and  clears  the  light.  And  yet,  though  grieved,  he  does  "  not  quench." 
Bunyan  tells  us  of  the  fire  in  the  wall,  and  of  one  who  poured  water  upon  it  to  quench 
it.  It  was  not  Christ  who  acted  thus.  He  pours  on  the  oil  of  grace,  until  the  flame  is 
made  to  glow  and  blaze  in  power  and  beauty.  But  sometimes  he  holds  back  his  grace, 
and  lets  the  water  almost  quench  the  fire  in  the  dull  and  careless  soul.  Many  must 
confess  that  it  is  even  so  with  them.  Awhile  ago  the  fiame  was  all  glowing ;  and  now 
there  are  only  a  few  curlings  and  wreathings  of  smoke,  and  scarcely  one  feeble  flame 
— the  waters  of  the  world,  self-indulgence,  pride,  and  neglected  Christian  duty  have 
nearly  quenched  it. .  Leave  it  but  a  little  longer,  and  the  last  flicker  will  die  out.  Con- 
clude by  showing  the  way  for  such  feeble  believers  back  to  Christ,  who  "  waiteth  to  be 
gracious."  "  0  Lord,  revive  thy  work  in  the  midst  of  the  years,  in  the  midst  of  the 
years  make  known ;  in  wrath  remember  mercy ; "  "  Restore  unto  me  the  joy  of  tliy 
salvation."— R.  T. 

Ver.  4. — Divine  persistency,  "  He  shall  not  fail  nor  be  discouraged."  "  He  shall  not 
bum  dimly  nor  be  crushed."  The  figure  prominent  in  the  mind  of  the  prophet  is  not 
the  actual  Israel,  the  ideal  Israel,  Cyrus,  or  Judas  Maccabeus,  but  the  Messiah  who,  in 
the  deepest  view  of  him,  is  the  manifested  God.  And  "  though  he  meets  with  hard 
service  and  much  opposition,  and  foresees  how  ungrateful  the  world  will  be,  yet  he  goes 
on  with  his  part  of  the  work,  till  he  is  able  to  say,  •  It  is  finished!'  and  he  enables  his 
apostles  and  ministers  to  go  on  with  theirs,  too,  and  not  to  fail  nor  be  discouraged  till 
they  also  have  finished  their  testimony."  Henderson  gives  the  connection  of  the 
passages  suggestively :  "  Mild  and  gentle  as  he  would  be  towards  the  broken-hearted 
and  the  desponding,  no  power  should  depress  his  Spirit,  impede  his  progress,  obscure  his 
gloiy,  or  thwart  his  purpose." 

L  Chbist  has  a  obeat  end  towabds  which  he  is  eveb,  and  has  been  eyeb, 
WOBKINO.  The  largest  view  we  can  take  of  Christ  regards  him  as  God  operating  for 
high  moral  ends  in  the  sphere  of  humanity.  God's  direct  moral  Agent,  in  all  the  ageS) 
has  been  the  Second  Person  of  the  sacred  Trinity,  the  Angel-Jehovah,  Jehovah  minis- 
tering, or  the  Christ.  So  we  link  the  great  Incarnation  with  all  the  foreshadowing 
inoamations.  _  God's  end,  in  Christ,  is  (1)  the  setting  up  of  troth,  of  judgment,  of 
the  sense  of  right,  of  righteousaess ;  and  this  (2)  is  synchronous  with  the  universal 
establishment  of  his  Law,  or  living  rule  and  authority.  The  kingship  of  Christ  is  the 
reign  of  righteousneaa — a  rdgn  than  can  be  above  and  within  idl  earthly  IdngE^ps.    Is 


OH.  XLH.  1—25.]    THE  BOOK  OF  THE  PROPHET  ISAIAH.  133 

reaching  this  end  we  can  see  a  series  of  stages.  1.  A  preparatory  work  in  the  world. 
Letting  men  find  out  the  value  of  righteousness  by  experiences  of  evil.  2.  A  stage  o< 
visible  manifestation  of  the  righteousness  <lesired  for  the  whole  world,  in  the  person  of 
the  righteous  Servant  of  the  Lord,  the  "  Man  Christ  Jesus."  3.  A  stage,  now  incom- 
plete, of  the  inward  workings  of  the  Holy  Spirit,  using  agencies  of  human  ministry  and 
Christian  influence  and  example. 

II.  Christ  might,  we  think,  fail  and  be  discodraoed  bt  the  slow  progress  or 
HIS  KINGDOM  OF  RIGHTEOUSNESS.  The  stages  are  long.  The  progress  often  rather  seems 
backward.  Bach  stage  has,  indeed,  been  misunderstood.  We  are  only  now  getting 
glimpses  of  the  importance  Of  the  first  preparatory  stage.  We  say,  "  How  long?"  and 
wonder  that  Christ  does  not.     It  is  long  waiting  for  the  "  travail  of  his  soul." 

III.  If  Christ  is  not  discottraged,  surelt  we  need  not  be.  Our  imperfect  know- 
ledge, our  passion  for  results,  and  our  weak  faith,  may  excuse  our  failing.  Wo  readily 
forget  that  the  honour  of  God  is  far  more  tmly  bound  up  in  the  full  redemption  of  the 
world,  and  the  universal  reign  of  righteousness,  than  ours.  "  It  is  enough  for  the  servant 
that  he  be  as  his  Master."  Not  until  our  living,  loving  Lord  is  disheartened  and  gives 
np  his  work  of  saving  men,  may  we  let  the  tools  of  our  Christian  service  drop  out  of  our 
hand.— R.  T. , 

Ver.  8. — The  uniqueness  of  Jehovah.  "My  glory  will  I  not  ^ve  to  another." 
Wherein  lies  the  separaten«s8  and  distinctness  of  our  God  which  makes  it  so  impossible 
for  us  to  find  any  likenesses  for  him?  The  uniqueness  of  Jehovah  is  embodied  in  his 
Name,  which  is  the  assertion  of  absolute  and  independent  existence;  and  this  can  be 
predicated  of  only  one  Being.  We  can  conceive  of  divinities  having  ia  their  special 
charge  certain  forces  of  nature,  or  faculties  and  relationships  of  men ;  and  of  these  there 
may  be  many.  But  if  we  can  conceive  of  an  uncaused  Being,  who  is  the  cause  of  all 
being,  there  can  be  only  one  such.  Jehovah  stands  alone.  All  others  must  say,  "  I 
was  made ; "  he  says,  "  I  am."  The  distinction  comes  out  very  forcibly  in  relation  to 
the  idols  which  men  worship.  We  know  their  origin  in  men's  mental  conceptions,  or 
in  men's  handiwork.  Of  Jehovah  we  know  nothing  save  that  he  it.  But  the  prophet  is 
far  less  concerned  with  the  abstract  nature  of  GoH  than  with  his  special  and  gracious 
relations  with  his  people.  He  is  here  dealing  with  Jehovah's  faithfulness  to  his 
predictions  and  promises.  He  is  unique  in  this — he  keeps  his  word.  The  glory  of 
fulfilling  his  promises  belongs  to  him  alone.  It  was  characteristic  of  idolatry  that 
large  promises  were  made  to  men  by  oracle  and  priest,  for  which  there  was  no  guarantee ; 
and  there  is  no  more  miserable  chapter  in  the  history  of  idols  than  the  chapter  ol 
excuses  for  disappointed  piomise-holders.  If  the  predictions  of  Jehovah  ever  failed,  he 
would  sink  to  lower  levels  than  the  idols.  "The  voice  that  moves  the  stars  along 
speaks  all  the  promises."  The  point  on  which  to  dwell  is  that,  however  tolerant 
idolatry  may  be  of  other  conceptions  and  other  ritual  developed  in  other  lands,  and 
however  attractive  to  men  such  latitude  in  religion  and  worship  may  be,  not  one  jot  of 
the  absolutely  supreme  claims  of  Jehovah  can  be  removed.  In  this  no  concession  can 
be  made.  Here  there  can  be  no  rivalry,  no  sharing  of  honours.  God  is  God  alone. 
He  is  above  all.  It  is  absolutely  essential  to  the  worship  of  Jehovah  that  it  should  be 
wholly  exclusive  of  the  idea  of  another  god.  No  reproach  of  men  can  be  more  severe 
and  searching  than  this,  "  They  feared  the  Lord,  and  served  other  gods."  The  unique- 
ness of  God  is  seen  in  that :  1.  He  is  for  man  only  a  thought ;  we  cannot,  we  may  not, 
fix  him  in  any  shape.  "  He  is  a  Spirit."  2.  He  is  behind  all  things.  Not  behind  some 
things,  as  idols  of  wisdom,  or  of  music,  or  of  corn  and  wine.  At  the  back  of  everything 
we  can  conceive  is  God,  in  whom  the  conception  first  took  shape.  3.  He  controls  all 
forces.  Not  like  idols,  this  one  controlling  the  wind,  and  that  the  sea.  4.  He  claims 
all  homage.  Not  of  a  nation,  but  of  the  world ;  not  of  a  time,  but  of  the  ages.  5.  He 
has  the  supreme  record  of  faithfulness;  for  he  has  been  the  "Refuge  and  Dwelling- 
place"  of  men  in  all  generations. — R.  T. 

Ver.  16. — The  surprising  Li/e-Ouide.  "I  will  bring  the  blind  by  a  way  that  they 
knew  not."  Only  the  figure  is  taken  from  the  gracious  Divine  arrangements  made  for 
the  return  of  the  captives  from  Babylon.  That  is  indeed  prominent  in  the  prophet's 
mind,  but  only  as  illustrative  of  God's  constant  dealings  as  the  Life-Guide  of  bis  people. 


194  THE   BOOK   OP   THE  PROPHET  ISAIAH,     [ch.  xlii.  1— 2& 

Let  us,  in  any  vivid  and  impressive  way,  see  God's  working  and  providing  in  any  ons 
ingtance,  and  we  learn  wliat  he  really  is,  and  what  he  really  does,  in  all  instances. 
Therefore  is  every  man's  life  dotted  over  with  special  scenes  of  rescue  and  deliverance, 
when  ways  were  made  for  him  altogether  beyond  his  ima^iaation,  that  he  might  learn 
to  say  from  the  heart,  "This  God  is  our  God  for  ever  and  ever:  he  will  be  our  Guide 
even  unto  death."  Matthew  Arnold  paraphrases  the  verse  thus:  "I  will  bring  my 
faint-hearted,  incredulous,  and  undiscerning  people  safe  through  the  desert  to  their 
own  land."  I'rominent  are  two  thing? :  (1)  the  inability  of  man ;  (2)  the  perplexity  of 
his  circumstances.  The  Divine  guidance  ensures  a  safe,  good  way  through  all.  This 
may  be  fully  opened  and  illustrated  on  the  following  lines. 

L  We  cannot  obasp  the  pukpose  of  life.  God  holds  it.  What  are  we  here  for  ? 
God  knows.  How  will  our  work  fit  into  the  work  of  others?  God  knows.  We  are 
only  servants  working  at  parts  of  a  plan  which  has  never  been  shown  us.  The  Divine 
Architect  is  our  Guide,  and  shows  us  just  wliat  we  have  to  do.  Men  are,  in  a  despair- 
ing spirit,  asking  "  Is  life  worth  living  ?  "  We  answer,  "  Certainly  it  is,  if  only  it  is  put 
into  God's  hands  for  the  guiding."  Perhaps  we  shall  never  reach  to  grasp  the  purpose 
of  our  life  on  the  earth  better  than  this — it  is  our  becoming  holy,  and  the  agents  in 
helping  others  to  become  holy.  That  is  God's  thought  for  us,  and  towards  its  realiza- 
tion he  is  ever  working,  ever  guiding. 

IL  Wk  cannot  uake  a  wat  of  life.  We  plan,  but  life  does  not  carry  out  out 
plan.  We  wish,  but  life  will  not  fulfil  our  desires.  Every  one  of  us  has  to  say,  when 
life  closes,  "  I  could  not  have  imagined  the  way  in  which  1  have  been  led."  "  It  is  not 
in  man  that  walketh  to  direct  his  steps."  "  The  future  we  explore  in  vain,  so  little 
understood."  God  opens  it.  He  knows  the  way  of  life  for  every  man.  He  "  leads  in 
paths  that  we  have  not  known."  Two  striking  instances  may  be  taken,  one  from  Old 
Testament  and  the  other  from  Kew  Testament  Scripture.  David  tending  his  sheep 
could  not  even  imagine  the  way  of  life  he  was  to  take ;  yet  God  was  guiding  him  step 
by  step  along  a  way  he  had  maiked  out  for  him.  Tell  Saul,  the  zealous  Hebrew,  that 
his  way  lay  round  from  Jerusalem  to  Illyricum,  preaching  the  gospel  of  the  crucified 
Naiarene,  and  he  will^exclaim,  "  Impossible  I "  But,  under  God's  guidance,  it  was  ths 
way  that  he  took. 

IIL  We  cannot  heet  the  claims  of  life.  God  can  help  us.  Those  claims  teem 
often  as  impossible  for  us  as  a  command  to  carry  sufdcient  water  with  them  for  all 
their  long  desert-journey  would  have  been  for  those  returning  exiles.  At  times  the 
responsibilities  resting  upon  us  seem  quite  overwhelming,  and  heart  and  flesh  faiL 
Then  we  need  to  be  reminded  of  the  amazing  contrast  between  what  a  man  can  do  by 
himself,  and  what  a  man  can  do  when  God  is  with  him.  Wonderful  becomes  bis 
"enduring"  when  he  can  "see  him  who  is  invisible."  The  ever-strengthening  con- 
viction, which  makes  spiritual  giants,  is  that  God  never  gives  any  man  any  work  to  do 
without  holding  out,  ready  for  him,  grace  for  the  doing. 

IV.  We  cannot  provide  fob  the  needs  or  life.  God  is  the — to  use  an  Eastern 
figure — Sheikh  of  tlie  caravan,  and  he  provides.  What  is  wanted  is  the  knowledge 
that  anticipates  all  wants,  and  the  abilities  that  can  meet  all.  The  various  needs  of 
life  may  be  gathered  under  one  head — the  need  of  renewals.  Renewals  of  body,  by 
sleep;  of  health,  by  air,  food,  medicine;  of  mind,  by  knowledge ;  of  heart,  by  love.  It 
is  nothing  short  of  a  Divine  thing  to  arrange  tor  all  the  needs  of  a  single  life — many  of 
them  needs  to  which  the  man  himself  is  "blind,"  of  them  he  knows  nothing.  God 
knows,  guides,  and  provides. 

v.  We  cannot  mabtee  the  ills  of  life.  God  overrules.  Again  and  again  we 
have  to  face  calamities  in  conscious  helplessness.  What  can  Job  do  with  the  ills  of 
life  ?  The  Sabsaans  carry  off  his  fiocks,  and  he  can  do  nothing.  Mighty  winds  bring 
the  house  down  upon  his  sons  and  daughters,  and  he  can  do  nothing.  Painful  diseases 
afflict  his  own  body,  and  he  can  do  nothing.  He  can  master  none  of  the  ills  of  Ufe. 
Darkness  is  round  him ;  things  are  crooked.  Yet  God  is  the  Life-Guide.  Circumstaocei 
are  all  in  his  control.  He  overrules.  He  makes  the  very  ills  turn  to  good,  by 
securing  for  Job,  through  them,  a  new  and  more  spiritual  hold  of  himself,  and  by 
making  Job  the  supreme  example  of  patience  for  the  whole  world.  He  brings  light 
on  the  darkness,  and  makes  the  crooked  things  go  straight.  Id  conclusion,  ur>ia 
that,  in  view  of  our  helplessness  and   God's  all-sufficing  helpfulness,  we  may  well 


CH.  XLii.  1—35.]    THE  BOOK  OP  THE  PROPHET  ISAIAH.  135 

lift  eyes  and  hearts  up  unto  him,  saying,  "  My  Father,  thou  shalt  be  the  Guide  of  my 

Ver.  31. — The  honouring  of  God's  Law.  Cheyne  translates,  "It  was  Jehovah's  pleasure 
for  his  righteousness'  sake  to  make  the  instruction  great  and  glorious."  The  Revised 
Version  gives  this  as  a  marginal  reading.  Only  by  a  straining  of  this  passage  can  it  be 
made  to  bear  any  relation  to  Christ's  obedience  and  righteousness.  It  is  true,  but  it  is 
not  the  truth  presented  or  suggested  here,  that  Christ  "  magnified  the  Law,  and  made  it 
honourable."  The  point  of  the  passage  is  well  expressed  by  J.  A.  Alexander.  "  The 
people,  being  thus  unfaithful  to  their  trust,  had  no  claim  to  be  treated  any  longer  as  an 
object  of  Jehovah's  favour;  and  yet  he  continues  propitious,  not  on  their  account,  but  out 
of  regard  to  his  own  engagements,  and  for  the  execution  of  his  righteous  purposes."  God's 
Law,  \,'hich  he  is  here  said  to  honour,  is  the  "  stream  of  Mlf -consistent  and  inspired  in- 
struction %/hich  has  run  through  all  the  ages."  It  is  the  total  inspired  revelation  of  God's 
mind  and  will,  regarded  as  the  supreme  authority  for  man,  and  therefore  called  God's 
Law.  It  may  be  illustrated  by  the  elaborate  Mosaic  system,  which  both  announced 
great  controlling  principles,  and  covered  the  whole  lives  and  relations  of  men  with  de- 
tailed instructions.  Of  this  we  may  be  well  assured,  God's  providences  will  always  be  in 
harmony  with,  and  will  support  and  honour,  his  revelations.  Treating  the  subject  in 
this  larger  sphere,  we  dwell  on  two  points. 

I.  God  magnifies  his  Law  by  making  obedibnob  secube  man's  good.  "  Righteous- 
ness tendeth  unto  life."  Men  are  dependent  for  forming  right  judgments  upon  sensible 
impressions.  We  apprehend  moral  good  through  the  sensible  figures  of  material  good. 
Therefore  God  makes  godliness  carry  "  the  promise  of  the  life  that  now  is."  There  may 
be  things  which,  on  occasion,  break  the  connection  between  moral  and  material  good, 
and  then,  like  Asaph,  we  are  in  perplexity;  but  the  generally  working  rule  brings  bless- 
ings round  to  the  good  man,  and  so  honours  God's  provisions  and  laws  and  promises. 

n.  God  haonifies  his  Law  by  following  dibobbdhnce  with  man's  disability. 
"Though  hand  join  in  hand,  the  wicked  shall  not  go  unpunished."  It  is  often  pointed 
out  that  sin  is  folly.  The  man  who  does  wrong  is  false  to  his  heat  interests ;  he  wrongs 
himself.  The  link  between  sin  and  penalty  is  forged  tightly ;  sooner  or  later  penalty 
is  sure  to  follow  sin.  These  two  points  are  made  evidently  true  in  the  history  of  ancient 
Israel ;  that  people  was  under  a  distinct  system  of  material  rewards  and  punishments. 
But  they  may  still  be  illustrated  in  the  large  spheres  of  the  world.  Iniquity  never 
pays,  even  now.  They  may  be  illustrated  in  the  case  of  individuals,  if  moral  and 
spiritual  rewards  and  judgments  be  taken  into  due  account. — "&.  T. 

Vers.  24,  26. — Ineffective  judgmenU.  QtoA  has  even  burned  Israel,  and  "  yet  he  lud 
it  not  to  heart."  There  is  immediate  reference  to  the  sufferings  of  the  people  during 
the  Captivity.  It  did  seem  strange  that  such  manifest  Divine  judgments  were  not 
duly  considered  and  properly  effective  in  securing  humiliation  for  national  sin  and 
penitential  return  to  God.  The  secret  of  the  failure  of  the  Divine  judgments  then  is 
the  great  secret  of  feilure  still ;  it  is  this — when  men  fall  into  trouble  they  persist  in 
looking  only  at  the  second  causes,  which  are  the  mere  occasions,  and  will  not  recognize 
the  true  and  only  cause,  or  recognize  God's  hand  in  them.  It  has  been  so  in  all  ikges. 
One  of  the  most  striking  instances  is  that  of  the  Boman  siege  of  Jerusalem  under 
Titus.  Distinctly  foretold  as  a  Divine  judgment  on  the  nation  for  its  rejection  of 
Messiah,  the  Jews  to  this  day  will  not  so  regard  it.  To  them  it  is  still  only  a  national 
calamity,  and  so  it  has  been  hitherto  ineffective  in  the  production  of  a  due  sense  of 
national  sin.  So  many  sides  and  aspects  of  this  subject  have  been  treated,  that  we 
only  give  a  brief  outline  of  the  topics  which  may  be  wisely  and  helpfully  considered. 

L  All  suffemng  is  Divine  judgment.  Whatever  else  may  be  said  of  it,  its 
explanations  are  never  exhausted  until  the  Divine  purpose  in  it  is  explained.  The 
connection  of  a  particular  judgment  with  a  particular  individual  it  may  be  unwise  for 
us  to  attempt  to  trace.  But  we  can  always  see  the  judgment  aspect  of  race,  national, 
or  family  calamities ;  and  we  know  that  God  can  show  the  judgment  element  in  each 
man's  woe. 

n.  All  jvdoxknt  u  oobbectitb.  It  is  a  Father's  rod.  No  Ckther  chastiws  save 
for  eomotion,  and  with  a  riew  to  the  profit  of  the  corrected. 


136 


THE  BOOK  OF  THE  PROPHET  ISAIAH,     [oh.  xliii.  1— 28 


UL  All  jddoments  abb  within  strict  limitations.  They  are  precise  to  individual 
sases.  Sometimes  liaht,  sometimes  heavy.  Soiiietimesbrief,sonietinie3  long-continued. 
Always  in  exact  adaptation.  There  is  never  any  exaggeration,  any  overdoing,  in 
Grod's  judgments.  They  are  just  adequate  to  the  ends  sought.  They  take  due  count 
of  reMonable  response  from  tho§e  to  whom  they  are  sent. 

rv.  All  despised  judgments  must  be  renewed  in  severer  forms.  Because  they 
jreate  new  and  more  serious  conditions,  and  these  mu.st  he  adequately  met.  Gcd  can 
iBver  permit  effective  and  successful  resistance  and  rebellion.  If  a  man  will  not  bend, 
he  must  break.    Heavier  judgments  must  grind  him  to  powder. — ^B.  T. 


EXPOSITION. 


CHAPTEB  XLTIL 


Yen.  1 — 7. — A  Renewed  Promise  to 
[sbail  op  Pboteotion  and  Deliverance. 
Severe  rebuke  (oh.  xlii.  18 — 25)  is  followed, 
13  so  often  in  Isaiak  (oh.  i  25 — 27;  iv. 
2 — 6 ;  ix.  1 — 16,  etc.),  by  comfort  and  con- 
solation. Israel  is  assured  that  God  has  not 
cast  him  off,  and  promised  the  comfort  of 
the  Divine  presence  during  the  existing 
tribulation  (ver.  2),  and  a  speedy  restora- 
tion to  Palestine  (vers.  3 — 7).  The  scattered 
Israelites  will  be  brought  together  from  all 
quarters  by  the  Divine  omnipotency. 

Ver.  1. — But  now.  The  wdrJs  mark  the 
strong  contrast  between  the  closin;;  passage 
of  the  preo.  diug  cliapter  and  the  opening 
paragraph  of  tlie  present  one.  Israel  had 
■  undergone  a  severe  punishment  for  his  sins; 
he  is  still  suffering,  but  now  there  is  going 
to  be  an  entire  change.  He  is  to  be  protected 
and  delivered.  Created  thee  .  .  .  formed 
thee  .  .  .  redeemed  thee  . .  .  called  thee  by 
thy  name.  An  ascending  series  of  benefits. 
First,  creation,  like  that  of  formless  matter 
out  of  nought ;  tlien,  formation,  or  putting 
of  the  formless  matter  into  shape ;  tliirdly, 
redemption,  or  making  them  all  his  own ; 
lastly,  calling  them  by  their  name,  and  so 
conferring  on  them  a  proud  and  enviable 
distinction.  On  tliis  fourfold  ground  God 
claims  Israel  as  his  own. 

Vei.  2. — Through  the  waters  . . .  through 
the  rivers;  i.e.  through  troubles  of  any  kind 
(comp.  Ps.  Ixvi.  12,  "  We  went  through  flre 
and  through  water:  but  tliou  broughttst  us 
out  into  a  wealtliy  place").  There  were, 
perhaps,  tpecial  troubles  to  be  endured  con- 
nected with  the  final  Babylonian  struggle. 
There  were  certainly  others  connected  with 
the  tedious  and  dangerous  journey  from 
Babylonia  to  Palestine  (Ezra  viii.  22,  31). 
There  were  others,  again,  after  the  Holy 
Land  was  reached,  arising  out  of  the  jealousy 
and  ill  will  ol  neighbouriug  nations  (Ezra  iv. 
and  V. ;  Neh.  iv. — vi.).  Neither  shall  the 
dame  kindle  upon  thee.  The  literal  fulfil- 
ment in  the  personi  of  the  "  three  children  " 


(Dan.  iii.  27)  will  be  obvious  to  eveiy  reader. 
But  the  prophecy  has,  no  doubt,  a  fsr  wider 
scope. 

Ver.  3. — ^The  Holy  One  of  Israel  (oomp. 
oh.  xli.  14,  20,  with  the  comment).  Thy 
Saviour.  He  who  had  saved  them  from 
I'haraoh  (Exod.  xiv.  23 — 31),  from  Jabin 
(Judg.  iv.),  from  Midiau  (Judg.  vii.),  from 
the  Philistines  (2  Sam.  viii.  1),  from  Zerah 
(2  Chron.  xiv.  9 — 15),  from  Sennacherib 
(eh.  xxxvii.  36).  The  term  is  first  used  of 
God  by  David  in  2  Sam.  xxii.  3  and  Ps. 
cvi.  21  (if  that  psalm  be  David.cal).  It  is 
also  applied  to  God  once  in  Jeremiah 
(xiv.  8),  and  onre  in  Hosea  (xiii.  4). 
With  Isaiah,  in  these  later  chapters  it  is 
a  favourite  epithet,  being  used  of  God  no 
fewer  tl  an  eight  times  (see  ver.  11 ;  oh.  xiv. 
15,  21;  xlvii.  15;  xlix.  26;  Ix.  16;  Ixiii.  8) 
With  his  eye  fixed  on  the  deliverance  of 
Israel  out  of  the  double  captivity  of  sin  and 
of  Babylon,  he  naturally  had  much  before 
him  this  aspect  of  Jehovah.  I  gave  Egypt 
for  thy  ransom,  etc. ;  rather,  I  have  given ; 
that  is  to  say,  "  In  my  counsels  I  have 
already  assigned  to  the  Persians,  as  com- 
pensation for  their  letting  thee  go  free,  the 
broad  countries  of  Egypt,  Ethiopia,  and 
Seba."  Even  tlie  latest  date  assigned  by 
sceptical  critics  to  "  the  Second  Isaiah " 
would  make  this  a  most  remarkable  prophecy. 
Egypt  was  not  reduced,  nor  was  Ethiopia 
made  tributary  to  Persia  until  several  years 
after  the  death  of  Cyrus,  whose  son,  0»m- 
byses,  eff  cted  the  conquests  about  •a.c. 
527-6.  Human  foresight  could  not,  in  the 
lifetime  of  Cyrus,  have  predicted  with  any 
certainty  what  would  be  the  result  of 
collision  between  Egypt  and  Persia ;  much 
less  coull  it  have  ventured  on  the  im- 
probable supposition  that  the  remote 
Ethiopia  would  submit  itself  to  the  Achss- 
menian  yoke.  Yet  this  was  the  result  of 
the  invasion  of  Oambyses,  who  made  Egypt 
a  Persian  province,  and  frroed  the  Ethiopians 
to  submit  to  the  payment  of  an  annual 
tribute  (see  Herod.,  iii.  97 ;  vii.  69).  And 
Seba.  If  "Seba"  is  "the  land  of  Meroe, 
which  is  enclosed  between  the  White  and 
Blue  Niles"  (Delitzsch),  it  may  be  ques- 


OH.  XLin.  1—28.]     THE  BOOK  OF  THE  PROPHET  ISAIAH. 


137 


tioned  whether  really  this  ever  formed  a 
portion  of  the  Persian  empire.  But  Isaiah 
has  probably  no  very  distinct  knowledge 
of  the  geographical  position  of  Seba,  or  of 
the  relations  between  the  Sabseans  and  the 
rest  of  the  Ethiopians.  He  couples  the  two 
together,  both  here  and  in  ch.  xlr.  14,  as 
forming  two  portions  of  one  nation.  The 
subjection  of  the  Ethiopians  involves,  in  his 
eyes,  tlie  subjection  of  the  Sabaeans.  And 
we  cannot  say  that  he  is  wrong,  since  it  is 
not  at  all  clear  that  the  if^abseans  were  not 
generally  spread  through  Ethiopia,  or  at 
any  rate  scattered  in  various  parts  of  the 
country. 

Ver.  i. — Since  thou  wast  preoions.  "  Since" 
probably  means  "from  the  time  that" 
(LXX.,  &<!>'  of),  not  "  because,"  as  Delitzsch 
and  Mr.  Cheyne  render.  Israel  became 
"  precious "  from  the  time  that  the  promise 
was  given  to  Jacob  that  in  his  seed  all  the 
nations  of  the  earth  should  be  bh  ssed  (Gen. 
xxviii.  14).  Thenceforward  God  placed  the 
interests  of  Israel  above  those  of  "  men " 
generally,  and  markedly  above  those  of  any 
other  "people."  People;  rather,  peoples — 
as  Mizraim,  Gush,  Seba  (ver.  3). 

Ver.  5. — ^Fear  not:  for  I  am  with  thee 
(comp.  ch.  xli.  10).  I  will  bring  thy  seed 
from  the  east  .  .  .  from  the  west.  The 
actual  extent  of  the  Jewish  diaspora  in 
Isaiah's  day  has  been  greatly  exaggerated 
by  some  modern  critics,  who  say  that  there 
were  at  that  date  "  bands  of  Jewish  exiles 
in  the  far  lands  of  the  Mediterranean,  and 
even  in  Cliina  "  (Oheyne).  Israel  liad  been 
carried  captive  into  Mesopotamia  and  into 
Media  (2  Kings  xvii.  6;  1  Chron.  v.  26), 
perhaps,  also,  into  otiier  regions  belonging 
at  the  time  to  Assyria,  as  liabylonia,  Assyria 
l^roper,  Syria.  Two  hnndred  thousand  Jews 
had  been  taken  to  Nineveli  by  Sennacherib 
('  Eponym  Canon,'  p.  134),  and  planted  prob- 
ably by  him  m  outlying  portions  of  his 
dominions.  But  sucli  transplantation  would 
nut  carry  the  dispersion  further  than  Cilicia 
and  Cyprus  towards  the  west,  Armenia 
towards  the  north.  Media  towards  the  east, 
and  the  shores  of  the  Persian  Gulf  towards 
the  south.  Any  scatteiing  of  the  nation 
into  regions  more  remote  than  these,  as  into 
Egypt,  Ethiopia,  Elam  (oli.  xi.  ll),and  China 
— if  Siniui  is  China  (ch.  xlix.  12) — must 
have  been  seen  by  Isaiah  in  vision,  ur  made 
known  to  him  by  revelation.  It  had  not 
taken  place  in  his  day.  The  expression, 
"ends  of  the  earth"  (ver.  6),  must  not  be 
pressed  in  Isaiah  any  more  than  in  Herodotus, 
where  the  eVxaT/oi  t^s  olKovfieyris  are  India, 
A.rabia,  Ethiopia,  and  Scythia  (iii.  106 — 116). 

Ver.  6. — Bring  my  sons.  Tlie  nations  are 
called  upon,  not  merely  to  "  let  Israel  go," 
but  to  oonduot  and  escort  them  from  the 
places  of  their  abode  to  their  own  country. 


(On  the  need  of  such  escort,  see  Ezra  viii. 
22,  31.^  On  the  actual  furnishing  of  ac 
escort  in  one  case  by  a  Persian  king,  see 
Nell.  ii.  7.  8.) 

Ver.  7. — Every  one  that  is  called  by  my 
name.  Tlie  very  name  of  "  Israel "  meant 
"  prince  of  God,"  or  "  soldier  of  God,"  and 
thus  every  Israelite  was  "called  by  God's 
name."  Israelites  were  also  known  among 
the  nations  as  Jehovah -worshippers  (see  the 
Moabite  Stone,  line  18).  I  have  created 
.  .  .  formed  ,  .  .  made  him  (comp.  ver.  1). 
"The  three  verbs  describe  the  process  of 
formation  from  the  first  rough  cutting  to  the 
perfecting  of  the  work"  (Cheyne).  The 
third  verb  would,  perhaps,  be  best  trans- 
lated, "  I  have  perfi  cted,"  or  "I  have  com- 
pleted (him)."  All  three  acts — creation, 
formation,  and  completion— are  done  by 
God  for  his  own  glory  (comp.  Pro  v.  xvi.  4). 

Vers.  8 — 13. — ^A  Eenewed  Challbnqe  to 
THE  Natioks.  The  nations  are  once  more 
challenged  (comp.  ch.  xli.  1,  21 — 26)  to  set 
forth  the  claims  of  their  gods  against  those 
of  Jehovah.  Israel  is  summoned  on  the 
one  hand  (ver.  8) ;  the  nations  on  the  other 
(ver.  9).  What  prophecy  can  the  nations 
produce,  either  old  or  new?  The  Israelites 
can  abundantly  witness  on  behalf  of  Jehovah 
(ver.  10).  Jehovah  adds  a  further  witness 
of  himself  (vers.  11 — 13). 

Ver.  8. — Bring  forth  the  blind  people  that 
have  eyes.  A  tribunal  is  supposed  to  have 
been  prepared,  before  which  the  contending 
parties  are  summoned  to  appear  and  plead. 
Israel    is    first    summoned,    as    "a    blind 

Eeople  that  have  eyes ; "  i,e.  a  people  long 
lind  (ch.  xxix.  18 ;  xxxv,  6 ;  xlii.  7,  18, 
19),  who  have  now,  to  some  extent,  recovered 
their  sight  (ch.  xxxii.  3 ;  xxxv.  5),  and  are 
ready  to  witness  for  God.  Next,  the  nations 
are  summoned  (see  the  following  verse). 

Ver.  9. — ^All  the  nations;  rather,  all  ye 
nations.  Israel  is  a  witness  on  the  one 
hand,  a  multitude  of  nations  on  the  other, 
recalling  the  ooptention  of  Elijah  with  the 
four  hundred  priests  of  Baal  (1  Kings  xviii. 
22).  The  people ;  rather,  the  peoples.  Who 
among  them  can  declare  this  t  i.e.  which  of 
them  can  show  any  prediction  made  by  their 
gods  comparable  to  the  one  contained  in 
vers.  1— 71'  And  show  ns  former  things. 
"Exhibit  the  past  history  of  the  world  in 
well-attested  documents"  (Kay);  "Make 
mention  of  past  events  which  they  have 
correctly  foretold"  (Cheyne,  Delitzsch). 
According  to  the  former  rendering,  the  cor 
trast  is  between  the  solemn,  serious  history 
of  early  times  in  Genesis,  and  the  grotesque 
and  extravtigaiic  myths  in  which  tlie  nations 
geneially  eiiibodied  their  views  of  the  primi- 


138 


THE  BOOK  OF  THE  PROPHET  ISAIAH.      [ch.  xuii.  1—90. 


tire  BgM.    (For  a  Bpedmen  of  the  oontiast, 

see  '  Ai(l3  to  Faith,'  Essay  vi.  pp.  275,  276.) 
Let  them  bring  forth  their  witnesses.  Wit- 
nesses that  the  prophecies  were  really 
delivered  before  the  events  happened,  or 
that  the  accounts  of  past  times  are  such 
as  have  really  come  down  to  them  from 
their  ancestors.  Or  let  them  hear  and  say, 
It  is  truth.  It  is  uncertain  whether  we 
onght  to  translate  the  initial  vau  here  by 
"  and  "  or  by  "  or."  If  the  former,  the  sense 
is,  "  And  then  let  them  (i.e.  the  witnesses) 
give  ear  to  the  assertions  made,  and  declare 
them  true ; "  if  the  latter,  we  may  render, 
with  Dr.  Kay,  "  Or,  if  they  have  no  wit- 
nesses, let  them  listen  to  the  sacred  records, 
and  confess  them  to  be  the  truth." 

Yer.  10. — ^Ye  are  my  witnesses,  saith  the 
Lord;  i.e.  "Ye,  Israel,  are  the  witnesses  that 
I  cite  " — ye  can  prove  the  antiquity  of  the 
historical  books  of  Scripture  by  the  ordinary 
modes  by  which  antiquity  is  proved,  and 
also  the  exact  dates  of  the  prophetical  ones. 
Ye  can  show  what  clear  and  unambiguous 
prophecies  liave  been  delivered  centuries 
before  the  event,  as  the  destruction  of  Jeru- 
salem by  a  nation  in  whom  none  can  fail 
to  recognize  the  Bomans  (Ceut.  zzviii. 
49 — 57),  prophesied  by  Moses ;  the  demoli- 
tion of  the  altar  at  Bethel  by  a  king  of  the 
hoase  of  David,  Josiah  by  name,  prophesied 
by  a  man  of  God  in  the  reign  of  Jeroboam 
(1  Kings  xiii.  2);  tlie  long  continuance  of 
David's  progeny  upon  the  throne  of  Judah, 
prophesied  by  Nathan  in  David's  time  (2 
Sam.  vii.  11 — 16);  the  fairly  long  con- 
tinuance of  the  house  of  John  on  the  throne 
of  Israel,  prophesied  to  Jehu  himself  (2 
Kings  z.  30);  and  tlie  like.  Israel  has  been 
at  all  times,  and  still  is,  one  of  the  most  im- 
portant witnesses  for  God  that  exists  in  the 
world.  Like  the  Church,  Israel  is  the 
"  witness  and  keeper  "  of  a  large  portion  of 
"  Holy  Writ."  Her  past  history  witnesses 
for  Ood.  Her  continued  existence  and 
present  condition  constitute  additional 
testimony.  And  my  Servant  whom  I  have 
chosen.  To  explain  this  as  meaning  "  and 
ye  are  also  my  servant,  whom  I  have  chosen" 
(Niigelsbach,  Oheyne,  Delitzsch),  is  to 
empty  it  of  all  its  force.  Manifestly,  a 
further  witness  is  adduced,  "Ye  are  my 
witnesses ;  and  to  it  my  Servant,"  eto.  The 
"Servant"  intended  can  only  be  the  one 
true  Servant  of  oh.  xlii.  1 — 7,  since  faithful 
Israel  is  already  among  the  witnesses.  The 
prophet  rises  above  the  consideration  of  the 
immediately  present,  or  of  the  single  trial- 
scene  which  he  is  sitting  before  us,  and  has 
in  mind  the  great  controversy  ever  going  on 
between  those  who  are  for  Ood  and  those 
who  are  against  him.  He  sees,  on  the  side 
of  God  (1)  faithful  Israel;  and  (2)  Christ, 
the  "Faithful  Witness"  (Bev.  i.  5;  iii.  14), 


who  "came  into  the  world  that  he  should 
bear  witness  of  the  truth"  (John  xviii.  37). 
These  are  the  two  witnesses  by  whom  God's 
truth  is  maintained  in  a  world  of  falsehood 
and  delusion.  That  ye  may  know.  The 
subject  is  changed.  "Ye"  here  points  to 
"  the  nations,"  or  mankind  at  large.  I  am 
he  (comp.  ch.  xli.  4).  Before  me  there  was. 
no  God  formed.  All  other  gods  beside  me 
are  "formed"  gods — invented,  fashioned, 
made  by  men.  Kone  of  them  was  ever 
made  before  me. 

Ver.  11. — Beside  m*  there  is  no  saviour. 
None  but  God  can  save  men.  Man  cannot 
make  atonement  for  his  fellows ;  "  for  it 
cost  more  to  redeem  their  souls,  so  that  he 
must  let  that  alone  for  ever"  (Fs.  xliz. 
8,  Prayer-book  Version).  The  human 
"  saviours  "  whom  rsod  raises  up  to  deliver 
his  people  out  of  the  hand  of  tlieir  enemies 
(Judg.  iii.  9;  2  Kings  xiii.  5;  Neh.  ix.  27, 
etc.),  are  "saviours"  in  quite  a  secondary 
and  inferior  sense. 

Ver.  12. — ^I  have  declared,  etc.  Translate, 
I  annomtced,  and  delivered,  and  proclaimed 
{the  deliverance),  vlien  there  was  no  strange 
god  among  you ;  i.e  I  did  what  the  idol-gods 
cannot  do — announced  deliverance,  and 
ieffected  it,  and  furtiier  proclaimed  (or  pub- 
lished) it,  at  the  time  when  you  Israelites 
had  no  idolatiy  among  you.  The  allusion 
is  to  the  deliverance  of  Jerusalem  from 
Sennacherib,  wliioU  God  announced  by  the 
mouth  of  Isaiah  (ch.  xxxvii.  33 — 35),  etfeoted 
by  the  hand  of  his  angel  (ch.  xxxvii.  36), 
and  then  caused  to  be  published  by  Isaiah, 
who  wrote  tlie  two  accounts  of  the  deliver- 
ance— both  that  in  his  own  prophecy,  and 
tliat  in  the  Second  Book  of  Kings  (xix. 
20—35).  At  that  time  there  was  no  (open) 
idolatry  in  Judah,  since  Hezekiah  had  de- 
stroyed the  idols  (2  Kings  xviii.  4).  There- 
fore ye  are  my  witnesses  . ,  .  that  I  am  God; 
literally,  and  ye  are  my  ojitneeecs,  and  1  am 
God.  Ye  can  bear  witness  of  the  truth  of 
what  I  liave  asserted  in  the  previous  portion 
of  the  verse,  and  your  witness  to  this  effect 
proves  me  to  be  God. 

Ver.  13. — Yea,  before  the  day  was  I  am 
he.  So  the  LXX.,  Jerome,  and  Stier;  but 
most  moderns  translate,  "Yea,  from  thii 
time  forth  I  am  he  "(comp.  Kzek.  xlviii.  35). 
Kay,  however,  thinks  that  the  translation  of 
the  Authorized  Version  may  stand.  Who 
shall  let  it  1  literally,  as  in  ch.  xiv.  27,  mAo 
thall  turn  it  backi  "i.e.  "reverse  it,  undo  it" 
Surely  no  one. 

Vers.  14 — 21. — ^A  Deolabatiom  asaina 
Babylon,  aijd  a  Fbohisb  of  Isbasl'i 
Restoration.  Having  wound  up  the  pre- 
ceding "controversy"  with  a  reference  ta 
his  own  power  to  work  great  results  (vw, 
13),  Jehovah  now  brings  forward  two  ex< 


CH.  XLUi.  1-28.]     THE  BOOK  OF  THE   PROPHET  ISAIAH. 


139 


■mples — ^the  discomfiture  of  Babylon  (vers. 
14,  15),  and  the  lecoveiy  and  restoration 
of,  Israel  (vers.  16—21),  both  of  which  he 
is  about  to  accomplish. 

Ver.  14. — For  youi  lake  I  have  sent  to 
Babylon.  For  Israel's  sake  God  has  already, 
in  bia  counsels,  sent  to  Babylon  the  instru- 
ments of  his  vengeance — Gyrus  and  bis 
soldiers — and  by  their  instrumentality  has 
brought  down  all  their  nobles;  or  rather, 
has  brought  them  aU  dovm  (to  be)  fugitivet 
(comp.  on.  XT.  5);  and  the  Chaldeans;  or, 
even  the  Chaldeani.  The  Chaldeans  are 
not  in  Isaiah,  as  in  Daniel  (ii.  2 ;  iv.  7 ; 
T.  7),  a  special  class  of  Babylonians,  but, 
as  elsewhere  commonly  in  Scripture,  the 
Babylonians  generally  (see  ch.  ziL  19 ; 
xlvii.  1).  In  the  native  inscriptions  the 
term  is  especially  applied  to  the  inhabitants 
of  the  tract  upon  the  sea-coast.  Whose  cry 
is  in  the  ships;  rather,  into  their  ships  of 
wailing.  The  Chaldeans,  flying  from  the 
Persian  attack,  betake  themselves  to  their 
ships  with  cries  of  grief,  the  ships  thereby 
becoming  "  ships  of  Wiiiling."  The  nautical 
character  of  the  Babylonians  is  strongly 
marked  in  the  inscriptions,  where  "the 
ships  of  Ur"  are  celebrated  at  a  very  remote 
period,  and  the  native  kings,  when  hard 
pressed  by  the  Assyrians,  are  constantly 
represented  as  going  on  ship-board,  and 
crossing  the  Persian  Gulf  to  Susiana,  or  to 
some  of  the  islands  (see  'Becords  of  the 
Past,'  vol.  i  pp.  40,  43,  73;  vol.  vii.  p.  63; 
vol.  ix.  p.  60).  The  abundant  traffic  and 
the  numerous  merctiants  of  Babylon  are 
mentioned  by  Ezekiel  (xvii.  4).  .ffischylus, 
moreover,  notes  that  the  Babylonians  of 
his  day  were  "  navigators  of  ships  "  ('  Persts,' 
IL  52—55). 

Ver.  15. — ^Ihe  Creator  of  IsraeL  An 
unusual  epithet;  but  comp.  vers.  1, 7.  Tour 
King  (see  Judg.  viii.  23 ;  1  Sam.  viii.  7 ;  xii. 
12 ;  and  comp.  ch.  xxxiii.  22 ;  xlv.  6). 

Yer.  16.— The  Lord,  which  maketh  a  way 
in  the  sea.  The  deliverance  out  of  Egypt 
is  glanced  at,  to  prepare  the  way  for  the 
announcement  of  deliverance  from  the  hand 
of  Babylon.  Then  "  a  way  was  made  in  the 
sea"  (Bxod.  xiv.  21 — 29),  "and  a  path  in 
the  mighty  waters ;  "  now  it  will  be  neces- 
sary to  make  "a  way  in  the  wilderness" 
(ver.  19). 

Ver.  17.— Which  bringeth  forth  the 
chariot  and  horse.  Still  the  reference  is 
to  the  events  of  the  Exodus,  whereof  Israel 
is  reminded,  since  "the  redemption  out  of 
Egypt  was  a  type  and  pledge  of  the 
ddiverance  to  be  looked  for  out  of  Babylon" 
(Delitzseh).  God  then  "brought  out"  after 
Israel,  to  attack  him,  "chariot  and  horse, 
army  and  power ; "  but  the  result  was  their 
ileslraotion.    They  shall  lie  down  .  .  .  they 


shall  not  rise;  rather,  they  lie  down  .  . 
they  do  not  rise  (so  Cheyne  and  Delitzseh). 
The  future  has  here,  as  so  often,  the  force 
of  a  present,  the  present  being  the  prasseni 
hiftoricum.  What  the  prophet  describes  in 
a  few  touches  is  the  complete  overthrow  of 
Pharaoh's  host  in  the  Bed  Sea,  and  the 
entire  extinction  of  that  life  which  had 
just  before  shown  itself  as  "lusty  and 
strong."  Q'a.enched  as  tow  (comp.  ch.  xlii. 
8).  The  metaphor  is  not  drawn  from 
burning  tow,  which  is  not  very  readily  ex- 
tinguished, but  from  the  wick  of  a  lamp, 
which  a  single  breath  puts  out. 

Ver.  18. — Bemember  ye  not  the  former 
things,  The  old  deliverance  will  be  as 
nothing  compared  with  the  new.  Israel 
must  cast  its  eye  forwards,  not  backwards. 
Mr.  Cheyne  well  compares  Jer.  xxiii.  7,  8, 
and  also  well  notes  that  "  the  chief  glories 
of  the  second  manifestation  are  spiiitual." 
Israel  in  the  wilderness  "was  a  stiif-necked 
and  rebellious  people,  given  to  murmuring, 
licentiousness,  and  idolatry.  Israel,  re- 
turned from  Babylon,  will  no  more  hanker 
after  idols,  but  will  have  God's  Law  "put 
in  their  inward  parts"  (Jer.  xxxii.  33),  and 
will  "show  fortli  God's  praise  "  (ver.  21). 

Ver.  19.— Behold,  I  wiU  do  a  new  thing 
(comp.  ch.  xlii.  9,  with  the  comment).  It  is, 
of  course,  quite  possible  that  the  novelty  is 
not  merely  in  the  circumstances  of  the  deliver- 
ance, but  extends  to  all  its  results,  among 
which  is  the  Messianic  kingdom— verily,  a 
"new  thing"  (see  Jer.  xxxi.  22).  Now  it 
shall  spring  forth ;  rather,  already  it  ia  spring- 
ing up  (comp.  ch.  xlii.  9).  Things,  however, 
are  more  advanced  (to  the  prophet's  eye) 
than  when  that  passage  was  written.  Events 
are  shaping  themselves  —  the  deliverance 
approaches.  Shall  ye  not  know  it  t  rather, 
leill  ye  not  give  heed  to  iti  Will  not  the 
exiled  people,  whom  Isaiah  addresses,  turn 
their  thoughts  this  way,  and  let  the  idea 
of  deliverance  take  possession  of  their 
minds,  instead  of  brooding  on  past  and 
present  sufferings  (see  ch.  xl.  80 ;  xlL  17 ; 
xlii.  22)  ?  God  is  about  to  make  a  way  in 
the  wilderness,  and  rivers  in  the  desert.  Aa 
he  led  his  people  out  of  their  Egyptian 
bondage,  first  through  the  Bed  Sea,  and 
then  through  a  "howling  wilderness" 
(Dent,  xxxii.  10),  so  now  he  will  "make 
a  way  "  for  them  through  a  still  more  deso- 
late tract.  We  are  nowhere  historically 
told  by  what  route  the  Israelites  ultimately 
returned.  If  they  went  by  Tadmor  and 
Damascus,  they  must  have  traversed  a 
most  arid  and  difHoult  desert.  Even  if  they 
did  not  quit  the  Euphrates  till  they  reached 
the  latitude  of  Aleppo,  still  they  must  have 
had  some  wld",  tracts  of  wildc^mess  to  cross. 
Ver.  20.— The  beast  of  the  flelft  shall 
honour   me.      The    animal    creation   shuii 


140 


THE  BOOK  OF  THE  PROPHET  ISAIAH,    [oh.  xlhi.  1—28 


participate  in  the  benefits  of  tlie  "new 
thing"  introduced  by  the  restoration  of 
Israel,  and  in  their  dumb  way  shall  show 
their  gratitude.  The  dragons  and  the  owls. 
The'  recent  mention  of  the  desert  causes 
animals  of  the  desert  (oh.  xiii.  21,  22)  to  be 
taken  as  examples.  (On  the  animals  in- 
tended, see  the  comment  on  oh,  xzxiv.  13.) 
If  even  the  beasts  of  the  desert  honoured 
God,  much  more  would  the  rest  of  the 
animal  creation  (comp.  ch.  zi.  6 — 8). 

Yer.  21. — This  people  have  I  formed  for 
myself  (see  above,  ver.  7,  and  oomp.  Prov. 
xvi.  4).  They  shall  show  forth  my  praise ; 
i.e.  their  restoration  to  their  own  land  shall 
cause  them  to  glorify  me  both  with  songs  of 
praise  (for  the  fulfilment,  see  Ezra  iii.  9 — 1 1 ; 
Neh.  xii.  27;  and  the  post-Captivity  psalms), 
and  also  by  a  life  in  accordance  with  my 
laws. 

Vers.  22 — 28. — A-Bepboaob  adbbesbed  to 
Captive  Israel  roB  its  Past  Omissions  and 
Bins.  The  thought  of  Israel  in  the  future, 
redeemed,  restored,  and  "  telling  out  God's 
praise "  (ver.  21),  raises  naturally  the  con- 
trasted thought  of  Israel  in  the  present  and 
the  past,  disobedient,  full  of  shortcomings 
(yen.  22 — 24),  too  often  guilty  of  overt  acts 
of  sin  (vers.  24 — 28).  While  reproaching 
his  people,  and  reminding  them  that  the 
exile  is  the  well-merited  punishment  of 
their  past  offences  (vers.  27,  28),  God  still 
promises  them  pardon  if  they  will  appeal 
to  his  covenant  of  mercy  (vers.  25,  26). 

Yer.  22.  -  Bat  thon  hast  not  called  upon 
me.  The  Jews  htid  never  been  greatly 
given  to  prayer.    They  were  a  "  practical " 

Eeople,  active,  energetic,  hard-working, 
usily  employed  in  handicrafts,  commerce, 
or  agriculture.  David  and  Daniel,  who 
pray^  three  times  a  day  (Fs.  Iv.  17 ;  Dan. 
vi.  10),  were  probably  exceptions  to  the 
general  rule.  At  any  rate,  it  appears  here 
that  in  the  exile  the  nation  had  neglected 
prayer.  No  doubt  there  was  a  nucleus  of 
"  faithful  men,"  who  did  as  Daniel  did. 
But  with  the  mass  it  was  otherwise.  Hard 
toil  occupied  their  time.  Despair  made  dull 
their  hearts.  They  looked  for  no  allevia- 
tion of  their  lot,  and  lived  on  in  a  sort  of 
apathy.  But  thou  hast  been  weary  of  me ; 
rather,  for  thou  liatt  wearied  of  me.  Thou 
hast  left  off  praying,  because  thou  wast 
weary  of  my  service. 

Ver.  23. — Then  hast  not  brought  me  the 
•mall  oattle  of  thy  burnt  offerings.  If  this 
reproach  is  regarded  as  addressed  to  captive 
Israel,  who  emUd  not  offer  sncrl  flees,  we 
must  explain  it  by  the  analogy  of  the 
expression,  "the  calves  of  your  lips"  (Hos. 
xiv.   2).     All  prayer  may  be  regarded  oa 


a  sort  of  offering,  and  withholding  it  ai 
withholding  sacrifice.  But  it  is  possible 
that  the  prophet  is  not  addressing  captive 
Israel  only,  but  carrying  his  thoughts  buck 
to  the  period  preceding  the  Captivity,  when 
there  was  a  general  neglect  of  God's  service, 
and  for  a  time  the  temple  was  given  up 
to  idol-worship  (2  Kings  xxi.  3 — 7 ;  xxiii. 
4 — 14).  The  glance  back  at  earlier  times 
is  apparent  in  vers.  27,  28.  I  have  not 
caused  thee  to  serve  with  an  offering,  etc. ; 
rather,  I  put  no  heavy  eerviee  on  thee  in 
respect  of  meat  offering,  neither  made  I  thee 
to  toil  in  respect  of  incense ;  i.e.  "  my  positive 
requirements  have  been  light — surely  thou 
shnuldst  have  complied  with  fhem."  Meat 
offerings  were  to-  accompany  every  sacrifice, 
but  were  a  small  burthen.  Incense  was  not 
required  from  any  private  person. 

Ver.  24. — Thou  hast  bought  me  no  sweet 
cane  with  money.  "Sweet  cane"  is  men- 
tioned in  the  Law  only  in  connection 
with  the  "holy  anointing  oil"  (Exod. 
XXX.  23).  But  the  present  passage  raises 
a  suspicion  that  it  was  practically  used  in 
the  burnt  offerings  of  private  persons  (see 
the  next  clause).  That  it  was  anciently 
used  in  Babylonia  in  sacrifice,  appears  from 
the  Deluge  Tablets  ('  Transactions  of  Society 
of  Bibl.  Archaeol.,'  vol.  iii.  p.  559,  1.  48). 
But  thou  hast  made  me  to  serve  with  thy 
sins.  "The  sins  of  Israel,"  as  Delitzsch 
observes,  "pressed  upon  Jehovah,  as  a 
burthen  does  upon  a  servant"  This  is  a 
part  of  the  fimdamental  idea  running 
through  the  third  piirt  of  Isaiah,  closely 
connected  with  the  mediatorial  office  of  the 
"  Servant  of  the  Lord,"  who  "  bare  the  sin 
of  many  "  (ch.  liii.  12),  and  on  whom  "  the 
Lord  laid  the  iniquity  of  us  all "  (ch.  liii. 
6).  Israel,  both  during  tlie  Captivity  and 
before,  had  accumulated  a  heavy  load  of 
sin,  not  merely  by  negligence,  but  by  overt 
acts  of  guilt  (see  ch.  i.  4,  IS,  21 — 23,  etc.). 

Ver.  25. — I,  even  I,  am  he  that  blotteth 
out  thy  transgressions  (comp.  Ps.  li.  1,  9). 
The  idea  is  based  on  that  of  sins  being 
"  noted  in  a  book"  (Ps.  Ivi.  8 ;  Eev.  xx.  12). 
For  mine  own  sake ;  i.e.  purely  from  the  love 
that  I  bare  thee. 

Ver.  26. — Put  me  in  remembrance.  Either, 
ironically,  "  Keuiiud  me  of  thy  good  deeds ; 
plead  thy  cause  with  me  on  that  ground; 
show  the  merits  that  justify  thee ; "  or  else 
seriously,  "  Remind   me  of   my  promises ; 

Elead  them  before  me;  declare  them,  that 
y  my  free  grace  I  may  justify  thee."     The 
latter  is  the  more  probable  interpretation. 

Ver.  27.— Thy  first  father  hath  sinned; 
rather,  thy  first  father  sinned  ;  that  is, "  Thou 
hast  no  merits  of  thy  own.  Even  thy  first 
father,  Abraham,  sinned  (Gen.  xii.  13, 18; 
xvii.  17;  xx.  2);  and  thy  teaohers  hart 
transgressed.     Thy  70?^  priesU  and  pro- 


tiH.  xum.  1— 25.J      THE  BOOK  OF  THE  PROPHET  ISA.IALI. 


1^1 


phete  have  been  full  of  imperfections — have 
often  sinned  against  me.  Much  mori!  hast 
thou,  my  people  generally,  committed 
grieToua  offences.  Thou  must  therefore 
throw  thyself  on  my  mercy." 

Yer.  28. — Therefore  I  have  profaned  the 
princes  of  the  sanotuary.  The  "  princes  of 
the  sanctuary  "  (literally,  "  jirinces  of  holi- 
oees")  are  we  principal  memben  of  the 


priesthood,  who  were  carried  itiin  captivity 
with  the  rest  of  the  people  (2  Kings  xzv. 
18),  and  deprived  of  their  functions,  as  a 
part  of  the  punishment  due  to  Israel  for 
its  sins.  Israel  itself  was  at  the  same  time 
given  to  the  curse  of  a  severe  bondage 
and  to  the  reproaohei  of  the  neighbouring 
nations. 


HOMILBTICS. 

Ver.  7.— Man  made  for  the  glory  of  Ood,  The  great  end  of  all  creation  is  Gtod's  glory. 
Not  that  this  is  to  be  understood  in  such  sort  as  that  God  was  moved  to  create  by  the 
desire  of  getting  glory  thereby,  for  nothing  could  enlarge  or  enhance  that  glory  which 
he  had  from  all  eternity,  before  even  the  angels  were  brought  into  being.  The  motive 
of  God's  external  working,  if  we  may  use  the  expression,  was  his  goodness,  or  benevo- 
lence (Pearson  on  the  Creed,  art.  i.  p.  99),  which  caused  bira  to  seek  to  communicate 
his  own  blessedness  and  happiness  to  others.  But  the  law  of  his  working  was  the 
exhibition  of  his  glory.  He  so  created  all  things  that  they  should  set  this  forth.  From 
the  lowest  atom  of  dead  inert  matter,  possessed  of  no  qualities  but  substance  and  exten- 
sion, to  the  highest  created  intelligence,  endued  with  almost  Divine  attributes,  every 
thing,  as  it  issued  from  his  hand,  was  so  made  as  to  show  forth  and  proclaim  his  glorious 
and  unapproachable  majesty,  power,  and  greatness.  Hence  the  outburst  of  the  psalmist, 
"  The  heavens  declare  the  glory  of  God ;  and  the  firmament  showeth  his  handiwork. 
One  day  telleth  another,  and  one  night  certifieth  another  "  (Ps.  xix.  1,  2).  Hfnce  the 
call  upon  all  things  to  "praise  the  Lord,  since  his  Name  only  is  excellent,  and  his  glory 
above  heaven  and  earth"  (Ps.  cxlviii.  13).  Hence  the  cry  of  the  four  and  twenty 
elders  in  the  heavenly  place,  "  Thou  art  worthy,  0  Lord,  to  receive  glory  and  honour 
and  power:  for  thou  hast  created  all  things,. and  for  thy  pleasure  they  are  and  were 
created "  (Rev.  iv.  11).  God's  glory  may  be  set  forth  (1)  unconsciously,  or  (2)  con- 
sciously— unconsciously,  as  it  is  by  the  things  that  are  devoid  of  intelligence, "  sun,  and 
moon,  and  stars  of  light,  heavens,  and  waters  above  the  lieavens,  earth,  sea,  fire,  hail, 
snow  and  vapours,  stormy  wind,  mountains,  hUls,  fruitful  trees,  cedars,  beasts,  and  all 
cattle,  creeping  things,  and  flying  fowl "  (Ps.  cxlviii.  3 — 10) ;  consciously,  as  by  the 
host  of  heaven,  the  angels  of  all  grades  (Ps.  cxlviii.  2),  and  also  by  the  children  of  men 
-^•^ young  men  and  maidens,  old  men  and  children,  kin^is  of  the  earth  and  all  people, 
princes  and  all  judgesof  the  earth"(Ps.  cxlviii.  10,  12).  For  the  better  setting  forth  of 
his  glory,  God  "  created  man  in  his  own  image  "  (Gen.  i.  27) — "  created  him,  formed 
him,  perfected  him "  (ver.  7).  Then,  when  he  had  marred  the  image  in  which  he 
was  made,  God  redeemed  him.  Thus  he  is  still  able  to  set  forth  God's  glory,  and  to 
do  so  is  the  end  of  his  being.  "Whether  ye  eat,  or  drink,  or  whatsoever  ye  do,"  says 
the  apostle,  "do  all  to  the  glory  of  God"  (1  Cor.  x.  31)  ;  and  again,  "Ye  are  bought 
with  a  price :  therefore  glorify  God  in  your  body,  and  in  your  spirit,  which  are  God's  " 
(1  Cor.  vL  20). 

Vers.  8 — IL — Witnesses  for  Ood  and  against  him.  On  the  side  of  God,  witnesses 
for  him,  assertors  of  his  existence,  his  unity,  his  omnipotence,  his  providential  direction 
of  human  affairs,  are — 

I.  Hm  Chuboh  in  all  ages,  whbtheb  Jewish  oe  Christian.  1.  It  was  the  object 
of  God,  in  calling  the  Israelites  and  making  them  his  "  peculiar  people,"  to  secure  the 
result  that  he  should  not  be  "  left  without  witness  "  (Acts  xiv.  17).  Monotheists  from 
tha  first,  tiie  children  of  Israel  stood  up  for  ages  a  light  in  a  dark  world,  giving  a  clear 
■ad  unmistakable  testimony  for  God,  asserting  him  to  be  One,  intelligent,  possessed  of 
will,  **•*  Creator  of  the  world  attd  of  man,  omnipotent,  omniscient.  "  This  august 
doctrine  began  with  them ;  and  they  have  been  its  witnesses  and  confessors,  even  to 
torture  and  death"  (Newman,  'Grammar  of  Assent,'  p.  428).  From  the  time  of  the 
M  empire  in  Egypt  to  the  present  day,  a  uniform  consistent  witness  has  been  borne 
by  all  orthodox  Jews  to  these  great  and  fundamental  truths,  the  necessary  bases  of  all 


itf  THE  BOOK  OF  THE  PROPHET  ISAIAH,    [oh.  XLin.  1— 28 

true  religion,  the  only  safeguards  for  the  continuance  among;  men  of  law,  order,  oi 
morality.  2.  The  Christian  Church  is  at  one  on  all  these  points  with  the  Jewish  Church, 
and  bears  the  same  testimony  for  God,  only  with  additions  to  it.  Christianity  teaches 
that  within  the  Unity  of  the  Divine  Substance  there  is  a  Trinity  of  Persons.  Chris- 
tianity maintains  that  the  most  essential  attribute  of  the  Diyinity  is  love  (1  John 
iv.  8,  16).  Christianity  has  much  to  tell  of  the  Second  and  Third  Persons  of  the 
Trinity,  of  which  Judusm  knows  nothing.  Thus,  at  the  present  day,  it  forms  a  second 
witness  for  God,  and  gives  a  wider,  fuller,  and  deeper  testimony. 

II.  The  Lord  Christ  himself.  "  Ye  are  my  witnesses,  .  .  .  wnd  my  Servant  whom  1 
hiuvt  chosen  "  (ver.  10).  The  Lord  Jesus  witnessed  for  God  in  many  ways ;  and  his  utter- 
ances, placed  on  record  by  the  evangelists,  are  testimonies  of  inestimable  value,  infallibly 
declaring  to  us  the  true  nature  of  God.  "  God  so  loved  the  world,  that  he  gave  his  only 
begotten  Son  "  (John  iii.  16) ;  "  God  sent  not  his  Son  into  the  world  to  condemn  the 
world ;  but  that  the  world  through  him  might  be  savid  "  (John  iii.  17) ;  " God  is  true" 
(John  iii.  33);  "God  is  a  Spirit"  (John  iv.  24);  "The  Father  raiseth  up  the  dead, 
and  quickeneth  them"  (John  v,  21);  "If  a  man  love  me,  he  will  keep  my  words: 
and  my  Father  will  love  him,  and  we  will  come  unto  him,  and  make  our  abode  with 
him"  (John  xiv.  23) ;  "  Whatsoever  ye  shall  ask  the  Father  in  my  Name,  he  will  give 
it  you"  (John  xvi.  23).  Or,  to  take  another  class  of  utterances,  "  God  clotlieth  the 
grass  of  the  field  "  (Matt.  vi.  30) ;  God  "  sendeth  his  rain  on  the  just  and  on  the  unjust " 
(Matt.  V.  46) ;  "  My  Father  worketh  hitherto,  and  I  work  "  (John  v.  17).  The  witness 
of  the  Son  to  the  Father  is  far  beyond  the  witness  of  men,  and  is  inexpressibly  touching, 
being  pervaded  by  a  spirit  of  such  tender  loTe  ami  reverence  as  we  shall  vainly  seek  for 
elsewhere. 

ni.  The  Father  m  his  own  Person.  In  the  present  chapter  of  Isaiah,  Jehovah, 
while  citing  as  witnesses  the  Jewish  Church,  and  his  Servant,  i.e.  Christ  (ver.  10),  goes 
on  to  bear  his  own  testimony  to  his  own  greatness  and  una|iproachableness.  "lam 
he :  before  me  there  was  no  God  formed,  neither  shall  there  be  after  me.  I,  even  I,  am 
Jehovah ;  and  beside  me  there  is  w  >  Saviour . .  .  Tea,  before  the  day  was,  I  am  he ;  there 
is  none  that  can  deliver  out  of  my  hand :  I  will  work,  and  who  shall  reverse  it  ?  "  (vers. 
10 — 13).  And  does  not  the  Father  bear  the  same  testimony  to  himself  in  the  soul  ot 
each  of  us?  Is  the  general  recognition  of  something  high  and  holy  external  to  us, 
"making  for  ris iteuusnc ss,"  anything  but  the  Father  speaking  in  us  and  bearing 
witness  of  himself  in  our  heart  of  hearts  ?  Has  he  not  thus  spoken  always  to  all  the 
teachable  ones  of  his  myriads  upon  myriads  of  human  creatures,  besides  providing 
external  testimony,  making  himself  also  an  internal  witness  to  his  own  Being? 

Witnesses  a<;ainst  God  are,  unfortunately,  also  many,  as  appears  by  the  present 
passage.     Among  them  may  be  mentioned — 

I.  The  moLATRons,  or  in  ant  way  irreligious,  nations  and  peoples.  Idolatry 
is  either  a  negation  of  God  or  an  utter  misrepresentation  and  degradation  of  him. 
Polytheism  is  in  a  certain  sense  atheism,  since  a  "  god,"  limited  and  conditioned  by  a 
host  of  other  gods,  is  in  veiy  truth  no  "  God  "  at  all.  And  the  gods  of  idolaters  had 
rarely  such  a  character  as  enlightened  Christians  would  willingly  assign  even  to  a  low 
grade  of  angels.  The  "  nations  "  of  Isaiah's  time,  and  of  later  ages,  "  because  they  did 
not  like  to  retain  God  in  their  knowledge,"  had  been  given  over  by  him  to  "  a  reijrobate 
n.ind,"  and  had  lost  the  power  of  forming  in  their  minds  the  conception  of  a  pure,  holy, 
all-perfect,  spiritual  existence.  When  such  a  corception  was  presented  to  them,  they 
rejected  it,  preferring  their  own  familiar  ideas  of  gods  more  nearly  on  a  level  with  them- 
selves to  so  transcendental  a  Being. 

II.  The  sceptical  thinkers  and  philosophers  everywhere.  At  all  times  there 
have  been  "fools"  who  have  "said  in  their  hearts,"  or  even  proclaimed  to  the  world  at 
large,  "  There  is  no  God  "  (Ps.  xiv.  1).  Democritus,  as  early  as  B.C.  440,  and  Leucippui 
still  earlier,  taught  that  the  universe  had  come  into  being  without  the  help  of  a  God, 
by  evolution  from  llfi-less  and  shapeless  matter.  Practical  atheism  was  as  ancient  in 
China  as  the  time  of  Confucius.  Soi-dimnt  philosophers  have  been  in  every  age  among 
the  aaoet  forward  to  witness  against  the  Being  from  whom  they  derive  their  whole 
power  to  speak,  think,  or  act.  In  the  present  day,  atheism,  though  still  bold  and 
blatant  in  some  places,  for  the  most  part  bates  its  breath,  and  modestly  shroude  itself 
•mder  the  agnostic  veil. 


CH.  XLin.  1— 28.]    THE  BOOK  OP  THK   PBOrHET   ISAIAU.  143 

in.  Tmt  PRACTICALLY   IKRELIMOUS  AMONG  THE  NOMINAL   BBEVANT8   OP  GoD.      The 

witnesses  against  God  whose  testimony  is  most  dishonouring  to  him,  and  at  the  same 
time  most  injurious  to  mankind,  are  the  unworthy  professors  of  beliuf  in  him.  To 
tonfess  God  with  the  lips  while  denying  him  in  the  life,  is  to  do  him  the  greatest  dis- 
service that  is  possible.  It  is  to  c^st  a  doubt  upon  the  value  of  all  the  human  testi- 
mony borne  in  his  favour,  since  who  shall  say  how  much  of  it  is  Insincere  ?  It  is  to 
insult  God  by  a  mock  acknowledgment,  a  lip-service,  in  which  the  heart  has  no  part. 
It  is  to  admit  his  claim  to  allegiance  and  to  cast  off  our  allegiance  in  the  same  breaih. 
The  Cliristian  religion  would,  it  is  probable,  have,  long  ere  this,  overspread  the  world, 
had  it  not  been  for  the  vicious  lives  of  professing  Christians.  The  testimony  of  their 
acts  takes  away  all  its  force  from  the  testimony  of  their  words,  and  changes  them  from 
witnesses  for  God  into  most  persuasive  witnesses  against  him. 

Vers.  16 — 21. — 7%ree  deliveraTices,  In  the  past,  Israel  had  had  one  great  and 
unparalleled  deliverance,  that,  namely — 

L  From  the  power  of  Egypt.  With  a  "  mighty  hand  and  a  stretched-out  arm  " 
God  had  saved  them  from  the  miserable  fate  of  being  bondservants,  bound  to  task- 
work, and  compelled  to  labour  under  the  lash.  He  had  effected  their  deliverance  by  a 
series  of  miracles,  culminating  in  ^he  death  of  the  firstborn,  and  the  passage  of  the 
Bed  Sea,  whereby  it  might  have  been  hoped  that  the  nation  would  have  been  so 
impressed  as  to  turn  heartily  to  God,  and  become  "  a  praise  upon  earth."  But  the  result 
had  not  followed.  Even  in  the  wilderness  they  had  set  up  idols  (Bxod.  xxxli.  1 — 20; 
Acts  vii.  43).  In  the  Holy  Land  they  had  gone  from  bad  to  worse,  "  walked  in  the 
statutes  of  the  heathen;  built  them  high  places  in  all  their  cities,  set  them  up  images 
and  groves,  wrought  wicked  things  to  provoke  the  Lord  to  anger,  hardened  their  hearts, 
follov*ed  vanity  and  become  vain  "  (2  Kings  xvii.  8 — 15) ;  "  transgressed  very  much 
after  all  the  abominations  of  the  heathen,  polluted  the  house  of  the  Lord,  mocked  his 
messengers,  and  misused  his  prophets  "  (2  Chron.  xxxvi.  14 — 16);  "shed  innocent  blood, 
which  the  Lord  would  not  pardon "  (2  Kings  xxiv.  4) ;  and  thus  rendered  their  first 
deliverance  of  no  avail,  since  it  was  an  outward  deliverance  only  from  an  earthly 
oppressor,  and  not  an  inward  deliverance  from  the  bondage  of  sin.  Now  Israel  is 
promised  in  the  future  a  second  and  a  third  deliverance — 

II.  From  thb  oppression  or  Babylon.  God  will  once  more  show  forth  his  power, 
will  chastise  Babylon  by  the  sword  of  Cyrus,  will  cause  Cyrus  to  "  perform  all  his 
pleasure"  (ch.  xliv.  28),  will  bring  his  people  from  the  four  winds  of  heaven  (vers. 
5,  6)  and  plant  them  again  in  their  own  land  (ch.  li.  11).  "  The  ransomed  of  the  Lord 
will  return,  and  come  to  Zion."  This  deliverance  is,  so  far,  a  sort  of  duplicate  of  the 
deliverance  from  Egypt,  only  that  it  is  effected  by  new  means,  without  miracle,  by 
Qtid's  ordinary  and  secret  action  on  the  course  of  human  affairs. 

III.  From  the  tyranny  of  sin.  The  second  deliverance  is  to  lead  on  to  the  third. 
Israel,  redeemed  from  Babylon,  and  replanted  in  its  own  land,  is  to  "  show  forth  God's 
praise"  (ver.  21).  The  unimpressible  people  is  to  be,  to  a  certain  extent,  impressed. 
In  point  of  fact,  after  the  return  to  Palestine  idolatry  disappeared.  The  post-Captivity 
Jews  were  faithful  to  Jehovah.  I^hough  not  free  from  certain  minor  sins  (Ezra  ix.  1 ; 
Neh.  xiii.  1 — 25;  Mai.  i.  7 — 14;  ii.  8 — 17;  iii.  8 — 15),  they  were  never  apostates. 
In  the  Maccab^an  times  large  numbers  showed  a  noble  contempt  for  death,  and  were 
martyrs  and  confessors  for  the  truth.  When  our  Lord  came,  there  was  still  a  sound 
and  healthy  element  in  the  nation.  He  was  able  to  gather  to  himself  a  "  little  flock." 
The  "  little  flock  "  expanded,  and  became  the  nucleus  of  the  Christian  Church.  This 
Church,  holy  by  its  calling,  holy  by  its  profession,  holy  by  the  sanctified  lives  of  so 
many  of  its  members,  is  but  an  enlargement  of  that  early  "  flock."  Thus  the  final 
deliverance — begun  here,  but  not  to  be  cumpleted  till  the  consummation  of  all  things — 
IS  a  deliverance  from  sin.  The  final  "Israel  of  God"  will  be  "a  glorious  Church, 
not  having  spot,  or  wrinkle,  or  any  such  thing  "  (Eph.  v.  27). 

Vers.  22 — ^28. — 2^ folly  t^  self-justification  before  God.  Self-justification,  addressed 
by  man  to  God,  is  doubly  foolish — 

I.    As  HAVING   KG   BASIS  IN  TRUTH,   AND   THEREFORE    EASILY    CONFUTED.        There    U 

no  fact  more  certain,  whether  we  accept  the  statements  of  Scripture  as  authoritatire,  or 


14*  THE  BOOK   OF  THE  PROPHET  ISAIAH.    Loh-  ^-m  l-2a 

pin  onr  faith  on  our  own  observation  and  experience,  than  that  "  all  have  sinned  and 
come  short  of  the  glory  of  God  "  (Rom.  iii.  23).  Each  man  is  conscious  to  himself  of 
sin,  and  no  one  claims  perfection  for  his  neighbours.  The  greatest  saints,  both  of  the 
Old  Testament  and  the  New,  have  shortcomings,  defects,  fall  into  actual  sins.  One 
alone  is  depicted  without  sin,  and  he  was  more  than  man.  Human  biographies  are  in 
accord.  No  one,  whatever  his  admiration  for  his  hero,  claims  that  he  was  perfect.  All 
accept  the  notion  that  the  best  man  is  simply  the  one  who  has  fewest  faults. 

II.   As   EXCLUDING  MAN  FROM  THE  ONLY  JUSTIFICATION  POSSIBLE  TO  HIM.      God  will 

not  justify  the  self-righteous.  He  forgives  those  only  who  ask  his  forgiveness.  Pride 
is  a  barrier  which  shuts  men  out  from  him,  and  places  them  on  a  par  with  the  fallen 
angels,  "  to  whom  is  reserved  the  blackness  of  darkness  for  ever  "  (Jude  13).  God 
"justifies  the  sinner"  (Rom.  iv.  6),  but  only  the  sinner  who  confesses  his  sin  and  begs 
for  pardon.  If  we  "  go  about  to  establish  our  own  righteousness,  and  do  not  submit 
ourselves  to  the  righteousness  of  God,"  we  exclude  ourselves  from  God's  covenant  of 
salvation,  which  is  made  with  the  humble,  the  contrite,  the  self-abased,  the  penitent. 
"  If  we  confess  our  sins,  he  ia  faithful  and  just  to  forgive  ua  our  sins  "  (1  John  L  9). 


HOMILIES  BY  VARIOUS  AUTHORS. 

Vers.  1— 7.— 7%e  love  of  Jehovah  to  Israel.  "  But  now."  The  word  itself  hints  yearn- 
ing affection.  There  has  been  a  conflict  between  Divine  love  and  Divine  wrath,  and  the 
former  has  gained  the  victory.  In  fact,  the  wrath  of  Jehovah  was  but  grieved  affection. 
Its  force  is  now  for  the  time  spent.  He  will  now  deliver  and  protect,  reassemble  and 
restore  his  people  (Gheyne). 

I.  It  IB  THE  LOVE  OF  A  FABENT.  "Thy  Creator,  0  Jacob;  he  that  formed  thee,  0 
Israel."  Of  all  the  works  of  God,  confessedly  the  noblest  is  man;  and  if  man  is  only 
known  as  forming  nations,  these  too  are  the  works  of  God.  And  Israel  especially  ia 
the  embodied  thought  of  God,  in  her  laws  and  institutions,  her  place  and  mission  in  the 
world.  Or,  if  we  think  of  Israel  as  gradually  fashioned,  by  schooling  and  by  afHiction, 
into  a  "  new  and  singular  product,"  not  less  is  she  endeared  to  her  Maker  and  Builder. 
We  cannot  but  love  our  cliildren ;  and  scarcely  less  dear  to  us  are  the  children  of  our 
brain  and  of  our  heart — our  schemes,  our  books  ;  the  house  whose  structure  we  have 
planned,  whose  arrangements  have  been  made  after  ideas  of  our  own ;  the  flock  we  have 
overseen ;  the  little  body  of  disciples  or  friends  whom  we  have  made  an  organization 
for  the  diffusion  of  our  views  of  life.  That  delight  we  feel  in  the  reflected  image  of  oiu: 
mind  in  what  is  not  ourself,  we  transfer  by  analogy  to  God. 

n.  It  is  the  lotb  of  a  Redeemer.  And  this  implies  sacrifice,  love  proved  by 
expense  of  some  sort.  The  tense  gives  a  reference  to  history  and  to  prophecy — past 
•nd  future.  No  price  can  be  too  high  for  the  ransom  of  Israel :  other  nations  will  be 
giTen  up — Egypt,  Ethiopia,  and  Seba — for  her.  Cambyses,  son  of  Cyrus,  conquered 
Egypt  and  invaded  Ethiopia.  The  Persian  was  destined  to  set  free  the  chosen  people ; 
and  those  other  peoples  ^ven  into  his  hand  as  compensation  are  the  ransom  price  for 
delivered  Israel.  If  the  "  wicked  are  a  ransom  for  the  righteous  "  (Prov.  xxi,  18),  if  the 
sufferings  of  the  evil  are  in  some  way  connected  with  the  deliverance  of  the  good, — ^this 
helps  to  shed  a  consoling  light  upon  many  a  dark  page  of  human  history.  But  not 
only  the  suffering  of  the  evil  may  be  thus  viewed — the  suffering  of  the  good  also,  in  the 
light  of  the  great  saying,  "The  Son  of  man  came  ...  to  give  bis  life  a  ransom  for 
many" — for  the  greater  or  spiritual  Israel  in  all  ages. 

III.  It  is  ah  appropriating,  specializing,  honouring  love.  To  "call  by  name" 
la  an  expressive  phrase  for  selection  and  election.  So  was  Bezaleel  the  artist  called  in 
conneotiiin  with  the  tabernacle- work  (Exod.  xxxi.  2);  so  was  Moses  called  by  name 
(Exod.  xxxiii.  12, 17)  and  designated  for  his  work.  It  ia  to  "  find  grace  "  in  the  eyes  of 
God ;  it  is  to  be  precious  and  honourable  in  his  sight.  It  is  to  be  a  " peculiar  treasure"- 
(Exod.  xix.  5,  6),  a  property  of  the  Eternal — "  mine  art  thou."  We  are  led  into  the 
heart  of  the  covenant-relation  by  these  words.  And  every  association  of  affection  and 
good  which  has  belonged  in  the  thought  of  the  world  to  the  spiritual  bond  whicn  kniti 
ioul  to  soul,  may  be  used  to  illustrate  Israel's  relation  to  her  God — that  of  ckdld  to 
parent,  of  client  to  patron,  of  confidential  servant  to  lord,  of  soul  to  guardian  apirit  oi 


ja.  iLUi.  1— 28.]      THE  BOOK  OF  THE   PROPHET  ISAIAH.  145 

angel,  may  be  thought  of  in  this  connection.  What  is  true  of  the  nation  must  be 
true  of  its  individuals ;  what  holds  good  of  the  Church  must  be  valid  for  the  life  «f  each 
Christian. 

IV.  It  IB  AN  ALL-PROTECTINO  LOVE.  Israel  shall  go  through  water  and  through  fire 
unhurt.  No  stronger  figure  could  be  used  for  safety  amidst  calamity  (of.  Ps.  Ixvi.  12;  Dan. 
iii.  17.  27).  We  may  think  of  the  salvation  of  Ih^rael  from  the  waves  of  the  Bed  Sea, 
of  the  three  cnildren  in  the  furnace  at  Babylon,  of  ihe  ever-consuming  yet  never-con- 
sumed bush  seen  by  Moses.  These  things  are  parables  of  the  indestructibility  of  the 
spiritual  life  in  mankind,  and  of  the  perfect  integrity  of  the  empire  of  souls,  ruled 
by  the  redeeming  God.  Prom  the  east  and  the  west  and  the  nortb  and  the  south,  these 
scattered.soiils  are  to  be  gathered  to  their  home.  Impossible  to  limit  such  words  to  any 
temporal  reference  merely.  The  bounds  of  time  fade  away  as  we  listen ;  and  there  rises 
before  us  the  inspiring  picture  of  the  world  as  one  vast  scene  of  trial,  of  education,  of 
an  elect  people  to  eternity  — in  which  many  sons  are  being  brought  to  glory,  that  glory 
the  reflection  of  God  upon  their  renewed  spirits. — J. 

Vers.  8 — 13. — The  great  controversy.  The  challenge  of  ch.  xll.  is  renewed,  and 
Jehovah's  claims  are  contrasted  with  those  of  the  false  gods. 

I.  Absbmblino  of  the  nations.  Israel  is  first  brought  forth  by  the  ministers  of 
justice.  The  people  were  once  blind  and  deaf,  but  now  are  in  possession  of  their 
faculties.  And  then,  over  against  this  small  company  of  the  faithful,  the  vast  host  of 
the  heathen  appears.  And  the  challenge  is  issued — What  god  of  the  nations  can 
produce  predictions  such  as  those  in  vers.  1 — 7?  If  this  can  be  done,  let  them  name 
former  things — appeal  to  past  events  correctly  foretold,  and  establish  this  by  testimony. 
But  the  appeal  is  met  by  silence,  by  impotence.  There  are  no  witnesses  forthcoming. 
And  so  once  more  idol-power  is  convicted  and  exposed  as  being  "  nothing  in  the  world." 

II.  The  witness  to  Jehovah.  Israel  is  now  called  upon.  She  has  known  again 
and  again  the  power  of  Jehovah  to  foresee  and  foretell  the  future.  Let  their  faith, 
then,  be  wholly  given  to  him — a  iaXth  founded  on  eviderux,  a  faith  rooted  in  intelligence. 
This  faith  cleaves  to  Jehovah  as  the  Eternal.  He  is  both  before  and  after  all  created 
things.  These  idols  have  been  the  objects  of  an  illusory  worship — formed  and  fashioned 
things.  Their  power  breaks  with  the  decay  of  the  nations  of  whom  they  have  been 
the  imagined  patrons.  In  the  hour  of  adversity  they  have  seemed,  like  Baal,  asleep  or 
gone  on  a  journey — have  lifted  no  arm  to  save.  Jehovah  remains  the  sole  able  God, 
the  exclusive  Deliverer.  No  "  stranger,"  no  foreign  God  had  power  for  good  or  evil  in 
Israel.  To  this  test  of  ability  to  meet  the  wants  of  the  times,  true  and  false  religions 
must  ultimately  be  brought.  The  doctrine  .or  the  institution  which  visibly  is  saving 
men  from  evil,  emancipating  them  from  bondage  to  vice,  must  have  a  Divine  element 
in  it.  And  Christianity  seems  to  need  no  other  apology  than  the  witness  of  what  it  has 
done  and  is  doing  to  purify,  save,  and  bless  mankind. 

III.  His  ireeveesible  work.  "  I  work,  and  who  can  tui-n  it  back  ?  "  Messengers 
of  his  vengeance  have  been  sent  to  Babylonia,  and  all  the  mixed  multitude  will  be 
brought  down  into  their  proud  ships,  hopelessly  overwhelmed.  The  great  deliverance 
from  Egypt — eternally  mcnumental  of  Jehovah's  power  to  deliver^ — shall  itself  be  sur- 
passed by  the  coming  deliverance  of  Israel  from  the  recesses  of  the  earth.  It  is  seen 
already  "  shooting  forth,"  and  a  blissful  picture  of  the  future,  peaceful,  abundant, 
victorious  over  savagery,  closes  the  representation.  1.  God  is  Eternal.  2.  He  is 
unchangeably  the  same.  And  this  is  the  sure  foundation  of  the  security  of  his  people. 
None  can  trust  a  fickle  and  a  vacillating  being.  3.  He  can  deliver  his  people  from  all 
enemies,  amidst  every  variety  of  circumstances.  4.  None — whether  man,  demon,  ol 
god — can  resist  him.  Opposition  to  him  is  both  wicked  and  vain.  The  condition  of 
happiness  is  to  comply  with  his  plans,  and  become  servants  in  the  fiirtherance  of  his 
designs. — J, 

Vers.  22 — 28 — Memories  of  exUe.  I.  The  faithlessness  of  the  people.  They 
have  forgotten  the  covenant  of  their  God.  They  have  neglected  one  of  its  first  duties — 
prayer,  which  marks  dependence ;  or  they  had  prayed  to  other  gods ;  or  their  prayers 
had  been  merely  ritual  and  formal.  And  this  was  the  less  excusable  a«  the  burden  of 
sacrifices  had  not  laid  upon  them  during  the  exile. 

UAIAB— U,  9 


14«  THE  BOOK  OF  THE  PROPHET   ISAIAH.       [o«.  xun.  1— 2a 

U.  The  mindful  mercy  of  Jehotah.  He  promises  to  blot  out  their  sins ;  and  thii 
simply  for  his  own  sake.  God  can  swear  by  none  mightier ;  he  can  appeal  to  no  principle 
that  is  higher  than  himself.  He  must  be  true  first  aud  above  all  to  his  nature;  and 
next  to  that  covenant  which  is  the  expression  of  his  nature  and  of  bis  relations  to  the 
people.  Let  them  remember  that ;  let  them  remind  God  of  his  promises,  and  he  will 
not  fiiil  to  respond.  Although  their  ancestors  had  sinned ;  their  leaders,  the  prophets 
and  the  priests  and  the  princes,  had  rebelled  against  him,  aud  had  by  him  been  rejected ; 
— the  people  are  still  dear  to  him,  and  must  remain  so  while  Jehoyah  remains  Jehovah. 
For  he  is  the  Eternal ;  he  changes  not.  Though  he  punishes,  he  will  not  destroy ;  in  the 
midst  of  wrath  be  remembers  mercy;  aud  holds  fast  to  the  set  counsels  of  his  love, 
from  generation  to  generation,  despite  all  the  fickleness  of  man's  fancies,  opinions,  and 
inclinations.  Their  endeavours  to  overcome  his  good  by  their  «Til  shall  be  met  by  his 
mightier  will  to  overcome  their  evil  by  his  long-suffering. — J. 

Ver.  2. — God,  in  trouble.  "  When  thou  passest  through  the  waters,  I  will  be  with 
thee :  and  through  the  rivers,  they  shall  not  overflow  thee."  When.  Then  it  is 
certain  that  such  experiences  will  come.  It  is  only  a  question  of  time.  Tribulation 
is  common  to  all  the  children.  "  The  same  sufferings,"  says  the  apostle,  "  are  accom- 
plished in  your  brethren  which  are  in  the  world."  When  ?  We  do  not  always  know 
when  the  desolating  floods  of  life  are  coming,  but  presently  they  will  rise  to  our  breast 
and  te  our  throat— deep  waters. 

L  Tribulation  does  not  destbot  fbogress.  We  pass  through  these  waters;  they 
are  part  of  the  way  in  which  the  Lord  our  God  is  leading  us.  "  Ever  onward"  is  our 
motto.  We  are  "  a  day's  march  nearer  home,"  even  in  the  days  of  desolation  and  distress. 
We  need  not  hope  to  escape  the  waters.  No  detour  will  take  us  out  of  the  way  of  the 
floods. 

II.  Tbibulation  BBiNas  Christ  nsab.  "  I  will  be  with  thee."  A  brief  sentence. 
But  it  is  enough.  We  have  but  to  study  the  little  word  "  /,"  It  speaks  of  One  who  has 
ail  power  in  heaven  and  in  earth;  One  who  is  human  and  Divine.  A  presence — that 
is  what  we  want.  Theologians  talk  of  a  "  real  presence."  How  can  a  presence  be 
unreal  ?  We  do  not  talk  of  real  sunlight,  or  real  bread,  or  real  air  I  This  is  the  presence 
of  One  who  understands  all,  and  whose  infinite  pity  accompanies  the  infinite  peace. 

ILL  Tribulation  does  not  destroy.  "  The  rivers,  they  shall  not  overflow  thee.'' 
It  is  Kfe  the  Saviour  seeks  for  us,  not  death.  Neither  faith  nor  iiope  shall  be  destroyed. 
And  if  these  waterfloods  be  death — which  they  are  so  often  taken  to  mean — then  they 
do  not  destroy.     No ;  we  pass  through  them  to  the  land  beyond.— W.  M.  S. 

Ver.  1. —  The  supreme  claim  and  the  sure  stay.  So  far  from  having  nothing  to  do  with 
us  as  individual  spirits,  we  may  say  that  God  has  everything  to  do  with  us.  On  the 
one  hand,  he  makes  a  very  great  claim  upon  us ;  and  on  the  other  hand,  he  holds  out 
very  great  hopes  to  us. 

I.  The  supreme  claim.  To  every  human  soul,  as  to  Israel  of  old,  God  says,  "  Thou 
art  mine,"  He  requires  of  us  that  we  shall  consider  ourselves  as  belonging  to  him ;  so 
that  he  may  employ  us  in  his  service,  may  direct  our  will,  may  command  our  affection, 
may  control  our  life.  God  does  not  claim  to  own  us  in  tlje  sense  of  being  at  liberty  to 
act  arbitrarily  and  capriciously  towards  us,  but  in  the  sense  of  being  free  to  rule  our 
souls  and  fashion  our  lives  according  to  the  dictates  of  righteousness  and  wisdom. 
His  claim  rests  on  his  fourfold  relation  to  us.  1.  His  creation  of  our  spirits.  "  The 
Lord  that  created  thee"  (ver.  1;  and  see  vers.  7,  15).  If  we  could  make  an  estimate 
of  our  comparative  obligations,  bow  much  should  we  consiiier  that  we  owed  to  him  that 
brought  us  out  of  nothing  into  being,  that  made  us  living  souls,  that  endowed  us  with 
all  the  immeasurable  capacities  that  are  enfolded  in  an  iramortal  spirit?  How  large  a 
claim  has  God  upon  our  thoughts,  our  gratitude,  our  service,  in  virtue  of  the  fact  that  to 
his  creative  power  we  owe  it  *Aa<  w«  or«f  2.  His  shaping  of  our  l^».  God  has  "  formed 
us."  He  who  formed  Israel  by  all  his  providential  dealings  with  that  nation  from  tht 
beginning  is  the  God  who  has  built  up  our  life  (see  Heb.  iii.  4).  Our  human  relation- 
ships, our  bodily  health  and  strength,  our  circumstances  of  comfort  and  joy,  our  mental 
strength  and  acquirements,— all  this  is  the  product  of  that  shaping  hand  which  "  forms  " 
tiw  destinies  <tf  men  ••  it  gires  figure  to  the  foliage^  arrests  the  tide,  er  detenoiate  tht 


CH.  xLiu.  1-28.]    THE  BOOK  OF  THE  PROPHET  ISAIAH.  14/ 

conrseB  of  the  stars.  8.  Bis  redemption  of  our  soul.  "  I  have  redeemed  thee."  God 
might  well  claim  to  be  Israel's  Redeemer,  for  he  had  mercifully  and  mightily  interposed 
on  its  behalf.  But  with  how  much  greater  reason  may  he  claim  to  be  our  Redeemer ! 
How  much  greater  is  that  "  great  salvation "  by  which  he  "  saves  his  people  from 
their  sin,"  than  that  deliverance  by  which  he  rescued  a  people  from  political  bondage 
or  military  disaster  1  The  surpussin^  strength  of  this  claim  upon  us  is  seen  (1)  in  that 
it  is  a  redemption  from  the  very  worst  spiritual  evils  to  spiritual  power  and  freedom  : 
and  (2)  in  that  it  was  wrought  at  such  a  priceless  cost  (I  Pet.  i.  18,  19).  4.  His 
penonal  interest  in  every  one  of  tis.  "  I  have  called  thee  by  thy  name."  The  distinct 
and  especial  interest  which  Jehovah  took  in  Israel  has  its  counterpirt  in  the  individual 
interest  he  takes  in  each  one  of  his  children.  Christ  has  led  us  to  feel  that  he  follows 
the  coxirse  of  every  human  spirit  with  a  parental  yearning,  with  a  Saviour's  restorative 
purp^^e  and  hope.  He  calls  us  by  our  name.  To  each  wandering,  backsliding  soul  he 
is  saying,  "  Return  unto  me."  To  each  striving,  inquiring  spirit  he  is  saying,  *'  Be  oi 
good  cheer ;  I  will  help  thee."  To  each  faithful  workman  he  is  saying,  "  Toil  on  ;  I 
will  come  with  a  recompense  "  (ch.  xxxv.  4). 

XL  The  scee  stay.  "  Fear  not."  There  are  many  comforters  who  approach  us  and 
whisper  these  two  words  in  our  ear.  Some  of  these  are  delusive,  and  others  are  imper- 
fect and  ineffectual.  It  may  be  an  ill-grounded  complacency,  or  it  may  he  favourable 
surroundings,  or  it  may  be  human  friendship;  but  the  house  of  our  hope,  thus  built 
upon  the  sand,  may  fall  at  any  hour.  If  we  would  build  our  corjfldence  upon  the 
rock,  we  must  rest  on  the  promised  stay  of  a  reconciled  heavenly  Father,  on  the  assured 
aid  of  an  Almighty  Friend,  on  the  certain  succour  of  a  Divine  Comforter.  Having 
returned  unto  the  living  God,  resting  and  abiding  in  Jesus  Ohrist,  we  may  go  forth  to 
any  future,  however  threatening  it  may  be ;  for  One  is  present  with  us  in  whose  company 
we  may  gladly  enter  the  darkest  shadows.  And  if  we  listen  we  may  hear  a  voice,  whose 
tones  we  may  trust  in  the  wildest  storm,  saying,  "  Fear  not :  for  I  have  redeemed 
thee."— 0. 

Ver.  2. — Siteeour  in  sorrow.  It  is  bad  indeed  for  us  when  our  best  friends  become 
our  worst  enemies.  Fire  and  water  are  two  of  our  best  friends  so  long  as  we  have  them 
under  control :  they  warm,  cleanse,  nourish,  fertilize,  convey.  But  when  they  gain  the 
mastery  over  us  they  overturn  and  consume,  they  injure  and  destroy  both  property  and 
life;  they  thus  become  striking  illustrations  as  well  as  fruitful  sources  of  trial  aud 
distress. 

L  The  obeatkb  affuotions  of  human  life.  The  terms  of  the  text  point  to  the 
larger  rather  than  the  lesser  troubles  through  which  we  pass ;  though  even  the  vexations 
and  annoyances  to  which  we  are  daily  subject  are  experiences  in  which  we  need  to 
summon  our  higher  principles  if  we  would  act  rightly  and  live  acceptably  to  God  our 
Saviour.  But  it  is  the  sterner  sorrows,  the  more  serious  calamities,  which  most  impera- 
tively demand  all  the  resources  at  our  command.  We  pass  through  the  waters,  we  walk 
through  the  fire :  1.  When  heavy  losses  reduce  our  possessions  and  make  us  face  narrow- 
ness of  means,  hard  toil,  or  dependence  on  the  charity  of  men.  2.  When  grievous  dis- 
appointment overtakes  us,  extinguishing  the  bright  hopes  by  which  our  path  had  been 
lighted  and  our  hearts  had  been  animated  and  sustained.  3.  When  sickness  assails  us, 
and  our  strength  fails,  and  we  lie  long  on  the  couch  of  helplessness  or  pain.  4.  When 
leremiement  throws  its  dark  shadow  on  our  homeward  way.  5.  When  the/oi7ureof 
those  from  whom  we  looked  for  good  or  even  great  things  sends  a  pang  through  our 
soul. 

II.  Thk  tbue  Refuge  of  the  sobrowful.  "  Qoi  is  our  Refuge  ...  a  very  present 
Help  in  trouble."  He  is  "  the  Lord  our  God  .  .  .  our  Saviour."  We  may  count  on  : 
1.  His  sympathizing  presence.  "I  will  be  with  thee."  Our  Divine  Friend  will  be  with 
us,  so  that  we  shall  be  able  to  feel  that  he  is  looking  upon  us  with  tender  and  pitiful 
regard.  2.  His  limiting  povaer.  The  rivers  may  rise  high,  but  they  shall  "not  over- 
flo\V "  the  man  whom  God  is  befriending.  His  hand  is  on  the  .adverse  forces  which 
oppress  us,  and  there  is  a  mark  beyond  which  he  will  see  that  they  do  not  come.  3. 
Hit  sustaining  grace.  The  fire  may  rage  around  his  children,  but  such  will  be  the 
resisting  strength  within  that  they  "  will  not  be  burned."  Their  faith  and  love  wilj  not 
fail ;  they  will  triumph,  in  spirit,  over  the  worst  distresses, 


U8  THE   BOOK  OF  THE   PKOPHET   ISAIAH,     [oh.  XLiil.  1— 24 

in.  The  conditions  which  God  rkquirbs.  It  is  not  every  man,  however  he  may 
stand  with  the  Supreme,  w}io  may  confidently  count  on  this  Divine  succonr.  Ther« 
must  he :  1 .  Acceptcm^  with  Ood.  Q-od  must  be  our  God ;  Jesus  Christ  our  Saviour ; 
liis  service  our  portion.  God  makes  no  such  promise  as  this  to  those  who  stand  stub- 
bornly aloof  in  waywardness  or  rebtlliousness  of  spirit.  It  is  his  children  who  have 
a  place  of  refuge  (Prov.  xiv.  26).  There  must  be  also:  2.  Submission  of  heart  to  hia 
wilL  3.  Ap-p&iX  for  his  help.  "Call  upon  me  in  the  day  of  trouble;  I  will  deliver 
thee,"  etc.  (i's.  1. 15).— C. 

Vers.  3 — 7. — Hie  goodness  of  Ood  to  man.  The  abounding  grace  of  QoA  to  the 
children  of  men  is  brought  out  very  strikingly  here.     It  is  seen  in — 

L  Thb  hish  purpose  fob  which  he  creates  us.  "I  have  created  him  for  my 
glory."  There  is  no  end  so  lofty  in  itself  and  so  elevating  in  its  influence  for  which 
God  could  have  made  mankind  as  this.  It  is  for  this,  primarily,  that  the  very  highest 
intelligences  in  the  heavenly  spheres  have  their  being. 

II.  The  profound  interest  he  takes  in  us.  "  Thou  wast  precious  in  my  sight . . . 
I  have  loved  thee."  God  regards  the  children  of  men  (Ps.  xxxiii.  13,  14).  He  attends 
to  their  requests,  and  meets  their  wants  (Ps.  cxlv.  15,  I'J).  He  pities  them  in  their 
griefs  (Ps.  ciii.  8).  He  yearns  over  them  with  parental  love  (see  oh.  xxxi.  20;  2  Pet. 
iii.  9).    He  disci|jlines  them  with  parental  solicitude  (Heb.  xii.  5 — 11). 

HI.  The  honour  which  he  confers  upon  us.  "  Thou  hast  been  honourable.'"  In 
Christ  Jesus  we  are  honoured  in  many  ways.  We  are  "  made  priests  and  kings  unto 
God."  What  manner  of  honour  as  well  as  of  love  the  Father  hath  shown  us,  that  we 
should  be  called  the  sons  of  God ;  and  that  we  should  also  be  made  his  heirs,  and  also 
"  labourers  together  with  him  "  (1  Cor.  iii.  9)  I 

rV.  The  sacrificial  means  he  employs  on  oub  behau*.  "  I  gave  Egypt  for  thy 
ransom  ...  I  will  give  men  for  thee."  That  which  is  of  immeasurably  greater  value 
thaa  gold  or  silver,  than  property  of  any  kind — men,  human  lives,  God  would  give  for 
Itrael.  For  us  he  has  given  that  which  is  of  far  greater  account  than  any  nation  or 
any  multitude  of  men — his  own  well-beloved  Son  :  "  God  so  loved  the  world,"  etc. ; 
"  He  spared  not  his  own  Son  ; "  "  He  gave  himself"  for  us. 

7.  His  puBFOSE  TO  OATHEB  HIS  OHiLDBEN  TOSETHEB  to  One  placo  of  isst  and  Joy 
(vers.  5,  6).— C. 

Ver.  10. — 7%e  witness  of  QvcPs  servants,  "Ye  are  my  witnessei."  God  summoned 
his  people  Israel  to  bear  witness  to  him;  he  challenged  them  to  come  forward  and 
testify  that  (1)  in  the  absence  of  any  possible  power  that  could  have  performed  it  (ver. 
12),  (2)  he  had  foretold  things  which  were  far  in  the  future ;  and  (3)  he  had  wrought 
signal  and  splendid  deliverances  on  their  benalf, — he  had  "saved"  as  well  as  declared 
(ver.  12).  Thus  they  were  in  a  position  to  maintain  that  (4)  he  was  the  One  living 
God  on  whom  the  wise  would  depend  for  guidance  and  redemption  (vers.  10,  11).  His 
charge  to  his  Church  is  similar.  God  demands  that  we  shall  bear  witness  to  him  and 
to  his  gospel  of  grace.  To  this  end  are  we  born,  and  for  this  cause  came  uw  into  the 
world,  that  we  should  "  bear  witness  unto  the  truth."  Concerning  this  testimony,  we 
are  left  in  no  doubt  as  to— 

L  Those  who  are  to  bbab  it.  We  know  who  they  are  to  whom  QoA  sayt, "  Ye 
are,"  etc.  They  are  these  who  have  themselves  returned  unto  him  in  true  penitence 
and  faith.  All  others  are  unsuited  by  their  character  and  their  spirit  (see  Ps.  L  16 ; 
li.  12,  13 ;  Bom.  ii.  21 ;  ch.  Iii.  11).  Only  they  who  are  in  sympathy  with  God  and 
are  living  in  accordance  with  his  holy  will  are  qualified  to  bear  witness  to  bis  truth. 

II.  The  substance  of  their  mebsaob.  The  first  and  greatest  thing  which  men  need 
to  know  is  the  nature  and  character  of  God.  For  it  is  the  relation  which  they  maintain 
towards  him  that  determines  their  own  character  and  destiny.  Apart  from  him  they 
are  separated  from  the  source  of  all  true  blessedness,  of  all  real  life.  In  him  and  with 
him  they  are  safe,  wise,  rich,  for  evermore.  We  have,  therefore,  to  testify  of  him :  (1)  of 
his  unity  (ver.  10) ;  (2)  his  holiness ;  (3)  his  redeeming  love  (ver.  11).  We  have  to 
bear  widieas  (4)  to  the  unique  efficacy  of  his  lalvation ;  that  there  is  no  Saviour  beside 
him ;  that  there  ia  "  no  other  Name  ...  by  which  we  can  be  saved."  And  also  (6)  to 
^he  conditions  unit  which  alone  this  salvation  can  be  leeured.    like  St.  Paul^  to  On«k 


OH.  xuiL  1—28.]    THE   BOOK  OP   THE  PEOPHET   ISAIAH.  149 

and  Jew,  to  cultivated  and  uncultivated,  to  those  who  eiteem  themselves  to  be  righteous 
and  to  those  who  know  themselves  to  he  sinners,  we  have  to  testify  "  repentance  toward 
Gtod,  and  faith  toward  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ." 

III.  Thb  experiencb  which  justifies  theib  VTiDWScm.  They  have  experienced 
that  which  amply  warrants  them  in  commending  the  gospel  «f  the  grace  of  Gk)d.  1.  A 
profound  sense  of  true  deliverance.  Their  own  consciousness  makes  it  clear  and  posi- 
tive that  tliey  have  been  rescued  from  the  tyranny,  the  depravity,  and  the  burden  of 
sin,  and  led  into  the  liberty,  the  purity,  and  the  joy  of  sonship.  2.  Peace  and  hope  in 
regard  to  the  future.  God  has  revealed  to  them  a  home  of  rest  and  love — a  future  state 
where  the  highest  and  noblest  aspirations  of  redeemed  humanity  will  find  fulfilment. 
In  sure  prospect  of  this  they  are  in  a  position  to  speak  freely  in  the  presence  of  those 
who  live  without  QtoA  and  die  without  hope. — 0. 

Vers.  22 — 25. — Bighteoumest,  guilt,  mercy.    We  notice  here — 

I.  The  beasonablgness  of  God's  bebvioe.  "I  have  not  caused  thee  to  serve  with 
an  ofTering,  nor  wearied  thee  with  incense."  God's  service  is  not  a  servitude,  a  slavery ; 
Qor  is  it  a  burdensome  task,  hard  and  heavy  to  be  borne.  Under  the  Mosaic  Law, 
special  provision  was  made  for  the  poor,  so  that  the  sacrifices  asked  of  them  should  be 
within  their  reach  (Lev.  v.  7 ;  xiL  8 ;  xiv.  21).  Women  and  children  were  excepted 
from  certain  requirements,  because  of  their  sex  or  their  years.  Various  exemptions 
were  allowed  in  the  spirit  of  considerateness.  There  was  nothing  hard,  rigorous, 
ungracious,  in  the  Law.  Nor  is  therein  the  Divine  demands  now  made  upon  us.  God 
desires — indeed,  he  requires  of  us — that  we  should  yield  to  him  our  thought,  our 
remembrance,  our  worship, — regular,  willing,  spiritual ;  our  love^  our  filial  affection ;  our 
obedience  to  his  precepts ;  our  submission  to  his  will.  But  there  is  nothing  arbitrary 
or  capricious  about  this  demand ;  it  is  only  that  which  grows,  naturally  and  even  neces- 
sarily, out  of  the  intimate  relation  in  which  God  stands  to  us  and  we  to  him.  What  is 
there  less  than  this  that  we  could  rightly  render  to  our  Creator,  our  Sustainer,  our 
bountiful  Benefactor,  our  Father,  our  Eedeemer?  And  in  everything  God  makes 
full  allowance  for  all  our  weakness  and  inca|>acity.  He  expects  of  us  according  to 
that  which  he  hag  entrusted  to  us.  Prom  those  to  whom  much  is  given,  much  will  be 
required,  etc.  (see  2  Cor.  viii.  12).  Prom  the  very  rich  God  will  look  for  the  talents  of 
gold;  from  the  very  poor,  small  pieces  of  copper;  from  the  strong  man,  his  strength; 
fl-om  the  weak  man,  his  weakness. 

II.  The  8EBI0DBNES8  AND  THE  HEIN0UBNE8B  OF  HUMAN  SIN.  The  Divine  Complaint 
is  against  us  all,  that  we  have  :  1.  Withhdd  from  him  what  it  due  to  him.  We  have 
"  not  called  upon  "  him  ;  for  we  have  been  "  weary  of  him."  We  have  not  brought 
him  even  our  smaller  offerings ;  we  have  not  honoured  him,  as  we  might  and  should 
have  done,  in  his  courts.  And  this  shortcoming  is  only  a  small  part  of  all  our  Bin  of 
omission.  We  have  all  failed  to  render  him  the  glory  due  to  his  Name,  the  reverence 
and  the  affection  due  to  himself,  the  obedience  and  the  service  due  to  his  will  and  to 
his  cause.  It  is  also  against  many  that  they  have :  2.  Added  aggravaiing  offeneti  to 
their  shortcoming ;  "  served  him  with  sins,"  "  wearied  him  with  iniquities."  Many 
have  not  only  refused  their  worship,  but  they  have  flagrantly  and  heinously  broken  his 
commandments;  have  mvdtiplied  their  iniquities,  and  made  him  to  write  down  the 
most  grievous  and  shameful  transgressions  in  his  book  against  them. 

IIL  The  ruLUBSS  and  feeenbss  of  the  Divine  merot.  (Ver.  25.)  For  his  own 
sake,  not  compelled  thereto  by  anything  which  they  had  done  or  should  do,  but 
impe'lled  by  his  abounding  and  overflowing  grace,  he  would  "blot  out  their  transgressions" 
from  his  book  of  remembrance.  God's  pardoning  love  to  us,  revealed  in  the  gospel : 
1.  Is  large  andfree,  (1)  He  forgives  the  most  flagrant  offences.  (2)  He  receives  those 
who  have  been  longest  in  rebellion  against  his  rule,  and  have  most  pertinaciously 
resisted  his  overtures.  (3)  He  takes  back  those  whom  he  forgives  i  n  to  his  full  favour  and 
treats  them  with  unstinted  kindness  (Luke  xv.).  2.  Is  granted  of  his  own  grace, 
and  for  the  sake  of  his  own  Son  our  Saviour.  8.  J$  conditional  on  our  repentance 
and  faith. — 0. 

Ver.  h—Penonal  relations  ivith  Ood.  "  Thon  ut  miae."  In  the  East,  to  call  a 
persoB  bf  anno  i»  a  mark  of  an  individualizing  tendemesH.    But  lo  H  it  in  all  lands, 


150  THE  BOOK  OF  THE  PROPHET  ISAIAH,    [oh,  xun.  1— 28 

Those  who  are  in  close  personal  relatioiiB  with  ui  we  call  by  their  Christian  nnmes ;  we 
even  give  them  a  uew  pet  name ;  and  they  love  that  name,  because  it  is  a  sign  to  them 
of  the  close  connection  in  which  they  stand  to  us.  God  tried  to  keep  this  sense  o( 
personal  relation  ever  before  the  people  of  Israel,  and  so  to  keep  them  assured  of  the 
living  interest  he  had  in  all  their  concerns.  Wherever  they  might  be,  and  whatever 
might  be  their  surroundings,  this  might  give  them  perfect  peace— they  were  his.  And 
when  Jesus  Christ  would  make  a  great  im[jression  on  his  disciples  of  his  personal  regard 
for  them,  he  said,  "  Henceforth  1  call  you  not  servants  ,  .  .  but  I  have  called  you 
fri«Hd»."  1.  Suc)>  relations  are  indeed  involved  in  the  fact  that  we  are  the  creatures 
of  Qoi.  "  He  made  us,  and  not  we  ourselves."  He  has  the  interest  in  us  which  we 
feel — in  measure — in  the  work  of  our  hands.  He  hai  great  thoughts  and  purposes  con- 
cerning us,  and  he  is  graciously  concerned  in  their  realization.  2.  Such  relations 
are  further  seen  in  his  entering  into  covenant  with  a  particular  people.  He  drew  them 
into  a  special  intimacy ;  committed  to  them  an  unusual  trust ;  made  them  depositaries, 
and  by-and-by  witnesses,  of  certain  foundation-truths;  and  for  generations  guarded 
them  while  they  guarded  these  truths.  The  closeness  of  relations  between  Ghod  and 
Israel  is  the  basis  of  Hosea's  exquisitely  tender  pleadings,  the  dearest  and  nearest  human 
relations,  of  husband  and  wife,  of  parent  and  child,  being  used  to  bring  home  Qod's 
appeals  (see  Hos.  iL,  etc.).  We  direct  attention  to  the  practical  side  of  this  subject.  If 
we  are  the  Lord's,  we — 

L  Enjoy  his  friendship.  Illustrate  from  Abraham,  the  friend  of  Gkid,  El-Khalil ; 
or  from  Enoch,  who  "  walked  with  God."  To  friendship  is  necessary:  1.  Community 
of  sentiment.  "  How  can  two  walk  together  except  they  be  agreed  ? "  2.  Mutual 
trust.  The  grace  unspeakable  is  that  God  should  trust  us.  Our  failure  and  rin  is  that 
we  so  half-heartedly  trust  him.  3.  Frequent  intercourse.  Nothing  blights  friendship 
like  separation.  Keeping  friendly  means  keeping  togetiier.  4.  Jealousy  of  each  other's 
honour.     Here  we  come  short,  sadly  short,  in  our  friendship  with  God. 

II.  Sbxdeb  Hiu  SERVICE.  Fiiends  love  to  Serve  One  another.  In  this  friendship  with 
Ghxl  we  should  not  forget  that  we  have  to  take  a  dependent  place.  His  is  a  condescend- 
ing friendship,  and  our -response  to  it  finds  best  expression  in  loving  obedience.  All 
hwdness  is  taken  out  of  service  when  it  is  the  expression  of  such  near  and  loTing  rela- 
tions as  those  unto  which  God  has  brought  us. — B.  T« 

Ver.  2. — Safety  for  the  soul  in  times  of  trouble.  The  first  figure  in  this  verse  is  a  very 
familiar  one ;  the  second  needs  such  explanations  as  are  given  by  writers  on  Eastern 
customs.  It  seems  that  the  setting  of  the  grass  and  undergrowth  on  fire,  in  the  Eiast, 
was  commonly  practised  to  annoy  enemies,  and  it  sometimes  occasioned  great  terror  and 
distress.  Hawkesworth  relates  that  the  wild  inhabitants  of  New  South  Wales  endea- 
voured to  destroy  some  tents  and  stores  belonging  to  Captain  Cook's  ship,  when  he  was 
repairing  it,  by  setting  fire  to  the  long  grass  of  that  country.  This  passage  has  been 
treasured  up  by  suffering  people  in  all  ages,  as  a  hymn  is  treasured  which  has  suggestive 
figures  (fi.g.  "  Eock  of  ages,  deft  for  me  ").  The  strength,  the  almost  extravagance,  of 
the  poetical  figures,  are  found  specially  helpful  in  meditative  moods.  From  this  uraianee 
we  note  three  things. 

I.  God  dobs  not  bemotb  oub  tboubles.  If  the  providences  bring  round  to  as  a 
"  passing  through  the  waters,"  or  a  "  walking  through  the  fires,"  special  grace  will  not 
prevent  us  or  change  our  allotment  or  our  circumstances.  Through  the  waters  and  the 
fires  we  have  to  go.  There  were  such  reasons  for  the  captivity  of  Israel,  that  special 
grace  would  not  interfere  with  the  chastisement.  St.  Paul  may  pray  to  have  his  afSiction 
removed,  but  the  prayer  could  not  be  answered, 

II,  God  assures  his  fbesenoe  in  the  tboublk.  And  it  is  earner  to  bear  when  two 
are  under  the  load,  and  One  has  "  everlasting  strength."  God's  presence  in  the  firas  may 
be  aiustrated  by  the  fourth  form  which  stood  beside  the  Hebrew  youths  in  the  fiery 
furnace.  God's  presence  in  the  waters,  by  the  following  incident.  When  the  steam- 
ship llcusaohusetts  was  wrecked  in  Long  Island  Sound,  there  were  two  mothers,  each 
with  a  child,  who  were  noticeable  for  their  respectful  calmness  during  the  hours  of 
greatest  peril  and  anxiety,  when  it  seemed  as  if  the  vessel  most  shortiy  go  to  pieces. 
A  passenger  from  Philadelphia  says  that  his  attention  was  first  called  to  them  by  their 
voices  in  sinj^g.    Going  towards  then,  he  found  a  little  boy  ittoding  then  with  hit 


OH.  xLiii.  1—28.]     THE  BOOK  OF   THE   PROPHET  ISAIAH,  151 


life-presenrer  on,  and  the  little  fellow  was  just  joining  with  his  mother  in  singing  a 
hymn  of  trust  and  confidence.  And  when  rescue  came,  and  the  passengers  were  safely 
on  another  vessel,  those  same  sweet  voices  were  again  heard,  this  time  in  a  ringing  strain 
of  praise  for  their  deliverance. 

III.  God  keeps  the  trouble  within  oarbfdl  limitations.  His  concern  is  about 
those  who  have  to  suffer,  not  about  the  trouble,  or  the  circumstances  that  make  the 
trouble.  It  may  reach  our  circumstances  ;  it  may  even  rtach  oar  bodies;  but  God  says, 
"  No  further."  Job  was  ruined ;  Job  was  diseased ;  but  God's  hedge  was  round  Job 
himself,  and  nobody  and  nothing  could  touch  him.  Waters  nor  fires  can  ever  reach  us, 
to  injure  or  destroy  the  life  in  us  which  God  has  quickened. — ^R.  T. 

Ver.  3. — Ood  the  Saoiour.  "I  am  the  Lord  thy  God,  the  Holy  One  of  Israel,  thy 
Saviour."  As  we  know  God,  he  is  a  Triune  Being — Father,  Son,  and  Holy  Ghost ;  and 
Script-.re  traces  the  whole  work  of  salvation  to  God  thus  apprehended.  Salvation  is 
not  the  woik  of  one  Person  of  the  Trinity,  but  the  work  of  the  whole  personality  of 
God.     This  is  the  truth  which  may  be  unfolded  from  the  expression  in  this  text. 

L  Salvation  is  the  work  of  the  Divine  Trinity.  This  is  variously  taught  in 
Holy  Scripture,  but  the  most  complete  and  precise  expression  of  the  tmth  may  be 
found  in  Titus  iii.  4 — 6,  which  Conybeare  and  Howson  render  thus:  "But  when  God 
our  Saviour  made  manifest  his  kindness  and  love  of  men,  he  saved  us,  not  through  the 
works  of  righteousness  which  we  had  done,  but  according  to  his  own  mercy,  by  the 
laver  of  regeneration,  and  the  renewing  of  the  Holy  Spirit,  which  he  richly  poured 
forth  upon  us,  by  Jesus  Christ  our  Saviour."  The  love  of  God  appeared.  The  regene- 
rations and  renewings  are  by  the  Holy  Spirit.  And  that  Divine  Spirit  is  shed  on  us 
abundantly  through  Jesus  Christ.  God  is  our  Saviour.  Jesus  Christ  is  our  Saviour. 
The  Holy  Ghost  is  our  Saviour.  And  yet  we  have  not  three  Saviours,  but  one  Saviour. 
Young  Christians,  in  the  earlier  stages  of  religious  apprehension,  are  wont  to  grasp  fii-mly 
the  one  truth — Jesus  is  the  Saviour.  Many  Christian  people  grow  old  in  experience 
without  coming  to  realize  that  this  is  a  central  truth,  which  has  another  truth  on  each 
side  of  it.  On  one  side  this  truth — God  is  the  Saviour.  On  the  other  side — the  Holy 
Ghost  is  the  Saviour.  Josus  Christ  is  declared  to  be  God  "manifest  in  the  flesh;" 
God  the  Father  manifest,  so  that  we  may  apprehend  him ;  and  God  the  Holy  Ghost 
manifest,  so  that  we  may  realize  his  gracious  inworkings.  We  know  God  the  Father 
and  God  the  Holy  Ghost  through  Christ,  the  manifested  Son.  Such  enlarging  of  our 
thought  to  embrace  the  full  Divine  agency  in  our  redemption  involves  no  kind  of 
dishimour  to  the  Lord  Jesus.  In  his  part  and  sphere  he  is  the  only  One,  the  only 
"Name."  As  the  Ma/nifester  and  Mediator,  he  stands  alone.  His  sphere  is  man's 
earthly  life ;  he  is  God  with  its.  He  shares  our  humanity ;  bears  a  human  name ;  lives 
through  a  human  lot ;  perfects  an  obedience  in  the  flesh ;  endures  the  final  testing  of 
a  painful  and  ignominious  human  death ;  and  in  his  redemptive  work  in  the  human 
spheres  he  has  none  to  share  with  bim.  When  we  speak  of  separate  Persons  in  the 
Divine  Trinity,  we  must  apprehend  the  most  absolute  unity  of  purpose  in  them ;  and 
the  differences  of  operation  which  we  can  trace  are  simply  gracious  modes  of  reaching 
men  so  as  to  be  a  perfect  redemptive  power  on  them.  The  Father-God,  in  his  Divine 
fatherly  love,  initiates  the  redemptive  puipose,  and  forms,  in  his  infinite  wisdom,  the 
redemptive  plan.  God  the  Son  executes  that  part  of  the  Divine  plan  which  required 
manifestation  in  man's  earthly  sphere — in  the  sphere  of  the  senses.  God  the  Spirit  is 
entrusted  with  that  part  of  the  Divine  plan  which  concerned  man's  inward  state — the 
renewal  of  his  mind  and  feeling  and  will. 

II.  The  one  fountain  and  source  of  cite  salvation,  whatever  its  form  ob 
ITS  AOENCT  MAY  BE,  IS  THE  DiviNE  LOVE.  "  We  are  saved  by  grace."  We  too  often 
speak  of  the  "  mercy  "  of  God,  as  if  it  were  only  an  attribute  belonging  to  him.  Nay, 
it  is  f«r  better  than  an  attribute — it  is  God :  "  God  is  love."  But  when  that  love  gains 
exj^egsion  in  man's  sphere,  so  that  we  may  apprehend  it,  we  find  it  is  working  out 
a  marvellous  purpose,  even  the  full  redemption  of  a  sinful  rane ;  and  we  see  it  in  the 
blessed  life  of  the  redeeming  Son  and  in  the  inward  grace  of  the  renewing  Spirit.  But 
all  is  of  God.  All  is  of  free,  sovereign,  unbought,  unconstrained,  unmerited  love.  He 
saved  us.  He  sent  the  Son. .  He  sheds  the  Spirit.  It  is  our  Father  in  heaven  whose 
fatherly  low  pitied  ns,  yewned  for  us,  and  found  the  gracious  wsvs  in  which  to  bring 


162  THE  BOOK  OF  THE  PBOPHET  ISAIAH,    [oh.  xliu.  1— 28 

the  prodigals  home,  and  to  ma^e  the  prodigals  sons  again.  It  is  the  "  grace  of  God 
that  bringeth  salvation."  We  may  have  laid  hold  of  the  truth  that  Christ /or  us  is  the 
Ghift  of  grace.  It  may  he  that  we  need  to  gain  firm  hold  of  th»t  other  and  answering 
truth,  that  the  Holy  Ghost  in  us  is  the  Provision  of  grace.  We  want  more  than  the 
doctrine  concerning  these  high  things.  We  want  a  living  impression,  which  gives  to 
them  practical  and  persuasive  power  on  our  hearts.  When  we  can  really  feel  uiat  our 
salvation  is  throughout,  firom  beginning  to  ending,  from  predestination  to  calling,  from 
calling  to  justification,  from  justification  to  sanctification,  and  right  through  to  glorifica- 
tion, wholly  of  grace,  then  the  last  lingering  confidence  in  our  own  doings  will  pass 
right  away,  and  we  shall  rejoice  altogether  in  "  God  our  Saviour." — R.  T. 

Yer.  14. — Ood  the  Bedeemtr.  Proof  of  the  existence  of  God  is  not  th«  proper  subject 
of  a  revelation  made  to  man  in  a  hooh.  The  being  of  God  is  assumed  by  making  a 
revelation  in  a  book.  The  proper  subject  of  a  book-revelation  is  not  God  creating. 
That  we  might  learn  from  the  things  created.  Not  God  providing.  That  we  could 
sufficiently  understand  by  due  observation  of  life.  Not  God  riding.  That  would  he 
impressed  upon  us  with  ever-increasing  force  by  the  history  of  the  ages  as  they 
accumulated.  The  great  subject  of  a  book  revelation  must  be  Ood  redeeming.  That 
we  could  not  learn  from  the  perfect  order  of  creation.  That  we  could  not  reach  bjr  the 
keenest  observations  of  his  providence.  That  is  not  traced  upon  human  history  save 
as  the  deeper,  hidden  lines  which  we  need  some  key  to  decipher.  With  that  our 
Scriptures  are  full.  That  must  be  told  in  human  language,  and  shown  in  human 
signs.  No  researches  of  science  will  declare  it ;  no  natural  relations  of  men  involve  it ; 
no  creature  is  commissioned  to  show  it  forth.  No  inquiry  of  the  human  mind  can 
reach  it.  Qod  the  Redeemer.  This  is  the  unknown  mystery — ^unknown  till  God 
himself  declares  it.  Too  glorious  to  be  received  by  men  until  it  is  seen  proved  over 
and  over  again,  and  at  last  gets  its  most  melting  display  in  that  cross  whereon  God's 
beloved  Son  dies  in  agony,  for  the  glorifying  for  ever  of  the  redeeming  love  of  God. 
The  Scriptures  may  have  side  information  on  matters  of  creation,  providence,  science, 
government,  and  duty ;  but  these  are  not  its  great  message.  Creation  is  God's  first 
work ;  redemption  is  his  second  and  greater,  called  for  by  the  world's  confusion  and 
man's  moral  ruin.  That  second  thought  God  could  tell  to  man  in  no  other  way  than 
by  words ;  only  words  could  reveal  the  deep  fact  of  the  pitying  love  of  God,  which  the 
heart,  not  the  head,  of  man  alone  can  grasp.  The  heart  wants  to  be  spoken  to  with 
human  words. 

L  Bedemftion  IB  God's  constant  wobk.  Our  Bible  is  full  of  it.  It  is  the  promi- 
nent thing  on  every  page.  Clouds  of  curse  and  woe  hang  heavy  over  the  very  first 
page  of  human  history.  The  darkness  of  Divine  indignations  drops  down  on  man  and 
woman  and  tempting  serpent.  But  right  across  the  great  thunder-clouds  God  threw 
a  brilliant  rainbow  of  promise.  In  symbol  it  said,  "  Bedemption  is  coming."  In  word.s 
it  read  thus :  "  The  seed  of  the  woman  shall  bruise  the  serpent's  head."  Abraham 
stands  forth  the  head  of  a  new  race.  Behold  a  man  reileemed  from  Chaldean  idolatries^ 
redeemed  unto  God.  A  mystery  hangs  round  the  second  patriarch,  Isaac.  Behold 
a  sacrifice  redeemed  by  God,  through  the  substitution  of  the  ram  caught  in  the  thicket ! 
Jacob  reads  his  life,  and  sees  everywhere  the  "  angel  who  redeemed  him  from  all  evil." 
The  national  life  of  the  Jewish  people  started  in  a  glorious  redemption,  which  was  to 
be  remembered  for  ever  as  giving  the  first  and  foundation-truth  concerning  God.  A 
mighty  host  fled  hurriedly  forth  from  Egypt,  and  found  themselves  hemmed  in  by 
lofty  hill-ranges,  a  flowing  sea,  and  foes  pressing  hard  upon  their  rear.  But  there  is 
a  pathway  through  the  mighty  waters,  and  the  delivered  sing  of  God  their  Salvation. 
Bedemption  is  a  constant  theme  in  the  Mosaic  system.  The  story  of  the  wanderings 
is  a  series  of  illustrations  of  redeeming  grace.  God  was  ever  delivering  in  the  time  of 
the  Judges.  David  was  redeemed  from  Saul,  Asa  from  the  Ethiopians,  Hezekiah  from 
the  Assyrians.  The  saints  from  all  the  ages  unite  to  say,  "  I  know  that  my  Redeemer 
liveth." 

II.  All  Gtoo's  bedeuftionb  display  his  power,  his  HOLnnsss,  aks  hu  iatb.  li 
they  did  not,  they  could  be  no  redemption  for  us.  If  there  ia  not  Divine  power  in 
them,  then  he  cannot  reach  our  case.  If  but  one  of  those  ndempUons  start  a  question 
of  the  Dirine  righteousness,  then  we  can  have  no  oonfldwiw  in  Mm  wortUDWi  of  Ml 


CH.  XLin.  1— 28.]    THE  BOOK  OF  THE  PROPHET   ISAIAH.  153 

scheme  to  rescue  us  in  Christ.  We  cannot  be  satisfied  with  Christ's  salvation  unless 
it  is  perfectly  plain  that  in  his  work  "justice  and  mercy  have  met  together,  righteous- 
ness and  peace  have  kissed  each  other."  And  if  the  redemption  do  not  take  such  a 
shape  as  shall  display  a  "  love  Divine,  all  love  excelling,"  then  our  hard  cold  hearts  will 
never  be  melted  and  won.  But  all  these  are  fully  seen  in  that  great  redemption 
wrought  by  Christ.  His  is  a  mighty  salvation.  The  perfect  obedience  unto  death  of 
the  beloved  Son  seals  for  ever  the  righteous  Father's  claims.  And  as  to  love,  what 
shall  we  say  about  love  in  sacrifice?  "  Greater  love  hath  no  man  than  this,  that  a  man 
lay  down  his  life  for  his  friends;"  but  "God  commendeth  his  love  toward  us  in  that, 
-while  we  were  yet  sinners,  Christ  died  for  us."  Love!  It  drops  from  the  overcharged 
heart  in  the  agony  of  the  garden.  It  drops  from  the  thorn-crowned  brow  in  the  mock 
judgment-hall.  It  drops  from  nail-pierced  hands  on  the  cruel  cross.  It  drops  from  the 
wounded  side  of  him  who  "bore  our  sins  in  his  own  body  on  the  tree."  0  melting 
drops!  Let  them  fall  afresh  on  your  heart  and  mine,  and  melt  us  into  penitence  and 
responsive  love  1 — R.  T. 

Ver.  21. — The  true  end  of  life.  This  is  illustrated,  for  us  all,  in  the  true  end  for 
which  the  Hebrew  tribes  were  formed  into  a  nation.  They  were  organized  in  Egypt, 
delivered,  trained  in  the  wilderness,  and  settled  in  the  land  of  Canaan  for  distinct 
purposes  of  God.  They  were  formed  into  a  nation  "  for  himself,"  to  "  show  forth  his 
praise."  St  Peter  applies  this  view  of  the  old  Israel  of  God  to  the  new  Israel  of  God, 
the  first  Christi«n  Church.  "Ye  are  a  chosen  generation,  a  royal  priesthood,  an  holy 
nation,  a  peculiar  people ;  that  ye  should  show  forth  the  praises  of  him  who  hath  called 
you  out  of  darkness  into  his  marvellous  light"  (1  Pet.  ii.  9).  And  the  same  view 
may  be  applied  to  every  regenerate  individual ;  he  too  is  formed  anew  for  God ;  in  his 
new,  regenerate  life  he  is  to  show  forth  God's  praise.  Taking  illustration  from  the 
older  and  the  newer  Israel,  we  may  impress  the  truth  of  the  text  in  its  relations  to  the 
individuaL     The  following  line  of  thought  may  be  worked  out. 

I.  Our  life  on  earth  is  but  a  limited  and  dependent  thing.  It  is  but  a  passing  time, 
an  interlude. 

II.  Its  beginnings  were  wholly  out  of  our  own  controL  Whence  we  came,  why  we 
came,  we  do  not  know. 

III.  Its  endings  aie  equally  beyond  our  reach.  Where  we  are  going,  and  whit  we 
are  to  be,  we  know  not. 

rV.  Even  in  the  passing  time,  we  are  in  the  midst  of  mysteries  which  we  cannot 
fathom ;  and  we  fashion  aims  of  our  own  which  never  satisfy  us,  even  if  we  attain 
them. 

V.  It  is  evident  that  there  is  One  who  gave  us  being  for  his  own  purposes;  who 
supports  us  throu.;h  our  interlude  to  show  forth  his  praise ;  and  who  holds  the  final 
issues  of  our  lives  as  the  completion  of  his  own  all-wise  plan. 

Then  this  follows,  and  may  be  duly  impress-ed — it  is  folly  indeed  for  any  dependent 
man  to  live  his  brief  life  unto  himself.  It  is  wisdom  indeed  to  know  him  who  gave  us 
being  for  his  own  purposes.  And  he  has  not  left  himself  without  witness  concerning 
himself  and  concerning  his  will.  His  revelation  convinces  us  that  the  true  end  of  life 
— which  is  to  honour  our  Maker — ^is  glorified  by  the  apprehension  of  how  good,  how 
wise,  how  gracious  our  Maker  is.  That  which  is  actually  the  chief  end  of  life  we  come 
lovingly,  thankfully,  rejoicingly,  to  set  before  ourselves  as  our  chief  end. — R.  T. 

Ver.  22. —  Wearying  of  Ood's  worship.  This  is  quite  a  customary  prophetical  com 
plaint.  The  idea  seems  to  be  that  God  noticed  his  people  making  a  toil  rather  than 
a  joy  of  his  service.  They  kept  it  up,  but  it  was  evidently  an  irksome  burden.  W« 
can  undtrstand  that,  during  the  Captivity,  when  removed  from  all  the  solemn  associa- 
tions of  the  temple-worship,  it  would  be  very  burdensome  to  keep  up  family  or  public 
religion.  Micah  pleads  thus,  in  God's  name :  "  0  my  people,  what  have  I  done  unto 
thee?  and  wherein  have  I  wearied  thee?  testify  against  me"  (Micah  vi.  3).  And 
Malachi  writes  thus :  "  Te  said  also.  Behold,  what  a  weariness  is  it !  and  ye  have  snuffed 
at  it,  saith  the  Lord  of  hosts;  and  ye  brought  that  which  was  torn,  and  the  lame,  and 
the  sick;  thus  ye  brought  »n  offering:  should  1  accept  this  of  your  hand?  saith  thf 
Lord  "  (Mai.  i.  13).    Matthew  Henry  suggests  the  signs  of  the  people  being  thus  wearj 


154  THE  BOOK  OF  THE  PEOPHET  ISAIAH,    [ch.  xLin.  1— 28. 

of  Cktd's  worsliip..  1.  They  hfld  cast  off  prayer.  2.  They  had  grown  weary  of  their 
religion.  3.  They  grudged  the  expense  of  their  devotion.  4.  What  sacrifices  they  did 
offer,  they  did  not  honour  God  with  them.  6.  Yet  God  made  no  imreasonahle  or 
burdensome  commands  upon  them.  The  two  points  which  may  be  illustrated  and 
enforced,  in  direct  relation  to  the  religious  life  of  our  times,  are  these — 

I.  Mbn  soon  wbabt  of  God's  worship  when  the  heart  ooks  out  of  it.  The 
worship  of  human  beings,  enslaved  by  the  senses,  must  be  formal,  ritual,  ceremonial — 
in  greater  or  less  degrees.  And  these  are  most  valuable  and  helpful  when  they  are, 
what  they  should  be,  expressions  of  the  soul's  love  and  admiration  and  thankfulness. 
Worship  is  blessed  if  there  is  life  in  it,  heart  in  it ;  if  it  says  anj  thing,  if  it  means  _ 
anything.  As  a  round  of  formalities,  it  is  but  a  "  weariness."  It  may  be  kept  up,  but 
only  as  an  irksome  task  that  must  be  done.  So  our  interest  in  Divine  worship  may 
become  a  test  of  ourselves.  If  there  is  life  in  the  soul  there  is  sure  to  be  joy  in  the 
worship. 

II.  The  heart  goes  out  of  the  worship  when  we  neglect  the  private  ototita- 
TIOK  <  F  THE  EEGBNEEATB  LIFE.  So  oftin men  tliink  to  make  up  by  diligence  in  public 
religion  for  neglect  and  indifference  in  private  religion.  But  it  can  never  be  done. 
The  preparation  for  worship  is  private  soul-cultivation.  We  must  bring  the  worship 
with  us,  or  we  shall  never  find  it  in  the  Church.  Eevive  personal  piety,  and  the  result 
will  at  once  be  revived  interest  in  Divine  worship.  If  men  neglect  the  house  of  Ch>d, 
it  will  always  be  found  that  they  have  "left  their  first  love." — B.  T. 

Ver.  26. — Forgivenen  for  God's  own  take.  "  For  mine  own  sake."  Human  action 
is  seldom  taken  on  the  persuasion  of  only  one  motive.  We  can  hardly  ask — What  was 
your  motive?  We  should  ask — What  were  your  nwtives  f  One,  indeed,  may  seem  to  be 
bigger  than  the  rest,  and  to  have  decided  the  course  of  conduct;  but  we  are  very 
imperfect  readers  of  human  nature  if  we  rest  satisfied  with  the  easy  statement  that 
every  act  has  a  single  reason,  a  suprerne  motive.  We  may  venture  to  apply  this  to 
God.  We  cannot  think  of  him  as  acting  without  motive.  We  may  assume  that  he 
is  influenced  by  various  motives.  But  we  may  be  sure  that  there  is  always  the 
controlling  motive — he  will  do  that  which  is  consistent  with  himself,  that  which 
upholds  the  honour  of  his  own  Name.  He  takes  into  account  our  prayers,  and  lets 
them  be  persuasions  upon  him ;  but  behind  all  other  impulses  we  must  see  this  one 
ever  constraining  him — "for  his  own  Name's  sake."  In  the  text  this  is  applied  to  the 
blotting  out  of  transgressions.  Forgiveness  comes  to  us  because  the  Divine  righteous- 
ness wants  exhibition,  and  the  Divine  love  wants  expression.  It  is  uninfl'ienced  by 
any  cause  in  us,  save  as  our  persuasions  are  permitted  to  be  secondary  causes.  The 
sovereignty  of  Divine  forgiveness  is  constantly  pressed  upon  us  in  Scripture;  and  the 
atonement  is  the  mode  in  which  it  gains  expression,  rather  than  the  agency  by  which 
it  is  Mcured.  God  is  a  forgiving  God  hecause  he  is.  No  more  can  be  iKiid  about  it. 
But  we  may  fully  enter  into  the  joy  of  his  forgiveness.  Three  things  t^^ay  be  opened 
and  illustrated. 

L   POROIVENESS    AB    A    HOLT   FEELING   AND  PITBFOSE   IN  THE    HEART    OF    GoD.      The 

father  holds  forgiveness  of  the  prodigal  in  his  heart  long  before  the  son  comes  back. 

11.  The  expression  of  the  forgiveness  to  those  who  have  sinned.  This  is  made 
in  Scripture  promises,  and  in  the  words  and  works  of  Christ. 

IIL  The  apprehension  of  the  forgiveness  bt  those  who  nefd  it.  This  only 
can  fce  known  by  the  penitent.  On  the  figure  used  in  the  text,  which  recalls  the 
blotting  out  of  a  cloud  from  the  sky,  Maclaren  says,  "Sin  is  but  th'.  cloud,  as  it  were, 
behind  which  the  everlasting  sun  lies  in  all  its  power  and  warmth,  unafff^ted  by  the 
cloud;  and  the  light  will  yet  strike,  the  light  of  his  love  will  yet  pierce  through,  with 
its  merciful  shafts,  bringing  healing  in  their  beams,  and  dispersing  all  the  pitohy 
darkness  of  man's  transgressions.  And  as  the  mists  gather  themselves  dp  and  roll 
away,  dissipated  by  the  heat  of  that  sun  in  the  upper  sky,  and  reveal  the  fai'  earth 
below,  so  the  love  of  Christ  shines  in,  melting  the  mist  and  dissiimting  the  fog; 
thinifag  it  ofi'  in  its  thickest  places,  and  at  last  piercing  its  way  right  through  il,  down 
to  the  heart  of  the  man  that  has  been  Ifimg  beneath  ike  offteamm  of  tbir  tb{r> 
darknest," — ^B.  T. 


OH.  xLiy.  1— 28.]    THE  BOOK   OP  THE  PROPHET   ISAIAH. 


155 


EXPOSITION. 


CHAPTER  XLIT. 
Vmi.  1 — 5, — ^A  Pbofhbot  of  Israel's 
BpittriTAL  Becotebt  Ain>  Reoeneration. 
This  section  is  closely  connected  with  ch. 
xliii.,  of  which  it  ought  to  form  the  con- 
clnsion.  The  prophet  cannot  bear  to  leave 
Israel  nnder  a  ban — ^its  spiritual  guides 
"  profaned,"  and  itself  given  over  to  "  re- 
proachefti"  He  must  end  with  a  brighter 
prospect.  Accordingly,  he  holds  out,  in  the 
present  passage,  the  double  hope  (1)  of 
the  blessing  of  an  abundant  outpouring  of 
the  Spirit,  to  take  the  place  of  the  preceding 
"curse"  (ch.  xliii.  28);  and  (2)  of  a  press- 
ing of  proselytes  into  the  renovated  Church, 
who  will  hold  It  in  honour,  instead  of  making 
it  the  object  of  their  "reproaches." 

Yer.  1. — Tet  now  hear;  t.e.  "be  not  dis- 
mayed at  what  has  been  said.  Listen  a 
little  longer."  0  Jacob  my  servant,  etc.  A 
recurrence  to  the  terms  of  endearment  used 
in  ch.  xU.  8,  showing  that  words  of  favour 
and  promise  are  about  to  follow. 

Yer.  2.— The  Lord  that  made  thee,  and 
formed  thee  from  the  womb  (see  ch.  xliii. 
1,  7).  "From  the  womb"  is  added  here 
for  increased  emphasis.  Jesnmn.  The 
Lord's  people  have  their  proper  names — 
Jacob,  Israel,  Jesurun,  or  ruther,  Jesharun. 
"Jacob"  marks  them  simply  as  descendantB 
of  the  patriarch — the  people  to  whom  the 
promiaes  weae  made.  "  Israel  "  marks  their 
militant  character — ^tbat  as  "  Ood's  soldiers  " 
thej'  fought  his  battles  and  maintained  his 
»iue  in  the  midst  of  a  hostile  world.  The 
third  name, "  Jeshnron,"  which  is  very  rarely 
used  (only  here  and  in  Deut.  xxxii.  15; 
xxxiii.  5,  26),  designates  them  as  "right- 
eous," being  a  derivative  from  the  root 
ycuhar  (oTJathar),  equivalent  to  "  upright," 
and  points  to  that  standard  of  moral  excel- 
lence which  it  was  their  duty  to  set  forth, 
and  which  to  some  extent  they  did  set  forth, 
in  a  world  that  "  lay  in  wickedness."  Had 
they  been  more  worthy  of  the  nume,  it  would 
probably  have  been  oftener  applied  to  them. 

Yer.  3. — ^I  will  ponr  water  upon  him  that 
is  thirsty.  "Water"  is,  in  Isaiah,  the  com- 
mon metaphor  for  Divine  grace.  Sometimes, 
as  in  this  place  (and  ch.  xxxv.  6 ;  xliii.  20 ; 
Iv.  1),  the  simple  maim, "  water  "  or  "  waters," 
is  the  word  used.  At  other  times  we  have 
instead,  or  in  addition,  "  rain  "  (oh.  v.  6 ; 
XXX.  23;  Iv.  10),  or  "dew"  (ch.  xxvi.  19), 
or  "riven"  (ch  xxx.  25;  xxxii.  2;  xxxiii. 
SI;  xlL  18;  xliii.  19,  etc.),  or  "streams" 
(oh.  xxx.  25;  xxxv.  6), or  "floods"  (as  in 
Hiia  place).     At  hU  coming  on  earth,  our 


blessed  Lord  took  up  the  comparison,  and 
has  made  it  familiar  to  all  men  throughout 
the  whole  Christian  world  (see  John  iii.  5 ; 
iv.  10,  11,  13-15;  vii.  37—39).  We  may 
note  here  that  the  "  water  "  is  only  poured 
on  him  who  is  athirst  for  it.  Thy  seed  .  .  . 
fbine  offspring.  Not  "  Israel  after  the  flesh  " 
only,  but  also  Israel  after  the  Spirit — the 
true  "  Israel  of  God  "  (Gal.  vi.  16). 

Yer.  4. — They  shall  spring  up  as  among 
the  grass.  The  LXX.  have,  "As  grass 
among  the  waters;"  and  this  reading  is 
followed  by  Bishop  Lowth,  Ewald,  and  Mr. 
Oheyne.  But  there  does  not  seem  to  be  any 
necessity  for  depcu:ting  from  the  existing 
Hebrew  texi  As  willows.  There  is  some 
doubt  whether  the  Hebrew  word  used  ('ere5) 
is  rightly  translated  "  willows."  The  modem 
yarab  seems  certainly  not  to  be  a  "  willow," 
but  rather  a  species  of  Viburnum  (see  the 
long  note  in  Delitzsch's  '  Commentary  on 
Isaiah,'  vol.  ii.  pp.  203,  204,  Eng.  trans.). 
It  is,  however,  most  strictly  a  water-plant, 
growing  only  "  near  flowing  water." 

Yer.  5.— One  shall  say,  I  am  the  Lord's, 
etc.  There  sliall  be  an  influx  of  proselytes. 
Instead  of  the  heathen  natious  looking  scorn- 
fully on,  and  uttering  gibes  and  jeers  (Ps. 
oxxxvli.  7)  at  Israel's  fall,  on  seeing  Israel's 
rise  they  shall  be  anxious  to  have  a  part  in 
it,  and  shall  hasten  to  enrol  themselves  among 
the  worshippers  of  Jehovah.  "One  shall 
say,  I  am  Jehovah's," — while  "  another  shall 
proclaim  the  name  of  Jacob,"  as  that  in  which 
he  glories ;  and  a  third  "  shall  write  on  his 
hand,  (I  am)  Jehovah's,  and  take  as  a  sur- 
name the  name  of  Israel."  It  was  usual 
among  the  heathen  nations  to  mark  the 
name  of  a  god  upon  the  bodies  of  persons 
specially  devoted  to  him  (Herod.,  ii.  113; 
vii.  235) ;  and,  though  the  practice  was  for- 
bidden to  Israelites  (Lev.  xix.  28),  it  might 
naturally  continue  in  use  among  semi-heathen 


Yers.  6—20. — A  Pobthbb  Oontbast  of 
Qov  WITH  Idols,  The  captive  Jews,  dwell 
ing  scattered  in  a  land  the  inhabitants  of 
which  were,  one  and  all,  idolaters,  and 
having  by  hereditary  taint  an  inclination 
to  idolatry,  would  be  easily  tempted,  during 
the  lung  and  weary  period  of  the  Captivity, 
to  put  away  the  worship  and  even  the 
thought  of  Jehovah,  who  had  allowed  their 
subjugation,  and  conform  to  the  religion  ol 
their  conquerors.  Hence  the  repeated  con- 
trasts in  these  later  chapters — specially  ad- 
dressed to  eapUve  Israel — ^between  Jehovah 
and  idola,  uid  the  sharp  ridicule  of  th( 


156 


THE  BOOK  OF  THE  PROPHET  ISAIAH,    [oh.  xur.  1— 28. 


latter  (oomp.  ch.  zl.  18—25;  zU.  4—7, 21— 
29). 

Ver.  6. — The  lord  thit  King  of  Israol. 
Therefore  entitled  to  Israel'i  allegianee 
(com p.  cb.  xliii.  15).  And  his  Bedeemer; 
f.e.  Israel's  Kedeemer-  he  who  had  redeemed 
them  from  Egyptian  bondage — who  will 
redeem  them  from  the  power  of  Babylon — 
who,  best  of  all,  will  redeem  them  from 
their  sins.  The  First  .  .  .  the  Last  (comp. 
ch.  zli.  4,  with  the  comment).  Beside  me 
there  is  no  Ood.  This  had  been  distinctly 
asserted  in  the  Law  (Beut.  iv.  35, 39 ;  zxxii. 
39) ;  but  Israel  could  not  be  induced  prac- 
ti<»Ily  to  believe  it.  The  "gods  of  the 
nations"  were  supposed  generally  to  be 
realities,  actual  powers,  not  perhaps  so 
potent  as  Jehovah,  but  still  real  beings, 
capalile  of  doing  good  and  harm  (see  ch. 
zli,  28).  It  is  one  of  Isaiah's  special  objects 
in  these  later  chapters  to  disabuse  Israel  of 
this  notion  (see  ch.  zli.  21 — 24 ;  zliii.  9 — 11 ; 
zlv.  5,  6,  14—22,  etc.). 

Ver.  7.— Who,  as  I,  shall  oall,  etc.?  t'.e. 
"  Who  will  do  (or  who  can  do)  as  I  do — call 
events  into  beijig,  declare  them,  and  set  them 
in  order  beforehand— who  can  do  this  for  me 
(or,  in  my  stead)  ?  No  one.  I  have  done  it, 
ever  since  I  appointed  (or,  placed  upon  earth) 
the  ancient  people" — that  is,  the  race  of 
men  before  the  Flood  (see  Job  zzii.  1 5).  The 
claim  is  that,  from  the  first  creation  of  man- 
kind, God  has  not  only  prearranged  the 
events  that  should  happen,  but  has  declared 
them  by  the  mouth  of  prophets  (see  Gen.  iii. 
15;  vi.  13, 17;  viii.22,23;  ix.  12— 16,  etc.). 
Ko  other  has  done  the  same.  The  things 
that  are  ooming,  and  shall  come.  Not  earlier 
and  later  events,  but  "  future  events,"  and 
"  such  as  will  actually  come  to  pass"  (Kay, 
Cheyne).  Let  the  idol-gods  declare  these, 
if  they  are  to  be  entitled  to  consideration. 

Ver.  8.— Fear  ye  not  (comp.  oh.  zli.  10, 13 ; 
tliii.  S ;  ver.  2).  Israel  need  not  fear  that 
they  will  be  forgotten  or  forsaken.  God 
has  told  them  from  that  time,  or,  from  the 
beginning  (ch.  zlviii.  3,  7),  and  declared  to 
them,  what  he  is  about  to  do — viz.  destroy 
Babylon,  and  give  them  deliverance.  He 
will  assuredly  do  as  he  has  said.  Ye  are 
even  my  witnesses  (comp.  ch.  zliii.  10, 12). 
There  is  no  Sod ;  literally,  there  is  no  Rock  ; 
i.e.  no  sore  ground  of  trust  or  confidence 
(comp.  ch.  xvii.  10 ;  xxvi.  4 ;  zzz.  29 ;  and 
see  the  comment  on  ch.  zvii.  10). 

Vers.  9 — 20. — The  uniqueness  of  God 
having  been  set  forth,  the  prophet  now  turns 
to  the  images  and  the  image-makers,  over- 
whelming them  with  his  scorn  and  ridicule. 
The  passage  may  be  compared  with  Jer.  z. 
3—10  and  Bamch  vi.  8—72. 

Ver.  9. — ^They  that  make  a  graven  image 
are  .  ■  •  TUlity ;  rather,  are  eonfutuya.  The 
word  mwd  i«  Idhu,  which,  together  with 


hohu,  describes  the  primitive  ehao*  in  Oen. 
i.  2  (comp.  oh.  zziv.  10 ;  zxzir.  11 ;  zl.  17, 
23 ;  zli.  29 ;  liz.  4).  Their  delectable  things 
shall  not  profit.  '*  Their  delectable  things  " 
are  their  idols,  which  are  "  pets,  favourites, 
treasures."  These  cannot  possibly  be  of  any 
advantage  to  them.  They  are  their  own 
witnesses,  Their  powerlessness  stands  con- 
fessed in  their  very  appearance,  since  they 
are  manifestly  sightless  and  senseless.  That 
they  may  be  ashamed.  The  subject  of  this 
clause  cannot  be  sought  in  the  earlier  part 
of  the  verse.  It  is  the  vioX-mdke/rt  that  will 
be  put  to  shame. 

Ver.  lO.^Who  hath  . . .  molten  a  graven 
image  1  Metal  idols  were  mostly  cast  in  the 
first  instance,  and  then  finished  off  with  a 
graving-tool.  "Who  hath  molten"  means 
"  who  has  been  so  foolish  as  to  do  so — to  take 
so  much  trouble  about  a  thing  which  cannot 
possibly  profit  any  one?" 

Ver.  11.— AH  his  fellows;  or,  aU  itt  o»- 
todates';  i.e.  all  who  are  associatctl  together 
in  the  worship  of  the  idoL  The  worshippers 
of  a  particular  idol,  or  sometimes  of  a 
particular  god,  formed  a  sort  of  guild  or  com- 
pany, bound  together  by  common  pnrticipa- 
tion  in  certain  rites,  and  under  an  obligation 
to  defend  each  other.  The  prophet  says 
that,  though  the  worshippers  and  the  makers 
should,  all  of  them,  be  gathered  together, 
and  stand  up  to  help  one  the  other,  yet 
should  they  be  unable  to  effect  anything. 
Gathered  together  against  God,  they  wonld 
"  tremble  and  be  ashamed." 

Ver.  12. — The  smith  vrith  the  tongs.  The 
Hebrew  tezt  is  defective,  some  word  having 
fallen  out  We  should  probably  supply 
"  maketh,"  and  translate,  The  smith  maketh 
an  axe,  and  umrheth  it  in  &e  eoals,  and 
with  hammers  fashioneth  it.  The  descrip- 
tion of  image-making  thus  eommences 
with  the  fadiioning  of  the  carpenter's 
tools.  He  is  hungry,  eto.  The  artificer 
who  takes  the  first  step  in  "forming  a 
god"  (ver.  10)  is  himself  hnngry  and 
thirsty,  depending  on  so  mean  a  thing  as 
food  to  supply  him  with  the  needful  strength. 
Unless  he  can  eat  and  drink,  the  whole  work 
is  brought  to  a  standstill. 

Ver.  13. — The  carpenter,  etc  When  the 
smith  has  done  his  part  in  the  formation  of 
tools,  the  carpenter  is  called  into  action. 
His  proceedings  are  traced  "  extragressively  " 
(Dolitzsch).  First,  he  is  regarded  as  in 
possession  of  his  block  of  wood.  On  this  he 
proceeds  to  stretch  out  his  mle,  to  obtain 
the  idol's  length  and  breadth.  Then  he 
marks  out  on  the  block  a  rough  outline  with 
red  chalk  (sered).  After  this  he  pares  away 
the  superfluous  wood  with  planes,  or  chisels, 
and  marks  out  the  limbs  more  accurately 
with  the  compass,  planing  and  meaauring 
until  be  has  brought  tke  rough  bloek  int( 


OH.  xuv.  1— 28.J    THE   BOOK.  OF   THE   PROPHET   ISAIAH. 


151 


the  flgnre  of  a  man,  and  impressed  on  it 
something  of  the  beauty  of  a  man,  so  that  it 
may  seem  worthy  of  remaining  in  the  place 
where  it  is  set  up,  whether  temple  or  private 
house.  But  there  is  something  necessarily 
anterior  to  all  this.  To  obtain  his  block,  the 
carpenter  must  first  cut  down  a  tree,  or  have 
one  out  down  for  him  (ver.  14);  to  obtain  a 
tree,  he  (or  some  one  for  him)  must  have 
planted  it ;  for  the  tree  to  liare  grown  to  a 
fitting  size,  the  rain  must  have  watered  it. 
So  the  very  existence  of  these  wooden  idols 
depends  ultimately  on  whether  it  has  rained 
or  not — i.e.  whether  God  has  given  his  rain 
or  withheld  it. 

Ver.  14. — Cedars  .  ,  .  cypress  .  .  .  oak. 
The  second  of  the  trees  mentioned  is  more 
probably  the  ilex  than  the  cypress,  which 
does  not  grow  either  in  Palestine  or  in 
Babylonia.  Idols  would  be  made  of  cedar 
on  account  of  its  fragrance,  of  ilex  and  oak 
on  account  of  their  hardness  and  durability. 
Cedar  was  used  as  a  mateiial  for  carved 
figures  in  Egypt  (Bii-ch, '  Contents  of  British 
lluseum,'  p.  21).  Which  he  strengtheneth 
for  himself  amoag  the  trees  of  the  forest. 
The  meaning  is  obscure.  Dr.  Kay  translates, 
"  and  he  ej^couragei  himself  in  the  trees  of 
the  forest/'  which  conveys  no  very  distinct 
idea;  Delitzsch,  "and  he  chooses  for  himself 
among  the  trees,"  etc.,  which  is  sufficiently 
dear,  but  scarcely,  obtainable  from  the 
Hebrew  text;  Kuobel,  "be  makes  himself 
secure  among  the  trees  "  (by  putting  a  mark 
on  those  which  he  intends  to  have),  which 
imparts  an  idea  certainly  not  contained  in 
the  original.  He  planteth  an  ash.  It  is 
uncertain,  and  it  does  not  greatly  matter, 
what  tree  ia  intended.  The  point  is  that, 
before  trees  can  grow  up,  they  have  to  be 
planted,  and  that,  for  them' to  grow  when 
planted,  God's  gift  of  rain  is  necessary  (see 
the  comment  on  ver.  13). 

Ver.  15. — ^Ihea  shall  it  be  for  a  man  to 
bum.  The  tree  that  has  been  planted,  and 
nourished,  and  has  grown  up  is  naturally 
"  for  a  man  to  bum."  That  is  its  ordinary 
destination ;  and  even  the  idolater  applies  it 
partly  to  this  purpose  j  but  out  of  a  portion 
he  maketh  a  god.  The  very  same  tree  serves 
him  both  for  fuel  and  for  a  divinity. 

Ver.  16. — He  bumeth  part  thereof ;  rather, 
half  thsreof;  "With /toZ/ thereof  "—not  tiie 
other  half,  but  the  same — "  he  eateth  flesh." 
One  fire  serves  for  the  two  purposes  of  warm- 
ing him  and  cooking  his  victuals. 

Ver.  17. — ^Ihe  residue  thereof;  i<.  the 
other  hal£ 

Ver.  18. — They  have  not  known  nor  under- 
itood.  The  cause  of  all  this  folly  is  a  blind- 
ing rf  the  understanding,  divinely  caused  in 
the  way  of  punishment,  on  account  of  their 
having  wilfully  closed  their  eyes  to  the  truth. 
Because  they  "did  not  like  to  ratain  Gtod  I 


in  their  knowledge,  Ood  gnve  them  up  to 
a  reprobate  (or,  UDdistinguiehing)  mind" 
(Bom.  i.  28;  comp.  oh.  xxix.  10).  He  hath 
shut ;  or.  One  hath  shut.  But  the  reference 
is  in  either  case  to  Goi).  The  word  trans 
lated  "shut"  means  literally  "plastered" 
or  "smeared." 

Ver.  19. — None  oonsidereth  in  his  heart ; 
literally,  recalls  it  to  his  heart ;  i.e.  returns 
to  a  sound  way  of  thinking  upon  the  subject. 
It  is  implied  that  the  idolaters  had  once  had 
it  in  their  power  to  think  and  reason  justly 
upon  the  absurdity  of  such  conduct  as  that 
which  was  now  habitual  to  them.  But  they 
had  lost  the  power.  They  had  suffered 
themselves  little  by  little  to  be  deluded. 
The  stock  of  a  tree.  The  marginal  rendering, 
"  that  which  comes  of  a  tree,"  is  preferable. 

Ver.  20. — He  feedeth  on  ashes;  «.«.  on 
vanity — on  what  can  give  no  support  or  sus- 
tenance (comp.  Prov.  xv.  14;  Hos.  xii.  1). 
A  deceived  heart.  Either  self-deceived,  or 
imposed  upon  by  illusions  from  without; 
e.g.  the  seeming  power  of  the  idols,  as  seen 
in  the  victories  and  conquests  of  their  wor- 
shippers. He  cannot  deliver  his  soul.  The 
deceived  soul  is  bound  in  trammels,  which 
it  feels  to  be  irksome,  and  from  which  it 
would  fain  be  free.  But  it  cannot  deliver 
itself.  Deliverance  must  come  from  some 
external  source ;  in  other  words,  man  needs 
a  Deliverer.  Is  there  not  a  lie  in  my  right 
hand  I  An  idol  is  "  a  lie."  It  professes  to 
have  power,  strength,  ability  to  help  and 
save,  whereas  it  has  no  power  at  all.  It 
cannnt  even  save  itself.  Savages  often  beat 
their  fetishes.  Diagoras  of  Melos  threw  an 
image  of  Hercules  into  the  fire  on  which 
he  was  cooking  his  dinner,  and  bade  Her- 
cules make  himself  of  some  use  by  boiling 
his  turnips.  The  powerlessness  of  idols  even 
to  help  themselves  ia  represented  with  much 
force  in  (he  Book  of  Baiuch  (vi.  12 — 15,  17 
—22,  27.  49,  etc.). 

Vers.  21 — 28. — Israel  onoe  more  promised 
Deltvebance,  and  the  Delivereb  mbn- 
TiosED  BY  Name.  Israel,  having  been  ex- 
horted never  to  forget  the  impotenoy  of  idols 
(ver.  21),  is  promised  forgiveness  and  deliver- 
ance (vers.  21, 22).  Then,  heaven  and  earth 
are  called  upon  to  join  in  rejoicing  over  the 
announcement  (ver.  23).  Finally,  in  a  noble 
burst  of  poetry,  God  ia  represented  as 
solemnly  declaring  his  intention  of  frus- 
trating all  the  false  sayings  of  the  soothsayers 
concerning  his  people,  and  accomplishing 
their  restoration  to  their  own  land,  and  the 
rebuilding  of  their  temple  through  the  in- 
strumentality of  Cyrus  (vers.  24 — 28). 

Ver.  21. — Bememher  these;  rather,  re- 
member fhese  thing$;  Le.  the  futility  of  idoli 


158 


THE   BOOK   OF   THE   PROPHET   ISAIAH,     [oh.  xliv.  1— 28 


and  the  folly  of  the  idol-worshippen.  For 
thon  art  my  servant.  Therefore  bound  to 
worship  me,  snd  noJ  the  idols  (comp.  oh. 
zli.  8 ;  vers.  1, 2).  I  have  formed  thee  (so 
also  in  ch.  xlili.  1,  21  ;  vers.  2,  24).  The 
duty  of  absolute  unquestioning  obedience 
seems  contained  in  the  relation  of  that  which 
is  formed  to  that  which  has  formed  it.  On 
the  other  band,  it  may  be  assumed  that  lie 
who  has  formed  a  thing  will  have  a  constant 
care  of  it  and  regard  for  it — that  at  any  rate 
he  will  not  "  forget "  it. 

Yer.  22. — ^I  have  blotted  out . . .  thy  sins 
(comp.  ch.  xliii.  25).  The  promise  there 
made  is  here  represented  as  having  its  ful- 
filment. Before  God  reverses  his  sentence 
and  restores  hia  people,  lie  must  first  forgive 
tbem.  As  a  thick  clond  ...  as  a  cloud.  It 
would  be  better  to  translate,  as  a  cloud 
.  .  .  as  a  thick  cloud.  The  latter  of  the 
two  Hebrew  words  used  is  the  more  em- 
phatic. Betum  unto  me.  This  is  an  under- 
lying condition,  both  of  restoration  and  of 
forgiveness.  Only  the  penitent  can  be  re- 
ceived back  into  favour.  The  knowledge, 
however,  that  God  has,  in  bis  counsels, 
"  redeemed  "  his  people  generally,  may  act 
as  a  stimulus  on  individuals  to  repent  and 
turn  to  him. 

Ver.  23.— Sin|r,  0  ye  heavens.  The  sym- 
pathy of  external  nature  with  the  fortunes 
of  Israel  is  assumed  throughout  Isaiah,  as  it 
is  throughout  the  Psalms  (see  ch.  xi.  6 — 8 ; 
xxiv.  4 — 7;  xxix.  17;  xxx.  25,  26;  xxxiii. 
9 ;  zxxv.  1, 2, 7,  etc.).  If  Israel  is  depressed, 
the  earth  mu^t  *'  mourn  and  languish,"  the 
heavens  grow  dark,  the  mountains  shrink 
and  "be  ashamed."  If,  on  the  contrary, 
Israel  prospers,  heaven  and  earth,  mountain 
and  forest,  must  alike  rejoice  and  sing.  Dr. 
Kay  expounds  the  rejoicing  of  the  heavens 
here  (and  also  in  ch.  xlix.  13),  of  the  joy  felt 
by  the  angels  over  the  returning  and  par- 
doned sinner ;  but  the  context  of  both  pas- 
sages is  in  favour  of  the  material  heavens 
being  meant.  It  is  quite  pn^silile  that  there 
is  a  real  and  not  merely  a  fancied  sympathy 
between  the  material  and  the  spiritual 
worlds.  The  Lord  hath  done  it;  literally, 
the  Lord  hath  wrought  —  what  he  has 
wrought  is  not  said.  Mr.  Clieyne  trans- 
lates, "Jehovah  hath  done  nobly."  Shout, 
ye  lower  parts  of  the  earth.  Metonymy  of 
the  part  for  the  whole — "  the  lower  parts  of 
the  earth  "  for  "  the  earth  even  to  ita  lowest 
depths."  There  is  no  thought  of  Shedl  or 
of  its  inhabitants.  Break  forth  into  sing- 
ing (comp.  oh.  xiv.  7 ;  xxxv.  2).  As  children 
and  birds  sing  from  the  very  gladness  of 
tUeir  hearts,  thereby  venting  the  joy  that 
almost  oppresses  them,  so  all  nature  is  called 
upon,  not  merely  to  rejoice,  but  to  give  vent 
to  ito  joy,  now  that  Israel  is  redeemed  and 
Ood  glorified. 


Ver.  24.— Thns  salth  fhe  Lord.  This  b 
not  a  new  prophecy  entirely  unconnected 
with  the  preceiling,  as  Delitzsch  supposes, 
but  a  declaration  to  which  the  prophet  has 
been  working  up,  and  which  he  intends  as 
the  crown  and  climax  of  all  that  he  has  been 
announcing  with  respect  to  Israel's  deliver- 
ance. Not  only  is  the  deliverance  absolutely 
determined  on  in  God's  counsels,  but  the 
Deliverer  himself  is  already  chosen  and 
designated.  He  that  formed  thee  from  the 
womb  (comp.  ver.  2).  I  am  the  Lord  that 
maketh  all  things— rather,  /  the  Lord  am  he 
that  doeth  all  things ;  i.e.  I  am  he  that  eze- 
cuteth  whatever  he  designs — ^that  stretoheth 
forth  the  heavens  alone  (comp.  Job  iz.  8), 
that  spreadeth  abroad  the  earth  by  myself. 
God  did  not  delegate  the  creation  of  the 
heaven  and  the  earth  to  an  inferior  spirit, 
a  Sri/uovpyis,  as  the  Greeks  generally  taught. 
He  did  not  even  call  in  the  co-operation  of  a 
helper.  Singly  and  solely  by  his  own  power 
he  created  all  things. 

Ver.  25.— That  frastrateth  the  tokens  ol 
the  liars;  i.e.  "who  brings  to  nought  the 
prognostications  of  the  astrologers  and  sooth- 
sayers, that  pretend  falsely  to  a  knowledge  of 
future  events  "  (see  oh.  xlix,  13 ;  and  comp. 
Jer.  zziz.  8,  9) ;  and  maketh  diviners  mad ; 
«.«.  "shows  them  to  be  fools  or  madmen" 
(see  Job.  xii.  17).  That  tnmeth  wise  men 
backward ;  i.e.  "  repulses  them — ^puts  them 
to  flight."  Pretenders  to  wisdom,  rather 
than  truly  wise  men,  are  meant. 

Ver.  26. — That  oonfirmeth  the  word  of  bis 
servant;  that  is,  of  Isaiah  himself,  whom 
God  calls  "  my  Servant "  in  ch.  zz.  8.  The 
"messengers"  are  the  prophets  generally. 
Before  the  return  from  the  Captivity  took 
place,  it  had  been  prophesied,  not  only  by 
Isaiah,  but  by  Jeremiah  (zxix.  10 — 14),  by 
Ezekiel  (xxxix.  25—28),  by  Joel  (iii.  1), 
by  Amos  (ix.  11 — 15),  by  Obadiah  (ver  20), 
by  Micah  (iv.  10),  and  by  Zephaniah  (iii. 
14-20). 

Ver.  27. — ^That  salth  to  the  deep,  Be  d^ 
(comp.  ch.  xlii.  15).  "The  flood"  here  is 
probably  the  main  stream  of  the  Euphrates, 
while  "the  rivers"  are  the  various  side 
streams  which  branched  off  from  it  and 
again  united  themselves  with  it.  Some 
commentators  regard  the  drying  of  Euphrates 
as  a  mere  metaphor  for  the  exhaustion  and 
ruin  of  Babylon  (Kay) ;  but  (with  Delitzsch) 
I  should  be  inclined  to  understand  a  reference 
to  the  action  of  Cyrus  in  drawing  off  the 
water  of  the  river  (see  the  comment  on  ch. 
xlii.  15). 

Ver.  28.— That  saith  of  Cyrus.  The  men- 
tion of  Cyrus  by  name,  here  and  again  in 
oh.  xlv.  1,  has  no  doubt  been  one  of  the  main 
grounds  on  which  has  been  set  up  the  theory 
of  two  Isaiahs.  It  has  been  thought  incre- 
dible, or  at  any  rate  contrary  to  the  analogy 


CH.  XLIT.  1— 28.]    THE  BOOK  OF  THE   PBOPHET   ISAIAH. 


159 


of  prophetical  rerelation,  that  so  minute  a 
matter  as  the  name  of  a  man  should  have 
been  announced  in  prophecy  more  tlian  a 
century  before  his  hi'th.  There  is,  however, 
the  parallel  case  of  Josiuh,  who,  according 
to  tbe  author  of  the  Books  of  Kings,  was 
announced  by  name  more  than  three  centu- 
ries before  his  birth  (1  Kings  xiii.  2).  And 
there  are  the  extremely  minute  facts  noted 
in  Dan.  xi.,  which  were  prophetically  de- 
clared from  two  centuries  to  three  centuries 
and  a  halt'  before  they  happened.  It  is,  per- 
hapsi  assuming  that  we  know  more  than  we 
really  do  know  about  the  object  and  laws  of 
prophetic  utterance,  to  lay  it  down  that  there 
can  be  no  minute  prophecy  except  when  the 
prophet  is  living  in  the  midst  of  the  events. 
It  is  certainly  a  very  marvellous  thing  that 
Isaiah,  living  at  tlie  close  of  the  eighth  and 
the  beginning  of  the  seventh  century  B.a, 
should  mention  a  king  by  name  who  did  not 
ascend  the  throne  till  the  middle  of  the 
sixth ;  but  no  one  can  suppose  that  God 
could  not  have  made  such  a  revelation  to 
him  if  he  pleased.  An  attempt  to  minimize 
the  marrel,  without  postulating  two  Isaiahs, 
has  been  made  by  the  supposition  that 
"  Cyrus  "  was  not  really  a  proper  name,  but 
an  old  title  of  ihe  Persian  (Achsemenian) 
kings,  signifying  "  the  sun,"  aud  that  Isaiah, 
therefore,  only  meant  to  point  out  Persia  as 
the  power  which  would  destroy  Babylon, 
which  he  had  already  done  in  effect  in  oh. 
xzi.  2.  But,  in  reality,  there  is  no  sufficient 
ground  for  either  of  the  two  statements  (1) 
that  Cyrus  meant  "the  sun,"  and  (2)  that 
it  was  an  old  titular  name  of  all  the  Persian 
kings.  That  "Cyrus"  meant  "the  sun," 
rests  upon  the  weak  authorities  of  Plutarch 
Hid  Clesias,  and  has  been  disproved  by  S  r 
H.  Bawlinson  (ICnneiform  Inscriptions,' 
ToL  ii.  p.  1 12).  That  it  was  an  old  titular 
nsm«  of  all  tha  Parsian  kings  ia  directly 


contrary  to  the  evidence.  Out  of  fourteen 
Acheemenian  kings,  two  only  bore  the  name ; 
and  they  bore  it  as  their  one  and  only 
personal  appellation.  It  was  also  borne  by 
an  Achsenienian  prince  who  had  no  other 
name.  It  is  as  purely  a  proper  name  as 
Cambyses,  or  Xerxes,  or  Darius.  The  theory 
of  Dean  Plumptre  ('Biblical  SluJies,'  p. 
195)  must  therefore  be  set  aside  as  untenable, 
and  we  must  face  the  fact  that  the  great 
Cyrus,  who  reigned  from  B.C.  559  to  B.o.  529, 
is  mentioned  in  prophecies  attributed  to  a 
writer  whose  dealh  cannot  be  placed  much 
later  than  B.o.  700.  The  name  which  the 
Oreeks  expressed  by  Kipos  and  the  Bomans 
by  "  Cyrus,"  is  in  the  original  Persian 
Kuruah,  in  the  old  Babylonian  Kurat,  and 
in  the  Hebrew  Koresh.  He  is  my  shepherd ; 
i.e.  not  a  mere  ordinary  king,  who  was  often 
called  "  the  shepherd  of  his  people  (wot/iiii/ 
Xawv),"  but  "toj/ shepherd" — the  shepherd 
of  my  people,  wlio  will  tend  them  and  care 
for  them.  And  shall  perform  (literally, 
acBompUsh)  aU  my  pleasure.  Cyrus  is  said 
by  Josephus  to  have  had  this  prophecy 
pointed  out  to  him  on  his  conquest  of  Baby- 
lon, and  to  have  thereupon  determined  tc 
fulfil  what  was  written  ('  Ant.  Jud.,'  xii.  1, 
§  2).  His  edict,  reported  by  Ezra  (i.  2 — 4), 
contained  a  staliement  that  "Jehovah  had 
charged  him  to  build  him  a  house  at  Jeru- 
salem." It  is  difficult  to  see  any  sufficient 
political  object  for  his  restoration  of  the 
Jews  to  their  country.  Thou  shalt  be  built ; 
rather,  it  shall  he  built.  Thy  foundation 
shall  be  laid ;  literally,  it  shall  be  founded. 
The  decree  of  Cyrus  found  by  Diirius  at 
Eobatana  required  that  "  the  foundations  of 
the  house  should  be  strongly  laid  "  (Ezra  vi. 
3),  and  prescribed  its  dimensions  and  mate- 
rials. (On  the  actual  laying  of  the  founda- 
tions, see  Ezra  iii.  8 — 13.) 


HOMILETICS. 

Ytte.  3,  4. —  Welter  a  lynibdl  of  Divine  grace.  It  has  been  shown  (in  the  comment 
on  Ter.  3)  (1)  how  this  symbolism  pervades  the  prophecies  of  Isaiah ;  and  (2)  what  an 
echo  it  found  in  the  teaching  of  our  Lord.  An  analogy  thus  recommended  8eem» 
entitled  to  be  Tiewed  as  something  more  than  poetic  imagery,  and  may  properly  be 
made  the  subject  of  our  serious  thought.  In  what  respects,  then,  we  may  ask,  does  the 
symbolism  hold  ? 

I.  Water  is  common,  abundant,  fbbelt  given  to  mankind  at  large.  So  i.s 
it  with  Divine  grace.  Christ,  the  Light  of  the  world,  lighteth  every  man  that  cometh 
into  it  (John  i.  9).  What  men  call  "  the  light  of  nature  "  is  an  illumination  poured 
by  G-od  into  the  soul,  and  this  light  is  common  to  all.  It  shows  men  the  way  that 
they  should  walk  in ;  it  enables  them  to  discern  between  right  and  wrong ;  if  they 
would  follow  it,  it  would  guide  them  to  heaven.  Nor  does  Divine  grace  stop  at  this 
point.  To  those  who  struggle  to  do  right  God's  assisting  grace  is  never  wanting.  His 
Spirit  strives  with  all  men  (Gen.  vL  3) ;  his  mercy  is  over  all  his  works  (Ps.  cilv.  9) ; 
ha  is  "no  respecter  of  persons  "  (Acts  x.  34). 

JL  Watbb  18  AMoLUTBLT  NEOKSSAET  TO  tiPB.    Nothing  living,  whather  animai 


LtiO  THE  BOOK  OF   THE   PROPHET  ISAIAH,    [ch.  xliv.  1— 2& 

or  vegetable,  can  exist  without  water.  No  spiiitual  life  can  exist  without  grace. 
Without  muisture,  neither  can  the  embryo  be  formed,  nor  will  the  seed  germinate. 
Without  grace  there  is  no  commencement  of  spiritual  life.  Water  is  needed  for  the 
sustentation  of  both  plants  and  animals.  Grace  is  needed  for  the  susteotation  of  the 
quickened  spirit. 

III.  Water  cleanses  men's  bodies  from  all  filth  and  pollution.  The  grace  ol 
God  cleanses  their  souls  from  the  filthiness  and  impurity  of  sin.  His  grace  is  the  "one 
fountain  opened  for  sin  and  for  uncleanness  "  (Zech.  xiii.  1) ;  the  precious  influences  of 
his  Spirit  can  alone  take  away  impurity,  and  make  the  soiled  soul  once  more  clean  in 
his  sight.  Wonderful  is  the  cleansing  power  of  water ;  still  more  wonderful  is  the 
guilt-removing  power  of  grace.  Sins  that  were  "  as  scarlet"  are  by  grace  made  "  white 
as  snow;"  iniquities  that  were  "red  as  crimson"  become  "as  wool"  (ch.  i.  18).  It 
is  not  merely  that  the  sins  themselves  are  forgiven,  but  the  "  evil  heart,"  from  which 
they  proceeded,  is  washed,  sanctified,  and  cleansed,  so  as  to  retain  no  taint  of  evil. 

IV,  Water  refreshes  and  renovates  those  who  are  weary  and  faint.  There 
is  no  refreshment  to  the  faint  and  weary  soul  comparable  to  the  pouring  out  upon  it 
of  God's  Spirit,  When  "  the  parched  ground  becomes  a  pool,  and  the  thirsty  land 
springs  of  water  "  (ch,  xxxv,  7),  the  result  is  a  cuiiplete  transformation  of  the  whole 
appearance  of  things,  "The  wilderness  and  the  solitary  place"  at  once  "are  glad 
.  .  ,  the  desert  rejoices  and  blossoms  like  the  rose.  ...  It  blossoms  abundantly  .  .  . 
the  glory  of  Lebanon  is  given  to  it,  the  excellency  of  Carniel  and  Sharon  "  (ch,  xxxv. 
1,  2).  "  Similarly,  when  the  dry  and  thirsty  soul  obtains  a  "  time  of  refreshing  from  the 
Lord"  (Acts  iii.  19),  its  whole  condition  is  on  a  sudden  changed.  Gladness  succeeds 
to  gloom,  happiness  to  despair,  an  almost  ecstatic  bliss  to  a  dull,  gnawin°;  sense  of  misery. 
The  soul  puts  forth  blossoms — rejoices  with  joy  and  singing  (see  the  Psalms,  passim). 

Vers.  9 — ^20. — The  utter  foUy  of  all  hinds  of  idolatry.  Idolatry  proper — the  actual 
worship  of  images — ^is  felt  by  modern  Englishmen  to  be  so  extreme  a  folly  that  they 
have  a  difficulty  in  believing  it  to  have  at  any  time  been,  or  still  anywhere  to  be,  the 
actukl  religion  of  a  people.  Their  inclination  is  to  regard  it  as  a  symbolism — coarse 
and  ill-judged,  perhaps — ^but  yet  a  well-meaning  symbolism,  expressive  of  the  truths  of 
natural  religion.  But  research  into  the  past  history  of  mankind,  and  investigation  of 
the  present  condition  of  the  nations  by  whom  idolatry  is  practised,  alike  show  a  real 
belief  in  the  supernatural  power  of  the  images,  and  a  real  trust  in  them  for  help  and 
I>roteotion,  Thus  the  idolatry  directly  denounced  by  Isaiah,  extraordinary  as  it  seems, 
is  in  bet  a  real  form  of  human  folly — one  of  the  many  strange  aberrations  of  the 
human  intellect  that  have  an  actual  existence ;  and  not  only  so,  but  one  that  is  widely 
prevalent.  Its  "utter  folly"  is  suffidently  expoeed  by  the  prophet,  and,  as  being 
generally  allowed  among  ourselves,  need  not  be  dwelt  upon.  The  folly  of  other  forms 
of  idolatry,  though  not  much  less,  is  not  so  commonly  admitted,  and  may  with 
advantage  be  pointed  out  in  connection  with  portions  of  Scripture  like  the  present.  We 
may  instance — 

I.  The  idolatry  of  persons.  Human  beings  are  allowed  to  stand  between  us  and 
God — ^to  absorb  the  thought,  the  attention,  the  affections,  that  ought  to  have  God  for 
their  Object.  Most  often,  perhaps,  it  is  a  child ;  but  sometimes  it  is  a  husband,  or  a 
wife,  or  a  lover,  that  holds  the  position,  occupying  the  first  place  in  our  heart,  and 
filling  it  to  the  entire  exclusion  of  that  Being  who  has  the  principal  claim  on  us.  Now, 
what  exceeding  folly  is  this!  Is  it  much  short  of  the  folly  of  the  old  idolaters? 
To  put  in  the  place  of  God  a  mere  human  being,  a  form  of  flesh  that  may  quit  us  at 
any  time,  that  may  change  towards  us,  that  has  no  power  to  help  or  save  us,— that  is 
not  much  superior  t«  the  idolater's  "  graven  image."  How  often  does  our  idol  shatter 
itself,  disappoint  our  hopes,  disregard  our  wishes,  become  estranged  from  us,  tear  our 
heartstrings,  trample  upon  our  best  feelings!  How  often  is  it  suddenly  snatched 
from  us  I  Gk)d  is  very  jealous  of  rivals  near  his  throne,  and  very  frequently  takes  from 
us,  1^  a  premature  death,  the  idol  that  is  imperilling  our  souls.  Even  in  the  best 
ease— which  is  alas!  the  worst — if  our  idol  stay  with  us,  and  do  not  change,  what 
madness  to  be  wholly  wrapt  up  in  the  love  of  the  finite,  and  to  let  go  from  us  for  its 
sake  the  love  of  the  Infinite  Being  ! 

n,  Th«  idolatbt  of  wbalth.    "  Oovetousness,"  St.  Paul  tells  us  (Ool.  iii.  6),  "  ii 


OH.  XLiv.  1— 28.]    THE  BOOK  OF  THE  PROPHET  ISAIAH.  161 

idolatry."  There  are  those  who  malce  riches  the  object  of  their  worship — who  allow  the 
idol  of  gold  to  come  between  their  souls  and  God,  having  more  regar<)  for  the  possession 
of  wealth  than  for  God's  approval,  and  a  greater  desire  to  be  rich  on  earth  than  to  be 
saints  in  heaven.  What  abject  and  grovelling  folly  is  this !  Wealth  !  So  many  pieces 
of  yellow  metal  to  be  our  object  in  life,  the  end-all  and  be-all  of  our  existence — pieces 
of  metal  that  we  cannot  take  away  with  us  when  we  die  (Ps.  xlix.  17)  or  even  make 
sure  of  keefiiag  with  us  during  our  lifetime ;  pieces  of  metal  that  do  not  save  us  one 
twinge  of  pain  in  sickness,  or  one  pang  of  remorse  at  death  1  The  idolatry  of  wealth  is 
even  greater  folly  than  the  idolatry  of  persons,  and  even  more  degrading  to  a  rational 
being. 

IIL  The  idola.tbt  of  rank  and  station.  Some,  who  despise  wtalth,  and  have 
no  strong  affection  for  any  individuals,  have  an  inordinate  regard,  a  profound  veneration, 
for  the  possessors  of  high  worldly  station.  To  number  princes  and  nobles  among  their 
friends  and  acquaintances  is  the  highest  pleasure  of  which  they  are  susceptible.  They 
idolize  rank,  consider  it  a  sufficient  set-off  against  all  demerits,  and  will  stoi'p  to  any- 
thing in  order  to  bring  themselves  into  contact  with  it.  Here,  again,  one  can  only 
exclaim — ^What  folly !  Bank  and  station,  like  wealth,  belong  to  this  world  only.  They 
have  to  be  left  beliind,  with  our  everyday  clothes,  when  we  step  into  the  grave.  They 
are  accidents  which  no  way  affect  a  man's  true  worth,  or  the  estimation  in  which  he  is 
held  by  those  whose  esteem  is  of  the  slightest  account.  The  prince  of  to-day  is  the 
exile  of  to-morrow ;  the  noble  may  become  bankrupt  in  purse,  and  too  often  is  bank- 
rupt in  reputation.  Such  as  idolize  rank  and  court  the  favour  of  nobles  are  despised 
by  men  of  sense,  disliked  for  the  most  part  and  ridiculed  by  those  to  whom  they  labour 
to  make  themselves  acceptable. 

'^er.  28. — Hie  duty  of  kings  to  he  Ood's  shepherds.  "  By  me  kings  reign,"  says  God, 
"and  princes  decree  justice"  (Prov.  viii.  15).  Though  the  expression,  "the  Diyine 
right  of  kings,"  has  been  greatly  abused,  it  is  yet  a  truth  which  all  must  acknowledge, 
that  mtnarchs  are  placed  in  their  responsible  position  by  God,  and  must  answer  to  him 
for  the  use  which  they  make  of  that  position.  The  whole  world  is,  in  a  certain  sense, 
God's  flock,  and  the  various  chief  rulers  who  hold  authority  over  difTerent  portions  of 
the  human  race  are  rightly  viewed  as  shepherds  entrusted  by  God  with  the  care  of 
this  or  that  division  of  the  flock  which  is  primarily  and  really  his.     Thus — 

I.  Each  kino  is  requiebd  to  act  as  a  shepherd  towards  the  nation  over 
WHICH  HE  18  SET.  A  true  shepherd  seeks  the  good  of  his  flock,  not  his  own  good.  He 
is  watchful,  vigilant,  wisely  provident.  He  seeks  to  benefit  his  flock,  not  to  pleasure 
them.  Ofientimes  he  must  check  their  desires,  restrain  their  wanderings,  keep  them 
back  from  alluring  pastures,  confine  them  to  high  regions,  where  the  herbage  is  short, 
scant,  and  far  from  succulent.  He  must  be  specially  careful  of  the  weak  and  sickly, 
and  of  such  as  have  suffered  any  hurt.  He  must  spare  no  trouble  or  pains  to  secure,  so 
far  as  he  can,  the  well-being  of  every  sheep  and  lamb  committed  to  his  charge.  And 
further — 

II.  Each  kino  is  8peciai.lt  required  to  act  as  a  shepherd  towards  the  portion 
OF  the  Ohobch  or  Christ  which  is  within  his  kingdom.  Within  the  universal 
flock,  which  is  coextensive  with  mankind,  our  Lord  has  a  special  flock,  enclosed  within 
a  special  fold,  which  he  calls  in  a  special  sense  his  own  (John  x.  1 — 16).  This  flock. is 
not,  however,  confined  to  one  place — it  is  "dispersed  throughout  the  whole  world." 
Kings  are  required  to  look  to  its  interests  in  some  special  way.  They  are  to  be  "  its 
nursing  fathers,"  as  queens  are  to  be  "  its  nursing  mothers  "  (ch.  xlix.  23).  Cyrus,  from 
the  time  of  his  conquest  of  Babylon,  while  in  a  general  way  the  shepherd  of  all  the 
nations  under  his  rule,  was  especially  the  shepherd  of  Israel.  And  the  case  is  the 
same  with  all  those  nionarchs  within  whose  dominions  any  portion  of  the  Church  of 
Christ  has  its  abode.  England's  monarchs  bear,  among  their  other  titles,  the  proud  one 
of  Fidei  Defensor — "  Defender  of  the  Faith."  The  faith  which  they  have  to  defend  is 
the  faith  of  Christ,  and  in  this  defence  is  necessarily  included  the  special  protection  ot 
Christ's  faithful  ones,  or  of  the  Chiistiaa  community  within  their  realm. 


UAIAH — a. 


102  THE  BOOK  OF  THE  PROPHET  ISAIAH,    [oh.  xuv.  1— 2a 


HOMILIES  BY  VARIOUS  AUTHORS. 

Vers.  1 — 5. — The  offspring  of  Israel.  JudgmentB  are  coming  upon  the  world.  And 
the  sacred  seed  shall  be  scattered  abroad  through  all  nations.  There  shall  be  deliver- 
ance of  Israel  from  all  those  calamities  and  much  more ;  the  heathen  nations  ahall  be 
brought  into  the  light  of  Jehovah. 

I.  Address  of  Jehovah  to  the  people.  There  are  three  names  for  the  people — 
Jacob,  Israel,  Jesurun — and  each  represents  a  separate  phase  of  moral  progress.  1. 
Jacob,  my  servant.  This  itself  is  a  title  of  honour.  To  be  the  minister  of  the  will  of  an 
earthly  sovereign  is  a  proud  distinction :  how  much  more  to  wear  the  badge  of  the 
King  of  kings !  Moreover,  in  ancient' times  servitude  often  meant  confidence  and  friend- 
ship of  the  happiest  kind  between  two  souls.  The  name  of  Jacob,  too,  calls  up  memor- 
able associations :  a  life  of  vicissitude  and  adventure,  cheered  by  the  constant  presence 
of  God ;  of  notorious  faults  and  weaknesses  united  with  victorious  faith ;  of  a  struggle 
to  realize  the  Divine  reality  of  love  richly  rewarded.  The  history  of  Jacob  is  beloved 
because  it  typifies  the  union  of  the  human  with  the  Divine — in  the  people,  in  all  believing 
men.  2.  Israel  the  chosen.  One  foreknown,  selected,  predestinated  from  the  first  to 
fulfil  the  ends  of  God.  From  the  beginning  of  their  history,  the  Divine  hand  had 
formed  and  moulded  all  Israel's  institutions.  As  the  organism  lies  implicit  in  the  cell 
of  protoplasm,  as  the  oak  may  be  seen  in  miniature  in  the  acorn,  so  Israel  sprang  from 
a  thought  of  God.  3.  Jesurun  the  upright  one.  An  imputed  righteousness,  we  are  told, 
is  meant.  Others  say  it  is  a  word  <^  flattery  and  endearment — a  diminutive  form  of 
"  Israel."  If  the  two  ideas  may  be  combined,  then  the  chosen  and  beloved  of  God  will  be 
upright  in  the  thought  of  God.  To  say  that  Chid  "  imputes  "  righteousness  to  thove 
who  have  it  not  in  themselves,  what  is  it  but  to  ascribe  to  him  the  most  beautiful  effect 
and  operation  of  love  ?  It  is  to  say  that  Israel  is  by  him  idealized.  And  to  feel  this 
about  oin:selves  means  deliverance  from  despair  in  those  moments  when  in  the  mirror 
of  conscience  we  behold  a  hideous  self-reflection,  or  when  we  perceiTe  how  cheaply  we 
are  held  by  the  WMJd — 

**  All  I  can  never  be, 

All  men  ignore  in  me, — 

This  I  am  worth  to  God, 

Whose  wheel  the  pitcher  shaped." 

There  are  secrets  of  the  heart  unknown  to  any  system  of  theology.  He  who  oan  hear 
Gk)d's  voice  saying  to  him, "  Fear  not,"  may  be  deaf  to  all  detraction  and  indifferent  to  all 
applause. 

n.  Promise  of  Jehovah.  1.  The  outpouring  of  the  Spirit.  Let  us  transport  our- 
selves in  fancy  from  these  moist  atmospheres  and  dripping  skies  of  Britain  to  yonder 
burning  Orient  clime.  Then  and  there  let  us  bathe  ourselves  in  the  generous  bounty 
of  those  refreshing  words,  "  I  will  pour  water  upon  him  that  is  thirsty,  and  streams 
upon  the  dry  ground."  But  we  need  not  go  to  the  Orient  to  experience  drought  of  soul. 
We  may  find  reading  "  dry,"  and  preaching  drier,  our  own  minds  driest  of  aU ;  nothing 
growing  within  us,  nor  promising  to  grow.  And  for  the  future  the  prospect  seems 
equjklly  cheerless.  Nothing  is  left  us  but  this  Word  of  God ;  but  all  is  left  us  in  that 
Word.  Thinking  of  snow  will  not  cool  us ;  the  imagination  of  water  will  not  refresh 
us  in  our  thirst;  but  faith  in  God,  the  realization  of  what  he  is  in  this  relation  to  us, 
remains  the  one  resource  which  Scripture  offers  to  us.  2.  3%e  spirituai  posterity. 
Biblical  promises  respect  the  "solidarity"  of  life.  That  which  we  modems  call  "inm- 
vidualism  "  appears  to  be  unknown.  As  the  curse,  so  also  the  blessing,  goes  on  working 
to  the  "  third  and  fourth  generation,"  nay,  to  "  a  thousand  generations,"  under  the  dis- 
pensation of  a  covenant-keeping  God.  Nay,  it  is  conceivra  as  abiding  through  time 
into  eternity — ^"a  seed  established  for  ever,  a  throne  built  up  to  all  generations"  (Ps. 
Ixxzix.  4).  Here  the  abundance  of  Israel's  spiritual  posterity  is  imaged  as  grass  by 
the  waters,  or  as  the  tall  and  graceful  poplars  by  the  artificial  water-courses.  "  A  tree 
planted  by  the  rivers  of  water;  "  "  Thy  years  shall  be  as  the  years  of  a  tree :"  what 
more  beautiful  and  touching  image  ?  The'tree  is  typical  of  life  in  its  itrengOt,  its 
gra^idmeM,  its  fruitfulnen.  These  shall  be  its  characteristics  in  the  Messianic  age. 
The  CSturch  will  finally  embrace  the  world.    ProaelyteB  wUl  come  thronging  to  her 


GH.  XLiT.  1— 28.]    THE  BOOK  OF  THE  PROPHET  ISAIAH.  163 

threshold.  They  will  Join  in  one  confession.  It  will  be  reooided  that  this  and  that 
man  was  bom  anew  in  Zion  (Ps.  Ixxxvii.).  Each  Jew  will  be  as  it  were  the  centre  of 
a  little  synagogue ;  ten  men  will  seize  his  skirta  and  say,  "  We  will  go  with  you :  for 
we  have  heard  that  God  is  with  you"  (Zech.  viii.  23).  The  frequent  confession  will 
be  heard,  "  I  belong  to  Jehovah ; "  or  be  found  taking  upon  his  person  the  stigmata, 
or  sacred  marks,  which  denote  him  as  rowed  to  Jehovah's  service  (cf.  Herod.,  ii.  113). 
We  may  learn :  (1)  The  blessedness  of  pious  parents,  and  their  corresponding  responsi- 
bilities. (2)  The  gift  of  God's  Spirit  is  the  source  of  true  happiness  and  prosperity. 
Piety  alone  can  be  the  root  of  the  Church's  and  the  nation's  weal.  (3)  God  will  never 
permit  true  religion  to  be  extinct.  It  may  appear  to  wither ;  but  so  long  as  he  lives  it 
will  certainly  know  its  recurring  times  of  revival. — J. 

Vers.  6 — 28. — Jehovah  and  the  imagee.  I.  Self-manifestation  of  Jehovah.  He  is 
the  First  and  the  Last,  Alpha  and  Omega.  Existing  before  the  creation,  he  will  endure 
when  it  shall  have  passed  away  (ch.  xlviii.  12).  It  is  a  thought  which  strikes  us  at  once 
by  its  sublimity,  and,  what  is  better,  with  its  truth.  Men  sometimes  speak  of  the  material 
world  as  real,  of  the  world  of  faith  and  imagination  as  dreamy.  Not  so  the  greatest 
prophets  and  poets.  Shakespeare  describes  the  globe  and  all  its  human  splendours  as 
passing  away  like  an  "  insubstantial  pageant  faded."  But  Isaiah  outdoes  Shakespeare, 
making  the  very  heavens  themselves  pass ;  and  perhaps  St.  Paul  goes  a  step  further  when 
he  sees  "  knowledge  itself "  vanishing  away.  Moreover,  Jehovah  is  the  incomparable 
God.  He  can  admit  no  "  rival  near  the  throne ; "  cannot  accommodate  other  di-ities  to 
places  in  a  tolerant  pantheon.  He  is  the  sole  Object  of  worship,  the  only  Being  to  whom 
is  due  the  title  "  God."  So,  too,  he  alone  can  tell  the  future.  Let  the  long  |  ast  bear 
witness.  He  placed  the  "  ancient  people,"  or  the  "  everlasting  people."  The  reference 
seems  to  be  to  the  ever-enduring  covenant  spoken  of  in  Exod.  xxxi.  16,  to  the  priest- 
hood and  the  kingdom  which  are  everlasting  (Exod.  xl.  15 ;  2  Sam.  xiii.  16).  It  sug- 
gests "  the  everlastingness  of  God's  people,'  in  opposition  to  the  proximate  fall  of  thfe 
idolatrous  nations.  Or,  the  reference  may  be  to  the  days  before  the  Flood — to  the  most 
ancient  inhabitants  of  the  world.  In  any  case,  he  has  appointed  beforehand  the  times 
and  the  bounds  of  the  habitations  of  men.  And  history  is  intended  to  teach  men  of 
him,  that  they  may  with  mind  and  heart  glorify  him.  Israel  herself  is  the  great  witness 
on  the  earth  to  God.  He  is  her  "  E(  ick  " — a  great  and  memorable  figure  (Deut.  xxxii.  4, 
30,  31 ;  Ps.  xix.  14 ;  xxxi.  2,  3 ;  xlii.  9).  Eock  of  Ages,  Dwelling-plane  of  all  genera- 
tions :  who  can  wear  such  titles  but  himself?  "  If  there  were  another  Rock  of  Ages, 
Jehovah  would  not  complain ;  but  as  his  Being  is  unique,  it  pains  him  that  men  will 
not  have  him  for  a  God." 

IL  Idolatbt  criticized.  The  image-makers  are  all  of  them  "  chaos  " — an  expres- 
sion of  extreme  contempt.  There  is  no  use,  no  profit,  in  their  trade.  To  that  question 
of  use  all  institutions,  yea,  all  men,  must  ultimately  come.  Now,  what  can  be  said  on 
behalf  of  idolatry  ?  Produce  the  witnesses.  Blind  and  ignorant,  what  have  they  to  say  ? 
To  produce  them  is  to  abash  and  confound  them.  And  so  it  is  with  many  an  idol  and 
institution  of  our  time.  It  tries  to  keep  off  criticism  under  the  plea  of  sacredness ;  when 
the  age  insists  on  criticism,  and  will  have  an  answer,  its  silence  or  its  confused  apologies 
are  its  condemnation.  What  can  be  answered  to  the  following  questions?  How  can 
you  turn  an  image  into  a  living  spiritual  being  t  Quit  nisidemens — who  but  one  out  of 
his  senses  can  confound  the  one  with  the  other?  The  worship  of  these  idols  was  sacra- 
mental, and  was  kept  up  by  societies  and  guilds.  The  members  were  in  association  with 
the  idol  and  with  one  another;  like  Ephraim  (Hna.  iv.  17),  they  were  in  fellowship 
with  demons  (cf.  1  Cor.  x.  20).  If  the  idol  be  nothing  in  the  world,  what  becomes  of 
those  "joined  to  him"?  Let  that  qnestion  be  answered.  And  then,  again,  how  can 
these  human  craftsmen  make  their  Maker?  Let  them  all  combine  in  their  toil:  the 
ludicrousness  of  their  endeavours  is  the  more  manifest.  There  is  the  smith  with  his 
sharp  axe  and  his  hammers,  sweating  at  the  fire  till  he  is  faint;  the  carpenter  with  his 
line  and  sharp  chisel,  plane  and  compasses.  The  semblance  of  a  human  figure  appears. 
The  god  is  made;  and  sacrifioe  and  prayer  follow.  "Save  me!"  the  benighted  wor- 
shipper cries  to  his  manu&cture.  The  scene  is  enough  to  carry  conviction  to  the 
spectator's  mind,  and  to  convince  him  that  these  votaries  can  have  no  perception,  so 
"  daubed  "  are  their  eyes  and  their  hearts  by  the  habits  of  sense.   The  power  of  r^Udicn 


164  THE  BOOK  OF  THE  PROPHET  ISAIAH,    [oh.  xuv.  1— 28 

seeiBB  gone — the  power  to  holcl  up  the  act  before  the  mind  and  judge  it.  A  thoughtlega 
religion,  an  uninquiring  compliance  with  tradition  and  custom,  is  often  enjoined  upon 
us ;  but  only  thoughtful  religion  will  endure.  God  is  Mind ;  and  if  we  fail  to  offer  him 
the  best  of  our  mind,  we  sink  down  into  some  such  miserable  delusion,  such  ashy  refuse 
of  religion,  as  is  here  held  up  to^scorn  and  ridicule. 

III.  Admonition  to  Israel.  Let  the  child,  the  servant  of  Jehovah,  remember  these 
things,  and  lay  to  heart  the  folly  of  idolatry,  and  the  glorious  constancy  of  the  God 
who  has  claimed  them  for  his  own.  Do  they  think  they  are  forgotten  of  God?  Impos- 
sible! "0  Israel,  thou  canst  not  be  forgotten  of  mel  "  He  is  beforehand  with  her. 
Before  she  confesses,  he  proclaims  her  sins  forgiven ;  before  she  returns  to  her  allegiance, 
lie  cries,  "  I  have  blotted  out  as  a  mist  thy  rebellions ; "  before  she  prays  for  deliverance, 
he  proclaims,  "  I  have  released  thee ;  then  return  ! "  Here  is  the  heart  of  the  gospel, 
the  heart  of  the  infinite  love.  We,  with  too  narrow  heart,  too  often  make  human  good 
the  antecedent  of  Divine  grace.  "  Repent,"  we  say, "  and  God  will  forgive;  be  obedient  and 
God  will  reward."  But  on  the  prophet's  representation,  Jehovah  makes  the  first  advances. 
He  calls  for  conversion  on  the  ground  that  he  has  released  Israel,  And  so  ever.  The 
parable  of  the  prodigal  reflects  the  same  ideas.  The  "  goodness  of  God  leadeth  thee  to 
repentance."  It  is  this  thought  which  makes  hardness  of  heart — Chousing  up  wrath 
against  the  day  of  wrath — appear  so  odious  in  the  sinner's  own  eyes.  We  need  to  repre- 
sent the  gospel  so  that  the  sinner  shall  throw  all  the  blame  of  his  condition  on  self,  not 
on  God.  Let  us  ever  speak  of  him  as  One  who  "  keeps  mercy  for  thousands,"  and  whose 
stores  of  compassion  cannot  be  exhatuted. 

"  Oh  for  this  love  let  looki  and  hUIi 
Their  lasting  silence  break  1 " 

Let  heaven  and  earth  join  in  a  chorus  of  sympathy,  with  shoutings  irom  the  depth  of 
the  earth,  and  ringings  from  the  mountain-heights  and  from  the  forests.  Let  his  praise 
bfe  even  "  sounded  down  to  hell "  (cf.  Ps.  vi.  5 ;  Ixxxviii.  12) ;  for  he  is  Redeemer,  has 
" beautified  himself"  in  Israel  (cf.  ch.  xlix.  3 ;  Ix.  21 ;  Ixi.  3). 

IV.  Jehovah  and  his  pueposeb.  He  is  the  God,  the  Guardian  Spirit,  the  Guide, 
the  Avenging  Judge,  for  Israel.  He  has  moulded  Israel  in  the  womb  of  time,  who  has 
made  the  universe  of  things.  He  only  is  wise,  "  bringing  to  nought  the  signs  of  the 
praters,  and  making  the  diviners  mad,"  turning  the  wise  backward,  and  proving  their 
knowledge  folly.  On  the  other  hand,  he  speaks  by  the  prophet.  He  causes  his  servant's 
word  to  stand,  and  fulfils  the  counsel  of  his  messengers.  And  his  word  and  counsel  is 
that  Jerusalem  shall  be  peopled,  and  the  waste  places  of  Judah  be  built  upon ;  the  flood 
of  Euphrates  be  dried  up.  And  already  the  word  is  passing  into  deed.  The  instrument 
of  Jehovah's  purposes  has  been  selected ;  no  prince  of  the  Davidic  house,  but  Cyrus 
shall  be  his  shepherd  and  accomplish  all  his  pleasure.  And  we  read  in  Josephus  that 
Cyrus  read  the  prophecy  of  Isaiah,  and  was  seized  by  an  impulse  to  fulfil  it  ('  Ant.,'  xL 
1. 2),  Gh>d  has  jurisdiction  over  heathen  monarchs ;  their  plans  are  directed  by  him  and 
made  subservient  to  his  will.  What  the  Greeks  thought  of  as  Arumke,  Necessity,  the 
Hebrew  thinks  of  as  the  will  of  the  Eternal. — J. 

Ver.  20. — True  and  false  hread.  "He  feedeth  on  ashes."  Man  does  not  nnder- 
etand  himself.  Feed  he  must:  the  question  is,  on  what?  There  are  cravings  of 
heart  which  cannot  be  repressed.  Men  are  hungry  for  fame,  applause,  wealth,  honour. 
Full  many  a  time  they  taste  this  fruit ;  but  each  apple  has  ashes  at  the  heart  of  it. 
What  a  picture  of  contrast  is  given  us  by  Christ!  He  tells  us  of  the  true  bread — the 
living  bread,  the  bread  which  cometh  down  from  heaven. 

I.  Thk  table  of  the  men  of  this  wobld.  Ashes  I  Is  that  all  ?  In  other  words, 
dustl  Yes;  everything  that  does  not  feed  the  immortal  nature  within  us  is  dust. 
Wealth  is  dust,  and  is  scattered  like  dust.  Beauty,  however  fascinating,  turnSito  dust. 
And  so  far  as  the  pursuits  of  man  are  concerned,  how  unsatisfying  these  are  I  The  post 
of  honour  is  no  sooner  secured  than  others  are  eager  to  fling  the  victor  down.  The 
funons  "  garter  "  is  laid  on  the  coffin  and  the  pall.  We  are  told  the  reason  of  this  sad 
mistake.    "  A  deceived  Aeort  hath  turned  him  aside." 

II.  Thb  tablb  or  the  ohildbkt  or  God.  They  feed  on  the  Bread  of  God ;  and 
this  Bread  is  the  Son  of  God,  who  said,  "I  am  the  Bread  of  life."    1.  OhriU  mutt  U 


OH.  luv.  1— 28.]    THE  BOOK  OF  THE  PROPHET  ISAIAH.  16' 

taken  and  eaten.  Kot  in  the  hands.  That  is  impossible.  We  are  to  feed  on  the  living 
Christ.  His  mind  is  to  be  our  mind.  The  soul  can  only  feed  on  kindred  elements.  The 
spiritual  nature  cannot  be  satisflel  through  the  senses.  Christ  must  be  " in  us,"  the 
Hope  of  glory.  2.  Christ  was  the  broken  bread  for  us.  It  is  t'le  Christ  of  Gethsemane 
and  Calvary  on  which  we  are  to  feed.  "  My  body  was  broken  for  you."  So  we  take  into 
our  spiritual  being,  not  only  Christ  the  Example,  Christ  the  Teacher,  but  Christ  the 
Saviour.  And  as  we  eat  this  bread  we  live  by  him,  and  become  like  him.  He  die(i 
for  us,  that  we  who  live  should  not  henceforth  live  unto  ourselves,  but  unto  him  who 
jdied  for  us  and  rose  again ;  for  Christ  came,  not  merely  to  save  by  teaching,  but  to  teach 
by  saving  1 — W.  M.  S. 

Vert.  3 — 5. — I%e  indi^ensaible  blessing.  We  may  well  apeak  of  water  in  the 
natural  realm  and  of  its  antitype  in  the  spiritual  as — 

L  The  indispensable  blessing.  There  may  be  abundance  ot  earth,  and  it  may  be 
of  the  most  valuable  quality ;  there  may  be  the  utmost  diligence  in  the  field,  and  the 
latest  agricultural  science ;  but  if  the  rain  be  withheld,  if  no  water  can  be  obtained  to 
nourish  the  sown  seed,  there  can  be  no  harvest, — the  indispensable  blessing  is  not 
bestowed.  So  is  it  in  the  sphere  which  is  more  sacred  and  more  serious.  You  may 
have  the  soil  of  spiritual  human  nature,  you  may  have  the  seed  of  Divine  truth,  you 
may  have  the  diligent  and  watchful  culture  of  the  Christian  pastor ;  but  if  the  influences 
of  the  Holy  Spirit  do  not  descend,  there  will  be  no  ingathering  for  the  Husbandman. 
Qod  must  pour  down  his  rich  blessing,  or  all  our  labours  in  the  Master's  vineyard  will 
be  barren  of  result;  there  will  be  nothing  for  Heaven  to  see  but  thirsty  land,  dry 
ground,  fruitless  farming. 

IL  The  field  whebe  we  most  debibe  that  these  bains  should  fall.  "  I  will 
pour  my  Spirit  upon  thy  seed,  and  my  blessing  upon  thine  ofl'spring."  We  desire  that 
God  should  be  blessing  the  ministry  we  render  to  the  aged ;  we  are  more  solicitous 
that  words  of  Divine  wisdom  should  penetrate  the  minds  and  affect  the  lives  of  men  of 
middle  life,  on  whom  such  duties  devolve,  with  whom  so  many  issues  rest ;  but  we  are 
most  concerned  that  the  truth  of  Christ  should  enter  the  understanding,  cleanse  the 
conscience,  possess  the  soul,  of  tlie  young.  1.  They  are,  in  a  peculiar  degree,  the  objects 
of  our  love ;  they  may  be  "  our  seed,  our  offspring."  But  i  f  not,  we  are  strongly 
attached  to  them,  and  therefore  interested  in  their  spiritual  welfare.  2.  They  stand  at 
a  point  where  religious  decision  will  make  the  very  greatest  difference.  If  now  they 
seek  Cktd  and  surrender  themselves  to  his  service,  they  will  have  a  large  and  noble 
contribution  to  make  to  the  cause  of  righteousness,  to  the  service  of  mankmd.  3. 
Unaffected  and  nnwon  in  youth,  the  obstacles  in  the  way  of  decision  and  devotion  are 
continually  increasing. 

III.  The  blessed  besult  of  the  Divine  bestowal.  There  will  be  a  glorious 
spiritual  upspringing.  "  They  shall  spring  up,"  etc.  There  shall  be  the  signs  of  abound- 
ing life.  The  life  that  will  be  seen  when  the  floods  of  heavenly  influence  are  poured 
forth  will  be  manifest  in :  1.  The  stem  of  sacred  eouviction.  God's  truth  revealed  by 
Jesus  Christ  will  be  the  staple  of  human  thought.  2.  The  flower  of  fitting  utterance. 
(Ver.  6.)  (1)  The  Name  of  Christ  will  be  honoured  by  a  Christian  profession ;  and  (2) 
the  people  of  God  will  be  honoured  by  close  association  with  them.  3.  The  fruit  of 
holy  usefulness. — 0. 

Vers.  9 — 18. — The  irraUonal  and  the  rdigious.  This  passage  is  interesting,  as 
containing  the  most  pungent  and  effective  sarcasm  in  holy  writ.  There  are  indeed  the 
finest  conceivable  materials  for  the  sarcastic  in  the  practice  of  idolatry;  i.e.  in  all  those 
cases  in  which  idolatry  has  sunk  into  its  lowest  stage.  Where  a  statue  is  understood 
to  be  nothing  more  than  the  memorial  or  visible  representation  of  the  Divine,  the 
language  of  the  Hebrew  prophet  would  not  apply ;  but  where  it  is  regarded,  as  it  has 
been  and  still  is  regarded  by  millions  of  mankind,  as  not  only  suggestive  of  but  identical 
ivith  the  Deity,  then  these  strong  and  scorching  words  are  moat  appropriate,  most 
crushing.     They  may  suggest  to  us  thoughts  respecting — 

I.  Belision  tbavestied  bt  xbbationalisk.  Some  oaricaturea  are  olevw  and 
amusing  enough,  but  a  caricature  of  the  sacred  and  the  religioua  is  both  sinful  and 
hurtfuL    Idolatry  has  gone  far  to  dishonour  and  to  discredit  religion.     The  fact  thai 


166  THE  BOOK  OF  THE  PROPHET  ISAIAH,    [ch.  xliv.  1— 2& 

men  lukye  committed  such  gross  absurdities  in  connection  with  religion  as  these  which 
Isaiah  exposes  and  ridicules,  and  the  fact  tijat  they  have  thus  associated  the  utmost 
credulity  with  religious  faith  for  hundreds  of  years  under  many  skies, — this  has  done 
much  to  prejudice  the  minds  of  men  against  the  highest  and  purest  forms  of  piety.  £(o 
far  is  ignorance  from  being  the  "  mother  of  devotion,"  that  it  is  the  prolific  parent  of 
infidelity.  The  irrational  is  the  best  friend  of  the  sceptical  and  the  atheistic.  It  is  well 
that  we  understand  and  app'eciate  this  now.  For  thou;;h  the  grosser  forms  of  incre- 
dulity have  disappeared,  the  superstitious  is  with  us  still;  and  superstition,  though  it 
be  baptized  with  a  Christian  name  and  wear  Christian  garments,  will  be  recognized  as 
the  irrational  thing  it  is;  it  will  be  tiansfixed  by  the  modem  reformer,  and  be  shown  in 
its  true  colours,  and  it  will  weigh  down  the  truth  which  it  was  supposed  to  be  sustaining. 
II.  Beliqion  bepbgsekted  bt  seasonable  bebvice.  As  nothing  can  be  more 
utterly  iiiational  than  the  cimduct  here  descriVied  and  satirizedj  so,  on  the  other  hand, 
nothing  can  be  more  reasonable,  more  ]ierfectly  conformed  to  the  fitness  of  things,  than 
intelligent,  spiritual  devotion.  What  can  be  more  right  and  reasonable  than  that  the 
creature  should  worship  the  Creator;  than  that  the  finite  mind  of  man  should  seek  to 
be  instructed  in  the  wisdom  of  6ed;  than  that  the  recipient  of  innumerable  and 
inestimable  mercies  should  offer  deepest  gratitude  and  render  heartiest  thanksgiving  to 
the  Author  of  all  his  mercies ;  than  that  they  who  have  most  serious  duties  to  dis- 
charge, difficulties  to  surmount,  burdens  to  bear,  obligations  to  meet,  should  seek  the 
guidance  and  support  of  the  Lord  of  life,  the  Source  of  strength  and  righteousness; 
than  that  they  who  are  daily  travelling  to  the  grave,  and  have  no  liaht  of  experience 
to  tell  them  what  is  beyond  it,  should  make  their  appeal  to  One  who  has  ^ven  us  such 
strong  reasons  to  accept  him  as  the  Resurrection  and  the  Life  ? — 0. 

Yer.  20. — JTie  vanity  of  irreligion.  In  a  few  vigorous  touches  the  prophet  sketches 
the  utter  vanity  and  the  condemnation  of  idolatry.  The  idolatrous  man :  1.  Is  relying 
on  that  which  will  miserably  disappoint  him;  what  he  takes  for  food  turns  out  to  be 
nothing  better  than  "ashes."  2.  Is  misled  into  the  most  grievous  error;  he  has  been 
"turned  aside"  from  the  highway  of  truth.  3.  Is  continually  enacting  a  falsehood  ; 
there  is  "  a  lie  in  his  right  hand."  Idolatry  is  the  supreme  mistake  as  well  as  the 
most  heinous  sin.  But  what  is  palpably  and  particularlj  true  of  this  great  iniquity  is 
essentially  true  of  all  sin.    A  sinful  life  is — 

I.  A  LIFE  OF  SADDEST  iNBUFFioiENOT.  "  He  feedeth  on  ashes."  Like  the  "apples  of 
Sodom,"  like  the  "  little  book  "  of  the  prophet's  vision  (Rev.  x.),  a  guilty  action  (or 
a  sinful  life)  is  very  pleasant  on  the  outside  or  at  the  beginning ;  but  within,  afterwards, 
it  is  bitter  and  disappointing  in  the  last  degree.  Crime  begins  in  successful  violence  or 
enriching  fraud ;  it  ends  in  the  prison  or  the  garret.  Vice  begins  in  unholy  pleasure, 
in  unprincipled  companionship;  it  ends  in  distracting  pain,  in  mortal  sickness,  in  cruel 
loneliness.  Ungodliness  begins  in  the  delights  of  eager  but  unhallowed  ambition,  of 
happy  but  unsanctified  affection;  it  ends  in  weariness,  in  heart-ache,  in  the  discovery 
that  earthly  distinctions  and  human  love  cannot  fill  the  heart  that  God  made  for 
himself,  cannot  gladden  and  ennoble  the  life  that  he  fashioned  for  his  service.  A  life 
spent  without  God,  devoted  to  selfish  gratification,  is  a  life  of  deep  disappointment ;  the 
mistaken  sinner  finds  out  that  the  delectable  food  which  he  plucked  with  such  keen 
anticipation  is  only  ashes  between  his  teeth. 

II.  A  LIFE  OF  SERIOUS  DEFLECTION.  "  A  deceived  heart  hath  turned  them  aside." 
The  straight  road  is  the  path  of  piety,  of  purity,  of  truthfulness,  of  sobriety,  o( 
justice,  of  kindness.  When  men  "see  light  in  God's  light,"  they  recognize  this  path 
as  the  one  right  road  in  which  a  man  should  walk,  any  deviation  from  which  is  error — 
a  spiritual  wandering.  But  when  the  heart  is  deceived,  when  the  soul  is  corrupted  by 
"  the  deceitfulness  of  sin,"  when  the  inward  "  eye  is  evil "  and  consequently  the  whole 
body  is  full  of  darkness,  then  it  seems  to  the  deluded  spirit  that  the  wrong  way  is  Uie 
right  one,  that  the  green,  downward  slopes  of  folly  and  sin  are  the  highway  of  wisdom. 
Ajad  the  worst  of  it  is  that  the  path  of  sin  does  not  run  near  to  and  parallel  with  the 
way  of  life ;  it  goes  off  from  it  at  an  angle  which  ia  continually  increasing,  so  that  the 
further  a  man  goes  along  this  evil  road  the  greater  distance  he  is  away  from  that  in 
which  lie  skould  be  walking.  Every  step  tekes  the  mistaken  traveller  further  from 
hie  coune.    And  when  men  have  wholly  lost  nght  of  the  beauties  of  holineis,  of  th« 


OH.  xuy.  1— 28.]    THE  BOOK  OP  THE   PBOPHET  ISAIAH.  161 


excellency  of  holy  service,  of  the  claims  of  Divine  benefaction ;  when  they  are  so  fkr  oil 
the  true  track  that  the  voices  of  heavenly  wislom  no  longer  reach  their  ear; — they  are 
helpless,  they  are  lost.    The  deceived  and  deluded  pilgrim  "  cannot  deliver  his  souL" 

ni,  A  LIFE  OP  PBACTioAL  FALSITY.  " Is  there  not  a  lie  in  my  right  band?"  Men 
are  often  lining  falsehoods  when  they  are  not  putting  them  into  words;  the  lie  is  not  on 
their  lips  but  in  their  right  hand.  The  man  who  is  withholding  his  heart  from  Qod 
and  his  life  from  his  service  is  saying,  by  his  chosen  course,  by  his  daily  doings,  by  his 
deliberate  action,  that  it  is  better  to  live  a  selfish  than  a  devoted  life ;  that  the  clidms 
of  Christ  may  be  neglected;  that  the  temporal  is  of  more  consequence  than  the  eternal, 
the  material  than  the  spiritual ;  that  happiness  is  more  worth  seeking  than  blessedness, 
the  honour  that  Cometh  from- man  than  the  approval  of  the  heavenly  Father.  These 
are  fatal  falsehoods,  which  lure  men  to  sin  and  lead  them  down  to  death.  Happy  is 
that  wandering  soul  who  sees  a  form  that  <x>mes  to  rescue,  who  hears  a  voice  that 
summons  to  redeem — ^that  One  who  says,  "Man  shall  not  live  by  bread  alone;"  "He 
that  Cometh  to  me  shall  never  hunger;"  that  voice  which  says,  "  Return  unto  me,  and 
I  will  return  unto  you ; "  "In  the  way  of  righteousness  is  life,  and  in  the  pathway 
thereof  there  is  no  death  "  (Prov.  xii.  28). — 0. 

Vers.  23 — ^28. — Jog  in  GocPs  redeeming  power.    We  have  here^ 

I.  The  BEAOH  OF  ALMIOHTT  POWER.    It  exteuis  i  1.  OveT  oM  visihle  nature.  (Yer.  24.) 

He  makes  "all  things."    The  heavens  and  the  earth  are  the  work  of  his  hand.    2. 

Over  individual  men.    He  can  (1)  direct  the  indifferent,  so  that  Cyrus  performs  his 

pleasure  (ver.  28),  although  that  king  was  living  in  spiritual  ignorance  (ch.  xlv.  6) ; 

(2)  confound  the  rebellious,  so  that  the  impostor  is  discredited  and  ashamed  (ver.  25) ; 

(3)  establish  the  faithful,  so  that  his  servant,  however  he  may  have  been  disregarded, 
is  honoured  in  the  eyes  of  men  (ver.  26).  3.  Over  men  in  their  collective  capacity. 
Jehovah  had  fashioned  Israel,  making  her  all  she  had  become,  giving  her  strength  to 
do  all  she  had  accomplished;  it  was  he  that  "formed"  her  from  the  beginning,  that 
shaped  her  life  (ver.  24).  And  he  would  yet  restore  the  cities  of  Judah ;  they  should 
he  populous  and  powerful  again  (ver.  26).  4.  Over  the  most  formidable  difficultie$. 
Things  that  seem  impossible  of  achievement  are  found,  under  his  power,  to  be  effected. 
At  the  touch  of  his  hand  the  waters  of  the  great  deep  disappear;  at  the  sound  of  his 
voice  the  river-beds  are  dry  (ver.  27).  "  With  God  all  things  are  possible."  Mountains 
of  difficulty  are  removed,  and  seas  of  impediment  are  swept  away.  Nothing  ia  "too 
hard  for  the  Lord." 

IL  Its  beneficent  besults.  It  is  a  question  of  the  greatest  importance — What  are 
the  results  of  the  power  which  ia  exercised  by  the  strong  ?  The  world  has  had  some 
terrible  illustrations  of  the  miseries  of  malevolent  force.  Power  seeking  selfish 
gratification  at  the  expense  of  righteousness  and  of  human  happiness  is  the  most 
deplorable  as  it  is  the  most  damnable  thing  under  the  heavens.  Un  the  other  hand, 
power  put  forth  to  elevate  and  bless  is  the  most  admirable  and  beneficent  thing.  God 
works  toward  two  ends  (1)  the  exaltation  of  his  own  holy  Name ;  and  (2)  the  redemp- 
tion and  restoration  of  mankind  (ver.  23).  The  two  become  one;  for  it  is  by  bringing 
men  back  to  himself  and  to  his  service  that  he  redeems  them  from  all  that  is  ruinous, 
and  that  he  raises  them  to  all  that  is  elevating  and  ennobling.  Man  finds  his  worst 
calamity  in  distance  from  his  heavenly  Father;  he  finds  his  highest  good,  his  fullest 
blessedness,  in  the  honour  he  pays,  in  the  love  he  cherishes,  in  the  ohedience  he  renders, 
in  the  resemblance  he  reaches,  to  his  Divine  Saviour,  his  living  Lord  and  Friend. 

III.  Unspeakable  jot  thbbein.  "  Sing,  0  ye  heavens,"  ete.  (ver.  23).  Joy  at  iti 
very  fullest  is  uncontainable,  inexpressible.  He  wrote  well  who  said,  "  I  were  little 
happy  could  I  sag  how  much."  There  are  times  when  we  feel  that  we  want  every  one 
aad  everything  to  be  vocal  with  the  gladness  of  our  own  soul.  If  the  children  did  not 
shout,  the  very  stones  would  have  to  speak  the  joy  of  that  glad  hour  (Luke  xix.  40). 
When  the  great  and  gracious  purposes  of  God  are  accomplished  in  the  redemption  of 
one  human  soul  from  sin  and  its  restoration  to  the  love  and  the  likeness  of  God,  there 
is  occasion  for  more  joy  than  human  songs  can  celebrate;  how  much  more  so  when  a 
nation  is  redeemed  1  and  how  much  more  yet  will  there  be  when  the  whole  race  is 
transformed,  and  when  the  kingdom!  of  this  world  shall  have  become  the  kingdoms  «f 
our  Ood  and  of  hi*  OhiiatI— a 


X68  THE   BOOK  OF  THE  PROPHET   ISAIAH,    [oh.  xliv.  1—28 

Ver«,  2 — 6. — Revival  promised  in  the  power  of  the  Spirit.  The  history  of  the  Churck 
reminds  us  of  the  tides  that  rise  and  fall  upon  our  shores — ehb  and  flow,  ebb  and  flow. 
SometimeB  the  waters  rise  with  an  unusual  strength,  and  flood  all  the  land  around,  but 
soon  they  fall  back  into  the  old  limits  and  quiet  movements.  No  doubt  the  kingdom 
of  Christ  is  steadily  advancing,  widening  its  reach,  enlarging  its  influence.  Bat  as  we 
can  only  see  a  little,  one  little  bay  of  the  great  shore-line,  as  it  were,  we  can  only  form 
our  estimate  of  the  tide  in  this  our  "  arm  of  the  sea ;"  we  cannot  measure  the  encroach- 
ments of  the  great  tide  of  God.  We  may  live  at  a  time  when  the  high  tide  of  revival 
has  spent  its  strength,  and  is  receding  lower  and  lower.  So  far  as  we  can  observe,  it  is 
not  the  living  waters  encroaching  upon  dreary  sand,  but  dreary  sand  encroachins;  upon 
living  waters.  But  let  us  wait  awhile ;  the  tide  of  God  may  turn  again,  and  flow  up 
higher  than  ever.  There  is  a  promise  of  blessing  in  our  text  which  has  been  fulfilled 
and  will  be  fulfiUid  over  and  over  again. 

I.  OUB   DEPENDENCE,  FOR   BEVIVINGS,  ON  THE   POWER  OP  THE  SpIBIT.      The  CVlls  that 

gather  about  the  Church  of  Christ  are  too  subtle,  and  too  mighty,  to  be  mastered  by 
anything  less  than  the  strength  of  God.  The  tendencies  to  decline  and  spiritual  slum- 
bering are  too  constantly  working  fur  anything  less  than  Divine  energy  to  counteract. 
The  ends  for  which  Christians  associate  in  fellowship  are  too  pure,  too  high,  to  be 
reached  in  any  other  way  than  by  the  inspiration  of  the  Holy  Ghost.  The  Church  is  the 
Church  of  Christ ;  but  what  a  desolate  and  helpless  thing  it  would  be  if  it  were  opiy 
the  Church  of  a  dead  Christ,  or  the  Church  even  of  an  absent  Christ !  We  must  have 
the  assurance  that  he  is  still  with  us,  not  indeed  in  the  body,  but  in  the  grace  and 
power  of  his  Spirit— a  form  of  his  presence  so  much  better  suited  for  permanent  relations 
that  he  could  say,  "  It  is  expedient  for  you  that  I  go  away :  for  if  I  go  not  away,  the 
Comforter  will  not  come  unto  you ;  but  if  I  depart,  I  will  send  him  unto  you."  No 
helpless,  trembling  infant  trying  to  walk  needed  mother's  steadying  as  we  need  the  all- 
supixirting  Spirit.  No  young  lad  ever  took  tools  into  his  inexperienced  hands,  and  needed 
the  directions  of  the  master,  as  we  need  the  teachings  of  the  Spirit.  No  man  in  the  fulness 
of  manhood  ever  entered  on  an  untried  office,  and  looked  for  some  one  to  guide,  as  it 
becomes  us  to  look  for  the  help  of  the  Spirit.  And  yet  this  dependence  it  is  most  easy 
for  us  to  losu  out  of  heart  and  out  of  life.  The  Church  without  the  Spirit  is  figured  in 
our  text  as  an  un watered  Eastern  land.  No  dews  have  formed  on  the  grass  or  the  leaves ; 
no  rain-clouds  have  shaded  the  blazing  sun,  and  poured  down  revivings ;  the  rivers  have 
sunk  lower  and  luwer,  till  now  their  beds  are  exposed  to  view,  and  the  pebbles  are 
bleached  in  the  sunshine.  The  leaves  are  dropping  off  the  trees,  dried  up  and  scorched; 
the  grass  is  killed ;  the  ground  is  cracking  and  gaping  ;  there  is  no  scent  in  the  flower.i, 
no  song  in  the  birds ;  the  cattle  lie  panting  by  the  walls  and  hedgerows,  or  stand  thirst- 
ing by  the  river-bank.  It  is  a  "  dry  and  thirsty  land,  where  no  water  is."  That  is  the 
emblem  of  the  individual  and  the  Church  unwatered  of  the  Spirit. 

II.  The  GOOD  THINGS  THAT  FOLLOW  ON  Divine  BEViviNaa.  (Vers.  4, 5.)  1.  TVieylory 
of  a  sustained  godly  life.  Which  depends  on  the  constant  renewal  of  heart  motives, 
impulses,  and  resolves.  2.  The  glory  of  a  holier  and  more  earnest  ministry.  In  this 
direction  the  firstfruits  of  a  spiritual  revival  are  usually  gathered.  The  fruits  of  Divine 
outpourings  were  seen  in  Luther,  and  Wbitefield,  and  Wesley,  and  Venn,  and  Simeon, 
and  Arnold;  and  such  a  reviving  would  give  us  such  men  of  "power  with  God 
and  men 'to  prevail,"  once  again.  3.  The  glory  (fthe  widening  and  extending  cf  the 
Redeemer's  kingdom.  (Ver,  5.)  Who  does  not  long  for  the  promised  time  when  every 
scoffer  shall  be  stricken  dumb;  the  doubts  and  questionings  of  every  faint-hearted 
believer  shall  be  silenced,  because,  in  crowds,  "  as  doves  to  their  windows,"  as  locusts  over 
the  plain,  men  shall  come  to  Christ's  people  and  say,  "  We  will  go  with  you,  for  verily 
the  Lord  is  with  you"? 

III.  Tee  gbaoious  pbomises  we  mat  plead  in  pbating  fob  a  bevital.  There 
is  something  about  God's  promises  that  they  almost  overwhelm  our  power  of  faith  by 
their  largeness.  He  promises  "  floods,"  as  though  he  would  not  have  us  think  of  limits. 
I .  The  Spirit  is  the  Lord's  light.  Then  we  mtist  be  willing  to  let  him  in,  with  his 
Divine  illuminations,  dispelling  all  the  darkness,  and  making  us  light  in  the  Lord.  2. 
The  Spirit  is  the  Lord's  life.  We  must  let  him  in  with  hia  Divine  quickening,  maktaig 
every  good  seed  in  our  souls  thrire  unto  bUNWomiag  fruitage.  S.  'The  Spirit  b  the 
'.urd's  power.    Ho  can  make  "a  little  one  ohaae  a  thousand,  and  twr  put  ten  thxms^ 


OH.  XUT.  1— 28.]    THE  BOOK  OF  THE  PROPHET  ISAIAH.  169 

to  flight."  i.  The  Spirit  is  the  Lord's  lore.  And  we  must  be  willing  to  open  our  hearts, 
and  let  that  love  come  in  with  its  Divine  cleansings  and  burnings,  burning  up  sin  and  self, 
kindling  a  new  glow  of  fervour,  and  making  us  revived  souls  and  revived  Churches. — B.  T, 

Ver.  6. — Oo(Pt  kingdom  tntered  one  hy  one.  Reference  is  prubably  intended  to  the 
coming  of  Gentiles,  as  proselytes,  into  the  Israelite  commimion ;  and  the  point  suggested 
is  that  they  will  come  in  "  one  by  one,"  because  the  acceptance  of  the  Jewish  faith 
must  be  a  matter  of  individual  and  personal  decision.  Qc>d  asks  for  an  intelligent 
worship.  The  true  worship  is  the  voluntary  surrender  of  the  will  and  life  to  God,  and 
that  each  man  must  do  for  himself.  We  worship  together ;  but  there  is  no  virtue  in  the 
numbers  beyond  the  aggregate  of  the  virtue  in  each  individual.  If  we  hold  Tast  the 
truth  of  a  saving  conversion,  a  Divine  regeneration,  we  must  clearly  see  that  men  cannot 
flow  by  masses  into  the  kingdom  of  God ;  they  must  come  in  one  by  one.  The  Gjeeks 
may  be  inquiring  for  Jesus;  but  each  Greek  will  have  to  come,  for  himself,  into  vital 
and  saving  relations  with  him. 

I.  There  is  a  bblioion  of  association — ^rr  is  not  bavinq  belioion.  We  are 
Christians  as  citizens  of  a  Christian  country ;  as  worshipping  with  Christian  people ; 
and  as  members  of  Christian  families.  But  we  are  not  saved  men  and  women  by  virtue 
of  that  connection.  The  association  of  a  diseased  man  with  any  number  of  men  in 
health  does  not  make  him  a  healthy  man.  The  association  of  a  criminal  with  any 
number  of  honest  men  does  not  make  him  an  honest  man.  The  association  of  an 
unpardoned  sinner  with  any  number  of  forgiven  and  regenerate  people  does  not  make 
him  an  accepted  man.  And  yet,  in  various  ways,  we  are  yielding  to  this  self-deception, 
and  satisfying  oursdves  with  relations  that  are  merely  external,  that  are  not  vital.  No 
greater  work  is  demanded  in  this  our  age  than  that  of  driving  men  out  of  this  over- 
crowded "refuge  of  lies."  Not  to  masses,  but  "to  you,"  and  "  to  you,"  is  "  the  word  of 
this  salvation  sent." 

II.  The  belioion  of  assooiation  must  be  made  personal.  It  must  become  a 
direct  dealing  between  each  soul  and  God.  Each  one  must  be  humble  and  penitent ; 
each  one  must  seek  for  the  way  of  life;  each  one  must  believe  and  be  forgiven;  each 
one  must  make  full  consecration,  presenting  himself  to  God  a  living  sacrifice;  each  one 
must  take  up  the  precise  work  Qoi  may  entrust  to  his  care.  To  stamp  our  absolute 
individuality  in  our  soul-relations  with  God,  he  has  ordered  it  that  each  of  us  shall  come 
into  the  world  "one  by  one,"  and  each  of  us  shall  go  out  of  the  world  "one  by  one." 
The  gift  of  eternal  life  is  made  to  us  "  one  by  one,"  and  it  must  be  accepted  by  us  "  one 
by  one."— R.  T. 

Ver.  8. — GocPs  witness  to  his  own  rights.  "  There  is  no  God ;  I  know  not  any."  A 
most  striking  exclamation.  God  becomes  a  witness  to  his  own  claims,  and  the  last,  the 
supreme,  witness.  The  thought  here  so  grandly  and  sublimely  expressed  is  one  which 
occurs  also  in  the  sacred  book  of  the  Buddhists.  In  the  address  of  Gotama  "  Bh&gavat," 
are  the  following  sentences :  "  Even  I  was  even  at  first,  not  any  other  thing,  that  which 
exists,  unperoeived,  supreme ;  afterwards  I  am  that  which  is,  and  he  who  must  remain 
am  I."  The  exclamation  sets  us  upon  thinking  what  witnesses  we  have  to  the  Divine 
rights.  When  all  are  carefully  reviewed,  it  must  be  felt  that,  as  all  beings  and  all 
creation  are  really  dependent  on  one  great  Being,  the  supreme  witness  must  be  that 
Being's  witness  to  himself.  Our  sphere  is  strictly  limited  to  the  human  and  the  earthly, 
and,  so  far  as  our  experience  goes,  there  may  be  some  other  God  away  in  other  spheres 
which  we  cannot  reach.  No  man  can  prove  that  there  is  no  other  God  beside  Jehovah. 
But  Jehovah  fills  all  spheres :  he,  and  he  alone,  can  tell  us  whether,  in  any  sphere, 
there  is  any  rival  deity.  In  a  truly  sublime  way,  the  prophet  presents  him  as  looking 
—With  an  all-searching  eye — into  every  corner  of  unbounded  space,  and  then  turning 
to  us  and  saying,  "There  is  no  God  beside  me;  I  know  not  any."  The  passage 
stands  in  close  relation  with  the  supposed  claims  of  idol-gods ;  and  we  should  carefully 
note  that  the  idol-figures  are  first  of  all  representatious  of  qualities,  or  powers,  which 
are  supposed  to  exist,  though  unseen,  and  are  usually  personified  or  thought  of  aH 
living  beings.  Only  in  the  degraded  stage  are  idol- figures  treated  as  if  they  them- 
selves were  gods.  In  this  connection  two  points  may  be  illustrated,  and  practica' 
lessons  from  each  may  be  enforced. 


IT  THE  BOOK  OF  THE  PROPHET  ISAIAH,    [oh.  xlit.  1— 2& 

L  God  axsobbb  in  hiiibelf  aix  tbe  ideas  wmoa  idolatbt  beeks  to  ebibodt. 
Poetically  conceived,  the  figures  of  Baal  or  Jupiter  are  only  representations  of  certain 
power*— rf  life,  warmth,  rule,  wisdom,  etc.,  which  are  living,  unseen  beings.  Our  QoA 
says  there  are  no  such  beings.  Every  one  of  these  powers  is  in  himself.  He  is  Zens, 
and  Baal,  and  Venus,  and  Diana,  and  Moloch,  so  far  as  any  of  these  represent  necessary 
powers  belonging  to  Deity.  We  must  not  divide  him  into  many  beings ;  he  is  only  One. 
So  far  as  idols  are  mere  creations  of  men,  there  is  nothing  existing  that  corresponds  to 
them.  So  far  as  they  represent  real  powers,  these  powers  all  meet  in  the  Otie  &od— 
our  God! 

II.   God   demands  all  the  worship  which  idolatbt  DISTBIBnTES  OVER  MANT  GODS. 

True  worship  is  both  word  and  work,  profession  and  service.  Men  who  divide  God 
into  gods  have  their  favourite  deity.  God  cannot  be  divided.  And  the  law  for  every 
creature  made  in  his  image  is,  "  Thou  shalt  love  the  Lord  thy  God  with  all  thy  heart, 
and  all  thy  mind,  and  all  thy  soul,  and  all  thy  strength." — B.  T. 

Ver,  20. — I%e  ill-fed  soul.  The  expression,  "  he  feedeth  on  ashes,"  is  proverbial  in 
the  East  for  that  which  is  done  to  no  purpose — that  which  is  vain,  unsatisfying,  disap- 
pmnting.  Hugh  Macmillan  gives  some  accounts  of  depraved  and  perverted  appetite  in 
the  use  of  earth  for  food.  He  says,  "  This  propensity  is  not  an  occasional  freak,  but  a 
common  custom,  and  is  found  among  so  large  a  number  and  variety  of  tribes,  that  it 
may  be  regarded  as  coextensive  with  the  human  race.  From  time  immemorial  the 
Chinese  have  been  in  the  habit  of  using  various  kinds  of  edible  earths  as  substitutes  for 
bread  in  time  of  scarcity;  and  their  imperial  annals  have  always  religiously  noticed 
the  discovery  of  such  bread-stones,  or  stone-meal,  as  they  are  called.  On  the  western 
coast  of  Africa  a  yellowish  kind  of  earth,  called  caovac,  is  so  highly  relished,  and  so 
constantly  consumed  by  the  negroes,  that  it  has  become  to  them  a  necessary  of  life.  In 
the  island  of  Java,  and  in  various  parts  of  the  hill  country  of  India,  a  reddish  earth 
is  baked  into  cakes,  and  sold  in  the  village  markets  for  food."  But  such  food  cannot 
give  due  nourishment  to  the  body.  It  is  unnatural,  unsatisfying.  Our  souls  need 
healthy  and  satisfying  food  as  truly  as  our  bodies  do ;  and  men's  folly  in  respect  of 
their  bodies  only  illustiates  their  much  greater  folly  in  respect  of  their  souls.  So  many 
of  us  are  ill  fed,  injudiciously  fed.  After  showing  what  is  the  proper  nutriment  for  a 
renewed  soul,  leading  up  to  the  mystical  expression  of  our  Lord,  as  recorded  by  John, 
"  Hy  flesh  is  meat  indeM,  and  my  blood  is  drink  indeed,"  it  may  be  shown  that  food 
for  the  soul  is  insufficient  and  injurious  when  it  is — 

L  III  beleoted.  It  must  be  good,  but  it  must  also  be  appropriate  and  adapted. 
The  word  of  the  preacher  must  be  such  as  "ministers  grace  to  the  hearers."  The 
supreme  q^uestion  for  each  one  is — Do  the  means  of  grace  minister  grace  to  me  ?  I  may 
he  at  the  feast,  yet  be  ill  fed. 

II.  Ill  fbepabed.  Foorl  that  is  in  itself  good  is  often  made  unsuitable  for  us  in 
the  cooking.  Teachings  may  be  spoiled  by  the  vanity  or  the  over-adomment  of  the 
teachers.  Especially  teachings  may  be  ill  prepared  as  they  lack  the  true  spiritual 
flavour.    Then  they  come  to  us  as  the  word  of  man  rather  than  as  the  word  of  God. 

IIL  III  pbopobtioned.  Sometimes  in  excess ;  at  other  times  deficient.  We  maj 
at  times  be  starved,  and  at  others  surfeited.  We  may  have  the  false  appetite,  which 
feeds  voraciously  at  times.  We  may,  in  religious  things,  run  too  hard  along  particular 
line*,  interest  ourselves  only  iti  sides  and  aspects  of  truth,  and  so  become  ill-fed  souls. 

rV.  Ill  sustained.  In  respect  of  soul-feeding  the  law  for  the  body  applies.  Little 
and  often.  Plain  and  regular.  Therefore  are  we  taught  to  pray,  "  Give  us  day  by  day 
our  daily  bread."  And  to  teach  us  that  we  want  food,  not  luxuries,  Christ  said  of 
himself,  « I  am  the  Bread  of  Mfe."— R.  T. 

V«.  22. — 0«(P$  way  of  pleading  with  men.  Put  in  other  words,  the  statement  of 
this  text  is,  "  As  a  cloud  is  blotted  out  of  the  heavens,  so  have  I  blotted  out  thy  trans- 
gression*." But  it  is  difficult  for  us  to  realize  what  is  meant  by  "blotting  out  a  cloud." 
So  far  as  we  have  to  do  with  clouds,  we  cannot  speak  of  them  as  " blotted  out."  Some 
swiftly  hurry  1^ ;  others  move  majestically  along, — they  go  out  of  sight  into  some  other 
quarter  of  the  heaTens;  but  we  do  not  see  them  vanish  fi^m  their  place  in  mid-sky,  ui4 
i  "  blotted  out,"    Sometime*  the  cloud  sends  down  ahowers  tqpon  the  earth,  vU 


OH.  xiJT.  1— 28.]    THE  BOOK  OP  THE  PROPHET  ISAIAH.  171 

BO  it  exhausts  itself;  but  that  cannot  be  the  image  of  our  text,  because  it  intimates  a 
putting  away  of  our  sins,  so  that  they  shall  not  shower  down  upon  us  the  tribulation 
and  anguish  that  is  gathered  up  in  all  transgression.  But  the  image  which  our  damp 
climate  cannot  furnish  is  given  in  the  sunny  lands  of  the  East.  I'here,  in  the  morning, 
will  often  be  seen  dull  heavy  masses  of  clouds,  aod  there  is  every  indication  of  a  showery 
day.  But  as  the  sun  rises  and  gathers  strength,  these  clouds  alt  vanish  and  disappear ; 
they  do  not  drift  away,  or  pass  into  another  part  of  the  heavens ;  they  just  vanish  on 
the  spot,  they  die  away,  they  are  "  blotted  out."  Understood  thus,  it  is  a  striking  and 
impressive  figure.  Even  thus  the  thick  clouds  of  our  sins  darken  the  sky,  and  those 
sin-clouds  bear  manifest  tokens  of  punishment  and  wrath.  But  thus  also  God's  love, 
the  sun  of  his  forgiving  loye,  arises,  shines  out  full,  and  the  sin-cloud  is  dispelled,  it 
vanishes  away.  It  is  not  driven  into  the  future,  to  await  us  there;  it  is  just  "blotted 
out,"  forgiven  and  forgotten.  With  other  most  impressive  figures  God  endeavours  to 
convince  us  of  the  fulness  of  his  forgiving.  He  makes  his  servant  say,  "  As  far  as  the 
east  is  from  the  west,  so  far  hath  he  removed  our  transgressions  from  us."  Where  is 
the  east?  Where  is  the  west?  Is  it  yonder  ridge  of  bill,  behind  which  we  saw  the 
sun  set  yesterday  ?  Nay,  did  you  stand  on  that  very  spot,  the  west  would  be  still  away, 
away,  in  the  dim  distance.  The  more  you  hurry  toward  the  east,  the  further  you  get 
away  from  the  west.  Go  east,  and  try  to  find  your  forgiven  sins;  behold  God  has  put 
them  in  the  utmost  west.  Elsewhere  we  read  of  Gud's  "  casting  our  sins  behind  his 
back."  Ho  not  merely ^fs  them  behind  his  back,  he  casts  them  there ;  his  love  refuses 
to  look  on  them,  hie  forgiving  restoring  love  will  not  treasure  them  up  against  us;  they 
are  flung  away ;  they  are  done  with ;  they  are  bonds  cancelled,  debts  settled  for  ever. 
And  there  is  another  figure— that  of  "  casting  our  sins  into  the  depths  of  the  sea."  Take 
a  jewel,  and  when  upon  mid-ocean,  drop  it  over  the  ship's  side  into  the  waters.  It  is 
gone.  None  can  descend  into  those  depths  and  bring  it  back  again.  So  God,  as  it 
were,  binds  up  the  book,  the  "  hand  writing  of  ordinances  that  was  against  us."  He  drops 
it  in  mid-ocean.  And  as  we  see  it  go,  our  hearts  should  be  filled  with  thankful,  trustful 
love  to  the  great  Forgiver.  To  a  full  return  to  him  who  has  so  dealt  with  our  sins  the 
text  invites.    This  is  God's  way  of  pleading. 

I.  Otm  BEDEMFTioN  18  AN  AOcouPLisHGD  FACT.  The  terms  of  the  text  are  very 
explicit:  "I  have  blotted  out. ...  I  have  redeemed."  Kedemption  is  not  a  matter  which 
has  to  be  settled ;  it  is  settled.  We  too  often  speak  of  needing  to  be  redeemed ;  we 
should  speak  much  more  of  realizing  our  redemption — entering  into  the  life  and  privilege 
bought  for  us,  and  offered  to  us  in  the  sovereign  mercy  of  our  Gud.  That  redemption 
should  be  regarded  as  an  accomplished  fact  is  taught  by  our  Lord.  1.  See  the  parable 
of  the  prodigal  son.  The  charm  of  the  parable  is  the  look  it  gives  us  into  the  father's 
heart.  He  had  forgiven  the  son  in  his  heart  long  before  the  forgiving  word  could  be 
spoken.  2.  The  parable  of  the  feast.  The  message  sent  forth  is,  "  Come,  for  all  things 
are  now  ready."  3.  Notice  how  Christ  directed  the  thoughts  of  men  to  himsel£  If 
our  redemption  were  not  an  accomplished  fact,  of  which  our  Lord  was  the  Divine 
expresrion  and  persuasion,  how  could  he  say,  "  I  am  the  Way,  the  Truth,  and  the  Life  "  ? 
4.  This  is,  indeed,  involved  in  the  doctrine  of  the  cross  of  Christ.  God  provided  that 
cross  as  the  highest  expression  of  his  love  to  us ;  it  is  the  persuasion  that  he  has  for- 
given. It  is  not  in  order  that  he  may  love  us,  it  is  because  he  did  love  us,  that  he  gave 
his  only  begotten  Son.  6.  Observe  the  new  terms  of  condemnation  set  forth  in  the 
gospel :  "  He  that  hath  the  Son  hath  life,  and  he  that  hath  not  the  Son  hath  not  life ; " 
"  He  that  believeth  not  is  condemned  already."  God  looks  on  men  as  forgiven,  but 
tested  by  their  thoughts  of  Christ,  by  their  acceptance  of  his  offered  love  and  iiriendship 
in  the  person  of  Jesus  Christ.  God  says,  "  I  have  redeemed  you."  If  you  will  turn  to 
QoA,  return  to  Qoi,  you  shall  realize  that  you  are  redeemed.  If  you  will  not  return, 
then  that  Teiy  redemption  will  gather  into  a  burden,  weightier  far  than  all  others  that 
can  come  upon  you. 

IL  OuB  BEDEHPnoir,  A8  AN  ACCOMPLISHED  rAOT,  IS  God's  obeat  poweb  on  human 
80VL8.  This  is  the  very  essence  of  the  gospel — the  "  good  news "  of  God.  God  is  a 
forgiving  God.  He  has  forgiven  in  his  heart ;  he  speaks  his  forgiveness  in  Christ.  He 
caa  pass  by  iniquity,  transgression,  and  an.  He  can  keep  his  righteousness  before  all 
his  creature!,  and  yet  reach  down  a  hand  of  acceptance  to  us.  1.  The  cry  of  God,  in 
piiM  day%  waa  the  oiy  of  this  forgiriug  love,  "  Ho,  evaiy  one  that  thinteth,"  etc. 


172  THE  BOOK   OF  THE   PROPHET  ISAIAH,    [oh.  xuv.  1— 28, 

(ch.  It.  1).  The  wine  and  milk  are  bonght ;  they  are  set  ready ;  take,  and  eat.  2, 
Apostles  preached  a  perfect  salvation.  They  told  men  it  was  wrought — ^it  was  done. 
They  preached  remission  of  sins  in  the  Name  of  Jesus.  Our  faith  is  not  asked  for  a 
scheme  partially  realized,  a  salvation  partially  accomplished,  that  needs  the  addition  of 
our  delayings,  our  tears,  our  prayers,  our  goodnesses.  It  was  perfect  before  we  had  one 
thought  about  it.  It  sprang  out  of  God's  own  love;  it  was  manifested  in  God's  own 
perfect  way.  He  has  redeemed  us,  and  wants  the  fact  of  his  redemption  to  be  a  gracious 
persuasion  of  us  to  come  to  him.  We  have  seen  the  little  bird  taken  from  its  nest  in 
the  woods,  and  put  into  the  cage,  and  it  seemed  to  be  happy  even  with  the  bars  all 
round  it.  Not  always  happy.  Sometimes  it  would  flap  its  wings  against  the  bars,  and 
try  to  get  free,  when  a  glint  of  warmer  sunshine  broke  in  upon  it.  And  when  the  door 
was  opened,  wide  opened,  the  bird  scarcely  knew  what  to  do ;  it  seemed  bewildered,  as 
if  it  could  not  believe  such  good  news,  but  at  last  it  seemed  to  flash  upon  it,  "  I  am 
free — free  to  the  wil<1  woods,  and  the  open  sky,  and  the  glad  sunshine."  And  at  once  it 
spread  its  wings  and  fled  away.  We  are  like  that  bird,  caged  in  vrith  sin :  the  bars  are 
all  round  us.  Some  of  us  are  willing  to  be  caged,  some  of  us  fret  to  be  caged.  And 
the  fact  is  that  God  has  set  before  us  an  open  door.  Yet  we  stand  irresolute.  What  1  is 
the  cage  really  open  ?  May  we  come  forth  into  the  sky  of  God's  free  favour  and  accept- 
ance? Has  God  kept  his  holiness  and  his  truth,  and  yet  can  he  open  the  door?  That 
is  the  truth,  that  is  the  assurance  of  the  text.  That  is  God's  way  of  pleading,  "Eetum 
unto  me ;  for  I  have  redeemed  thee." — R.  T. 

Ver.  28. — OocPs  rights  in  the  individual.  God  made  us,  gave  ua  breath  and  being. 
We  are  his,  and  for  his  u*e.  He  can  call  any  man  into  any  sphere  he  pleases.  It  ought 
to  be  true  of  him  that  he  saith  to  one  "  Come,"  and  he  cometh ;  to  another  "  Go,"  and 
he  goeth.  Every  man's  true  attitude  is  figured  in  the  attitude  of  the  six-winged  seraphim 
before  the  throne.  "  With  twain  he  covered  his  face,  with  twain  he  covered  his  feet, 
and  with  twain  he  did  fly,"  or  did  stand  ready  to  fly.  Of  every  man,  great  and  small, 
our  God  may  say,  "  He  is  my  under-shepherd,  and  shall  perform  all  my  pleasure." 
Josephus  has  a  very  curious  statement  concerning  Cyrus,  which  may  have  some  basis 
of  truth.  "  Now  this  became  known  to  Gyrus  by  his  reading  the  book  which  Esaias 
left  behind  him  of  his  prophecy ;  for  this  man  said  that  God  had  spoken  thus  to  him  in 
secret :  •  My  will  is  that  Cyrus,'  etc.  This  was  prophesied  by  Esaias  one  hundred  and 
forty  years  before  the  demolition  of  the  temple.  When,  therefore,  Cyrus  had  read  this, 
and  marvelled  at  the  divinity,  a  kind  of  impulse  and  ambition  seized  upon  him  to  fulfil 
what  was  so  written."  Modern  discoveries  are  changing  our  received  notions  respecting 
Cyrus;  they  do  not  alter  the  fact  of  his  having  been  the  agent  in  securing  the  return  of 
the  exiles,  but  they  indicate  that,  so  far  as  he  was  concerned,  his  action  was  strictly  one 
of  state  policy.  The  idea  that  he  was  a  pure  monotbeist  is  greatly  shaken.  The 
line  of  thought  which  may  be  followed  can  only  be  indicated. 

I.  God  has  absolute  rights  over  every  individual. 

II.  He  makes  particular  claims  on  individuals  for  particular  services. 

III.  The  duty  of  each  individual  is  response  to  the  gracious  claims. 

IV.  The  highest  well-being  of  the  individual  lies  in  his  yielding  all  supposed  individual 
rights,  in  order  that  he  may,  entirely  and  faithfully,  meet  the  claims  of  God. 

Cyrus  (Koresh')  was  required  to  be  a  shepherd,  and  lead  God's  flock  back  to  its  old 
pastures.  Whatsoever  we  may  be  required  to  do,  that  must  be  done  as  unto  the  Lord. 
We  should  not  want  any  other  nian's  place  or  work.  The  best  for  us  is  just  that  one 
which  is  given  to  us.  And  the  daily,  lifelong,  attitude  which  we  should  keep  should 
inspire  the  daily  prayer,  "  Lord,  what  wilt  thou  have  me  to  do?"  "  It  is  the  greatest 
honour  of  the  greatest  men  to  be  employed  for  God  as  instruments  of  his  favour  to  hii 
people.  It  was  more  the  praise  of  Cyrus  to  be  Qtod'»  shepherd  than  to  be  Emperor  of 
&ie  Esst."— B.  T.  1-  ^ 


OH.  iLv.  1— 26.]     THE  BOOK  OF  THE  PROPHET  ISAIAH. 


17a 


EXPOSITION. 


OHAPTEB  XLV. 


Vera.  1 — 7. — Gob's  Will  oonobrntno 
Riu  AiraouiiOED  TO  Otrus.  This  direct 
address  of  God  to  a  heathen  king  is 
Tvithout  a  parallel  in  Scripture.  Nebu- 
chadnezzar, Fhanoh,  Abimelech,  weie 
warned  through  dreams.  Nebuchadnezzar 
was  even  promised  Divine  aid  (Bzek.  xxx. 
24,  25).  But  no  heathen  monarch  had 
previously  been  personally  addressed  by 
God,  much  less  called  "his  anointed,"  and 
spoken  to  iy  hit  name  (yet.  4).  Three 
motives  are  mentioned  for  this  special 
favour  to  him :  (1)  that  he  might  acknow- 
ledge Jehovah  to  be  the  true  God;  (2) 
that  Israel  might  be  benefited  and  advan- 
taged by  him;  (3)  that  the  attention  of 
the  whole  world  might  be  attracted,  and 
the  unity  of  God  made  manifest  far  and 
wide  (vers.  3 — 6). 

Yer.  1. — Thus  saith  the  Lord  to  his 
anointed.  The  "  anointed  of  Jeliovah  '  is 
elsewhere  always  either  an  Israelite  king, 
or  the  expected  Deliverer  of  the  nation, 
" Messiah  the  Prince"  (Dan.  ix.  25).  This 
Deliverer,  however,  was  to  be  of  the  line 
of  David  (ch.  xi.  1),  and  of  the  city  of 
Bethlehem  (Micab  v.  2),  so  that  we  can 
scarcely  suppose  Isaiah  to  have  seen  him 
in  Cyrus.  But  he  may  have  seen  in  Cyrus 
a  type  of  the  great  Deliverer,  as  he  saw  in 
the  rele^jse  of  Israel  from  the  power  of 
Babylon  a  type  of  their  deliverance  from 
sin.  Whose  right  hand  I  have  holden; 
latlier,  strengthened  (comp.  Ezek.  xxx.  21). 
To  snhdne  nations  before  bim  (see  above, 
oh.  xli.  2,  and  the  comment  ad  loo.").  Among 
the  nations  subdued  by  Cyrus  may  be 
mentioned  the  Modes,  the  Babylonians,  the 
Lydians,  the  Carians,  the  Caunians,  the 
Lycians,  the  Bactriuns,  the  Sacse,  the  Far- 
•hians,  the  Hyrcanians,  the  Chorasmians, 
the  Sogdians,  the  Arians  of  Herat,  the 
Zaiangians,  the  Arachosians,  the  Sata- 
gydians,  and  the  Gandarians.  I  will  loose 
the  loins  of  kings ;  i.e.  "  render  them  weak 
and  incapable  of  resistance  "  (comp.  Dan. 
V.  6),  not  "disarm  them"  (Cheyne);  for  the 
chief  royal  weapons  were  the  spear  and 
the  bow,  neither  of  which  was  carried  at 
the  girdle.  To  open  before  him  the  two- 
leaved  gates.  The  cities  and  forts  repre- 
sented on  the  Assyrian  monuments  have 
invariably  their  gateways  closed  by  two 
large  gates  or  doors  which  meet  in  the 
centre  of  the  gateway.  The  bronze  plating 
fonnd  at  BaUarat  gave  the  dimensions,  and 


showed  the  strength  of  such  gates  (*  Trans- 
actions of  the  Society  of  Bibl.  Archeeol.,' 
vol.  vii.  pp.  83—88). 

Ver.  2. — ^I  will  .  .  .  make  the  crooked 
places  straight;  rather,  I  will  make  the 
rugged  places  level.  No  doubt  intended 
generally,  "I  will  smooth  his  way  before 
bim."  The  gates  of  brass  .  .  .  the  bars  of 
iron.  According  to  Herodoius,  the  gates 
of  Babylon  were  of  solid  bronze,  and  one 
hundred  in  number  (i.  179).  Solid  bronze 
gates  have,  however,  nowhere  been  found, 
and  would  have  been  inconvenient  from 
their  enormous  weight.  It  is  probable  that 
the  "  gates  of  brass,"  or  "  bronze,"  whereof 
we  read,  were  always,  like  those  found  at 
Ballarat,  of  wood  plated  with  bronze.  7'o 
the  eye  these  would  be  "  gates  of  bronze." 
Gates  of  towns  were,  as  a  matter  of  course, 
secured  by  bars,  which  would  commonly 
be  made  of  iron,  as  the  strongest  material. 
Iron  was  well  known  to  the  Babylonians 
(Herod.,  i.  186;>. 

Ver.  3. — I  will  give  thee  the  treasures  of 
darkness ;  i,e.  "  treasures  stored  in  dark 
places" — "bidden  treasures."  Treasuries 
were  built  for  greater  security  without  win- 
dows. Of  the  treasures  which  fell  into  the 
hands  of  Cyrus,  the  greatest  were  probably 
those  of  Babylon  (Herod.,  i.  183)  and  of  Sar- 
dis  (Xen.,  '  Cyrop.,'  vii.  2,  §  11).  The  value 
of  the  latter  has  been  estimated  at  above 
one  hundred  and  twenty-six  millions  ster- 
ling. That  thou  mayest  know ;  or,  adcnote- 
ledge  (for  the  actual  acknowledgment,  see 
the  decrees  in  Ezra  i.  3  and  vi.  3 — 5).  If 
these  documents  are  accepted  as  genuine, 
or  even  as  true  in  substance  (Bwald),  Cyrus 
must  be  considered  to  have  identified 
Jehovah  vrith  his  own  Ormuzd,  and  tc 
have  viewed  the  Jewish  and  Persian 
religions  as  substantially  the  same.  He 
would  be  under  no  temptation,  with  sc 
weak  and  down-trodden  a  people  as  the 
Jews,  to  resort  to  politic  pretences,  as  he 
might  be  in  the  case  of  the  Babylonians 
(see  the  comment  on  ch.  xli.  25).  Which 
call  thee  by  thy  name  (comp.  ver.  1  and 
ch.  xliv.  28).  (On  the  special  favour 
implied  in  God's  condescending  to  "  know  " 
or  "  call "  a  person  by  his  name,  see  the 
'  Pulpit  Commentary '  on  Exod.  xxxiii.  12.) 
Am  the  Ood  of  Israel ;  rather,  am  the  Lord 
.  .  .  the  God  of  Israel. 

Ver.  4. — rbr  Jacob  my  servant's  sake. 
This  second  motive  is,  in  a  certain  sense, 
the  main  one.  Cyrus  is  raised  up,  especially, 
to  perform  God's  pleasure  vrith  respect  to 
Judah  and  Jerusalem  (oh.  xliv.  26 — 28), 
Jacob,  his  Church,  is  more  impoitant  in 
God's  eyes  than  any  individual.  No  doubt 
his  Church  is  maintained,  io  part,  that  it 


174 


THE  BOOK  OF  THE   PEOPHET   ISAIAH.      [oh.  xl.^r.  1—25. 


may  be  "  a  light  to  lighten  the  Oentiles  ;  " 
but  it  is  not  maintaitied  Bolely,  or  even 
mainly,  for  this  end.  Its  welfare  is  an  end 
in  itself,  and  would  be  sought  by  God  apart 
from  any  further  consequence.  Israel  mine 
elect  (comp.  ch.  xli.  8;  xlir.  1).  I  have 
■nmamed  thee ;  i.e.  "  given  thee  designa- 
tions of  honour,"  e.g.  "  my  anointed  "  (ver. 
1);  "my  shepherd"  (eh.  xliv.  28);  "he 
who  shall  do  all  my  pleasure  "  (ch.  xliv.  28). 
Though  thou  hast  not  known  me;  rather, 
though  thou  didst  not  know  me.  Cyrus's 
honours,  his  titles,  his  mention  by  name, 
etc.,  were  accumulated  upun  him  before  his 
birth,  when  he  knew  nothing  of  God,  when, 
therefore,  he  had  in  no  way  merited  them. 
Thus  all  was  done,  not  tor  hia  sake,  but 
tor  the  sake  of  Israel. 

Ver.  5. — ^I  girded  thee.  As  God  "  loosed 
the  loins"  of  Cyrus's  adversaries  (ver.  1), 
to  weaken  them,  so  he  "  girded  "  those  of 
Gyms,  to  give  him  strength  (comp.  Pa. 
xviii.  32). 

Ver.  6. — ^Ihat  they  may  know  from  the 
rising  of  the  sun.  Here  we  have  the  third 
motive  of  the  Divine  action  respecting 
Cyrus.  The  attention  of  all  the  world  from 
the  extreme  east  to  the  extreme  west,  would 
be  drawn  by  the  wonderful  occurrences. 
Jehovah's  hand  in  them  would  be  perceived, 
and  his  sole  Godhead  would  obtain  acknow- 
ledgment. An  impulse  was  doubtless 
given  to  monotheism  by  the  victories  of 
Cyrus  and  the  favour  which  he  showed  the 
Jews ;  but  it  cannot  be  said  to  have  been 
very  marked.  Idolatry  and  polytheism 
were  to  a  certain  extent  discredited;  but 
they  maintained  their  ground  nevertheless. 
It  was  not  till  the  true  "Anointed  One" 
appeared — the  antitype  of  whom  Cyrus  was 
the  type — that  the  idols  were  "utterly 
abolished." 

Ver.  7. — I  form  the  light,  and  create  dark- 
ness. It  has  been  recently  denied  tliat 
there  is  any  allusion  in  these  words,  or  in 
those  which  follow,  to  the  Zoroastrian 
tenets;  and  it  has  even  been  asserted  that 
the  religion  of  the  early  Achtemeninn  kings 
waa  free  from  the  taint  of  dualism.  But 
according  to  some  nuthorities,  "a  god  of 
liea  "  is  mentioned  in  the  Behistun  inscrip- 
tion ;  and  the  evidence  ia  exceedingly 
strong  that  dualism  was  an  essential  part 
of  the  Zonastrian  religion  long  before  the 
time  of  Gyrus  (see  '  Ancient  Monarchies,' 
vol.  ii.  pp.  332,  333,  2nd  edit.).  It  ia  quite 
reasonable  to  suppose  that  Isaiah  would 
be  acquaintad  with  the  belief  of  the  Persians 
and  Medes,  who  had  come  in  contact  with 
the  Assyrians  as  early  as  b.o.  830;  and  a 
waning  against  the  chief  error  of  their 
idigion  would  he  quite  in  place  when  he 
WM  holding  up  Oyma  to  his  countrymen 
M  Mititlad  to  uaii  raapect  and  veaeration. 


The  nexiu  of  the  words,  "I  am  the  Lord, 
and  there  is  none  else,  I  form  the  light,  and 
create  darkness,"  is  such  as  naturally  to 
suggest  an  intended  antagonism  to  the 
Znroiistrian  system.  Under  that,  Ormuzd 
created  "light"  and  "peace,"  Ahriman 
"darkness"  and  "evil."  The  two  were 
eternal  adversaries,  engaged  in  an  inter- 
minable contest.  Ormuzd,  it  is  true,  claimed 
the  undivided  allegiance  of  mankind,  since 
he  was  their  maker ;  but  Ahriman  was  a 
great  power,  terribly  formidable — perhaps 
a  god  ((izva)— certainly  the  chief  of  the 
devas.  It  was  from  Zoroastrianism  that 
Manii'heism  derived  its  doctrine  of  the 
two  principles,  and  to  the  same  source  may, 
with  much  probability,  be  traced  the  "  devu- 
worsliippers "  of  the  Zagros  mountain 
chain. 

Ver.  8.— The  Blebsed  Besdlts  op  Ibbaxl'i 
Delivebance.  The  restoration  of  Israel  to 
their  own  land  will  be  followed  by  a  great 
increase  of  righteousness  and  salvation. 
They  will  be,  aa  it  were,  showered  down 
abundantly  from  heaven,  while  at  the  aame 
time  they  will  spring  in  profusion  firom 
earth's  b(JSom.  Jehovah,  who  has  cauaed 
the  deliverance,  will  also  cause  these  reaulte 
to  follow  from  it. 

Ver.  8. — ^Drop  down,  ye  heavens ;  literally, 
distil,  ye  heavens  (comp.  Deut.  xxxii.  1 ; 
Job  xxxvi.  28) ;  or  rain  doom  on  the  thirsty 
earth  your  gracious  influences.  Let  right- 
eousness, or  God's  law  of  right,  deacend 
afresh  from  the  skies  as  a  boon  to  mankind 
— a  boon  for  wiiich  they  have  been  long 
waiting.  And  ...  let  the  earth  open.  Let 
earth  make  due  response,  opening  her 
gentle  bosom,  as  she  does  in  spring  (comp. 
Aprilis  from  aperio),  and  blossoming  witii 
human  righteousness,  the  fruit  and  evidence 
of  salvation.  To  the  prophet's  rapt  gaze 
the  excellence  of  the  post-Captivity  times, 
when  all  idolatry  had  been  put  away, 
seemed,  in  comparison  with  earlier  ages, 
the  reign  of  justice  and  truth  upon  earth. 
I  the  Lord  have  created  it ;  i.e.  "  I,  Jehovah, 
have  wrouglit  the  change  by  the  larger 
outpouring  of  my  Spirit"  (comp.  oh.  :diii 
3). 

Vera.  9 — 13. — Isbael  wabned  mot  to 
CALL  tN  Question  God's  Modes  of  Action. 
Apparently,  Isaiah  anticipatea  that  the 
Israelites  will  be  discontented  and  mnrmnr 
at  their  deliverer  being  a  heathen  king,  and 
not  one  of  their  own  body.  He  therefore 
warns  them  against  presuming  to  criticize 
the  arrangements  of  the  All- Wise,  remind- 
ing them  of  his  unapproachable  greatneas 
(T«r.  12),  and  once  more  aaanring  thnn 


OH.  XLT.  1— 26.]      THE  BOOK  OF  THE  PROPHET  ISAIAH. 


175 


ihkt  the  sppointiAent  of  Cyrus  is  from  him 
(Ter.  13). 

Yer.  9. — Woe  unto  him  that  striveth  mth 
hii  Uaker!  Let  the  potsherd  strive,  etc.; 
rather,  woe  unto  him  that  striveth  with  his 
Maker,  a  potsherd  among  potsherds  of  the 
ground.'  All  men  are  equally  made  of 
"the  dust  of  the  ground"  (Gen.  ii.  7). 
Inael  has  no  prerogative  in  this  respect. 
He,  too,  is  "  a  potsherd  among  potsherds  " 
-^clay  moulded  by  the  potter;  no  more 
entitled  to  lift  up  his  voice  against  his 
Maker  than  the  vessel  to  rebel  against  the 
man  who  shapes  it  (oomp.  ch.  xxix.  16; 
and  see  the  comment  furnished  by  St.  Paul 
in  the  Epistle  to  the  Bomans  iz.  20 — 
24).  What  would  a  man  think  if  the  clay 
that  he  was  fashioning  objected  U>  being 
moulded  in  a  particular  form,  or  if  a  work 
that  he  had  made  exclaimed,  "He  is  a 
poor  bungler — he  hath  no  hands  "  ?  Yet 
this  ia  what  a  man  does  who  finds  fault 
with  the  arrangements  of  the  Almighty. 

Ter,  10. — Woe  unto  him  that  saith  unto 
Us  father,  etc.  t  A  change  is  made  in  the 
metaphor,  the  relationship  of  a  father  and 
his  child  being  substituted  for  that  of  a 
potter  and  tiis  clay.  Wljat  would  a  man 
think  of  a  child  murmuring  against  his 
parent  for  not  having  made  liim  stronger, 
handsomer,  cleverer?  Would  not  such  a 
ehild  be  regarded  as  most  unnatural,  and  as 
deierving  to  have  woe  denounced  upon  him  ? 

Yer.  11. — ^Ihe  Holy  One  of  Israel;  i.e. 
he  who  always  does  right,  and  with 
whom,  therefore,  it  is  absurd  to  find  fault. 
His  Uaker;  i.e.  Israel's  Maker,  who  has, 
therefore,  the  right  to  do  with  him  aa  he 
pleases.  Ask  me  of  things  to  come  con- 
cerning my  sons.  This  sentence  is  wrongly 
punctuated.  The  last  three  words  should 
be  attached  to  what  follows,  thus :  "  Ask 
me  of,  things  to  come :  concerning  my  sons 
and  concerning  the  work  of  my  hands  com- 
mand ye  me ; "  i.e.  first  learn  of  me  what 
in  my  designs  is  to  be  the  course  of  human 
events,  and  then  (if  necessary)  give  me 
direetiona  concerning  my  sons  (Israel),  who 
are  tlie  work  of  my  hands;  but  do  not 
presume  to  give  me  directions  while  you 
are  still  in  utter  ignorance  of  my  designs. 
In  any  case  remember  who  I  am — the 
Maker  of  heaven  and  earth,  the  Creator 
of  man.  One  accustomed  to  give  directions 
to  the  angelio  host  (ver.  12). 

Yer.  12. — I,  even  my  hands;  literally,  /, 
My  hande;  i.e.  "my  hands,  and  my  hands 
alone."  All  their  host.  The  "host  of 
heaven"  ia  sometimes  put  for  the  stars, 
and  may  be  so  understood  here ;  but  "  com- 
mands are  laid  on  intelligent  rather  than 
on  unintelligent  beings.  (The  object  of 
the  verb  Mivm  in  Hebrew  is  almost  always 
Dorsonal.) 


Yer.  13.— I  have  raised  him  up.  "  Him  " 
can  only  be  referred  to  Cyrus,  the  one 
individual  mentioned  previously  in  the 
chapter  (vers.  1 — 5).  The  expression,"  raised 
up,"  had  been  already  used  of  him  (oh.  xli. 
25).  In  righteousness  means  "to  carry 
out  my  righteous  purposes."  I  will  direct; 
rather,  as  in  the  margin,  make  straight.  He 
.  .  .  shall  let  go  my  captives,  not  for  price 
nor  reward.  Captives  were  often  "  redeemed 
for  a  price"  (Neh.  vi.  8).  In  Greece  a 
fixed  sum  was  established  by  general  eon- 
sent  as  the  ransom  of  a  captive  (Aristot., 
'  Eth.  Nic.,'  V.  6).  Cyrus,  however,  in 
letting  the  Jews  go  free,  would  not  be 
actuated  by  the  paltry  motive  of  pecuniary 
profit.  He  may,  as  Mr.  Cheyne  remarks, 
have  been  actuated  in  part  "  by  a  considera- 
tion of  the  usefulness  of  such  a  faithful 
advanced  guard  at  the  border  of  Egypt ; " 
but  mainly  it  is  probable  that  "he  obeyed 
the  dictates  of  religious  sympathy  with  the 
Jews."  The  recent  coutention,  that  he 
was  not  a  Zoroastrian  (Sayce,  Academy, 
October  16,  1880;  'Ancient  Empires,'  p. 
439 ;  Cheyne,  '  Isaiah,'  vol.  ii.  p.  279)  rests 
upon  insufficient  evidence,  ms  so-called 
inscription  being  a  document  not  put  forth 
by  himself,  but  by  the  priests  of  Merodach 
at  Babylon;  and  the  first  introduction  of 
Zoroastrian  monotheism  into  the  state 
religion  of  Persia  by  Darius  Hystaspis 
(Sayce,  'Ancient  Empires,'  p.  440)  being 
expressly  disclaimed  by  him  in  tlie  Be- 
histun  inscription,  where  he  declares  his 
reformation  to  have  consisted  in  the  rebuild- 
ing of  the  temples  which  Gomates  the 
Magian  had  destroyed,  and  the  reinstitu- 
tion  for  the  state  of  the  religious  chants 
and  the  worship  which  he  had  put  down 
(col.  1.  par.  14). 

Vers.  14 — 25. — The  Cokvbesion  op  tub 
Gentiles  a  Coksequenoe  of  the  Bestoba- 
TiON  AND  Salvation  of  Israel.  "  With 
the  prospect  of  the  release  of  the  exiles  is 
associated,"  says  Delitzsch, "  in  the  prophet's 
perspective,  the  prospect  of  an  expansion 
of  the  restored  Church,  through  the  entrance 
of  the  fulness  of  the  Gentiles."  Egypt, 
Ethiopia,  and  Saba  are  especially  men- 
tioned here,  as  in  oh.  xliii.  3,  as  among  the 
first  to  come  in  (vers.  14,  15).  Later  on,  a 
more  general  influx  is  spoken  of  (ver.  20) ; 
and,  finally,  a  prospect  is  held  out  of  an 
ultimate  universal  conversion  (ver.  23).  At 
the  same  time,  judgment  is  denounced 
against  the  idolaters  who  persist  in  their 
idolatry  (vers.  16,  20),  and  they  are  warned 
that  they  will  have  no  share  in  the  coming 
glories  of  the  Israel  of  God. 

Yer.  14. — The  labour  of  Egypt,  and  mer 


17(5 


THE  BOOK  OF  THE  PROPHET  ISAIAH,    [ch.  xlT.  1— 25. 


ohanSise  of  XtMopia  and  of  the  SaleeaiiB; 
».«.  "  the  laborious  Egyptians,  and  the 
traffic-loving  EthlopianB  and  SabKans." 
Their  buildings  and  their  husbandry  alike 
justify  what  is  said  of  the  Egyptians,  while 
the  very  ancient  traffic  between  Egypt  and 
Ethiopia  is  sufficient  ground  for  the  assign- 
ment of  a  commercial  character  to  the 
Ethiopians  and  the  Sabseans.  Men  of 
stature.  (On  the  tall  stature  of  the  Ethio- 
pians, see  Herod.,  iii.  20;  and  comp.  oh. 
xviii  2,  with  the  comment.)  Shall  come 
over  unto  thee.  Knobel  understands  that 
they  would  give  their  aid  to  the  rebuilding 
of  the  temple ;  but  this  they  certainly  did 
not  do,  and  Isaiah's  words  certainly  do  not 
imply  it.  He  is  again  speaking  of  the  great 
conversion  of  the  nations,  which  he  con- 
nected with  the  restoration  of  the  Jews  to 
their  own  land  (ch.  xi.  12 ;  xviii.  7 ;  xix. 
18 — 25,  etc.),  and  which  may  be  considered 
to  have  begun  then,  but  only  to  have  had 
its  full  accomplishment  in  the  Messianic 
period.  In  chains  they  shall  come  over. 
Ready  to  serve  the  Church  as  slaves  and 
servants  —  not  literally  wearing  chains. 
They  shall  fall  down  unto  thee,  eto.  The 
Ohiurch,  as  informed  with  the  Spirit  of 
God,  shall  seem  to  them  a  holy  thing,  and 
therefore  an  object  of  worship  (comp.  Rev. 
iii.  9).  There  is  such  a  union  between 
Christ  and  his  Church,  that  worship,  in  a 
qualified  sense,  may  be  paid  the  Church 
without  unfitness. 

Ver.  15.-  Verily  thou  art  a  God  that 
Mdest  thyself.  Some  commentators  regard 
this  as  an  exclamation  made  by  Isaiah  him- 
self, who  marvels  at  the  unsearchable, 
mystery  of  God's  ways.  But  others,  with 
better  reason,  take  it  for  a  continuation  of 
the  speech  of  the  converted  heathen,  who 
marvel  that  God  has  so  long  hid  himself 
from  them  and  from  the  world  at  large, 
not  manifesting  his  power,  as  he  has  now 
done  in  the  person  of  Cyrus.  In  this 
recent  manifestation  he  has  showti  himself 
especially  the  Ood  of  Israel,  and  their 
Savionr. 

Ver.  16. — ^Ihey  shall  be  ashamed  .  .  . 
shall  go  to  confusion;  rather,  are  athnmed 
,  .  ,  are  gone  to  confurion — tlie  "  perfect  of 
prophetic  certainty."  While  (he  heathen 
that  join  themselves  to  Israel  partake  of 
their  glory  and  salvation,  such  as  abide  by 
their  idols  are  covered  with  shame  and 
confusion. 

Ver.  17. — ^Israel  shall  be  saved  ,  ,  ,  with 
an  STerlasting  salvation ;  literally,  a  lalva- 
tion  of  age$;  i.e  rue  which  will  continue 
age  after  age.  As  Mr.  Cheyne  remarks, 
for  this  to  bs  so,  the  redemption  required 
to  be  spiritual  as  weU  as  temporal.  Other- 
wise it  would  ere  lon^  have  been  forfeited. 

Ter.  18.— ThM  saith  the  Lord,  etc   Trans- 


late, Thus  saith  the  Lord  that  created  the 
heavens — he  ii  Ood — that  formed  the  earth 
and  made  it;  he  estahlished  it;  he  created 
it  not  a  chaos,  but  formed  it  to  be  iiJiabited : 
I  am  the  Lord,  and  there  is  none  else.  As 
God  had  not  formed  the  earth  to  be  a 
material  chaos,  but  had  introduced  into  it 
order  and  arrangement,  so  he  willed  his 
spiritual  creation  to  be  recovered  out  of  the 
confusion  into  which  it  had  fallen,  and  to 
be  established  in  righteousness. 

Ver.  19. — I  have  not  spoken  in  secret,  in 
a  dark  place  of  the  earth ;  literally,  in  a 
place  of  the  land  of  darkness.  Ji  hovah's 
oracles  have  not  been  given,  like  tliose  of 
the  necromanceiB,  or  those  of  the  heathen 
gods,  in  dark  places  of  the  earth — caves  like 
that  of  Trophonius  (Pausan.,  ix.  29,  §  2),  or 
the  inmost  recesses  (adyta)  of  temples ;  but 
openly  on  Sinai,  or  by  the  mouth  of  prophets 
who  proclaimed  his  words  to  all  Israel 
(comp.  Deut.  xxx.  11 — 14,  "This  com- 
mandment which  I  Command  thee  this  day, 
is  not  hidden  from  thee,  neither  is  it  far 
off.  .  .  .  But  the  word  is  very  nigh  unto 
thee,  in  thy  mouth,  and  in  thy  heart,  that 
thou  mavest  do  it ").  So  our  Lord  says  of 
his  own  teaching,  "I  spake  openly  to  the 
world ;  I  ever  taught  in  the  synagogue,  and 
in  the  temple,  whither  the  Jews  always 
resort ;  and  in  secret  have  I  said  nothing " 
(John  xviii.  20).  Seek  ye  me  in  vain; 
rather,  seek  ye  me  as  a  chaos  (comp.  Jer.  ii. 
31,  where  God  says  to  his  people,  "Have 
I  been  a  wilderness  unto  Israel  ?  a  land 
of  darkness?").  God  has  no  more  revealed 
himself  to  his  people  as  chaotic,  confused, 
disordered,  than  he  has  presented  the  world 
to  them  in  this  condition.  I  the  Lord 
speak  righteousness,  I  declare  things  that 
are  right.  There  is  an  allusion  to  the 
crooked  and  ambiguous  utterances  of  the 
heathen  oracles,  which  rarely  gave  direct 
answers  or  plainly  expressed  any  definite 
meaning.  God  in  his  utterances  never 
diverges  from  the  straight  line  of  righteous- 
ness and  truth  (comp.  Prov.  viii.  6). 

Ver.  20. — Assemble  yourselves  and  come 
.  .  .  ye  .  .  .  escaped  of  the  nations.  The 
prophet  reverts  to  the  main  idea  of  the 
section,  which  is  the  conversion  of  the 
Gentiles,  and  calls  on  all  "  the  escaped  o( 
the  nation  " — i.e.  all  who  have  survived  the 
judgments  of  the  time—  to  "  assemble  and 
come,"  to  consider  the  claims  of  Jehovah 
to  be  the  only  true  God,  to  "look  to  him 
(ver.  22)  and-  be  saved."  The  great  judg- 
ments through  which  the  heathen  will  be 
brought  to  God  have  been  frequently  men- 
tioned (ch.  xxiv.  1—23 ;  xxvi.  20,  21 ; 
xxvii.  1 — 1;  xxx.  27 — 33;  xxxiv.  1 — 10; 
xl.  24;  xli.  11,  12,  25;  xlii.  13—15,  etc.). 
They  must. not  be  regarded  as  limited  to 
the  time  of  Cyrus,  but  rather  as  oontiniiing 


.  XLT.  1— 25.]    THE  BOOK  OP  THE  PROPHET  ISAIAH. 


177 


into  the  Messianin  period,  and  indeed 
nearly  to  its  close  (see  especially  ch.  xxxiv.). 
Each  one  of  them  constitutes  a  call  to  the 
nations,  and  is  followed  by  a  conversion 
to  a  greater  or  less  extent.  They  have  no 
knowledge  that  set  np  the  wood  of  their 
graven  image ;  lather,  wh)  lift  up  (or,  earry) 
the  wood  of  their  graven  image  (oomp.  ch.  xl  vi. 
7,  •'  They  bear  him  upon  the  shoulder," 
where  the  same  verb  is  used).  It  was  a 
practice  of  the  idolatrous  heathen  to  carry 
the  images  of  tlieir  gods  in  pioeessions, 
geuerally  exposed  to  view  upon  their 
shoulders  (Layard,  "Nineveh  and  its  Ee- 
raains,'  vol.  ii.  opp.  p.  451),  but  sometimes 
partially  concealed  in  shrines,  or  *'  arks  " 
(Rawlinson,  'Herodotus,'  vol.  ii.  pp.  100, 
101).  There  would  be  still  among  the 
"escaped"  some  who  would  so  act. 

Ver.  21. — Tell  ye,  and  bring  them  near. 
Dr.  Kay  and  Mr.  Cheyne  understand  the 
nations  to  be  addressed,  and  told  to  "  show  " 
or  "  announce,"  and  "  bring  forth "  or 
"  pinduce,"  any  argument  in  favour  of  the 
divinity  of  their  godg.  But  it  is  simpler 
and  better,  with  our  translators,  to  regard 
the  adilress  as  made  to  the  prophets  of 
God,  who  are  bidden  to  announce  his 
message  of  mercy  to  the  nations,  and  to 
bring  them  near  to  him  (comp.  oh.  xl,  1). 
Let  them  take  oonnsel  together;  i.e.  let 
the  nations  consider  one  with  another, 
whether  GoJ  or  the  idols  be  the  fitter  object 
of  worship.  Who  hath  declared  this?  "This" 
must  refer  to  the  conquest  of  Babylon  and 
deliverance  of  Israel  by  Cyrus.  None  but 
Jehovah  had  ever  announced  this^— none  but 
he  could  bring  it  to  pass.  From  ancient  time ; 
rather,  from  aforetime  (Cheyne).  The  an- 
nouncement cannot  have  been  made  very 
long  before  this  prophecy  was  delivered. 
A  just  God  and  a  Saviour.  A  God  in  whom 
"mercy  and  truth  meet  together,  righteous- 
ness and  peace  kiss  each  other  "  (Ps.  Ixxxv. 
16);  who  can  be  at  once  just,  "acting 
stringently  according  to  the  demands  of 
his  holiness"  (Delitzsoh),  and  yet  design 
and  effect  the  salvation  of  sinners. 


Ver.  22. — look  unto  me;  rather,  turn 
unto  me  (as  in  Pb.xxv.  16 ;  Ixix.  10 ;  Ixzxvi. 
16);  i.e.  "Be  converted — turn  unto  the  Lord 
your  God."  It  is  implied  that  all  can  turn, 
if  they  will.  And  be  ye  saved.  On  con- 
version, salvation  will  follow.  It  will  extend 
even  to  all  the  ends  of  the  earth  (comp 
Ps.  xcviii.  3,  "All  the  ends  of  the  earth 
have  seen  the  salvation  of  our  God  "). 

Ver.  23. — I  have  sworn  by  myself  (comp. 
Gen.  xxii.  17;  Jer.  xxii.  5;  xlix.  15).  God 
swears  "  by  himself,"  because  he  can  swear 
by  no  greater"  (Heb.  vi.  13).  He  conde- 
scends, for  man's  sake,  to  confirm  in  this 
way  promises  that  are  exceedingly  precious 
(see  the  Homiletics  on  ch.  xiv.  21).  The 
word  is  gone  out  of  my  month  in  righteous- 
ness. So  Dr.  Kay  and  Mr.  Oheyiie  (oomp. 
ver.  19,  "  I  the  Lord  speak  righteousness  "). 
And  shall  not  return;  %.e.  shall  not  be 
withdrawn  or  retracted.  God's  gifts  and 
promises  are  "  without  repentance."  Every 
knee  shall  bow,  every  tongue  shall  swear. 
This  universal  turning  to  God  belongs  to 
the  final  Messianic  kingdom,  prophesied 
in  ch.  ii.  2 — 4;  xi.  6 — 9;  xxxv.  1 — 10; 
Ixv.  17—25;  Ixvi.  18—23;  and  also  by 
Daniel  (vii.  9 — 14)  and  St.  John  the 
Divine  (Eev.  xxi,  1 — 4).  The  entire  de- 
struction of  God's  enemies  is  to  take  place 
previously  (Rev.  xix.  17 — 21). 

Ver.  24. — Surely,  shall  one  say,  in  the 
Lord  have  I  righteousness  ;  rather,  only 
in  the  Lord,  shall  each  man  say  to  me  ('< 
their  righteousness.  All  shall  confess  that 
God  alone  is  righteous,  and  that  any  good- 
ness which  they  have  is  derived  from  him. 
The  Hebrew  has  "  righteousnesses  "  in  the 
plural,  to  express  abundance.  All  that  are 
incensed;  rather,  all  that  were  incensed 
(see  oh.  zli.  11).  Such  persons  shall  repent 
and  be  ashamed. 

Ver.  25. — In  the  Lord  shall  all  the  seed 
of  Israel  be  justified.  Joined  to  Jehovah 
in  mystic  union  (Cheyne),  the  whole  "Israel 
of  God"  shall  be  justified,  and  glory  in 
their  condition. 


HOMTLETICa 

Ver.  7. — In  what  sense  Ood"  creates  evil."  It  was  to  avoid  the  objections  winch  the 
human  conscience  feels  against  regarding  God  as  in  any  sense  the  author  of  evil,  that 
dualism  was  invented.  The  Western  Aryans  thought  it  simpler  and  more  natural  to 
explain  the  phenomena  of  the  physical  and  moral  universe  by  a  perpetual  struggle  of 
two  equal,  or  nearly  equal,  powers — one  a  principle  of  pure  goodness,  the  creator  of 
ev««y  thing  that  was  bright,  sweet,  delightful,  holy,  pure,  good;  the  other,  his  antagonist, 
the  creator  of  all  that  was  the  opposite — than  to  postulate  a  single  original  principle, 
all-powerful  and  all-perfect,  which  had  yet  brought  into  being  a  universe  in  which 
so  much  of  moral  and  physical  evil  obtains  as  experience  reveals  to  us.  And  it  scarcely 
seems  surprising  that  unassisted  human  reason  should  so  argue.  There  is  a  difficulty 
in  understanding  the  coexistence  of  evil  with  the  absolute  government  of  all  thing!  by 
I8AIAH— a  a 


178  THE  BOOK  OF  THE  PBOPHET  ISAIAH,    [oh.  XLV.  1— 26, 

an  omnipoteDt  and  absolutely  good  Ruler.  The  difficulty  is  greater  with  regard  to  moral 
than  physical  evil,  but  it  is  considerable  even  with  respect  to  the  latter. 

I.  Physical  evil.  "  The  whole  creation  groaneth  and  travaileth  in  pain  together  nctil 
now  "  (Kum.  viii.  22).  The  sum  of  animal  suffering  is  so  enormous  that  to  dwell  on  it 
in  thought  would  make  almost  any  man  miserable.  Even  the  sum  of  human  suffering 
i«  more  than  we  can  well  bear  to  think  of.  Hunger,  thirst,  sickness,  accidents,, blows, 
wounds,  sores,  excessive  toil,  make  the  lives  of  millions  a  burthen  to  them,  and 
cause  them  to  welcome  death.  No  doubt  much  of  this  physical  evil  is  the  result  of 
moral  evil ;  but,  making;  any  reasonable  deduction  on  this  score,  we  shall  still  find  in 
what  remains — ^the  resultant  of  the  physical  conditions  of  human  and  animri  life — a 
total  that  it  is  agonizing  to  contemplate.  Yet  God  must,  it  would  seem,  be  regarded  as 
the  direct  Author  of  this.  He  has  so  arranged  the  world  that,  with  the  first  introduc- 
tion into  it  of  sentient  life,  pain  came  in.  Appetites  are  pains ;  desires  are  pains;  most 
of  the  animal  functions  are  pains ;  growth  is  a  pain ;  decay  and  decline  are  pains ;  death 
is  mostly  an  intense  pain.  Man,  as  an  animal,  must  have  known  pain,  even  had  be 
never  known  sin — must,  as  he  increased  and  muliiplied,  have  found  the  means  Of  sub- 
sistence grow  scanty,  and  have  had  to  struggle  for  existence.  Can  we  at  all  account 
for  this?  Much  of  it,  especially  the  animal  suffering,  must,  we  think,  remain  an 
inscrutable  mystery  until  we  are  "  within  the  veil."  But  for  the  physical  evils  to  which 
men  are  liable  we  may  see  sufficient  reason.  Men  are  made  "  perfect  through  suffer- 
ings." In  overcoming,  or  in  bearing,  physical  pains,  man  finds  the  best  training  for 
his  moral  nature.  He  learns  to  be  courageous  by  resisting  fear,  which  is  a  pain ;  to  be 
just  by  resisting  covetousness,  which  is  another  pain ;  and  so  on.  Great  physical  evils 
bring  out  the  greatest  moral  excellences,  as  those  developed  in  martyrs  and  confessors. 
Altogether,  we  may  pretty  clearly  see  that  the  moral  good  produced  by  the  pain  which 
humanity  suffers  may  greatly  outweigh  the  evil  of  the  pain  itself  in  the  sight  c^  a 
moral  Being. 

II.  Moral  evil.  Moral  evil  is  certainly  not  "created"  by  God,  in  the  same  direct 
way  as  physical  evil.  He  has  not  necessitated  it  by  the  arrangements  of  his  universe. 
He  has  but  allowed  it  to  come  into  existence.  And  this  he  seems  to  have  done  in  con- 
sequence of  a  necessity  in  the  nature  of  things.  Either  be  must  have  limited  his  crea- 
tion to  objects  that  moved  mechanically  and  were  incapable  of  moral  action,  or,  by 
creating  mural  agents,  have  allowed  the  possibility  of  moral  evil  coming-into  being.  A 
free  agent  must  be  free  to  do  right  or  to  do  wrongs  if  he  is  not  free  to  do  wrong,  he 
is  really  not  free  when  he  does  right.  And  when  millions  of  free  agents  were  created, 
each  with  a  power  of  doing  wrong,  that  some  of  them  would  choose  to  do  wrong  was 
to  be  expected,  and  was  of  course  foreseen  by  the  Creator.  From  the'fact  that,  though 
thus  foreseeing  the  introduction  of  sin  into  bis  universe,  God  nevertheless  determined 
to  create  moral  beings,  we  may  gather  that  it  is  better  in  God's  sight,  and  therefore 
bettor  absolutely,  that  the  two  classes  of  good  and  bad  moral  beings  should  coexist, 
than  that  there  should  be  no  moral  beings  at  all.  Further,  moral  evil  is  certainly,  like 
^'hysical  evil,  a  great  means  of  developing  higher  forms  of  moral  goodness.  The  Tirtue 
that  resists  contact  with  vice,  the  influence  of  bad  example,  the  seductions  of  those  who 
make  all  possible  efforts  to  corrupt  it,  is  of  a  higher  form  than  that  untried  virtue  which 
has  passed  through  no  such  ordeal.  The  religion  that  leads  men  to  plunge  into  the 
haunts  of  vice,  and  give  themselves  to  the  reclaiming  of  the  lowest  outcasts  among  the 
dregs  of  our  populace,  is  the  highest  form  of  religion.  If  there  were  no  moral  OTil, 
moral  goodness  would  fall  far  short  of  being  what  it  is — there  would  be  no  Howards, 
no  Frys,  no  Havelocks,  no  Livingstones.  By  the  moral  furnace  through  which  it  passes, 
"the  trial  of  men's  faith,  being  much  more  precious  than  that  of  gold  that  peiisheth, 
though  it  he  tried  with  fire,"  is  found,  and  will  "  be  found  unto  praise  and  honour  and 
gl«»7  at  the  appearing  of  Jesus  Chriat "  (1  Pet.  L  7). 

Vewu  9 — 11. — Murmuring  againtt  OotTs  arrangement!  at  once  fodliA  and  wUhid. 
Man  is  very  apt  to  consider  himself  wiser  than  God,  if  not  altogether,  at  any  latit  in 
this  or  that  particular  matter.  There  are  few  who  do  not  at  times  imagine  that,  had 
the  arrangement  of  the  universe  been  committed  to  them,  they  could  have  improved  it 
in  many  respects.  Some  would  hare  had  no  sin ;  almost  all  would  have  had  no  suffer- 
)^t    Xrery  om  would  have  made  some  change  or  other.    Bishop  Butltr  suggMta  ftat 


JH.  XLT.  1— 26.]     THE  BOOK  OF  THE  PROPHET  ISAIAH.  17» 

sach  speculatioDB  are  not  altogether  innocent  ('Analogy,!  part  i.  cb.  iL)';  but  they 
are,  perhaps,  not  greatly  to  be  blamed,  unless  where  they  lead  on  to  positive  disaatis- 
faction,  to  complaints,  and  to  murmurings. 

I.  MnBiTORiiia  18  FOOLISH.  Since :  1.  It  is  vain,  idle ;  it  can  produce  no  change. 
Gk)d  will  not  alter  his  arrangements  because  we  are  dissatisfied  with  them-  "  With 
him  is  no  variableness,  neither  shadow  of  turning  "  ( Jas.  i.  17).  The  laws  which  he  g^vei 
are  laws  "  which  shall  not  be  broken  "  (Ps.  cxlviii.  6,  Prayer-book  Version).  "  Since  the 
fathers  fell  asleep,  all  things  continue  as  they  were  from  the  beginning  of  the  creation  " 
(2  Pet.  iii.  4).  If  we  could  affect  the  operation  of  God's  laws,  change  them,  modify 
them,  the  case  would  be  different ;  there  would  then  be  some  result  of  our  querulons- 
ness.  But,  as  it  is,  there  is  no  result — we  effect  nothing.  2.  It  is  founded  on  igno- 
rance. We  know  so  little  of  QoA'a  entire  scheme  of  things  that  we  cannot  possibly  tell 
whether  any  part  of  the  scheme  to  which  we  object  may  not  be  a  necessary  condition 
to,  or  inseparably  bound  up  with,  some  other  part  or  parts  on  which  we  set  the  highest 
value.  That  to  which  we  object  may  conceivably  be  the  very  thing  which,  if  we  knew 
all,  we  should  most  prize.  3.  It  is  the  preference  ^  a  lesser  good  over  a  greater.  What- 
ever we  may  say  in  momenta  of  suffering!,  ennui,  or  dissatisfaction,  we  do  not  really 
believe  in  our  inmost  hearts  that  any  portion  of  God's  arrangement  of  the  universe  is 
actually  wrong  and  could  be  set  right  by  our  wisdom.  We  know  that  "  whatever  is, 
is  best."  Were  we  actually  empowered  to  make  a  change,  we  should  hesitate.  We 
should  be  afraid  of  doing  harm.  How  foolish,  then,  to  grumble  at  arrangements  which 
we  should  fear  to  disturb ! 

II.  MuBMUBiNO  IB  WICKED.  Since :  1.  It  is  a  form  of  rebellion  against  Ood,  and  so 
of  the  basest  ingratitude,  inasmuch  as  God  is  our  great  Benefactor,  to  whom  we  owe 
everything.  2.  It  is  always  selfish.  We  are  never  tempted  to  murmur  except  when 
the  operation  of  some  law  of  God's  universe  interferes  with  our  own  immediate  comfort, 
or  our  profit,  or  our  imagined  advantage.  But  in  such  cases  we  know  that  otir  disad- 
vantage must  be  compensated  by  some  overplus  of  advantage  to  others,  or  the  law 
would  LOt  exist;  so  that  our  murmuring  implies  a  desire  that  othars  should  suffer 
instead  of  ourselves,  which  is  pure  selfishness.  3.  It  argues  pride.  If  we  had  a  right 
sense  of  our  own  demerit  and  ill  deserving,  we  should  accept  any  and  every  chastening 
at  God's  hands  as  far  less  than  our  due.  We  should  "  humble  ourselves  under  the 
mighty  hand  of  God,"  and  take  thankfiiUy  whatever  suffering  he  sent  us.  It  is  only 
when  we  are  so  proud  as  to  imagine  we  do  not  need  chastening  that  we  can  murmur. 

Yers.  14 — 23. — The  convereion  of  the  Qentilet  gradual,  hat  ultimately  eomphte. 
Three  stages  in  the  conversion  of  the  Gentiles  seem  to  be  marked— one  in  ver.  3 ;  another 
in  ver.  20 ;  a  third  in  ver.  23. 

I.  The  first  stase.  The  nations  within  a  certain  moderate  radius  of  Palestine 
are  naturally  the  first  to  come  in — Egypt  and  Ethiopia,  in  Africa ;  and  by  parity  of 
reasoning,  Syria,  Mesopotamia,  and  Asia  Minor,  in  Asia ;  Greece,  Italy,  and  Southern 
Gkiul,  in  Europe.  This  was  very  much  the  range  of  Hebrew  influence  during  the 
five  centuries  preceding  Christianity,  and  of  Christian  influence  during  two  centuries 
afterwards. 

n.  The  second  btaoe.  The  circle  gradually  widens,  and  a  time  comes  when  the 
gospel  may  be  said,  roughly,  to  have  penetrated  everywhere,  and  "  the  earth  "  to  be 
"  full  of  the  knowledge  of  the  Lord,  as  the  waters  cover  the  sea "  (ch.  xi.  9).  Mis- 
sionaries have  visited  the  remotest  ends  of  the  earth ;  and  the  nations  generally  may 
be  challenged  to  "  assemble  themselves,  and  come,"  and  make  their  choice  between  true 
religion  and  their  own  false  and  absurd  systems  (ver.  20).  But  conversion  has  not 
kept  pace  with  preaching.  On  many  nations  very  little,  on  some  no,  impression  has 
been  made.  Prayer  is  still  offered  widely  to  deities  "  that  cannot  save."  This  is  the 
state  of  things  at  the  present  day.  Scarcely  a  nation  in  the  world  has  not  heard  of 
the  salvation  of  God ;  but  a  large  number — as  much  as  three-fourths  of  the  population 
of  the  globe,  we  are  told — have  not  yet  accepted  it. 

IIL  The  third  btaok.  God  has  "  sworn  by  himself,  the  word  is  gone  out  of  his 
mouth  in  righteousness,  and  shall  not  return  " — that  ultimately  "  unto  him  every  knee 
■hall  bow,  and  every  tongue  shall  swear  "  (ver.  23).  In  "  a  new  heaven  and  a  new 
earth  "  (ch,  Ixr.  IT)  the  Messiah, "  the  Ancient  of  days  "  (Dan.  vii.  6),  will  nde  ovsr  a 


180  THE  BOOK  OP  THE  PROPHET  ISAIAH,     [oh.  xlv.  1— 2S. 

kingdom  which  will  contain  "  all  people,  nations,  and  languages  "  (Dan.  vii.  14).  How  this 
will  be  brought  about,  what  exactly  will  be  the  scene  of  the  kingdom,  what  the  con- 
dition of  its  members,  is  not  revealed,  otherwise  than  in  mystical  words,  and  cannot 
be  laid  down  with  defliiiteness^;  but  in  that  kingdom,  beyond  a  doubt, "  all  people  will 
tall  down  before  Jehovah,  all  nations  will  do  him  service" — the  prophecies  of  Isaiah 
will  have  full  effect :  "  all  flesh  will  worship  before  the  Lord  "  (ch.  Ixvi.  23). 


HOMILIES  BY  VARIOUS  AUTHORS. 

Vera.  1 — 8. — Oyrut  the  anointed  of  Jehovah.     L  The  reason  of  thb  Dimiit 

FAVOUB  TO  Cyeus.  Gyrus  is  the  only  king  out  of  Israel  who  bears  the  title  of 
Jehovah's  anointed.  He  is  solemnly  set  apart  as  an  instrument  to  perform  an  important 
public  service  in  the  cause  of  Jehovah.  It  does  not  necessarily  imply  the  piety  of  Cyrus. 
For  the  purposes  of  Jehovah  he  is  upheld, "  grasped  by  the  right  hand,"  that  he  may 
subdue  nations  before  him — from  the  Euxine  to  Egypt,  from  the  Indian  Ocean  to  the 
Mediterranean.  The  girdles  of  mighty  kings  will  be  unloosed  before  him.  See  this 
said  of  Belshazzar  (Dan.  v.  6) ;  then  were  the  "  two-leaved  gates"  of  Babylon  left  open, 
amidit  the  revelry,  and  the  cotjqueror  broke  in  imopposed  (Herod.,  i.  191).  The  toea- 
sures  of  the  city  are  laid  open  before  him.  1.  The  object  was  that  he  mi;iht  acknow- 
ledge Jehovah.  "  He  hath  given  me  all  the  kingdoms  of  the  earth  "  (Ezra  i.  2).  "  Son 
of  Cambyses,  Heaven  favours  you  manifestly,  or  you  could  not  thus  have  risen  superior 
to  fortune "  (Herod.,  i.  124 ;  cf.  205).  None  but  the  Omniscient  could  have  known 
the  person  and  the  name  of  him  who  was  to  conquer  Babylon  and  deliver  his  people. 
2.  The  next  object  was  the  deliverance  of  the  chosen  people.  "  The  fates  of  the 
empires  and  kingdoms  of  the  world  are  divinely  disposed  of  with  a  view  to  the  Church." 
But  all  the  progress  and  prosperity  of  true  religion  are  summed  up  in  the  knowledge  of 
Jehovah :  that  lie  is  the  soh  Qod ;  that  he  is  the  Creator  and  the  providential  Btder 
of  the  world.  The  alternation  of  day  and  night  is  Jehovah's  ordinance.  So  also  is  that 
of  peace  and  war,  success  and  misfortune,  good  and  eviL  This  is  pure  monotheism, 
opposed  alike  to  pantheism  and  to  dualism.  That  the  world  may  be  converted  to  true 
religion  is  the  final  and  all-comprehensive  object. 

II.  SoNO  OF  FBAisE.  "  The  appearance  of  the  shepherd  of  Jehovah,  and  the 
thought  of  the  blessings  of  which  he  is  to  be  the  medium,  inspires  the  prophet  with  a 
joyous  strain  of  p-almody."  The  form  of  the  expression  is  borrowed  from  the  Eastern 
religions,  the  fertility  of  the  earth  being  due  to  the  impregnating  influence  of  Heaven 
(Ps.  Ixxxv.  11 ;  Hos.  ii.  21, 22).  Righteousness,  in  the  sense  of  salvation  (oh.  li.  5, 6, 8 ; 
Ivi.  1 ;  lix.  17  ;  Ixi.  10, 11 ;  Ixii.  1),  descends  upon  the  souls  of  men.  And  they  will 
break  forth  into  "fruits  of  righteousness  "  to  the  glory  of  God.  Prepared  for  repentance 
and  the  reception  of  the  tiuth  from  the  Holy  Spirit,  they  will  be,  even  as  the  earth  is, 
made  mellow  and  adapted  for  the  reception  of  seed  by  rain  and  dew.  "  A  Church  smiles 
under  the  influence  of  a  revival  of  religion,  and  society  puts  on  the  aspect  of  loveliness 
like  the  earth  after  abundant  showers." — J. 

Yers.  9 — 13. — The  sovereignty  of  Ood.  L  Thk  kubitober  against  Proyidenoe. 
He  is  compared  to  a  "  potsherd  among  potsherds  on  the  ground."  "  Woe  imto  him  who, 
though  made  of  earth,  and  with  no  intrinsic  authority  over  others  of  his  race,  presumes 
to  find  fault  with  the  Maker  I "  (cf.  ch.  xxix.  16  ;  Ixiv.  8 ;  Jer.  xviii.  1 — 6 ;  xix.  1, 10, 11 ; 
Rom.  ix.  20 — 24).  In  the  account  of  the  Creation,  the  Almighty  is  conceived  as  making 
man  out  of  the  dust  of  the  earth  (Gen.  ii.  7).  Shall  the  day,  then,  quarrel  with  the 
plastic  hand  of  the  Potter  ?  How  can  the  distance  between  man  and  God  be  better 
expressed  than  by  the  tautology,  "  God  is  God,  and  man  is  man  "  ?  or  that  he  is  Maker, 
man  the  made  ?  "  Since  matters  stand  thus  between  God  and  us,  let  us  consider  what 
hands  we  are  in,  and  what  an  irresistible  grip  has  hold  of  us ;  and  let  that  teach  us, 
even  for  our  sakes,  to  be  quiet  under  it.  There  is,  indeed,  but  one  way  of  encountering 
an  infinite  power ;  and  that  is  by  an  extraordinary  (if  it  were  possible),  an  infinite 
patience  "  (South).  Is  it  natural,  again,  for  the  child  to  complain  of  its  parents  th»t  it 
aiM  been  brought  deformed  or  weakly  into  the  world  ?    Nor  is  it  becoming  of  men  t| 


•H.  M.T.  1— 26.]     THE  BOOK  OF  THE  PBOPHET  ISAIAH.  181 

catechize  and  call  to  account  Jehovah.  "  Are  ye  children  of  God  ?  Then  ia  it  well  witb 
you ;  and  to  murmur  against  me  is  as  if  ye  should  renounce  your  sonship." 

II.  The  absuboitt  of  mubmttrino.  To  criticize  the  Creator  is  to  a.s»ume  a  know- 
ledge we  hare  not  got.  We  should  be  creators  ourselves  before  we  could  say  whether 
this  or  that  part  of  the  great  world-work  could  have  been  otherwise  executed.  It  is 
also  to  assume  a  knowledge  of  the  clues  of  history,  the  springs  of  sudden  events,  which 
is  not  ours.  And  Jehovah  reminds  man  again  of  his  providential  relation  to  Cjmis. 
His  absolute  unquestionable  dominion  and  sovereignty  over  all  things  is  the  great 
argument  for  our  submission  to  him.  His  dominion  is  founded  on  an  inalienable  title — 
Creation  and  Providence.  It  is  reasonable  that  the  first  cause  should  be  the  Supreme 
Governor;  and  whatever  has  been  made  by  God  should  also  be  commanded  by  him. 
He  might  have  chosen  whether  he  would  have  made  the  world  or  no ;  lor  he  had  no 
need  of  it  to  complete  or  add  to  his  happiness,  v^hich  was  infinitely  perfect  within  the 
cumpass  of  his  own  glorious  being.  Yet  he  was  pleased,  by  the  free  motion  uf  his  will, 
to  communicate  and  diffuse  some  little  shadow  of  those  perfections  upon  the  creatures, 
and  more  especially  upon  his  nearer  resemblances,  men  and  angels.  A  being  essentially 
wise  cannot  do  anything  but  wisely.  Our  ignorance  of  God's  actions  cannot  make  them 
or  argue  them  to  he  unreasonable.  He  is  more  honoured  by  our  admiration  than  by  our 
inquiries.  Hence  the  necessity,  the  prudence,  and  the  becomingness  of  submission, 
without  murmuring  to  his  allotments.— -J. 

Vers.  14 — 17. — T?te  conversion  of  Egypt.  In  this  conversion  of  the  nations  to  true 
religion  the  Divine  goodness  and  providence  will  be  at  last  recognized.  They  are 
represented  as  going  over  to  Israel  of  their  own  accord,  and  surrendering  to  her  their 
wealth.  And  they  will  be  brought  at  last  to  the  great  confession,  "  Of  a  truth  God  is 
in  thee,  and  there  is  none  beside — no  Godhead  at  all." 

I.  History  as  the  concealment  of  God.  So  it  often  appears.  The  weak  are 
down-trodden ;  ihe  proud  and  tyrannical  are  in  the  ascendant.  Israel  in  her  proatiste 
condition  and  insignificance  seemed  to  imply  a  God  impotent  to  save.  And  so  it  is  ir^ 
the  personal  life  and  history.  There  are  sufferings  which  obscure  the  light  of  faith, 
and  seem  to  give  the  lie  to  tl.e  most  deep-seated  religious  hopes.  But  God  is  where  he 
was,  though  our  view  pierces  not  to  him.  "  He's  in  his  heaven ;  all's  right  with  the 
world  1 " 

IL  History  the  unveiling  of  God.  "Now  we  are  forced  to  own  that  Israel's 
God  is  the  absolutely  Strong  One,  able  and  willing  to  deliver  all  who  trust  in  him." 
Then  in  a  moment  they  who  have  trusted  in  idols  are  covered  with  confusion,  together 
with  the  artificers  of  them.  And  Israel  is  saved  with  an  everlasting  salvation.  "Time, 
like  a  dome  of  many-coloured  glass,  stains  the  white  radiance  of  eternity."  What  is 
all  life  and  tiine,  nature  and  human  fashion,  but  a  veiling  of  God  ?  How  can  we  see 
him  except  "  through  a  glass  darkly  "  ?  What  is  thinking  but  dreaming,  and  dreams 
what  but  pictured  screens,  concealing  and  revealing  the  truth  ?  We  are  in  bondage  to 
sense,  to  belief,  to  fancy.  But  our  deliverance  draws  near ;  and  no  confusion  will  await 
them  that  have  believed  to  the  end. — J. 

Vers.  18 — 2B.—  Ood,  Israel,  and  the  world.  Again,  with  solemn  iteration,  Jehovah 
ileclares  that  he  is  Creator  and  God  alone.  The  eafth  was  framed  and  fitted  to  be  the 
habitation  of  man,  and  the  theatre  of  providential  manifestations. 

I.  The  reality  of  the  Eternal.  The  truth  is  open,  and  may  be  published  to  all ; 
it  is  no  thing  of  mystery,  secrecy,  like  heathen  esoteric  rites  or  knowledge.  "  Jehovah's 
Law  is  not  to  be  obtained  by  any  occult  arts  from  the  under-world."  He  has  not  been 
a  wilderness  unto  Israel  or  a  land  of  darkness  (Jer.  ii.  31 ;  cf.  ii.  6).  The  seeking  of 
his  people  after  him  is  not  to  end  in  chaos.  Here,  again,  may  be  an  allusion  to  the  dark 
sayings  of  the  heathen  oracles — ambiguous,  oblique,  or  fallacious.  His  speech  is  direct, 
upright,  and  true.  Let  those  who  have  escaped  from  the  judgment  upun  the  nations 
bear  witness.  How  foolish  they  who  carry  the  wooden  image  in  processions,  and  pray 
to  it  (cf.  ch.  xlvi.  1 ;  Jer.  x.  5;  Am.  v.  26)1  What  argument  can  be  produced  for  the 
rlivinity  of  idols?  Which  of  them  can  pretend  to  the  prophetic  and  predictive  power 
uf  Jehovah  ?  God  is  the  only  Reality,  the  only  Truth,  the  only  faithful  Principle  in  a 
world  of  idolatrous  unrealities,  pretences,  and  shams. 


18t  THE   BOOK  OF  THE  PROPHET  ISAIAH,     [oh.  U.T.  1— SA 

IL  Call  to  salyatiom.  In  him  who  is  real  and  true,  alone  can  men  find  delirer- 
aace  from  temporal  and  spiritual  ills.  Not  IstmI  alone,  but  mankind,  is  destined  ta 
look  to  him  as  the  Universal  Saviour.  Jehovah  swears  hj  himself— the  strongest  fenn 
of  assurance — "  when  the  accompanying  revelation  is  specially  grand,  or  specially  hard 
to  believe."  "  The  abolition  of  the  last  vestige  of  nationalism  in  the  true  reli^on  is 
announced."  The  word  is  gone  forth,  and  sh^  not  miss  its  aim;  the  truth  has  sped 
like  an  arrow  to  the  mark.  Every  knee  shall  bow  in  homage,  every  tongue  shall  swear 
allegiance.  SuVimi^jsion  shall  be  without  reserve  and  absolute.  "  Only  in  Jehovah  are 
righteoumess  and  strength."  While  confusion  shall  be  the  portion  of  his  enemies,  his 
servants  shall  be  accepted,  and  be  placed  by  him  on  the  footing  of  the  justified  and 
righteous.  "  He,  then,  that  trembles  at  the  name  of  an  offended  Creator,  let  him  comfort 
himself  in  the  title  of  a  reconciled  Father.  Though  we  have  cause  to  dread  the  tribunal 
of  his  justice,  let  us  come  confidently  to  the  throne  of  his  mercy.  Let  us  come  fireely, 
and  spread  all  our  wants  before  him,  lay  open  all  our  complaints,  tell  him  all  the  dia- 
trestea  and  secret  anguishes  of  our  burdened  consciences.  Believe  it,  we  cannot  be 
more  ready  to  tell  them  than  he  is  to  hear  them ;  nor  he  to  hear  them  than  to  relieve 
them.  Let  us  anchor  oiu  hopes,  our  trust,  our  confidence,  on  his  goodness ;  for  although 
as  our  Creator  he  will  not  save  us,  yet  as  our  Bedeemer  he  will." — J. 

Vers.  18 — ^25. — Jehovah :  his  nature  and  purposes.  I.  His  -sole  Dxitt.  He  is  the 
Creator,  and  to  ^ay  this  is  to  say  that  his  is  "  the  Godhead."  This  truth  ia  repeated 
"  line  upon  line,"  and  "  precept  upon  precept."  Simple  truths  have  an  emphasis  pecu- 
liar to  them.  They  need  to  be  iterated,  because  the  memories  of  men  are  unfaithful, 
their  imaginations  vagrant,  their  affections  prone  to  wander  from  their  true  and  central 
Object.  It  was  so  in  ancient  times ;  it  is  so  stilL  Then  men  were  tempted  to  think 
that  other  national  gods  had  some  power;  now  they  are  disposed  to  turn  to  some 
"  id«al  substitute  "  for  Ood.  We  should  learn,  not  to  share  out  our  reverence  among 
God  and  various  ideals  of  the  true,  wise,  beautiful,  and  good,  but  to  conceive  of  him  as 
the  sum  total  of  them  all.  The  endiiringly  good,  and  the  permanently  true  and 
spiritually  and  essentinlly  fair,  all  enter  into  the  conception  of  "  the  Eternal,  beside 
whom  there  is  none." 

IL  His  purpose  in  the  Creation.  It  was  to  be,  "  not  as  a  chaos,"  but  a  scene  of 
order,  a  kosmos,  as  the  Greek  said.  It  was  "  formed,  finished,  and  arranged,  that  it 
might  be  inhabited  " — like  "a  lodging  for  a  friend."  God  "rejoices  in  the  habitable 
parts  of  the  earth;  and  his  delights  are  with  the  children  of  men."  His  thought  was 
above  all  for  the  social  kosmos — the  spiritual  system,  the  beauty  of  the  regenerate 
state  of  souls ;  his  mind  to  be  reflected  in  the  human  creation ;  the  human  creation  to 
illustrate  the  glory  of  his  mind.  If  science  brings  to  light  the  wonders  of  tlie  natural 
order,  true  theology  brings  to  light  the  greater  wonders  of  the  spiritual  order.  It  is  a 
discovery  of  the  law  to  which  the  passions  and  forces  of  human  nature  must  render 
obedience  in  order  to  happiness. 

III.  The  openness  of  his  bevelations.  Not  in  darkness  and  secrecy,  like  the 
heathen  mysteries ;  nor  in  obscure  and  symbolic  phrases,  like  theirs.  Nor  is  it  a  matter 
of  occult  art  and  divination.  It  is  the  "light  of  Jehovah"  (cf.  Deut.  xzx.  11 — 14; 
Jer.  ii.  31).  Luminous  in  themselves,  his  words  lead  us  on  to  tracts  of  light  and 
felicity.  They  are  direct,  and  opposed  to  the  crooked  and  enigmatic  deliverances  of  the 
heathen  oracles.  Let  human  experience  decide  between  Jehovah  and  the  heathen  gods. 
They  only  dare  to  make  such  an  appeal  who  are  conscious  that  it  cannot  be  resisted. 
That  religion  cannot  stand  which  will  not  endure  satire ;  for  ridicule  is  the  test  of  truth. 
How  can  they  endure  it  who  "  without  knowledge  carry  the  word  of  their  image,  and 
pray  unto  a  god  that  cannot  save"?  What  argument  can  they  produce?  What 
covenant  can  there  be  between  the  soul  and  an  idol  ?  what  ability  in  wood  or  stone.to 
save  ?  The  result  remains  as  before.  As  there  is  but  one  Creator,  so  is  there  but  one 
Moral  Governor — one  righteous,  faithful,  covenant-kee|iing  God. 

IV.  Call  to  salvation  and  to  adoration.  "Be  saved  I"  That  is,  ys  shall  be 
saved  in  turning  unto  me.  If  he  is  the  only  God,  obedience  to  him  must  be  th«  only 
salvation.  And  upon  this  end  God  has  set  his  heart — this  end,  he  swears,  as  God  is 
Ged,  shall  be  accomplished.  The  true  Israel  shall  expand,  the  barriers  of  natunlisa 
■hall  be  broken  down;  there  shall  be  universal,  voluntary,  unrestrained  submiisiWi 


cH.  XLT.  1— 26.J     THE  BOOK  OF  THE  PBOPHBT  ISAIAH.  183 

Shame  at  error,  and  triumphant,  boastful  gladness  in  the  new-fonnd  truth,  shall  go 
together.  Such  a  communion  of  spirits  iu  God  and  with  one  another  is  the  object  of 
faith,  «f  aspiration  now,  and  shall  be  a  glorious  realization  hereafter^— J. 

Vor.  Sj, — God  in  our  past  lift.  "  I  girded  thee,  though  thou  hast  not  known  me.* 
When  the  soul  of  man  is  renewed,  and  his  rebellion  against  Qod  ceases,  wonder- 
ment often  arises  in  the  heart  that  life  has  not  been  altogetiier  a  ruin.  Bo  many  times 
we  have  been  near  the  precipice ;  the  crumbling  stones  fell  down  into  the  plain ;  our 
feet  well-nigh  slipped.    Here  is  the  open  secret. 

L  Uncokboiotts  bklf.  "  I  girded  thee."  We  have  not  seen  a  &ce  nor  even  heard  a 
voim,  but  an  invisible  arm  has  been  aroimd  us.  "  It  is  of  the  Lord's  mercy  that  we  are 
not  consumed."  Our  folly  was  suCBcient  to  ruin  us.  Our  obstinacy  was  wild  and 
wilfnl.  We  cannot  take  credit  to  ourselves  for  deliverances  from  moral  danger.  We 
can  look  back  and  see  that  often  there  was  but  a  step  betwixt  us  and  morel  death. 
"  Great  deliverances,"  as  the  prophet  says,  hath  God  wrought. 

II.  Human  laNOBANCE.  "  Though  thou  hast  not  known  me."  The  life  baa  been 
destitute  of  fellowship  with  Gh>d  and  likeness  to  God.  We  have  not  retained  the 
knowledge  of  God.  There  has  been  all  through  our  life :  1.  OocCs  ea/re  without  owr 
cognizance,  2.  OocPs  love  without  our  gratitude.  3.  OoiTs  wisdom  without  our  shiR. 
Yeiily  the  apostle  was  right :  "  By  the  grace  of  God  I  am  what  I  am." — ^W.  M.  S. 

Yer.  22. — The  eye  of  the  soul.  Look  unto  me,  and  be  ye  saved."  Faith  can  look! 
We  have  the  spiritual  vision  and  the  spiritual  object.  "  Blessed  are  your  eyes, 
for  they  see."  We  look,  and  are  saved  1  Yes ;  and  we  look  in  hours  of  sorrow  and 
unrest,  and  our  burdens  are  lightened.  This  is  no  dream  of  the  qmetist ;  no  meditation 
of  the  mystic.  We  do  not  look  into  infinity,  and  feel  awe.  We  do  not  merely  set 
religious  imagination  to  work.  We  have  a  loving  Lord  and  Saviour,  to  whom  we  look. 
"  Sir,  we  would  see  Jesus."  When  our  eyes  are  filled  with  worldly  visions ;  when  we 
are  active  in  the  warehouse,  the  office,  the  street,  the  home; — then  we  have  experience 
of  time-yisions.  When  our  sotds  are  awake  we  gaze  on  the  unseen  Lord,  who  has  been 
about  our  path  all  the  day,  and  who  is  always  waiting  to  be  graciotis.  What  is 
the  exact  word,  do  you  say  ?  I  see  1  You  are  accustomed  to  a  close  exegesis  of  the 
Scripture.  It  is  well  1  The  Hebrew  means,  "  flowed  together."  Is  not  that  beautiful  ? 
"  They  looked  unto  him,  and  flowed  together."  We  are  lightened  by  oneness  with 
our  Lord. 

L  LooKiNO  miTO  jEsns  lightknb  ns  bt  consoious  btmpatht.  This  always 
lightens.  In  a  human  sense  it  does.  We  can  enter  into  each  other's  lives,  and  bear 
each  other's  burdens.  We  want  not  more  strength,  but  more  cheer.  He  does  not  give 
new  faculty,  but  the  Holy  Spirit  quickens  faith ;  faculty  we  already  have.  Think  of 
the  one  Civine  life.  Christ  knew  what  it  was  to  go  to  his  Father  in  prayer,  to  be 
alone,  to  be  misunderstood,  to  be  solitary  and  forsaken.  He  was  tempted,  too,  in  all 
points  as  we  are,  yet  without  sin.  He  suffered,  being  tempted.  We  look  to  the 
Brother  as  well  as  the  Saviour.  Sympathy  1  Is  it  not  precious  ?  We  get  hardened  by 
habits,  where  each  has  to  struggle  for  himself  or  herself.  Yes,  herself  1  The  womanly 
life  is  often  a  heroism  of  endeavour  in  the  sense  of  seeking  sometimes  a  livelihood ;  and 
the  world  to  a  widow  does  seem  a  very  selfish  place  at  times.  Christ  was  poor.  He 
waf,  in  a  himian  sense,  needy.  But,  you  say,  even  in  these  lives  of  struggle  and 
diffienlty,  the  spiritual  anxieties  are  the  deepest :  to  maintain  a  pure  heart,  a  faithful 
lovv^  •  true  conscience,  a  gracious  progress  in  heavenward  affection.  Then  remember 
he  knows  your  inner  history.  Look  to  him.  Seek  oneness.  Let  your  life  and  his 
"  flow  together." 

n.  LooEixa  nirro  Jkbus  uqbtenb  us  bt  oonsoioub  fowxb.  He  is  able  to  keep — able 
to  Bave.  Have  you  ever  been  in  a  gale  at  sea,  and  beea  nervous  and  timorous?  But 
there,  on  the  bridge,  is  the  calm,  keen-eyed,  well-trained  captain.  You  feel  that  there 
is  confidence  coming  to  your  heart  as  you  look  at  him.  What  waves  cannot  Christ 
calm  ?  What  coast  of  Itfe  does  not  he  know  the  soundings  of?  What  can  surprise  his 
vi^lance,  or  blind  his  knowledge,  or  hinder  his  commands  ?  Even  when  the  earthly 
physician  came  to  your  tkk  child,  yon  watched  his  face  and  were  lightened ;  he  hoped, 
tai.  ytu  nMWfd  your  (trongth.    ▲  Ohrist  leia  than  DiTine  is  no  red  refsge  for  such 


184  THE  BOOK  OF  THE  PBOPHET  ISAIAH,     [ch,  xlv.  1— 25 

i,nxious  souls  aa  ours.  We  need  not  only  beautiful  ethics,  exquisite  parables;  but  wc 
want  Divine  authority :  "  /  will ;  be  thou  clean  I "  We  are  at  rest  when  we  can  say 
with  the  centurion,  "  Truly  this  was  the  Son  of  God."  We  feel  how  guilty  we  are. 
We  admit  no  man,  no  priest,  into  the  picture-gallery  of  the  soul.  We  decline  to 
reveal  our  leprosy  of  heart  to  our  fellow-mea.  But  we  are  all  polluted  and  evil ;  and 
we  have  deep  repose  of  heart  when  we  come  to  the  one  fountain  open  for  sin  and 
uncleanness,  and  know  that  Chiist  is  "  able  to  save  to  the  uttermost  all  that  come  unto 
God  by  him."  Ko  look  lightens  us  which  is  merely  imitative — which  is  a  lesson-look 
of  duty.     We  need  a  great  Saviour  as  well  as  a  great  Teacher. 

III.  Looking  unto  Jssns  lishteks  as  by  coNSCions  obedience.  This  comes  next. 
We  flow  together,  not  merely  in  sympathy,  but  in  life  and  service.  We  do  his  command- 
ments ;  we  know  in  following  him  we  are  in  the  right  path ;  and  how  it  lightens  one  to 
feel  that  the  way  is  right,  however  hard  and  painful  it  may  be  1  Bectitude  is  the  music 
of  the  soul.  Is  not  this  sometimes  forgotten?  you  say.  Or,  if  not  forgotten,  is 
obedience  relegated  to  a  very  inferior  place  by  some  Christians?  Yes;  they  mean 
well,  but  they  take  a  superficial  view  of  the  gospel.  Bemoval  of  guilt  is  not  all. 
Doing  is  not  a  deadly  thing,  it  does  not  end  in  .death — if  it  is  li/e-doing  and  not  law- 
doing.  Christ  says,  "  Keep  my  commandments."  "  This  do,  and  thou  shalt  live."  We 
are  never  lightened  by  self-indulgent  piety,  which  leaves  all  to  God.  We  are  to  exer- 
cise our  graces ;  to  use  what  Paul  calls  "  the  gymnastic  of  godliness " — a  beautiful 
expression.  Looking  to  Jesus,  we  shall  giun  strength  for  every  earnest  endeavour  after 
the  Divine  life.  But  is  there  not  a  danger  of  spiritual  pride?  Is  it  not  better  to  feel 
God  does  all  ?  There  is  no  one  of  us  free  from  the  danger  of  spiritual  pride.  We  must 
all  watch  and  pray  against  it.  But  you  may  detect  spiritual  pride  often  very  mani- 
festly in  those  who  think  that  they,  and  they  alone,  know  the  entire  secret  of  God's 
will ;  and  their  secret  is,  a  leaving  it  all  to  him.  Then  pride  says,  "  See ;  I  am  free 
from  legalism,  and  I  have  no  dans;er  of  self-righteousness."  Pride  may  hide  under  this 
cloak  of  confessed  humility.  We  are  only  safe  in  Christ's  own  way.  He  and  no 
earthly  teacher  is  to  be  really  our  spiritual  Director, and  he  says,  "If  ye  love  me, keep 
my  commandments ; "  "  If  ye  know  these  things,  happy  are  ye  if  ye  do  them ; "  "  He 
that  reapeth  receiveth  wages,  and  gathereth  fruit  unto  eternal  life."  Kot  by  a  cowardly 
shrinking  from  duty,  but  by  looking  up  to  the  Captain  of  the  great  host  and  gathering 
nerve  to  throw  one's  self  into  the  thick  of  the  fight  is  our  heart  lightened. 

IV.  LooEiNO  uirro  Jesus  mohtens  bt  ookscious  exfebienoe.  We  have  tried  it  in 
the  days  of  old  I  Christ  has  lightened  many  a  burden  we  foolishly  tried  to  carry  alone. 
Men  are  ashamed  of  their  failures.  They  boast  of  a  certain  specific,  and  it  fails.  They 
recommend  certain  methods  of  conduct  which  break  down  in  operation.  But  our 
faces  are  not  ashamed.  They  glow  with  the  consciousness  of  what  Christ  has  been  in 
past  times  of  test  and  trial.  He  has  never  failed — never  forsaken.  This  ia  a  beautiful 
idea  about  the  countenance — a  Christian  should  have  no  shame  there.  I  do  not  mean 
a  face  defiant  or  boastful ;  that  is  not  the  meaning  of  these  words,  "  And  their  faces 
were  not  ashamed."  It  means  no  confusion,  no  flush  of  anxiety,  no  prophecy  of 
fiulure  on  it.  We  can  all  look  to  him.  We  are  all  invited  I  None  of  us  can  measure 
the  weight  on  the  heart.  Christ  can.  And  he  knows  that  it  is  heavy,  very  heavy. 
We  are  often  tired  and  weary.  Come  to  him  I  You  need  him  I  Yon  have  slighted 
and  neglected  him  long  time  now ;  but  you  have  found  no  Friend,  no  Sarioar  mny 
from  him. 

" '  Lay  down,  thou  weaiy  one,  lay  down 
Thy  head  upon  my  breast.' " 

Let  OB  do  so.    Then  this  experience  will  hare  brought  to  of  •  peace  whioh  pUMth 
all  understanding.— W.  M.  8. 

Vers.  1 — 5. — The  wi/elt  hand  on  the  human  heart.  Of  this  passage  the  most  striking 
and  inviting  words  are  those  in  the  fourth  and  fifth  verses :  "  I  have  sumamed  thee, 
thoi^  thou  hast  not  known  me ; "  "I  girded  thee,  though  thou  hast  not  knows  me." 
But  whfle  these  sentences  furnish  the  theme  of  consideration,  the  other  part  of  the 
passage  suggests  three  particular  tMng$  in  which  the  prophiUe  word  was  /ulfiUtd, 
I,  The  opening  of  the  gates  of  htiM  (ver.  1),  fulfilled  during  th*  M^tur*  cf  BtbyW, 


urn  XLT.  1—25.3     THE  BOOK  OF   THE   PROPHET  ISAIAH.  185 

2.  Tha  discovery  of  hidden  treasure  (ver.  3),  fulfilled  iu  the  talcing  and  sacking  of  two 
of  the  wealthiest  cities  of  antiquity,  besides  other  great  acquisitions.  3.  The  strength- 
ening of  Cyrus  for  the  sake  of  Israel  (vers.  1 — 4),  fulfilled  in  the  brilliant  successes  of 
the  great  Persian  conqueror,  followed  by  the  liberation  of  the  Jews  from  captivity.  But 
the  interesting  fact  is  the  presence  and  addon  of  the  Divine  hand  in  the  conrse  of  this 
heathen  king.  Little  as  Cyrus  imagined  it,  he  was  under  the  guardianship  and  guidance 
of  the  Lord  of  hosts  from  bis  earliest  childhood  to  his  last  successes.  The  powe;  that 
snatched  him  from  earliest  peiil,  that  made  him  the  wise  and  capable  administrator  he 
became,  that  planted  in  him  the  spirit  of  humanity  and  equity,  that  Eave<i  him  in  a 
thousand  dangers,  and  gave  so  triumphant  an  issue  to  his  various  enterprises, — this  was 
none  other  than  the  power  which  is  Divine.  God  was  girding  him,  though  he  knew 
not  the  name  and  the  works  of  Jehovah.  On  this  unenlightened  sovereign,  from 
infancy  to  age,  through  all  the  events  of  a  crowded  life,  a  Divine  hand  was  laid ;  its 
touch  was  aU  unfelt,  its  secrets  undiscovered ;  but  it  was  there — a  gentle,  constraining 
force,  shaping  his  career,  tracing  the  lines  along  which  he  moved,  making  him  the 
power  among  the  nations  that  he  was  in  those  ancient  times.  This  known  fact  does 
two  very  useful  things  for  us. 

I.  It  gives  a  PBOFOxniD  intebebt  to  all  ecman  histobt.  There  is  too  much  in 
the  affairs  of  men  to  justify  the  sarcasm  about  the  "  battle  of  kites  and  crows ; "  there  is 
something  pitifuliy  small  in  the  contests  which  proceed  in  "  high  places  "  fur  honours, 
titles,  and  emuluments.  In  one  view  the  struggles  of  men  are  small  enough  to  excite 
our  pity,  if  not  our  disregard.  But  introduce  the  element  of  the  Divine !  Then  all  is 
changed.  And  should  we  not  introduce  that  element?  If  God's  unfelt  hand  was  on 
one  heathen  king,  why  not  on  another  ?  why  not  on  all  the  others  ?  If,  all  unknown, 
he  was  upsetting  and  upraising  lungdoms  in  one  clime  and  age,  why  not  in  other 
climes  and  in  other  ages  7  In  this  view  "  profane  "  history  becomes  "  sacred ; "  for  in 
it  we  have  a  record  of  God's  doings  in  the  world.  When  we  read  the  account  of  the 
overthrow  of  Assyria,  of  Persia,  of  Greece,  of  Rome,  of  Spain ;  when  we  read  the  careers 
of  Alexander,  of  Caesar,  of  Charlemagne,  of  Napoleon,  of  Cromwell,  of  Washington, — in 
the  light  of  the  truth  which  lies  in  the  text,  human  histoiy  is  very  much  more  than  the 
story  of  a  "  battle  between  kites  aad  crows ; "  it  is  more  than  the  account  of  human 
passions  in  stern  conflict,  of  human  ambition  working  itself  up  and  burning  itself  out. 
It  is  Divine  procedure ;  it  is  God's  outworking  and  overruling  ;  it  is  the  hand  of  Gud  laid 
on  the  arm  of  man, — unfelt,  unrecognized,  but  directing  and  controlling,  working  to 
wise  and  righteous  issues.  In  the  great  events  which  are  the  landmarks  of  history, 
and.  in  the  careers  of  illustrious  men;  God  is  "within  the  shadow,"  girding  men  though 
they  know  him  not — the  mightiest  factor  by  far  in  all  worlds,  and  even  in  this,  where 
he  is  so  little  known,  so  much  forgotten. 

XL  It  lends  obeat  iupobtance  to  eveby  human  life.  Men  may  imagine  that 
there  is  nothing  sacred  about  their  individual  life ;  that  they  have  very  little  to  do  with 
God  and  he  with  them ;  that  God  stands  in  no  closer  relation  to  them  than  that  of  the 
Author  of  the  laws  by  which  they  are  governed,  and  the  ultimate  source  of  the  blessings 
which  they  receive.  But  they  are  wrung.  God  is  much  more  to  them  than  this.  He 
is  the  Father  pf  their  spirits;  he  is  the  Saviour  of  their  souls;  he  is  seeking  their 
welfare ;  is  following  them  out,  in  his  thought  and  affection,  to  the  "  far  country  "  of 
sin;  is  inviting  and  promoting  their  return;  is  touching  them  in  many  ways  and  at 
many  points,  "  girding  them,  though  they  know  him  not."  The  meaning  of  all  sacred 
privilege  and  of  all  parental  discipline  is  that  God  is  laying  his  hand  upon  us,  and  is 
saying  to  us,  "  Return  unto  me ; "  "  Come  unto  me."— 0. 

Vers,  6 — 8. — An  old  perplexity.  From  very  ancient  times,  through  very  many 
generations,  there  has  presented  itself  to  the  human  mind  the  perplexity  which  arises 
from  the  antagonism  of  forces.    We  find  eveiywhere — 

I.  Opposite  aspects  of  human  life.  Here  are  light  and  darkness,  peace  and  evil 
(ver.  7).  On  the  one  hand  are  signs  and  indications  of  a  marvellous  and  minute 
benevolence.  In  the  sea,  in  the  soil,  in  the  forests,  in  the  air,  and  on  the  earth ;  in  fish, 
in  insects,  in  beast,  in  bird,  and,  above  all,  in  the  life  and  in  the  mind  of  man, — are 
innumerable,  inestimable  evidences  of  Divine  beneficence.  But,  on  the  other  hand, 
tbere  are  drawbacks,  diera  are  shadows,  there  are  evils,  the  number  of  which  we 


186  THE  BOOK  OF  THE  PBOPHET  ISAIAH,     [oh.  xx.t.  1— 26. 


cannot  eoan^  and  the  nature  of  which  it  ia  difficult  to  exaggerate.  Pleasure  is  matched 
with  pain;  joy  is  followed  by  sorrow ;  hope  is  shadowed  by  fear;  peace  ia  waited  upon 
by  strife ;  life  is  swallowed  up  by  death. 

II.  The  pbrplkzitt  thus  ocoasioked.  What  ia  the  secret  of  this  strange  contradic- 
tion? What  is  the  explanation  of  it?  Shall  we  find  intellectual  rest  in  dwdiwm? 
or  shall  we  fall  back  upon /ate — upon  the  blind  action  of  unintelligent  forces?  or  may 
we  rise  to  the  belief  in  one  oTerruling  Ood?  Who  shall  read  the  riddle  of  the 
unintelligible  world  ? 

III.  The  ARauHENT  from  thk  issue.  Qo  far  enough  on,  and  we  shall  find  that 
which  enlightens  and  relieves  us ;  we  must  look  to  "  the  end  of  the  Lord"  (Jas.  v.  11). 
The  end  of  the  Lord  is  found :  1.  In  righteousness,  (Ver.  8.)  At  last,  in  the  history  of 
men,  families,  and  nations,  the  pure  and  just  are  exalted,  while  the  wicked  are  .con- 
sumed and  perish.  2.  In  salvation,  (Ver.  8.)  To  the  suffering  ones  comes  rescue  from 
poverty  or  oppression ;  to  the  sinful  ones  comes  redemption  from  penalty,  reinstatement 
in  the  home  and  kingdom  of  Gh>d. 

IV.  The  batisfyino  truth.  After  all,  only  one  thing  will  decide  the  question — 
God's  revealing  Word.  It  was  his  declaration  through  the  prophets,  "I  am  the 
Lord;"  "I  the  Lord  have  created  it."  It  it  the  word,  the  life,  the  work  of  Jesus 
Christ,  who  reveals  to  us  an  ever-present,  overruling  Father  of  mankind.-^. 

Vers.  9 — ^12. — 2%«  argument /or  aeqwesoence.  Ko  doubt  there  are  circumstaaees  in 
which  men  find — 

I.  A  TEUFTATioN  TO  BBBEii.  1.  Men  are  bitterly  disajppointed,  or  they  are  greatly 
distressed;  their  high  hopes  are  dashed  to  the  ground,  or  their  chief  treasures  are 
taken  from  their  grasp.  2.  Then  they  think  themselves  aggrieved;  tbey  imagine  that 
the  Almighty  is  dealing  with  them  as  he  does  not  with  their  fellows — that  he  is  acting 
ungraciously  and  even  unjustly  toward  them.  3.  The  issue  is  often  a  settled  rAdlious- 
ness  of  spirit,  an  "inward  thought  "that  God  is  partial  and  unfair;  a  tone  of  querulous- 
ness,  if  not  actual  terms  of  reproach,  or  even  blasphemous  arrugnment. 

II.  The  ABOuiiENT  fob  acquiescence.  This  is  manifold.  1.  The  impotence  and 
the  peril  of  human  resistance  tu  the  Divine  wilL  "  Woe  unto  him  that  striveth,"  etc. 
(ver.  9).  How  vain  is  the  contrast  between  finite,  perishable  man  and  the  Infinite 
and  Eternal;  between  one  whs  is  formed  of  clay  and  him  who  "  made  the  earth  and 
stretched  out  the  heavens"!  2.  The  deference  due  from  the  creature  to  the  Creator. 
"  That  striveth  with  his  Maker  "  (vers.  9, 11).  For  us  to  enter  into  a  controversy  with 
the  Being  who  called  us  into  existence,  who  endowed  us  with  all  the  faculties  we 
possess,  who  gave  ua  the  very  power  which  is  being  exercised  in  criticism  and 
questioning,  without  whose  creative  and  sustaining  hand  we  could  not  think  one 
thought  or  speak  one  word,  is  unseemly  and  unbecoming  in  the  last  degree.  3.  The 
fact  of  God's  fatherhood,  and  all  the  reasons  that  reside  therein.  If  it  be  unfitting  for 
a  son  to  reproach  his  father  (ver.  10),  how  much  more  for  us  to  reliel  against  Ch>d,  who 
stands  to  us  in  a  relation  far  more  intimate,  far  more  sacred,  far  more  worthy  of 
reverent  submission,  than  that  in  which  the  human  parent  stands  to  his  child  I  And  it 
is  also  short-sighted ;  for  the  Divine  Father  has  thoughts  in  his  mind,  reasons  for  his 
action,  which  we,  his  children,  are  quite  unable  to  comprehend  or  even  to  conceive. 
For  us  to  complain  of  him  is  for  ignorance  to  compltun  of  wisdom.  4.  Consideration  of 
the  future  which  is  coming.  We  must  not  leave  the  "things  to  come"  (ver.  11)' out 
of  our  reckoning ;  they  have  much  to  do  with  the  whole  question  of  God's  dealings  with 
mankind.  What  God  purposes  to  do  for  us,  both  as  individual  men  and  as  a  race, 
forms  an  essential  element  in  the  whole  matter.  The  future  will  be  found  to  adjust  the 
past  and  the  present.  The  grievous  things  which  have  been  and  the  painful  things 
which  are  now  will  be  balanced  by,  will  be  completely  list  in,  the  blessed  and  glorious 
things  which  "  wait  to  be  revealed." — 0. 

Ver.  15. — Divine  concedlmeni.  In  God's  dealings  with  individual  men  and  with 
mankind  at  large,  as  with  his  people  Israel,  there  are  three  stages. 

I.  The  bevblation  of  himself.  "0  God  of  Israel."  The  God  who  was  thus 
addressed  was,  emphatically,  a  Revealing  One.  He  was  known  to  Israel  as  tiie  One 
who  revealed  himself  to  Abraham  and  Isaac  and  Jacob,  to  Moses  and  Aaron,  to  Samuel 


OH.  XLT.  1— 26.]     THE  BOOK  OF  THE  PROPHET  ISAIAH.  187 

and  David  and  Solomon,  to  all  his  holy  prophets.  We  also  know  God  as  the  Being 
who  has  revealed  himself  in  nature,  in  the  human  reason  and  conscience,  in  providence, 
and  more  especiaUy  in  Jesus  Christ.  We  worship  him  as  the  God  who  "  hath  showed  us 
light,"  who  has  made  clear  to  us  his  nature,  his  character,  bis  dispo»icion  toward  us, 
his  sinful  children,  the  conditions  under  which  he  will  receive  and  reinstate  us. 

IL  Bib  conoealment  of  bihbelf.  "  Thou  art  a  God  that  hidest  thyself."  We  see 
this  truth  appearing  in  various  directions.  1.  In  the  processes  of  nature.  The  power 
of  God  is  in  all  the  beneficent  forces  of  nature,  working  out  for  us  the  changes  of  the 
seasons,  the  bounties  and  the  beauties  of  the  earth,  the  wonders  of  human  attainment ; 
but  his  hand  is  unseen,  his  touch  unfelt.  2.  In  his  government  of  mankind.  Israel 
did  not  understand  what  Jehovah  was  doing  with  her;  as  a  nation  she  entirely  mis- 
understood her  mission.  Qoi.  concealed  the  purpose  he  had  in  his  training  and  his 
providential  treatment.  The  other  nations  of  antiquity — ^Assyria,  Persia,  Egypt, 
Greece,  Rome — were  serving  a  Divine  purpose ;  but  they  knew  it  not.  It  was  "  the 
mystery  hid  from  the  ages  and  generations."  3.  In  his  redemption  of  our  rouse.  How 
little  did  the  apostles,  while  they  accompanied  our  Lord  and  ministered  to  his  wants 
and  witnessed  his  sufferings,  imagine  that  he  was  laying  the  foundations  of  a  spiritual 
and  universal  empire — a  kingdom  of  truth  and  love !  What  a  blessed  purpose,  what 
a  grand  design  was  concealed  beneath  the  humble  person  and  the  peaceful  ministry 
of  the  Son  of  manl  And  in  all  the  subsequent  outworkings  of  the  Divine  plan,  how 
much  has  there  been  of  Divine  concealment  1  So  that,  as  one  has  said,  while  these 
eighteen  centuries  have  been  anni  Domini,  we  have  had  to  lament— 

**  Years  of  the  I^ord  are  these, 
But  of  a  Lord  away." 

4.  In  Ms  conduct  of  ea/ih  human  life.  We  believe  that  God  is  ordering  our  lives, 
shaping  and  moulding  them,  determining  their  course,  and  deciding  what  shall  be  the 
witness  they  shall  bear  and  the  work  they  shall  do — what  shall  be  their  contribution 
to  the  great  campaign  he  is  conducting.  But,  here  again,  his  band  is  all  unseen. 
Often,  generally,  we  cannot  detect  the  unity,  the  plan,  the  purpose  of  our  lives;  it 
is  because  we  walk  by  faith  and  not  by  sight  that  we  are  convinced  of  the  presence 
of  his  intervening  and  overruling  power.  Many  are  the  dark  passages  in  the  good 
man's  career,  when  he  is  prompted  to  exclaim,  "  Verily  thou  art  a  God  that  hidest 
thyself." 

III.  His  manifestation  m  BEOEEMiNa  love.  The  last  word  we  have  to  use  is 
a  word  which  explains  everything — "  the  Saviour."  Israel  is  brought  very  low;  Qoi'a 
face  is  hidden  from  his  people ;  he  seems  to  have  forgotten  them ;  but  he  comes  in 
redeeming  grace,  and  "  with  the  saving  strength  of  his  right  hand  "  proves  himself  their 
Refuge  and  their  Friend.  The  human  race  goes  from  bad  to  worse,  and,  when  it  seems 
delivered  over  to  corruption  and  ruin,  there  is  born  iu  the  city  of  David  a  Saviour, 
Jesus  Christ.  The  hour  in  our  experience  is  dark,  misfortunes  have  multiplied, 
disaster  is  imminent;  but  our  extremity  is  his  opportunity,  and  God  appears  in 
delivering  power.  "Unto  the  upright  there  ariseth  light  in  the  darkness."  From  the 
very  edge  of  the  precipice  we  are  snatched  by  the  strong  and  saving  hand  of  Otoi.  1. 
Circumstances  of  distress  are  no  poof  of  God's  absence.  He  may  only  be  hiding  his 
face  for  a  while.  2.  Let  all  souls  in  their  integrity  appeal  for  and  anticipate  a  merciful 
and  full  redemption  (Ps.  1.  15). — 0. 

Vers.  16 — 19. — What  shall  the  end  h«t  Things  are  rightly  tested  by  their  issues. 
We  do  well  to  ask — To  what  is  this  course  tending?  in  what  wili  it  terminate? 
Taken  in  a  deep  and  fuU  sense,  though  not  in  a  short  and  shallow  one,  "  all  is  well  that 
ends  well."  The  prophet  says  that  idolatry  will  be  condemned  in  the  ultimate  and 
utter  overthrow  and  confusion  of  its  victims  (ver.  16),  while  true  piety  will  be  finally 
and  fuUy  established  (ver.  17).  Of  this  there  was  the  most  ample  security  (vers. 
18, 19).    We  infer,  generally— 

I.  That  evil  ends  in  overthbow  and  dishonoub.  It  is  not  idolatry  only  whieh, 
when  the  last  stage  is  reached,  is  covered  with  confusion.  It  is  the  doom  of  all 
departure  from  the  righteous  will  of  God.  Sdf-indulgence  has  its  pleasant  hours;  but 
it  conducts  by  a  sure  road  to  disease  and  early  death.     OritM  has  its  successes ;  but  it 


188  THE  BOOK  OF  THE  PBOPHET  ISAIAH,     [oh.  xlt.  1— 2* 

spends  its  last  dmys  within  prison-walls.  Greed  has  its  own  wretched  gratification; 
but  it  earns  general  and  unspeakable  contempt.  Worldlineu  wins  its  honour  and 
"has  its  reward;"  but  it  ends  in  heart-ache  and  bitter  disappointment.  Bapaoity  and 
injustice  do  often  wring  treasures  from  the  wronged  and  suffering;  but  they  end  in 
exposure,  in  condemnation,  in  ruin. 

II.  That  obedience  ends  in  blessedness  and  eonottr.  It  is  not  confounded  nor 
ashamed;  it  is  saved — it  "seeks  not  God's  face  in  vain."  It  "inherits  the  land." 
Though  much  may  be  endured,  yet  a  great  deal  more  is  gained,  by  a  complete  surrender 
of  self  to  the  service  of  Christ  (see  Mark  x.  29,  30).  It  ensures  that  without  which  all 
earthly  possessions  and  all  human  honours  are  worthless,  with  which  they  can  be 
cheerfully  foregone.  It  brings  peace  of  mind,  joy  of  soul,  growth  in  goodness,  victory 
over  the  world.  Divine  favour  and  guidance,  eternal  glory. 

in.  That  of  this  besult  we  have  the  most  ample  seoubitt.  It  rests  on  the 
foandations  of:  1.  Divine  power.  On  the  "  thus  saith  the  Lord,"  on  the  word  of  him 
who  "created  the  heavens  and  formed  the  earth."  2.  Divine  wisdom.  On  the  word 
of  him  whose  presence  is  attested  by  his  han<iiwork :  "  He  created  it  not  in  vain."  3. 
Divine  righteousness.  "1  the  Lord  speak  i  ighteousness,  I  declare  things  that  are 
right."  The  power,  the  wisdom,  and  the  ri^jhteousness  of  God  are  to  us  the  all-sufBcient 
pledge  that  we  shall  not  seek  his  face  in  vain,  but  shall  find  that  the  earnest  seeker 
after  God  will  find  all  that  wili  fill  his  heart,  ennoble  his  life,  and  secure  a  gloriona  and 
immortal  destiny. — 0. 

Vers.  21 — 25. — Our  great  hope ;  a  missionary  sermon.    The  view  of  the  prophet  is 
'exceeding  broad."    He  sees  that  which  is  "afar  off."    He  looks  across  the  countries 
and  across  the  centuries,  and  he  has  a  more  glorious  vision  than  statesman  cAer  pictured, 
than  poet  ever  dreamed.     We  look  at  this — 

I.  Otrat  SUPREME  HOPE  FOR  THE  HUMAN  WORLD.  Isaiah  hag  before  his  mind  a  time 
when  "  all  the  ends  of  the  earth  will  be  saved ; "  when  "  every  knee  will  bow  "  to  God, 
and  erery  tongue  solemnly  invoke  his  holy  Name ;  when  men  shall  "  come  to  him  "  in 
adoration  and  in  thanksgiving.  This  is  our  heart's  most  profound  desire,  our  soul's 
highest  hope.  We  do  not  want  our  nation  to  subdue  every  other  to  si-rvitude  and 
subsidy.  We  do  not  want  our  form  of  faith  or  polity  to  swallow  up  every  other  form. 
We  do  want  mankind  to  know  God,  to  approach  him  in  pure  worship,  to  bless  him  for 
his  fatherly  love,  to  glory  in  his  goodness,  to  submit  to  his  righteous  sway,  to  rejoice.in 
him  as  the  One  that  saves  from  sin  and  restores  to  righteousness.  When,  beneath  every 
sky,  speaking  every  language,  with  all  possible  varieties  of  custom  and  civilization,  men 
everywhere  shall  honour  the  one  holy  Lord  and  rejoice  in  the  same  righteous  Redeemer, 
the  supreme  hope  for  the  world  will  be  fulfilled.    But  we  have  to  consider — 

II.  Thb  delay  in  its  fulfilment.  The  Israelites  returned  from  captivity,  and 
entered  again  on  a  course  of  national  freedom  and  Divine  worship  in  the  holy  place ; 
the  Lord  "did  great  thiniis  for  them,  whereof  they  were  glad."  But  nothing  happened 
then  or  in  subsequent  days  in  Jerusalem  or  in  Judaea  which  could  be  said  to  be  a 
realization  of  this  glorious  vision.  Jerusalem  perished  and  Israel  was  scattered,  while 
the  prophecy  remained  unfulfilled.  Jesus  Christ  came  and  formed  his  Church ;  that 
Church  grew  and  throve,  overturning  the  idolatries  with  which  it  contended.  It  has 
beei]  making  its  way  in  the  world,  and,  during  the  last  century,  has  made  substantiMl 
progress.  But  the  world  is  very  far  indeed  from  having  attained  to  the  condition  which 
is  here  foretold.  The  prophetic  word  waits  to  be  fulfilled ;  there  is  a  long  delay  in  the 
realization  of  our  supreme  hope.     But  let  us  gladly  turn  to— 

III.  OuB  confidence  in  a  victorious  ebsult.  It  rests  on  three  things.  1.  The 
triumphs  which  have  been  already  gained.  These  are  very  great,  and  they  are  exactly 
proportionate  to  the  purity  of  the  doctrine  which  has  been  taught  and  the  zeal  of  the 
Churches  which  has  been  shown.  With  Christ's  truth  taught  as  it  came  from  him  and 
from  his  inspired  apostles,  and  with  the  Churches  of  Christ  asonuch  in  earnest  as  they 
have  been  during  this  century,  the  advance  will  be  sure  and  swift.  2.  T/ie  strong  word 
of  Divine  promise.  "  I  have  sworn  by  myself  .  .  .  that  unto  me,"  etc. ;"  I,  if  I  be 
lifted  up  from  the  earth,"  etc. ;  "  All  power  is  given  unto  me  ...  go  ye  therefcre," 
etc.  3.  The  fitne$»  of  the  gospel  of  Christ  for  the  necessitiei  of  men.  It  provides :  (1) 
A  sense  of  fnreivxuBRi  of  sin.     "  Be  justified."    (2)  The  possession  of  moral  exocttancy. 


OH.  XLT.  1—26.]     THE  BOOK  OP  THE  PROPHET  ISAIAH.-  189 


"  Righteoiuness."    (3)  Spiritual  power  to  resist  temptation.    "Strength."    (4)  Joy  of 
heart,  showing  itself  in  praise.    "  Shall  glory." 

IV.  OoR  FRiviLEOs  AND  DUTY  iH  RELATION  TO  IT.  Slnce  there  is,  indeed,  such  a 
hope  for  mankind,  since  that  is  to  be  tlie  final  issue  of  all  strife  and  suffering  and  toil, 
let  each  nation,  each  Church,  each  family,  each  Christian  man,  see  to  it  that  its  (his) 
contributiun  is  forthcoming,  so  that,  when  the  fields  are  ripe,  it  (be)  may  have  a  share 
in  the  joy  of  harvest. — 0. 

Ver.  2. — The  secret  of  assured  success.  These  figures  indicate  the  remoTal  of  all 
obstacles  and  hindrances  out  of  the  way  of  him  who  is  called  of  God,  entrusted  with 
some  particular  work  for  God,  and  helped  of  God  in  the  doing  of  that  work.  Historical 
illustration  is  found  in  the  feet,  as  stated  by  the  older  writers,  that  in  some  unaccount- 
able Way  the  river-gates  of  Babylon  were  found  open  on  the  approach  of  Cyrus ;  or,  as 
stated  on  the  authoiity  of  the  monuments,  that  the  city  capitulated,  as  a  consequence  of 
the  defeat  of  Nabonidus  in  the  field.  Professor  Sayce  says, "  Another  fact  of  an  equally 
revolutionary  kind,  which  the  inscriptions  teach  us,  is  that  Babylon  was  not  besieged 
and  taken  by  Cyrus.  It  opened  its  gates  to  his  general  long  before  he  came  near  it, 
and  needed  neither  fighting  nor  battle  for  its  occupation."  Grote,  in  his  '  History  of 
Greece,'  says,  "  The  way  in  which  the  city  was  treated  would  lead  us  to  suppose  that 
its  acquisition  cannot  have  cost  the  conqueror  either  much  time  or  much  loss  ...  it 
is  certain  that  the  vast  walls  and  gates  were  left  untouched."  The  assurances  of  the 
text  are  even  better  fulfilled  by  moving  obstacles  out  of  the  way,  than  by  Cyrus 
actually  mastering  them.  Herodotus  tells  us  that  Babylon  had  a  hundred  gates  of 
brass,  with  posts  and  hooks  of  the  same  metaL 

I.  Obstacles  ni  the  way  should  be  no  hindbanoe  to  ub.  There  is  hardly  any- 
thing worth  doing  in  life  that  is  not  diOicult  to  do.  The  difierence  between  men  is 
seen  in  their  attitude  in  face  of  difficulties.  Illustrate  by  the  position  of  Israel  before 
the  Eed  Sea.  It  was  a  brave  thing  for  Moses  to  command  Israel  to  "  go  forward  ; "  but 
it  was  a  type  of  the  right  attitude  for  us  always  to  take  when  the  way  seems  obstructed. 
"  I  cannot "  must  give  place  to  "  I  will,  GK>d  helping  me." 

n.  The  one  thino  to  seek  is  the  asbubanoi  that  wb  abb  doino  God's  will. 
This  distinguishes  the  good  man  from  the  mer«  man  of  energy.  The  Cyrus  here 
referred  to  was  raised  up  by  God,  and  entrusted  with  a  particular  work.  But  it  is  true 
that  still  Ood  calls  individuals  to  special  service.  He  makes  plain  to  tbem  his  will. 
And  our  first  anxiety  should  be  to  be  sure  that  we  are  where  he  has  set  us,  and  are 
doing  just  what  he  would  have  us  do.  Once  let  these  things  be  settled,  and  oppositions 
and  hindrances  count  for  nothing.  We  want  more  faith  in  Divine  providence,  in  the 
inward  inspirations  and  outward  directings  of  God.  Where  he  sets  us  we  must  bear, 
conquer,  and  do. 

III.  Wats  always  open  befobe  the  obedient,  bebolute,  trustful  man.  Firm- 
ness, moral  courage,  persistency,  and,  above  all,  real  faith  in  God,  compel  difficulties  to- 
yield.  They  are  always  according  to  the  size  of  the  man  himself.  If  he  is  big  with 
faith,  they  grow  small ;  if  he  is  little  with  fears,  they  grow  big.  Obstacles  are  searching 
tests  of  character.  Men  of  faith  are  like  the  mountain  streams  that  make  their  way 
down  amid  the  rocks ;  if  they  cannot  get  over  the  rocks,  they  go  round  them,  but  they 
will  not  be  stopped. — B.  T. 

V«r8.  4,  6.— The  Divine  sumaming.  "  I  that  call  tbee  by  thy  name."  "  I  have  titled 
thee"  (Cheyne's  translation).  Some  think  the  reference  is  to  the  name  Cyrus,  or 
Eoresh,  regarded  as  a  new  title  for  one  who  was  originally  known  as  Agradates.  Others, 
with  more  probability,  think  the  reference  is  to  the  honourable  epithets,  "  my  shep-. 
herd,"  "my  anointed."  Our  knowledge  of  Cyma  has  been  modified,  in  some  very 
important  particulars,  by  recent  discoveries  of  Babylonian  inscriptions.  Professor 
Sayoe  is  of  opinion  that,  "  We  must  give  up  the  belief  that  Cyrus  was  a  monotheist, 
bent  on  destroying  the  idols  of  Babylon.  On  the  contrary,  from  the  time  when  we 
firet  hear  of  him,  be  is  a  worshipper  of  Bel-Merodach,  the  patron-god  of  Babylon ;  and 
the  first  care  of  himself  and  his  son,  after  his  conquest  of  Babylonia,  is  to  restore  the  Baby- 
loniui  gods  to  the  shrines  from  which  they  had  been  impiouslj-  removed  by  Nabonidos.'' 
•The  theory,"  he  says,  "which  held  that  Cyrus  had  allowed   the  Jews  to  return 


190  THE   BOOK   OF  THE  PROPHET  ISAIAH,      [oh.  xlv.  1— 25 


to  their  own  land  because,  like  them,  he  believed  in  but  one  Bupreme  god — the  Ormazd, 
or  good  spirit,  of  the  Zoroastrian  creed — must  be  abandoned.  God  consecrated  Cyrus  to 
be  his  instrument  in  restoring  his  chosen  people  to  their  land,  not  because  the  King  of 
Elam  was  a  monotheist,  but  because  the  period  of  Jewish  trial  and  punishment  had 
come  to  an  end."  It  has  been  thought  by  some  that  this  prophecy  of  Isaiah  concern- 
ing Cyrus  was  brought  to  that  king's  notice,  and  so  helped  to  secure  its  own  fulfilment. 
It  is  agreed  that  this  Cyrus  was  a  singularly  just  and  noble  monarch.  Dr.  H.  Bushnell 
says,  "  So  beautiful  is  the  character  and  history  of  Cyrus,  the  person  here  addressed, 
that  many  have  doubted  whether  the  sketch  given  by  Xenophon  was  not  intended  as 
an  idealizing  or  merely  romantic  picture.  .  .  .  And  what  should  he  be  but  a  model  of 
all  princely  beauty,  of  bravery,  of  justice,  of  impartial  honour  to  the  lowly,  of  great- 
ness and  true  magnanimity  in  every  form,  when  God  has  girded  him,  unseen,  to  be  the 
minister  of  his  own  great  and  sovereign  purposes  to  the  nations  of  his  time?"  Dean 
Stanley  says,  "  Though  we  know  but  little  of  the  individual  character  of  Cyrus,  he 
first  of  the  ancient  conquerors,  appears  in  other  than  a  merely  despotic  and  destructive 
aspect.  It  can  hardly  be  without  foundation  that  both  in  Greek  and  Hebrew  literature 
he  is  represented  as  the  type  of  a  just  and  gentle  prince."    Three  subjects  are  suggested. 

L  The  distikct  endowments  of  men  indicate  Divine  oaij.  to  Divine  work.  In 
the  Divine  sovereignty  and  wisdom  there  is  a  proportionate  distribution  of  gifts  among 
men.  In  the  figure  of  onr  Lord's  parable,  we  may  say,  the  master  of  the  house  calls 
together  his  servants,  and  delivers  to  each  one  some  portion  of  his  goods  in  trust.  Very 
marked  are  the  varieties  of  endowment  and  ability  in  a  single  family.  We  are  often 
made  to  feel  that  God  has  given  special  gifts  to  some  of  our  children ;  but  we  should 
see  that  these  ctises  are  only  prominent  illustrations  of  the  truth  that  he  has  given 
some  gifts  to  all.  We  all  have  some  special  work  to  do  for  Gbd  in  the  world,  and  so  we 
all  have  some  special  endowments  for  the  doing  of  it.  Every  man  is  called  of  QoA, 
girded  by  God,  sumamed  by  God,  and  the  moment  when  he  clearly  sees  what  his  life- 
work  is,  is  the  moment  when  he  becomes  conscious  of  his  call.  Bushnell  says,  "  What 
do  the  Scriptures  show  us  but  that  Ck>d  has  a  particular  care  for  every  man,  a  personal 
interest  in  him,  and  a  sympathy  with  him  and  his  trials,  watohing  for  the  uses  of  his 
sne  talent  as  attentively  and  kindly,  and  approving  him  as  heartily  in  the  right 
employment  of  it,  as  if  he  had  given  him  ten  ?  and  what  is  the  giving  out  of  the  talents 
itself  but  an  exhibition  of  the  fact  that  God  has  a  definite  purpose,  charge,  and  work, 
be  it  this  or  that,  for  every  man  ?  "  "  Every  human  soul  has  a  complete  and  perfect 
plan  cherished  for  it  in  the  heart  of  CM — a  Divine  biography  marked  out,  which  it 
enters  into  life  to  live."  The  ]ioint  on  which  we  dwell  is  that  the  sense  of  power,  the 
consciotisness  of  power,  is  the  witness  to  Gk>d's  call ;  and  the  responsibility  of  using  the 
power  to  do  Ck>d's  work  comes  with  the  consciousness.  To  say  "  I  can "  is  to  affirm 
that  there  is  something  Gk>d  wants  me  to  do. 

II.  Thb  fbecibk  tugb  nr  wmoH  a  hah  has  to  ltvb  indicates  Divine  call  and 
WORK.  Each  one  comes  into  being  at  the  "  fulness  of  time  "  for  him.  It  is  sometimes 
said  that  reat  preachers  and  thought-leaders  of  the  past  would  do  little  if  they  lived 
now.  The  snying  is  a  foolish  one.  'They  belonged  to  their  age,  and  were  endowed  for  their 
age.  The  Divine  lead  was  as  marked  in  the  time  of  their  appearing  as  in  the  gifts  with 
which  they  were  endowed.  In  each  age  Gh>d  wants  men  (1)  who  can  represent  the  age, 
and  find  expression  for  the  average  thought  of  the  age ;  (2)  men  who  are  before  the  age, 
and  can  lead  the  age  up  towards  the  thoughts  and  things  that  are  to  be ;  and  (3)  men 
who  are  behind  the  age,  and  zealously  preserve  the  good  things  of  the  past  that  may 
seem  to  be  imperilled.  A  man  may  say, "  God  has  called  me  to  live  just  now ;  then  I  may 
be  quite  sure  that  there  is  something  which  he  wants  me  to  do  for  him,  and  which  he 
has  fitted  me  to  do,  just  now."  Thus  viewed,  life  grows  solemn  and  holy  for  us  alL  Wa 
have  our  own  work  to  do. 

ni.  The  frovidential  otrLTiniE  of  men  fits  them  fob  doino  God's  fbecise  wobk 
FOE  TBBif.  This  is  often  imperfectly  apprehended.  We  are  precisely  endowed,  and  set 
forth  in  the  world  at  just  the  right  time ;  but  it  is  important  that  we  further  trace  how 
God  cultures  the  gifts  by  the  influences  with  which  he  surrounds  us,  and  the  piovi- 
deooes  he  arranges  for  us.  Often  when  men  have  found  out  what  thdr  Ufe-work  is  to 
be,  they  gidn  the  key  to  the  meaning  of  the  scenes  and  circumstances  through  wUeh 
they  have  been  led.— R.  T. 


aH.  XLT.  1— 25.]     THE  BOOK  OF  THE  PROPHET  ISAIAH.  i91 

Var.  7.— One  touroe  of  mU  and  good.  "  I  make  peace,  and  create  evil."  It  is  an 
unworthy  forcing  of  Scripture  to  set  this  passage  in  relation  to  the  insoluble  difficulty 
of  the  origin  of  moral  eviL  Two  things  are  often  sadly  confounded — evil  as  an 
unpleasant  state  of  our  circumstances ;  and  evil  as  a  wrong  condition  of  our  will.  The 
latter  is  referable  to  God  only  in  the  sense  that  he  gave  to  man  a  moral  nature  and  a 
capacity  of  choice.  The  former  view  of  evil  is  chat  alluded  to  in  the  passage  now  before 
us.  It  has  been  thought  that  the  passage  was  written  in  view  of  the  principles  of 
Persian  dualism.  "The  Magi  taught  that  there  are  two  coeternal  supramnndane 
beings — Ormazd,  the  pure  and  eternal  principle  of  light,  the  source  of  all  that  is  good  ; 
and  Ahriman,  the  source  of  darkness,  the  fountain  of  all  evil,  both  physical  and  moral. 
These  two  divide  the  empire  of  the  world,  and  are  in  perpetual  conflict  with  each  other." 
Perhaps  Isaii^  deals  here  with  evil  and  good  as  they  are  regarded  by  man,  not 
as  thOT  are  estimated  by  Qod,  The  "good"  here  is  that  which  is  i>leasant;  the 
"evil  is  that  which  is  painful;  and  the  assertion  is  that  both  the  pleasant  and 
the  painful  are  within  the  Divine  controlling,  and  are  forcos  used  by  God  to  secure 
certain  high  moral  ends.  "Darkness"  represents  the  misery  and  woe  of  the  exile; 
"  light "  represents  the  happy  state  to  which  Israel  was  to  be  restored  through  the 
agency  of  Of  tub. 

I.  Thb  TENDENdT  TO  THINK  OF  A  SEPABATS  soimcB  OF  EVIL.  So  great  are  the  dis- 
turbances of  GK)d's  order  through  man's  sin  and  wilfulness,  that  human  life  seems  more 
t'uU  of  calamities  and  anxieties  than  of  blessings  and  good.  This  is  man's  impression, 
and  he  has  ever  been  disposed  to  say,  "  The  good  God  cannot  send  these  calamities ; 
they  must  have  a  source  of  their  own."  Men  are  always  ready  to  make  Ahrimans, 
Sivas,  or  Typhons,  to  explain  the  existence  of  physical  evils. 

n.  The  tendency  to  give  almost  exclusive  worship  to  the  evil-god.  To  ward 
off  evil  seems  to  be  a  more  pressing  thing  than  to  be  good  or  to  obtain  good,  and  so 
the  supreme  effort  is  made  to  propitiate  the  evil-god.  Illustrate  by  the  heathen  sailors 
in  the  boat  with  Jonah,  exposed  to  storms.  We  even  need  to  be  most  careful  in  our 
conceptions  of  Satan,  lest  a  notion  of  his  independence  should  divide  our  worship 
between  him  and  Jehovah.     He  must  be  thought  of  as  dependent  on  God,  even  as  we. 

III.  The  inetitable  deobadation  of  humak  wobship  undeb  this  condition. 
The  maintenance  of  high  morality  is  found  absolutely  to  depend  on  the  jealous  preser- 
vation of  the  truth  of  the  IMTine  unity. — B.  T. 

Vflr.  9. — The  sin  and  fvtlg  of  resisting  Qod.  The  truth  of  the  Divine  sovereignty 
must  be  clearly  and  faithfully  presented.  But  we  must  carefully  guard  God  from  all 
charges  of  caprice  or  favouritism.  We  must  lik  jn  him  to  man,  in  order  to  apprehend 
him  at  all;  but  we  must  eliminate  from  our  figure  of  man  all  that  is  weak  and  self- 
seeking.  The  infinite  holiness  and  infinite  wisdom  of  God  glorifies  his  sovereignty. 
He  does  what  he  wills  with  bis  own;  but  what  he  wills  to  do  is  always  the  absolute 
best,  the  eternally  right.  It  must,  then,  be  mistaken,  unworthy,  and  wrong  for  us  to 
resist  God.  "  Woe  unto  him  that  striveth  with  his  Maker  1 "  The  immediate  refer- 
ence of  the  text  is  to  those  who  murmured  at  the  delay  of  the  deliverance  from  exile. 
"  Woe  unto  him  who,  though  made  of  earth,  and  with  no  intrinsic  superiority  over 
others  of  his  race,  presumes  to  find  fault  with  his  Maker,  and  to  criticize  providential 
arrangements ! "  Matthew  Henry  says,  "  Men  are  but  earthen  pots,  nay,  they  are  broken 
jiotsherds,  and  are  made  so  very  much  by  their  mutual  contentions.  They  are  dashed 
in  pieces  one  against  another ;  and,  if  they  are  disposed  to  strive,  let  them  strive  with 
one  another,  let  them  meddle  with  their  match ;  but  let  them  not  dare  to  contend  with 
him  that  is  infinitely  above  them,  which  is  as  senseless  and  absurd  as  for  the  clay  to 
find  favdt  with  the  potter,  as  unnatural  as  for  a  child  to  find  fault  with  his  parents." 
Criticizers  of  God  may  be  classed  under  two  heads — (1)  those  who  only  question  and 
raise  doubta ;  (2)  those  who  arrogantly  condemn.  Some  of  the  people  of  Israel  were 
looking  for  a  dehverer  to  arise  from  among  themselves,  and  criticized  God's  delay,  and 
then  criticized  his  delivering  by  the  agency  of  a  heathen  prince  The  plea  urged  is 
this:  "  Will  Israel  be  more  wise  than  God?"  We  have  here  suggested  three  stages  of 
unworthy  treatment  of  Gh)d. 

L  CKinoiziia.  There  are  two  ways  of  Judging  the  actions  of  othws,  and  they  differ 
li^  the  diffemice  in  their  tone  and  spirit  rather  than  in  the  acts  themselves.    X,  We 


198  THIS  BOOK  OF  THE  PROPHET  ISAIAH,      [oh.  xlv.  1— 2S, 

may  judge  with  the  prevailing  disposition  to  find  out  all  thnt  is  good,  2.  We  may 
judge  with  the  prevailing  disposition  to  find  fault.  This  is  always  unworthy,  but  never 
■0  unworthy  as  where  applied  to  the  ways  and  works  of  God. 

II.  CoNDEMNiNO.  AlwayB  a  doubtful  thing  for  man  to  do,  seeing  he  is  invested  with 
neither  authority  nor  ability  for  such  work.  Always  wrong  and  unworthy,  if  man's 
condemnation  of  God,  seeing  that  he  cannot  compass  the  whole  of  God's  reasons, 
motives,  and  aims.  Man  never  knows  enough  to  allow  him  to  venture  on  a  condem- 
nation. 

III.  WoKKIKO  AOAiNST.  Translating  bad  opinions  into  bad  conduct.  Allowing 
criticism  to  encourage  enmity.  Illustrate  from  Saul  of  Tarsus,  who  ventured  to  criticize 
and  condemn  God's  Messiah,  and  then  thought  himself  justified  in  working  against 
him.— R.  T. 

"Ver.  15. — The  joy  of  mystery  in  Ood.  "  Surely  thou  art  a  God  that  hideth  himself, 
O  God  of  Israel,  Saviour  I "  (Gheyne's  translation).  This  represents  the  average  feel- 
ing of  the  captives.  God's  ways,  though  excellent,  are  not  as  man's  ways ;  they  are 
often  hidden  from  men.  They  are  mysterious  ways ;  but  faith  rises  above  the  myste- 
ries, and  calls  them  "  good  ways."  (1)  God's  plans  are  hidden  in  the  counsels  of 
eternity ;  (2)  God's  work  is  often  hidden  in  the  variety  of  the  agencies  he  employs ; 
and  (3)  Gkid's  results  cause  surprise  and  joy  when  they  can  be  revealed.  Dealing  with 
this  subject  in  a  larger  way,  we  inquire— 

I.  What  is  God  to  man's  sbeino  ?  In  our  pride  of  heart  we  are  very  unwilling  to 
admit  the  limitation  or  imperfection  of  our  facalties.  We  can  know  so  much ;  why 
cannot  we  know  God?  We  can  see  so  much  ;  why  cannot  we  see  God?  Men  are  rest- 
less, and  bitterly  fret,  because  the  dark  mists  still  fringe  and  hide  the  "  mountain-peak 
of  a  God."  They  say,  "  If  it  be  so  to  our  vision  down  in  the  plains  of  common  life, 
then  we  will  climb  the  hills  of  science,  get  up  above,  and  look  down  on  the  peak,  and 
•ha'ter  for  ever  the  mysteries  that  surround  him."  Some  expect  to  return  to  us  with 
a  scornful  smile,  prepared  to  say,  "There  is  no  God,  only  a  high  peak,  which  the 
unclouded  sun  gilds  with  a  perpetual  radiance ;  and  this,  shining  through  the  cloadl, 
made  you  think  there  was  a  Ood." 

"  Then  all  goes  wrong :  the  old  foundations  rock ; 
One  scorns  at  him  of  old  who  gazed  unshod ; 
One,  striking  with  a  pickaxe,  thinks  the  shook 
Shall  move  the  seat  of  God. 

■A  little  way,  a  very  little  way 

(Life  is  so  short),  they  dig  into  the  rind. 
And  they  ore  very  sorry — so  they  say- 
Sorry  for  what  they  find. 

"O  marvellous  credulity  of  man  I 

If  God  indeed  kept  secret,  couldst  thou  know 
Or  follow  np  the  mighty  Artisan 
Unless  he  willed  it  so  ?  " 

(Jean  Ingelow.) 

Human  vision  cannot  aee  all  round.  When  it  can  see  the  wider-world  and  the  tvithiri' 
world,  it  may  bei;in  to  hoast  that  it  can  see  the  beyond-vrorM.  But  not  till  then.  And 
what  it  does  see  it  can  only  see  imperfectly.  Only  sides  and  parts  and  aspects.  With 
the  great  heap  of  human  attainments  lying  before  us,  we  may  say,  "  Lo,  these  are  parts 
of  his  ways ;  but  the  thunder  of  his  power  who  can  understand?"  Do  you  want  to  se» 
God  all  round  and  right  through  ?  Be  assured  of  this :  "  No  mortal  vision,  pure  or 
sinning,  hath  seen  the  facft*  Better,  far  better,  to  adore  and  love  the  mystery  of  God 
and  God's  ways. 

II.  What  is  God  beyond  man's  sbeino?  Man's  foolish  ambition  is  to  see  every- 
thing with  his  bodily  eyes.  Man's  true  wisdom  is  in  knowins  God  through  the 
soul-visions  that  are  granted  to  faith.  And,  beyond  our  seeing  of  the  clouds  and  the 
mysterj,  what  is  God  ?  I.  To  our  seeing,  there  is  much  difiioulty  and  mystery  about 
Gud'g  ruling  of  the  earth ;  but  our  louls  know  that  he  reigns  in  righteousness.    2.  T« 


ta.  sxv.  1— 25.]      THE  BOOK  OF  THE  PROPHET  ISAIAH.  193 

our  seeing,  there  is  much  cloud  and  mystery  about  God's  providential  dealings  with  us ; 
but  our  souls  know  that  he  makes  "  all  things  work  together  for  good."  3.  To  our 
seeing,  the  redemption  of  the  human  race  from  sin  is  a  profound  and  awful  mystery; 
but  our  souls  know  that  Christ  "  shall  see  of  the  travail  of  his  soul,  and  shall  be  satis- 
fied." 4.  To  our  seeing,  the  future  of  the  human  race  is  all  hung  about  with  clouds 
and  davkness.  The  very  terms,  "  eternal  life,"  "  eternal  death,"  are  but  folds  of  the 
wondrous  veil  that  hides  the  unspeakable  from  our  view  ;  but  our  souls  do  enter  into 
rest.  Righteousness  and  love  will  preside  over  man's  future,  as  truly  as  over  the  past 
and  the  present.  We  may  rejoice  in  a  God  who  hideth  himself.  We  may  be  glad  that 
the  clouds  hang  low  about  him,  that  the  mystery  of  him  cannot  be  solved,  and  that  he 
therefore  calls  for  a  great  wondering,  lowly  adoration,  and  the  perfept  trust.  Oar  God 
is  within  the  grasp  neither  of  our  hand  nor  of  our  mind.  Nothing  in  heaven  above  or 
earth  beneath  can  be,  in  any  full  sense,  a  likeness  of  him.  The  grandest  things  do  but 
hint  his  grandeur ;  the  most  lovely  things  do  but  suggest  his  loveliness ;  the  truest 
things  are  but  faint  echoes  of  his  truth.  Away,  beyond  us,  above  us,  he  soars  into  the 
"light  inaccessible  "—our  ever-blessed  God,  who,  though  he  hidedi  himself,  ig  cur 
Saviour. — R.  T. 

Ver.  19. — Seeking  in  vain.  Henderson  regards  this  as  an  appeal  "  to  the  publicity 
and  perspicuity  with  which  the  Divine  predictions  had  been  announced ;  with  manifest 
reference  to  the  responses  of  the  heathen  oracles,  which  were  given  from  deep  and 
obscure  caverns,  or  the  hidden  recesses  of  temples ;  and  were,  at  the  best,  artful  and 
equivocal,  and,  in  cases  of  extreme  difficulty,  were  altogether  withheld."  Cheyne  says, 
"  The  heathen  oracles  are  as  obscure  in  their  origin  as  they  are  unveracious  and  dis- 
appointing. Those  who  deliver  them  say,  as  it  were,  '  Seek  ye  me  as  chaos.'  But 
the  revelations  of  Jehovah  are  the  embodiments  of  righteousness  and  uprightness." 
(comp.  Prov.  viii.  6).  It  may  be  urged  (1)  that  God's  message  to  men  is  pluin ;  (2)  is 
satisfactory ;  (3)  is  just.  Or  it  may  be  shown  that  God's  will  is  clearly  and  suffi- 
ciently revealed,  in  all  its  several  forms :  (1)  in  creation  ;  (2)  in  history ;  (3)  in  indi- 
vidual experiences ;  (4)  in  Word-revelations  spoken  directly  within  man,  as  the  law  of 
conscience ;  and  (5)  in  Word-revelations  spoken  to  man,  as  the  law  of  conduct.  It  is 
suggestive  of  illustration  to  recall  the  declaration  of  our  Lord  Jesus,  "  In  secret  have  I 
said  nothing  "  (John  xviii.  20).    Another  line  of  treatment  may  be  offered. 

L  Men's  self-pubsoits  end  in  vanity.  We  do  "  seek  them  in  vain."  Hlnstra- 
tions  should  be  taken  from  the  Book  of  Ecclesiastes,  which  is  precisely  this — a  man's 
record  of  his  seeking  the  "  chief  good "  as  he  could  conceive  it.  He  sought  this  way 
and  that,  in  every  conceivably  hopeful  direction,  and  with  every  possible  advantage  in 
the  search ;  and  his  conclusion  of  the  matter  is,  "  Nothing  satisfies.  All  is  vanity." 
Byron  sought  self-satisfaction  in  pursuing  self-ends ;  and  long  ere  old  age  could  come 
with  its  burdens  he  wrote,  "  The  worm,  the  canker,  and  the  grief,  are  mine  alone." 
Before  the  ruins  of  the  self-seeking  life,  we  stand  and  say,  "  So  is  he  who  heapeth  up 
riches  for  himself,  and  is  not  rich  toward  God." 

II.  Man-made  EELiaioNs  end  in  vanity.  To  trust  them  is  "  spending  money  for 
that  which  is  not  bread."  Illustrate  this  by  showing  how,  in  St.  Paul's- day,  the 
Athenians  had  multiplied  gods  because,  one  after  another,  they  had  been  sought,  and 
failed  to  satisfy ;  and  at  length  they  even,  in  their  unrest,  inscribed  altars  to  the 
"  Unknown  God." 

HI.  God's  way  of  lite  is  abundantly  BATiSFYma.  It  is  a  living  fountain  of 
waters.  1.  It  meets  the  soul-cry  for  righteousness  in  God.  2.  It  meets  the  soul-cry 
for  pardon  of  sin.  3.  It  meets  the  soul-cry  for  restored  and  happy  relatione  with  God. 
4.  It  meets  the  soul-cry  for  power  to  perform  that  which  is  good.  6.  It  meets  the 
yearning  of  the  soiU  for  assurance  concerning  the  future.  So  men  never  seek  God  in 
vain.— R.  T. 

y«r.  21. — Jutt  and  taving.  The  idea  is  that  God  is  strictly  faithful  to  his  covenant, 
and  therefore  he  must  be  a  saving  God,  Saving  is  implied  and  involved  in  the 
covenant.  There  is  the  further  assertion  that  God  stands  alone  as  a  Saviour ;  there  ia 
no  God  who  can  save  besides  him.  The  point  which  may  be  unfolded  and  illustrated  ia 
that  there  is  here  declared  the  union  of  two  attributes  in  GK>d  which,  in  human  actions, 

ISAIAH — u.  o 


19 1  THE  BOOK  OP  THE  PROPHET  ISAIAH,      [oh.  xlv.  1— 26. 

are  often  thought  to  he  incumpatible.  Tbe  just  man  is  thought  of  as  likely  to  panisk. 
The  just  Ood  is  sure  to  save. 

I.  Man's  idea  is — just  and  pdnishino.  Our  minds  are  mostly  occupied  with  the 
work  of  justice  in  finriing  and  punishing  evil-doers.  Consequently,  a  very  limited 
forensic  idea  of  justice  has  come  to  possess  men's  minds;  and  this  limited  and  unworthy 
notion  of  justice  we  too  readily  apply  to  God ;  and  according  to  it  settle  God's  relations 
with  men.  But  justice  is  properly  "  doing  right  by  men  "  and  "  setting  men  right,"  and 
mere  punishment  is  only  an  accident  of  the  true  work  of  justice ;  or,  we  may  say,  one 
of  its  agencies  in  doing  its  higher  work.  Justice  is  as  truly  delivering  men  out  of  the 
hands  of  the  wicked,  as  it  is  punishing  the  evil-doer.  This  position  should  be  fully 
illustrated,  and  it  will  prepare  the  way  for  the  consideration  of  the  next  division. 

IL  God's  idea  is — just  and  saving.  With  God  the  "just"  means  the  "right," 
and  that  always  includes  the  "  kind."  Tliis  may  be  opened  in  several  ways.  1.  Grod 
is  just  in  saving  his  people  from  disasters  which  others  have  brought  on  them.  2.  God 
is  just  in  saving  them  from  the  consequences  of  their  own  infirmities  and  follies. 
3.  God  is  just  in  saving  men  from  their  sins  by  punishing  them  for  their  sins.  4.  God 
is  jvist  in  saving  them  from  punisiiment,  when  the  ends  of  punishment  have  been 
secured.  5.  God  is  just  in  finding  a  way  by  which,  through  the  voluntary  sacrifice 
of  his  Son,  his  honour  can  be  maintained  while  his  mercy  is  extended  to  guilty  and 
helpless  sinners.  His  saving,  in  Christ  Jesus,  is  the  expression  of  his  justice.  He  ii 
the  "  Justifier  of  him  who  believeth  in  Jesus." — B.  T. 

Ver.  22. — Salvation  by  looking.  The  illustration  at  once  suggested  is  that  of  the 
Israelites,  henled  from  the  bite  of  the  serpents  by  looking  at  the  God-provided  brazen 
serpent,  lifted  up  on  high  in  the  middle  of  the  camp.  This  familiar  subject  needs  only 
•  bare  outline  of  points  to  unfold  and  impress. 

I.  Him  to  whom  we  should  look.  "  I,  if  I  be  lifted  up,"  said  Christ,  "  will  draw 
all  men  unto  me,"  "That  whosoever  believeth  on  him  might  not  perish,  but  hare 
ef  erlasting  life." 

II.  The  look  that  saves.  1.  The  look  of  conscious  need.  2.  The  look  of  personal 
helplessness.     3.  The  look  of  humility.     4.  The  look  of  faith. 

III.  The  salvation  that  comes  bt  looking.  1.  Salvation  from  the  penalty  due  to 
sin.  2.  From  the  wrong  relations  brought  about  by  sin.  3.  From  the  bad  inward 
state  induced  by  sin.  "  For  all  within  you,  Guido,  which  sighs  after  a  redemption,  i* 
Christ  come  as  a  Redeemer ;  he  has  redeemed  your  heart  and  your  reason ;  he  has 
redeemed  your  spirit  and  your  body ;  he  has  redeemed  yourself  and  nature  which 
surrounds  you  "  (Tholuck). — B.  T. 

Ver.  23.— The  LorcPt  final  triumph.  (Comp.  PhiL  ii.  10.)  It  should  be  noticed  that 
"  kneeling  "  and  "  swearing  to  "  are  acts  of  homage  and  fealty ;  and  they  are  so  used  in 
this  passage.  Still  we  "  swear"  allegiance  to  a  sovereign.  "  If  the  heart  be  brought 
into  obedifuce  to  Christ,  and  made  willing  in  the  day  of  his  power,  the  knee  will  bow 
to  him  in  humble  adoration  and  addresses,  and  in  cheerful  obediince  to  his  commande, 
submission  to  his  disposals,  and  compliance  with  his  will  in  both  ;  and  the  tongue  will 
swear  to  him,  will  lay  a  bond  upon  the  soul  to  enj^age  it  for  ever  to  him."  The  point 
suggested  for  illustration  is  this — How  can  the  faith  of  Israel  claim  to  be  the  universal 
religion  for  mankind  ?  The  answer  is  that,  beneath  its  forms  and  ceremonials,  which 
were  but  illustrations  of  its  truths,  it  holds  all  the  absolute  essentials  of  religion,  and 
these  can  gain  varied  expression,  to  suit  the  genius  of  all  races,  in  all  olimas  and 
periods.    These  essentials  are — 

L  The  truth  that  these  is  one  God,  ako  hk  m  a  bpiritqal  Bhno. 

IL  The  faot  that  this  one  God  has  bbvealbd  his  mLL. 

IIL  The  demand  that  this  one  Goo  sbodlb  bb  wxodub  bx  MAM'i  VAm  m 
vKvno  vt  HAs's  uaaTBOusKSii. — ^B»  I^ 


.XLVLl— 13.]    THE  BOOK  OP  THE  PROPHET  ISAIAH. 


19S 


BXPOSITION. 


OHAPTBB  XLVl 

Ven.  1,  2. — ^Thb  Fall  op  the  Godb  of 
Babtlon.  Among  the  direct  coDsequences 
of  tlie  victorieg  of  Cyras  vtill  be  the  down- 
fall, in  a  certain  sense,  of  the  Babylonian 
iilolatry.  The  prophet  expresses  the  down- 
fall by  material  imagery,  graphically  de- 
scribing the  fate  of  the  idols  themselves. 
But  we  mnst  regard  him  as  exulting  mainly 
in  the  thought  of  the  blow  that  would  be 
dealt  to  idolatry  in  general,  and  to  the 
Babylonian  form  of  It  in  particular,  by  the 
substitution  of  the  non-idolatrous  and  almost 
monotheistio  Persians  for  the  polytheistic 
and  grossly  idolatrous  Babylonians,  in  the 
sovereignty  of  the  Asiatic  world.  The 
Babylonian  religion  no  doubt  maintained 
itself  at  Babylon  until  and  beyond  the  time 
of  Alexander;  but  it  had  lost  all  its  prestige. 
From  the  state  religion  of  the  chief  empire 
of  Western  Asia,  it  had  sunk  to  the  position 
of  a  piovinoial  onlt 

Yer.  1. — Bel  boweth  down,  Keho  stoopeth. 
In  the  later  Babylonian  period,  to  which 
IsRiah's  prophetic  vision  transports  him,  Bel 
and  Nebo  (if  we  understand  by  Bel,  Bel- 
Merodauh)  were  decidedly  the  two  principal 
gods.  Of  the  seven  kings  of  the  last 
dynasty,  three  had  names  in  which  Nebo, 
and  two  names  in  which  Bel  or  Merodaoh, 
was  an  element.  Bel-Merodach  and  Nebo 
are  the  chief  gods  worshipped  by  Nebu- 
chadnezzar and  Neriglissar.  Bel,  Nebo,  and 
Merodach  are  the  only  three  Babylonian 
gods  that  receive  acknowledgment  from 
Cyrus  in  the  so-called  'O.vrus  Cylinder.' 
Bel  is,  in  the  Babylonian, "  Bil,"  or  »  Belu," 
and  means  simply  "lord."  There  was  an 
ancient  god  of  the  name,  one  of  the  First 
Triad  (Ann,  Bel,  and  Hea  or  Hoa),  who  came 
by  degrees  to  be  identified  with  Merodaoh, 
^he  tutelary  deity  of  Babylon.  Bol-Merodaoh 
was  the  BqAos  (Belus)  of  the  Greeks  and 
Bomang,  who  was  worshipped  in  the  great 
temple  of  Babylon,  now  represented  by  the 
rain  called  ■'Babil."  His  name  forms  an 
element  in  those  of  Bel-1  ush,  Bel-kudur-azur, 
Bel-ipni,  Bel-zakir-iskun,  and  Belshazzar, 
all  of  them  kings  or  viceroyg  of  either 
Babylonia  or  Aasyria.  Nebo  was  the 
Babylonian  god  of  learning,  and  has  there- 
flHFe  been  compared  to  Meiooiy.  He  was 
the  special  deity  of  Borsippa.  The  name  is 
tliou^t  to  be  etymologically  connected  with 
tlA  Hebrew  tia&t,  prophet.  The  "  bow- 
ing" and  "stooping"  of  Bel  and  Nebo  has 


primary  reference  to  the  overthrow  of  their 
images  by  the  conqueror,  but  includes  also 
the  idea  of  the  fall  of  the  gods  themselves 
in  the  opinions  of  men.  Their  idols  were 
upon  the  beasts.  The  Chaldean  images 
generally — not  only  those  of  Bel-Merodaoh 
and  Nebo,  but  also  of  Ann,  and  Hea,  and 
Beltis,  and  Ishtar,  and  Nergal,  and  Sin, 
and  Shamas,  and  Gula,  and  others — would 
be  torn  from  their  shrines,  and  placed  upon 
the  backs  of  beasts  of  burden,  to  be  carried 
off  by  the  conquerors.  No  doubt  ttiis  wag 
the  case  with  a  large  number  of  the  images, 
which  were  among  the  most  precious  of  the 
spoils  seized  by  the  soldiers.  But  it  appears 
that  numerous  exceptions  were  made. 
Neither  Cyrus  nor  Cambyses  touched  the 
famous  golden  image  of  Bel-Merodach  at 
Babylon,  which  was  first  carried  off  from 
the  great  temple  by  Xerxes  (Herod.,  i.  183). 
Cyrus,  moreover,  restored  various  idols,  which 
Nabonidus  had  taken  to  Babylon  from 
provincial  towns,  to  the  temples  to  which 
they  of  right  belonged  (^Journal  of  Boyal 
Asiatic  Society,  January,  1 880,  art.  ii.).  But 
though  their  fate  was  in  this  way  often 
delayed,  ultimately  it  is  probable  every 
valuable  idol  was  carried  off  and  committed 
to  the  melting-pot.  Your  carriages  were 
heavy  loaden;  rather,  the  things  that  yt 
carried  (in  procession)  are  now  borne  along 
heavily.  The  allusion  is  to  the  contrast 
between  the  light-hearted  carrying  of  the 
images  on  festal  occasions  by  their  votaries 
(ch.  xlv.  20),  and  their  slow  transport  to 
foreign  lands  on  the  backs  of  wearied 
beasts. 

Yer.  2.— They  stoop,  thay  bow  down 
together;  f  e.  all  the  Babylonian  gods  would 
suffer  equally — not  one  would  be  able  to 
protect  himself  They  oonld  not  deliver  the 
burden.  A  distinction  is  here  made  between 
the  god  and  the  idol,  which  have  hitherto 
been  identified.  The  god  was,  in  each  case, 
unable  to  deliver,  or  save  from  capture,  the 
heavy  "burden  "  of  gold,  or  silver,  or  bronze 
(i.e.  hig  own  image)  which  was  carried  off 
on  the  back  of  the  "  weary  beast."  On  the 
contrary,  the  gods  themselves — the  "souls" 
of  the  images,  immanent  in  them — ^were 
carried  off  with  the  images  into  captivity, 

Yers.  3 — 8. — Am  Admonitiok  to  Isbabl. 
Israel  should  learn  from  the  fate  of  the 
Babylonian  idols  to  trust  in  Jehovah,  who 
can  and  will  deliver  them,  rather  than  in 
gods  of  gold  and  silver,  which  can  give  no 
aid,  either  to  themselves  or  others. 

Yer.  3. — All  the  remnant  of  the  honse  of 
Israel.  The  address  is  not  to  those  who 
had  remained  faithful  of  the  ten  tribes  (as 


196 


THE  BOOK  OF  THE  PROPHET  ISAIAH,    [cm.  xivi.  1— la 


Delitzech  supposes),  but  to  the  captives  of 
Babylon,  designated  in  theae  later  cliapters 
indifferently  as  "Jacob"  or  "Israel"  (eh. 
xl.  27;  xli.  8,  14;  xlii.  24;  xlUi.  1,28 ,  xliv. 
1,  21,  23 ;  xlv.  4,  etc.),  never  as  "  Judah," 
and  constantly  mentioned  as  a  "remnant" 
— all  that  was  left  of  the  oppressed  and 
down-trodden  nation  (see  cb.  i.  9 ;  x.  20 — 22 ; 
si.  16,  etc.).  Borne  by  me.  Carried  in  the 
everlasting  arms,  as  a  child  in  the  arms  of 
its  nurse  or  mother  (comp.  ch.  Iziii.  9). 
From  the  lielly  .  .  .  from  the  womb.  From 
the  Tery  beginning  of  the  national  existence. 
Ver.  4. — Even  to  your  old  age  I  am  he ; 
even  to  hoar  hairs,  etc.  The  nurse — even 
tlie  mother — soon  grows  tired  of  carrying 
the  child,  and  leaves  him  to  shift  for  him- 
self. But  God's  tender  care  for  his  people 
lasts  from  their  infancy,  through  their  boy- 
hood and  manhood,  to  their  old  age.  The 
everlasting  arms  never  weary.  God's  watch- 
fulness, his  providence,  his  protection,  never 
fEiil.  I  have  made,  and  I  will  bear.  The 
maker  of  a  thing  has  naturally  regard  to 
what  he  has  made,  loves  it,  desires  its  good, 
seeks  to  defend  and  save  it. 

Ver.  5. — ^To  whom  will  ye  liken  mel 
(comp.  oh..  xL  18.)  Am  I  to  be  likened  to 
the  idols  of  Babylon?  WUl  yon  make 
images  of  me?  Bethink  you  what  the 
very  nature  of  an  idol  is — how  contrary  to 
my  nature  I  My  idol  wonld  be  no  more 
capable  of  helping  itself  or  others  than  the 
images  of  Nebo  or  Bel-Merodach. 

Ver.  7. — They  bear  him  upon  the  shoulder 
(see  the  comment  on  ch.  xlv.  20).  Here, 
however,  it  is  not  the  carrying  in  procession 
that  is  spoken  of,  but  the  conveyance  of  the 
image  by  the  workman  from  his  own  work- 
shop to  the  temple  where  it  is  to  be  set  up. 
The  carrying  of  heavy  burdens  upon  the 
shoulder  is  mentioned  by  Herodotus  (ii.  35), 
and  frequently  represented  on  ancient 
momunents  (see  'Ancient  Monarchies,' 
voL  L  pp.  402j  475 ;  '  Herodotus,'  voL  ii.  pi. 
opp.  p.  177;  etc.).  Tiom  his  place  shall  he 
not  remove ;  i.e.  he  (the  god)  wiU  have  no 
power  of  moving  an  inch  ficm  the  spot  fin 
which  he  is  set  up.  There  he  will  stand 
motionless,  till  some  one  comes  and  poshes 
him  or  pulls  him  from  his  place. 

Ver.  8.— Bemember  this,  and  show  yoTir- 
selves  men ;  or,  remember  thit,  and  etand 
firm.  laaiali  is  addressing  those  who  waver 
Detween  true  religion  and  idolatry.  Hitherto 
they  have  not  fallen  away,  but  they  are  in 
danger  of  so  doing.  "Bemember,"  he  says 
to  ttiem,  or  "bear  in  mind  constantly  the 
impotence  of  the  idols,  and  the  power  of 
Jehovah,  and  then  stand  firm — remain  in 
yoni  old  faith — do  not  be  drawn  over  to  so 
foolish  a  thing  as  idolatry."  0  ye  trans- 
gressors. It  is  to  be  a  "  transgreesor "  even 
to  contemplate  the  turning  from  Jehovidi  to 


idolatry.  Israel  has  been  already  ''called 
a  transgressor  from  the  beginning"  (oh. 
xlviii.  8). 

Vers.  9 — 11. — X  Fdbtheb  Adhonitioii 
QBOUNDED  ON  OTBEB  MOTIVES.  Israel  ii 
exhorted  to  continue  firm  in  the  faith  (1) 
by  the  recollection  of  God's  mercies  in  tha 
past  (ver.  9);  (2)  by  the  consideration  of 
his  prophetic  power  (ver.  10);  and  (3)  by 
a  renewed  promise  of  coming  deliverance 
through  Cyrus  (ver.  11). 

Ver.  9. — ^Bemember  the  former  things  of 
old;  I.e.  God's  wonderful  dealings  with 
Israel  in  times  past — ^the  miracles  in  Bgjrpt, 
the  passage  of  the  Eed  Sea,  the  deliverances 
from  Midian,  and  Ammon,  and  the  Philis- 
tines, and  Zerah,  and  Sennacherib — ^which 
proved  him  God  in  a  sense  in  which  the 
word  conld  be  applied  to  no  other.  I  am 
God  ...  I  am  God.  In  the  origiiial,  "I 
am  El  ...  I  am  Elohim."  El  is  "the 
Mighty  One,"  "  the  Omnipotent ; "  Elohim, 
"  the  Godhead  "  in  all  its  fulness. 

Ver.  10. — ^Dedaiing  the  end  from  the 
beginning;  t,e.  "possessed  of  the  very 
highest  prophetic  power,  able  to  declare 
from  the  very  beginnings  of  history  its  ulti- 
mate issues  (see  Gen.  iiL  15;  xvt  12; 
xxi.  18,  etc.).  Hy  counsel;  rather,  my 
purpose,  or  my  plan  (comp.  Ps.  xxxiii  11  • 
Job  xxiii.  13;  and  supra,  ch.  xlv.  24). 

Ver.  11. — Calling  a  ravenous  bird;  rather, 
a  bird  of  prey.  The  imagery  is  quite  natural, 
and  exactly  parallel  to  that  by  «hich 
Nebuchadnezzar  is  tamed  "  an  ea^e^"  both 
by  Jeremiah  (xlix.  22)  and  Ezekiel  (xvii.  3). 
There  is  no  need  to  suppose  any  allusion 
to  the  fact,  if  &ct  it  be,  that  file  Permans 
from  the  time  of  Ojtob  had  fbr  a  standard  a 
golden  eagle,  with  wings  ontspiead,  on  the 
top  of  a  spear-shaft  (Xen.,  'Oyiop.,'  vii  1,  §  4; 
'  Anab.,'  L  10,  §  12).  From  fhe  east  (comp. 
ch.  xlL  2,  25).  Both  Persia  and  Snsiana, 
which  were  the  primary  seats  of  Uie  power 
of  Cyrus,  lay  to  the  east  of  Babylon,  Uie 
latter  due  east,  the  former  somewhat  to  the 
south-east.  Even  Media  might,  according 
to  Hebrew  nsage,  be  described  as  east, 
thongh  lying  almost  dne  north-east 

Vers.  12,  13. — Af<  ADuomnoir  to  thi 
Obddbate  in  Isbael.  God's  mercy  extends 
even  to  those  who  resist  his  grace.  They 
who  have  been  hitherto  stiff-necked  and 
"&r  from  righteousness,"  have  a  special 
warning  addressed  to  them.  Salvation  it 
drawing  nigh ;  the  deliverance  of  Israel  is 
approaching;  there  is  no  time  to  lose;  will 
they  not  cast  in  their  lot  with  the  tma 
Israel,  and  take  advantage  of  the  deliv 
when  it  cornea? 


cH.  XL VI.  1— 13.J    THE  BOOK  Of  THE  PROPHET  ISAIAH. 


Ver.  12. — Te  stont-hearted  (comp.  Ezek. 
U.  6 ;  iii.  7 ;  and  infra,  oh.  xlviii.  4).  The 
LXX.  translate  by  irKKtipoiedpSioi. 

Ver.  13. — I  bring  near  my  righteousness ; 
i.e.  "  my  righteous  judgment  is  approaching 
—that  judgment  which  involves  vengeance 
on  my  enemies,  mercy  and  deliverance  to 


my  people.''  This  latter  Is  the  salvation 
that  shall  not  tarry.  In  Zion.  The  head- 
quarters of  the  "salvation"  shall  once  more 
be  Mount  Zion,  or  Jerusalem,  where  Ood's 
people  shall  once  more  take  up  their  abode, 
and  which  shall  be  "the  centre  of  the 
renovated  nation"  (Delitzsoh). 


H0MILET1C& 

Vers.  1 — 11. — The  effect  of  Ctod'i  temporal  judgments  upon  nations  on  the  religious 
history  of  the  world.  In  the  ancient  world,  where  religions  had  no  revealed  or  historic 
basis,  but  had  been  evolved  by  degrees  from  the  thought  or  imagination  of  each  people, 
the  fate  of  a  religion  depended  greatly  upon  the  course  of  secular  history,  and  the 
success  or  failure  that  attended  upon  the  arms  of  the  nation  professing  it.  As  no 
'people  could  have  a  rational,  or,  consequently,  a  firm  belief  in  a  system  based  upon 
imagination,  each  was  ready  to  adopt  any  other  which  seemed  to  prove  its  superiority 
by  triumphs  and  victories.  The  downfall  of  an  empire  involved,  for  the  most  part,  the 
downfall  of  the  system  which  its  rulers  bad  made  the  state  religion ;  or,  if  not  its 
absolute  downfall,  its  depression  and  gradual  decay.  When  doi  raised  up  a  conquering 
power,  he  gave  an  impetiis  to  its  religious  system,  which  was  either  imposed  by  force 
upon  conquered  tribes,  or,  in  many  cases, voluntarily  acceptid  by  them.  The  gross  and 
sensuous  idolatry  of  Assyria  and  Babylon  had  obtained  almost  exclusive  possession  of 
Western  Asia  through  the  conquests  of  the  Assyrians  and  Babylonians  between  the 
twelfth  century  B.a.  and  the  sixth.  When  Cyrus  captured  Babylon  and  shattered  the 
Babylonian  empire,  this  idolatry  received  its  death-blow.  The  subject  nations  either 
reverted  to  their  ancieut  creeds  or  adopted  the  belief  of  the  new  conquerors.  Zoroas- 
trianism  became  the  predominant  religion  of  civilized  Asia.  Id  Babylon  itself  and  its 
neighbourhood  a  small  knot  of  believers  clung  to  the  old  superstition ;  but,  generally 
speaking,  it  was  discredited,  and  had  to  make  way  for  the  dualism  uf  Persia.  Dualism 
suffered  in  its  turn  when  the  Persian  empire  was  overthrown  by  Alexander  the  Great, 
and  continued  under  a  cloud  during  the  Parthian  period,  at  the  close  of  which  (a.d.  226) 
it  once  more  rea.sserted  itself  under  Artaxerxes,  son  of  Babek,  who  brought  the  Parthian 
empire  to  an  end.  Military  success,  simikrly,  established  Mohammedanism  as  the 
religion  of  Syria  and  Egypt,  Asia  Minor,  Persia,  Upper  India,  Turkestan,  Turkey,  and 
North  Africa,  even  Chrisitianity  suffering  when  God's  judgments  fell  on  the  effete  and 
debased  Byzantine  empire.  The  only  religion  that  has  been  but  slightly  affected  by 
military  success  and  failure  is  the  religion  of  Christ.  Originally  spreading,  like  leaven, 
silently  and  gradusjly,  without  any  help  from  conquerors  or  from  the  secular  arm,  till, 
having  become  the  religion  of  the  mass  of  his  subjects,  it  was  adopted  as  the  state 
religion  by  Constantine ;  it  resisted  the  great  influx  of  the  barbarians  into  the  Boman 
empire;  and,  instead  of  disappearing  before  Teutonic  and  Scandinavian  heathenism, 
converted  its  conquerors.  Unarmed  missionaries  spread  it  through  Central  and  Northern 
Europe,  through  Georgia,  Armenia,  and  Mesopotamia,  and  again  into  Abyssinia  and 
the  African  desert.  In  America  alone  was  it  propagated  by  the  sword.  Gradually 
progressive  in  almost  every  quarter,  once  only  and  in  one  quarter  has  it  retrograded 
through  a  Divine  judgment.  The  followers  of  the  Arabian  prophet  were  allowed  to 
sweep  it  from  the  greater  part  of  the  East,  from  Egypt  and  from  Northern  Africa,  for 
a  time  from  part  of  Spain ;  but  this  judgment,  provoked  by  immorality,  coldness,  and 
heresies  of  various  kinds,  was  not  a  final  judgment — already,  in  all  the  regions 
temporarily  lost  to  it,  the  religion  of  the  cross  has  recovered  a  footing,  and  is  guning 
ground.  Propagaudism  by  the  swurd  has  now  ceased ;  but  everywhere  the  course  of 
secular  history  is  so  ordered  that  Christianity  comes  more  and  more  to  the  front. 
Islam  is  dying  out ;  Brahminism  is  shaken  to  its  basis ;  Buddhism  has  well-nigh  spent 
itself.  The  religion  on  which  God  has  set,  and  is  each  jeai  more  olear^  setting,  the 
seal  of  success  is  Christiatiitj. 


198  THE   BOOK  OF   THE   PROPHET   ISAIAH,    [en.  xlvi.  1— li 


HOMILIES  BY  VARIOUS  AUTHORS. 

Vers.  1 — 13. — TTte  religion  of  Jehovah  caatrasted  with  idolatry.  L  Tmi  BmnUA- 
TiON  OF  Bel  and  Nebo.  These  wire  tlie  tutelar  gods  of  Babylon  and  its  suburb, 
Borsippa.  Mei'dach,  or  Marduk  (Jtr.  1.  2),  is  another  name  of  a  being  closely  related 
to  or  identical  wiih  Bel.  The  idols  of  the  Chaldeans  are  given  up  to  the  beasts,  and 
the  images  once  carried  in  solemn  procession  by  the  priests  and  nobles  are  put  upon  the 
backs  ol  beasts  of  burden.  Herodotus  and  Diodorus  tell  us  of  the  golden  statue  ci 
the  great  god  at  Babylon  (the  Greeks  called  him  after  their  own,  Zeus),  and  the  great 
golden  table  i[i  frunt  of  it— a  "table  of  demons" — and  the  golden  altar.  The  image 
was  said  to  have  been  carried  away  by  Xerxes  (Herod.,  i.  183).  These  gods,  then, 
once  held  as  miglity,  tutelar,  delivering  saviours  in  one  of  the  greatest  cities  in  the 
world,  have  them  elves  gone  into  captivity.  Themselves  they  could  not  save.  Had 
these  gods  been  rcaLy  Divine,  tliey  uould  surely  have  rescued  their  own  images. 
Conceived  as  persons  by  the  heathen,  thfy  are,  in  the  pro|ihet's  arguments,  convicted 
of  being  without  any  of  the  proper  ability  of  personality.  "  It  is  diflicult  not  to 
think  of  the  last  strange  journey  of  these  desecrated  images,"  remarks  a  commentator 
(cf.  Layard's  picture  of  the  '  Procession  of  the  Bull  beneath  the  Mound  of  Nimrod  *). 
The  power  of  the  heathen  god  depended  on  the  faith,  i.e.  the  imagination,  of  his 
worshippers.  The  overthrow  of  Babylonian  power  was  a  great  shock  to  the  heathen 
imagination.  It  showed  that  the  power  in  which  they  had  believed  was  an  illusion 
and  a  lie  from  the  Hebrew  point  of  view.  And  so  ever;  the  powers  of  this  present 
world  and  its  princes  and  its  illusions  are  seen  passing  away  before  the  prevalence 
of  true  religion. 

II.  The  providence  of  Jehovah  oveb  his  feoplb.  He  is  what  the  gods  counter- 
feited— a  wise  superintending  Being,  a  faithful  supporting  Being,  to  bis  people,  alike 
in  war  and  in  peace;  the  gods  of  conquered  peoples  had  failed  to  be  this,  according 
to  the  prophet,  and  according  to  ancient  thought  generally.  Jehovah  is  this. 
Note  the  extreme  tenderness  of  the  representations  of  him  in  this  attitude  to  his  folk. 
Not  a  timid  and  trembliiig  captive  but  may  appropriate  the  truth  to  his  own  consola* 
tion.  He  is  as  the  Nurse,  they  as  the  little  helpless  infant  (cf.  ch.  Ixiii.  9 ;  Deut.  L 
31;  Kxod.  xix.  4;  Ps.  xxviii.  9;  Hos.  xi.  3).  But  the  thought  of  the  human  parent 
and  nurse  reminds  us  of  mortality  and  of  transiency  belonging  to  human  conditions. 
"The  devoted  watchfulness  of  the  parent  dies  away  when  his  child  has  come  to 
maturity;  and  he  is  commonly  removed  by  death  when  his  offspring  has  attained  to 
old  age."  Not  so  with  Israel  and  Jehovah.  Israel  is  always  the  objc  ct  of  the  motherly 
care  and  afi'ection  of  God  (ch.  xlii.  14 ;  xlix.  15 ;  Ixvi.  9, 13).  "  Even  to  old  age  I  am 
the  same  "  (see  Ps.  Ixxi.  18,  where  the  people  speak  as  one  person).  "  Even  to  grey 
hairs  I  will  bear ;  I  have  made,  and  /  will  carry,  and  /  will  bear  and  will  rescue." 

III.  His  appeal  to  the  reason  of  the  people.  Ever  we  seem  to  hear  him  saying, 
"Come  now,  and  let  us  reason  together."  There  are  "rebellious  ones"  (ver.  8),  ye( 
Jehovah  still  reasons  with  them.  Once  more  the  piece  of  manufactured  bolplessness 
called  an  idol  is  placed  before  their  thuujiht.  What  can  it  do  for  men?  They  "cry 
unto  it,  but  it  cannot  answer,  nor  save  them  out  of  trouble."  Is  Jehovah  to  be  com- 
pared  with  that  thing  f  And  then  the  positive  argument  is  again  brought  forward. 
Jehovah  alone  has  the  power  of  prediction.  "  From  the  very  beginidng  of  a  period  of 
history  he  can  announce  the  far-off  issue,  utterly  incalculable  to  human  ey^."  If, 
then,  now  he  has  announced  his  purpose,  it  will  stand.  If  the  bird  of  prey,  the  ^ie 
Gyrus,  has  been  called  from  the  east,  it  will  be  to  the  certain  execution  of  a  mission 
from  Jehovah.  To  trust  in  him  is  to  have  all  i:i(iiculties  solved,  all  confidence  restored. 
To  believe  in  Providence ;  to  be  ussurol  that  the  world's  history  at  any  raomeuti  M 
this  moment,  is  not  a  mere  play  of  passion,  caprice,  and  chance,  but  that  things  ars 
working  together  to  an  end  foreseen ; — this  is  strength,  because  this  ia  reason,  ^nd 
God  would  have  his  people  understand  waht  true  roasou  brings  to  religion;  that  rolimm 
is  reason  and  sense,  while  idolatry  is  weakness,  folly,  and  unreason. 

IV.  1'he  nearness  of  God's  salvation.  This,  too,  is  an  emphatic  thought  (of 
sh.  Ivi,  1).  Righteousness  and  salvation  are  but  two  aspects  of  the  same  oFesMna 
Y^et  men  may  be  "  far  off."    How  ?    It  is  not  space,  it  is  not  time,  that  s^paratea  I^QBt 


OH.  XLVL  1—13.]    TEE  BOOK  OF  THE  PBOPHET  ISAIAH.  1»9 

Ood.  It  is  in  the  heart  that  men  are  near  or  far.  The  power  of  imagination  mnat  not 
be  forgotten.  In  one  sense  God  is  no  more  near  or  distant  at  one  time  than  another, 
nor  to  one  person  than  another;  that  our  reasun  assures  us.  Yet  the  evidence  of 
feejing  and  of  imagination  is  otherwise.  They  tell  us  that  he  may  he  "  near  "  or  "  far." 
It  is,  then,  in  ourselves  that  the  cause  must  he  sought.  The  warm  affection,  the  lively 
fancy,  the  open  and  lowly  intelligence, — these  bring  him  near.  The  obdurate  heart— 
which  means  the  dull  intelligence,  the  sluggish  fancy,  the  state  of  coldness  in  the 
affections — this  may  place  him  wide  as  the  poles  asunder  from  man.  What  is  needed 
in  religion,  alike  in  its  intellectual  and  its  practical  aspects,  is  simplicity,  yielding  child- 
likeness,  impressionableuess  to  great  and  obvious  truths. — J. 

Ver.  4. — God? a  care  for  the  aged.  "And  even  to  your  old  age  I  am  he,"  etc. 
What  B  contrast  between  God  and  man  1  Concerning  how  many  may  it  be  said  that 
they  are  forgntten  in  old  age  I  Sometimes  even  children  are  faithless  to  their  parents, 
and  age  has  died  in  a  workhouse,  when  children  have  been  well-to-do.  But  change 
comes,  too,  in  other  relationships.  The  world  does  not  want  us  when  we  are  worn  out. 
Its  sweet  songs  can  charm  no  more.  The  cunning  of  the  worker's  hand  fails.  The  preacher 
faints.    A  new  generation  of  strength  and  health  has  won  the  palm.    Then,  mark — 

I.  The  snBPBisE.  Even.  At  the  time  when  the  world  draws  off,  God  comes  nearer. 
Weakness  is  always  welcome  to  him.  He  loves  to  comfort.  His  infinite  strength  is 
not  weakened  by  all  outgoings  of  help  to  others.  Wherever,  iu  age,  sickness  confines  us, 
or  solitude  keeps  us,  there  is  our  Father.  Even  then,  when  heart  and  flesh  faint  and 
fail.  He  has  not  merely  pi'omised  this,  but  the  Jacobs  of  the  world  can  attest  the 
truth :  "  All  my  life  long."  And  apart  from  promise  and  experience,  it  is  God's  nature 
so  to  do. 

IL  The  beasons.  1.  "I  have  made."  God  will  not,  as  Job  says,  forget  us, 
because  "  thou  hast  a  desire  to  the  work  of  thy  hands."  2.  "  I  have  rescued."  What 
else  says  the  prophet?  "  I  will  carry  and  deliver  you."  What  we  could  not  bear  away, 
God,  in  the  person  of  his  Son,  will  do  for  us.  "  Behold  the  Lamb  of  God,  which  taketh 
away  the  sin  of  the  world  1"  Hoar  hairs  may  have  their  perfect  whiteness,  but  hoar 
hearts  have  not,  and  we  need  a  Saviour  to  the  end.  Nor  is  this  all.  Old  age  has  its 
sorrows  as  well  as  its  sins.  The  young  have  not  always  sympathy  with  the  old.  They 
do  not  understand  what  it  is  to  feel  so  "  alone,"  with  buried  generations  behind,  who 
once  joined  in  the  race  of  life  with  them,  and  who  worshipped  with  them  in  the  house 
of  God.  Those  who  admired  and  understood  and  loved  them  are  gone,  and  a  generation 
has  risen  up  who  know  not  Joseph.  Beautifully  does  the  next  verse  be^in,  "  To  whom 
will  ye  liken  me  ?  "  "  Even  to  your  old  age  I  am  he."  Always  a  Father,  always  a 
Saviour,  always  a  Friend. — W.  M.  8. 

Vers.  1 — i. — Men  bearing  gods,  and  Ood  bearing  hi$  peoph.  The  pitiable  and  even 
ludicrous  insuflii-iency  of  idolatry  is,  admirably  drawn  in  this  picture.  We  see  the 
beasts  bowed  down  with  the  i  mages  of  the  helpless  deities  of  Chaldea.  In  what  striking 
and  glowing  contrast  does  the  relation  of  Jehovah  to  his  people  appear  I  From  the 
very  infancy  of  Israel  God  had  borne  them  in  the  arms  of  his  taitbiulnegs  and  power ; 
and  his  tender  kindness  in  the  past  would  extend  to  the  furthest  future.  Ev«i  to 
old  age  he  would  bear  them  ;  they  might  confidently  lean  on  his  strength;  t^eyOHj^t 
count  with  absolute  assurance  on  his  protecting  care,  on  bis  delivering  graoe.  *'  I 
will  carry,  and  will  deliver  you."    We  learn — 

L  That  false  trusts,  so  fab  fbom  liioHTENiNO  oub  bubdens,  abb  a  HSATTimaHT 
TO  OABBT.  Men  make  mistakes  now  which  are  as  serious  in  their  consequences  as  that 
made  by  the  Babylonians.  They  put  their  trust  in  things  which  prove  to  be  delusiTe 
and  even  burdensome.  This  is  true  of  unwise  friendshipa  t  of  ill-gained  or  excessive 
wealth ;  of  exalted  positions,  which  we  have  not  strength  to 'fill,  or  high  honours  which 
we  have  not  grace  to  carry;  of  learning  in  one  direction,  unbalanced  by  knowledge  in 
other  directions.  You  see  men  who  thought  to  bless  themselves  with  these  "  idols," 
who  expected  to  he  enriched  and  sustained  by  them,  staggering  under  their  weight, 
blinded  and  misled  by  them,  betrayed  and  ruined  by  them.  Instead  of  their  gods- 
carrying  them,  they  have  to  carry  their  gods. 

IL  That  tbust  in  God  will  be  justified  by  the  LOHam  utk.   (Yer.  4.)  1.  Qui 


200  THE   BOOK  OF   THE    PROPHET   ISAIAH,    [oh.  xlti.  1— U 

continued  hia  mercies  to  us  from  our  birth  to  our  regeneration;  though  we  knew  him 
not,  he  girded  us  (ch.  xlv.  5).  He  fed  and  clothed  and  sheltered  us.  2.  He  undertook 
to  befriend  us  when  we  gave  ourselves  to  him,  and  he  has  done  so.  He  has  made  good 
to  us  his  kindest  words  of  promise.  3.  A  time  of  special  trial  may  confront  ns :  the 
pillar  and  mainstay  may  have  fallen ;  unfriendly  seasons  or  adverse  circumstances  may 
have  stripped  us ;  sickness  may  have  weakened  us,  or  infirmity  may  be  visibly  advanc- 
ing on  us.  Our  human  powers,  our  earthly  prospects,  may  be  failing  and  waning,  4. 
But  we  may  go  on  undaunted,  untroubled.  "  The  Lord  will  provide."  We  have  a  strong 
consolation — we  whose  hope  is  in  the  Lord  our  God.  (1)  His  word  of  promise  cannot 
be  broken.  (2)  We,  men,  do  not  desert  our  servants  in  iheir  age  or  their  sickness :  how 
much  less  will  he  (Ps.  Ixxi.  18 ;  ch.  Iv.  9)  1  (3)  Our  very  weakness  and  distresg  are 
a  strong  guarantee  that  the  compassionate  and  considerate  Father  will  befriend  and 
sustain  us.  (4:)  The  unchangeable  One  will  not  begin  without  concluding  his  work ; 
he  will  "  perfect  that  which  concerns  us ; "  he  will  "  not  forsake  the  work  of  his  own 
hands."  To  old  age,  to  hoar  hairs,  he  will  carry  us  along  the  path  of  life,  till  we  nach 
tlie  home  of  unfailing  health  and  unbroken  joy. — 0. 

Ver.  8. — Manliness  in  relation  to  religion.  "  Bemember  thia,  and  show  youi-selvea 
men."  Tlie  prophet  calls  on  the  people  of  God  to  show  themselves  to  be  men,  either 
by  exercising  their  powers  of  recollection  and  reason  in  remembering  the  facts  and 
arguments  he  has  adduced,  or  by  taking  appropriate,  manly  action  in  the  recollection 
and  realization  of  these  convincing  and  constraining  reasons.  Beligion  is  a  manly  thing 
in  both  these  aspects.  So  far  from  its  being  the  childish  or  effeminate  thing  which  its 
enemies  have  been  pleased  to  call  it,  it  is  a  sphere  of  thought  and  of  action  in  which 
the  very  highest  and  noblest  attributes  of  our  humanity  have  fullest  scope. 

I.  Ab  a  8FHEBE  OF  HUMAN  THOUGHT.  1.  It  is  the  uiost  elevated.  All  objects  of 
creation  are  worthy  of  regard,  and  the  study  of  them  is  full  of  recompense.  But  they 
differ  in  the  ilegree  of  their  worthiness ;  there  is  an  ascending  scale,  and  they  culminate 
in  the  Divine.  The  noblest  study  of  mankind  is  God — his  nature,  his  character,  his 
will,  his  kingdom.  2.  It  is  the  most  obligatory.  Men,  as  men,  should  consider  that 
which  most  claims  their  attention,  should  dwell  on  those  themes  which  n^ost  demand 
their  thought  and  care.  And  these  are  found  in  Divine  blessings.  Divine  dealings. 
Divine  messages,  Divine  beauties  and  excellences.  We  are  never  doing  anything 
more  worthy  of  om-  manhood  than  when  we  are  recalling  and  realising  what  God  is, 
what  he  has  done,  what  he  has  been  to  our  race  and  to  ourselves,  what  sovereign  and 
supreme  claims  he  has  on  our  reverence  and  love. 

II.  Ab  a  sfhebe  of  human  action.  If  there  be  anything  which  can  be  said  to  be 
manlier  than  patient  and  earnest  thought  on  the  highest  themes,  it  is:  1.  Deliberate 
choice  of  the  wisest  and  hest  course — the  determination,  at  all  costs  and  spite  of  all 
inducements,  to  take  that  course  which  commends  itself  to  our  judgment  as  the  right 
and  the  wise  one.  This  is  exactly  what  men  do  when  they  surrender  themselves  to 
the  will  of  God,  to  the  service  of  Jesus  Christ.  2.  Resolute  and  persistent  pursuit  of 
it.  Where  does  manliness  find  nobler  illustrations  than  in  the  persistent  worship  ol 
God  under  cruel  persecution,  the  immovable  adherence  to  sacred  conviction  under  the 
wearying  and  worrying  assaults  of  worldly  and  frivolous  associates,  the  steadfast 
endeavour  to  extend  the  kingdom  of  righteousness  and  to  raise  the  condition  of  the 
degraded,  notwithstanding  all  the  discouragements  that  awut  the  Christian  work- 
man ? — C. 

Ver.  4. — Grace  for  a  long  life.  "Even  to  hoar  hairs  will  I  carry  you."  Reference 
is  made  mure  especially  to  the  prolonged  life  and  varied  experience  of  the  nation;  but 
the  promise  and  assurance  are  equally  iipplicable  to  the  individual — they  exactly  match 
other  assurances  which  are  adrlressed  to  individuals.  And  Israel  may  always  be 
regarded  as  the  type  of  the  godly  man.  For  us  all  life  is  full  of  changes,  surprises,  anil 
calamities.  We  have  nothing  absolutely  stable  and  unchangeable,  nothing  always  true 
and  trustworthy,  unless  God  is  such.  In  an  exquisite  fragment  of  aitobiography,  by 
Dr.  Horace  Bushnell,  foimd  dimly  pencilled  on  a  stray  sheet  of  paper,  is  the  f<mowing 
indication  of  the  rest  a  soul  finds  in  the  permanence,  the  unchmgeableness,  of  God : 
"  My  mother's  loving  instinct  was  from  God,  and  God  was  in  love  to  me  first  there- 


OH.  XLTL  1— 13.]    THE   BOOK  OP  THE  PROPHET  ISAIAH  201 


fole ;  which  love  was  deeper  than  hers,  and  more  protracted.  Long  years  ago  she 
vanished,  but  God  stays  by  me  still,  embracing  me  in  my  grey  hairs,  as  tenderly  and 
carefully  as  she  did  in  my  infancy,  and  giving  to  me  as  my  joy  and  the  principal  glory 
of  my  life  that  be  lets  me  know  him,  and  helps  me,  with  real  coufidence,  to  call  him 
my  Father."  This  truth  of  God's  permanent  gracious  relations  with  those  who  put 
their  trust  in  him  was  stated  in  its  Christian  form  by  the  Apostle  John  (John  liii.  1), 
when,  speaking  of  his  Master,  he  said,  "  Those  whom  he  loveth,  he  loveth  unto  me 
end."  It  may  be  noticed  that,  while  mother's  love  and  interist  never  flags  or  fails, 
mother's  work,  of  hearing,  tending,  carrying,  does  change  and  pass  as  the  children  grow 
older.  So  even  with  a  mother  God  may  be  contrasted ;  for  he  tends  even  to  old  age, 
even  to  the  end.  Opening  the  general  topic  suggested  by  the  text,  we  may  observe 
that  the  promise — 

L  Assumes  us  to  be  in  obaoioub  relations  with  God.  Sometimes  those  relations 
are  presented  under  the  figure  of  a  "covenant."  At  other  times  they  are  seen  as 
relations  brought  about  by  "  redemption  "-work  in  our  behalf.  Here  the  closer,  more 
natural,  more  personal,  relations  of  parents  and  children  are  referred  to.  G-od  is  repre- 
sented as  feeling  towards  us  like  the  mother  who  bore  us.  Compare  the  psalmist's 
sense  of  the  motherly  relation  in  bis  plea,  "  When  my  &ther  and  my  mother  forsake 
me^  then  the  Lord  will  take  me  up." 

II.  Declares  that  the  relation  shall  bb  kept  up  to  the  end.  Such  an 
assurance  is  necessary,  not  because  we  fear  any  changeableness  in  Qoi,  but  because 
we  fear  that  the  wilfulness  and  changeableness  in  us  may  grieve  him,  and  lead  him  to 
remove  his  grace  from  us.  The  comfort  of  the  promise  of  the  text  lies  in  the  confidence 
it  gives  us  that  o\a  waywardness  will  not  outweary  our  God.  "  Though  we  believe 
not,  yet  he  abideth  faithful." 

III.  Involves  grace  BtnrFiciENT  fob  uaintaininq  the  relation.  It  is  not 
a  promise  of  grace  at  the  end,  but  unto  the  end.  All  along  the  way  we  may  be  quite 
sure  of  adaptations  of  Div'ne  grace  such  as  may  go  into  the  words  "carry,"  "bear," 
"  deliver."— R.  T. 

Ver.  8. — OocTs  eaU  to  exercise  right  reason.  "  Show  yourselves  men."  This  is  the 
language  of  irony.  Worshippers  of  idols  should  have  the  courage  of  their  convictions. 
They  should  not  be  such  children  as  to  confound  the  spiritual  God  with  dumb,  senseless 
idols,  who  can  neither  counsel  nor  save.  "  Remember  this,  that  has  often  been  told 
you,  what  senseless,  helpless  things  idols  are,  and  show  yourselves  men — men,  and  not 
brutes ;  men,  and  not  babes.  Act  with  reason,  act  with  resolution,  act  for  your  own 
interest.  Do  a  wise  thing,  do  a  brave  thing,  and  scorn  to  disparage  your  own  judgment, 
as  you  do  when  you  worship  idols  "  (Matthew  Henry).  The  point  presented  for  con- 
sideration is — that  God  is  served  by  the  diligent  and  faithful  use  of  our  faculties,  and  not 
by  crushing  them. 

I.  God  is  best  served  by  man  at  his  best.  A  very  curious  perversion  of  St.  Paul's 
glorying  in  his  infirmities  is  the  notion,  which  prevails  in  some  quarters,  that  the 
more  ignorant,  weak,  and  foolish  we  are,  the  better  we  can  serve  God's  purposes.  It  is 
the  universal  truth  that  Q-od  works  out  his  best  purposes  through  the  consecration  of 
nan's  best  and  most  cultured  powers  to  his  service.     It  is  only  the  exception  of  Divine 

grace  that  God  is  pleased  sometimes  to  use  man's  feebleness.  Sometimes,  indeed,  it  is 
so,  that  "  out  of  the  mouths  of  babes  and  sucklings  God  perfects  praise ; "  and  his  so 
doing  efficiently  persuades  us  of  the  absolute  sovereignty  of  Divine  grace ;  but  the 
normal  law  is  that  God  shall  bs  served  by  the  best  culture  and  the  wisest  use  of  just 
tnose  powers  and  faculties  which  he  has  himself  given  us.  Let  babes  be  babes,  and 
honour  God  With  infant  songs.  Since  we  are  men,  it  is  the  best-cultured  and  most 
fully  matuied  manhood  that  we  must  lay  upon  his  altar.  When  reproached  by  a 
mere  sentimentalist  that  "  God  had  no  need  of  his  learning,"  the  cultured  divine  very 
wisely  as  well  as  smartly  replied,  "  Ami  he  has  as  little  need  of  your  ignorance.'  We 
must  be  in  every  way  the  best  possible  for  God,  and  this  includes  onr  mental  best. 

II.  Man  at  his  best  is  but  a  skrvant  of  God.  This  conviction  will  keep  him  in 
his  place,  whatsoever  his  attainments  may  he.  It  is  the  constantly  observed  fact  that 
fulness  of  learning  and  a  genuine  humility  go  together  hand-in-hand.  It  is  a  "  little 
knowledge"  that  puffeth  up,  a  "little  culture"  that  nourishes  self-will.     The  thing? 


208  THE  BOOK  OF  THE  PROPHET  ISAIAH,    [oh.  xlvi.  1—14 

we  hare  in  the  household  and  family  life,  for  daily  uae.  Heed  not  be  chipped,  i^ly,  oi 
inefficient  things;  they  may  be  in  the  best  shapes,  and  may  be  artistic  in  appearance, 
pleasant  to  the  eye,  withont  losing  their  practical  nsefulness.  So  we  can  be  the  truest, 
wisest,  most  cultured,  most  beautiful  men  and  women,  and  yet  keep  in  perfect  dmplicity 
the  humility  and  the  joy  of  oar  service. — B.  T. 

Yen  10. — Thagoodntu  of  Ood?»  "pUasaireJ'   "  My  counsel  shall  stand,  and  I  will  do 

all  my  pleasure.  An  anthropopathic  expression.  Care  is  necessary  in  transferring 
human  sentiments  and  feelings  to  God.  Words  may  oome  to  be  applied  in  such  a  way 
to  men  that  they  cannot  be  wisely  used  for  God.  A  man's  "  pleasure"  has  come  to 
stand  for  his  mere  " self-wiUedness,"  his  unreasoning  and  often  unreasonable  "wishes." 
A  man's  "pleasure"  is  simply  the  thing  that  he  "likes."  In  such  senses  we  cannot 
properly  apply  such  a  word  to  God.  In  the  text,  the  word  "pleasure"  is  associated 
with  the  word  "  counsel,"  and  the  suggestion  made  is  that  the  counsels  of  the  infinite 
wisdom  and  goodness  are  such  that  God  can  find  a  personal  pleasure  in  carrying  them 
.out.  Just  as  he  looked  upon  all  his  creation-work,  called  it  good,  and  found  pleasure  in 
it,  so  he  looks  upon  all  the  operations  of  his  providence,  for  nations  and  individuals, 
and  finds  pleasure  io  watching  them  as  they  bear  townrds  the  final  issue  of  universal 
good.  It  may  be  shown  that  every  being  finds  its  pleasure  "after  its  kind,"  according 
to  its  nature ;  and  we  ought  to  have  the  utmost  satisfaction  in  <God's  getting  his 
pleasure  because  of  what  we  know  of  him.  His  pleasure  must  be  like  him,  worthy  of 
him ;  and  that  is  enough. 

L  What  is  pleasant  to  God  must  be  right.  For  men  that  is  true  which  is 
expressed  in  the  proverb,  "Stolen  waters  are  sweet,  and  bread  eaten  in  secret  is 
pleasant."  Man  finds  his  pleasure  in  that  which  is  doubtful,  and  even  in  that  which 
is  wrong.  But  we  have  the  roost  perfect  confidence  that  God  finds  no  pleasure  in  any- 
thing that  is  not  through  and  through  right.  If  he  is  well  pleased,  then  we  are  sure 
that  the  thing  is  right.  Indeed,  so  fixed  is  this  relation  between  "  God  "  and  "  right," 
that,  for  us,  the  right  has  come  to  be  simply  "  God's  will." 

IL  What  is  pleasant  to  God  must  be  kind.  That  is,  it  must  have  taken  all  due 
consideration  of  the  well-being  and  the  wishes  of  others ;  and  it  must  involve  a  going 
out  of  God,  as. it  were,  beyond  himself,  to  live  in  the  feelings  of  others.  The  essence  of 
pleasure  is  unselfish  concern  for  others.  And  God  may  do  all  his  "  pleasure,"  because  he 
proposes  only  that  which  secures  our  highest  welfare.  What  may  be  spoken  of  as  the 
highest  pleasure  God  can  know  ?  We  are  assured  that  he  has  "  no  pleasure  at  all  in 
the  death  of  the  wicked,  but  that  he  turn  from  his  evil  way  and  live."  God's  supreme 
pleasure  is  found  in  redeeming;  in  all  that  this  most  suggestive  and  comprehensive 
word  involves.  "The  Lord  taketb  pleasure  in  them  that  fear  him,  in  those  that  hope 
in  his  mercy." — B.  T. 

Ver.  12. — Stout-heartedneu.  "  Te  stout-hearted,  that  a'^  far  from  righteousness.' 
Bzekiel  has  other  terms.  "For  they  are  impudent  childrau  and  stiff-hearted"  (ii.  4); 
"  For  all  the  house  of  Israel  are  impudent  and  hard-hearted "  (iii.  7).  The  term 
" stout-hearted"  expresses  stubborn  and  confirmed  opposition,  rebelliousness,  obduracy, 
a  state  of  mind  and  heart  that  is  beyond  the  influence  of  any  gracious  pleadings  and 
persuasions.  And  such  "stoiit-heartedness"  Involves  the  man's  own  self-willed 
exclusion  from  the  "righteousness  of  God."  The  stout-hearted  man  gets  far  away 
from  God,  because  he  has  no  intentions  of  obedience  to  him.  The  plea  of  the  text  is 
sent  to  those  exiles  who  were  slow  to  believe  in  their  deliverance  through  the  agency 
of  Gyrus ;  and  it  must  be  admitted  that  all  the  later  information  we  have  concerning 
Cyrus  helx^s  us  to  understand  how  unlikely  a  person  he  was  for  the  carrying  out  of 
Jehovah's  purposes.  Not  even  yet  have  we  sufficent  information  to  peimit  our  under- 
standing the  national  circumstances  and  political  pressure  which,  humanly  speaking, 
led  to  the  restoriition.  The  plea  of  the  text  is  full  of  force  for  all  sinners  who  refuse  to 
accept  the  offers  of  mercy  and  salvation  which  God  has  been  pleased  to  make  to  them. 
The  "  stout-hearted  "  can  even  refuse  God's  mercy  in  Christ  Jesus.  But  the  refusal  is 
rebellion  and  insult ;  and  the  stone  that  should  be  a  foundation  must  prove  a  stone  that 
falls  and  cii'shes.  Matthew  Henry  regards  these  "stout-hearted"  as  "  the  nnhumbled 
Jews,  that  have  been  long  under  the  hammer,  long  in  the  furnace,  but  are  not  bro^  en. 


OH.  XLVii.  1— 15.]    THE  BOOK  OF  THE  PROPHET  ISAIAU. 


203 


are  not  melted;  that, like  the  unljelieving,  murmuring  Israelites  in  the  wilderness,  thinlt 
themselves  far  from  God's  righteousness  (that  is,  from  the  performance  of  his  promise, 
and  his  appearing  to  judge  for  them),  and  by  their  distrusts  set  then)selves  at  a  yet 
further  distance  from  it,  and  keep  good  things  from  themselves,  as  their  fathers,  who 
could  not  enter  into  the  land  of  promif^e  hecause  of  unbelief."  A  study  of  this  state 
and  condition  of  mind  and  feeling  may  follow  along  three  lines. 

I.  Stout-heaetedness  as  a  natural  disposition.  There  is  a  natural  obstinacy, 
a  self-willed  tendency  to  object  and  to  resist,  which  parental  training  ought  to  correct, 
lest  it  should  get  established  as  a  bad  bias  for  life.  Severe  child-chastisements  only 
can  check  this  evil. 

.II.  Stout-hbabtbdness  as  a  produot  op  oibodmstanobs.  Illustrate  from  the 
distressed  condition  of  exiles  in  Babylon,  the  long  delay  in  Divine  deliverance,  etc. 
We  can  hardly  wonder  that  some  should  say,  "Why  should  we  wait  for  God  any 
longer?" 

III.  STonr-HEARTBDNESs  AS  A  RESULT  OF  ACTS  OT  WILFULNESS.  Nothing  is  moro 
morally  injurious  than  for  ns  to  be  successful  in  first  transgressions  and  little  sins, 
and  so  to  become  hardened  and  proud  in  our  hearts. — R.  T. 

Ver.  13. — OoiPg people  are  QocPs  glory.  "For  Israel  my  glory."  He  glories  in  them. 
He  is  glorified  in  them.  He  ought  to  be  glorified  in  them.  Some  read  the  clauses  from 
which  the  text  is  taken  so  as  to  throw  uut  a  different  meaning :  "  And  I  appoint  in 
Zion  salvation,  unto  Israel  (I  give)  my  glory."  God's  glory  is  thus  represented  as  con- 
nected with  his  salvation  and  his  righteousness.  God's  glory  is  liis  faithfulness  and 
his  redemption.  As  we  have  so  v/ften  the  declaration  of  Oo-l's  interest  in  Israel,  his  joy 
in  her,  and  the  honour  he  expects  her  to  be  to  him,  we  take  the  simpler  thought 
suggested  by  the  English  Version,  and  suggest  such  a  homily  as  may  be  suitable  for 
a  week-night  service  or  prayer-meeting.  God's  people  are  God's  glory;  they  bring 
honour  to  him,  as  we  see — 

I.  What  he  does  for  them.  Illustrate  from  God's  moving  away  all  obstacles,  and 
constraining  unlikely  agents  to  serve  him  in  the  restoring  of  the  exiles  to  their  loved 
city  and  country. 

II.  What  he  dobs  in  them.  By  the  very  delay  of  his  promise,  and  by  his  gracious 
sanctifyings,  preparing  them  to  get  the  very  best  moral  and  spiritual  blessings  out  of 
their  deliverance. 

III.  What  he  dobs  with  them.  Making  them  a  spectacle  and  a  witness  for  himself, 
to  their  own  age  and  the  surrounding  nations ;  and  making  the  marvel  of  their  story 
a  testimony  to  his  faithfulness  and  mercy  to  all  ages,  until  the  end  of  the  world  shaU 
come. — B.  T. 

EXPOSITION. 


CHAPTER  XLVIL 

Vers.  1 — 15.— A  Song  of  Thiumph  over 
THE  Fall  op  Babylon.  The  song  divides 
itself  into  four  strophes,  or  stanzas — the  first 
one  of  four  verses  (vers.  1 — 4);  the  second 
of  three  (vers.  5—7);  the  third  of  four 
(•v'erB.  8 — 11);  and  the  fourth  also  of  four 
(vers.  12 — 15).  The  speaker  is  either 
Jehovah  (see  ver.  3,  ad  fin.)  or  "a  chorus 
of  Celestial  beings"  (Cheyne),  bent  on  ex- 
pressing their  sympathy  with  Israel. 

Ver.  1. — Come  down,  and  sit  in  the  dnst ; 
f.e:  "  descend  to  the  lowest  depth  of  humilia- 
tion "  (comp.  ch.  ill.  26  and  Job  ij.  8).  0 
Yirgin  daughter  of  Babylon.  The  "virgin 
daughter  of  Babylon  "  is  the  Babylonian 
people  ea  distinct  from  the  city  (comp.  ch. 


xxiii.  12).  « Virgin"  doea  not  mean  "nn- 
conquered;"  for  Babylon  had  been  taken 
by  the  Assyrians  some  half-dozen  times 
('Ancient  Monarchies,'  vol.  ii.  pp.  58,  130, 
149,  157,  164,  175,  etc.).  Sit  on  the  ground : 
there  is  no  throne ;  rather,  tit  on  the  ground 
thronelees,  or  without  a  throne.  Hitherto 
the  "  virgin  daughter "  had  sat,  as  It  were, 
on  a  throne,  ruling  the  nations.  Now  she 
must  sit  on  the  ground— there  was  no  throne 
left  for  her.  It  is  the  fact  that  Babylon  was 
never,  after  her  capture  by  Cyrus,  the  capital 
of  a  kingdom.  Under  the  Achsamenian 
kings  she  was  the  residence  of  the  court 
for  a  part  of  the  year;  but  Susa  was  the 
capital.  Under  Alexander  she  was  desig- 
nated for  his  capital;  but  he  died  before 
his  designs  oc  llcl  be  carried  out.  Under 
the  Seleucida  she  rapidly  dwindled  in 
consequence,    until    she    became   a   ruin. 


204 


THE  BOOK  OF  THE  PROPHET  ISAIAH,    [oh.  XLvn.  1— 15. 


Thou  shalt  no  more  be  oalled  tender  and 
delioate ;  or,  delicate  and  luxurious  (Oheyne). 
Babylon  had  hitherto  been  one  of  the  chief 
seats  of  Oriental  luxury.  She  was  "the 
elory  of  kingdoms,  the  beauty  of  the  Chiil- 
dees'  excellency"  (ch.  xiii.  19),  "the  golden 
city  "  (ch.  xiv.  4).  She  was  given  to  revelry 
•nd  feasting,  to  mirth  and  drunkenness,  to 
•  shameless  licensed  debaucheiy  (Herod.,  L 
199;  Bamoh  vi.  43).  All  this  wonld  now 
be  changed.  Her  population  would  have  to 
perform  the  hard  duties  laid  upon  them  by 
foreign  masters. 

Ver.  2. — ^Take  the  millstones,  and  grind 
meal.  Do  the  hard  work  commonly  allotted 
to  female  slaves.  Turn  the  heavy  upper 
millstone  all  day  long  upon  the  nether 
one  (comp.  Exod.  xi.  5).  Babylon  having 
been  personified  as  a  female  captive,  the 
details  have  to  be  in  nnison.  ITncoTer  thy 
locks.  Babylonian  women  are  represented 
in  the  Assyrian  sculptures  as  wearing  close- 
fitting  caps  upon  their  beads  (sec  '  Ancient 
Monarchies,'  voL  ii.  p.  500).  Uake  bare  the 
leg  .  .  .  pass  over  the  rivers.  On  the  way 
from  their  own  city  to  the  land  of  their 
captivity,  they  would  have  to  wade  through 
streams,  and  in  so  doing  to  expose  parts  of 
their  persons  which  delicacy  required  to  be 
concealed. 

Ver.  3. — I  will. not  meet  thee  as  a  man; 
literally,  I  shall  not  meet  a  man;  i.e.  "I 
shall  not  find  any  one  to  oppose  me." 

Ver.  4. — ^As  for  onr  Bedeemer,  eto.  Mr. 
Oheyne  suspects,  with  some  reason,  that 
this  is  "  the  marginal  note  of  a  sympathetic 
scribe,  which  has  made  its  way  by  accident 
into  the  text."  It  is  certainly  quite  unlike 
anything  else  in  the  song,  which  would 
Mtistically  be  improved  by  its  removal.  If, 
however,  it  be  retained,  we  must  regard  it 
u  a  parenthetic  ejaculation  of  the  Jewish 
Church  on  hearing  the  first  strophe  of  the 
song — the  Church  contrasting  itself  with 
Babylon,  which  has  no  one  to  stand  up  for 
it,  whereas  it  has  as  **  Bedeemer  the  Lord 
of  hosts,  the  Holy  One  of  Israel." 

Ver.  5. — Sit  thou  silent,  and  get  thee  into 
darkness.  The  second  strophe  begins,  like 
the  first,  with  a  double  imperative.  The 
fallen  people  is  recommended  to  hide  its 
shame  in  silence  and  darkness,  as  disgraced 
persons  do  who  shrink  from  being  seen  by 
their  fellows.  Thou  shalt  no  more  be  called. 
The  lady  of  kingdoms.  Babylon  can  scarcely 
have  borne  this  title  in  Isaiah's  time,  or  at 
any  earlier  period,  nnless  it  were  a  very 
remote  one.  She  had  been  seooudury  to 
Assyria  for  at  least  six  hundred  years  when 
Isaiah  wrote,  and  under  Sennacherib  was 
ruled  by  viceroys  of  his  appointment.  But 
Isaiah's  prophetic  foresight  enables  him  to 
realize  the  later  period  of  Babylon's  pros- 
perity and  glory  under  Nabopolassar  and 


Nebnchadnezzar,  when  she  became  the 
inheritress  of  the  greatness  of  Assyria,  and 
exercised  rule  over  a  large  portion  of 
Western  Asia.  Nebuchadnezzar  was,  no 
doubt,  as  he  is  called  by  both  Ezekiel 
(xxvi.  7)  and  Daniel  (ii.  37),  a  "king  of 
kings;"  and  Babylon  was  then  an  empress- 
state,  exercising  authority  over  many  minor 
kingdoms.  It  is  clear  that,  both  in  the 
easier  and  the  later  chapters,  the  prophet 
realizes  this  condition  of  things  (see  oh.  xiii. 
19;  xiv.  4—6,  12 — 17;  as  well  as  the  pre- 
sent passage). 

Ver.  6. — I  was  wroth  with  my  people  (comp. 
2  Kings  xxiv.  3, 4;  2  Chron.  xxxvL  13—17). 
I  have  pollnted  .  .  .  and  given ;  rather,  1 
polluted  and  gave.  The  reference  is  to  the 
conqufst  of  Judeea  by  Nebuchadnezzar. 
Thou  didst  shew  them  no  meroy.  We  have 
very  little  historical  knowledge  of  the 
general  treatment  of  the  Jewish  exiles 
during  the  Captivity.  A  certain  small 
number — ^Daniel  and  the  Three  Children — 
were  advanced  to  positions  of  importance 
(Dan.  i.  19 ;  ii.  48,  49 ;  iii.  30),  and,  on  the 
wliole,  well  treated.  On  the  other  hand, 
Jehoiachin  underwent  an  imprisonment  of 
thirty-seven  years'  duration  (2  Kings  xxv. 
27).  Mr.  Cheyne  says  that  "the  writings 
of  Jeremiah  and  Ezekiel  do  not  suggest 
that  the  [bulk  of  the]  exiles  were  great 
sufferers."  This  is,  no  doubt,  true;  and 
we  may,  perhaps,  regard  Isaiah's  words  in 
this  place  as  sufBciently  made  good  by  the 
"  cruelties  which  disfigured  the  first  days 
of  the  Babylonian  triumph  "  (Lam.  iv.  16 ; 
v.  12;  2  Chron.  xxxvi.  17).  Still,  there 
may  well  have  been  a  large  amount  of 
suffering  among  the  rank-and-file  of  the 
captives,  of  which  no  historic  record  has 
come  down  to  us.  Fs.  cxxxviii.  reveals 
some  of  the  hitter  feelings  of  the  exiles. 
TTpon  the  anoient;  rather,  upon  the  aged. 
The  author  of  Chronicles  notes  that 
Nebuchadnezzar,  on  taking  Jerusalem, 
"had  no  compassion  on  young  man  or 
maiden,  old  man  or  him  that  stooped  for 
age  "  (!. ».  c).  There  is  no  reason  for  giving 
the  words  of  the  present  passage  an  alle- 
gorical meaning. 

Ver.  7. — And  then  saidst,  I  shall  be  a 
lady  for  ever.  Tlie  idea  of  "continuance" 
is  one  of  the  primary  instincts  of  human 
nature.  Hence  we  regard  it  as  certain* 
that  the  sun  will  rise  on  the  morrow.  We 
expect  things  to  "continue  in  one  stay," 
and  "  to-morrow  to  be  as  to-day,"  if  not  even 
"  more  abundant."  Babylon  was  not  much 
more  arrogant  than  other  nations  when  she 
assumed  that  she  would  be  "a  lady  for 
ever."  And  she  had  more  excuse  than 
almost  any  other  nation.  Her  capital  was 
one  of  the  most  ancient  cities,  if  not  (h» 
most  ancient  city  in  th?  world  (Geiv  x-  W; 


OH.  nvn.  1— 15.]    THE  BOOK  OP  THE  PROPHET  ISAIAH 


205 


zL  1 — 9).  Though  not  nnconqnered  (see 
the  comment  on  ver.  1),  she  had  yet  for 
two  millennia  or  more  maintained  a  promi- 
nent position  among  the  chief  peoples  of 
the  earth,  and  had  finally  risen  to  a 
prouder  eminence  than  any  that  she  had  pre- 
viously occupied.  Btill,  she  ought  to  have 
remembered  that  "  all  things  come  to  an 
end,"  and  to  have  so  comported  herself  in 
the  time  of  her  prosperity  as  not  to  have 
provoked  God  to  anger.  So  that  thoa  didst 
not  lay  these  things  to  thy  heart.  "  These 
things  "  must  refer  to  the  calamities  about 
to  fall  upon  Babylon,  of  which  she  may 
have  heard  before  the  end  came — since  they 
had  been  prophesied  so  long  previously — 
bnt  which  she  did  not  take  to  heart.  The 
latter  end  of  it ;  t'.e.  "  the  probable  issue  of 
her  pride  and  cruelty"  (Kay), 

Yer.  8. — ^Therefore;  rather,  atui  now.  The 
third  strophe  begins  here,  but  with  a  single, 
instead  of  a  double,  imperative.  So  also  the 
fourth  strophe  in  ver.  12.  Thou  that  art 
given  to  pleasures  (see  the  comment  on  ver. 
1,  tub  fin.^  That  dwellest  carelessly ;  or, 
Otat  tittett  geeurely;  i.e.  in  an  imagined 
■eonrity.  Herodotus  says  that,  when  Cyrus 
invested  the  city,  the  inhabitants  "  made  light 
of  his  siege "  (i.  190),  and  occupied  them- 
selves "in  dancing  and  revelry"  (i.  191). 
The  Nabonidus  Tablet  seems  to  show  that 
very  slight  and  insufBcient  preparations  for 
defence  were  made.  I  am,  and  none  else 
beside  me.  This  is  not  self-deification,  but 
only  a  boast  of  superiority  to  all  other 
earthly  powers.  Zephaniah  expresses  in 
exactly  similar  terms  the  pride  and  arro- 
gance of  Assyria  (ii.  15).  I  shall  not  sit 
aa  a  widow;  i.e.  in  solitude  and  desola- 
tion (Lam.  i.  1),  deserted  by  the  crowds 
who  had  sought  her  marts  and  delighted 
in  her  luxury.  This  result,  which  now  im- 
pended, had  never  been  anticipated  by  the 
"  careless "  one,  who  had  expected  to  be 
for  ever  "  the  lady  of  kingdoms."  The  loss 
of  children ;  t.e.  diminution  of  population. 

Ver.  9. — In  a  moment  in  one  day.  The 
day  of  the  capture  of  the  city  by  Cyrus, 
which  was  the  third  of  Maichesvan,  b.o. 
539.  Then,  "in  a  moment,"  Babylon  lost 
the  whole  of  her  prestige,  ceased  to  reign, 
ceased  to  be  an  independent  power,  became 
a  "  widow,"  had  a  portion  of  her  population 
torn  from  her,  was  brought  down  to  the 
dust.  Lois  of  children,  and  widowhood 
came  upon  her  in  their  perfectian;  i.e.  "in 
the  full  extent  of  their  bitterness"  (Cheyne). 
Not  that  Cyrus  imitated  her  common  prac- 
tice by  carrying  off  her  entire  population ; 
on  the  contrary,  she  continued  ibr  more 
than  two  centuries  to  be  a  flourishing  and 
populous  town.  Twice  she  revolted  from 
Duius  Hystaspis  ('Beh.  Ins.,'  col.  i.  par. 
16;  col.  iii.  par.  13),  once,  perhaps,  from 


Xerxes  (Otes., '  Exc.  Pers,'  §  22).  Alexander 
the  Great  found  her  walls  and  her  great 
buildings  in  ruins,  but  still  she  was  a  con- 
siderable place.  Cyrus,  however,  no  doubt, 
carried  off  a  portion  of  her  population, 
which  thenceforth  began  to  dwindle,  and 
continually  became  less  and  less  as  time 
went  on,  until  she  sank  into  a  solitude. 
That  extreme  desolation  which  the  pro- 
phets paint  in  such  vivid  colours  (ch.  xii. 
19—22;  xiv.  22,  23;  Jer.  1.  10—15,  38—40; 
li.  36 — 43)  was  potentially  contained  in  the 
capture  by  Cyrus,  which  was  the  work  of 
a  single  day.  For  the  multitude  of  thy 
sorceries  ...  of  thine  enchantments  (comp. 
ver.  13 ;  and  see  also  Dan.  ii.  2 ;  v.  7).  The 
word  here  translated  "sorceries"  probably 
means  "incantations"  or  "enchantments," 
while  that  translated  "  enchantments " 
means  "spells."  The  addiction  of  the 
Babylonians  to  magic  is  largely  attested 
by  the  classical  writers,  and  has  been 
proved  beyond  a  doubt  by  the  lately  dis- 
covered native  remains.  By  these  it  appears 
that  their  magic  fell  under  three  principal 
heads:  (1)  tlie  preparation  and  use  of  spells 
and  talismans,  which  were  written  forms 
engraved  on  stone  or  impressed  on  clay,  and 
worn  on  the  person  or  attached  to  the  object 
on  which  their  influence  was  to  be  exerted ; 
(2)  the  composition  and  recitation  of  formulas 
of  incantation,  which  were  supposed  to  act 
as  charms,  and  to  drive  away  demons  and 
diseases ;  and  (3)  the  taking  of  observations 
and  framing  of  tables  of  prognostics  and  of 
omens  for  general  use,  together  with  the 
casting  of  horoscopes  for  the  special  advan- 
tage of  individuals  (see  Eawlinson's  'Egypt 
and  Babylon,'  p.  58;  and  comp.  Lenor- 
mant, '  La  Magie  chez  les  Chaldeens,'  and 
Piofessor  Sayce's  papers  in  the  'Transac- 
tions of  the  Society  of  Bibl.  Archieol.,'  vol. 
iii.  p.  145,  et  seqq. ;  vol.  iv.  p.  302,  et  eeqq.). 
The  first  and  second  forms  of  magic  are 
glanced  at  in  the  present  passage;  the  third 
is  noticed  in  ver.  13. 

Ver.  10. — Thou  hast  trusted  in  thy  wicked- 
ness; i,e.  in  thy  incantations  and  spells, 
which  were  supposed  to  work  in  secret,  and 
which  could  not  be  counteracted  if  their 
victim  was  not  aware  of  them.  Thy  wisdom 
and  thy  knowledge,  it  hath  perverted  thee. 
The  astronomical  "wisdom  and  knowledge" 
of  the  Babylonians,  confessed  by  the  Greeks 
to  have  been  the  origin  of  their  own  astro- 
nomical knowledge  (Flat.,  'Epinomis,'  p. 
987;  Hipparch.  ap.  Procl.,  'In  Tim.,'  p.  71; 
Phoenix  Coloph.  ap.  Athen., '  Deipnos.,'  xii. 
p.  530,  E. ;  Died.  Sic,  ii.  31,  etc.),  led  them 
on  to  that  perversion  of  true  science, 
astrology,  which,  wnen  once  entered  upon, 
seduces  the  mind  from  all  genuine  and 
fruitful  study  of  the  celestial  phenomena, 
and  leads  it  mto  a  labyrinth  of  absurdities. 


806 


IKE   BOOK  OF  THE   PROPHET  ISAIAH,    [oh.  xlvil  1— 15 


It  also  puffed  them  np,  and  made  them 
regard  wemselves  as  altogether  superior 
te  other  nations  (see  the  comment  on  ver, 
8,  tuhfin.). 

Ver.  11. — ^Therefore  shall  evil  come  upon 
thee.  Connect  this  with  the  first  clause 
of  ver.  10,  "Thou  hast  trusted  in  thine 
own  evil  (moral),  therefore  shall  evil 
(physical)  fall  upon  thee."  The  same  word, 
ra'ah,  is  used  in  hoth  places.  Thou  shalt 
not  know  from  whence  it  riseth.  8o  the 
Vulgate,  Vitringa,  Gesenius,  and  Dr.  Kay. 
But  the  bulk  of  modern  comtoentators 
(Hitzig,  Ewald,  Delitzsr-h,  Nagelsbach, 
Weir,  Cheyne)  render,  "  Thou  wilt  not 
know  how  to  charm  it  away."  Bolh  mean- 
ings are  possible,  and  are  almost  equally 
good;  but  the  parallelism  of  the  clauses 
is  in  favour  of  the  latter  rendering. 
Sh&hhrah  should  correspond  in  construc- 
tion, as  in  sound,  with  kapp'rdh.  To  put  it 
off;  literally,  to  expiate  ;  i.e.  to  get  rid  of  it 
by  means  of  expiatory  rites.  Which  thou 
shalt  not  know ;  or,  of  which  thou  shalt  not 
be  aware,  (On  the  carelessness  and  want 
of  foresight  displayed  by  the  Babylonians, 
see  the  comment  on  ver.  8.) 

Ver.  12.— Stand  now.  The  fourth  and 
concluding  strophe  now  begins;  it  opens, 
like  the  third,  with  a  single  imperative. 
It  has,  as  Mr.  Cheyne  observes,  "a  strongly 
ironical  tinge,  reminding  us  of  Elijah's  lan- 
guage to  the  priests  of  Baal  in  1  Kings 
xviii.  27."  The  irony  is,  however,  con- 
fined to  the  first  half  (vers.  12,  13) ;  giving 
place  in  vers.  14  and  15  to  a  scathing 
sentence  of  judgment  and  ruin.  Enchant- 
ments .  .  .  sorceries ;  rather,  epelU  .  .  .  en- 
chantmenti  (see  the  comment  on  ver.  9). 
It  so  be,  etc. ;  rather,  perchance  thou  wilt  be 
aUe  to  profit ;  perchance  thou  wilt  cause 
terror.  The  prophet  gives  a  pretf-nded  en- 
couragement to  Israel's  adversaries.  "If 
Dabylon  uses  all  the  resources  of  her 
magical  art,  perhaps  she  may  succeed — who 
knows?  Perhaps  she  may  strike  terror 
into  the  hearts  of  her  assailants." 

Ver.  13. — Thon  art  wearied  in  the  multi- 
tude of  thy  counsels.  Mr.  Cheyne's  render- 
ing is  more  intelligible,  "Thou  hast  wearied 
thyself  with  the  multitude  of  thy  consulta- 
tions." Those  at  tlie  bead  of  affairs  had 
nonsuited  the  diviners  of  all  classes,  till 
tliey  were  utterly  weary  of  so  doing  (compare 
the  "  consultations  "  of  Xebuchadnezzar  and 
Belshazzar  with  such  persons,  Dan.  ii. 
a— 11 :  v.  7,  8).  Yet  let  one  further  effort 
be  made.  Let  now  the  astrologers,  the  star- 
gazers,  the  monthly  prognosticatois,  stand 
ap.  These  are  scarcely  three  classes  of 
persons,  but  rather  the  same  class  under 
three  designations :  "  astrnlngei  s  "  (literally, 
"dividers  of  the  heavens");  "star-gazers," 
or  observers  of  the  stars;  and  "monthly 


prognosticators,"  or  almanack-makers.  The 
astronomy  of  the  Babylonians  consisted 
primarily  in  "dividing  the  heavens"  into 
"houses,"  or  constellations,  and  thus 
mapping  them  out  in  such  a  way  that  the 
infinite  multiplicity,  which  at  first  baffles 
the  beholder,  might  be  grasped,  reduced  to 
order,  and  brought  within  the  sphere  of 
distinct  cognizance.  This  work  was  an 
eminently  useful  one,  and  maintains  its 
place  in  astronomy  to  the  present  day 
('Ancient  Monarchies,'  voL  ii.  p.  573). 
After  the  heavens  were  mapped  out,  and 
the  courses  of  the  sun  and  moon  through 
the  "houses"  laid  down,  "star-gazers" 
directed  their  attention  mainly  to  sun, 
moon,  and  planets,  noting  eclipses,  occulta- 
tions,  conjunctions,  and  the  like.  All  this 
was  legitimate  science;  but,  finally,  the 
greater  part  of  the  astronomers  launched 
into  astrology,  and  undertook  to  prognosti- 
cate events  from  the  changing  phenomena 
of  the  heavens.  Almanacks  were  put  forth, 
in  which  predictions  were  made,  either 
specially  for  a  particular  year,  or  generally 
for  all  time,  based  upon  astronomical  con- 
siderations; and  on  these  great  dependence 
was  placed.  (For  a  specimen  of  such  an 
almanack,  see  '  Becords  of  the  Past,'  voL  i. 
pp.  158—161.) 

Ver.  14. — ^Behold,  they  shall  be  as  stubble 
(]comp.  oh.  V.  24 ;  xl.  24 ;  xli.  2).  A  favour- 
ite  metaphor  with  Isaiali  for  extreme  weak- 
ness and  incapacity  of  resistance.  In  ch.  v. 
24  it  is  connected,  as  here,  with  fire.  No 
doubt  in  Palestine,  as  elsewhere,  an  acci- 
dental fire  from  time  to  time  caught  hold  of 
a  stubble-field,  and  speedily  reduced  it  to 
a  mass  of  blackened  ashes.  The  threat  here 
is  that  God's  wrath  shall  similarly  sweep 
over  Babylon.  They  shall  not  deliver  them- 
selves from  the  power  of  the  flame.  Mr. 
Cheyne  translates,  with  much  spirit,  "They 
cannot  rescue  their  soid  from  the  iHuitch  of 
the  flame."  Like  those  who  are  caught  in 
the  midst  of  a  fire  in  a  prairie  or  jungle, 
they  have  no  escape — ^the  flame  is  on  all 
sides— and  they  cannot  but  perish.  There 
shall  not  be  a  coal  to  warm  at ;  rather,  it  it 
not  a  charcoal-fire  to  warm  one's  self  at.  A 
return  to  the  sarcastic  tone  of  vers.  12, 13. 
The  conflagration  which  spreads  around  is 
something  more  than  a  flre  to  warm  one's  self 
at — it  is  an  awful  widespread  devastation. 

Ver.  1.5. — Thus  shall  they  be  unto  thee 
wich  whom  thou  hast  labonred.  The 
foreigners  who  have  participated  in  the  toil* 
and  labours  of  Babylon  shall  share  in  her 
punishment.  The  flame  of  judgment  shall 
not  spare  even  them.  Even  thy  merchants. 
Babylonian  commerce  is  the  subject  of  an 
important  chapter  in  Hceren's  'Aaiatie 
Nations'  (vol.  ii.  pp.  190-^260),  and  ie 
discussed    also    in    the    present    writer"* 


0H.XLT1I.1— 16.]    THE  BOOK  OF  THE  PROPHET  ISAIAH. 


207 


•Egypt  and  Babylon'  (oh.  viii.  pp.  127 — 
144).  It  was  carried  on  both  by  land  and 
sea,  and  was  very  extensive,  including  both 
a  large  import  and  a  large  export  trade. 
Her  merchants  were,  in  part  natives,  in 

Eart  forei^ers.  -  It  is  the  latter  -who  are 
ere  specially  intended.  Seeing  the 
giadnal  closing  in  upon  Babylon  of  the 
Persian  armies,  and  anticipating  the  worst, 
they  fly  in  haste  firom  the  doomed  city, 
each  one  making  for  his  own  oountry,  and 


having  no  thought  of  interposing  to  saye 
the  people  which  have  so  long  encouraged 
and  protected  them.  Probably  the  greater 
number  of  these  foreign  merchants  were 
either  Phuenicians  or  Arabians.  They  shall 
wander  every  one  to  his  quarter.  Not 
his  own  quarter  of  the  town,  but  his  own 
quarter  of  the  earth;  «.«.  his  own  country 
(comp.  ch.  xiii.  14,  "  They  shall  every  man 
turn  to  his  own  people,  and  flee  every  one 
into  his  own  land  "}. 


H0MILETIC8. 

Vers.  1 — ^16. — The  fall  tf  ancient  states  a  warning  to  modem  ones.  History  has  been 
defined  as  "philosophy  teaching  by  examples."  It  is  only  on  the  supposition  that 
there  are  lessons  to  be  learnt  from  them  that  historical  inquiries  or  historical  records 
can  be  regarded  as  of  any  value  or  importance.  In  a  certain  sense  it  is  no  doubt  true 
to  say  that  "  history  never  repeats  itself."  The  exact  circumstances,  even  of  those 
historical  events  which  rnost  nearly  resemble  each  other,  are  always  in  many  respects 
dissimilar.  But  the  value  and  use  of'  history  lies  in  the  fact  that,  speaking  broadly, 
history  does  repeat  itself.  Its  events,  as  Thuoydides  observes,  recur — "the  same, 
or  nearly  the  same " — and  will  do  so  "  while  human  nature  remains  what  it  is " 
(Thucyd,,  L  22).  Hence  history  teaches  lessons,  and  among  its  most  important 
lessons  are  those  that  it  teaches  to  existing  states  or  communities,  by  the  exarliple 
which  it  seta  before  them  of  the  careers  and  ultimate  fates  of  former  states  and  com- 
munities, which  existed  under  more  or  less  similar  circumstances.  In  most  cases  we 
have  to  speculate  on  the  causes  which  produced  the  decline  and  fall  of  empires,  king- 
doms, countries ;  and  thiis  our  concl  usions  can  seldom  be  more  than  probable  conjectures 
on  the  subject.  Still,  they  are  often  of  a  high  value.  But  a  very  much  higher  value 
attaches  to  the  instances  when  an  inspired  writer  delivers  to  us  the  Divine  view  of  the 
causes  which  brought  about  the  fall  of  a  nation ;  for  here  we  stand  on  firm  ground — ^we 
have  a  solid  and  assbred  basis  upon  which  to  rest ;  and  we  may  draw  out  the  lesson 
which  the  writer's  words  convey  with  a  certainty  that  we  shall  not  mislead  or  cause  an 
unfounded  alarm.  Now,  according  to  Isaiah,  the  downfall  of  Babylon  was  produced  by 
four  principal  causes ;  and  the  lesson  to  be  learnt  from  her  fall  is  avoidance  of  four 
vices.    The  fall  of  Babylon  warns  states — 

I.  Against  inxuRT.  Babylon  was  "given  to  pleasure"  (ver.  8),  was  "tender  and 
delicate  "  (ver.  1),  or  "  delicate  and  luxurious."  It  is  generally  allowed  that  luxury 
saps  the  vigour  of  states,  destroying  the  severer  virtues  of  courage,  manliness,  and 
endurance,  and  at  the  same  time  producing  a  degeneracy  of  the  physical  nature,  a  loss 
of  muscle,  of  tone,  of  fibre.  It  is,  no  doubt,  difficult  to  draw  the  line,  and  to  say 
what  exactly  constitutes  luxury ;  but  certain  practices,  common  in  most  modern  as 
well  as  in  many  ancient  states,  may  be  distinctly  regarded  as  "  luxurious,"  The  worst 
and  most  fatal  of  these  is  unchastity.  If  the  manhood  of  a  nation  indulges  generally, 
or  widely,  in  licentiousness,  if  purity  in  man  is  a  rare  thing,  we  may  be  sure  that  the 
national  character  and  the  national  strength  are  being  undermined.  The  vice  of 
UDchastity  gnaws  at  the  roots  of  a  nation's  vigour,  and  brings  a  premature  decay. 
States  should  take  such  measures  against  it  as  they  take  against  a  pestilence.  They 
should  strive  to  keep  it  out.  Having  once  admitted  it,  they  should  seek  to  stamp  it 
out.  If  they  cannot  do  this,  if  the  vice  is  too  deeply  ingrained  to  be  got  rid  of,  then 
they  must  look  out  for  speedy  disaster,  culminating  in  ruin.  Another  dangerous  vice, 
likewise  to  be  carefully  guarded  against,  is  intemperance.  This,  too,  affects  both  body 
and  soul,  inflames  and  so  exhausts"  the  one,  degrades  and  enfeebles  the  other.  Of  less 
accouDt,  but  still  coming  under  the  head  of  luxury,  and  therefore  to  be  avoided,  are 
gluttony,  sloth,  effeminacy,  over-refinement  Of  such  it  may  be  said,  "  Hoc  nigrum 
est;  hoc  tu,  Romane,ca veto."  -  ,        „v     „  .i.         j 

II.  Against  ceueltt.  Babylon  "showed  no  mercy"  (ver.  6);  "upon  the  aged, 
veiy  heavily  she  laid  her  yoke  "  (ver.  6).    Cruelty  has  less  direct  tendency  to  weaken 


208  THE  BOOK  OP  THE  PROPHET  ISAIAH,    [oh.  ilvii.  I— 15 

»  nation  than  luxury ;  but  still  it  weakens  in  certain  ways.  It  alienates  the  subject 
races  towards  whom  it  is  shown.  It  exasperates  foreign  enemies,  and  causes  a  people 
to  be  hated  even  by  those  who  have  not  themselves  suffered  at  their  hands.  But  its 
deleterious  effect  is  probably,  in  the  main,  due  to  God's  hatred  of  it.  GroA  abominates 
oppressors  (oh.  i.  21 — 24 ;  iii.  12 ;  ▼,  23,  etc.),  and  takes  care  to  punish  them.  "  Woe 
to  the  oppressing  city  I"  says  God  by  Zephaniah  (iii.  1);  and  again,  by  Nahum  (iii.  1), 
"  Woe  to  the  bloody  city ! "  "  Behold,  I  am  agMnst  thee,  0  destroying  mountain, 
sidth  the  IJoid,  which  destroyest  all  the  earth  "  (Jer.  li.  25).  God  pours  out  his  anger 
against  the  cruel  and  truculent,  making  them  experience  in  their  turn  the  sufferings 
they  have  caused  to  others  (Jer.  IL  24,  35,  36,  etc.),  and  thus  bringing  them  to 
destruction. 

III.  AdAiNBT  PRIDE.  Babylon  thought  that  she  was  "a  lady  for  ever"  (ver.  7). 
She  "  said  in  her  heart,  I  am,  and  none  else  beside  me  "  (vers.  8, 10).  She  had  such  an 
overweening  opinion  of  herself  that  she  "dwelt  carelessly"  (ver.  8),  despised  her 
enemies,  made  slight  preparation  against  them.  Her  pride,  therefore,  like  her  luxury, 
by  its  natural  working,  seriously  diminished  her  strength  for  resistance,  making  her 
negligent  and  improvident.  But  it  was  also  among  the  causes  which  especially  called 
down  God's  judgment.  "  Pride,"  as  we  are  told, "  goeth  be foie  destruction "  (Prov.  xvi 
18),  and  nothing  seems  so  to  provoke  the  Divine  vengeance.  "  By  that  sin  fell  the 
angels."  God  "  brings  down  the  high  looks  of  the  proud."  "  The  lofty  looks  of  man  shall 
be  humbled,  and  the  haughtiness  of  man  shall  be  bowed  down,  and  the  Lord  alone  shall 
be  exalted  in  that  day  "  (ch.  ii.  11).  When  God  brought  low  Assyria,  the  object  was 
to  "  punish  the  fruit  of  the  stout  heart  of  the  King  of  Assyria,  and  the  glory  of  his  high 
looks  "(ch.  X.  12).  When  Babylon  was  chastised,  it  was  "because  she  had  been  proud 
against  the  Lord — therefore  were  her  young  men  slain  in  the  streets,  and  all  her  men  of 
war  cut  off"  (Jer.  1.  29,  30).  Pride,  therefore,  is  a  vice  especially  to  be  eschewed  by 
states,  if  they  desire  continuance,  and  would  fain  be  "  ladies  for  ever." 

IV.  AOAINST  FOOLISH  SUPERSTITION.  There  is  a  ScuriSai/«ii'(a  which  is  praiseworthy, 
rather  than  blamable,  as  was  that  of  the  Athenians  (Acts  xviii.  22,  Revised  Version). 
Babylon  is  not  rebuked  because  she  really  venerated  her  gods,  poor  shadows  of  Divinity 
as  they  were.  She  is.  blamed  because  she  superseded,  or  overlaid  the  worship  of  her 
gods  with  various  meaner  superstitions.  Bereavement  and  widowhood  came  upon  her 
"for  the  multitude  of  her  sorceries,  and  for  the  great  abundance  of  her  enchantments" 
(rer.  9).  It  is  addiction  to  magic  which  is  especially  "her  wickedness"  (ver.  10),  in 
which  she  has  "  trusted ; "  and  it  is  this  wickedness,  together  with  the  other  three  vices 
already  spoken  o(  that  has  caused  the  sentence  of  destruction  to  go  forth  against  her. 
Modem  states  may  well  take  the  warning  to  heart.  When  religion  is  discredited, 
superstitions  speedily  usurp  her  place.  Such  monstrosities  as  Mormonism  and  spirit- 
npping,  which  disgrdce  the  nineteenth  century,  are  superstitions  as  degrading  as  any 
to  which  the  Babylonians  gave  way,  and  may  well  bring  down  a  Divine  judgment  on 
the  nations  which  encourage  them  or  think  lightly  of  them.  Such  superstitions  cer- 
tainly cannot  "save"  those  who  trust  in  them  (ver.  13);  but  it  is  not  so  certain  that 
they  may  not  destroy. 

HOMILIES  BY  VARIOUS  AUTHORS. 

Veri.  1—16. — TTte  faU  of  Babylon.  This  is  a  scoffing  song  at  the  overthrow  of 
Babylon.  It  is  divided  into  four  nearly  equal  stanzas.  Luxury,  ambition,  and  the 
practice  of  magic — ^the  one  sift  worse  than  the  others — were  prevalent  at  Babylon. 
Etch  of  these  is  lashed  in  the  first  three  stanzas.  There  is  a  climax,  the  scorn  of  the 
prophet  reaching  its  highest  pmnt  in  the  last  stanza  (Ewald).  Spiritually  considered, 
the  picture  may  represent  the  course  of "  this  present  world  "  in  its  godless  pride. 

I.  Babtu>n  ab  ttfioal  of  luxury.  The  city  in  ancient  fancy  is  ever  thought  of 
as  a  woman— in  all  her  beauty  and  glory,  or  in  all  her  shame.  The  great  city  here 
appears  as  tUe  haughty  and  luxurious  courtesan.  The  just  judgment  has  fallen  upon 
her  impurity.  She  is  violently  torn  away  from  her  life  of  softness  and  refinement,  and 
reduced  to  the  status  of  a  common  slave— has  to  ply  the  hard  labour  of  grinding  meal 
(Exod.  xL  6, 12  i  Job  xxxi.  10).    Or,  like  a  captive  stripped  of  all  her  finery,  she  hu 


CH.  XLvn.  1— 16.]    THE  BOOK  OP  THE  PROPHET  ISAIAH.  f09 

to  wade  barefoot  through  streams.  Every  hidden  shame  will  he  exposed  to  the  light 
of  day.  Only  in  Israel — as  ch.  xlii. — ^zItL  have  repeatedly  proclaimed — is  salvation  to 
he  found.  These  calamities  of  the  proud  city  are  in  retribution  for  her  Bin»— the  just 
vengeance  of  an  offended  God. 

II.  Babtlon  as  typical  of  fbide  akd  aubition.  This  "daughter  of  the  Chaldeans" 
is  no  longer  to  he  termed  "  lady,  or  mistress,  of  kingdoms."  When  Jehovah  was  wroth 
with  his  people,  and  desecrated  his  heritage,  giving  them  into  her  hands,  she  thowed  no 
pity,  but  laid  a  heavy  yoke  upon  the  aged,  thinking  in  her  heart,  "  I  shall  be  niistress 
for  ever."  She  did  not  consider  the  end,  which  has  now  come  upon  her.  While  Israel 
enjoys  freedom,  she  must  pass  into  the  darkness  of  the  prison-house  (ch.  xlii.  7,  22). 

III.  As  TYPICAL  OF  SUPERSTITION.  In  her  carelessness  and  pride  she  has  exalted 
herself  above  Jehovah  (Zeph.  ii.  15).  She  thinks  she  will  never  lose  her  protector,  the 
Chaldean  king;  and  her  ciiildren,  the  stout  burghers  of  the  city.  But  sudden  conquest 
will  deprive  her  of  both,  and  she  will  be  as  a  widow,  forlorn.  Her  third  and  inexcusable 
sin  is  superstition.  Her  wisdom  and  science  have  led  her  astray  tp  a  point  of  blinding 
self-conceit.  But  now  an  evil  has  come  upon  her  wliich  no  incantations  and  spells  can 
oharm  away — a  mischief  for  which  none  of  her  rites  can  atone.  Her  false  confidence 
has  blinded  her  to  the  true  faith  in  the  eternal  God  (with  vers.  10, 11,  cf.  ch.  xlv.  18 ; 
xix.  11,  etc.).     And  the  result  must  be  sudden  and  crushing  ruin. 

IV.  Babylon's  fall  as  typical  op  the  wisdom  that  is  bbouoht  to  nohoht. 
What  can  all  her  learned  astrologers  and  magicians  do  for  her  now— r they  whose  guidance 
has  so  long  been  followed  (cf.  ch.  xlvi.  6,  7 ;  xli  v.  12 ;  xliii.  23)  ?  Let  them  stand  by 
her  in  her  need,  those  star-gazers  and  moon-gazers.  But  all  are  dumb,  and,  so  far  from 
helping,  flee  for  their  own  safety  from  the  fire — no  gently  warming  hearth-fire  (ch.  xliv. 
16),  but  one  most  horrible  and  devouring,  from  which  there  is  no  escape  (ch.  L  11 ; 
xxxiii.  11 — 14 ;  v.  24). 

Y.  Lessons.  All  the  great  sins  are  connected  together  as  links  in  «  chain.  They 
are  drawn  as  with  a  cart-rope.  Sensuality  and  luxury  bring  pride  and  contempt  in 
their  train;  and  these,  again,  blindness  and  bewilderment  of  mind.  And  where  no 
affliction  nor  humiliation  have  been  known,  there  will  be  no  sympathy  nor  pity  towards 
others.  Yet  religion  is  ever  a  necessity  to  man ;  and,  if  the  true  religion  he  rejected, 
some  counterfeit  must  take  its  place.  The  most  foolish  and  the. darkest  superstitions 
flourish  in  such  times.  So  it  was  again  when  Christianity  was  making  its  way  in  the 
decaying  Boman  world.  True  religion,  rooted  in  humanity  and  the  fear  of  Qoi,  and  in 
light-loving  intelligence,  alone  can  deliver  the  nation  and  tiie  individuaL— ^. 

Ver.  13. — Many  coimsellorB.  "  Thou  art  wearied  in  the  multitude  of  thy  counsels." 
The  mind  of  roan  will  seek  counsel.  For  men  everywhere,  in  the  old  Athenian 
groves  and  gardens,  and  in  the  fellowship  of  modem  clubs  and  associations,  will  seek 
for  "  opinion  "  to  guide  and  help  them.  They  are  so  slow  to  trust  alone  to  conscience 
and  to  God. 

I.  The  unsatisfying  okacles.  "  Thou  art  wearied."  You  have  tried  them  so  often 
without  results  of  guidance  and  good.  AU  is  vain.  Men  go  here  and  there,  hut,  alas  I 
too  often  to  those  who  are  the  most  likely  to  fall  in  with  their  desires  and  whims. 
Like  Absalom,  men  consult  counsellors  like  Ahithophel,  who  pander  to  their  folly. 
Then,  when  times  of  real  emergency  and  anxiety  come,  when  the  poor  tired  heart  needs 
rest  and  peace,  it  is  led  to  new  pleasures,  new  excitements  and  interests,  until  weariness 
ensues.    How  contrasted  is  the  Christian's  lot!    "  Commit  thy  way  unto  him." 

II.  The  manifold  failube.  It  is  a  failure  all  ronnd.  Think  of  the  multitude  of 
counsellors.  Men  go  to  a  minister  instead  of  to  the  Bible ;  or  to  a  priest  instead  of  to 
a  Saviour ;  or  to  their  passions  instead  of  their  conscience ;  or  to  man  instead  of  to 
God.  Humbly  let  us  seek  the  heavenly  guidance.  "  The  meek  will  he  guide  in  judg- 
ment: and  the  meek  will  he  teach  his  way." — ^W.  M.  S. 

Ver.  6. What  we  owe  to  the  aged,    "  Upon  the  ancient  hast  thou  yvrf  heavily  laid 

thy  yoke."  This  wrong-doing  is  selected,  out  of  all  others,  to  point  the  reproaches  of 
the  prophet.  If  Babylon  would  do  that,  it  was  merciless  enough  to  do  anything.  Hard, 
indeed,  is  the  heart  that  will  show  no  pity  for  old  age,  but  wiU  lay  a  heavy  yoke  mt  its 
shoulders.  We  may  let  this  sentence  suggest  to  lu  the  light  in  which  ft  Cabnatian  man 
ISAIAH— n.  f 


210  THE  BOOK  OF  THE  PROPHET  ISAIAH,     [oh.  xlvii.  1—15, 


wai  look  at  age.  What  is  its  due?  How  shall  we  exhildt  the  temper  our  Master 
would  approve  in  our  bearing  towards  it  ? 

I.  The  considbbateness  which  is  dite  to  the  weak.  Many  passnges  from  both 
Testaments  invite  our  attention  to  the  considerateness  of  the  Divine  Father,  of  the 
gracious  Lord,  to  the  weak,  to  the  burdened,  to  the  defenceless  (see  ch.  xl.  H),  To 
be  patient  and  considerate  in  our  relations  with  those  whose  power  is  r&iuced,  and  who 
are  going  back  to  the  feebleness  out  of  which  they  once  came,  is  to  be  "  the  children  of 
our  Father  who  is  in  heaven,"  is  to  be  "  disciples  indeed"  of  the  great  Exemplar. 

II.  The  eespeot  which  is  due  to  the  experienced.  There  are  truths  which 
nothing  but  experience  seems  able  to  teach.  What  evils  might  not  he  shunned,  what 
sorrows  escaped,  what  happiness  and  what  usefulness  secured,  if  we  would  but  let  the 
wisdom  of  the  experienced  direct  our  thoughts  and  guide  our  steps !  They  only  who 
have  Bounded  the  waters  of  life  can  tell  their  depth ;  they  only  who  have  dri^k  of  its 
many  cups  can  tell  us  where  the  killing  poison  or  where  the  curing  medicine  is  to  be 
foimd.  Age,  instructed  by  experience,  has  a  wisdom  which  youth  and  maturity  do  well 
to  reverence  and  to  master. 

IIL  The  geatitude  which  is  dub  to  those  who  have  served  ub.  There  are  many 
aged  men  who  have  lived  selfish  livcB,  and  to  whom  we  owe  no  gratitude  at  all ;  but 
there  are  others  who  have  toiled  and  suffered,  not  perlunctorily  or  of  constraint,  but 
freely  and  magnanimously, — ^to  these  far  more  is  due  than  the  pecuniary  payment  they 
may  have  received,  and  they  will  go  to  the  grave  unrecompensed  if  those  who  reap  the 
fruits  of  their  labours  and  trials  do  not  render  them  the  honour  they  have  earned. 

rV.  The  bervicb  we  should  render  to  those  who  wili.  boon  be  betond  oub 
BEAOE.  It  is  an  affecting  and  constraining  thought  that  there  remain  but-a  very  few 
times  more  when  we  can  do  anything  for  one  of  our  neighbours — that  he  will  soon  he 
where  our  hand  cannot  reach  to  rescue  or  to  enrich  him.  The  aged  will  soon  be  gone 
from  amongst  us.  A  few  weeks  or  months  will  take  them  where  no  kindness  of  ours 
can  make  their  path  smoother,  their  heart  happier,  their  character  more  DoUe.  To 
them,  most  of  all,  applies  the  gracious  sentiment — 

**  Be  kind  to  each  other ; 
The  night's  coming  on. 
When  fiiend  and  when  brother. 
Perchance,  will  be  gone." 

I.  UnkindnesB  to  the  aged  is  peculiarly  displeasing  to  Gt>d.  2.  Considerateness  and 
succour  shown  to  the  aged  will  draw  down  the  special  favour  of  Christ.  Tbey,  too,  are 
among  the  "  little  ones  "  whom  it  is  at  our  peril  that  we  "offend,"  to  render  whom  the 
simplest  act  of  love  is  to  win  a  Saviour's  blessing. — 0. 

Vers.  7 — 11. — tSpiritual  infatuation.  This  is  a  striking  picture  of  infatuation.  We 
note — 

I.  Its  essbntiai,  nature.  Under  the  perverting  influence  of  sin  men  come  into 
a  mental  and  spiritual  condition  in  which  "everything  is  strange,  unnatural,  distorted. 
Something  has  "  perverted  "  them  (ver.  10).  It  is  a  condii;ion  in  which  things  seem 
to  them  other  than  they  are — in  which  they  fail  to  discern  what  ought  to  he  quite 
palpable  to  them,  in  which  they  are  subject  to  unhappy  and  hurtful  delusions. 
Knowledge  does  not  instruct  thera,  facts  do  not  affect  them,  reasons  do  not  convince 
them,  truth  does  not  (ii lighten  them.  They  are  duped  by  semblances,  betrayed  by 
errors,  ruined  by  the  falsehoods  which  they  entertain  and  cherish. 

n.  The  FORMS  which  it  ASSUMES.  1.  An  extravagant  and  offensive  egotism.  "Thou 
sayest  in  thine  heart,  I  am,  and  none  else  beside  me."  It  is  a  very  common  effect  of  sin 
to  produce  in  men  a  seuse  of  their  own  importance  carried  to  a  painfully  high  degree; 
they  think  and  feel  as  if  their  present  interests  were  the  only  things  to  be  consulted. 
Sivery thing  else  must  make  way,  every  one  else  must  give  way  to  them ;  their  comfoi^ 
their  advantage,  absorbs  all  other  considerations  whatever.  None  else  beside  them  is  ti 
any  account.  2.  A  blind  disregard  of  the  future.  "  Neither  didst  remember  the  latter 
end  of  it."  Many  men  regulate  their  lives  as  if  they  would  always  remain  as  strong 
and  healthy  as  they  are  to-day.  Many  indulge  in  courses  which  tend  to  weakness  or 
to  dishonour,  or  even  to  utter  ruin,  without  concerning  themselves  as  to  tiie  goal  toww} 


CH.  xLvii.  1 -16.]      THE  BOOK  OP  THE  PROPHET  ISAIAH.  211 

which  thev  are  travelling.  They  know  that  death  is  in  front  of  them,  that  judgment 
awaits  them ;  hut  they  do  not "  lay  it  to  heart " — they  remember  not "  the  latter  end  of 
it."  3.  An  overweening  estimate  of  their  own  power.  "  I  shall  he  a  lady  for  ever.  .  .  . 
I  shall  not  sit  as  a  widow."  Men  "  say  in  their  heart,"  "  Other  men  have  made  great 
mistakes,  but  I  shall  avoid  them ;  other  men  have  suffered  in  their  circumstances  or  in 
(heir  health,  but  I  shall  et^cape;  on  other  men  judgment  and  penalty  have  fallen,  but 
I  know  how  to  avert  the  blow,  etc.  They  imagine  themselves  to  he  possessed  of  an 
Ingenuity,  a  sagacity,  a  power  of  defeating  the  operation  of  penal  laws,  which  does  not 
belong  to  them.  No  one  else  credits  them  with  this  extraordinary  faculty ;  everybody 
else  is  convinced"  that  they  will  be  bitterly  undeceived :  they  are  infatuated  by  their 
sinful  folly.  4.  A  belief  in  the  excellency  of  animal  enjoyment.  They  are  "  given  to 
pleasures"  (ver.  8).  One  of  the  infatuations  of  sin  is  that  sensuous  delights  will 
satisfy  a  human  soul.  It  is  a  complete  delusion.  As  men  yield  to  the  temptations  of 
the  flesh  they  find  that  pleasure  lessens  as  the  craving  grows :  they  eat,  but  are  hungry 
still ;  they  drink,  but  are  thirsty  as  before.  The  lower  gratifications  do  not  fill  the  heart 
which  God  created  for  himself  and  for  his  service  and  friendship.  6.  K  fatuous  infidelity. 
"  None  seeeth  me  "  (ver.  10). 

m.  Its  inevitablb  doom.  "Therefore  shall  evil  come  upon  thee,"  etc.  (ver.  11). 
The  doom  of  spiritual  infatuation  is:  1.  Sometime  sudden.  "  Desolation  comes  suddenly; " 
when  men  are  saying,  "  Peace,  peace,"  then  sudden  destruction.  2.  Often  mysterious. 
Men  do  "not  know  whence  it  ariseth."  Concealed  beneath  the  surface  are  the  seeds  of 
sorrow  and  of  death ;  they  are  invisible,  but  they  are  there.  3.  Always  inevitable.  Men 
are  "not  able  to  put  it  off."  Wealth  cannot  purchase  its  departure  ;  authority  cannot 
order  it  away ;  ingenuity  cannot  escape  its  power.  A  voice  which  none  may  disregard 
or  disobey  will  be  heard  exclaiming,  "  Get  thee  into  darkness  "  (ver.  6). — 0. 

Vers.  1,  2. — Humiliation  the  Divine  Judgtnent  on  pride.  The  point  here,  according 
to  aome,  is  that  Babylon  loudly  boasted  about  her  never  having  been  captured ;  so  she 
called  herself,  and  was  called,  a  "  virgin  "  city.  The  figure  suggests  all  the  delicacy,  all 
the  luxuriousness,  all  the  pride,  of  the  Eastern  princess.  "  Pride  goeth  before  destruc- 
tion, and  an  haughty  spirit  before  a  fall."  The  humiliation  of  Babylon  is  presented  in 
precise  accordance  with  the  circumstances  and  sentiments  of  a  grand  and  proud  princess. 
The  hands  that  were  never  soiled  shall  do  menial  work ;  the  lady  who  sat  in  state,  in 
her  lovely  boudoir,  shall  sit  on  the  ground  and  work  the  household  handmill ;  she  who 
walked  alone,  attended  by  her  maids,  shall  be  tied  to  a  group  of  captives,  and  dragged 
to  foreign  slavery ;  and  the  delicate  dame  who  had  been  royally  clothed  and  modestly 
veiled  shall  be  exposed  to  the  jests  and  sneers  and  rude  gaze  of  rough  and  brutal  men. 
It  is  a  picture  of  crushing  judgments,  such  as  must  surely,  sooner  or  later,  overtake 
proud  persons,  proud  cities,  and  proud  nations.  God  works  by  humblings,  as  well  as 
by  actual  sufferings.  The  force  of  the  picture  presented  here  lies  in  the  command  to 
the  exquisite  princess  to  "  take  the  millstones,  and  grind  meal."  This  was  the  most 
servile  form  of  lemale  labour,  and  those  engaged  in  it  are  often  squalid  and  half-clad. 
Poor  blind  people  go  from  house  to  house  to  grind,  and  thus  earn  a  pittance.  The 
indignity  expressed  in  the  command  to  "  uncover  thy  locks  "  can  only  he  understood  as 
it  is  known  that  Jewish  women  are  not  permitted  to  show  their  hair  after  marriage, 
and  their  head-dress  is  so  contrived  as  completely  to  conceal  the  hair.  The  expression, 
"  pass  over  the  rivers,"  alludes  to  the  demand  to  wade  the  streams  as  the  humiliated 
princess  journeys  to  the  place  of  her  captivity.    Illustrate — 

I.  The  humiliation  op  pboud  nation^.  Such  striking  cases  may  be  dealt  with  as 
the  ruin  of  commercial  Tyre;  the  dismantling  of  strong  and  gorgeous  Babylon;  the 
overthrow  of  imperial  Bome;  the  discomfiture  of  Xerxes  and  his  immense  army; 
the  prostration  of  Napoleonic  France.  Bushnell  has  a  fine  argument  for  the  dignity 
of  human  nature  as  shown  by  its  ruins,  and  he  illustrates  by  references  to  the  utter 
desolation  and  ruin  of  what  were  once  the  great  cities  of  great  nations. 

IL  The  humiliation  of  pboud  classes.  The  calamities  of  war,  famine,  pestilence, 
trade  depression,  most  quickly  and  grievously  affect  them,  because  of  the  thousand- 
fold fictitious  wants  which  their  pride  creates.  There  are  no  miserable  creatures  so 
mleisnhle  as  those  who  are  born  to  riches,  and,  having  none  or  lodng  all,  are  left  in 
their  helplessness. 


212  THE  BOOK  OF  THE  PEOPHET  ISAIAH,    [oh.  xi-Tii.  1— 15 


in.  The  humiliation  of  peoud  individuals.  Show  the  various  shapes  it  takes  in 
this  life,  and  illustrate  from  the  parable  of  the  nch  man  and  Lazarus,  the  certainty 
and  hopelessness  of  it  in  the  next  life.  Of  this  we  may  be  quite  Buie— God  has  woe  in 
store,  iu  this  life  and  in  the  next,  for  all  the  proud. — B.  T. 

Ver.  6. — Doing  OocFt  work  wnworthUy.  "Thou  didst  not  show  them  oompsasion." 
Ood  had  entrusted  Babylon  with  the  work  of  executing  his  Divine  judgments  on  his 
people.  The  work  was  done,  but  God  could  not  approve  of  the  way  in  which  it  was 
done.  Compare,  for  illustrative  purposes,  the  cases  of  King  Saul  and  of  Jehu.  Saul  was 
made  executioner  of  the  Divine  judgment  on  Amalek,  but  Gkid  could  not  approve  of 
his  work :  he  erred  on  the  side  of  laxity.  Jehu  was  made  executioner  of  the  Divine 
judgment  on  the  house  of  Ahab,  but  Crod  could  not  approve  of  his  work :  he  erred  on 
the  side  of  severity.  The  complaint  God  makes  against  Babylon  is  that  it  had  "shown 
no  mercy,"  and  one  specific  instance  is  given — there  had  been  no  considerateness 
shown  towards  the  aged  among  the  captives ;  even  "  upon  the  ancient  bast  thou  very 
heavily  laid  thy  yoke."  Even  the  old  people  were  made  to  do  the  tasks  of  bond-slaves. 
"  They  resi^iected  not  the  persons  of  the  priests,  they  favoured  not  the  elders  "  (Lam. 
iv.  16);  "Princes  are  hanged  up  by  their  hand:  the  faces  of  elders  were  not 
honoured"  (Lam.  v.  12);  "I  am  very  sore  displeased  with  the  heathen  that  are  at 
ease:  for  I  was  but  a  little  displeased,  and  they  helped  forward  the  afBiction"  (Zech. 
L  15).  "  The  writings  of  Jeremiah  and  Ezekiel  do  not  suggest  that  the  Jewish  exiles 
were  great  suiferers.  Perhaps  the  prophet  may  refer  to  the  cruelties  which  disfigured 
the  first  days  of  the  Babylonian  triumph;  or  possibly  the  conduct  of  the  Babylonians 
varied,  according  to  the  flexibility  and  submissiveness  of  the  conquered"  (Cheyne). 
The  general  topic  si^gested  is  that  God's  work  entrusted  tons  becomes  a  Divine  agency 
for  the  searching  and  testing  of  our  characters.  God  will  be  sure  to  take  account,  not 
only  of  the  fact  tliat  we  have  done  the  work,  but  also  of  the  spirit  and  the  manner  in 
which  we  have  done  it.  No  parent  can  be  satisfied  with  obedience  that  is  a  mere  act. 
God  watches  the  character  of  our  obedience.  It  may  be  shown  that  we  do  God's  work 
unworthily,  and  come  under  his  reproof,  when  we — 

L  Do  IT  TO  6EBVB  SELFISH  ENDS.  TMs  spoils  all  obedieuce.  The  motive  in  it  is 
wrong.  But  how  searching  it  would  be  to  us  all  to  try  and  read  our  actions  in  the 
light  of  the  motives  that  prompted  them  I  Babylon  served  itself,  so  it  can  expect  no 
approval  or  acceptance  fi'om  God. 

IL  Do  it  otherwise  than  as  God  wishes.  For  he  who  properly  takes  up  a  work  for 
God  keeps  himself  open  to  Divine  leadings  and  teachings  as  to  the  way  in  which  it 
should  be  carried  out.  We  often  err  by  taking  up  work,  and  then  severing  ourseWea 
from  any  close  and  daily  dependence  on  God  in  the  doing  of  it. 

III.  Do  it  without  DUE  coNsiDEBATioNS  AND  QUALIFIOATIONB.  Here  the  repioach 
is  that  no  "mercy"  was  shown.  God's  judgments  are  always  considerate  in  their 
applications ;  they  are  mercy-tempered ;  tiiey  take  due  account  of  "  remnants  •  and 
"  faithful  few."  In  this  man  almost  always  &ils,  and  so  he  does  not  represent  or  honour 
God  even  in  his  work  for  him. — E.  T. 

Ver.  7. — Dve  regard  to  conseguencet,    "Neither  didst  remember  the  latter  end  of  it." 

The  experiencis  of  mankind  have  brought  the  conviction  that  moral  laws  are  always  and 
uniformly  working,  as  surely  as  physical  laws.  Wrong  universally  leads  on  to  ruin. 
Whatsoever  a  man  sows  he  reaps.  "  Sin,  when  it  is  finished,  brings  forth  death."  Tliis 
is  all  so  certain  that,  if  any  man  proposes  to  take  any  particular  course  in  life,  he  may 
duly  consider  the  "latter  end  of  it" — he  may  estimate  it  in  the  light  of  that  "latter 
end."  He  is  foolish  indeed  if  he  does  not  take  into  account  final  issues  and  results. 
And  yet  this  is  precisely  what  men  usually  fait  to  do.  The  thief  takes  no  account  of 
the  prison;  the  forger  of  penal  servitude ;  or  the  murderer  of  the  gallows.  The  proud 
will  not  see  the  certainty  of  life-humblings,  or  the  violent  the  evil  which  the  bitterness 
of  the  crushed  and  inscilted  will  bring  upon  them.  If  we  asked  ourselves,  before 
entering  on  self-willed  courses,  Where  shall  we  be,  what  shall  we  be,  ten  years  hence  I 
we  should  hesitate  and  step  back.  Babylon  enjoyed  pride,  and  refused  to  see  any 
consequences  resulting  from  high-handedness  and  defiance  of  God  and  cruelty  to  man. 
But  if  the  Nemesis  moves  slowly,  it  moves  surely ;  its  tread  is  firm,  its  advwifi^e  i| 


oa.  XLvra.  1— 22.]    THE  BOOK  OP  THE  PROPHET  ISAIAR  213 

certain.  The  "lady  for  eyor,"  in  her  own  vain  imaginations,  sits  down  at  last  a 
desolate  captive,  a  humbled,  childless  widow,  the  most  helpless  and  miserable  creature 
that  Eastern  imagination  can  cunceive  (vers.  8,  9).  "  The  guilt  of  Babylon  is  intensified 
by  her  reckless  arrogance.  She  presumed  that  the  colossus  of  her  power  would  never 
be  broken,  forgetting  the  danger  of  provoking  the  God  of  jiods." 

I.  CONSEQITENCES    HELP   U8   TO    UNDERSTAND   THE   CHAKACTEB   OP   THB   COnBSBB  WE 

OHOOBI.  We  may  be  hurried  into  acts  and  scenes  of  life  by  excitement  and  passions ; 
we  may  be  deluded  l(y  the  mere  appearances  of  things  as  they  pass.  We  only  know 
what  things  really  are  as  we  sit  down  quietly  and  count  up  their  issues,  see  them 
working  out  their  results.  We  know  sensuality  thus ;  for  he  that  soweth  to  it  reapi> 
corruption.  We  know  frivolity  thus ;  for  it  works  out  into  a  wretched  unfitness  for  all 
the  solemn  scenes  and  responsibilities  that  must  come  to  us  all.  We  know  pride  thus, 
when  we  see  it  driving  from  us  all  who  could  render  us  service  of  love,  and  leaving  us 
to  sufTer  and  die  in  the  hands  of  the  hireling. 

II.  Consequences  should  wabn  us  pbom  evil  coubses.  The  dmnkard  should  run 
from  the  cup,  at  the  bottom  of  which  lies  the  awful  picture  of  the  drunkard's  body,  the 
drunkard's  mind,  the  drunkard's  home,  the  drunkard's  helL  And  so  of  other  deceitful 
sins  and  lusts.  Alas!  that  men  will  not  "consider  their  ways"  in  the  light  of  their 
"latter  end"  1—B.T. 

Ver.  11.— J|fan*«  helplessness  in  presence  of  Divine  calamities.  The  point  impressed 
is  that  disaster  takes  unexpected  and  overwhelming  forms,  against  which  the  wisest 
man  fails  to  take  precautions.  Man  can  only  affect  the  smallest  of  circumstances  that 
are  put  into  his  control,  and  the  few  persons  who  are  under  his  immediate  influence. 
But  eacli  one  of  us  belongs  to  a  great  whole,  and  is  affected  by  great  forces,  which  QoA 
alone  controls.  We  are  carried  whither  we  would  not.  We  are  borne  down  by  evils 
which  we  seem  to  have  done  nothing  to  create.  We  are  helpless  before  the  hurricanes 
and  earthquakes  and  pestilences  with  which  God  can  smite.  After  illustrating  and 
impressing  this  point,  show  how  we  ought  to  stand  to  the  Divine  order.  We  may  so  - 
stand  that  no  event  arranged  by  the  Divine  wisdom  can  take  shape  for  us  as  caHamity. 

I.  We  mat  steive  to  be  fbbe  of  the  Divine  ordeb. 

II.  We  may  resist  the  Divine  obdeb. 

III.  We  may  put  ourselves  in  harmony  with  the  Divine  obdeb.  That  involves 
our  fitting  our  will  to  the  Divine  will ;  and  that  self-seeking  man  will  never  do  until 
he  is  "  humbled  under  God's  mighty  hand." — R.  T. 

Ver.  13. — 2%«  weariness  of  self-service.  "  Thou  art  wearied  in  the  multitude  of  thy 
counsels."  Babylon  was  trusting  self,  trying  to  find  its  own  way  out  of  calamities ; 
and  it  was  proving  what  weary,  hopeless  work  that  always  is.  Astrology  was  the  final 
resource  of  the  despairing  Babylonians. 

L  The  weariness  op  variety,  A  vMn  searching  for  some  new  device.  A  restlesi 
dissatisfaction  with  everything. 

IL  The  wkabimesb  op  multiplicity.  Bewildered  with  the  many  helpers,  who  yet 
were  all  vain  helpers.  Multitude  is  suggested  by  the  different  terms,  "astrologers, 
star-gazers,  monthly  prognosticators."  Illustrate  by  the  weariness  of  Athens,  in  her 
multiplicity  of  idols  and  altars. 

IlL  The  weariness  op  bbpbatkd  pailubbs.  Nothing  is  more  depressing  than  to 
fail  again  and  a^in.  Yet  precisely  this  is  the  ever-repeated  consequence  of  self-trust 
and  self-help.  Messed  is  it  when  weariness  does  not  pass  into  despair,  but  leads  to 
this  abandonment  of  self-reliances,  that  full  trust  may  be  placed  in  God. — B.  T. 


EXPOSITION, 
CHAPTER  XLVra. 


Tb0  pteeent  chapter,  which  terminates 
the  second  section  of  Isaiah's  later  pro- 
pbeoiee,  oonaistt  of  a  long  address  by  God 


to  his  people,  partly  in  the  way  of  com- 
plaint, partly  of  combined  promise  and 
exhortation.  The  address  is  divided  into 
three  portions,  eaoh  commencing  with  a 
call  on  Israel  to  pay  attention:   Verp.  |— 


214 


THE  BOOK  OF  THE   PROPHET  ISAIAH,    [oh.  xlvui,  1—22. 


11,  "Hear  ye  this,"  eto. ;  vers.  12—15, 
"Hearken  tmto  me,"  etc.;  vers.  16 — 22, 
"  Come  je  near  nato  me,  hear  ye  this,"  eto. 

Vera.  1—11. — The  First  Addbess  con- 
sista  mainly  of  expoBtulatiou  and  complaint. 
Israel  has  not  called  on  God  "  in  truth  and 
righteonsneas"  (ver.  1).  They  have  had 
"  neoka  of  iron  "  and  "  biowa  of  braas  "  (ver. 
4).  Ck)d  haa  given  them  prophecies  of 
different  kinda  (vers.  3 — 7) ;  yet  they  have 
neither  "heard"  nor  "known;"  they  have 
"dealt  treacherously"  and  been  "trana- 
greaaora  from  the  womb"  (ver.  8).  God 
might  juatly  have  "  out  them  off  "  for  their 
rebellion,  but  he  haa  "  deferred  his  anger," 
and  "  refrained"  himself — not,  however,  for 
larael'a  sake,  but  for  his  own  honour. 

y«r.  1. — Jacob  .  .  .  Israel  (comp.  ch.  xL 
27;  xli.  8,  14;  xliii.  1,  22;  xliv.  1,  etc.). 
"  Jac(jb  "  ia  the  natural  and  aecular  designa- 
tion ;  "  larael "  is  a  spiritual  or  covenant 
name  (Cbeyne).  Both  terms  being  appro- 
priate to  the  ten  tribes  no  less  than  to  the 
two,  and  the  present  addreas  being  intended 
especially  for  the  Jewish  captives,  a  further 
designation  is  appended — which  are  come 
forth  oat  of  the  watera  of  Jndah  (eomp. 
Pb.  Ixviii.  26,  "  Ye  that  are  of  the  fountain 
of  larael,"  marginal  rendering).  Which 
■wear  by  the  Name  of  the  lord.  Swearing 
"  by  the  Name  of  the  Lord  "  ia  an  evidence 
of  true  religion,  to  a  certain  extent  (Dent. 
vL  IS;  X.  20).  It  indicatea  that  there  has 
been,  at  any  rate,  no  open  apostasy.  Still, 
it  does  not  necessarily  prove  more  than  this; 
and,  in  the  present  case,  it  scarcely  showed 
anything  beyond  mere  outward  formal  con- 
formity. The  bulk  of  the  captives  "swore 
by  the  Kame  of  Jehovah,  and  made  men- 
tion of  the  God  of  larael"  (comp.  Joah. 
xxiii.  7),  but  did  so  not  in  tmth,  nor  in 
righteoTisness ;  t.e.  "without  their  atate  of 
mind  or  mode  of  aotion  corresponding  to 
their  confession,  ao  as  to  prove  that  it  was 
sincerely  and  seriously  meant"  (Delitzscb). 
The  condition  of  the  majority  of  the  exiles 
was  that  expressed  in  the  words,  "This 
people  honoureth  me  with  their  lips,  but 
in  their  hearts  are  far  bom  me"  (Matt 
XT.  8). 

Yer.  2. — 7or  they  call  themselves  of  the 
holy  dty.  It  ia  an  indication  of  their  real 
want  of  truth  and  righteouaneas,  that  they 
lay  anoh  stress  upon  what  b  so  entirely  ou^ 
ward  and  formal,  as  the  fact  of  their  belong- 
ing to"  the  holy  city,"  Jerusalem.  Compare 
the  boait  of  tne  Jews  in  o«r  Lord's  time, 
"  We  be  Abraham'i  seed  "  (John  TiiL  83). 
Stay  themselTes  upon  the  God  of  IsraaL 
Not  resting  upon  bilm  in  real  fitlth  and  troe 
bomUe  dapandMMt^  m  thos*  luMlitM  wh* 


are  mentioned  in  ch.  x.  20,  but  trusting  tc 
the  facts  that  they  were  "  latael,"  and  that 
God  was  "the  God  of  Israel,"  and  there- 
fore bound  to  protect  them.  God  reminds 
them  that,  if  he  is  "the  God  of  Israel,"  he 
is  also  "the  Lord  of  hosts" — a  term,  as 
Dr.  Eay  notes,  especially  connected  with 
the  holiness  of  God. 

Ver.  3.  —  X  have  declared  the  former 
things  from  the  beginning  (oomp.  ch.  xli. 
26;  xliii.  9,  10;  xliv.  7,  8,  etc).  "Former 
things  "  are  here  contrasted  with  the  "  new 
things"  of  ver.  6.  Two  cycles  of  prophecy 
seem  to  be  intended — one  of  comparatively 
ancient  dnte,  the  other  quite  freah — both 
equally  showing  forth  the  power  of  God 
and  his  infinite  superiority  to  the  idols.  It 
is  difBcult  to  determine  what  the  two  cycles 
of  prophecy  are.  Delitzsch  suggests  that  "the 
former  things  are  the  events  experienced 
by  the  people  from  the  very  earliest  times 
down  to  the  times  of  Cjrrus,"  while  "the 
new  tUngs  embrace  the  redemption  of 
Israel  from  Babylon,  the  glorification  of 
the  people  in  the  midst  of  a  world  of  nations 
converted  to  the  God  of  Israel,  and  the 
creation  of  a  new  heaven  and  a  new  earth." 
Dr.  Eay  thinks  that  the  "former  things" 
are  those  mentioned  in  the  prophecies  eon- 
ceming  Babylon  generally,  the  "new  thing! 
those  about  to  be  announced  in  oh.  xUx. — 
Ivi.  I  did  them  suddenly;  rather,  mti- 
denly  I  wrought. 

Ver.  4. — ^I  knew  that  thon  art  obstinate ; 
literally,  hard,  or  stiff— Vb.o  adjective  used  in 
the  phrase  translated  in  our  Torsion  "  stiff- 
necked.*  The  idea  is  still  more  forcibly 
expressed  in  the  following  clanse^thy 
neck  is  an  iron  sinew;  or  rather,  a  band 
of  iron,  as  stiff  aa  if  it  were  made  of  the 
hardest  metal.  And  thy  brow  brass.  The 
exact  simile  here  need  does  not  oocnr  else- 
where in  Scripture.  It  s<iems  to  be  the 
origin  of  our  expressions, "  brazen,"  "  brazen- 
faced," "  to  brazen  a  thhig  out"  The  fore- 
head may  be  hardened  for  a  good  or  for  • 
bad  purpose;  in  obstinacy  or  in  »  deter- 
mination to  resist  evil  (comp.  ch.  L  7  and 
Ezek.  iii.  8  with  Jer.  v.  3;  Ezek.  iiL  7; 
Zeoh.  vii.  12).  Here  the  hardening  is  eiril, 
marking  defiance  and  self-wilL 

Ver.  S. — I  have  even  from  the  beginning 
declared  it  (oomp.  ver.  3).  The  declaration 
here  made  is  that  God  rendered  his  pro- 
phede*  more  than  ordinarily  marvellons  on 
aooonnt  of  Israel's  obstinaoy,  not  punishing 
them  for  it,  but  seeking  graeiously  ana 
lovingly  to  OTercoma  it  oy  adding  te  the 
weight  of  the  evidence  to  which  Ite  wenld 
fain  have  had  it  yield.  Had  his  prophecies 
been  leas  astenishing,  had  they  in  a  less 
degree  transcended  ordinary  human  expert 
ence,  Israel  might  conoeivaUy  have  ascribed 
tbsia  and  the  aeoemplishment  of  Vtmm  <• 


OH.  XLVtn.  1— 22.]    THE  BOOK  OF  THE  PROPHET  ISAIAH. 


215 


the  false  gods.  As  it  was,  this  was  barely 
possible.  Mine  idol  .  .  .  my  molten  image. 
It  baa  been  already  observed  (see  the  com- 
ment on  oh.  xl.  18)  that  there  was  a  strong 
tendency  to  idolatry  among  the  Jews,  not 
only  before,  but  during  the  Captivity. 
Ezekiel  says  that  those  among  whom  he 
lived  were  "polluted  after  the  manner  of 
their  fathers,  and  committed  whoredom 
after  their  abominations;  made  their  sons 
pass  through  the  fire,  and  polluted  them- 
selves with  M  their  idoh  "  (xx.  30,  81) ; 
nay,  went  so  far  as  to  declare  boldly,  "  We 
will  be  as  the  heathen,  as  the  inhabitants 
of  the  countries,  to  lerve  wood  and  ttone" 
(xx.  32).  The  "  prevailing  tendency,"  as 
Delitz'sch  remarks,  was  "to  combine  the 
worship  of  Jehovah  with  heathenism,  or 
else  to  exchange  the  former  altogether  for 
the  latter."  We  cannot  conclude  anything 
concerning  the  mass  of  the  community 
from  the  character  of  those  who  returned. 
Those  who  returned  were  the  sincere  wor- 
shippers of  Jehovah — the  irreligious  did 
not  care  to  return.  It  is  always  to  be  borne 
in  mind  that  it  was  "the  great  mass  even 
of  Judah,"  no  less  tlian  of  Israel,  that 
"  remained  behind  "  (Delitzsoh) ;  and  these 
"  became  absorbed  into  the  heathen,  to 
whom  they  became  more  and  more  assimi- 
lated" (ibid.).  Hath  commanded  them; 
t.«.  "hath  caused  them  (the  events)  to 
take  place  "  (comp.  Fs.  xxxiii.  9). 

Yer.  6. — Ihon  hast  heard,  see  all  this ; 
rather,  thou  didst  hear,  (now)  see  it  all ;  i.e. 
see  all  the  prophecies  now  fulfilled,  which 
thou  heardest  in  days  gone  by.  Will  ye 
not  declare  it?  Will  ye  not  for  very  shame 
make  known  generally  the  accordanee  be- 
tween the  prophecies  and  the  events,  which 
you  cannot  fail  to  see  ?  Will  ye  not  become 
"my  witnesses"  (ch.  xliii.  10),  and  turn 
away  from  your  idols  ?  I  have  showed  thee ; 
rather,  I  show  thee;  i.e.  "I  am  about  to 
show  thee  from  this  time  new  things,  even 
hidden  things,  which  thou  knewest  not" — 
things  belonging  to  the  new  cycle  of  pro- 
phecy, not  previously  announced,  but  re- 
served for  the  present  crisis  (see  the  com- 
ment on  ver.  3).  On  the  whole,  the  language 
used  seems  most  consonant  with  the  view 
of  Dr.  Kay,  that  the  "new  things"  are 
those  about  to  be  revealed  in  the  next 
section  of  the  prophecy  (ch.  xlix. — liii.), 
things  belonging  to  the  coming  of  Christ, 
and  the  "new  creation"  which  it  will  be 
the  great  object  of  his  coming  to  bring 
about. 

Ver.  7. — They  are  created  now.  The 
revelation  to  man  of  what  has  lain  secret 
in  God's  counsels  from  all  eternity  is  a 
sort  of  creation.  As  Nagelbaoh  well  say«, 
it  converts  the  \.6yo5  ivSMtros  into  a  K6yos 
irp«^apiK^s,and  therefore  ia  one  step  towards 


actual  accomplishment.  The  mystery  o! 
"  the  Servant  of  the  Lord,"  and  of  atone- 
ment and  salvation  through  him,  had  hither- 
to been  hid  away — "hid  in  God"  (Eph. 
iii.  9),  and  was  now  for  the  first  time  to 
be  made  known  to  such  as  had  "eyes  to 
see  "  and  "  ears  to  hear"  by  the  teaching  of 
the  evangelical  prophet.  Zven  before  the 
day  when  thon  heardest  them  not ;  rather, 
and  before  to-day  thou  heardest  {hem  not. 
Whatever  shadows  of  evangelic  truth  are 
discernible  in  the  Law  and  in  the  earlier 
psalms,  they  did  not  constitute  a  revelation 
of  the  way  of  salvation  at  all  comparable  to 
that  contained  in  Isaiah's  later  chapters. 
Lest  thou  shoxddest  say.  Behold,  I  knew 
them.  If  the  "new  things"  of  Isaiah's 
prophecy  had  been  revealed  many  cen- 
turies before,  they  would  not  have  impressed 
the  Jews  of  Isaiah's  time,  or  even  of  the 
Captivity  period,  as  they  did  by  having 
been  reserved  to  a  comparatively  late  date. 
They  would  have  seemed  to  most  of  them 
an  old  and  trite  story. 

Ver.  8. — ^Thon  heardest  not  .  .  .  thon 
knewest  not.  Again  we  seem  to  hear  the 
voice  of  oomplaint,  as  in  vers.  1,  2,  4. 
Israel  bad  not  "  ears  to  hear "  to  any  pur- 
pose such  higuly  spiritual  truths  as  those 
of  the  coming  section.  They  had  not  pro- 
fited by  what  was  taught  concerning  Christ 
in  the  Law  and  the  Psalms.  From  that 
time  that  thine  ear  was  not  opened;  rather, 
from  that  time  thine  ear  hath  not  been  open. 
"From  that  time"  means  "from  of  old," 
or  "  from  the  beginning." 

Ver.  9. — For  my  Name's  sake  will  I  defer 
mine  anger.  Israel's  insincerity  (ver.  1), 
obstinacy  (ver.  4),  addiction  to  idols  (ver. 
5),  blindness  (ver.  8),  and  general  resist- 
ance to  God's  will  ^er.  8),  conld  not  but 
have  provoked  God's  "  anger."  He  will, 
however,  "defer"  it,  "refrain"  himself, not 
"cut  Israel  off,"  "for  his  Name's  sake." 
God,  having  selected  one  nation  out  of  all 
the  nations  of  the  earth  to  be  his  "peculiar 
people  "  (Dent.  xiv.  2),  and  having  declared 
this,  and  supported  his  people  by  miracles 
in  their  straggles  with  the  other  nations 
and  peoples,  was,  so  to  speak,  committed 
to  protect  and  defend  Israel  "  fur  his  Name's 
sake,"  lest  hisKame  should  be  blasphemed 
among  the  Gentiles  (see  Exod.  xxxii.  12; 
Numb,  xiv.  13;  Deut.  ix.  28;  Fs.  Ixxix. 
10;  cvi.  8,  etc.).  He  was  also  bound  by 
the  promises  which  he  had  made;  and, 
still  more,  by  the  position  which  Israel 
occupied  in  his  scheme  of  salvation,  to 
allow  the  nation  still  to  exist,  and  there- 
fore to  condone  its  iniquities  and  restrain 
his  anger.  But  the  dregs  of  the  eup  of 
vengeance  were  poured  out  at  last. 

Ver.  10— I  have  refined  thee,  but  not 
with  silver ;  rather,  hut  not  as  silver  (Ohe^ne^ 


tM 


THB  BOOK  OP  THE  PROPHET  ISAIAH,    [oh.  xtvin.  1— 2» 


ar,  but  not  in  the  manner  of  tUver  (Selitzsoh) ; 
l^.  not  with  the  severity  vith  which  silver 
is  refined  (see  Fe.  xij.  6).  I  have  chosen 
thee;  rather,  I  have  tested  Ihee.  The 
fumaoe  of  oCBiotion  is  here  the  Baby- 
lonian captivity.  The  object  of  the  Cap- 
tivity was  to  "test"  and  "refine,"  or 
purify  God's  people  to  a  certain  extent — 
not  with  extreme  severity,  but  in  aueh  sort 
P.8  to  fit  them  to  "bear  his  Name  before  the 
Gentiles  "  for  another  five  hundred  years. 

Ver.  11. — ^How  should  my  Name  be  pol- 
luted t  i.e.  how  should  I  allow  of  its  pollu- 
tion or  desecration  (see  the  comment  on 
ver.  9)?  I  will  not  give  my  glory  unto 
another  (comp.  oh.  xlii.  8).  God  would 
have  ceded  his  glory  to  some  i  god  of  the 
nations,  had  he  under  existing  ciroum- 
stances  forsaken  Israel. 

Vera.  12 — 15.  —  Tbb  Seoond  Address. 
The  tone  of  complaint  is  now  dropped. 
Israel  is  invited  to  refleot  seriously  on  the 
chief  points  urged  in  the  preceding  chapters. 

(1)  Their  near  relation  to  Jehovah  (ver.  12) ; 

(2)  Jehovah's  eternity  and  omnipotence 
(vers.  12,  13) ;  (3)  the  superiority  of 
Jehovah  to  the  gods  of  the  nations,  as 
shown  by  his  prophetic  power  (ver.  14); 
and  (4)  the  near  approach  of  deliverance 
by  Gyrus  (vers.  14, 15). 

Yer.  12. — 0  Jacob  and  Israel  (comp.  ch. 
xL  27;  za  8, 14;  xliii.  1,  22;  xliv.  1,  21; 
xlvi  8;  xlvliL  1).  The  figure  is  used 
which  rhetoricians  call  hendiadyi.  The  two 
names  designate  one  and  the  same  object. 
My  called.  "Called"  and  "chosen"  irom 
of  old,  out  of  all  the  nations  of  the  earth 
(comp.  oh.  xlL  9;  xliv.  1,  2,  etc.);  tbere- 
foie  bound  to  "hear"  and  to  attend.  Still 
more  bound,  considering  who  it  is  by  whom 
they  have  been  called—!  am  hk — i.e.  "I 
am  the  absolute  and  eternally  unchange- 
able One,  the  Alpha  and  Omega  of  all 
history"  (Delitzsch).  The  First,  and  also 
the  Last,  "from  whom  and  to  whom  are 
all  things"  (Kom.  xL  36). 

Ver.  13. — ^Hine  hand  also  hath  laid  the 
foundation  of  the  earth  (comp.  ch.  xl.  12, 
22,  26,  28;  xlU.  5;  xliv.  24;  xlv.  12,  18). 
As  the  Maker  of  heaven  and  earth,  God  is 
entitled  to  the  attention  and  obedience  of 
all  the  dwellers  in  heaven  and  earth.  My 
right  hand  hath  spanned  the  heavens ;  t'.e, 
measured  them,  as  with  a  span  (ch.  xU.  12)— 
fixed  their  limits  and  dimensions.  When 
I  call  nnto  them,  they  stand  up  together 
(comp.  eh.  xL  26).  Heaven  and  earth,  and 
all  things  that  are  in  them,  except  man, 
are  prompt  to  perform  God's  will,  and  rise 
up  at  onee  at  his  oall  to  show  their  readiness. 
The  metaphor  is  drawn  from  the  conduct 
(f  intelligent  agents. 


Yer.  14.— All  ye,  assemble  yonraelTes. 
"  Once  more  the  nations  are  challenged  to 
say  which  of  their  deities  has  foretfold  the 
work  that  the  Lord  has  willed  to  perform 
on  Babylon"  (Kay)  (see  above,  ch.  xliii  9). 
If  none  has  done  so,  will  not  Israel  see  and 
acknowledge  the  superiority  of  Jehovah  to 
suoh  blind  deities?  The  Lord  hath  loved 
him.  It  had  not  been  previously  declared 
in  so  many  words  that  Jehovah  "loved" 
Cyrus;  but  it  had  been  sufSciently  indi- 
cated by  the  way  in  which  he  was  spoken 
of  in  ch.  xliv.  28  and  xlv.  1 — 5.  God 
"loves"  all  who  "in  an  honest  and  good 
heart "  seek  according  to  their  lights  to  do 
his  will  and  serve  him  faithfully.  Kebu- 
chadnezzar  is  called  bis  "servant"  (Jer. 
XXV.  9 ;  xxvii  6;  Ezek.  xxix.  18, 20),  Cyrus 
(in  oh.  xlv.  1)  his  "anointed."  It  is  but 
going  one  step  further  to  call  the  latter  his 
"  loved  one."  Ha  will  do  his  pleasure ;  m. 
"  God's  pleasure,"  not  his  own  (me  ch,  xliv. 
28).  His  arm  shall  be  on  the  CluUdeaiu. 
The  Hebrew  is  very  harsh,  and  perhaps 
requires  emendation ;  but  the  meaning  can 
scarcely  be  other  than  that  expressed  in  oar 
version. 

Yer.  15. — ^I  have  called  him  (comp.  ch. 
xlvi.  11,  "Calling  a  ravenous  bird  from 
the  east ").  Cyrus  is  represented  as  raised 
up  by  God,  "called"  %  him,  and  com- 
missioned by  him  "  to  do  all  his  pleasnre." 
God  has  brought  him  on  his  way,  and  made 
that  way  prosperons.  According  to  the 
account  of  Herodotus,  Cyrus  received  no 
check  of  any  kind  until  the  last  expedition, 
in  which  he  lost  his  life.  His  "  prosperity  " 
was  beyond  that  of  almost  any  other  com- 
mander. 

Yers.l6 — 22. — The  Third  Addbms.  Israel 
is  reminded  of  Grod's  merciful  teaching  and 
leading  in  the  past  (vers.  16,  17);  expos- 
tulated with  on  their  disobedience  (vers. 
18,  19);  exhorted  to  go  foi-th  boldly  and 
joyfully  from  Babylon  (vers.  20,  21);  and 
finally  warned  that  God's  blessings — even 
such  a  blessing  as  deliverance  —  are  no 
blessings  to  any  but  the  righteous  (ver.  22). 
Yer.  16. — I  have  not  spoken  in  seoret  ficom 
the  beginning.  God,  "  from  the  beginning," 
i.e.  from  his  first  dealings  with  Israel,  hgid 
raised  up  a  succession  of  prophets,  who  had 
declared  his  will,  not  "in  seoret,"  or  am- 
biguously, but  openly  and  plainly,  so  that 
all  who  heard  might  understand  (comp.  eh. 
xlv.  1 9,  and  see  the  comment  ad  loe.').  ttcm 
the  time  that  it  was,  there  am  I;  <.«.  "irom 
the  time  that  the  earth  was,  there  (in  the 
succession  of  my  piophetio  messengers)  was 
I."  It  was  I  who  n>»ke  by  their  month, 
and  thus  announced  my  will  publicly. 
And  now  the  Lord  Oed,  and  bii  Spuit,  Ml 


«H.  XLvm.  1— 22.]    THE  BOOK  OF  THE  PROPHET  ISAIAH. 


217 


Mnt  ne.  Dr.  Eay  suppoees  that  "one 
Divine  Personage  is  here  sent  by  another  " 
— the  Second  Person  of  the  Holy  Trinity  by 
the  First  and  by  the  Third ;  bnt  it  is  against 
the  analogy  of  faith  that  the  Third  Person 
should  send  the  Second.  Probably  Mr. 
Oheyne  is  right  in  suggesting  that  "here 
a  firesb  speaker  is  introduced,"  and  also 
right  in  his  supposition  that  the  fresh 
speaker  ii  "the  prophet  himself,"  who  tells 
us  that  he  is  now  carrying  on  the  goodly 
suooession  which  has  been  "  from  the  begin- 
ning," and  is  sent  to  deliver  his  message 
by  Ooil  (the  Father)  and  his  (Holy)  Spirit. 
(jn  the  tendency  of  ibaiah  to  "  hypostatize  " 
the  Spirit  of  God,  see  the  comment  on  ch. 
xl.  13;  and  compare  Mr.  Cheyne's  note  on 
the  same  passage  ('Prophecies  of  Isaiah,' 
vol.  i  p.  243). 

Ver.  17. — The  lord  .  .  .  which  teaoheth 
thee  to  profit.  God's  teachings  are  all 
directed  to  the  "profit"  of  those  to  whom 
they  are  addressed;  and,  if  received  in  a 
proper  spirit,  actually  "  profit "  them  more 
than  anything  else  can  do.  "  All  Scripture 
is  given  by  inspiration  of  God,  and  is  pro- 
fitable "  (2  Tim.  iii  16).  Very  profitable  also 
are  the  teachings  of  God's  providence, 
whieh  chasten  men,  warn  men,  and  tend  to 
keep  men  in  the  right  path. 

Ver.  18. — Oh  that  then  hadst  hearkened  I 
(oomp.  Pi.  Ixxxi.  13—16,  "Oh  that  my 
people  had  hearkened  nnto  me,  and  Israel 
had  walked  in  my  ways  I  I  should  soon 
have  subdued  their  enemies,  and  turned  my 
hand  against  their  adversaries,"  etc.)  Some 
render,  "  Oh  that  thou  wouldst  hearken  I  " 
etc.,  on  the  analogy  of  ch.  Ixiv.  1 ;  bnt 
unnecessarily.  Dr.  Kay  says  that  God 
"npbraideth  not,"  referring  to  Jas.  L  5. 
But  he  may  expostulate.  What  is  it  bnt 
expostulation,  when  our  Lord  says,  "  O 
Jerusalem,  Jerusalem,  thou  that  killest  the 
prophets,  and  stonest  them  which  are  sent 
unto  thee,  how  often  would  I  have  gathered 
thy  children  together,  even  as  a  hen 
gathereth  her  chickens  under  her  wings,  and 
ye  would  not  1  Behold,  your  house  is  left 
unto  you  desolate"  (Matt,  xxiii.  27,  2«)? 
To  look  back  on  the  past,  and  see  what 
we  have  missed,  is  a  good  lesson  for  the 
future.  Then  had  thy  peace  been  as  a  river ; 
literally,  ai  the  river  (i.e.  the  Euphrates), 
abounding,  overflowing,  continuous.  Thy 
righteousness.  Not  "  thy  prosperity " 
(Cheyne),  but  "  thy  good  deeds."  If  Israel 
kad  clung  to  God,  then  God's  blessing 
would  have  been  poured  upon  them,  and 
have  enabled  them  to  bring  forth  abundant 
firniti  of  righteousness.  As  the  waves  of 
the  sea ;  i.e.  innumerable  and  unceasing. 

Ter.  19.— Thy  seed  also  had  been  as  the 
■and.  Israel,  at  the  close  of  the  Captivity,  was 
"  a  remnant "  (oh.  xxxviL  31),  a  "  very  small 


remnant"  (eh.  L  9);  the  ten  tribes  were 
for  the  most  part  absorbed  into  the  heathen 
among  whom  they  had  been  scattered; 
the  two  tribes  had  dwindled  in  number 
through  the  hardships  of  the  Captivity,  and 
were  scarcely  more  than  a  "  handful."  Less 
than  fifty  thousand  returned  with  Zerubbabel 
(Ezra  ii.  61) ;  less  than  two  thousand  males 
with  Ezra  (Ezra  viii.  2 — 20).  Had  Israel 
not  been  disobedient,  the  promises  made 
to  Abraham,  Isaac,  and  Jacob  would  have 
been  literally  fulfilled,  and  the  descendants 
of  Abraham  would  have  been  millions  upon 
millions,  instead  of  being  one  or  two  hundred 
thousand.  The  offspring  of  thy  bowels  like 
the  gravel  thereof;  rather,  like  the  grains 
thereof:  i-e.  the  grains  of  the  sand.  His 
name;  ('.«.  "Israel's  name."  Should  not 
have  been  cut  off.  Israel's  name  had  not 
been  wholly  "  cut  off"  or  "  destroyed."  But 
it  had  been  approximately  "  cut  ofi'."  Israel 
was  no  more  a  people,  but  only  a  horde  of 
slaves.  The  restortlion  to  Palestine  was  ii 
resurrection— the  Ire-oreation  of  a  nation 
which,  humanly  speaking,  had  ceased  to  be. 

Ver.  20.— Go  ye  forth  of  Babylon.  A 
sudden  transition  from  expostulation  to 
exhortation.  It  might  have  seemed  that 
no  exhortation  would  be  needed;  that,  as 
soon  as  the  prison-doors  were  set  open, 
there  would  be  a  general  rush  to  escape. 
But,  when  the  time  came,  it  was  not  so. 
Those  only  availed  themse  es  of  the  edict 
of  Cyrus  "whose  spirit  God  had  raised  to 
go  up  and  build  his  house"  (Ezra  i.  5). 
The  wealthier  classes,  Josephus  tells  us 
('  Ant.  Jud.,'  xi.  1),  remained.  The  very  poor, 
it  is  probable,  could  not  leave.  Motives 
of  various  kinds  detained  others.  The 
result  was  that  probably  a  larger  number 
elected  to  continue  in  the  country  than  to 
return  to  Palestine.  Hence  the  exhorta- 
tion to  "go  forth  from  Babylon  and  flee 
from  the  Chaldeans"  was  far  from  being 
superfluous.  Flee  ye  from  the  Chaldeans. 
Not  "  flee  before  them  "  (see  ch.  Iii.  12), 
as  enemies  to  be  feared ;  but  quit  tbem 
hastily,  as  corrupters  to  be  avoided.  With 
a  voice  of  singing ;  rather,  with  a  voice  of 
diouting  (Delitzsch),  or  with  u  ringing  cry 
(Cheyne).  The  cry  was  to  rsftch  even  to 
the  end  of  the  earth.  All  the  nations  were 
to  be  informed  of  the  great  event,  in  which 
tliey  might  riot/e«Z,but  in  which  they  were, 
deeply  interested — the  deliverance  of  Israel 
out  of  Babylon,  which  was  "  the  prelude  of, 
aiid  a  preparation  for,  the  world's  redemp- 
tion "(Kay). 

Ver.  21. — ^They  thirsted  not  (oomp.  oh. 
xliii.  19,  and  the  comment  ad  loo.).  The 
literal  meaning  is  not  to  be  altogether 
excluded.  We  have  no  historical  account 
of  the  journey  made  by  the  bulk  of  the 
exiles  who  returned  with  Zerubbabel ;  bu* 


218 


THE  BOOK  OF  THE  PROPHET   ISAIAH,    [oh.  XLVin.  1— 22 


they  mngt  almost  certainly  have  experi- 
enced difficulties  with  respect  to  water; 
and  it  is  quite  possible  that  a  miraRulons 
supply  was  Toucbsafed  to  them.  Most  com- 
mentators, hovruver,  are  content  to  explain 
both  this  and  the  earlier  passage  as  merely 
"symbolical."  The  Israelites— they  say — 
bod  spiritual  refreshment  on  their  home- 
ward journey,  by  Ood's  goodness,  oonstaatly. 


Yer.  22.— There  is  no  peace,  et&  This 
warning  phrase  occurs  again, "  in  the  manner 
of  a  refrain  "  (Olieyne),  at  the  close  of  what 
most  commentators  regard  as  the  second 
section  of  this  portion  of  Isaiah's  work 
(ch.  Ivii.  21).  The  third  section  closes 
with  a  still  more  solemn  warning  (oh.  IzvL 
21> 


HOMILETIOS. 

Ver.  L — Bwtaring  by  the  Name  of  Ood.  Our  Lord's  injunction  to  hii  disclplw  is 
"Swear  not  at  all;"  and  in  a  community  where  all  were  true  Christians,  swearing 
would  be  superfluous,  and  the  injunction  might  be  carried  out  to  the  letter.  But  in 
imperfect  conditions  of  society,  such  as  the  old  covenant  contemplated,  and  such  as 
alone  exist  under  the  new,  "  swearing  by  the  Name  of  God  "  canhot  be  dispensed  with. 
Life  and  property  would  be  greatly  endangered  were  courts  of  justice  to  decide  causes 
on  the  unsworn  evidence  of  witnesses,  the  majority  of  whom  might  have  a  very  slight 
regard  for  truth.     "  Swearing  by  the  Name  of  Gk)d"  is  thus  lawful — 

L  When  a  witness  is  called  upon  to  do  so  in  a  couet  of  JtrsTicE.  The 
Christian  Church  in  all  its  branches  has  always  allowed  and  approved  of  oaths  being 
taken  in  courts  of  justice.  Only  a  few  sectaries  have  from  time  to  time  so  strained  our 
Lord's  words  as  to  consider  them  prohibitive  of  oaths  of  this  kind.  Such  persons  "have 
a  zeal  of  Ood,  but  not  according  to  knowledge  "  (Rom.  x.  2).  It  is  clear  from  the 
context  that  our  Lord's  injunction  was  levelled,  not  against  judicial  oaths,  but  against 
the  habit  of  strengthening  asseverations  by  oaths  in  familiar  discourse  (Matt.  v.  34 — 
37).  And  he  himself,  when  adjured,  or  put  upon  his  oath,  did  not  rebuke  the  man  by 
whom  he  was  adjured,  but  gave  an  answer  to  his  questioner,  though  previously  he  had 
refused  to  give  one  (Matt.  xxvi.  63,  64). 

II.   When   the   civil   aOVERNOK   calls   upon   us   fob    an  oath  of   ALLSaiANCB,  oE 

THB  LIKE.  The  practice  of  Christian  countries  in  this  respect  has  varied ;  but  where 
oaths  of  allegiance  are  required  there  would  seem  to  be  no  reasonable  ground  for 
objecting  to  them.  The  state  is  entitled  to  assure  itself  of  the  good  will  and  fidelity  of 
the  citizens ;  and,  unless  it  can  be  sufficiently  assured  by  a  mere  affirmation,  would 
seem  to  be  entitled  to  the  better  security  of  an  oath. 

ni.  When  in  ant  vebt  bebious  circumstances  a  vebt  solemn  assukanob  is 
RBQUKITE.  Bandits  have  captured  two  friends.  One  of  them  is  allowed  to  leave  the 
bandits'  stronghold  in  order  to  obtain  the  ransom  for  both,  but  is  required  to  swear  that 
in  any  case  he  will  return,  otherwise  both  will  be  put  to  a  lingering  death.  There 
would  seem  to  be  no  sufficient  grounds  for  refusing  to  make  oath  in  t^uch  a  case.  The 
bandits  will  not  accept  a  promise.  The  oath  is  a  concession  to  their  incredulity.  It  is 
given  solemnly,  seriously,  almost  judicially;  since  those  who  tender  it  possess,  under 
the  circumstances,  the  power  of  life  and  death.  It  cannot  be  thought  the  injunction, 
"  Swear  not  at  all,"  was  given  with  reference  to  such  a  case  any  more  than  with 
reference  to  oaths  in  courts  of  justice. 

The  great  end  is  to  avoid  light  swearing,  unnecessary  swearing,  profane  swearing. 
Let  these  forms  of  swearing  be  carefully  eschewed,  and  a  Christian  man's  conscience 
need  not  be  greatly  exercised  in  respect  of  the  oaths  which  he  is  called  upon  to  take  as 
witness,  as  subject,  as  friend,  as  husband,  as  citizen. 

Ver.  12.— God  the  First  and  the  Last.  It  is  readily  intelligible,  thou<'h  not  by  finite 
minds  conceivable,  that  "God  is  the  First."  Something  must  have  existed  from  all 
eternity,  or  nothing  could  ever  have  existed.  The  first  existence  must  either  have  been 
matter  or  spirit,  or  both.  But  it  could  not  have  been  matter  alone,  since  matter  could 
never  have  produced  spirit ;  and  it  was  not  matter  and  spirit,  since  the  "  things  that  ars 
seen  were  not  made  of  things  that  do  appear"  (H.b.  xi.  3).  It  was  therefore  spuit 
alone;  and  that  primeval  Spirit  which  existed  apart  from  matter,  and  apart  from 
any  created  spirit,  was  God.    Thus  "God  is  the  First"— the  Piret  Cause— Wore  ai; 


CH.  XLvm.  1— 22.]    THE  BOOK  OP  THE   PROPHET   ISAIAH.  219 

things — the  Origin  of  all  things — "  Creator  of  heaven  and  earth,  and  of  all  things,  both 
visible  and  invisible."  But  howls  he  "the  Last"?  Eternal  life  is  promised  to  all 
created  beings  who  do  not  fall  from  their  first  sinless  estate,  and  also  to  all  who,  having 
fallen,  repent  and  amend,  turning  to  God,  and  putting  their  whole  trust  in  the  atonement 
of  Christ.  They  will  live  on  eternally  in  his  eternal  glory.  Actually,  then,  God  will  not 
ever  be  in  the  future  a  single  solitary  Being,  as  he  once  was,  but  will  always  be  a  King 
and  Governor  of  innumerable  hosts  of  happy  spirits,  created  by  himself.  Actually  he 
will  never  be  "the  Last."  'Rni  potentially  he  is  "  the  Last."  He  could,  if  he  so  pleased, 
destroy  with  a  word  all  that  he  has  ever  created,  and  be  once  more  alone,  without 
a  second.  And  further,  all  thinp  are  "  to  him"  and  "for  him" — they  exist  for  his 
sake ;  he  is  their  Aim  and  Object ;  their  sole,  final  rtxat. 

Vw.  16.— Z%e  separate  personality  and  Divine  authority  of  the  Holy  Spirit.  The 
doctrine  of  the  Holy  Trinity,  like  most  of  the  other  great  and  mysterious  doctrines  of 
true  religion,  was  gradually  revealed  to  mankind.  In  one  sense  we  may  call  it  an 
exclusively  Christian  doctrine;  but  in  another  we  must  assign  it  an  antiquity  far  higher 
than  that  of  the  Christian  era.  God,  in  his  several  revelations  to  niaukind,  gradually 
paved  the  way  for  its  acceptance.  In  the  revelations  which  he  made  to  Noah  and 
Abraham  (Gen.  ix.  6,  16 ;  xvii.  7,  8),  God  announced  himself  as  Elohim — a  word  of 
plural  form.  In  the  revelation  which  he  caused  to  be  put  forth  by  his  servant  Moses, 
he  distinguished  between  "God"  (^Elohim)  and  "the  Spirit  of  God"  (ruakh  Elohim) 
which  moved,  or  brooded,  upon  the  face  of  the  primeval  chaos  (Gen.  i.  2).  By  David 
he  made  it  known  that  there  was  a  "  God,"  whose  "  throne  was  for  ever  and  ever," 
whom  "  God,  even  hie  God,  would  anoint  with  the  oil  of  gladness  above  his  fellows  " 
(Ps.  xlv.  6,  7 ;  comp.  Ueb.  i.  8,  9).  To  the  same  great  saint  he  revealed  it  that  bis 
Holy  Spirit  could  be  given  to  man  and  taken  from  him  (Ps.  li.  11).  Isaiah,  in  the 
present  passage,  proclaims  that  he  is  sent  "by  the  Lord  Jehovah"  (Adonai  Yekovah) 
and  also  by  "his  Spirit."  The  doctrine  of  the  Trinity  in  Unity  is  thus  faintly 
shadowed  out,  and  to  a  certain  extent  implied  in  the  books  of  the  Old  Testa* 
ment,  though  first  openly  preached  and  emphatically  set  forth  in  those  of  the  New 
(see  a  paper  bj  Dr.  Paul  Kleinert,  in  the  Jahrbuch  far  deuteche  Theologie  for  1867, 
pp.8— 69> 

HOMILIES  BY  VARIOUS  AUTHOR& 

yiam  I—IL—Lesione  from  the  past  to  the  future.  Those  addressed  are  the  people 
"  named  from  Israel  and  sprung  from  Judah's  spring ; "  who  swear  by  Jehovah's  Name 
and  render  homage  to  Israel's  God — ^not,  alas  I  so  sincerely  as  they  should.  Still,  they 
have  learned  to  find  their  true  reliance  in  Zion  and  in  Jahveh.  Let  them,  then,  hear  the 
exhortation  of  Jehovah. 

L  Thk  obacle  of  teb  past.  Jehovah  has  in  former  times  predicted  events  by  the 
mouth  of  his  prophets  which  came  to  pass.  Those  predictions  were  disbelieved ;  the 
fulfilment  was  delayed;  and  yet  suddenly  the  ideal  was  translated  into  fact;  and 
the  unexpected  had  come  to  pass.  In  general,  history  is  the  oracle  of  the  Eternal.  An 
empire  founded  on  force  or  fraud  cannot  stand;  the  kingdom  which  subsists  by 
righteousness  and  for  righteousness  carries  with  it  vitality  and  enduring  dominion. 
It  was  said  by  a  great  statesman,  *<  The  unexpected  always  happens."  And  in  truth 
the  purposes  of  God  are  not  seldom  known  by  their  fulfilment  in  sudden  and  surprising 
events.  He  thinks  long,  but  acts  promptly.  As  in  Northern  climates,  the  winter 
of  human  discontent  breaks  as  if  by  magic  into  spring.  Such  experiences  should  tend 
to  subdue  the  obstinacy  of  incredulity.  God  knew  that  the  Israelites  were  prone  to 
unbelief  and  hardness  of  heart,  and  therefore  had  plied  them  with  so  many  proofs  of  his 
providence.  George  Herbert  mentions,  "Bibles  laid  open,  millions  of  surprises,"  among 
the  means  which  God  employs  to  bring  the  soul  to  himself.  The  "  iron  sinew  and  the 
brow  of  brass "  are  significant  of  the  state  of  mind  which  be  had  to  encoimter  in  the 
people.  "  Some  aie  so  obstinately  bad  and  confirmed  in  their  vice,  that  judgments  and 
afflictions  are  but  thrown  away  upon  them ;  and  God's  shooting  at  them  is  but  shooting 
at  a  mark,  which  indeed  receives  the  arrow,  but  does  not  at  all  feel  it." 


220  THE  BOOK  OP  THE  PROPHET  ISAIAH,    [ch.  xLvm.  1— 2a 


n.  New  fbedictions.  Again,  things  hidden  from  human  penetration  shall  be  mad« 
known  by  the  Divine  oiacles.  The  events  could  no  more  be  anticipated  than  could  an 
act  of  creation  from  the  operation  of  natural  causes.  And  so  the  taking  of  Babylon  by 
Gyrus,  and  the  deliverance  of  the  exiles  from  bondage,  could  be  known  by  no  human 
foresight  or  sagacity.  But "  their  ears  were  not  open."  They  were  infidel  and  rebellions 
at  heart.  The  open  ear  means  the  affected  heart,  the  awakened  understanding,  the 
cherishing  memory,  the  steady,  fruitful  perseverance  in  action.  If  there  be  defect  of 
these,  the  soul  is  no  better  than  if  it  haii  not  heard  at  alL  Nay,  it  may  be  worse  (of. 
John  V.  25 ;  vi.  45 ;  Acts  ii.  37). 

III.  The  gbeat  Divihb  motivb.  Not  because  the  people  have  deserved  it  will 
Jehovah  act  thus,  but  for  his  honour's  sake,  because  he  is  not  yet  known  among  the 
Oentiles.  And  it  is  through  Israel  that  his  purposes  to  the  heathen  must  be  carried 
out.  Yet  this  people  had  not  been  found  puie  metal  after  their  trial  in  the  furnace 
of  affliction.  They  were  wicked,  sinful,  and  unbelieving.  It  is  his  glory,  then,  in  the 
spread  of  true  religion  and  justice  in  the  earth,  that  is  the  principle  and  the  end  of  the 
procedure  of  Jehovah.  As  he  can  swear  by  no  higher,  so  he  can  work  for  no  more 
majestic  object,  than  himself.  But  he  must  have  instruments,  he  must  have  men, 
however  imperfect,  to  work  out  his  purposes.  "God's  glory  is  the  motto  inscribed 
upon  every  created  being ;  ai)d  wheiesoever  God  reads,  he  owns  this  superscription. 
It  is  all  the  creature  has,  under  God's  haad  and  seal,  to  show  for  its  life.  Wherever  we 
are,  we  are  nut  our  own,  but  his.  All  men  are  by  nature  servants  to  the  interest 
of  ids  glory." — J. 

Vers.  12 — 22. — The  new  revelation.  The  verses  contain  a  summary  of  the  conlents 
of  ch.  xl. — xlvii.  God  is  the  First  and  the  Last — the  sole  Creator.  Prophecy  is  an 
evidence  of  his  claims ;  and  so  is  the  mission  of  Gyrus. 

I.  The  revelation  conceenino  God.  First  Jacob  and  Israel,  the  chosen  people, 
are  called  to  listen.  Jehovah  is  the  Alpha  and  the  Omega  of  the  universe.  The  First 
Cause  and  Beasou  of  things ;  he  gave  the  first  impulse  to  their  course,  the  goal  of  which 
will  still  be  himself.  Before  the  earth  and  the  heavens  were,  his  was  the  creative  hand, 
guided  by  the  creative  mind.  Then  the  idolatrous  nations  are  summoned  to  assemble^ 
and  challenged  to  produce  a  power  of  prophecy  to  rival  that  of  Jehovah. 

IL  CoNCEBNiNG  Gtbus.  "  He  whom  Jehovah  hath  loved,"  to  whom  he  hath  spoken, 
whom  he  hath  called,  shall  have  a  prosperous  career,  performing  the  Divine  pleasure 
on  Babylon  and  on  Chaldea.  In  ver.  20  the  prophet  sees  the  destruction  of  Babylon 
as  an  accomplished  fact.  Thence  let  a  ringing  cry  go  forth  to  the  end  of  the  earth  I 
Jehovah  hath  redeemed  the  people !  Already  they  have  drunk  of  the  refreshing  waters 
in  the  desert.  And  that  peace,  which  is  the  sum  of  all  blessings,  and  which  can  never 
be  the  portion  of  the  ungodly,  is  theirs. 

III.  Appeal  to  conscience  and  expeeibnoe.  Let  the  chosen  people  draw  near 
and  commune  with  their  God.  From  the  first  he  has  spoken  to  them,  not  in  dark  and 
ambiguous  oracles,  but  in  words  of  clearness  and  unmistakable  purport.  And  now 
he  is  to  speak  again  by  the  mouth  of  his  present  servant,  and  to  crown  his  revelations 
by  the  greatest  of  them  all.  And  what  of  Israel  ?  Doubly  tender  is  the  reproach 
and  the  expostulation.  Why  have  the  people  not  walked  in  the  straight  way  in  which 
he  would  have  led  them  ?  He  is  their  "  Teacher  to  their  profit ; "  why  have  they 
chosen  what  is  unprofitable?  and  followed  after  the  "not-profitable"  gods  (Jer.  ii. 
11 ;  cf.  Micah  vi  8;  Ps.  xxiii.  3)?  He  would  lead  them  in  the  straight  path,  but  Israel 
has  forced  him,  as  it  were,  to  lead  them  by  the  circuitous  path  of  affliction.  The  appeal 
to  experience  turns  upon  this  point — the  profitableness  of  godliness,  which  has  the 
promise  of  the  life  that  now  is,  and  of  that  which  is  to  come.  "  Deep  down  in  human 
natiu-e  lies  the  idea  of  a  covenant  between  the  worshipper  and  his  god.  In  retilm  for 
external  service,  the  god  gives  help  and  protection.  The  prophets,  with  a  generous 
freedom,  retain  so  much  of  this  theory  a<  matches  wiih  the  truths  revealed  to  them. 
Jehovah's  protection  is  still  conditional,  but  the  conditions  extend  to  the  inner  as  well 
as  the  outer  man  "  (Gheyne).  Obedience  alone  brings  peace  and  prosperity.  If  men 
had  but  hearkened  to  God,  their  peace  would  have  been  as  the  great  volume  of  the 
Euphrates,  and  their  blessedness,  reflecting  the  favour  of  Jehovah,  as  the  multitudinous 
waves  of  the  sea ;  its  posterity  as  the  sand  of  the  sea,  or  as  the  fishes  that  swarm  in  iti 


CH.  XLVui.  1—22.]    THE  BOOK  OF  THE  PEOPHET  ISAIAH.  221 


waters.  Its  name  would  have  been  imperishable.  It  is,  then,  the  "hearing  ear"  and 
the  "perceiving  heart"  Tvhich  above  all  are  needed  as  conditions  of  true  temporal  and 
spiritual  well-being.  To  hear  so  as  to  be  pricked  in  heart ;  to  hear  so  as  to  follow  and 
prosecute  the  things  we  hear; — this  alone  is  to  hear  in  the  Scripture  sense.  And  her* 
we  are  reminded  of  the  need  of  the  Holy  Spirit's  influence,  without  which  we  may 
see  and  never  perceive,  and  hear  and  never  understand.  There  must  be  an  aptness 
between  the  object  and  the  faculty.  Things  sensible  must  be  known  by  sense ;  things 
mental  by  the  mind;  and  things  spiritual  by  some  principle  infused  into  the  soul  from 
above.  "  Two  sit  together  and  hear  the  same  sermon.  One  finds  a  hidden  spiritual 
virtue  in  the  Word,  by  which  he  lives  and  grows  and  thrives.  Another  finds  no  such 
virtue  in  it ;  perhaps  it  pleases  his  reason,  and  there  is  an  end.  This  proceeds  from 
the  want  of  the  spiritual,  perceiving  heart.  Why  is  it  that  a  man  is  so  affected  with 
music  that  all  his  passions  are  moved  by  it,  while  brutes  are  not  at  all  pleased? 
Because  there  is  in  man  a  principle  of  reason  concurring  with  his  sense,  which  discovers 
the  sweetness  and  harmony  of  the  sounds  that  bare  sense  is  not  able  to  discern."  And 
so  of  the  things  of  God.  Open  thou  mine  eyes  and  mine  ears;  let  my  noblest  faculties 
be  ever  in  communion  with  the  noblest,  my  spiritual  nature  be  awakened  by  the  Spirit, 
and  again  respond  to  his  influence  1 — this  should  be  our  prayer.  We  will  hearken  mito 
and  obey  him  who  hath  the  words  of  eternal  Ufe :  this  should  be  our  resolve. — J. 

Ver.  4. — 2%e  revealing  truth.  "  I  knew  that  thou  art  obstinate."  We  blame  this  in 
a  child.  We  sometimes  falsely  call  it  firmness  in  a  man.  This  is  a  mistake.  Firmness 
is  only  in  a  moral  sense  such,  when  it  is  infused  by  faith,  governed  by  reason,  approved 
by  conscience,  and  consecrated  to  some  noble  and  godlike  end. 

I.  Hebe  is  a  revelation  of  huuan  foweb.  Man  can  stand  out  against  God. 
This  is  marvellous,  but  it  is  at  the  basis  of  all  moral  freedom  and  responsibility.  The 
original  Hebrew  means  "  hard  " — so  hard  that  the  tenderest  revelations  of  Divine  love 
cannot  melt  the  heart;  so  hard  that  the  spectacle  of  the  ruin  and  misery  which 
rebellion  everywhere  brings  does  not  create  repentance  and  "returning." 

II.  Hebe  is  a  revelation  of  Divine  knowledqb.  "I  knew."  Man  cannot  see 
his  brother's  inner  countenance.  God  can.  "  Thy  neck  is  an  iron  sinew,  and  thy  brow 
brass."  Let  not  man  say  that  any  law  of  necessity  has  compelled  his  defiant  course. 
Let  him  not  say  that  it  has  been  demanded  of  him  by  the  idols  of  fashion  and  custom. 
"  Before  it  came  to  pass  I  showed  it  thee,  lest  thou  shouldest  say.  Mine  idol  hath  done 
them,  and  my  graven  image,  and  my  molten  image,  hath  commanded  them."  God  knows 
that  the  soul  has  stood  out  against  all  Divine  warnings,  invitations,  rebukes,  and  inter- 
positions.   "O  Israel,  thou  hast  destroyed  thyself!" — W.  M.  S. 

Ver.  6. — Hidden  ihingt.  "Hidden  things."  The  earth  is  full  of  latent  forces. 
These  are  concealed.  Take  beat,  for  instance :  how  it  hides  in  the  secret  places  more 
stealthily  than  the  panther !  Take  electricity :  here  it  is  quite  close  to  us — within  us ; 
and  what  a  masterful  power  it  is ! — how  it  can  rend  the  rock  and  lay  low  the  lofty 
oalaces  1  These  are  beneficent  forces,  though,  and  do  their  work  well,  for  the  security, 
,  health,  and  comfort  of  man.  There  are  hidden  forces  that  are  baneful.  The  latent  seeds 
of  disease  lie  hidden  behind  that  pearly  skin — that  pure  and  radiant  complexion.  And 
when  we  have  to  speak  of  sin,  what  a  latent  force  that  is  hidden  in  the  breast  of  a  child  1 
— concealing  itself  under  the  cloak  of  outward  respectability  in  manhood,  and  by  its 
manifestations  here  and  there  like  the  volcano,  telling  us  what  depths  of  evil  there  are 
in  the  human  heart,  which  only  Christ  and  his  cross  can  overcome.  Men  understand 
much,  but  they  do  not  understand  themselves. 

L  We  have  hidden  forces  of  jot  in  us.  In  a  human  sense  it  is  so.  Look  at 
those  childien,  all  eager  for  their  own  little  possession,  their  own  way;  they  know  not 
now  what  love  wiU  do :  how  for  that  bright  little  maiden  yonder,  presently,  in  a  few 
brief  years,  one  human  heart  will  give  up  time  and  thought,  and  all  that  earnest  love 
caifl  givel  What  a  force!  but  hidden  yet.  So  in  marriage;  that  young  wife  cannot 
be  informed,  or  instructed,  or  inspired  by  others  to  feel  what  maternal  love  is ;  but  when 
the  cry  is  heard,  and  a  child  is  born  into  the  world,  the  latent  instinct  leaps  into  life 
Id  the  heart,  and  she  knows  for  the  first  time  what  that  slumbering  force  really  is.  So 
there  are  in  our  souls  hidden  forces.    We  have  latent  faculties  of  faith  in  us  which  the 


222  THE  BOOK  OP  THE  PROPHET  ISAIAH,    [ch.  xltul  1— 22. 

Holy  Ghost  can  call  forth,  whereby  we  walk  in  a  new  world  of  wonder  and  hope  and 
joy  in  God,  We  have  latent  faculties  of  energy  in  us  which,  once  awakened,  will  make 
us  emulate  the  earnest  of  every  age ;  and  when  religion  sets  a  man  to  work,  he  finds 
that  there  is  a  joy  in  service  which  he  was  unconscious  of  before;  he  discerns  that, 
whilst  by  love  he  serves  others,  he  is  also  with  each  service  opening  up  new  joy- 
fountains  in  his  owu  heart. 

II.  We  have  hidden  roKCBS  op  pain  ik  us.  We  know  not  what  they  are,  it  may 
be,  at  present ;  but  we  are  fearfully  and  wonderfully  made,  and  we  shall  be  a  surprise 
unto  ourselves  in  this  I'espect  also.  1.  There  is  the  sorrow  that  hides  in  love.  We 
know  not  the  measure  of  love  save  by  loss  I  Then  we  know.  We  are  tempted  to  think 
in  our  youth  that  our  older  friends  are  too  pensive  sometimes,  too  little  open  to  the 
all-gladdening  influences  ai'ound  them.  Alasl  we  know  not  the  bread  they  eat.  There 
are  forces  of  memory  in  their  hearts  that  we  cannot  see.  2.  There  is  the  sorrow  that 
/tides  in  sin.  It  is  so  bright-presenced  at  first,  so  fascinating,  so  attractive ;  speaks  in 
such  dulcet  tones;  no  memory  at  work  yet;  no  consciousuess  of  shame  yet;  no  sense 
yet  of  the  disturbance  that  sin  works  in  God's  beautifully  ordered  universe.  To-morrow 
the  serpent  that  hides  at  tlie  bottom  of  the  cup  will  have  stung  I  3.  The  sorrow  that 
hides  in  wrong  or  neglect  in  relation  to  others.  While  they  were  with  us  here  we  did 
not  feel  it  so  much ;  but  now  I  Oh,  the  curtain  that  hides !  the  silence  in  which  there 
ia  no  voice  I  the  quivering  heart  that  puts  out  the  untouched  hand  I  Eternal  Father, 
we  were  not  what  we  wished,  or  all  we  wished,  to  them.  But  they  are  gone,  and  the 
place  which  knew  them  once  shall  know  them  no  more.  Death  ia  not  a  tidal  river ; 
its  waters  never  return. 

III.  We  have  hidden  foboes  of  evil  in  ub.  Fowertoainl  Forces  which  temp- 
tation may  set  fire  to,  as  a  spark  to  the  tow  I  We  see  this  illustrated  in  nature.  The 
o£Scer  who  played  with  his  beautiful  glossy  pair  of  cub-tigers  did  not  understand  his 
danger  till  they  tasted  blood  as  tliey  licked  a  little  cut  in  his  hand;  and  then  came  the 
■tirly  growl,  and  with  the  officer  a  sword  for  them  or  death  for  himself.  We  see  this 
in  the  history  of  the  disciples.  How  ignorant  they  were  of  their  own  hearts  1  What 
latent  scepticism  in  Thomas!  what  cowaidice  beneath  Peter's  enthusiasm!  what  pri^e 
in  those  who  wanted  chief  places  in  Christ's  kingdom !  Ah  I  yes  ;  but  they  recovered 
from  their  folly.  But  think  of  Judas;  think  of  Demas;  think  of  HymeuEBUs  and 
Philetus.  We  see  this  in  the  warnings  of  our  Saviour.  "  Watch  and  pray."  Yes ;  Mark 
you,  Christ  does  not  say,  "  Watch  and  pray  in  youth,"  or  "  in  manhood."  He  says  it  to 
U8  all.  He  knows  the  potency  of  evil,  and  that  there  are  temptable  places  in  our 
nature  even  unto  the  end.  For  instance,  "  When  every  other  passion  is  old,  covetouB- 
ness  is  young,"  says  the  proverb.  We  must  be  on  our  guard  till  the  last  hour.  Then 
will  come  release  and  victory. 

rv.  We  have  hidden  forces  of  immobtautt  within  vb.  Christ  revealed 
these.  He  "  brought  life  and  immortality  to  light  by  the  gospel."  All  men  do  not 
equally  feel  these ;  but  there  is  a  "  power  of  the  world  to  come,"  which  more  or  less 
affects  everybody.  When  outward  life  pleases,  and  we  have  vivacities  of  fiiendship, 
extensive  and  elaborate  functions  of  duty  to  fulfil ;  when  we  are  absorbed  in  the  out- 
ward life ;— we  do  not  al  ivays  feel  the  great  beatings  of  the  pulses  of  immortality  within 
us.  _  But  in  silent  meditative  hours  there  comes  over  us  all  the  consciousness  sdike 
of  sin  and  immortality.  "  How  abject,  how  august,  is  man  1 "  The  great  conservative 
power  of  religion  is  the  doctrine  of  the  immortality  of  the  soul.  Let  that  be  ignored  or 
denied,  and  materialism  will  make  very  rapid  strides,  1.  The  sense  of  immortality 
alters  our  estimate  of  tlm  world.  Makes  us  feel  the  "  tent-like  "  character  of  our  homes. 
"  We  have  here  no  continuing  city,  but  we  seek  one  to  come."  We  know  that  there 
temaineth  a  rest,  and  that  affliction  is  but  for  a  moment.  2.  The  sense  of  immortality 
alters  our  estimate  of  friendship.  We  long,  even  in  tliat,  to  lay  hold  of  the  everlasting, 
to  link  our  love  with  the  immortal  years—  to  feel  that  it  is  of  such  a  character  as  to 
•urrive  in  glory.  Hidden  the  force  may  be,  but  it  is  real,  and  the  strongest  of  all  the 
bulwarks  against  atheism  and  materialism.  When  Christ  speaks  we  feel  that  he  spake 
with  autliority.  Men  trembled  before  a  vision  of  themselves  so  searching  and  severe. 
Not  only  the  "  hidden  things  "  of  darkness,  however,  did  he  reveal ;  the  bright  diamond 
of  the  mind  flashed  forth  its  beauty  in  the  light  of  his  all-revealing  words,  "  Honour 
iill  men,"  says  St.  Peter.     A  beauiiftil  commandment,  for  the  gospel  hu  shown  the 


SH.  XLVui.  1—22.]    THE  BOOK  OF  THE  PROPHET  ISAIAH.  223 

hidden  glory  behind  the  veil  of  the  meanest  life.  "  For  I  have  shown  theo  hidden 
things"  may  therefore  suggest  to  us  the  reverence  which  we  ought  to  entertain  for  the 
soul.  Sin  is  not  a  subject  for  mere  scorn  ;  it  is  a  subject  for  deepest  sorrow.  "  When 
Jesus  came  near  the  city,  he  beheld  it,  and  wept  over  it."  Something  more  magnificent 
than  the  marble  temple  filled  his  vision  ;  he  wept  over  souls  where  the  altar  was  over- 
thrown and  the  love  of  God  cast  out.  Let  preachers,  teachers,  authors,  workers  in  the 
field  of  the  Lord,  realize  once  more  the  Divine  grandeur  of  their  work.  The  sublimest 
creation  of  this  universe  is  hidden  in  the  heart  of  man :  "  God  made  man  in  his  own 
image."— W.  M.  S. 

Vers.  1 — 9. — Things  worth  heeding  concerning  God  and  man,  "  Hear  ye  this : "  this 
is  something  well  worth  the  earnest  attention  of  men ;  their  truest  worth  and  their 
lasting  interests  are  bound  up  in  the  knowledge  and  regard  of  it. 

I.  Man's  oeiminal  inconsistenct  with  himself.  (Vers.  1,  2.)  Men  may.go  very 
far  in  conduct  which  is  quite  at  variance  with  "  the  spirit  which  is  in  them : "  they  may 
say  or  do  one  thing, and  be  the  very  opposite.  One  might  think  that  though  this  were 
so  in  their  dealings  with  one  another,  it  would  never  be  true  in  their  attitude  toward 
the  heart-searching  God.  Tet  in  nothing  is  there  more  insincerity,  more  hypocrisy, 
than  in  religion.  Men  "  swear  by  the  Name  of  the  Lord  .  .  .  but  not  in  truth."  To 
pretend  before  God,  to  affect  a  piety  which  is  not  felt,  is  not  Only  useless  and  worthless; 
it  is  in  the  last  degree  offensive  and  perilous  (see  Matt,  zxiii.). 

IL  Man's  habdeninq  of  himself.  (Ver.  i.)  Men  are  obstinate,  or  hard  (marginal 
reading) :  they  harden  their  heart  before  God  and  against  him,  so  that  their  neck  is 
" an  iron  sinew,  their  brow  brass."  1.  They  will  not  be  what  God  requiies  that  they 
should  become — his  children,  his  servants,  his  friends,  his  followers.  2.  They  will  not 
do  what  he  charges  them  to  do — will  not  work  righteousness,  justice,  equity ;  will  not 
refrain  from  impurity,  from  intemperance,  from  dishonesty,  etc.  3.  They  will  not  hear 
what  he  summons  them  to  heed ;  they  turn  a  deaf  ear  to  his  entreaties  and  his  warn- 
ings (Prov.  i.).  'i'hey  go  so  far  in  obduracy,  in  hardness,  that,  though  they  know  that 
their  Divine  Father,  their  gracious  Saviour,  is  speaking  to  them',  they  close  their  souls 
to  his  message  of  truth  and  love. 

III.  God's  evidence  ooNOEBNma  himself.  (Vers.  3, 5 — 8.)  God  adduces  proof  from 
his  foreknowledge  and  revelation  that  be  is  unquestionably  the  true  and  living  OroA — 
that  One  in  whom  and  in  whom  alone  they  should  put  their  trust.  It  is  not  only  by 
such  proof  as  this,  but  by  many  evidences,  that  God  establishes  his  claims  upon  us. 
He  "  leaves  not  himself  without  witness ; "  he  abundantly  confirms  his  truth :  the 
material  universe,  with  its  beauty,  its  bounty,  its  order,  its  magnificence ;  the  spiritual 
nature  of  man,  including  his  conscience ;  the  life,  the  works,  the  truth  of  Jesus  Christ ; 
the  character  and  design  of  the  gospel  of  peace  and  righteousness ;  its  glorious  achieve- 
ments, etc. 

IV.  God's  beasons  dt  himself.  (Ver.  9.)  1.  Ample  reasons  for  Divine  beneficence 
are  to  be  found  in  the  Divine  nature — that  God  is  what  he  is  accounts  for  all  the  grace 
and  mercy  which  abound  in  the  earth.  2.  In  the  interests  of  the  universe  God  must 
act  so  that  lus  children  shall  revere  and  praise  him.  Otherwise  the  most  disastrous 
disbelief  would  prevail. — 0. 

Vers.  10, 11. — 2^  Divine  aim  in  human  affliction.    We  infer— 

I.  That  the  afflictions  of  the  eiohteous  abe  of  God's  sensino.  To  the 
unrighteous  they  wear  the  aspect  of  inflictions,  but  to  the  servants  of  God  they  are 
chastisements  or  refining  processes ;  either  way,  they  are  regarded  as  events  which 
come  in  consequence  of,  or  (at  the  least)  in  accordance  with,  the  ordination  of  God 
(see  ch.  xlv.  7 ;  Amos  iii.  6).  Jesus  Christ  has  taught  us  that  the  smallest  incident 
cannot  happen  without  Divine  permission ;  much  less  (as  he  wishes  u8  to  infer)  any 
serious  trial  to  the  people  of  God  (Luke  xii.  6). 

II.  That  the  Divine  aim  is  doubly  beneficent.  1.  Our  refinement.  "I  have 
refined  thee."  God  refines  us  by  passing  us  through  the  furnace  of  aflBiction,  and  he 
does  this  not  for  his  advantage — "not  for  silver" — but  for  our  profit,  that  we  may  be 
partakers  of  his  holiness  (see  Heb.  xii.  10).  By  the  distresses  of  the  soul  the  dross  of 
worldlioess,  of  selfishness,  of  trust  in  temporal  securities  or  in  human  alliances,  of 


224  THE  BOOK  OP  THE  PEOPHBT  ISAIAH,    [oh.  xlvih.  1—22. 

lenauoiu  indulgence,  is  purged  away,  and  the  pure  gold  of  piety  and  purity  is  left.  Our 
heavenly  Father  resorts  to  this  refining  process  in  one  of  two  cases.  (1)  When  he  sees 
us  falling  under  the  power  of  temptation,  and  finds  our  ChrisLian  character  hecoming 
alloyed  with  error  and  evil.  (2)  When  he  wants  agents  of  tfie  highest  kind  for  the 
noblest  work  on  earth  or  in  heaven,  and  knows  that  no  abundance  of  privilege  vrill 
purify  and  perfect  as  will  the  refining  discipline  of  his  own  hand.  It  is  a  real  and 
important  feature  of  the  Divine  beneficence  that  in  parental  chastisement  God  is  seek- 
ing: 2.  His  exaltation  in  the  minds  of  men.  "For  mine  own  sake  will  1  do  it:  for 
how  should  my  Name  be  polluted,"  etc.  ?  It  is  to  the  interest  of  hia  creation,  in  the  very 
highest  degree,  that  God's  Name  should  be  exalted,  that  the  glory  which  is  his  due 
should  not  be  paid  to  another.  For :  (1)  False  worship  shows  a  constant  tendency  to 
decline  in  the  worthiness  of  its  objects.  When  men  abandon  the  service  of  the  living 
God,  and  "  go  after  Baal,"  they  pursue  a  downward  course ;  they  go  from  the  high  to 
the  less  high,  from  the  low  to  thrs  lower,,  from  the  lower  to  the  lowest;  until  they 
worship  devils.  (2)  The  character  of  the  Deity  men  adore  is  always  reflected  in  that  of 
its  devotees :  as  is  the  god  so  is  the  idolater.  We  have  the  highest  interest  in  rendering 
our  homage  to  the  righteous  Father  of  all,  and  any  discipline  that  weans  us  from  any 
kind  of  idolatry  renders  us  priceless  service.  If  God  regards  the  well-being  of  his 
creation,  he  cannot  give  his  glory  to  another. 

III.  That  wb  must  actively  oo-opebate  with  him,  ob  hib  pnBFOSE  wili.  bs 
DEFEATED.     (See  2  Cor.  vii.  10.) — 0. 

Vers.  17 — 19. — Buman  freedom  and  Divine  regret.  In  these  fervent  and  eloquent 
words  of  the  prophet  we  learn — 

L  That  God  designs  good  and  even  obeat  things  fob  the  obedient.  If  Israel 
had  only  been  obedient  to  the  Divine  commandment,  it  would  have  rejoiced  in :  1. 
Abounding  prosperity.  Its  peace  (prosperity)  would  have  been  "  as  a  river,"  flowing 
on  continuously,  without  break,  night  and  day,  generation  after  generation.  Victory  in 
war  and  fruitfulness  in  the  field  would  have  been  their  happy  heritage  (see  Ps.  Ixxxi. 
13 — 16).  This  is  the  oflfer  which  Christ  makes  to  his  obedient  disciples  (Marlt  x.  29, 30). 
Not  that  prosperity  always  comes  to  the  Christian  disciple  in  the  shape  of  "  incn  ase  of 
com  and  wine ; "  but  it  does  come  in  one  form  if  not  in  another — often  in  the  shape  of 
indwelling  peace  and  overflowing  joy  when  the  home  is  of  the  humblest  and  the  lot  of 
the  hardest  kind.  2.  Advancing  rectitude.  Its  righteousness  would  have  been  "  as  the 
waves  of  the  sea,''  coming  on  and  coming  in  with  steady,  irresistible  flow.  Bighteous- 
ness  is  an  incomparably  greater  blessing  than  prosperity.  To  be  a  "  righteous  nation  " 
is  to  be  vastly  more  than  a  triumphant  or  wealthy  nation.  Christ  promises  to  those 
who  are  the  true  .subjects  of  his  kingdom  that  their  blest  heritage  shall  be  "righteous- 
ness as  well  as  peace  and  joy  in  the  Holy  Ghost ; "  spiritual  rectitude ;  the  heart  in  its 
true  and  loyal  attitude  towards  God,  towards  man,  towards  truth  and  life.  3.  Abiding 
it^Awnce.    (Ver.  19,) 

IL  That  wb  ase  left  FEAsytrLLT  Tsaa  ro  iewabt  hib  gbaoiods  purpose. 
Jehovah  laments  that  Israel  had  forfeited  its  heritage,  had  used  its  freedom  to  disobey 
had  cut  itself  off  from  his  generous  design  (ver.  18).  What  God  would  gladly  have 
bestowed,  the  foolish  nation  had  resolved  to  refuse.  Such  power  of  choice  has  the  Creator 
given  to  his  creature,  man.  And  what  fearful  use  has  man  made  of  this  his  £rec»dom ! 
It  is  not  Israel  alone  that  has  elected  to  forego  splendid  opportunities.  What  might 
not  Borne  have  been,  and  Egypt,  and  those  European  lands  to  which  the  knowledge  o' 
the  gospel  has  been  carried !  It  is  not  too  late  to  ask —  WTiat  may  not  England  bf  f 
The  record  of  her  history  is  not  yet  complete ;  her  sands  are  not  yet  run ;  her  gate  of 
opportunity  is  not  \et  closed.  She  may  yet  rise  to  the  height  of  her  privilege,  as  she 
may  yet  sink  grievously  and  fatally  beneath  it.  With  the  same  solemn  and  awful 
freedom  every  individual  soul  is  invested  by  its  Creator.  Every  one  of  us  is  at  liberty 
to  thwart  his  gracious  purpose  if  we  choose ;  at  liberty  also  to  realize  it,  in  all  its  glorious 
fulness,  if  we  will. 

III.  That  oub  disobedience  and  disinheeitancb  aee  a  source  of  Divine  beobet. 
Do  we  not  hear  an  undertone  of  deep  sorrow  in  this  lament?  Our  heavenly  Father, 
our  Divine  Friend,  regards  the  sad  abuse  of  our  freedom  with  a  sorrow  which  is  all  his 
own.    The  human  parent  who  has  been  deeply  disappointed  in  the  character  and  career 


OH.  xLvm.  1— 22.]    THE  BOOK  OP  THE  PROPHET  ISAIAH.  825 

of  his  beloved  child  is  likely  to  have  the  truest  insight  into  the  grief  of  God  when  he 
witnesses  cur  rejection  of  his  truth  and  grace.  But  as  "  God  only  knows  the  love  of 
God,"  so  he  only  knows  the  depth  and  fulness  of  his  grief. 

IV.  That  we  may  recover  all  if  we  usten  when  God  speaks  aoain.  The 
Holy  One  is  our  Redeemer :  he  "  teaches  us  to  profit ; "  he  "  leads  ua  in  the  way,"  etc. 
(ver.  17).  He  comes  in  holy  discipline,  in  fatherly  correction,  to  call  us  from  our  folly, 
to  save  us  from  our  sin.  If  we  will  pnly  know  the  profitableness  of  his  redeeming  truth, 
we  may  be  restored  and  reinstated ;  we  may  yet  wear  the  robe  and  the  ring  of  sonship, 
and  sit  down  at  the  Father's  board. — 0. 

Ver.  22. — Peace :  appearance  and  reality.    "  There  is  no  peace,  saith  the  Lord,  onto 

the  wicked."     We  may  look  at— 

L  The  antecedent  likelihood  that  there  would  be  none.  For  the  wicked  are : 
1.  In  rebellion  against  the  Lord  of  all  righteousness  and  power;  t.e.  against  one  who 
is  hound  to  visit  sin  with  penalty  and  who  is  able  to  do  so.  2.  In  an  element  of  dis- 
turbance and  disorder.  They  are  in  a  wrong  and  false  position ;  they  are  in  a  sphere  which 
is  unnatural  and  unlawful ;  they  stand  where  storms  may  be  aaticipated,  where  calms 
are  things  to  be  surprised  at  and  suspected. 

II.  The  delusive  appearance  of  peace  in  the  case  of  the  unrighteous.  It  is  con- 
tinually happeniug  that  ungodly  men,  that  unbelieving  men,  that  even  vicious  men, 
spend  lives  of  domestic  comfjrt,  prosper  in  the  calling  in  which  they  are  engaged,  are 
untroubled  in  their  conscience  for  considerable  periods  of  time,  die  without  great  alarm 
or  even  serious  apprehension.  It  often  appears  as  if  there  were  peace  to  the  wicked. 
These  facts,  however,  are  consistent  with — 

III.  The  absolute  certainty  that  guilt  and  peace  are  never  found  together.  It  is 
not  only  true:  1.  That  crime  is  almost  always  attended  with  a  haunting  dread  of 
exposure  and  penalty.  2.  That  vice  and  irreligion  are  commonly  associated  with  a 
sense  of  guilt  and  with  the  rebukings  of  conscience.  But  it  is  also  true :  3.  That  no 
guilty  soul  can  possibly  have  that  in  his  heart  which  deserves"  the  name  of  peace.  He 
may  have  insensibility  or  false  security  ;  but  these  are  not  peace.  Feaca  is  the  blessed 
calm  which  belongs  to  a  consciousness  of  rectitude  before  God ;  it  is  the  possession  of 
those  alone  who  are  right  with  God,  and  who  believe  that  they  are  so.  No  hardihood,  no 
delusion,  can  confer  this.  A  man  who  is  living  apart  from  God,  unreconciled  to  him, 
unaccepted  by  him,  must  be  destitute  of  the  peace  of  God— of  the  peace  which  Christ 
gives  to  his  own. — 0. 

Vera.  1,  2. — The  offence  of  insincerity.  "Not  in  truth,  nor  in  righteousness.'' 
The  prophet  mentions  the  usual  outward  marks  of  the  true  Israelite ;  but,  in  the  case 
of  those  whom  he  addressed,  these  were  mere  formalities,  they  were  disconnected  from 
a  personal  and  living  faith  in  God.  These  people  said  they  were  Jews,  but  they  were 
not.  Their  professions  could  not  stand  the  examinations  of  the  Heart-searcher.  To 
the  good  man — and  how'much  more  to  the  great  and  holy  God  I — insincerity  is  absolutely 
offensive ;  we  have  scarcely  even  pity  for  the  man  who  has  no  reality  of  life  and  feeling 
to  match  his  professions,  whose  words  do  not  represent  his  heart.  Unspeakably  painful 
to  the  prophet  must  have  been  the  condition  of  the  many  Jews  in  his  day,  and  in  his 
pleading  the  ideal  attributes  of  Israel  are  pressed  in  contrast  with  their  actual  state  of 
hypocrisy  and  unrighteousness.  "  How  high  their  profession  soared  1  what  a  fair  show 
they  made  in  the  flesh !  and  how  far  they  went  towards  heaven  I  what  a  good  livery 
they  wore !  and  what  a  good  face  they  put  upon  a  very  bad  heart ! "  (Matthew  Henry).  On 
the  subjects  of  insincerity  and  hypocrisy  there  is  much  familiar  teaching,  which  needs 
constant  repetition.     We  only  suggest  two  points. 

I.  Insincerity  is  sometimes  a  drift.  We  get  into  it,  and  it  becomes  a  confirmed 
condition  we  scarcely  know  how ;  we  are  not  conscious  of  having  exercised  any  will 
in  the  matter.  With  some  there  is  a  great  idea  of  "  keeping  up  appearances,"  and  the 
eflEort  to  do  this  tends  to  nourish  insincere  habits  and  ways.  And  sometimes  we  are 
carried  into  expressions  of  religious  feeling  and  experience  that  are  quite  beyond  us,  in 
surroundings  of  religious  excitement;  and  the  pleasure  of  the  insincere  fascinates  us. 
We  drift  into  this  evil  by  the  use  of  sensational  hymns,  and  by  listening  to  ecstatic 
religious  experiences ;  and  there  is  no  graver  danger  besetting  the  Church  of  our  day 

ISAIAH — n.  Q 


2-^«  THE  BOOK  OP  TflE   PROPHET  18AIAH.    [oh.  XLVm.  1— 22. 

than  this  tendency  to  nourish  the  insincere  in  the  expressions  of  religious  life.  Qod'a 
reproaches  fall  on  many  who  think  themselves  very  holy,  but  whose  professions  Me 
not  rially  matched  by  heart  and  life. 

II.  Iksinoebitt  IB  SOMETIMES  A  SCHEME.  Then  it  ig  a  shame  and  disgrace,  and 
brings  us  under  the  overwhelming  judgments  of  God.  Illustrate  by  Judas  Iscariot.  For 
selfish  ends  men  determine  to  keep  up  before  the  world  all  the  appearances  of  piety, 
when  they  know  that  the  life  of  piety  has  died  out  of  their  souls.  Christ's  sternest 
words  were  spoken  to  conscious  and  purposed  hypocrites,  those  "whited  sepulchres, 
full  of  dead  men's  bones."  In  view,  then,  of  the  danger  of  drifting  into  insincerity, 
and  of  the  sin  of  scheming  to  be  insincere,  every  good  man  will  watch  and  strive  and 
pray  against  the  evil,  lest,  in  some  subtle  form,  it  should  assail  and  overcome  him. 
— R.  T. 

Yer.  4. — OhstintKg,  The  figures  used  are  the  stifT,  unbending  neck,  that  will  yield 
to  no  persuasions ;  and  the  bard  brow  that  can  resist,  as  does  the  brow  of  the  butting 
animal.  The  point  which  may  be  variously  illustrated  and  enforced  is  that  such 
obstinacy  is  a  result  of  previous  conduct.  The  obstinacy  that  is  only  a  stubbornness 
of  natural  disposition  can  be  dealt  with  efiBciently  by  educational  methods.  The 
obstinacy  which  results  from  prolonged  moral  conditions  is  well-nigh  irremediaUe,  and 
brings  a  man  under  crushing  Divine  judgments. 

I.  The  bemnning  of  moeal  obstinacy  is  a  lobs  op  spiKirnAL  behsibilitt.  The 
proper  attitude  before  God  is  one  of  openness,  humility,  and  self-distrust.  The  renewed 
soul  is  delicately  sensitive  to  every  expression  of  the  Divine  will,  and  to  everything 
that  is  in  harmony  with  the  Divine  mind.  And  the  maintaining  of  that  sensitiveness 
is  absolutely  essential  to  the  keeping  of  right  relations  with  God.  Piety  is  closely 
akin  to  meekness  and  gentleness,  it  loves  to  obey,  to  follow,  to  be  led.  We  have 
no  will  but  God's  will  for  us.  To  lose  this  "sensibility"  is  grave  danger.  It  is  to 
step  on  a  slippery  slide.  Therefore  should  we  "  keep  our  heart  with  all  diligence," 
and  be  most  jealous  cpver  those  various  spiritual  influences  that  help  to  m^e  our 
hearts  more  tender. 

IL  Such  lost  behsibilitt  mat  be  becovebed.  At  least  in  the  earlier  stages  of  it. 
But  our  peril  lies  precisely  in  this,  that  it  is  a  very  subtle  form  of  spiritual  disease,  and, 
like  some  forms  of  bodily  disease,  it  does  not  plainly  show  itself  until  it  has  gained 
strength,  and  gripped  us  with  a  firm  hold.  Our  best  sign  of  the  presence  of  the  evil  is 
fading  pleasure  in  Christian  worship  and  devotion.  We  are  in  danger  if  we  have  lost 
the  Joy  out  of  our  religious  duties  and  associations;  and  we  should  seek  at  once  for  the 
recovery  of  tone  and  fervour. 

III.  SuoH  LOST  sknbibilitt  MAT  PASS  INTO  8ELF-BELIAN0E.  It  certainly  will  if 
earnest  eflbrts  toward  recovery  are  not  made.  The  man  who  feels  he  is  getting  to  be 
alone  will  try  to  stand  alone.  He  who  looses  the  liand  that  steadied  him  will  try 
to  walk  steadily  by  himself.  He  who  refuses  to  humble  himseir  and  recover  his  lost 
place  will  puff  himself  up  with  pride  and  vain  confidences. 

IV.  Such  belf-beliance  is  in  dakoeb  of  becomino  hopeless  obstinaot.  The 
man  who  persists  in  forcing  his  own  way  finds  that  ever  fresh  strength  must  be  put 
into  the  forcing,  until,  hke  Pharaoh  of  old,  he  becomes  hardened  to  resist  even  God's 
judgments. — ^R.  T. 

Ver.  9. — Qod's  supreme  motive,  "  For  my  Name's  sake  I  defer  mine  anger,  and  fot 
my  praise  I  am  temperate  towards  thee,  not  to  cut  thee  off"  (Cheyne's  translation). 
It  may  seem  strange  that  God  did  not  utterly  destroy  the  Jews  as  a  nation,  in  his 
just  indignation  at  their  unfaithfulness,  hypocrisy,  and  rebellion.  God  here  explains 
the  supreme  reason  which  led  him  to  deal  so  considerately  with  them.  He  was  under 
covenant  engagements  with  them.  His  Name  and  honour  were  pledged  to  the  main- 
tenance of  the  covenant.  Overwhelming  severities  would  have  produced  wrong 
impressions  concerning  God  among  the  nations  around.  His  Name  would  be  dis- 
honoured in  their  view.  And  it  was  of  the  utmost  importance  that  this  should  not  be, 
because,  in  good  time,  these  heathen  were  to  become  subjects  of  the  one  Divine  King. 
Junius  very  truly  says,  "Even  legal  punishments  lose  all  appearance  of  justice  when 
too  strictly  inflicted  on  men  compelled  by  the  last  extremity  of  distress  to  incur  them." 


cH.  XLvin.  1—22.]    THE  BOOK  OP  THE  PROPHET  ISAIAH.  227 

(For  God's  Name,  see  Exod.  xxxiv.  6,  7.)  For  a  New  Testament  plea,  drawn  from  the 
jealousy  for  the  honour  of  the  Divine  Name,  recall  the  sentence,  "Though  we  believe 
not,  yet  he  abideth  faithful :  he  cannut  deny  himself."    It  may  be  shown  that^ 

I.  God  is  severk,  tor  the  sake  op  his  honodb.  That  he  may  not  be  blasphemed, 
and  represented  as  indifferent  to  the  obedience  offered  to  his  commandments.  "  Behold 
the  severity  of  God,"  which  should  be  a  theme  of  admiration,  and  a  bulwark  of  con- 
fidence to  us. 

II.  God  is  patient,  fob  the  sake  of  his  honoub.  In  order  that  he  might  reveal 
himself  as  the  Good,  and  win  confidence.  "  Behold  the  goodness  of  God,"  into  which 
we  may  run  and  find  shelter.  See  the  Name  of  God  as  revealed  to  Moses.  The  most 
marvellous  triumphs  over  human  self-wUledness  are  won  by  patient  mercy.  Divine 
long-suffering.  Forbearance  and  enduring  love  are  some  of  the  sweetest  things  in  the 
Divine  Name. 

A  more  subtle  course  of  thought  is  indicated  by  the  following  two  divisions. 

I.  God  is  anxious  that  men  should  honoub  his  Name.  And  this  anxiety  he 
cherishes  for  their  sakes.  It  is  supremely  important  that  men  should  have  high 
tlioughts  of  God. 

II.  God  is  anxious  to  be  found  tbue  to  his  own  Name.  And  this  anxiety  he 
cherishes  for  hit  own  sake ;  for  his  rest  involves  the  sense  of  being  true  to  himself. 
— R.T. 

Ver.  10. — The  refining  power  of  affliction.  The  likeness  of  Divine  dealings  to  the 
refining  of  metals  by  fire  is  somewhat  frequent  in  Scripture.  In  this  passage  there 
is  a  qualification  which  is  peculiar.  God's  message,  through  his  prophet,  is,  "  Behold, 
I  have  refined  thee,  but  not  os  silver."  There  was  evidently  something  unusual  about 
the  treatment  of  silver,  and  we  get  some  idea  as  to  what  it  was  from  an  expression  of 
the  psalmist  (xii.  6),  "  The  words  of  the  Lord  are  pure  words :  as  silver  tried  in  a 
furnace  of  earth,  purified  seven  times."  In  the  case  of  silver  great  severity  and  many 
repetitions  were  necessary.  Had  God  treated  Israel  with  the  severity  due  to  its 
iniquity,  it  must  have  been  cut  off.  He  therefore  reined  in,  restrained,  qualified  his 
anger,  and  corrected  them  only  "  in  measure."  "  God  would  refine  them,  but  not  so 
thoroughly  as  men  refine  tlieir  silver,  which  they  continue  in  the  furnace  till  all  the 
dross  is  separated  from  it ;  if  God  should  take  that  course  with  them,  they  would  be 
always  in  the  furnace,  for  they  are  all  dross,  and,  as  such,  might  justly  be  put  away, 
as  reprobate  silver.  He  therefore  takes  them  as  they  are,  refined  in  part  only,  and  not 
thoroughly."  "The  art  of  smelting  ore,  which  must  have  been  known  to  the  Israelites 
from  the  time  of  their  sojourning  in  Egypt,  but  had,  probably,  been  brought  into 
fresh  prominence  through  intercourse  with  the  Phcenicians  and  with  Sheba,  is  here 
used  as  an  illustration.  Wonderful  as  is  the  separation  of  the  pure  metal  from  the 
dross  with  which  it  has  mingled,  there  is  something  yet  more  wonderful  in  the  Divine 
discipline  which  purifies  the  good  that  lies  hid,  like  a  grain  of  gold,  even  in  rough  and 
common  natures,  and  frees  it  from  all  admixture  of  evil "(' Speaker's  Commentary '). 
Dr.  Guthrie  says,  "It  is  rough  work  that  polishes.  Look  at  the  pebbles  on  the 
shore  I  Far  inland,  where  some  arm  of  the  sea  thrusts  itself  deep  into  the  bosom  of 
the  land,  and,  expanding  into  a  salt  loch,  lies  girdled  by  the  mountains,  sheltered  from 
the  storms  that  agitate  the  deep,  the  pebbles  on  the  beach  are  rough,  not  beautiful, 
angular,  not  rounded.  It  is  where  long  white  lines  of  breakers  roar,  and  the  rattling 
shingle  is  rolled  about  the  strand,  that  its  pebbles  are  rounrled  and  polished.  As  in 
nature,  as  in  the  arts,  so  in  grace ;  it  is  rough  treatment  that  gives  souls  as  well  as 
stones  their  lustre;  the  more  the  diamond  is  cut,  the  brighter  it  sparkles;  and  in 
what  seems  hard  dealing  their  God  has  no  end  in  view  but  to  perfect  his  people's 
graces.  Our  Father,  and  the  kindest  of  fathers,  he  afBioita  not  willingly;  he  sends 
tribulations,  but  hear  St.  Paul  tell  their  purpose :  '  Tribulatiou  worketh  patience,  patience 
experience,  experience  hope.*" 

L  God's  purpose  concernino  his  people.  This  may  be  expressed  in  the  word 
"  redemption,"  which  means  much  more  than  rescue  from  peril.  It  means  deliverance 
from  all  evil,  and  more  especially  from  the  evil  within.  The  full  idea  of  QoA'b 
purpose  is  best  realized  through  the  purpose  concerning  her  child  of  a  saintly  mother. 
She  seeks  her  child's  redemption.     She  would  have  him  delivered  from  his  various 


228  THE  BOOK  OP  THE  PBOPHET  ISAIAH,    [oh.  XLvni.  1— 22 

evils,  and  established  in  goodness.  That  supreme  purpose  gives  point  and  tone  to  all 
her  dealings  with  him,  and  relations  to  him.  As  high  as  God  is  above  the  best  of 
mothers,  so  much  higher  is  God's  purpose  concerning  us  than  hers  concerning  her 
child.     He  would  have  us  whiter  than  snow,  whitened  so  as  no  earth-fiiller  can  whiten. 

II.  Gob's  dealings  in  wobkino  out  his  pubfose.  1.  His  supreme  aim  is  kept  in 
view  in  his  ordinary  everyday  dealings.  This  we  do  not  adequately  keep  in  mind. 
We  see  Gkjd  in  the  few  great  things,  but  not  in  the  thousandfold  little  things.  And 
yet  the  preciousness  of  life  in  God's  lead  lies  in  our  confidence  that  he  is  working  by 
small  and  continuing  influences,  making  all  work  for  good.  2.  His  purpose  is  wrought 
through  all  dealings  that  are  of  a  satisfactory  character.  We  easily  miss  observing 
this.  God  is  in  all  the  good  things  that  please  us.  He  works  in  and  through  our 
joys — ^through  human  love,  through  beauty,  grace,  wisdom;  society,  friendship,  success ; 
and  makes  the  pleasant  things  of  life  become  man's  severest  testing.  3.  His  purpose 
is  further  accomplished  through  disciplinary  dealings.  This  is  so  familiar  a  tofdc  that 
its  illustration  may  be  left  to  the  preacher. 

III.  God's  agents  thkough  whom  he  wobks  his  holt  will.  They  may  be  things 
or  they  may  be  persons.  The  point  is  that  they  can  be  presented  under  the  figure  of 
fire,  and  their  influence  can  be  indicated  by  the  action  of  fire.  This  may  be  opened 
out  by  showing  (1)  that  fire  causes  sufiering ;  (2)  fire  separates ;  (3)  fire  finds  out  what 
is  worthless;  (4)  fire  cleanses;  (5)  fire  is  a  continuing  force;  (6)  fire  can  tal?e  different 
degrees  of  force.  God's  agents  may  be  (1)  men ;  (2)  things ;  (3)  circumstances.  Any 
one,  anything,  into  which  God  can  put  a  refining  force.  Bach  one  of  us  may  be  one 
of  God's  refining  forces,  for  those  *ith  whom  we  have  to  do;  a-^d  at  the  same  time, 
each  one  of  us  is  under  the  refining  influence  of  others  for  our  own  purifying. 

IV.  God's  qualifications  in  the  pbocess  of  his  work.  This  is  the  point  more 
especially  presented  in  the  text.  God  does  not  treat  Israel  in  the  severe  way  in  which 
silver  is  treated  by  the  refiner.  He  knows  his  metal ;  he  knows  what  each  can  bear. 
He  never  suffers  us  to  be  tested  above  that  we  are  able  to  bear.  He  damps  down  the 
flres  when  they  blaze  too  high.  He  never  goes  beyond  our  strength.  Because  we 
have  this  conviction  so  settled  into  our  souls,  therefore  we  can  let  God  undertake  for 
us ;  refining  in  his  own  ways,  and  securing  at  last  his  own  pure  image  in  the  cleared 
metal— R.  T. 

Ver.  18. — The  blessings  of  dbedienee.  "0  that  thou  hadst  hearkened  to  my 
commandments!  then  had  thy  peace  been  as  a  river,  and  thy  righteousness  as 
the  waves  of  the  sea."  What  might  have  been!  How  often  we  rejiroach  ourselves 
with  thinking  over  the  "  might  have  beens"  I  How  searching  it  is  to  find  God  helping 
us  regretfully  to  realize  what  might  have  been  (comp.  Pa.  Ixxxi.  13 — 16)1  "Peace" 
and  "righteousness"  here  both  stand  as  terms  to  express  "prosperity,"  that  best  of 
prosperities  which  comes  as  the  manifestation  of  Jehovah's  righteousness  or  fidelity  to 
his  promises.  The  figures  used  may  be  thus  explained :  If  they  had  been  faithful  to 
their  covenants  their  national  prosperity  would  have  followed  on,  age  after  age,  like 
the  ceaseless  current,  day  and  night,  of  a  noble  river.  If  they  had  been  obedieut,  they 
would  have  mastered  all  forms  of  difBculty  and  opposition  with  a  resistless  power  like 
that  which  belongs  to  the  waves  of  the  sea.  The  time  of  exile  in  Babylon  was  a  sad 
break  in  the  national  prosperity.  There  would  have  been  no  occasion  for  it  if  Israel 
had  been  faithful  and  obedient.  J.  A.  Alexander  says,  "Nothing  could  well  be  more 
appropriate  at  the  close  of  this  division  of  the  prophecies  than  such  an  affecting 
statement  of  the  truth,  so  frequently  propounded  in  didactic  form  already,  that  Israel, 
although  the  chosen  people  of  Jehovah,  and  as  such  secure  from  total  ruin,  was  and 
was  to  be  a  sufferer,  not  from  any  want  of  faithfulness  or  care  on  God's  part,  but  as 
the  necessary  fruit  of  its  own  imperfections  and  corruptions."  Two  of  the  blessings 
that  always  follow  on  obedience  are  indicated  here — ^they  are  permanence  and  power. 

I.  Permanence  as  a  result  op  oibedibnce.  This  is  one  of  the  most  marked 
impressions  made  on  sensitive  minds  by  the  sight  of  the  fnll-flowilig  river,  especially  In 
Eastern  lands,  where  it  is,  in  such  a  marked  way,  contrasted  with  the  mountain  wadiea 
that  are  sometimes  dry  and  at  other  times  roaring  with  flood.  The  river  flows  on  for 
ever.  Men  come  and  go.  Cities  rise  and  fall  into  decay  on  its  banks.  Commerce 
BOW  uses  and  now  neglects  it.    Uynasties  last  their  little  while.    The  river  flowed  on 


BH.  XLvia  1—22.]    THE  BOOK  OP  THE   PROPHET  ISAIAH,  229 

ages  ago  just  as  it  flows  now ;  it  will  flow  still,  when  we  have  "  had  our  little  day  and 
cease  to  be."  So  nothing  can  occur  to  stop  the  current  of  true  prosperity  in  the 
obedient.  "  Patient  continuance  in  well-doing"  involves  continued  couditions  of  well- 
being.     "  He  that  doeth  the  will  of  God  abideth  for  ever." 

II.  Power  as  a  result  of  obedience.  The  steady  advance  of  the  tide  is  an 
impressive  illustration  of  quiet,  persistent  power.  The  rush  of  the  wind-driven  wave 
is  the  illustration  of  majestic  masterful  power.  He  that  does  the  will  of  God  over- 
comes himself;  and  he  who  overcomes  himself  need  never  fear  that  he  will  meet  a 
mightier  foe. — R.  T. 

Ver.  18. — Chrisfs  peace  and  righteousness.  Illustrating  the  meditative  and  spiri- 
tualizing method  of  treating  prophetic  Scripture,  the  following  outline,  after  R.  M. 
McCheyne,  is  given. 

I.  Thkib  peace  woitld  have  been  as  a  eivbr.  1.  It  lias  a  source.  It  begins  at 
the  fountain  of  Christ's  blood.  2.  It  is  fed  from  above.  Rains  and  showers  feed  the 
rivers.  The  shower  of  grace  feeds  the  rivers  of  peace.  3.  It  has  inundations,  as 
the  Nile.  An  awakenin-;  providence  often  makes  it  overflow.  AfHictions  and  the 
consolations  under  them  always,  if  the  sufferings  are  the  sufferings  of  Christ.  Sacra- 
mental times  also ;  hence  the  desirableness  of  frequency  in  the  administration  of  the 
Lord's  Supper.  4.  It  gets  broader  and  broader  to  the  sea.  Illustrate  by  such  a  river 
astheTay.  "The  path  of  the  just  is  like  the  shining  light."  5.  It  is  fertilizing.  It 
conveys  nourishment.  Egypt  owes  all  its  fertility  to  the  Nile.  The  peace  of  Christ 
makes  every  grace  grow.     Holiness  always  grows  out  of  a  peaceful  bre.ist. 

II.  ThEIB    EIGHTEOnSNESS    WOULD   HAVE    BEEN    AS    THE    WAVES    OF    THE    SEA.      The 

righteousness  of  Christ  is  compared  to  the  waves  of  the  sea,  because :  1.  It  covers  over 
the  highest  sins.  2.  It  covers  again  and  again.  3.  It  is  infinite  righteousness.  You 
cannot  count  the  waves  of  the  sea.  Application.  God  wants  men  to  be  saved.  God 
sometimes  pleads  with  men  to  be  saved  for  his  own  pleasure;  it  would  be  pleasant  to 
him;  it  would  make  him  glad,  as  in  the  parable  of  the  lost  sheep.  Bometimes  he 
pleads  for  his  own  glory  (Jer.  xiii.  16 ;  Mai.  ii.  i).  But  here  it  is  for  the  happiness 
of  sinners  themselves  (Ps.  Ixxxi.  13).  And  he  pleads  with  men,  because  unwilling 
that  any  should  perish  (2  Pet.  iii.  9). — ^R.  T. 

Ver.  22. — l%e  unrest  of  the  wiched.  "  There  is  no  peace,  saith  Jehovah,  to  the 
ungodly."  There  may  be  what  the  world  calls  success  and  prosperity,  without  peace. 
Peace  is  an  inward  state  and  condition.  It  is  not  a  matter  of  circumstance,  but  of 
mood.  "Thou  wilt  keep  him  in  perfect  peace  whc  se  mind  is  stayed  on  thee."  It  is 
not  a  specially  sent  threatening,  that  there  shall  be  no  peace  to  the  wicked ;  it  is  the 
permanently  appointed  Divine  arrangement.  By  the  constitution  of  things  there  can 
be  no  peace  to  the  wicked — "no  peace  with  God, or  their  own  consciences,  no  real  good, 
whatever  is  pretended  to."  It  may  be  urged  that  the  ungodly  have  no  inward  peace, 
because- — 

I.  Of  the  dissatisfaction  which  wickedness  brinos.  Bad  men  cannot  rest  in 
their  badness,  cannot  regard  it  with  pleasure.  They  want  to  get  away  from  it  to 
something  else.  A  new  excitement  alone  can  clear  away  the  thought  of  old  sins. 
That  is  the  saddest  thing  for  the  wilful  and  wayward  man — he  can  never  be  happy  in 
his  wrong-doing.     Excited  he  may  be,  never  restful. 

IL  Of  the  SMiTiNGS  WHICH  CONSCIENOB  oiVEB.  Por  though  a  man  may  ^'ag  and 
stifle  Conscience,  she  will  find  her  way  to  speak.  The  one  thing  absolutely  impossible 
to  the  most  wilful  man  is  the  silencing  of  Conscience.  She  has  a  way  of  wak'ng  up, 
and  looking  daggers  when  we  think  she  is  dead.  If  a  man  will  force  his  own  way 
against  God,  he  must  take  into  account  that,  as  long  as  he  lives,  he  shall  have  no  peace ; 
for  he  shall  fight  daily  against  his  own  conscience.  It  will  lie  do'wn  with  him ;  it  will 
go  forth  with  him. 

m.  Of  the  fbaks  which  wickedness  sugqbsts.  There  are  always  consequences 
to  actions.  Every  act  is  a  cause.  Every  result  is  appropriate  to  its  cause.  Sow  to 
the  flesh,  and  yon  must  reap  corruption.  The  bad  man  fears  (1)  the  circumstances 
which  his  wilfulness  may  create ;  (2)  the  enmities  which  his  wilfulness  may  excite ; 
(3)  the  future  in  which  all  the  power  may — nay,  must — ^lie  in  the  hands  of  the  God  he 


230 


THE  BOOK  OF  THE  PROPHET  ISAIAH,    [oh.  xlix.  1— 26, 


insults.  Wherever  the  ungodly  man  walks  he  can  know  no  real  peaoe ;  "  fears  are  in 
the  way." 

IV.   Of   the   DISTnBBANCES  OF   THE   DiVINE  ORDER  WHICH  HIS  SELF-WILL  OCOABIONB. 

There  is  a  Divine  order ;  and  it  involves  the  very  highest  well-being — up  to  its  capacity 
— of  every  creature,  great  and  small.  That  order  is  based  upon  man's  obedient  and 
submissive  harmony  with  God's  will.  This  the  wicked  man  refuses,  and  so  this  order 
the  wicked  man  breaks.  Alas !  spoiling  the  peace,  not  for  himself  alone,  but  for  all 
with  whom  he  has  to  do.  The  everlasting  peace  will  come  when  we  are  "  all  righteous," 
and  not  a  moment  before. — R.  T. 


Section  UL    The  Mission  of  the  Servant  of  the  Lord  (oh.  zlix — uay, 

EXPOSITION. 


CHAPTER  XLIX. 

rhe  connection  of  the  present  section  is 
especially  with  ch.  xlii.  1—7,  where  the 
mission  of  the  Servant  of  Jehovah  was  first 
announced.  That  mission  was  there  de- 
scribed with  extreme  brevity.  It  has  now 
to  be  fully  set  forth,  for  the  instruction,  con- 
solation, and  comfort  of  all  Israel,  which  is 
represented  as  sunk  in  despondency,  deeming 
itself  forgotten  of  God  and  forsaken  by  him 
(vers.  13,  14).  In  the  present  oliapter 
Jehovah's  attestation  of  his  Servant's  mission 
is  set  forth  (vers.  1 — 12),  and  Zion  is  com- 
forted in  her  despondency  (vers.  13 — 26). 

Vers.  1 — 12.^rBB0VAH's  Attestation  of 
HIS  Servant's  Mission.  Jehovah  called  his 
Servant  from  the  womb  ;  mentioned  him  by 
name ;  made  his  mouth  u  sharp  sword ; 
held  him  in  his  hand ;  caused  him  to  be  a 
polished  weapon;  appointed  him  his  Servant; 
assured  him  of  a  right  and  a  recompense; 
appointed  him,  not  only  to  restore  and 
recover  Israel,  but  to  be  a  Light  to  the 
Gentiles,  and  to  give  salvation  to  the  ends 
of  the  world  (vers.  1 — 6);  chose  him  (ver, 
7);  will  help  him  (ver.  8);  through  him 
will  both  deliver  the  captive  everywhere 
(ver.  9),  and  cause  joy  to  break  out  in 
every  part  of  heaven  and  earth  (vers.  11 — 
13).  It  is  quite  impossible  that  these  things 
can  be  said  of  aught  but  a  person,  or  of  any 
person  other  thau  him  in  whom  all  the 
nations  of  the  earth  were  to  be  blessed 
(Gen.  xxii.  18). 

Ver.  1. — Listen,  0  isles  (oomp.  ch.  xli. 
1;  xlii.  1,  4,  6).  Since  the  beginning  of 
oh.  xliii.  Israi]  alone  has  lieen  addressed. 
Now  that  the  mission  of  the  Servant  of 
Jehovah  is  to  be  treated  of,  all  the  world 
must  be  summoned  to  hear,  for  all  the  world 
is  directly  interested.    Ye  people;  rather. 


ye  peoples,  or  ye  nation$.  The  lord  bath 
called  me  from  the  womb.  Isaiah  could  not 
have  said  this  of  himself,  for  his  "call" 
took  place  when  he  was  of  mature  age.  But 
Christ  was  designated  for  his  office  from  the 
womb  (Luke  i.  81 — 33).  He  was  also  stUl 
"in  the  womb  of  his  mother"  when  the 
name  of  Jesus  was  given  to  him  (Matt  i, 
21 ;  Luke  i.  31). 

Ver.  2. — ^He  hath  made  my  month  like  a 
sharp  sword.  The  author  of  the  Epistle  to 
the  Hebrews  says  that  "the  Word  of  God" 
generally  "is  .  .  •  sharper  than  any  two-edged 
sword,  piercing  even  to  the  dividing  asunder 
of  soul  and  spirit,  ajid  of  the  joints  and 
marrow"  (Heb.  iv.  12).  Christian  ex- 
perience testifies  that  this  keen,  searching, 
cutting  power  attaches  in  an  especial  way 
to  the  sayings  of  Jesus,  which  pierce  the 
heart  as  no  other  words  can  do,  and  rankle 
in  the  soul,  which  is  quite  unable  to  forget 
them.  The  imagery  rectus  in  the  Revela- 
tion of  St.  John  (i.  16;  u.  12, 16;  xix.  15, 
21).  In  the  shadow  of  his  hand  l^Ui  he 
hid  me.  Either  keeping  him  safe  from  the 
malice  of  his  enemies,  or  reserving  him 
until,  "in  the  fulness  of  time,''  it  would  be 
fitting  to  reveal  him  to  the  world.  And 
made  me  a  polished  shaft.  A  weapon  even 
keener  than  a  sword,  smoothed  and  polished, 
so  as  to  make  it  pierce  the  deeper,  and  kept 
hid  in  God's  quiver  until  the  time  came 
when  it  could  be  launched  with  most  effect 
against  the  hearts  of  ungodly  men. 

Ver.  3. — Thou  art  my  Servant,  0  Israel. 
That  the  literal  "Israel,"  is  not  intended 
appears  plainly  from  ver.  5.  The  Servant 
himself  is  addressed  as  "Israel,"  because  he 
"  would  stand  as  a  new  federal  head  to  the 
nation "  (Kay),  which  would  be  summed  up 
in  him,  and  also  because  he  would  be,  in  a 
truer  sense  than  any  other,  an  "  Israel,"  oi 
"  Prince  with  God."  In  whom  I  will  be 
glorified  (comp.  John  xiii.  81,  "Now  is  the 
Son  of  man  glurified,  and  God  is  glorified  in 
him  ").  He  who  is  "  the  Brightness  of  the 
Father's  glory  "  sets  forth  that  glory  before 
men,  and  causes  them  to  glorify  him,  both 
with  their  tongues  and  in  their  lives. 


oa.  XLix.  1—23.]    THE  BOOK  OF  THE  PROPHET  ISAIAH. 


i3l 


Ver.  4.— Then  I  said,  I  have  laboured  in 
vain;  rather,  and  I,  for. my  part,  had  said. 
The  Servant  had  momentarily  desponded, 
Beein^  the  small  results  of  all  his  efforts  to 
reclaim  Israel,  and  had  felt  a  natural  human 
regret  at  so  much  labour  apparently  expended 
in  vain ;  but  his  despondency  had  been  soon 
checked  by  the  thought  that  GTod  would  not 
suffer  any  "labour  of  love"  to  be  wholly  in 
vain,  but  would  give  it  the  recompense 
which  it  merited.  The  verse  brings  strongly 
oat  the  true  humanity  of  the  "Servant," 
who  feels  as  men  naturally  feel,  but  restrains 
himself,  and  does  not  allow  his  feelings  to 
carry  him  away.  Ckimpare  with  this  de- 
spondency the  grief  exhibited  by  our  Lord 
on  two  occasions  (Matt,  xxiii.  37 ;  John  xi. 
35),  and  the  depression  which  extorted  from 
him  the  memorable  words, "  Eli,  Eli,  lama 
sabachthani  ?  "  (Matt,  xxvii.  46).  Uy  work ; 
rather,  my  reward,  or  my  recompense. 

Yer.  5. — And  nov,  saith  the  Lord,  etc.; 
rather,  and  now  the  Lord  hath  said — he  that 
formed  me  from  the  womb  to  be  a  Servant  to 
him,  that  I  might  bring  back  Jacob  to  him, 
and  that  Jurael  might  be  gathered  to  him; 
for  I  shall  be  glorious  in  the  eyes  of  the  Lord, 
and  my  God  is  become  my  Strength — he  hath 
said — It  is  a  light  thing,  etc.  The  whole  of 
ver.  6,  after  the  words,  "  and  now  the  Lord 
hath  said,"  is  parenthetic.  (On  the  service 
which  our  Lord  continually  rendered,  while 
on  earth,  to  the  Father,  see  Luke  ii.  49; 
iv.  43;  John  iv.  34;  vi.  38;  xvii.  4.)  The 
Revelation  of  St.  John  shows  that  in  heaven 
he  is  still  engaged  in  carrying  out  his 
Father's  behests.  Though  Israel  be  not 
gathered.  This  reading,  as  Mr.  Cheyne 
remarks,  "entirely  spoils  the  symmetry  of 
the  verse."  The  practice  of  writing  fresh 
copies  of  the  Scriptuie  from  dictation  is 
answerable  for  the  double  reading  of  li^ 
and  Sh  both  here  and  in  other  places.  Yet 
shall  I  be  glorious.  The  "Servant"  would 
receive  glory  even  by  such  a  partial  conver- 
sion of  the  Jews  as  took  place  through  his 
ministry.  It  is  never  to  he  forgotl:en  that 
all  the  original  twelve  apostles  were  Jews, 
that  Matthias  was  a  Jew,  that  Paul  and 
Barnabas  were  Jews,  and  that  the  original 
Church  was  a  Church  of  Jews  (Acts  iL 
41 — 47).  All  that  was  truly  spiritual  in 
Judaism  flowed  into  the  Church  of  Christ, 
as  into  its  natural  home,  and  the  Jewish 
element  in  the  Church,  if  not  numerically 
great,  was  yet  the  predominant  and  forma- 
tive element. 

Ver.  6. — It  is  a  light  thing.  God  rewards 
his  servants  according  to  their  works.  He 
is  supremely  just.  He  was  not  content 
that  even  Nebuchadnezzar  should  be  in- 
BuiSciently  rewarded  for  the  service  that  he 
rendered  against  Tyre  (Ezek.  xxix.  18),  and 
he  therefore  gave  him  Egypt  in  addition  as 


his  recompense  (Ezek.  xxix.  20).  It  would 
have  bten  "a  light  thing" — "too  light  a 
thing"  (Kay,  Cheyne) — to  have  re«arded 
the  labours  of  Jesus  with  the  conversion 
of  the  Jews  only.  God  therefore  gave  him 
as  his  recompense  the  gathpring  in  of  the 
Gentiles  also,  and  made  him  a  means  of 
salvation  even  to  the  uttermost  ends  of  the 
earth.  Xhe  preserved  of  Israel;  i.e.  the 
"remnant"  that  had  not  perished  through 
previous  judgments.  I  wUl  also  give  the* 
for  a  Light  to  the  Gentiles  (comp.  ch.  xi.  10; 
xxxiv.  1 ;  xlii.  6 ;  Iv.  5,  etc.).  Greeks  ("EX- 
\rives)  were  brought  into  contact  with  our 
Lord  himself  shortly  before  his  crucifixion 
(John  xii.  20).  He  wrought  a  miracle  for  a 
Syro-Phoenician  woman  (Mark  vii.  25 — 30). 
His  apostles,  after  a  little  time,  understood 
that  the  gospel  was  for  the  world  at  large, 
and  declared  that  in  Christ  there  was  no 
difference  between  Jew  and  Greek,  nay  I 
between  Jew  and  barbarian.  Christ  had 
died  for  all — ^had  come  to  be  a  Light  to  all, 
would  have  all  come  into  his  Church  and 
obtain  salvation  through  union  with  him. 
That  thou  mayest  be  my  Salvation,  Christ 
is  called  "Salvation,"  as  the  Bearer  of 
salvation — ^he  through  whom  alone  can  any 
man  be  saved  (Acts  iv.  12),  So  he  is  called 
"Peace"  (Micah  v.  5),  as  the  Oiver  of 
peace. 

Ver.  7.— His  Holy  One;  i.e.  "the  Holy 
One  of  Israel."  To  him  whom  man  de- 
spiseth;  literally,  who  is  despised  of  souls. 
Tliis  is  the  first  place  in  the  prophecies  of 
Isaiah  where  this  note  of  the  Messiah  is 
brought  forward.  It  is  found  earlier  in  the 
Psalms,  as  especially  in  Ps.  xxii.  6,  et  seqq., 
"I  am  a  worm,  and  no  man;  a  reproach  of 
men,  and  despised  of  the  people ; "  and  later 
on  it  is  expanded  into  a  chapter  (ch.  liiL). 
Whom  the  nation  abhorreth;  rather,  whom 
mankind  abhorreth.  The  term  used  is  goi, 
which  points  to  the  Gentiles  rather  than  to 
the  Jews.  Mankind  at  large  dislikes  a 
"Holy  One,"  since  he  is  a  perpetual  re- 
proach to  it  (see  ch.  xxx.  11;  and  cnmp. 
Pint., '  Republ.,'  vii.  2,  ad  fin,).  It  is  not  the 
Jews  only  who  exclaim  in  such  a  case,  "Away 
with  him  1  away  with  him  1 "  (John  xiz.  15). 
There  is  such  an  antagonism  between  sin 
and  holiness,  that  the  ungudly  everywhere 
and  in  all  ages  detest  the  godly  and  virtuous. 
A  servant  of  rulers ;  or,  a  slave  of  despots ; 
treated  as  a  slave,  ».e.  by  such  irresponsible 
rulers  as  Herod  (Luke  xxiii.  11)  and  Poutiui 
Pilate  (John  xix.  1,  16).  The  "King  of 
kings"  bowed  himself  to  a  slave's  death. 
Kings  shall  see  and  arise,  princes  also  shall 
worship  (comp.  Ps.  Ixxii.  10,  11;  ch.  lii.  15; 
Ix.  3,  10, 11,  etc.).  According  to  a  tradition 
— which,  however,  cannot  be  traced  back  to 
any  very  ancient  sciuroe — the  Mngi  who 
came  to  worship  our  Lord  at  Bethlehem 


232 


THE  BOOK  OF  THE  PROPHET  ISAIAH,      [oh.  xlix.  1— 26. 


were  "kings,''  The  prophecy  is,  however, 
to  be  regarded  as  haviog  its  main  fulfilment 
in  the  coming  to  Christ  of  bo  many  kings 
and  princes,  since  his  ascension  into  heaven 
(comp.  ver.  23).  And  the  Holy  One  of  Israel, 
and  he  shall  choose  thee;  rather,  the  Holy 
One  of  Israel,  that  hath  choien  thee.  Kings 
will  rise  from  their  thrones,  and  prostrate 
themselves  before  Messiah,  convinced  that 
Jehovah  is  faithful  in  the  performance  of 
his  promises,  and  hag  chosen  the  Son  of 
Mary  to  be  the  Bedeemer  so  long  announced 
as  about  to  appear  on  earth, 

Ver.  8. — In  an  acceptable  time;  literally, 
in  a  time  of  good  pleasure;  i.e.  tlie  time 
fixed  by  my  good  pleasure  from  the  creation 
of  the  world.  Heard  thee  .  .  .  helped  thee. 
The  Father  "heard"  and  "helped"  the 
only  begotten  Son  through  the  whole  period 
of  his  earthly  ministry  (Luke  it  40,  52; 
John  iii  2 ;  viii.  28 ;  xii.  28 ;  xiv.  10,  etc.). 
I  will  give  thee  for  a  Covenant  of  the  people 
(comp.  oh.  zlii.  6,  and  the  comment,  ad  loc). 
To  establish  the  earth ;  rather,  as  in  ver.  6, 
to  raise  up  the  earth,  to  lift  it  out  of  its 
existing  condition  of  meanness  and  degra- 
dation. To  cause  to  inherit  the  desolate 
heritages ;  i.e.  to  cause  tlie  desolate  herithges 
of  the  earth — the  places  devoid  of  true 
religion — to  be  possessed,  and  as  it  were 
"  inherited,"  by  those  who  would  introduce 
into  thtm  the  true  knowledge  of  God.  As 
Israel  inlierited  Canaan  (Deut.  iii.  28 ;  Josh, 
i.  G),  so  would  Christian  nations  inherit 
many  "  desolate  heritages,"  where  ignorance 
and  sin  prevailed,  with  the  result  that  light 
would  penetrate  into  the  dark  regions,  and, 
ultimately,  aU  flesh  see  the  salvation  of 
Gtod. 

Ver.  9. — ^That  thou  mayest  say  to  the 
prisoners.  Go  forth.  "The  prisoners"  here 
are  not  the  captives  in  Babylon,  but  tlie 
servants  of  sin  throughout  the  world.  Christ 
would  say  to  them,  "  Go  forth."  He  would 
summon  them  by  his  messengers  to  repent 
and  be  converted,  and  quit  the  service  of 
sin,  and  "go  forth"  from  the  kingdom  of 
darkness,  and  "  show  themselves  "  as  lights 
of  the  world  (Matt.  v.  14;  Phil.  ii.  15), 
walking  "  as  children  of  the  light "  (Eph.  v. 
8).  It  is  a  narrow  exegesis  which  confines 
the  prophet's  forecast  to  the  mere  return  of 
the  exiles  to  Palestine,  and  their  re-settle- 
ment on  their  ancestral  estates.  They  shall 
feed  in  the  ways,  etc.  The  returning 
"  prisoners  "  are  now  represented  as  a  flock 
of  sheep  (comp.  ch.  xl.  11),  whom  the  good 
Shepherd  will  "lead"  and  "guide"  by 
ways  in  which  they  will  find  sufficient 
pasture,  which  shall  not  fail  them  even 
when  they  pass  over  bare  "hill-tops"  (see 
John  I.  11—16;  xxi.  15—17). 

Ver.  10. — They  shall  not  hunger  nor 
thirst  (cf.  John  iv.  14 ;  vi.  35).    God's  grace 


is  sufBoient  for  his  faithfnl  ones.  The; 
are  content  with  the  sustenance  which  he 
awards  them,  and  neither  "hunger"  nor 
"  thirst."  Neither  shall  the  heat  nor  sun 
smite  them ;  ratlier,  neither  shall  the  glowing 
land  nor  the  sun  smite  them  (see  ch.  zxzv. 
7).  To  those  who  walk  at  noonday 
over  the  "glowing  saud"  of  the  desert, 
the  heat  which  "smites  them"  seems  to 
come  as  much  from  below  as  from  above, 
tlie  white  ground  reflecting  the  sun's  rays 
with  a  force  almost  equal  to  that  wherewith 
the  rays  themselves  beat  down  upon  them 
from  the  sky.  The  Lord's  faithful  ones,  in 
their  passage  through  the  wilderness  ot  life, 
shall  be  free  from  these  fearful  trials.  "  The 
sun  shall  not  smite  them  by  day,  neither 
the  moon  by  night"  (Ps.  cxxi.  6).  He  that 
hath  meroy  on  them;  or,  that  hath  com 
passion  on  them — ^that  sympathizes  with  their 
sufferings,  and  pities  them  in  their  trials 
(comp.  vers.  13  and  15).  Shall  lead  them 
(comp.  Ps.  xxiii.  2;  ch.  xl.  11).  The 
Oriental  shepherd  for  the  most  part  goes 
before  his  flock. 

Ver.  11. — I  will  make  all  my  mountains  a 
way.  No  obstacles  shall  prevent  the  return 
of  the  wanderers.  Mountains  shall  be  as 
roads,  and  as  highways  lifted  up. 

Ver.  12. — ^These  shall  come  from  far.  The 
nations  shall  flow  in  from  all  sides  to  the 
Redeemer's  kingdom  (ch.  ii.  2;  zi.  10;  Ix. 
1 — 5,  etc.).  They  shall  come  from  the 
north  and  from  the  west;  literally, /rom  the 
north  and  from  the  sea,  which  generally 
means  "  the  west,"  but  which,  in  one  enu- 
meration of  the  points  of  the  compass  (Ps 
ovii.  3),  is  certainly  "the  south."  They 
shall  also  come  from  the  land  of  Sinim,  by 
which  most  recent  interpreters  understand 
China.  But  it  is  highly  improbable  that 
an  ethnic  name  which  was  not  known  to  the 
Greeks  till  the  time  of  Ptolemy  (a.d.  120) 
should  have  reached  Palestine  by  B.o.  7oO. 
And  if  "the  sea"  means  "the  south"  in 
the  preceding  clause,  the  Sinim  may  be 
tliose  of  Phoenicia  (Gen.  x.  17),  who  were 
among  the  furthest  inhabitants  of  Asia 
towards  the  west.  In  any  case,  the  reference 
is,  not-  to  the  dispersed  Jews,  but  to  the 
remote  Gentiles,  who  would  pass  from  all 
quarters  into  the  kingdom  of  the  Bedeemer, 

Vers,  13 — 26. — Zioif  comforted  nr  beb 
Dbbpondenot.  While  the  future  is  thus 
glorious,  both  for  the  "  Servant  of  the  Lord  " 
and  for  his  people  Israel,  the  present  is 
gloom  and  misery.  Zion — ^not  here  the  city, 
but  the  people  of  God — desponds  and  says, 
"Jehovah  has  foroiiken  me,  and  my  Lord 
hath  forgotten  me"  (ver,  14),  This  burst 
of  grief,  though  arising  firom  weakness  ot 
faith,  is  forgiven  by  the  compassioE  ol  Qoi, 


OH.  3XIX.  1— 26,]    THE  BOOK  OF  THE  PROPHET  ISAIAH, 


233 


and  "•fflioted"  Israel  is  "comforted"  and 
ooiMoIed  through  the  remainder  of  the 
chapter  (vers.  15^26). 

Ver.  13. — Sing,  0  heavens  (comp.  oh.  xliv. 
23).  Heaven  and  earth  are  culled  upon  to 
rejoice  and  "  break  forth  into  singing "  (1) 
because  of  the  glory  that  awaits  the  Be- 
deemer  (vers.  5 — 12);  and  (2)  because  of 
the  gracious  intentions  of  God  with  respect 
to  Israel  (vers.  16 — 26).  0  mountains.  The 
majesty  of  mountains  seems  to  have  deeply 
impressed  Isaiah.  Throughout  his  writings 
they  are  continually  introduced  as  the 
grandest  of  the  works  of  God  (comp.  oh.  ii. 
2,  14;  v.  25;  xiii.  4;  xiv.  25;  xxii.  5;  xxx. 
25;  xxxiv.  3;  xxxvii.  24;  xl.  4,  9,  12;  xli. 
IS;  xlii.  11, 15,  etc.).  He  expects  them  to 
be  especially  ready  to  sympathize  with  man. 
Such  a  feeling  would  be  natural  to  one  accus- 
tomed to  the  hill-country  of  Palestine  and 
the  lofty  heights  of  Hermon  and  Lebanon, 
but  could  scarcely  have  been  developed  in 
an  exile  of  the  time  of  Cyrus,  born  and 
brought  up  in  the  dead  level  of  Babylonia. 
Hath  comforted  .  .  .  will  have  meroy.  Both 
verbs  designate  the  same  action,  which  is 
really  future,  but  in  God's  counsels  is 
already  accomplished.  The  perfect  is  thus, 
once  more,  that  of  prophetic  certitude. 

Ver.  14. — Bat  Ziou  said.  "  Zion  "  is  here 
the  "daughter  of  Zion,"  or  the  people  of 
Israel,  as  in  eh.  li.  16.  The  meaning  is  a 
rare  one.  The  Lord  hath  forsaken  mt 
(comp.  ch.  xl.  27).  It  is  not  surprising  that 
Israel— even  faithful  Israel — sometimes  de- 
sponded, or  perhaps  despaired,  during  the 
long  and  weary  time  of  the  Captivity. 
Even  tlie  "Servant  of  the  Lord"  knew 
moments  of  despondency  (see  above,  ver.  4, 
with  the  comment). 

Ver.  15.^-Can  a  woman  forget  1  .  .  .  yea, 
they  may  forget.  In  the  siege  of  Samaria 
by  Benhadad,  King  of  Syria,  a  mother,  we  are 
told  (2  Kings  vi.  28,  29),  boiled  her  son  for 
food.  In  the  last  siege  of  Jerusalem  similar 
horrors  are  reported  (Joseph., '  Bell.  Jud.,*  vi. 
3, 4).  Mothers  have  even  been  known  inEng- 
land  who  have  forced  their  tender  and  inno- 
cent daughters  to  commit  deadly  sin.  Yet 
wiU  I  not  forget.  The  love  of  God  surpasses 
that  of  either  father  or  mother.  "When 
my  father  and  my  mother  forsake  me,"  Buys 
David,  "then  the  Lord  wiU  take  me  up" 
(Ps.  xxvii.  10).  "  God  is  love  "  (1  John  iv.  8) 
in  his  very  essence ;  and  his  infinite  love  is 
deeper,  tenderer,  truer,  than  finite  love  can 
ever  be.  Still,  that  which  is  nearest  to  it 
upon  earth  is,  doubtless,  the  love  of  a  mother 
for  her  children  (see  oh.  Ixvi.  13). 

Ver.  16.— Behold,  I  have  graven  thee  upon 
the  palms  of  my  hands.  The  prophet  has 
passed  here  from  the  living  Zion,  Israel, 
to  their   material  home,  Jerusalem.    The 


metaphor  which  he  uses  is  no  doubt  drawn 
irom  the  practice,  common  both  in  ancient 
and  in  modern  days,  of  burning  or  punctur- 
ing figures  and  other  mementos  upon  the 
hand,  the  arm,  or  some  other  part  of  the 
body,  and  then  rendering  the  figures  in- 
delible by  rubbing  in  henna,  indigo,  gun- 
powder, or  some  other  coloured  substance. 
Pilgrims  in  the  East  have  almost  always 
such  marks  put  upon  them  when  they  have 
accomplished  their  pilgrimage.  English 
sailors  are  fond  of  them,  and  few  are  with- 
out some  such  mark  on  their  breast  or 
limbs.  The  meaning  here  is  that  God  has 
the  thought  of  Zion  as  constantly  present 
with  him  as  if  her  image  were  indelibly 
marked  on  the  palms  of  his  hands.  (On  the 
anthropomorpbio  representation  of  God  as 
having  "  arms  "  and  "  hands,"  see  the  com- 
ment on  ch.  xl.  10.)  Thy  WEtUs.  It  is  the 
city,  Zion,  the  emblem  of  the  people,  that 
can  alone  be  "  graven "  or  "  portrayed." 
This  city  has,  of  course,  walls.  God  tieara 
them  in  mind  perpetually,  since  he  is  about 
to  cause  them  to  be  built  up  (Neh.  iii.,  iv.). 

Ver.  17. — ^Thy  children  shall  make  luste; 
i.e.  "  thy  exiled  children  shall  hasten,  when 
the  appointed  time  comes,  to  return  to  Zion, 
and  rebuild  its  temple  and  towers  and 
walls."  At  the  same  time,  thy  destroyers 
and  they  that  have  made  thee  waste,  who 
are  regarded  as  still  carrying  on  their 
devastations,  shall  leave  thee  and  go  forth 
of  thee. 

Ver.  18. — Lift  up  thine  eyes  round  about 
and  behold  (comp.  ch.  Ix.  4,  where  the  same 
phrase  occurs  in  connection  with  the  con- 
version of  the  Gentiles).  All  these  gather 
themselves  together  (comp.  ver.  12).  Thoa 
shalt  surely  clothe  thee  with  them  all,  as 
with  an  ornament  (comp.  Zech.  ix.  16).  The 
restored  Church,  receiving  adhesions  from 
the  nations  on  all  sides,  wUl  be  like  a  bride 
who  puts  on  her  ornaments,  and  is  thereby 
made  glorious  to  look  upon  (ch.  Ixi.  10, 
ad  fin!).  The  entire  Church,  not  any  one 
part,  is  designated  as  the  "  Bride  "  of  Christ 
in  the  New  Testament  (2  Cor.  xi.  2;  Bph. 
V.  29,  32;  Kev.  xxi.  2,  9;  xxii.  17). 

Ver.  19. — The  land  of  thy  destruction;  or, 
of  thy  overthrow — ^i.e.  where  thou  wert  over- 
thrown by  Nebuchadnezzar — shall  even 
now  he  too  narrow,  etc.  This  must  not  be 
understood  literally.  Palestine,  after  the 
return  from  the  Captivity,  was  at  no  time 
over-populated;  and  when  the  couversion  of 
the  Gentiles  took  place  it  caused  no  influx 
of  fresh  settlers  into  the  Holy  Land.  The 
object  of  the  prophet  is  simply  to  mark  the 
vast  growth  of  the  Church,  which  would 
necessarily  spread  itself  far  beyond  the 
limits  of  Palestine,  and  would  ultimately 
require  the  whole  earth  for  its  habitation. 

Ver.  20. — The  children  which  thou  shalt 


234 


THE  BOOK  OF  THE  PROPHET  ISAIAH,    [oh.  xlix.  1—26, 


have,  after  thou  hast  lost  the  other ;  literally, 
the  children  of  thy  hereavement ;  i.e.  the 
Gentiles  who  shall  replace  those  many 
faithless  Israelites  who  refused  to  return 
when  Cyrus  issued  his  edict,  and  became 
lost  to  the  Church  of  God.  The  place  is  too 
strait  for  me  (see  the  comment  on  ver.  19). 

"Ver.  21. — ^Who  hath  begotten  me  these! 
The  Jewish  Church  is  astounded  at  the 
influx  of  the  Gentiles,  and  asks,  "Where 
did  they  come  from  ?  Who  has  made  them 
my  children?  Who  baa  trained  them?" 
That  they  are  not  her  natural  cliildreti 
she  is  sure,  since  she  knows  that  she  has 
been  for  a  long  time  "  bereaved  and  unfruit- 
ful "  (Cheyne>— a  captive,  and  a  "  wanderer" 
(Kay).  It  is  certain  that  tbe  Jewish  Church 
did  not  at  first  altogether  welcome  the  in- 
coming of  the  Gentiles  (Acts  xi.  1 — 3; 
XV.  1—11;  Gal.  ii  11—14,  etc.).  But  the 
guidance  of  tbe  Holy  Spirit  surmounted 
the  difficulty  (Acts  xv.  28). 

Ver.  22. — I  will  lift  up  mine  hand  to  the 
Gentiles.  The  new  children — ^the  new  con- 
verts— are  to  come  from  tbe  Gentiles ; 
the  fresh  "  sons "  and  "  daughters  "  will  be 
carried  by  tbe  nations  in  their  arms,  and 
by  tbe  peoples  upon  their  shoulders.  It  is 
usual  to  expound  this  and  parallel  passages 
(ch.  Ix.  4;  Ixvi.  20)  of  tbe  return  of  tbe 
Jews  to  their  own  land  by  favour  of  the 
Gentiles,  either  when  the  decree  of  Cyrue 
went  forth,  or  at  some  still  future  period. 
But  perhaps  the  children  intended  are 
/oster-cbildren,  actual  Gentiles,  whom  their 
parents  will  bring  to  baptism.  In  the 
Assyrian  sculptures,  mothers  are  constantly 
represented  as  carrying  their  children  upon 
their  ehoulders  ('Ancient  Monarchies,'  vol.  i. 
p.  480). 

Ver.  23. — Kings  shallbethynursing  fathers, 
and  their  queens  thy  nursing  mothers; 
or,  thy  foster-fatherg  .  .  .  thy  foster-mothers. 
Kings  and  queens  (sultanas)  shall  put  them- 
selves at  the  disposal  of  the  Church,  to 
nourish  and  cheiish  such  of  the  Church's 


children  as  may  be  entrusted  to  their  care. 
They  shall  bow  down.  They  shall  not  seek 
to  lord  it  over  the  Church,  but  shall  acknow- 
ledge in  tlie  officers  ol  the  Church  a  spiritual 
authority  superior  to  their  own,  before  which 
they  shall  "  bow  down,"  as  Theodosius  did 
They  shall  even  be  willing,  when  they  are 
conscious  of  guilt,  to  "lick  tbe  dust"  under 
tbe  Cliurch's  feet,  or  subject  tliemselves  ta 
deep  humiliation,  that  they  may  be  restored. 
They  shall  not  be  ashamed  that  wait  for  me. 
Such  as  wait  patiently  and  trust  in  the  ful- 
filment of  all  these  gracious  promises  shall 
escape  shame,  for  the  promises  will  assuredly 
be  fulfilled. 

Ver.  24. — Shall  the  prey  he  taken,  etc.? 
The  incredulous  among  the  exiles  thought 
it  well-nigh  impossible  that  Babylon  should 
be  forced  to  disgorge  her  prey — the  captives 
whose  labours  were  so  valuable  to  her. 
Babylon  was  mighty.  By  tbe  laws  of  war 
she  had  a  rightful  claim  to  her  captives. 
How  was  she  to  be  induced  or  compelled  to 
give  them  up  ?  • 

Ver.  25. — The  oaptives  of  the  mighty  shall 
be  taken  away.  The  answer  to  tbe  questions 
of  ver.  24  is  that,  if  Babylon  is  mighty,  God 
is  mightier.  God  will  "take  away"  the 
captives,  and  "  save  "  his  "  children." 

Ver.  26. — I  will  feed  them  that  oppress 
thee  with  their  own  flesh  (comp.  ch.  ix.  20). 
Civil  disunion  is  intended,  which  wUl  break 
the  power  of  Babylon,  and  render  her  an 
easy  prey  to  tbe  Persians.  Tbe  recently 
discovered  inscriptions  clearly  show  that 
this  was  the  case.  Nabonidus  had  alienated 
the  affections  of  his  subjects  by  changes  in 
tbe  religion  of  the  country,  and  during  the 
course  of  tbe  war  with  Cyrus,  many  Baby- 
lonian tribes  went  over  to  the  invaders,  and 
fought  against  their  own  countrymen  (see 
tbe  '  Cylinder  of  Nabonidus ; '  and  comp. 
Sayce,  'Ancient  Empires  of  the  East,'  p. 
387).  The  mighty  One  of  Jacob  (see  the 
comment  on  ch.  i  24). 


HOMILETICS. 

Vers.  5 — 12. — The  lovest  humiliation  and  the  highest  glory  meet  in  Christ.  The 
Messiah  was  to  be  "  glorious  in  the  eyes  of  the  Lord "  (ver.  5) ;  God  was  to  be  "  bis 
Strength ; "  "  kings  "  were  to  "  see  him  and  arise  ; "  "  princes  also  "  were  to  "  worship  " 

fver.  7)  J  he  was  to  "  raise  up  tbe  earth  ; "  to  "  cause  to  inherit  the  desolate  heritages  " 
ver.  8) ;  he  was  to  loose  the  prisoners  (ver.  9),  to  "  restore  Israel "  (ver.  6),  and  to 
carry  salvatioa  to-the  ends  of  the  world  (ver.  6);  yet,  at  the  same  time,  he  was  to  be 
"despised  of  men,  an  object  of  abhorrence  to  the  nations,  a  servant  [or,  'slave']  of 
rulers "  (ver.  7).  That  such  opposites  should  meet  in  one  person  must  have  seemed, 
anterior  to  the  event,  most  improbable;  yet  the  prophet  utters  no  "uncertain  sound." 
He  proclaims  alike,  with  the  greatest  distinctness,  both  the  glory  (ch.  ix.  6,  7 ;  xlii. 
1 — 8;  xlix.  1 — 6)  and  the  humiliation  (ch.  xlix.  7;  liii.  2 — 12),  both  the  exaltation 
and  the  depression,  of  tbe  Redeemer.  And  the  event  justified  him,  in  both  respect* 
alike. 


OH.  XLTX.  1—26.]    THE  BOOK  OF  THE  PROPHET  ISAIAH.  235 

I.  Chkist's  extreme  HDMiLiATiON.  Chriflt  '*  made  himself  of  no  reputation,  and 
took  upon  him  the  form  of  a  servant,  and  was  made  in  the  likeness  of  men :  and  being 
found  in  fashion  as  a  man,  he  humbled  himself,  and  became  obedient  unto  death,  even 
the  death  of  the  cross  "  (Phil.  ii.  7,  8).  Note  the  chief  points  of  tlie  humiliation.  Being 
"in  the  form  of  God"  and  "equal  with  God,"  he  consented  (1)  to  be  born  on  earth 
as  a  man ;  (2)  in  a  humble  station ;  (3)  to  be  laid  in  a  manger ;  (4)  to  be  "  subject " 
to  earthly  parents ;  (5)  to  be  cast  out  of  his  native  city  by  his  fellow-townsmen  ; 
(6)  to  have  not  where  to  lay  his  head ;  (7)  to  have  his  teacliing  rejected  by  the  mass 
of  his  countrymen ;  (8)  to  be  betrayed  ;  (9)  bound;  (10)  smitten;  (11)  derided;  (12) 
spit  upon ;  (13)  scourged;  (14)  crucified;  (15)  buried.  The  steps  of  the  humiliation 
were  progressive.  First  it  was  negative  rather  than  positive,  while  he  woiked  as  a 
"carpenter"  in  his  reputed  father's  shop.  Then  it  received  aggravation,  when  he 
became  a  homeless  wanderer,  was  "  rejected  of  men,"  bidden  to  "  depart  out  of  their 
coasts,"  threatened  with  stoning,  declared  to  "  have  a  devil,"  "  hated,"  plotted  against. 
Finally,  it  culnlinated  in  that  night  and  day  of  agony  when  one  disciple  betrayed  him, 
and.  the  rest  forsook  him  and  fled,  and  he  was  led  before  three  tribunals,  mocked, 
buffeted,  crowned  with  thorns,  smitten  with  a  reed,  scourged  judicially,  nailed  to  the 
cross,  flouted,  railed  on,  finally  buried  out  of  men's  sight,  as  though  all  was  indeed 
"  finished  "  with  him,  and  the  earth  would  hear  no  more  of  One  who  had  lived  an  outcast's 
life,  and  died  the  death  of  a  malefactor ! 

II.  Chkist's  exaltation  and  olort.  "  Wherefore  God  also  hath  highly  exalted 
him;  and  given  him  a  Name  which  is  above  every  name :  that  at  the  Name  of  Jesus 
every  knee  should  bow,  of  things  in  heaven,  and  things  in  earth,  and  things  under  the 
earth ;  and  that  every  tongue  should  confess  that  Jesus  Christ  is  Lord,  to  the  glory 
of  God  the  Father  "  (Phil.  ii.  9 — 12).  Note  the  chief  points  of  the  exaltation.  No 
sooner  is  he  dead  than  he  descends  to  Hades,  "preaches  to  the  spirits  in  prison,"  and 
deprives  hell  of  its  prey ;  then  rises,  "  loosens  the  bonds  of  death,  because  it  was  not 
possible  that  he  should  be  holden  of  it,"  cheers  his  "little  flock"  with  his  presence 
for  forty  days,  ascends  to  hoaven,  and  sits  at  God's  right  hand.  King  of  kings  and  Lord 
of  lords  for  evermore.  On  earth  he  has  "a  Name  above  every  name."  The  Eoman 
empire  bows  down  to  him ;  the  barbarians  are  in  great  part  converted ;  more  and  more 
nations  flow  into  his  kingdom ;  and  at  the  present  day  three  hundred  millions  of  men, 
more  than  a  fourth  part  of  the  world's  inhabitants,  nominally  at  any  rate,  confess  him 
for  their  Master  and  Lord.  In  heaven  the  angels  worship  him ;  he  sits  upon  the  great 
white  throne,  and  before  him  are  the  four  and  twenty  elders,  and  the  host  of  angels, 
and  the  ten  thousand  thousand  saints,  and  the  song  is  sung,  "  Salvation  unto  our  Gud 
which  sitteth  upon  the  throne,  and  unto  the  Lamb;"  and  all  the  angels  stand  about 
the  throne,  and  about  the  elders  and  the  four  beasts,  and  fall  on  their  face  before  the 
throne,  and  worship  him,  saying,  "  Blessing,  and  glory,  and  wisdom,  and  thanksgiving, 
and  honour,  and  power,  and  might,  be  unto  our  God  for  ever  and  ever.  Amen  "  (Bev. 
vii.  9—12). 

Vers.  13 — 16. — The  love  of  Ood  for  his  Church.  The  love  of  God  for  his  Church  is 
no  doubt  something  mysterious,  inscrutable,  as  are  all  the  Divine  attributes ;  but  it  is 
so  pointedly  set  before  us  in  many  places,  both  of  the  Old  and  the  New  Testaments,  that 
it  must  certainly  be  intended  we  should  meditate  upon  it.  We  may  with  reverence 
consider  it  (1)  in  its  origin  ;  (2)  in  its  action ;  (3)  in  its  results. 

I.  Ik  its  origin.  God's  love  for  his  Church  would  seem  to  originate  in  the  fondness 
with  which  all  intelligent  beings  regard  the  work  of  their  own  hands ;  that  on  which 
they  have  spent  toil,  time,  labour,  thought,  care.  God  in  creating  the  world  had, 
primarily,  his  Church  in  view ;  he  made  all  material  things  for  the  sake  of  man ;  and 
he  made  mankind  with  a  view  to  his  Church,  He  was  moved  to  the  creation  of  the 
world  by  a  desire  to  have  for  all  eternity  a  body  of  pure,  good,  happy,  intelligent 
worshippers  dwelling  with  him  in  heaven.  He  began  by  making  man  "  in  his  own 
image  "  (Gen.  i.  27),  with  a  moral  nature,  free-will,  consciousness,  personality,  memory. 
He  knew  that,  with  these  gifts,  man  would  _fall ;  but  he  determined  from  the  first  that 
out  of  fdllen  humanity  he  would  raise  up  a  certain  number — as  many  a.s  would  allow 
him — save  them,  purify  them,  make  them  his  "  peculiar  prople  "  (Deut.  xiv.  2),  his 
Church.    In  idea,  we  may  say  that  God'loved  his  Church  Kfore  he  had  created  it;  for. 


23«  THE  BOOK  OP  THE  PROPHET  ISAIAH,    [oh.  xlix.  1- 24 

kaowing  what  it  would  be,  he  loved  it  by  anticipation,  recogoizing  in  it  the  best,  and 
so  the  dearest  to  Iiim,  of  all  his  works.  Such  was  his  lore  for  his  Church  in  its  origin. 
We  have  now  to  consider  it — 

II.  In  its  action.  As  a  means  of  obtaining  that  Church  triumphant  in  heaven 
which  he  desired,  God  eaw  good  to  create  a  Church  militant  on  earth,  which  should  be 
its  shadow  and  representative,  and  to  make  that  Church  the  peculiar  object  of  his  care. 
For  this  Church  he  showed  hia  love  by  unwearied,  ceaseless  watchfulness,  by  super- 
natural interpositions  from  time  to  time,  by  patient  endurance  of  provocations,  by 
occasional  chastisements,  by  wamings,  by  providential  guidance,  by  direct  teaching 
from  Sinai,  by  indirect  instrnction  through  a  long  series  of  inspired  prophets  and  seers. 
Never  forgetting,  nover  forsaking  Israel,  he  delivered  them  out  of  Egypt,  led  them 
through  the  wilderness,  gave  them  Canaan,  subdued  the  nations  before  them,  saved 
them  from  the  power  of  Assyria,  brought  them  forth  out  of  Babylon,  sustained  and 
supported  them,  until,  in  the  fulness  of  time,  he  gave  the  strongest  possible  evidence 
of  his  love  by  sending  forth  his  Son  to  die  for  his  Church,  and  by  his.  death  to  infuse 
into  it  fresh  life,  and  transform  it  from  a  national  into  a  world-wide  society,  from  the 
Church  of  the  Jews  into  the  "  holy  Catholic  Church  " — the  Church  of  all  nations.  And 
this  Church  he  has  built  upon  a  rock  ;  he  has  promised  to  be  with  it  always ;  he  liaa 
declared  that  the  gates  of  hell  shall  not  prevail  against  it.  This  Church  he  "  nourisheth 
and  cherisheth  "  (Bph.  v.  29),  guiding  it  with  his  Spirit,  sanctifying  and  cleansing  it 
(Eph.  V.  26),  protecting  it  from  its  secret  foes,  delivering  it  from  its  avowed  enemies. 
The  Church  of  Christ  for  nearly  nineteen  hundred  years  has  triumphed  over  all  attempts 
to  crush  it  and  destroy  it,  not  by  its  own  strength,  but  through  the  love  and  care  of 
the  Almighty.  The  action  of  God's  love  for  his  Church  is  thus,  in  the  first  place,  to 
keep  it  in  being ;  in  the  second,  to  purify  and  perfect  it.  It  only  remains  to  consider 
this  precious  love — 

III.  In  its  besdlts.  The  present  results  are:  I.  That  there  is  a  witness  for  God 
in  almost  every  land^a  witness  which  testifies  unceasingly  to  the  existence,  power,  and 
goodness  of  the  Almighty ;  to  the  free  offer  of  redemption  through  his  Son,  and  to  the 
free  gift  of  sanctification  through  his  Spirit.  2.  There  is  a  body  which  preaches  holi- 
ness of  life,  even  if  it  Fery  imperfectly  practises  it.  3.  There  is  a  community  which 
witnesses  to  the  spirituality  of  man,  to  free-will,  moral  responsibility,  the  absolute  and 
eternal  difference  of  right  from  wrong,  a  future  life,  and  judgment  to  come.  4.  There 
is  a  body  which  hands  on  religion  from  age  to  age  as  a  real  living  thing ;  a  power  seen 
in  its  fruits ;  a  transforming,  energizing  power ;  not  a  philosophy,  but  a  hfe.  In  the 
future  the  great  result  will  be — that  which  the  Revelation  of  St.  John  indicates— the 
eternal  existence  in  heaven  of  a  Church  triumphant ;  '« a  multitude  which  no  man  can 
number,"  consisting  "  of  all  nations,  and  kindreds,  and  people,  and  tongues,"  who  will 
"  stand  before  the  throne  of  God,  and  before  the  Liamb,  clothed  with  white  robes,  and 
palms  in  their  hands,"  praising  him  and  ready  to  do  his  pleasure  for  ever  (BeT.  vil 
9, 10^ 

HOMILIES  BY  VARIOUS  AUTHOEa 

Verp.  1 — 13. — Jehovah  amd  his  Servant.  The  Servant  of  Jehovah  is  wearied  with  the 
ohitinMy  of  the  Israelites,  and  turns  to  the  lands  afar  off,  that  he  may  unfold  to  them 
his  high  mission  and  its  purport.  The  offer  of  salvation  is  to  be  extended  to  the  heathen 
world. 

I.  HiB  OAI.L.  From  his  very  birth  he  has  been  destined  as  a  missionary  to  the 
heathen  world  (of.  Jer.  i.  5 ;  Gal.  i.  15 ;  Luke  i.  31).  The  emphasis  is  on  the  fact. 
He  was  not  self-called,  and  there  was  no  presumption  on  his  part.  There  is  all  the 
difference  in  the  world  between  calling  one's  self  missionary,  or  apostle,  or  minister,  and 
feeling  that  "  God  has  made  mention  of  one's  name." 

II.  His  ENDOWMENT.  His  mouth  has  been  made  a  sharp  sword;  a  vehicle  for  that 
Word  which  is  elsewhere  compared  to  a  sharp  and  two-edged  sword,  to  pierce  the  con- 
science, to  overcome  the  proud  and  the  stubborn  (cf.  oh.  xi.  4;  li.  16;  Heb.  iv.  12  ; 
Bph.  vi.  17  ;  Rev.  i.  16;  xix.  16.  See  also,  for  iVepvmgmcy  of  eloquence,  Bccles.  xii. 
11).    ft  is  a  lesson ;  pointiest  speech  is  no  speech  for  the  minister  of  (Jod.    We  do  not 


OH.  xtix  1—26.]    THE  BOOK  OF  THE  PROPHET  ISAIAH.  23t 

speak  to  "  gain  time,"  but  to  gain  hearts.  In  some  respects  we  may  be  compared  to 
marksmen.    In  Gentile  poets  the  like  figures  occur  of  the  sword  or  the  arrow, 

"  His  powerful  speech 
Pierced  the  hearer's  soul,  and  left  behind. 
Deep  in  bis  bosom,  its  keen  point  infizt. 
Say  through  what  paths  of  liquid  air 
Our  arrows  shall  we  throw?" 

(Find., 'Ol.' 2, 160.) 

And  BO  with  the  apostolic  preaching.  They  told  the  world  in  plain  terms  "  that  he 
who  believed  should  be  saved,  and  that  he  who  believed  not  should  be  damned."  "  This 
was  the  dialect  which  pierced  the  conscience,  and  made  the  hearers  cry  out,  '  Men  and 
brethren,  what  shall  we  do?*  It  tickled  not  the  ear,  but  sank  into  the  heart;  and 
when  men  came  from  such  sermons,  they  never  commended  the  preacher  for  his  taking 
voice  or  gesture,  for  the  fineness  of  such  a  simile  or  the  quaintness  of  such  a  sentence, 
but  gpoke  like  men"  conquered  with  the  overpowering  force  of  truth."  The  Servant  of 
God  is  also  compared  to  a  "polished  shaft"  (of.  Jer.  li.  11).  His  ■wovde  penetrate  easily, 
because  natural,  familiar,  and  not  above  the  capacity  of  the  hi  arer.  "  Nothing  is  more 
preposterous  than  for  those  who  profess  to  aim  at  men's  hearts  to  shoot  over  their 
heads"  (South). 

III.  His  DEARNE88  TO  GoD.  This  polished  shaft  is  covered  in  the  quiver  of  God. 
The  Almighty  takes  care  of  his  tools,  as  every  good  workman  does.  Through  Israel  as 
his  instrument,  he  designs  to  manifest  his  glory.  "  His  Servant  will  become  the  Head  of 
a  regenerated  and  expanded  Israel,  whiohJehovah  will  hold  forth  to  the  universe  as  his 
fairest  prize"  (Cheyne).  This  sense  of  being  related  to  God  and  his  purposes  is  the 
source  of  the  purest  consolation.  It  is  true  the  Servant  of  God  is  tempted  to  despondencj", 
as  in  the  typical  case  of  Elijah  in  the  wilderness.  The  "  flesh  is  weak."  On  the  other 
hand,  jus'j  when  he  is  weak,  then  is  the  Servant  of  God  strong.  The  cry  of  seeming 
despair  in  Ps.  xxii.  1  is  absorbed  in  the  jubilant  exultation  of  the  singer  at  the  close, 
in  the  prospect  of  the  extension  of  the  kingdom  (cf.  Matt,  xxvii.  46).  So  here,  after  the 
melancholy  outburst,  "I  have  laboured  in  vain,"  etc.,  the  Servant  of  Jehovah  "  gives 
the  lie  to  all  delusive  appearances,"  assured  that  his  recompense  is  with  God.  The 
Servant  of  God  has  his  rights,  founded  on  the  nature  of  God  himself  and  on  his  covenant . 
The  missionary  of  the  great  King  has  a  right  to  be  protected,  and  to  expect  submission 
to  his  message.  "  The  mention  of  recompense  shows  that  'Servant'  here  has  a  special 
meaning  of  its  own.  A  slave  can  have  no  recompense"  (Cheyne).  He  will  have  a  "  portion 
nmong  the  great "  (ch.  liii.  10, 12).  And  what  is  the  great  "  recompense  of  the  reward  "  ? 
The  noblest  that  can  be  thought  of — to  "  bring  back  Jacob,"  to  "  gather  Israel,"  and 
still  more,  to  be  the  Light  of  the  nations,  to  be  the  Instrument  of  Jehovah's  salvation 
unto  the  earth's  end.  It  is  natural,  it  is  noble,  it  is  Christian,  to  have  respect  to  such 
a  recompense.  The  quality  of  life's  rewards  is  the  main  thing  to  be  considered.  There 
can  be  no  contradiction  between  the  doctrines  of  grace  and  the  hopes  of  reward,  if  that 
reward  be  conceived  as,  first  and  last,  consisting  in  the  fa\'our,  the  friendship,  the 
enployment  of  the  righteous  and  merciful  Governor  of  the  world. 

IV.  Glimpses  of  the  great  reward.  Already  faith,  revived  in  the  breast  of 
Jehovah's  Servant,  is  encouraged  by  large  views  of  the  future.  1.  His  promised 
honours.  He  is  now  heartily  despised  by  man  ;  but  the  "God  of  Israel,"  the  Redeemer 
and  Avenger,  saith  that  he  shall  in  his  future  fortunes  be  the  Ripresenlative  of  Israel's 
glories.  He  is  now  under  the  sway  of  great  despots,  heathen  lords.  The  time  shall  come 
when  kings  shall  rise  up  to  do  him  homage,  and  princes  shall  bow  down  before  him; 
for  behind  him  is  Jehovah  himself,  the  faithful  Oovenant-keeper,  who  has  chosenj 
and  therefore  will  support  his  Servant.  2.  Bis  mediatorial  office.  When  the  season  o( 
Providenc.  has  come,  the  Servant  shall  not  only  be  helped  and  saved,  but  shall  become 
the  Source  of  salvation  to  others  (cf.  Ps.  xxii.  23 — 27).  He  shall  raise  up  the  ruined 
land;  he  shall  assign  to  the  different  families  the  heritages  belonging  to  them  ;  he  shall 
say  to  the  captive  Jews,  "Go  forth! "  and  they  shall  return,  like  a  well-shepherded  flock, 
finding  pasture  everywhere  on  the  way.  They"  shall  not  be  afflicted  by  the  burning 
sun  nor  by  the  illusive  mirage.  Led  by  refreshing  springs,  and  finding  a  highway  through 
the  mountains,  they  shall  come  from  all  quarters  to  the  wished-for  end  of  their  pilgrim- 
age.   The  description  may  be  taken  as  an  allegory  of  life's  pilgrimage. — J. 


238  THE  BOOK  OF  THE  PROPHET  ISAIAH,    [oe.  xlix.  1— 2& 

Vert.  14 — ^26. — Despondency  comforted.  I.  Ths  temptation.  "  Jehovah  hath  for- 
saken me,  and  the  Lord  hath  forgotten  me."  The  temptation  is  to  ascribe  the  cause 
of  feeling  in  our  own  mind  to  a  Being  outside  us;  forgetting  that  "'tis  in  ourselves 
that  we  are  thus  or  thus."  It  does  not  follow,  because  our  hearts  are  dry,  that  the 
fountain  of  comfort  is  sealed.  It  does  not  follow,  because  we  feel  ourselves  lonely,  that 
the  good  God  has  deserted  us ;  nor,  because  we  do  not  realize  the  Divine  presence,  that 
God  has  forgotten  us.  But  the  mind  naturally  leans  on  signs  and  symbols  and  outward 
manifestations.  The  act  of  faith — so  simple  to  speak  about — the  "walk  by  faith,  not 
by  sight,"  is  really  most  difficult.  There  are  times  when  even  the  noblest  of  man- 
kind are  unequal  to  such  an  effort.  Beascu  will  hardly  meet  the  case.  "He  that 
despairs,"  it  has  hcen  said,  "limits  an  infinite  Power  to  a  finite  apprehension,  and 
measures  Providence  by  his  own  little  contracted  model."  True ;  and  the  truth  is  not 
consoling.    The  sense  and  assurance  of  love  alone  can  console. 

II.  Debpondbnoy  het.  Not  by  censure,  not  by  argument,  but  by  the  assurance 
of  uninterrupted  and  undying  love.  It  is  a  Divine  love;  surpassing,  therefore,  the 
noblest  manifestations  of  human  love — that  of  father  or  mother.  A  woman  may, 
like  a  Lady  Macbeth,  allow  some  mightier  passion  to  get  the  better  even  of  maternal 
love.  But  there  is  no  mightier  passion  in  the  heart  of  Glod  than  the  love  to  bis  children. 
Human  memory  m  infirm;  hut  Qod  cannot  forget.  The  picture  of  Israel  is  graven  on 
the  palms  of  his  hands.  "  It  is  indelible,  like  the  sacred  marks  of  devotees.  Jehovah 
inverts  the  usual  order.  A  worshipper  needs  a  consecrating  mark  to  remind  him  of  his 
relation  to  God.  Zion's  God,  though  not  needing  such  reminder,  has  condescended  to 
grave  Jerusalem  on  the  palms  of  his  hands.  The  objects  of  human  interest  are  changing ; 
Ood  concentrates  his  thought  on  his  people.  "  Thy  walls  are  ever  before  me."  The  visible 
city  was  indeed  destroyed,  but  God  had  his  eye  upon  the  preservation  of  the  spiritual 
building  for  eternity.  "  Dost  thou  think  that  that  is  the  city  of  which  I  said,  '  I 
engraved  thee  on  the  palms  of  my  hands'?  Kay ;  that  building  is  not  now  built  in 
the  midst  of  you.  It  is  that  which  shall  be  revealed  in  my  presence ;  it  was  prepared 
from  the  time  when  I  meditated  to  produce  a  Paradise,  and  I  showed  it  to  Adam  before 
he  .sinned ;  when  he  cast  away  my  command,  it  was  removed  from  him.  And  now,  lo  I 
it  hath  been  kept  by  me,  even  as  Paradise."  Men's  thoughts  decline  to  the  material ; 
Ood  is  concerned  with  the  ideal  and  eternal.  And  in  this  truth  lies  profound  encourage- 
ment. Forms  decay,  institutions  come  down  with  a  mighty  crash ;  the  building  of  the 
ages  is  ever  going  on.  And  it  must  go  on  by  means  of  the  labours  of  Zion's  children. 
The  desolate  city  will  yet  be  clothed  with  ornaments  like  a  lonely  bride ;  and  she  who 
has  been  as  a  desolate  widow  will  have  a  family  too  numerous  to  be  contained  within 
present  narrow  bounds. 

in.  Unfailino  hope  is  Jeeotah.  At  his  bidding,  and  with  the  hearty  aid  of  the 
Gentiles,  the  exiles  shall  return  to  their  own  houses,  as  the  foster-fiither  carries  the 
child  in  the  bosom  of  his  garment.  The  custom  is  Oriental  (see  on  2  Kings  x.).  The 
meaning  is  that  the  princes  of  the  Gentiles  shall  favour  and  respect  IsraeL  Some 
fulfilment  may  be  seen  in  the  conduct  of  the  Persian  kings,  of  Alexander  and  his 
successors  towards  the  Jews ;  another  kind  of  fulfilment  in  the  patronage  of  the 
Church  by  Constantine.  But  the  full  accomplishment  of  the  prediction  remains  for 
the  future.  But  incredulity  breaks  in.  "  Can  the  tyrant  be  made  to  disgorge  his  prey  ?  " 
This  shall  take  place.  Jehovah  shall  appear  in  battle-might,  as  Avenger  and  Hero  of 
Jacob,  and  the  foes  shall  be  put  to  shame.  Jehovah — those  that  hope  in  him  shall  not 
be  ashamed.  The  strain  that  began  with  the  mutterings  of  despondency  ends  in  the 
triumph  of  confidence  and  exultation,  Hope  in  the  Eternal — this  must  be  our  sure 
stay  in  the  times  of  the  nation's,  the  Church's,  the  individual's  need.  Our  conduct 
cannot  rise  higher  than  our  hopes,  no  more  than  the  water  in  the  pipe  can  rise  higher 
than  the  spring-head.  He  who  lives  by  the  hopes  of  the  present  and  passing  world, 
acts  and  gufi'ers  with  a  strength  that  is  less  than  might  be  his.  Nothing  in  this  world 
can  support  us  against  trials  which  threaten  the  loss  of  our  worldly  all.  We  can  only  be 
borne  up  by  something  mightier  and  greater  than  this  world,  not  to  be  found  In  it,  but 
in  the  Eternal  himself. — J. 

Yer.  4. — A  mistaken  estimate.  "  Then  I  said,  I  have  laboured  in  vain,  I  have  spent 
my  strength  for  nought,  and  in  vain."     Oft-repeated  words.     Human   ignorance. 


«■.  XLix.  1— 26.]    THE  BOOK  OF  THE  PROPHET  ISAIAH.  239 

Burvsying  the  fields,  says,  "No  harvests;  or  at  best  no  harresta  accordant  with  the 
toil  and  tears  of  the  sowing."  What  folly  I  As  if  we  conld  see  beneath  the  soil  the 
slumbering  seed  waiting  to  spring  forth ;  or  the  seeds  that  have  been  carried  as  by 
the  birds  of  the  heavens  to  far-away  acres. 

I.  The  borsowfui.  itobeebb.  The  words  have  pain  in  them.  "I  have  laboured  in 
vain."  No  man  likes  to  feel  that.  These  are  not  the  tears  of  indolence,  but  the  sorrows 
of  the  toiler.  We  can  sympathize  with  them ;  for  we  have  all  at  seasons  felt  thus. 
But  the  words  are :  1.  Mistaken  in  their  main  idea.  Who  knows  what  success  is,  or 
where  success  is  7  "  In  vain  ?  "  Sometimes  the  largest  harvests  grow  above  the  sower's 
grave.  2.  Mistaken  in  their  central  object.  "J  said."  Yes;  but  who  are  ^ou  7  God 
is  the  Judge.    Let  no  man  make  the  attempt  to  enter  the  Divine  observatory. 

II.  The  BATiNo  OLAusa.  "Yet  I"  Here  comes  wisdom  after  mistake.  "Surely  my 
judgment  is  with  the  Lord."  1.  This  quickens  inspiration  to  duty.  2.  This  sanctifies 
the  sorrow  of  disappointment.  3.  This  keeps  alive  the  hope  of  reward.  What  a 
beautiful  sentence  1— "  My  work  is  with  my  Q-od."    It  is  in  good  hands. — ^W.  M.  8. 

Ter.  6. — A  Light  to  the  Gentiles.  "  It  is  a  light  thing  that  thou  shouldest  be  my 
Servant,  etc."    How  distiiictly  this  prophesies  concerning  Christ ! — 

L   IX  BELATION  TO  THE   TBCE   OLOBT  OF   HIS  KINODOM.      Not  tO  eXalt  JaCOb,  Or  to 

prewrre  Israel,  but  to  be  a  Light  to  the  Gentiles. 

n.  Ix  RELATION  TO  THE  BISTORT  OF  HIS  MINI8TBT.  Why  did  the  Jewish  nation 
despise  and  crucify  the  Bedeemer  ?  It  would  have  been  a  light  thing  to  serve  in  such 
a  cause  as  that  which  ministered  to  their  glory  by  restoring  their  prestige  and  pre- 
eminenca;  but  it  was  " heavy  as  the  cross"  to  save  the  world. — ^W.  M.  S. . 

Vers.  1—4. — The  daim,  the  confession,  and  the  consolation  6f  the  Servant  of  Ood, 
We  may  treat  this  passage  either  historically  or  practically.    We  look  at  it — 

L  In  ITS  REFERENCE  TO  Jews  Chbist.  He  was,  indeed,  an  Israel,  a  Prince  with 
God,  as  never  Jacob  was.  He  was  truly  a  Servant  of  Jehovah,  doing  his  work  as  never 
prophet  or  nation  did  before.  These  words  are  most  appropriate  on  his  lips.  1.  Ee 
claimed  the  attention  ^mankind.  He  said,  in  other  words  and  ways,  "  Listen,  0  isles, 
unto  me ;  and  hearken,  ye  people,  from  far."  He  said  that  "every  one  that  was  of  the 
truth  "  would  hear  his  words ;  that  he  would  draw  all  men  unto  him.  He  summoned 
the  weary  hearts  of  men  everywhere  to  come  and  find  rest  in  him  and  in  his  service ; 
he  offered  himself  to  mankind  as  the  Light  of  the  world,  as  the  Bread  of  life,  etc.  He 
had  the  most  penetrating  truth  to  utter  (ver.  2 ;  see  John  vi.  63).  2.  Be  confessed 
a  temporary,  mitoardfaUwre.  He  had  to  acknowledge  that  the  men  of  social  standing 
and  of  ecclesiastical  position  did  not  believe  in  him ;  that  many  of  his  disciples  fell 
away  fi:om  him  in  the  time  of  difficulty  and  trial ;  that  he  was  left  "  alone.  3.  Ee 
•  fotmd  great  consolation  ifi  Ood.  f  1)  In  the  consciousness  that  the  Eternal  Father 
called  him  to  his  work  (ver.  1).  The  thought  that  "  the  Father  had  sent  him  "  was 
his  continual  refuge.  (2)  In  the  assurance  that  the  Father  was  with  him,  encompassing 
him  with  his  protecting  love  (ver.  2 ;  and  see  Matt.  xxvi.  53).  (3)  In  the  confident 
belief  that  the  future  would  justify  his  action  and  his  words.  He  knew  that  the  time 
would  come  when  God  would  be  glorified  through  his  life  and  death  (see  John  xii.  24 ; 
xvii.  4).  (4)  In  the  unfaltering  conviction  that  his  work  would  receive  a  Divine 
reward  in  his  own  exaltation  (ver.  4). 

II.  In  its  application  to  ourselves.  1.  We,  as  true  teachers,  make  oar  daim. 
We  confidently  believe  that  we  have  something  to  say  which  is  worth  the  ^rorld's 
attention ;  which  is  fitted  to  penetrate,  like  a  sharp  sword,  the  thoughts,  the  purposes, 
the  convictions,  of  mankind ;  which  will  give  light  to  the  understawling,  peace  to  the 
conscience,  nobility  to  the  character,  bri<;htness  and  beauty  to  the  life,  of  all  who 
will  listen  and  learn.  2.  We  have  to  make  our  confession  of  difeai — to  acknowledge, 
often,  that  we  have  "  laboured  in  vain  "  (see  ch.  liii.  1).  The  truth  we  preach,  or  teach, 
or  print,  does  not  penetrate ;  it  is  like  the  seed  which  falls  on  stony  ground — ^it  yields 
no  fruit.  Even  the  influence  of  our  lives,  and  even  the  plendings  of  our  soul  wili  God 
in  earnest  prayer,  sometimes  seem  to  be  unavailing.  3.  Wejvndowr  consolation  in  God. 
In  the  conviction  that  he  has  called  us  to  do  the  work  in  which  we  are  occupied;  that 
he  is  surrounding  us  with  his  Divine  protection  and  inspiring  ns  by  hn  upholding 


t40  THE  BOOK  OP  THE  PEOPHET  ISAIAH,    [oh.  xlix.  1— 26, 

Spirit ;  that  God  will  grant  increase  to  onr  toil  in  the  distant  if  not  in  the  near  future ; 
tUat  he  will  bestow  on  ua  a  full  reward  when  the  hour  of  blessed  recompense  arrives. — C 

Vers.  5 — 7. — The  greater  mission.  The  main  point  of  this  passage  is  that  far  greater 
triumphs  should  await  the  Redeemer  of  Israel  than  any  recovery  of  the  scattered  tribes; 
he  was  to  be  a  Light  to  the  whole  Gentile  world — to  be  "  for  salvation  to  the  uttermost 
part  of  the  earth."  The  fact  that  a  true  but  small  mission  opens  out  into  one  that  is 
very  much  larger,  widening  and  deepening  as  it  proceeds,  is  one  that  has  many  illua- 
trations — 

L  In  thb  work  of  thb  Lord  himself.  As  he  "  grew  in  wisdom,"  he  found  that 
"his  Father's  business"  involved  more  than  appeared  to  him  when  he  was  twelve  years 
oW.  There  was  a  time  when  he  instructed  his  disciples  to  "go  not  into  any  way  of  the 
Gentiles  ; "  and  when  he  said,  "  I  am  not  sent  but  unto  the  lost  sheep  of  the  house  of 
Israel"  (Matt,  x,  6;  xv.  24).  But  later  on,  he  not  ouly  recognized  for  himself  that 
his  work  was  to  be  wide  as  humanity  and  to  embrace  those  furthest  away  from  truth 
and  from  God,  but  he  commanded  his  disciples  to  "baptize  all  nations,"  to  "go  unto  all 
the  world,"  etc.  Under  his  holy  hand  his  great  mission  grew,  and  it  became  that  one 
which,  for  the  vastness  of  its  proportions  and  the  beneficence  of  its  aim,  leaves  every 
human  enterprise  immeasurably  behind. 

n.  In  the  woek  of  the  apostles  or  oue  Lobd.  James  and  John,  when  they 
ware  asked  by  their  Master  whether  they  could  drink  of  his  cup,  answered  with  sure 
confidence,  "  We  can ;"  but  they  little  knew  what  were  the  contents  of  that  cup;  they 
little  imagined  how  great,  bow  stupendous,  was  the  task  which  their  Lord  would  leave 
in  their  hands. 

III.  In  the  woke  of  individuaIj  befobuebs.  At  different  times  men  have 
addressed  themselves  to  some  work  of  necessary  reformation.  They  supposed  that  they 
could  measure  the  extent  of  their  task;  but  they  found  that  as  they  proceeded  it 
enlarged,  and  what  they  first  attempted  proved  to  be  "a  light  thing"  in  comparison 
with  all  that  they  ultimately  accomplished.  Witness  the  work  of  Luther,  Knox, 
Cranmer,  Wesley,  etc. 

IV.  In  the  woek  of  each  Christian  Chubch.  A  Christian  Church,  when  first 
planted,  is  most  anxious  to  establish  and  consolidate  itself — to  grow  in  numbers  and  in 
reputation  and  in  strength.  But  before  long  it  awakes  to  the  truth  that  it  has  a 
greater  mission  to  effect  than  this;  it  is  called  into  being  to  exert  a  powerful  influence 
for  good  on  all  the  surrounding  neighbourhood — to  communicate  spiritual  health  and 
eternal  life  to  all  human  souls  that  can  be  reached  and  blessed.  To  establish  itself  is 
"» light  thing  "  in  comparison  with  this  high  and  holy  function. 

1.  The  entrance  on  this  greater  mission  should  be  in  the  spirit  of  pure  devotion. 
We  should  feel  that  we  are  God's  servants  (ver.  5),  called  to  do  his  work.  2.  It  should 
be  carried  on  and  completed  in  God's  strength.    "My  God  shall  be  my  Strength."— C. 

Vers.  8 — 12. — The  hivgdom  of  Christ :  a  missionary  sermon.  In  an  elevated  strain, 
fuU  of  high  hope  and  touched  with  the  pure  joy  of  anticipation,  the  prophet  writes  of 
Messiah's  kingdom.    He  calls  our  attention  to— 

L  Its  mos*  steikino  charaoteeistics.  1.  Spiritual  restoration.  "To  establish 
the  earth,"  or  rather  to  restore  the  land,  and  to  bring  about  the  repossession  by  their 
true  owners  of  the  "  desolate  heritages."  In  the  kingdom  of  Christ  humanity,  that  had 
"  lain  waste  "  and  bad  produced  all  kinds  of  noxious  and  ugly  growths,  should  be  re- 
cultivated,  bear  its  own  true  fruits  of  peace  and  righteousness,  and  be  a  "  land  restored." 
2.  Spiritual  freedom.  To  the  prisoners  of  sin,  of  folly,  and  of  vice,  the  commanding 
word  will  be  addressed,  "  Go  forth  "  (ver.  9) ;  and  they  will  walk  in  the  atmosphere  of 
►  acred  freedom.  3.  Abundance  of  truth.  The  disciples  of  Christ  are  "the  children  of 
light;"  they  walk  in  the  light  of  his  holy  truth  (ver.  9).  4.  The  sheltering  a/rSSe^ 
■providing  power  of  the  sovereign  Saviour.  The  ])resent  Lord  shall  satisfy  their 
hungering  hearts,  shall  slake  their  spirits'  thirst,  shall  shelter  them  from  the  heats  of 
strong  temptation,  shall  supply  them  with  all-suBicieut  grace  for  their  recurring  need 
(▼ar.  10).    All  its  springs  are  in  him  and  he  is  near  to  minister  to  all  their  wants. 

IL  The  openness  of  the  way  to  its  full  establishment,  (Vers.  11, 12.)  In 
tb9  •rrangemt^nts  of  Divine  providence,  when  Jesus  Christ  came  and  introduced  hif 


OH.  XLix.  1— 26.]    THE  BOOK  OP  THE  PROPHET  ISAIAH.  241 

gospel  to  the  world,  there  were  ready  three  things  that  were  wanted  to  carry  it  over  the 
world.  1.  A  missionary  people — supplied  by  the  Jewish  nation,  in  whom  were  all  the 
elements  of  moral  worth  and  religious  enthusiasm.  2.  A  suitable  language — supplied 
by  the  Greeks.  3.  A  highway  to  distant  lands — supplied  by  Boman  roads  and  Roman 
laws.  And  the  new  faith,  which  seemed  certain  to  perish  as  soon  as  it  was  born,  grew 
and  spread  on  every  hand.  It  was  as  if  the  very  obstructions  were  "away." 
Difficulties  disappeared ;  a  "  great  door  and  effectual  was  opened."  And  in  oar  time  the 
way  is  being  further  opened.  Exploration,  human  science,  international  treaties,  even 
war  itself,  is  levelling  the  separating  hUls  and  bridging  the  dividing  gulfs ;  and  even 
into  the  very  heart  of  China  (tiinim?)  the  missionary  is  penetrating  with  the  truth  of 
Ohrist. 

III.  Its  agoeftabus  houb.  The  era  in  which  we  live  is  one  in  which  the  Father 
of  all  is  disposed  to  bless  and  save.  It  is  "  a  day  of  salvation."  The  atoning  work 
is  wrought ;  the  Divine  Spirit  is  ready  to  regenerate  and  renew ;  the  Word  of  truth  and 
grace  is  multiplied ;  great  is  the  company  of  the  preachers ;  the  Churches  of  Christ 
are  £i8t  awaking  to  a  sense  of  their  obligation  and  their  opportunity.  It  is  a  time  to 
pray,  to  work,  and  to  look  for  God's  favouring  presence  and  redeeming  power. — C. 

Vers.  IS,  16. — Ood  thinking  upon  us.  No  language  could  be  stronger  thnn  that 
which  is  here  employed  to  assure  us  of  God's  remembrance  of  us.  We  are  thankful  for 
the  fulness  and  force  of  the  promise ;  for  there  are  at  least — 

I.  Three  temptations  to  think  othebwise.  There  iat  1,  A  eonscioitsness  of  our 
littleness.  Thiuking  of  the  smallness  of  this  earth  as  one  little  plauet  among  the  whole 
stellar  universe ;  of  the  insignificance  of  any  nation,  group,  or  family  of  mankind ;  of  the 
infinitesimal  character  of  the  individual, — we  are  apt  to  suppose  that  each  one  of  us  is, 
in  the  matter  of  intrinsic  worth,  undeserving  of  God's  regard.  This  is  very  shallow 
reasoning ;  but  it  is  not  uncommon,  nor  is  it  without  influence  among  men.  2.  A  sense 
of  our  sin.  It  is  natural  enough  that  we  should  conclude  that  our  guilt  in  God's  sight 
has  so  "  separated  between  us  and  him  "  that  he  banishes  us  from  his  thought,  as 
a  human  father  who  has  been  grievously  wronged  by  his  son  dismisses  him  from  his 
mind.  3.  An  appearance  of  desertion.  When  trial  comes  upon  trial,  when  all  the 
waves  and  billows  of  affliction  go  over  our  soul,  when  all  things  seem  to  be  against  us 
as  they  seemed  of  old  to  Jacob,  it  is  not  surprising  if  we  look  up  despondently,  or  even 
despairingly,  to  heaven  and  say,  "  Hath  God  forgotten  to  be  gracious  ? "  "  My  God, 
my  God,  why  hast  thou  forsaken  me  ? "  There  may  come  times  to  us,  as  to  others, 
when  we  shall  seem  abandoned  by  men,  and  at  length  deserted  of  God— the  darkest, 
bitterest,  saddest  hour  of  our  life,  even  as  it  was  of  his  (Matt,  xxvii.  26). 

II.  The  strong  Divine  bbassueance.  The  tone  of  the  text  is  as  pathetic  as  its 
argument  is  convincing.  The  appeal  is  made  to  the  tenderest  human  afiection — ^that  of 
motherly  love.  God  says  to  us,  "  Though  your  love  for  one  another  may  fail,  even  where 
the  tie  is  the  tenderest  and  strongest,  yet  my  remembrance  of  you  shall  not  fail." 
Human  attachments  do  not  suffice  to  indicate  the  fulness  of  Divine  fidelity;  that 
surpasses  anything  which  our  experience  will  illustrate.  He  further  grants  us  the 
assurance  that  he  is  as  one  who  has  taken  the  most  effective  measures  to  secure  the 
necessary  mindfulness ;  he  has,  so  to  speak,  made  indelible  impressions  where  he 
cannot  fail  to  see  them.  He  goes  as  far  as  language  can  go  to  implant  in  our  minds 
the  conviction  that,  however  our  logical  understanding  may  argue,  however  appearances 
may  be  against  it,  we  are  never  out  of  his  mind-;  he  always  has  us  in  his  heart.  The 
extremity  will  never  come  in  which  we  may  not  say,  "  I  am  poor  and  needy,  but  the 
Lord  thinketh  upon  me." — 0. 

Vers,  23,  25. — The  fear  which  may  he  fearless,  etc.  We  have  two  oonditiona 
indicated  in  these  two  texts  which  present  us  with  a  perfect  contrnst.    We  have— 

I.  The  peak  which  mat  be  fbablbss.  "  They  shall  not  be  ashamed  that  writ  for 
me,"  or  "  that  hope  in  me."  Reverent  trust  in  the  living  God,  in  the  Divine  Friend  of 
man,  has  nothing  to  fear.  It  may  be  seriously  threatened,  but  it  is  secure.  Sickness 
may  come,  adversity  may  assail,  friends  may  forsake,  bereavement  may  affiiot,  death 
may  cast  its  shadows ;  but  a  confiding  trust  in  the  love  and  the  faithfulness  of  Qod  will 
never  be  put  to  shame.    It  will  retain  its  calmness  under  all ;  it  will  triumph  ©rer  all. 


242  THE  BOOK  OF  THE  PROPHET  ISAIAH.      [oh.  xux.  1— 26. 

n.  The  hope  which  vitst  be  hopeless.  "  I  will  contend  with  blm  that  contendeth 
with  thee."  He  who  fights  against  the  people,  the  truth,  the  cause  of  God,  is  fighting 
against  the  Almighty  One  himself.  However  promising  outward  appearances  may  be, 
he  is  foredoomed  to  utter  and  disastrous  failure :  his  hope  is  hopeless. — 0. 

Ver.  Z.—Fitness  for  OocPs  terviee.  The  general  idea  of  this  section  of  Isaiah's 
prophecies  needs  to  he  borne  in  mind.  In  it  "  Israel  himself,  in  all  his  contradictory 
characteristics,  becomes  the  engrossing  subject  of  the  prophet's  meditations.  His 
restoration,  still  future,  but  indubitable,  is  celebrated  in  ch.  Ix.  by  an  ode  somewhat 
similar  to  that  on  the  fall  of  Babylon  in  the  preceding  part.  But  the  nearer  the  great 
event  arrives,  and  the  more  the  prophet  realizes  the  ideal  Israel  of  the  fvtnre,  the  more 
he  is  depressed  by  the  low  spiritual  condition  of  the  actual  Israel.  Strange  to  say, 
this  combination  of  apparently  inconsistent  data — the  splendour  of  the  future  and  the 
misery  of  the  present— supplies  the  material  for  a  specimen  of  dramatic  description 
surpassing  anything  in  the  rest  of  the  Old  Testament"  (Cheyne).  By  the  "servant  of 
Jehovah  "  we  may  understand  those  sent  forth  by  God  as  the  prophets  and  teachers  of 
each  age,  hearing  Divine  messages  of  warning  and  of  duty.  These  are  personified, 
as  It  were,  in  the  one  great  Divine  Teacher,  the  Messiah.  It  was  one  of  the  most 
important  features  of  the  ministry  in  every  age  that  it  should  convict  of  sin ;  therefore 
the  work  of  the  mouth  is  likened  to  that  of  a  "  sharp  sword "  (comp.  Heb.  iv.  12, 
"  The  Word  of  God  is  quick,  and  powerful,  and  sharper  than  any  two-edged  sword, . . . 
and  is  a  discemer  of  the  thoughts  and  intents  of  the  heart "}.  Pindar  employs  the 
metaphor  of  the  arrow  in  application  to  powerful  eloquence.  And  the  metaphor 
of  a  sward  and  on  arrow,  both  in  the  best  state  of  preparation,  aptly  sets  forth  the 
penetrating  and  subduing  efficacy  of  the  gospel.  This  one  feature  of  fitness  for  doing 
God's  work  in  the  world — the  eloquent,  persuasive,  convincing  tongue — aaj  introduce 
to  us  the  general  subject  of  "  fitness  for  God's  service." 

L  It  libs  in  endowment.  The  true  servant  of  God  is  a  gifted  man — one  to  whom 
special  powers  have  been  committed,  which  powers  indicate  his  work,  and  make  him 
responsible  for  the  doing  of  it.  The  proper  idea  of  a  Christian  ministry  is  the  separation 
to  the  work  of  preaching  and  teaching  of  all  those  who  are  evidently  divinely  endowed 
for  preaching  and  teaching  work.  The  right  of  a  man  to  do  any  particular  kind  of 
work  in  the  world  is  simply  the  right  which  comes  from  the  divinely  given  capacity 
for  doing  it.  If  God  made  us  painters,  we  must  paint ;  if  he  made  us  poets,  we 
must  shape  beautiful  thoughts  in  verse ;  if  he  made  us  preachers,  we  must  preach. 
Canon  Liddon  eloquently  describes  the  endowed  teacher.  "Picture  to  yourselves  a 
teacher  who  is  not  merely  under  the  official  obligation  to  say  something,  but  who  is 
morally  convinced  that  he  has  something  to  say.  Imagine  one  who  believes  alike 
in  the  truth  of  his  message,  and  in  the  reality  of  his  mission  to  deliver  it.  Let 
this  teacher  be  tender,  yet  searching ;  let  him  win  the  hearts  of  men  by  his  kindly 
humanity,  while  he  probes,  ay,  to  the  quick,  their  moral  sores.  Let  him  pursue  and 
expose  the  latent  evil  of  the  human  heart  through  all  the  mazes  of  its  unrivalled 
deceitful  ness,  without  sullying  his  own  purity,  and  without  forfeiting  his  strong  belief 
in  the  present  capacity  of  every  human  being  for  goodness.  .  .  .  Clearly,  such  a  teacher 
•  must  bo  a  moral  power ; "  a  "  sharp  sword."  One  thing  greatly  needed  in  our  day  is 
quickness  to  recognize  Divine  endowments  in  men,  and  brotherly  aid  to  all  endowed 
men  in  the  due  exercise  of  their  ^fts. 

XL  It  lies  in  the  Divine  call.  For  the  fact  of  possessing  power  is  not,  standing 
alone,  authority  for  its  being  put  forth  and  exercised.  There  must  be  the  inward 
Divine  call,  which  may  or  may  not  be  heard  through  the  voice  of  outward  circumstances 
This  is  the  lesson  taught  by  the  records  of  the  prophets — Elijah,  Isaiah,  Jonah,  eta 
They  were  endowed,  but  they  did  not  act  until  they  were  called.  The  distinction 
is  expressed,  poetically,  in  Ps.  xxxix.  3,  "  While  I  was  musing  the  fire  burned :  then 
spake  I  with  my  tongue."  Illustrate  from  apostles,  who  were  endowed  with  the  Holy 
Ghost,  symbolized  in  tongues  of  fire;  but  who  were  also  sent  ones.  It  is  one  thing  to 
he  ahh  to  speak,  it  is  quite  another  to  be  called  to  speak. 

III.  It  libs  in  responsive  good  will.  A  man  may  actually  deliver  God's  message 
unwillingly  and  grumblingly,  as  Jonah  did,  but  it  is  clear  that  this  cannot  be  regarded 
as  fit  service.    Only  when  we  say,  "Lord,  just  what  thou  wouldst  have  me  do  ii 


«H.  xux.  1— 26.]    THB  BOOK  OP  THE  PftOPHET  ISAIAH.  848 

exactly  'what  I  desire  to  do,"  can  we  be  regarded  as  serrants  Indeed.  This  does  not  say 
that  onr  good  will  towards  what  is  Grod's  will  for  ns  involves  no  effort,  no  coaflict  with 
self.  The  way  of  earthly  prosperity  may  be  the  way  of  our  own  will ;  and  the  way 
of  lifelong  disability  may  be  the  way  of  doing  God's  will  and  work.  Many  a  man 
has  given  up  every  earthly  prospect  to  preach  Christ  to  his  fellow-men.  And  he  is 
no  fit  preacher  who  does  not  preach  with  good  will — preach  from  the  heart.  He  should 
preach  because  he  must;  he  should  preach  because  be  mshes  to. 

IV.  It  lies  in  oulturk  of  gift.  This  is  the  human  element  in  the  fitness,  which 
is  as  truly  essential  as  the  Divine  element,  the  natural  endowment.  We  cannot  give 
the  gift,  but  we  can  train  it  into  efBoienoy.  It  has  to  be  prepared  for  the  work  of  a 
particular  age,  and  for  the  demands  of  a  particular  sphere.  The  sword  has  to  be 
furbished  and  sharpened.  The  "gift"  has  to  use  instruments;  it  must  gain  skill  in 
the  use  of  instruments.  The  culture  properly  takes  two  forms.  1.  Self-culture,  the 
whole  responsibility  of  which  lies  on  the  would-be  minister.  2.  Culture  by  agencies, 
which  can  be  secured  by  those  who  recognize  in  the  would-be  minister  the  Divine 
"  gift."  Let  the  endowed  and  cultured  man  wait  on  Ood,  and  of  this  we  are  sure— he 
will  find  both  his  place  and  his  work. — B.  T. 

Ver.  4. — Mistaken  ideas  of  success.  None  of  us  can  properly  understand  or  estimate 
onr  life-work.  We  do  not  know  what  it  was  designed  to  do,  nor  where  it  properly  fits. 
Picturing  the  ideal  "Servant  of  the  Lord,"  Isaiah  represents  him  as  disheartened  with  the 
issues  of  his  testimony  and  labour.  The  Messiah  seemed  to  be  "  all  day  long  stretching 
forth  his  hands  to  a  disobedient  and  gainsaying  people."  Mistakes  about  the  success  of 
work  are  quite  common  to  God's  servants.  David  thought  it  was  no  good  to  try  any 
longer,  and  exclaimed,  "  I  shall  now  perish  one  day  by  the  hand  of  SauL"  Elijah 
moaned  in  his  weariness  and  grief,  "I  am  not  better  [more  successful]  than  my  fathers; " 
and  Jonah,  fainting  in  the  sun  beside  the  withered  gourd,  "  It  is  better  for  me  to  die 
than  to  live.  To  him  the  Nineveh-mission  appeared  as  an  utter  and  disgraceful  failure. 
We  must  leave  God  to  estimate  our  successes.  "  The  day  "  shall  declare  it.  We  must 
wait  for  the  "  day  of  God." 

I.  Mas  is  bbqdikbd  to  wokk  without  considbbation  or  bebitlts.  And  that  is 
reasonable,  (1)  because  his  one  work  is  obedience;  (2)  because  the  best  results  are  long 
in  coming ;  (3)  because  any  one  man's  work  is  never  more  than  a  part  of  a  whole,  and 
results  follow  the  united  inSuence  of  all  the  parts;  and  (4)  because  any  seeming  result 
man  may  recognize  is  only  a  cause  of  other  and  better  results  that  are  quite  beyond  his 
estimating.  George  Maodonald  makes  one  of  his  heroes  reproach  his  brother  for  good 
advice  given  which  had  led  to  unpleasant  consequences,  and  the  brother  gives  the 
following  forcible  reply :  "  My  dear  fellow,  I  gave  you  no  advice  that  had  the  least 
regard  to  the  consequence  of  following  it  1  That  was  the  one  thing  you  had  nothing  to 
do  with." 

II.  Man  mat  be  otfLTUEBD  through  his  DI8TBKSS  AT  BESULTB.  One  point  only 
is  suggested.  Seeming  failure  reveals  the  self-seeking  which  had  been  in  his  work. 
And  it  is  the  best  of  culture  to  get  true  knowledge  of  ourselves.  The  man  who  urns 
for  results  really  works  for  himself— for  his  own  praise.  We  must  just  work  as  God's 
servants,  satisfied  to  do  work  that  can  stand  his  inspection;  and  none  of  us  will  find 
it  easy  to  draw  in  our  minds  flrom  results,  and  concentrate  them  on  work, 

III.  Man  may  be  subb  of  the  Divine  acoeptancb  of  good  work.  And  that  is 
an  all-satisfying  resvlt.  It  is  only  man's  poor  view  that  makes  results  into  the  standard 
that  tests  the  value  of  the  work.  The  best  work  may  produce  little,  but  it  is  "  best 
work  *  nevertheless.  Many  a  minister  has  failed  in  his  sphere.  At  least,  so  the  world 
says.  But  its  foolish  estimate  does  not  matter.  Was  it  good  work  ?  God's  judgment 
is  of  the  work.— B.  T. 

Ver.  6. The  great  commission.    St,  Paul  uses  this  verse  in  his  address  to  the  Jews 

of  Antioch  in  Pisidia  (Acts  liii.  47).  "  It  was  necessary  that  the  Word  of  God  shonld 
first  have  been  spoken  unto  you:  but  seeing  ye  put  it  from  yon,  and  judge  yourselves 
unworthy  of  everlasting  life,  lo,  we  turn  to  the  Gentiles.  For  so  hath  the  Lord 
commanded  us,  (saying,)  I  have  set  thee  to  be  a  Light  of  the  Gentiles,  thst  thou 
shouldest  be  for  salvation  unto  the  ends  of  the  earth."    The  truth  Illustrated  is  that  no 


244  THE  BOOK   OF  THE  PEOPHET  ISAIAH,    [oh.  xlix.  1— 2«i 

man  can  have  exclusive  privileges ;  everything  he  has  belongs  to  the  whole  race — it  ii 
the  property  of  everybody.  This  can  be  illustrated  in  prominent  cases.  Aristotle's 
philosophic  thoughts  belong  to  the  race.  Baphael's  paintings  are  the  inspiration  of  the 
race.  Homer's  poetry  is  revelation  for  the  race.  Handel's  music  is  song-praise  for  the 
race.  The  truth  is  true  in  the  smallest  things.  Whatsoever  any  one  of  us  has  he  has 
for  others,  he  has  for  all,  he  has  for  "  whosoever  will."  Our  text  declares  this  to  be 
true  of  the  Jewish  race — as  indeed  of  all  races.  Israel  seemed  to  have  some  peculiar 
privileges.  It  had  them  for  others.  They  could  not  be  exclusive.  Through  Israel  all 
men  were  to  be  saved.  Their  sound  was  to  go  out  even  to  the  ends  of  the  earth. 
'I'here  could  be  no  keeping  to  a  limited  sphere  even  the  privilege  of  the  Messiah  being 
horn  into  the  Jewish  race.  Let  him  but  grow  to  his  manhood,  and  he  will  say,  "Other 
sheep  I  have,  which  are  not  of  this  fold:  them  also  I  must  bring  "  (John  x.  16).  Getting 
practical  application  for  this  searching  truth,  we  note — 

I.  Man  has  DfFLtrEECB  within  the  bansb  of  his  own  pubposbs.  We  may  make 
our  life-spheres.  We  may  decide  what  we  will  do,  and  where  we  will  do  it.  We  may 
propose  to  limit  ourselves  to  a  certain  number  whom  we  will  endeavour  to  aid  and 
bless.  Our  energy  can  do  much,  and  we  often  speak  of  men's  influence  as  limited. 
And  it  is  so  far  true  that  every  man  has  si  first  cirde — a  sphere  immediately  round  him ; 
and  it  is  well  tliat  it  should  have  his  best  work. 

II.  Man  has  influence  bbtond  ant  purposes  op  his  own.  You  may  break  the 
soent-bottle  to  purify  a  room,  but  the  fragrance  will  fill  the  house.  Jesus  came  to 
the  Jews,  but  his  salvation  has  gone  forth  to  the  ends  of  the  earth.  We  may  live  for 
a  home,  but  the  glory  of  gracious  character  fills  a  street.  We  may  preach  to  a 
congregation,  but  strangers  may  hear,  and  from  us  carry  inspiring  words  to  the  distant 
colonies.  Every  one  of  us  may  truly  say,  "  Humanity  is  my  congregation ;  the  world 
is  my  .sphere." 

III.  A  man's  larger  infldbnor  depends  on  the  oharagtbb  shown  in  the 
SMALLER  SPHERE.  Especially  on  his  "  individuality."  By  just  that  in  which  a  man 
differs  from  other  men,  hn  sphere  of  influence  is  the  whole  world. — R.  T. 

Ver.  8. — "  The  acceptable  time"  Called  also  a  "day  of  salvation."  There  can  be  no 
doubt  that  by  this  expression  is  meant  the  period  of  the  new  dispensation,  at  the 
commencement  of  which  the  Messiah  appeared,  to  effect  the  work  of  human  redemption, 
and  during  which  the  blessings  of  that  redemption  are  being  commimicated  to  mankind. 
We  may  say  it  is  the  period  in  which  God  had  reconciled  the  world  unto  himself; 
in  which  sinful  men  can  come  to  God,  and  deal  with  him  in  respect  of  their  sins, 
through  an  appointed  Mediator.  "  All  our  happiness  results  from  the  Son's  interest  in 
the  Father,  and  the  prevalency  of  his  intercession,  that  he  always  heard  him.  And 
this  makes  the  gospel-time  an  acceptable  time,  welcome  to  us,  because  we  are  accepted 
of  God,  and  reconciled  and  recommended  to  him"  (Matthew  Henry).  Our  Lord  used 
this  expression  in  his  remarkable  Messianic  sermon  at  Nazareth,  declaring  that  he  had 
come  to  proclaim  the  "acceptable  year  of  the  Lord"  (Luke  xiv.  19),  probably  taking 
his  figure  from  the  jdyousness  of  the  Jewish  year  of  jubilee.  From  this  passage,  what 
is  understood  as  a  "  simple  gospel  sermon  "  may  be  preached. 

I.  There  mat  be  hindrances  to  Divine  acceptanob.  Get  right  apprehensions 
of  God,  and  it  will  be  understood  that,  under  some  circumstances,  he  cannot  accept — he 
must  reject,  he  must  frown,  he  must  be  against  man.  Acceptance,  to  be  any  moral 
good  to  us,  must  be  based  on  righteousness.  We  do  not  care  for  acceptance  unless  we 
are  quite  sure  that  God  is  right  in  accepting.  Illustrate  this  in  connection  with  the 
three  prominent  figures  we  use  for  God.  1.  King.  Certainly  a  king  cannot  always 
accept  his  subjects.  2.  Moral  Governor.  A  very  intangible  figure.  But  the  addition  of 
the  word  "  moral "  shows  clearly  that  conditions  are  involved.  3,  Father.  True  fathers 
must  sometimes  hold  off  their  sons. 

II.  The  hindrances  mat  be  such  as  we  put  in  the  wat.  It  is  easy  to  say  the 
hindrances  are  our  sins ;  it  is  much  more  searching  to  say  they  are  the  sinfulness  of 
which  our  sins  are  the  expression.  It  would  be  easy  to  forgive  sins,  if  our  sinfulness 
were  put  away.  And  Christ's  mission  brought  to  us  an  "  acceptable  time,"  because  H 
bore  upon  getting  away  both  the  sinfulness  and  the  sin. 

III.  The  hindbanoes  mat  be  such  as  God  must  put  in  ths  way.     This  th« 


ca  XLix.  1— 26.]    THE  BOOK  Of  THE  PEOPHET  ISAIAH.  245 

preacher  must  deal  with  according  to  the  notions  he  has  of  God's  Law  and  God'« 
righteorianess.  He  has  demands ;  acceptance  must  be  hindered  until  they  are  reason- 
ably met. 

IV.  When  God  and  man  agebb  to  pttt  the  hindrances  awat,  the  acceptable 
TIMS  HAS  coUE.  Man  must  put  avv  ay  his  sinfulness  in  penitence.  God  will  put  away 
bis  claims  in  mercy ;  and  righteousness  and  peace  can  kiss  each  other.  Christ  bears 
mediatorial  relations  both  to  God  and  man. — B.  T. 

Vot.  10. — The  ideal  state.  The  return  journey  cS  the  exiles  is  here  compared  to  that 
of  a  well-tended  flock,  which  has  no  temptation  to  roam,  for  every  need  is  supplied  and 
every  possible  danger  is  averted  from  them.  Prophetic  figures  can  never  be  read  aright 
unless  we  carefully  distinguish  between  the  pictured  ideals  of  poets  and  prophets,  and 
their  realization  in  actual  life.  The  actual  never  comes  up  to  the  ideal.  The  ideal 
is  the  best  possible  under  the  best  of  circumstances ;  the  actual  is  the  best  possible 
under  circumstances  that  come  far  short  of  the  best  possible.  Ideals  have  their  mission 
in  keeping  up  our  standards,  and  making  ua  "  aim  high."  Utopias  are  never  found, 
but  the  world  everywhere  is  the  better  because  some  of  the  human  race  have  conceived 
Utopias,  and  presented  their  conceptions  to  their  fellows.  The  absence  of  all  elements 
of  evil  from  the  ideal  state  is  figured  by  the  removal  of  all  sources  of  physical  distress. 
This  applies  to  the  prophetic  descriptions  in  the  passage  before  us,  and  to  the  pictures 
of  the  heavenly  given  us  in  the  Book  of  Eevelation,  "  They  shall  hunger  no  more, 
neither  thirst  any  more ;  neither  shall  the  sun  light  on  them,  nor  any  heat."  The 
points  which  may  be  profitably  treated  are  these  two. 

L  Disabilities  abb  needed  while  mobal  cultuee  has  to  be  oaeeied  on.  If 
any  proof  were  required  of  that  fallen  and  deteriorated  condition  of  man  which  is 
a  matter  of  universal  experience  and  conviction  and  really  requires  no  proof,  it  would 
be  found  in  the  fact  that  man  now  will  only  learn  his  best  moral  lessons  through  suffer- 
ing. We  so  readily  think  of  suffering  as  arranged  in  the  sovereign  will  of  God ;  it  is 
a  sovereign  necessity  in  meeting  man's  fallen  condition.  Why  will  we  not  learn 
without  these  disabilities?  It  is  clear  that  we  do  not,  and  we  will  not.  It  is  evident 
that  we  are  biassed  towards  wrong,  towards  self-willedness.  Bodily  pain,  life-distresses, 
are  necessary  to  the  culture  of  moral  creatures  who  have  become  enslaved  to  self-will. 
Sorrow  is  graciously  linked  with  sin,  lest  sin  should  come  to  be  loved. 

II.  Disabilities  mat  be  removed  when  moral  character  is  established.  When 
men  are  all  holy,  then  their  surroundings  may  be  ail  beautiful.  There  is  no  smiting 
heat,  no  chilling  cold,  no  lack  of  food,  no  biting  hunger,  no  raging  thirst,  no  wearing 
pnin,  no  blinding  tears,  no  separating  sea,  no  remorseless  death,  in  heaven,  because  all 
who  dwell  there  are  established  in  goodness,  and  so  there  is  no  mission  for  disabilities 
to  accomplish;  their  "occupation's  gone."  And  just  so  far  as  we  win  goodness  on 
earth  we  rise  above  all  our  disabilities,  heaven  is  begun  below;  as  with  everything,  sc 
with  love,  "perfect  love  casteth  out  fear." — ^B.  T. 

Ver.  14. — Ever-recmring  doubts.  What  God  has  to  complain  of  in  every  age  is  our 
"  little  faith."  "  He  cannot  do  many  mighty  works  among  us  because  of  our  unbelief." 
The  reproach  here  is  of  the  great  proportion  of  the  Jewish  people^  who  had  become 
utterly  despondent  under  their  long  captivity,  and  even  began  to  complain,  not  to  God, 
that  would  be  right,  but  (^  God,  which  was  wrong,  saying,  "  The  Lord  hath  forsaken 
me,  and  my  Lord  hath  forgotten  me."    Consider — 

I.  The  human  reasonableness  oj'  doubt.  Days  went  on  for  those  captives,  the 
days  made  years,  the  years  passed  by  the  score,  and  with  the  utmost  stiaining  not  one 
gleam  of  light  could  be  seen  in  the  nation's  sky.  Indeed,  the  political  conditions  and 
combinations  made  the  hope  of  return  more  vain  than  ever.  From  the  human  point  of 
view  it  was  time  indeed  to  doubt.  "  See  how  deplorable  the  case  of  God's  people  may 
be  sometimes,  such  that  they  may  seem  to  be  forsaken  and  forgotten  of  their  God ;  and 
at  such  times  their  temptations  may  be  alarmingly  violent.  Weak  believers,  in  their 
despondency,  are  ready  to  say,  'God  has  forsaken  his  Church,  and  forgotten  the  sorrows 
of  his  people '"  (Matthew  Henry).  This  text  is  "  not  an  expression  of  absolute  unbelief; 
it  is  the  pain  of  seemingly  unreturned  affection,  which  borrows  the  language  of 
goepticiam.    The  highest  act  of  faith  is  to  see  God  with  the  heart  when  all  outward 


249  THE  BOOK  OF  THE  PBOPHET  ISAIAH,    [ca.  xjjol  l—2tt, 

tokens  of  his  presence  are  removed.  There  are  times  when  even  the  nohlest  of  mankind 
are  unequal  to  such  an  effort "  (Cheyne).  So  long  as  we  are  dependent  on  the  senses, 
and  our  knowledge  is  strictly  limited,  for  disciplinary  purposes,  so  long  there  is  a  good 
sense  in  which  it  is  reasonable  for  us  to  doubt. 

XL  The  Divine  uintBASONABLENEBS  op  Doiibt.  Knowing  what  he  is,  and  what  he 
is  purposing  and  doing,  man's  doubt  must  always  seem  unreasonable  to  God ;  and  his 
one  response  to  every  doubter  is,  "  Cannot  you  trust  me  f  "  It  is  the  love  of  God,  the 
unchangeable  love  of  God,  which  puts  our  best-grounded  doubts  and  fears  to  shame. 
Exactly  this  is  pressed  on  the  attention  of  despondent  Israel  by  God's  comparing 
himself  to  a  mother  whose  child  is  daily  Feeding  on  her  own  life.  Such  mothers  have 
a  most  sacrificing,  passionate  love  for  their  children,  and  no  intenser  simile  could  have 
been  found.  "Thou  art  more  than  mother  dear;"  then  how  can  we  douht?  Why 
not  rest  in  the  love,  and  be  at  peace?  Illustrating  the  strength  of  mother-love,  Lander 
says  he  frequently  met,  during  his  journey  in  Africa,  with  mothers  who  carried  about 
their  persons  little  wooden  images  of  their  deceased  infants,  to  whose  lips  they  presented 
a  portion  of  food  whenever  they  partook  of  it  themselves,  and  nothing  could  induce  them 
to  part  with  these  inanimate  memorials. — B.  T. 

Ver.  16. — The  dosenest  of  the  Divine  interest.  The  idea  of  the  passage  i»  that  the 
plan  of  Jerusalem  remained  in  God's  sight,  though  the  Chaldeans  bad  devastated  it, 
and  even  broken  down  its  walla.  It  could  all  he  built  again,  after  the  plan  in  the 
Divine  mind.  Thus  impressively  it  is  suggested  that  nothing,  no  sort  of  outward 
circumstance  or  calamity,  can  remove  us  from  God's  thought  and  care.  His  supreme 
care  is  for  us,  and  that  abides  through  all  conceivable  changes  of  condition  and 
circumstance.  "  It  was  the  custom  among  the  Hebrews  and  other  Eastern  nations  to 
trace  upon  the  palms  of  the  bands  the  outlines  of  any  object  of  affection  or  admiration. 
By  this  means  the  traveller  always  had  before  him  a  visible  memorial  of  the  city  or 
place  he  had  visited.  The  sketch,  although  necessarily  imperfect,  was  nevertheless 
indelible,  as  it  was  produced  by  puncturing  the  skin  with  a  sharp  instrument,  and 
introducing  into  the  punctures  a  peculiar  dye,  very  much  in  the  same  manner  in  which 
a  saUor  prints  on  his  arm  the  figure  of  an  anchor  or  the  initials  of  his  own  name. 
From  the  indestructible  nature  of  the  sketch  the  process  might  he  called  a  species 
of  engraving."  Dean  Plumptre  says,  "  The  words  point  to  the  almost  universal  practice 
of  tattooing,  A  man  thus  '  engraved '  the  name  of  his  god,  or  the  outlines  of  his  home, 
or  the  face  of  her  he  loved,  upon  his  hands  or  arms.  So,  by  a  holdly  anthropomorphic 
figure,  Jehovah  had  'graven'  Jerusalem  on  his  hands.  He  could  not  act  without 
being  reminded  of  her."  Roberts  says  that  "he  never  saw  or  heard  of  things  being 
engraved  on  the  palms  of  the  hands.  The  palms  are,  however,  believed  to  have  written 
on  them  the  late  of  the  individual,  and  from  this,  it  is  common  to  say,  in  reference 
to  men  or  things,  they  are  written  on  the  palms  of  his  hands."  The  assurance  given 
in  this  figurative  form  may  be  opened  in  two  directions. 

L  Always  in  bioht,  to  bk  oabed  fob.  This  is  true  of  friends  who  truly  love  one 
another— of  husband  and  wife,  of  parent  and  children.  They  may  not  be  always  in 
bodily  sight ;  they  are  always  in  thought,  which  is  soul-sight.  Of  God  it  is  said,  "  He 
careth  for  you."  We  are  always  in  his  thought.  Eound  us,  wherever  we  may  be,  are 
the  "  everlasting  arms." 

IL  Always  in  bight,  to  be  wobeed  fob.  This  is  quite  an  additional  idea.  Others 
may  care  for  us,  who  have  nothing  to  do  for  us  or  can  do  nothing.  God's  care  is  an 
active  care,  finding  due  expression  in  tendings,  watchings,  providiugs,  and  arrangings. 
He  keeps  us  before  him,  in  order  that  he  may  do  for  us  exceeding  abundantly  more 
than  we  ask  or  think. — B.  T. 

Ver.  23w — No  shame  in  waiting  for  Ood.  "  For  they  shall  not  be  ashamed  that  wait 
for  me."  Those  who  weut  for  him,  in  a  dependence  upon  his  promise  and  a  resignation 
to  his  will,  shall  not  be  made  ashamed  of  their  hope.  Quaintly  stating  the  reasons  for 
God's  withholding  his  blessings  firom  ns  awhile,  Thomas  Brookes  (1650)  says,  "  Ood 
oftoitimes  delays,  that  his  people  may  come  to  him  with  greater  strength  and  importunity. 
He  puts  them  off,  that  they  may  put  on  with  more  life  and  vigour.  God  seems  to  be 
Qcdd,  that  he  may  make  us  the  more  hot ;  he  seems  to  be  slack,  that  he  may  mak« 


OH.  L.  1—11.]        THE  BOOK  OF  THE  PROPHET  ISAIAH. 


ta 


us  tTie  more  earnest;  he  seems  to  be  backward,  that  he  may  make  us  the  more  forward 
in  pressing  upon  him."  The  particular  shame  here  referred  to  is  that  which  comes 
from  disappointment  of  expectations  and  hopes. 

**  The  hope  that's  built  upon  his  word 
Can  ne'er  be  overthrown." 

The  line  of  thought  suggested  is  this:  Find  the  various  sources  whence  comes  our 
disappointment  with  men,  and  show,  in  each  case,  that  they  cannot  possibly  apply 
to  God. 

L  Men  promise  mobb  than  thbt  can  pbbporm.  Often  they  do  this  in  (1)  gushing 
and  impulsive  generosity  ;  or  in  (2)  desire  to  produce  an  extravagant  impression  of  their 
ability;  or  in  (3)  false  estimate  of  their  means;  or  in  (4)  simple  but  weak  good 
nature.  Such  people  are  not  thoroughly  true;  and  we  learn  by  experience  never  to 
trust  their  promises.  We  give  them  credit  for  meaning  well,  and  then  forget  what  they 
said.    God's  promises  are  strictly  true  to  his  intentions  and  his  power. 

II.  Men  promise  what  thet  never  intend  to  perform.  A  man  who  had  just 
parted  from  a  female  friend  was  overheard  to  say,  "  I  told  her  more  in  a  minute  than 
she  will  find  come  true  in  a  twelvemonth."  Men  intentionally  deceive,  and  then  we 
cannot  but  be  ashamed  and  disappointed  in  them.  Of  this  we  may  be  quite  sure — God 
intends  to  fulfil  everything  he  promises.  "  Hath  he  said,  and  shall  he  not  do  it?"  "  If 
we  believe  not,  yet  he  abideth  faithful :  he  cannot  deny  himself." 

III.  Men  promise  what  oiroumstanoes  never  allow  them  to  perform.  With 
the  best  intentions,  and  the  best  ability  at  the  time  of  promising,  mei»  cannot  anticipate 
the  changes  of  life,  and  may  disappoint  us  through  force  of  circumstances.  But  he 
who  sees  the  end  from  the  beginning  makes  his  promises  in  view  of  every  possible 
conticgeacyi  and 

*  His  very  word  of  grace  is  strong 

As  that  whioh  built  the  skies ; 
The  voice  that  moves  the  stars  along 

g^eaks  all  the  prouustia." 

B.T. 


EXPOSITION 


CHAPTER  Ifc 


This  chapter  seems  to  be  made  np  of 
short  fragments,  which  the  collector,  or 
collectors,  of  Isaiah's  writings  regarded  as 
too  precious  to  be  lost,  and  which  they 
consequently  here  threw  together,  though 
in  reality  they  were  detached  utterances, 
and  are  not  even  connected  in  subject- 
matter.  Vers.  1 — 3  are  a  rebuke  to  the 
exiles  for  deeming  themselves  wholly  re- 
jected, and  not  rising  to  the  occasion  now 
that  deliveiauce  is  at  hand.  Vers.  4—9 
ca»y  on  the  account  of  "  the  Servant  of  the 
Lord  "  from  ch.  xlix.  12,  further  describing 
bis  humiliation,  and  declaring  his  stead- 
fastness and  his  faith.  Vers.  10,  11  are  an 
exhortation  to  weak  believers  generally, 
•nd  contain  on  encouragement  and  a 
warning. 

Ver.  1.— Where  is  the  hill  of  your  mother's 
divorcement  1  On  account  of  her  persistent 
"backsliding,"  God  had  "  put  away  Israel," 
Judah's  sister,  and  had  •«  given  her  a  bill  of 


divorce"  (Jer.  Hi.  8).  But  he  had  not  re- 
pudiated Judah;  and  her  children  were 
wrong  to  suppose  themselves  altogether  cast 
off  (see  oh.  xlix.  14).  They  had,  in  fact, 
by  their  transgressions,  especially  their 
idolatries,  wilfully  divorced  themselves,  or 
at  any  rate  separated  themselves,  from  God ; 
but  no  sentence  had  gone  forth  from  him  to 
bar  reconciliation  and  return.  Or  which  ol 
my  creditors  is  it  to  whom  I  have  sold  yon ! 
Neither  has  God  exercised  the  right,  re- 
garded as  inherent  in  a  parent  (Exod.  xxi. 
7 ;  2  Kings  iv.  11 ;  Neb.  vi.  5,  8),  of  selling 
his  children  to  a  creditor.  They  are  not 
Bold — he  has  "  taken  no  money  for  them  " 
(Ps.  xliv.  12;  ch.  Hi.  3);  and  the  Babylonians 
are  thus  not  their  rightful  owners  (ch.  xlix. 
24) — they  are  still  God's  children,  his  pro- 
perty, and  the  objects  of  his  care.  For  your 
iniquities  ...  for  your  transgressions; 
rather,  by  your  iniquitiet  ,  .  .  by  your  trant- 
gressiom.  The  separation,  such  as  it  was, 
between  God  and  his  people  was  caused  by 
their  sins,  not  by  any  act  of  bis. 

Ver.  2.— Wherefore,  when  I  came,  was 
there  no  man?  Such  being  the  condition 
of  things;  Judah  having  rejected  me,  not 
I  them— why,  "when  I  came"  <Mid  ••• 


248 


THE  BOOK  or  THE  PEOPHET  ISAIAH.        [ch.  l.  I— 11 


nounced  deliverance  from  Babylon,  was 
there  no  response  ?  Why  did  no  champion 
appear?  Is  it  that  my  power  was  doubted ? 
that  it  was  feared  my  hand  was  shortened, 
to  that  it  could  not  redeem  or  deliver  1  But 
I  am  he  who  hag  power  with  his  rebuke  to 
dry  np  the  sea  (Exod.  ziv.  21),  to  make 
rivers  a  wilderness  (Exod.  vii.  20;  Josh. 
iii  16, 17);  in  fact,  to  change  the  course  of 
nature  as  seemeth  him  good,  and  accomplish 
his  will  against  all  obstacles.  Is  my  hand 
shortened  T  i.e.  "  is  my  power  less  than  it 
was?"  Can  any  one  suppose  this ?  Surely 
what  I  have  once  done  I  can  do  again.  If 
1  delivered  from  Egypt,  I  can  redeem  from 
Babylon.  Their  fish  stinketh  (comp.  Exod. 
vii.  21).  But  the  object  is  rather  to  assert 
an  absolute  control  over  nature  than  to  take 
the  thoughts  of  the  hearers  back  to  any 
special  occasions  when  control  was  exer- 
cised. 

Ver.  3. — I  olothe  the  heavens  with  black- 
ness (comp.  Jer.  iv.  28 ;  Ezek.  xxxii.  7,  8 ; 
Joel  iL  10;  iU.  15;  Matt.  xxiv.  29;  Mark 
xiii.  24;  Luke  xxi.  25;  Bev.  vi.  12).  The 
Egyptian  plague  of  darkness  (Exod.  x.  21 — 
23)  is  not  adequate  to  the  expressions  here 
used.  God  means  to  assert  bis  power  of 
leaving  all  nature  in  absolute  darkness,  if 
he  BO  choose — a  power  necessarily  belonging 
to  him  who  said,  "  Let  there  be  light ;  and 
there  was  light "  (Gen.  L  3).  I  make  sack- 
cloth their  covering  (see  Rev.  vi.  12,  "The 
■un  became  black  as  sackcloth  of  hair  "). 

Vers.  4^9. — A  Soliloqut  of  the  Seb- 
VANT  OF  Jehovah.  The  separateneas  of 
this  passage  has  been  maintained  in  the 
opening  paragraph.  That  it  is  not  of  him- 
self that  the  prophet  here  speaks,  appears 

(1)  from  the  self-assertion  (vers,  4,  5,  9); 

(2)  from  the  depth  of  humiliation  declared 
in  ver.  6,  which  is  beyond  anything  re- 
corded of  Isaiah.  But  if  he  does  not  speak 
of  himself,  he  can  scarcely  speak  of  any 
other  besides  "the  Servant,"  of  whom  he 
has  already  said  much  (eh.  xlii.  1 — 8 ;  xlix. 
1 — 12),  and  of  whom  he  has  still  much  more 
to  say  (oh.  Iii.  13—15;  liii.  1—12). 

Ver.  4. — The  Lord  God  hath  given  me  the 
tongue  of  the  learned ;  literally,  the  tongue 
of  dieciplet;  i.e.  a  trained  tongue,  a  well- 
taught  tongue.  Christ  "did  nothing  of 
himself;  as  the  Father  had  taught  him," 
so  he  spoke  (John  viii.  28).  That  I  should 
know  how  to  speak  a  word  in  season  to  him 
that  is  weary ;  rather,  {kat  I  ehall  know  how 
to  natain  by  a  word  him  that  it  weary. 
Compare,  "Come  unto  me,  all  ye  that 
labour  and  are  heavy  laden,  and  I  will 
give  you  rest "  (Matt.  zi.  28).  He  wakeneth 
vonungr  by  moming  .  .  .  mine  ear.    God 


held  immediate  and  constant  communica- 
tion with  the  "  Servant " — ^not  enlightening 
him  occasionally,  as  he  did  the  prophets,  by 
dreams  and  visions,  but  continually  whisper- 
ing in  his  ear.  At  no  time  did  the  Father 
"  leave  him  alone  "  (John  viii.  29)  or  cease 
to  speak  to  him.  "  Morning  by  morning  "  is 
not  to  be  narrowed  to  the  bare  literal  mean- 
ing, but  to  be  taken  in  the  sense  of  "un- 
interruptedly." To  hear  as  the  learned; 
rather,  to  hear  as  disciples  hear;  i.e.  atten- 
tively, submissively,  gladly. 

Ver.  5. — ^The  Lord  hath  opened  mine  ear. 
Some  understand  this  of  the  boring  of  the 
ear  for  perpetual  service  (Ps.  xl.  6 ;  Exod. 
xxi.  6)  I  but  it  is  perhaps  better  to  regard  it 
as  intended  to  mark  a  contrast  between  the 
true  Servant  and  the  professed  servants,  or 
children  of  Israel.  They  "did  not  hear; 
their  ear  was  not  opened;  they  were 
treacherous  and  rebellious  from  the  womb" 
(oh.  xlviii.  8).  His  ear  was  opened  to 
receive  God's  word  perpetually ;  he  was  not 
rebellious,  did  not  turn  away  back.  Even 
when  most  tried,  his  final  word  was,  '*  Not 
my  will,  but  thine,  be  done"  (Luke  zxii. 
42). 

Ver.  6. — I  gave  my  back  to  the  smiters 
(see  ch.  liii.  5,  ad  fin. ;  and  comp.  Matt.  zxvi. 
67;  xxvii.  26;  John  xix.  1).  My  cheeks  to 
them  that  plucked  off  the  hair.  This  is  a 
detail  not  historically  recorded  by  the 
evangelists;  but  it  may  have  had  a  literal 
fultilment.  Plucking  off  the  hair  was  not 
unknown  to  the  Jews  as  a  punishment  (see 
Neh.  xiii.  25).  I  hid  not  my  face  f^om 
shame  and  spitting  (see  Matt.  xxvi.  67; 
xxvii.  30).  Spitting  in  the  East  marked 
at  once  contempt  and  abhorrence.  It  is 
a  practice  which  continues  to  the  present 
day. 

Ver.  7. — "Sot  the  Lord  God  will  help  me ; 
rather,  hut  the  Lord  God  viill  help  me.  I 
shall  not  be  left  always  in  the  hands  of  my 
enemies.  In  this  confidence  the  Servant 
rests,  and  is  not  confounded,  even  when  the 
worst  happens  to  him.  He  sets  his  face  like 
a  flint;  i.e.  makes  it  hard,  impassive,  ex- 
preasionlesa,  and  at  the  same  time  deter- 
mined, fixed  not  to  give  way  (comp.  Ezek. 
iii.  8,  9). 

Vers.  8, 9. — He  is  near  that  jnstifleth  me. 
God,  who  knows  his  innocence,  is  near  at 
hand,  and  will  shortly  "  make  his  righteous- 
ness clear  as  the  noonday."  This  was 
done  when  God  raised  up  from  the  dead 
"  the  Holy  One  and  the  Just "  (Acts  iii.  14), 
whom  cruel  men  "by  wicked  hands  had 
crucified  and  slain "  (Acts  ii.  23).  By  the 
resurrection  God  acquitted  Christ  (n  the 
charge  of  blasphemy  on  whiob  he  had  been 
condemned,  and  proclaimed  him  "holy, 
harmless,  undefiled,  separate  from  ainnen  " 
(Heb.  Til.  26).   Who  will  contend  with  m«  1 


oiLbl— IL]       THE  BCOK  OF   THE   PROPHET  ISAIAH. 


249 


(compare  St.  Paul's  words  in  Bom.  viii.  33, 
34,  "  It  IB  God  that  justifieth.  Who  is  be 
that  oondemneth  ?").  God  is  the  sole  Judge 
of  all  men— of  the  "  Seivant "  in  his  human 
capacity,  no  less  thaa  of  others.  If  he 
acquits,  it  is  idle  for  any  accuser  to  stand 
forth  and  "contend"  or  "condemn"  (ver. 
9).  God  will  help  the  innocent,  whom  he 
has  acquitted,  and  will  destroy  tlie  accuser 
by  a  secret  but  most  sure  destruction.  The 
moth  shall  eat  them  np  (oomp.  Fs.  xxxix. 
11,  and  infra,  ch.  li.  8). 

Vers.  10,  11. — An  Addbess  of  Jehovah 
TO  HIS  Cbuboh.  Some  suppose  that  the 
Church  of  Hezekiah's  reign  is  addressed; 
others  the  exiles  towards  the  close  of  the 
Captivity  period.  The  first  verse  is  an  ex- 
hortation, enconraging  those  who  fear  God, 
but  have  insuiBcient  light,  to  trust  in  him. 
The  second  threatens  such  as  "  kindle  fixe," 
or  cause  strife,  with  retribution. 

Ver.  10. — That  oheyeth  the  voice  of  his 
servant;  that  is,  of  "his  servant"  for  the 
time  being,  whether  Isaiah,  or  Jeremiah,  or 
"  Iht  Servant "  km'  f^ax^v.    That  walketh 


in  darkness.  Not  clearly  seeing  his  way  oi 
knowing  what  his  duty  is,  and  so  inclined 
to  despond  and  doubt.  Every  such  person 
is  bidden  to  put  aside  his  doubts,  and  trust 
wholly  in  the  Name  of  the  lord,  and  stay 
upon  his  God.  Hence  light  will  shine  in 
upon  him,  and  his  doubts  will  be  resolved, 
and  sufficient  light  will  be  granted  him  to 
direct  liis  paths. 

Ver.  11.— All  ye  that  kindle  a  fire,  that 
compass  yourselves  about  with  sparks ;  or, 
with  firebrands.  The  persons  intended  seem 
to  be  thoFe  whose  "  tongue  is  a  fire,  a  world 
of  iniquity  "  (Jas.  iii.  6),  and  who  by  means 
of  it  are  employed  in  "  stirring  up  strife  all 
the  day  long."  They  are  condemned  to  be 
scorched  by  the  fire  which  they  have  them- 
selves kindled,  to  be  made  wretched  by  the 
strife  which  they  have  themselves  caused 
to  spring  up.  Their  end,  moreover,  will  be 
to  lie  down  in  sorrow;  or,  in  torture  (Cheyne). 
God  will  punish  them  in  the  next  world  for 
the  misery  which  they  have  brought  about 
in  this,  and  will  thus  exercise  retributive 
justice  upon  the  wicked  ones,  whose  main 
object  in  life  has  been  to  embilter  the  lives 
of  their  fellow-men. 


HOMILETICa 

Vew.  2,  3. — OoiPs  power  over  nature.  Modem  pseudo-science,  or  "un-science,"  as 
it  has  been  called,  seems  to  hold  that  nature,  having  been  once  for  all  arranged  and 
ordered  by  God,  was  thenceforth  left  to  itself,  being  an  automatic  machine,  bound  to 
work  in  a  certain  way,  needing  no  superintendence,  and  brooking  no  interference 
thenceforward.  Hence  miracles  are  regarded  as  impossible,  or  at  any  rate  as  non- 
occurrent ;  and  we  are  invited  to  ascribe  to  the  combined  influence  of  priestcraft  and 
credulity  all  the  statements  with  respect  to  supernatural  interferences  with  nature 
which  we  find  in  the  history  of  our  race.  The  view  of  the  sacred  writers  is  the  direct 
opposite  of  this.  Grod  is  not  regarded  as  having  ever  left  nature  to  itself.  On  the 
contrary,  he  is  always  represented  as  working  with  nature  and  in  nature.  He  "  covereth' 
the  heaven  with  clouds,  and  prepareth  rain  for  the  earth,  and  maketh  the  grass  to  grow 
upon  the  mountains.  He  giveth  to  the  beast  his  food,  and  to  the  young  ravens  which 
cry. .  . .  He  giveth  snow  like  wool,  and  scattereth  the  hoar-frost  like  ashes.  He  casteth 
forth  his  ice  like  morsels:  who  can  stand  before  his  cold?  He  sendeth  out  his  word, 
and  melteth  them :  he  causeth  his  wind  to  blow,  and  the  waters  flow  "  (Ps.  cxlvii.  8 — 
18).  He  is,  in  fact,  ever  in  his  laws,  executing  them  continually — making  the  sun  to 
shine,  and  the  moon  to  give  her  light,  and  the  stars  to  sparkle  in  the  canopy  of  heaven, 
and  the  mountains  to  stand  firm,  and  the  winds  to  blotv,  and  the  rain  to  fall,  and 
the  earth  to  give  her  increase.  The  secret  of  the  quasi-unvarying  character  of  nature's 
laws  is  his  unchangeableness — the  fact  that  "  with  bim  is  no  variableness,  neither 
shadow  of  turning  "  (Jas.  i.  17).  But,  as  he  thus  holds  nature  in  his  hand,  and  does 
not  let  it  go,  so  he  is  necessarily  at  all  times  omnipotent  over  nature,  and  can  suspend 
or  change  any  "law  of  nature"  at  his  pleasure.  In  point  of  fact,  he  does  not  do  so 
unless  upon  emergencies.  But,  Idt  a  fitting  occasion  come,  and  it  is  as  easy  for  him  to 
reyerse  a  law  as  to  maintain  it.  He  can  "dry  up  the  sea"  in  a  moment,  "make 
rivers  a  desert "  (ver.  2),  "  clothe  the  heaven  with  blackness  "  (ver.  3),  cause  the  stars 
to  fall  (Matt.  xziv.  29),  create  a  new  heaven  and  a  new  earth  (Rev.  xxi.  1),  cast 
death  and  bell  into  the  lake  of  fire  (Eev.  xx.  14),  To  regard  miracles  as  impossible 
ii  to  be  an  atheist ;  to  say  that  they  are  non-occurrent  is  to  fly  in  the  face  of  history. 
No  doubt  many  false  miracles  have  been  alleged,  and  an  alleged  miracle  is  not  to  b» 


260  THE  BOOK  OF  THE  PEOPHBT  ISAIAH.       [oh.  l.  1— IL 

receWed  without  «  gearohiog  scrutiny.  But  the  summary  rejection  of  all  miracles, 
which  modern  pseudo-science  proclaims,  is  as  little  reasonable  as  the  wholesale  accept- 
ance of  all  alleged  miracles  without  exception. 

Vers.  8,  9. — No  condemnation  for  those  whom  God  Justifies.  Those  whom  God  has 
justified  may  still  be,  sometimes  are,  arraigned  (1)  by  Satan ;  (2)  by  their  fellow-men. 

I.  Satan's  aebaiqnmbnt  vaiit.  "Hast  thou  considered  my  servant  Job,"  said 
JehoTah  to  Satan,  "  that  there  is  none  like  him  in  the  earth,  a  perfect  and  an  upright 
man,  one  that  feareth  God,  and  escheweth  evil?"  To  which  the  answer  was  given, 
"Doth  Job  fear  God  for  nought?"  (Job  i.  8,  9).  Satan  arraigned  Job  as  selfish, 
hypocritical,  irreligious,  and  was  allowed  to  put  him  to  the  proof;  but  with  the  result 
that  Job's  integrity  was  established,  and  the  accuser  put  to  shame.  Satan,  however, 
gains  no  wisddm  by  experience.  Still  he  remains  "  the  accuser  of  the  brethren,  which 
accuseth  them  before  God  day  and  night "  (Rev,  siL  10).  All  that  can  be  said  against 
them,  doubtless,  he  says — misrepresents  their  motives,  exposes  their  shortcomings, 
exaggerates  their  failings  and  their  sins.  But  to  what  purpose?  "They  overcame 
him  by  the  blood  of  the  Lamb"  (Bev.  xii.  11).  To  them  whom  God  has  justified, 
whom  God  has  forgiven,  past  sins  are  blotted  out,  past  shortcomings  are  made  up. 
The  merits  of  Christ  suf&ce  to  cover  all  their  iniquities.  Let  them  but  have  true  faith 
in  him,  let  them  but  cling  to  him,  and  then  "  their  sins,  though  they  be  as  scarlet, 
shall  be  white  as  snow ;  though  they  be  red  like  crimson,  they  shall  be  as  wool " 
(ch.  i.  18). 

II.  Man's  ABBAiaNMENT  idle.  Man's  arraignment  of  his  fellow-men  can  have  no 
effect  at  all  excepting  in  this  world.  He  may  bring  them  before  tribunals,  obtain 
their  condemnation,  their  execution,  their  temporal  disgrace.  He  may  gibbet  them  in 
history,  misrepresent,  malign,  blacken  their  names  and  their  reputations.  But  over 
their  real  selves  be  is  powerless.  God  justifies  them,  pardons  them,  receives  them  into 
his  kingdom,  looks  on  them  with  &vour,  reckons  them  among  his  saints,  gives  them 
the  blessing  of  eternal  communion  with  him  in  heaven.  What  matters  it  to  them 
that  somewhere,  in  a  paltry  planet,  ignorant  and  ephemeral  mortals  speak  evil  of 
them  and  brand  their  memories  ?  "  It  is  God  that  justifieth."  One  justifying  word 
from  him  may  well  outweigh  any  amount  of  human  dispraise,  of  human  contumely. 
Their  end  in  this  world  may  have  been  "  without  honour ; "  but  their  entrance  into  the 
next. is  with  words  at  once  of  promise  and  of  high  honour,  "Well  done,  good  and 
faithifUl  servant;  enter  thou  into  the  joy  of  thy  Lord." 


HOMILIES  BY  VARIOUS  AUTHOE& 

Vers.  4 — ^9. — Jehovah  and  his  Servant.  The  passage  is  to  be  compared  with  oh.  xlii. 
1 — 4 ;  xlix.  1 — 9.  The  manner  in  which  God  is  referred  to  is  peculiarly  solemn — by 
his  double  name,  the  Lord  Jehovah. 

I.  The  Sbbvakt's  ENDOWMENTS  AND  TBMPEE.  The  tonguc  ofdiseipUs.  The  "facility 
of  well-trained  scholars"  (ch.  viiL  6;  11  v.  13) — ^"a  discipled  tongue,  speaking  nothing 
but  what  it  has  learned  from  God."  A  tongue  the  object  of  which  is  comfort  to  the 
weary.  Not  to  astonish,  dazzle,  bewilder,  but  to  edify  and  console.  "  The  wisdom  of 
Heaven  does  not  bespeak  man' in  an  unknown  tongue;  nor  design,  what  would  be  more 
miraculous  than  all  miracles,  that  men  should  be  saved  by  what  they  could  not  under- 
stand." But  true  eloquence  implies  the  faculty  of  listening.  "  The  things  we  have 
heard  declare  we  unto  you."  They  are  things  imparted  to  the  wakened  soul,  in  the 
clear  conscious  hours  of  calm  contemplation,  and  in  the  mood  of  devout  sympathy. 
"  The  Servant  was  not  a  mechanical  organ  of  revelation,  but  had  a  spiritual  sympathy 
with  it,  even  when  it  told  of  suffering  for  himself.  It  is  not  that  bare  assent  to  the 
truth  which  is  seldom  followed  by  spiritual  effects.  Nothing  is  more  common  than 
to  see  men  of  rare  knowledge  and  raised  speculations  in  the  things  of  God,  who- have 
no  relish  and  savour  of  them  in  their  hearts  and  affections.  Their  practice  bids  defianc* 
to  their  knowledge.  They  never  know  God  so  as  to  obey  him,  and  therefore  never 
know  him  at  all.  To  hear  ike  Word  of  Qod,  and  to  hear  Ood  speaking  in  his  Word,  are 
things  vastly  different "  (South).    Now,  Jehovah  had  opened  an  ear  to  his  Servant ;  and 


OH.  u  1—11.]       THE  BOOK  OF  THE  PROPHET  ISAIAH.  261 

he  "  had  not  been  defiant,  had  not  turned  hack."  AH  our  duties  as  (erranti  of  God 
resolve  themselves  into  faith,  obedience,  and  patience ;  and  the  vital  principle  of  all  b 
Bubmission.  Faith,  the  submission  of  the  understanding;  obedience,  the  submission 
of  the  will  to  what  U-od  bids  us  to  do;  and  patience,  submission  to  what  God  bids  ua 
suffer.  In  coDtrast  to  this  temper  Jonah  may  be  cited ;  and  in  exemplification  of  it, 
Jeremiah  (xvii.  6 ;  xx.  7).  lu  such  a  temper  humihation  and  scorn  may  be  patiently 
endured. 

II.  The  Divine  presence  and  beip.  "  Against  the  crowd  of  mockers  he  places  the 
Lord  Jehovah."  Jehovah  is  on  his  side ;  and  therefore  he  can  (in  a  good  sense)  harden 
his  face  like  a  flint  against  his  foes,  be  confident,  and  not  be  disappointed.  A  good 
conscience  is  a  tower  of  strength.  "  Near  is  he  that  justifieth  me."  "  To  justify,"  in  the 
Old  Testament,  almost  always  means  to'  pronounce  a  man  righteous,  or  prove  him  so 
~in  act.  The  Servant  is  thinking  of  a  trial  through  which  he  is  passing,  and  where 
God  is  the  Judge.  But "  while  Job  shrinks  in  terror  from  the  issue,  the  Servant  has  no 
doubt  as  to  a  favourable  result."  The  passage  is  full  of  a  holy  and  strong  confidence, 
in  the  strength  of  which  he  can  face  all  his  foes.  Only  he  who  has  not  defied  God 
(ver.  5)  is  able  to  defy  the  world,  and  speak  of  his  enemies  as  falling  to  pieces  like  a 
rotten,  moth-eaten  garment.  And  thus  from  personal  experience  he  is  able  to  comfort 
and  to  exhort  others.  "  He  that  walketh  in  darkness  and  hath  no  light,  let  him  trust 
in  the  Name  of  Jehovah,  and  rely  upon  his  God."  The  opposition  is  between  outward 
darkness  and  inward  light — in  the  man's  own  "clear  breast,"  where  he  "may  sit  in 
the  centre,  and  enjoy  clear  day."  To  have  a  conscience  defiled  and  obscured  is  to  be 
left,  in  the  time  of  adversity,  "wholly  in  the  dark."  The  man  cannot  tell  whether 
God  is  his  enemy  or  bis  friend;  or  rather,  has  cause  to  suspect  him  of  being  his  enemy. 
Then,  "  if  we  would  have  our  conscience  deal  clearly  with  us,  we  must  deal  severely 
with  it.  Often  scouring  and  cleansing  it  vrill  make  it  bright."  We  learn  from  the 
passage  how  the  hahit  of  stibmission  to  the  Spirit  of  God,  and  hearty  obedience  to  his 
will,  tends  to  promote  a  reasonable  confidence  in  every  hour  of  triaL  Not,  indeed,  one 
that  is  secure  against  all  vicissitudes  of  wavering  and  distrust,  any  more  than  a  strong 
physical  constitution  can  be  exempt  from  occasional  attacks  of  disease.  But  in  the 
will  absolutely  submitted  to  the  Divine,  vigorously  exerted  in  the  cause  of  right,  may  be 
found  a  confidence — short,  indeed,  of  perfect  assurance,  yet  "  for  the  purposes  of  a  pious 
life  much  more  usefuL" — J. 

Ver.  10. — A  searching  query.  "  Who  is  among  you,"  etc.  ?  What  wonderful  discri- 
mination of  character  there  is  in  Scripture!  It  ts  "a  discemer  of  the  thoughts  and 
intents  of  the  heart."  And  it  is  ever  associated  with  the  Divine  remedies.  Gro  to  a 
physician,  and  you  often  fear  the  worst.  JTiat  never  is  so  with  the  great  Physician. 
Beautiful  idea  of  trust  1  We  cannot /orce  either  conviction  or  feeling.  1.  The  position 
described.     2.  The  remedy  proposed. 

L  Tee  position  debcbibed.  Human  life  has  its  terrible  side.  So  has  nature. 
You  see  the  broad  Sea  in  her  bewitching  and  entrancing  beauty,  and  you  forget  how 
many  boats  have  been  lost  in  the  wild  tempest.  This  is  said  of  a  devout  man :  "  one 
who/ears  God."  Not,  of  course,  strange  that  a  man  who  does  not  fear  God  should  feel 
hke  this.  We  may  be  children,  knowing  God's  will,  trying  in  our  poor  way  to  do  it. 
1.  A  season  of  deep  distress.  Other  griefs  are  great ;  but  we  feel  the  religious  life  cold 
and  indifferent !  Not  only  at  times  do  we  feel  weal^ened  confidence  in  man,  but  in  God  I 
Xt^AMs  so  beautiful.  It  quickens  life.  It  stirs  the  pulses  of  joy.  It  keeps  the  home 
in  view.  2.  A  season  of  weak  faith.  Not  so  much  in  a  Providence  as  in  the  ability 
to  lay  hold  on  the  promises.  To  doubt  our  sincerity.  To  doubt  our  love.  Given  a  man 
of  exceeding  faith :  he  will  minimize  his  troubles,  according  to  the  extent  of  his  faith. 
3.  A  season  of  pilgrimage.  Still  has  to  waik  on.  Avocations  call  him  forth.  Belation- 
ships  to  others  must  be  sustained.  Opportunities  must  be  made  use  of.  Life  if  a  con- 
tinual forthgoing ;  and  we  woZA  on.    What  meditations  I    What  regrets  I 

II.  The  bembdt  proposed.  1.  A  Name,  How  simple  1  God  is  not  merely  ever- 
lasting, or  almighty :  he  is  known  to  us  by  a  Name.  Christ  has  shown  us  the  Father. 
Well,  we  cannot  understand  God  apart  from  intuitions  and  relationships.  I  thank 
God  for  the  lexicon  of  the  family.  2.  A  trust.  Not  trying  to  hurry  events.  Refusing 
to  judge  by  appearances.    Why  should  I?    Did  the  Old  Testament  heroes t    AppeaF> 


252,  THE  BOOK  OP  THE  PROPHET  ISAIAH.       [oh.  l.  1— IL 

ances  have  deceived.  Even  untoward  health  and  untoward  fortune.  3.  A  stay.  This 
is  an  old  English  word.  I  cannot  stay  myself  on  myself— cannot  anchor  a  boat  to 
itself.  I  can  and  do  stay  upon  that  which  I  see  not.  I  can  rely  upon  a  God  whose 
promise  invites  me.  I  may  refuse  to  give  up  that  rest,  and  say,  amid  human  disappoint- 
ments, "Beautiful  tree,  under  whose  shadow  I  pasture  I  Blessed  rock,  where  I  have  refuge 
from  the  heat  I "    We  love  to  feel  that  we  are  in  him  that  is  "  true." — ^W.  M.  S. 

Vers.  1 — 3. — Explanation  of  exile.  The  Lord  would  impress  on  his  exiled  people 
that  their  calamities  found  their  explanation  not  in  him  but  in  themselves;  and  we 
shall  find,  when  we  look,  that  this  is  the  account  of  our  estrangement  and  distance 
from  God. 

I.  What  AOCoxnrrED  fob  Ibbael's  exile?  1.  It  was  not  any  fickleness  in  Qod.  He 
had  not  acted  toward  Israel  as  a  husband  often  acted  toward  the  wife  of  whom  he  was 
weary ;  there  had  been  no  changeableness  on  his  part.  2.  It  was  not  his  necessity. 
The  father  might  sell  his  son  when  hard  pressed  by  pecuniary  straits;  but  God 
could  never,  by  any  supposition,  be  reduced  to  such  necessities.  He  who  can  say,  "  Every 
beast  of  the  forest  is  mine,  and  the  cattle  upon  a  thousand  hills,"  the  generous  Donor  of 
all  gifts,  and  bountiful  Source  of  all  treasures,  cannot  be  in  want  of  anything.  3.  It  is 
not  his  inability  to  protect  or  to  redeem.  There  was  abundance  of  Divine  power  to 
preserve  from  captivity  or  to  rescue  from  it.  He  who  could  "dry  up  the  [Red]  sea," 
and  in  whose  hand  are  the  storms  and  tempests  of  the  sky,  could  defeat  any  armies  of 
the  invader,  or  could  bring  out  of  bondage,  if  he  chose.  4.  It  was  their  own  disobedience 
which  accounted  for  it — their  iniquities,  their  transgressions  (ver.  1);  it  was  their 
heedlessness  and  disobedience  when  the  voice  of  the  Lord  was  heard  rebuking  and 
inviting  (ver.  2). 

II.  What  AOOOUNTa  fob  oub  alienation  fbom  Qod?  1.  Nothing  in  him.  He  is 
not  unwilling  that  we  should  return  and  be  reconciled ;  he  does  not  weary  of  bis 
children ;  he  has  been  obliged  to  condemn  us,  but  he  "  earnestly  remembers  us  still." 
His  attitude  is  one  of  gracious  invitation :  all  the  days  of  our  life  long  he  "  stretches 
out  his  hands  "  toward  us.  He  is  not  unable.  The  power  which  God  shows  in  nature, 
in  his  control  of  the  elements,  in  regulating  the  tides  of  the  sea,  and  directing  the 
tempest  in  the  sky,  is  small  and  slight  in  comparison  with  that  he  shows  in  redeeming 
a  fallen  race ;  mechanical  or  miraculous  power  is  of  a  far  inferior  kind  to  that  which 
is  moral  and  spiritual.  And  the  Author  of  nature  is  the  Redeemer  of  man ;  he  has 
completed  a  glorious  work  of  mercy  and  restoration.  He  has  made  it  possible  for  the 
most  guilty  to  be  forgiven,  for  the  foulest  to  be  cleansed,  for  the  most  distant  to  return. 
There  is  no  obstacle  to  our  restoration  in  God.  2.  Everything  in  us.  We  "  wiU  not 
come  unto  him  that  we  may  have  life."  (1)  We  do  not  listen  when  he  speaks ;  we  go 
on  our  way,  regardless  of  the  fact  that  God  is  speaking  in  his  Word,  in  the  sanctuary, 
by  Jesus  Christ,  in  his  providence.  (2)  Or  we  do  not  reflect  when  we  hear.  We  may 
come  and  listen  and  understand,  but  go  away  "  hearers  only,  and  not  doers ; "  we  are  the 
"  people  that  do  not  consider."  (3)  Or  we  do  not  decide.  We  feel  and  we  entertfun  the 
question  of  returning;  we  may  say,  "I  will  arise,"  but  we  do  not;  conviction  loses 
the  name  of  action ;  we  defer,  and  remain  in  exile.— C. 

Ver.  4. — 2%e  hearing  ear  and  the  hdp/ul  tongue.  The  whole  passage  (vers.  4 — ^9)  is 
strikingly  appropriate  to  the  spirit  and  the  work  of  the  Messiah ;  and  this  verse  as 
much  as  the  rest.  For  it  was  true  in  no  small  measure :  1.  That  Jesus  received  con- 
tinual communications  from  the  Divine  Father.  "  The  Son  can  do  nothing  of  himself, 
but  what  he  seeth  the  Father  do:  for  what  things  soever  he  doeth,  these  also 
dueth  the  Son  likewise'*  (John  v.  19;  see  also  John  iii.  11;  v.  30;  viiu  28,  40), 
2.  That  he  spoke  many  words  of  cheer  and  succour  (Matt.  xi.  28 ;  John  xiv.  1 — 4, 
16 — 18,  27,  etc.).  Many  and  mauifold  were  "the  gracious  words  which  proceeded 
out  of  his  mouth."  But  we  will  take  the  text  as  applicable  to  the  faithful  servant  of 
Christ  now — more  particularly  to  him  who  is  the  minister  of  Christ.  And  thus  regarded, 
we  infer — 

I.  That  wk  should  hatb  an  open  eab  to  welcoke  all  the  truth  God  hj^s  to 
TEAOH  ns.  Between  the  mau  who  knows  enough  to  find  admission  into  the  kingdom 
of  Christ  and  the  man  who  has  been  best  instructed  in  that  kingdom,  there  is  a  very 


OB.  U 1—11.]        THE  BODK  of  the  FBOFHET  ISAIAH.  258 

gnat  difference,  >  rerj  large  distance.  We  stand  somewhere  along  this  line.  But 
where?  Near  the  starting-point  or  near  the  goal?  It  is  a  question  of  grave  conse- 
quence. Not  only  because  it  is  most  desirable  for  our  own  sake  that  we  should  reach 
Uie  highest  attainable  point  of  heavenly  wisdom ;  but  also,  and  principally,  because  the 
extent  of  our  knowledge  of  God  and  of  bis  truth  is  the  measure  of  our  power  to  influence 
and  bless  our  fellow-men.  A  man  who  is  learning  daily  of  God  is  a  man  who  is  daily 
gaining  power  to  teach  and  help  his  brethren.  Therefore  have  the  ear  to  hear,  the 
mind  to  understand,  the  spirit  of  reverent,  earnest  docility.  Learn  of  the  written 
Word,  of  the  human  ministry,  of  Divine  providence,  of  the  discipline  of  life.  Morning 
by  morning  be  receptive  of  the  truth  which  the  Father  is  desirous  of  teaching;  let  no 
day  pass  on  which  something  more  of  holy  wisdom  is  not  treasured  in  the  mind,  is  not 
hidden  in  the  heart. 

II.  That  we  should  studt  to  bb  helpfuIi  in  our  bfegoh.  Some  men  speak  as 
often  to  wound  as  they  do  to  heal,  to  disturb  and  distress  as  to  comfort  and  to  cheer. 
Immeasurable  is  the  opportunity  we  possess  in  the  way  of  rendering  help  by  simple  hut 
kindly  speech.  Not  by  a  few  elaborate  endeavours,  but  by  a  multitude  of  friendly 
utterances,  unchronicled  and  unconsidered,  do  we  benefit  and  even  bless  our  kind.  To 
comfort  the  sad,  to  cheer  the  weary  on  their  hard  way,  to  guide  the  perplexed,  to  help 
the  wavering  to  a  wise  decision,  to  strengthen  those  who  are  ready  to  faint  in  some 
field  of  holy  usefulness,  to  whisper  Christian  hope  in  dying  ears, — this  may  satisfy  the 
ambition  of  the  good  and  wise. — 0. 

Vers.  5 — 10. — Signs  of  faithful  service.  Whether  this  la  intended  to  point  to  the 
Person  and  work  of  the  Messiah,  or  to  that  of  some  living  prophet,  it  treats  of  the 
faithful  servant  of  God ;  it  is  applicable  to  any  one  among  us  "  that  feareth  the  Lord, 
that  obeyeth  the  voice  of  his  servaat"  (ver.  10).  We  find  here  marks  of  fidelity  in 
holy  service. 

I.  CoMiNQ  INTO  THE  SHADOW  OF  FEBSEOUTioN.  In  doiug  thls  the  faithfiil  one :  1. 
Follows  in  the  train  of  the  noblest  men  of  ancient  time  (Matt.  v.  12).  2.  Treads  in 
the  footsteps  of  the  Divine  Master  (Matt.  xvi.  24,  25;  x.  22—25).  3.  Takes  the 
necessary  consequence  of  his  faithfulness.  For  the  man  who  fearlessly  speaks  the 
truth,  and  unwaveringly  follows  the  example  of  Christ,  must  come  into  conflict  with 
the  error  and  the  evil  which  is  in  the  world.  He  must  (1)  teach  that  against  which 
the  pride  of  human  intellect  will  rebel  (Mark  x.  15;  1  Cor.  i.  23;  ii.  14;  iii.  18);  (2) 
say  and  do  things  which  reflect  upon  the  habits  of  men ;  (3)  take  up  positions  which 
militate  against  the  temporal  interests  of  men  (see  Acts  xix.  25).  It  is  still  true, 
though  the  provocation  and  the  resentment  take  different  forms  in  our  time,  that  "  ail 
that  will  live  godly  in  Christ  Jesus  shall  suffer  persecution  "  (2  Tim.  iii.  12). 

II.  Ebsolutblt  PEBBiSTiya  IN  THE  JATH  OP  FAITHFULNESS.  Not  "  turning  away 
back ; "  "  setting  our  face  like  a  flint " — immovably  determined  to  go  on  in  the  direction 
in  which  truth  is  pointing,  to  which  God  is  calling.  "  None  of  these  things  [neither 
bonds  nor  afSictions]  move  me,"  is  the  laugui^e  of  Christian  fidelity  (see  Acts  xx.  24 ; 
Phil.  i.  20). 

III.  Finding  bbfugb  in  God.  ''The  Lord  God  will  help  me;  and  I  know  that  I 
shall  not  be  ashamed  "  (ver.  7) ;  "  He  is  near  that  justifleth  me "  (ver.  8).  Let  him 
that  obeyeth  and  walketh  in  darkness  trust  in  the  Name  of  the  Lord,  and  stay  upon  his 
God — ^upon  his  near  presence,  upon  his  parental  pity,  upon  his  upholding  grace,  upon 
his  overruling,  victorious  power,  which  will  make  truth  and  righteousness  to  triumph 
ia  the  end.-— G. 

Ver.  11. — Ineffectual  light  and  guilty  darkness.  These  words  are  not  applicable  to 
those  who  have  had  no  special  privileges,  and  to  whom  there  has  been  no  alternative 
but  that  of  groping  their  way  in  such  light  as  they  could  gain  from  their  own  reason 
and  from  the  condusions  of  other  men.  They  apply  to  those  only  who  will  not  walk 
in  the  light  which  is  offered  them.    There  are — 

L  Those  who  seek  no  dibbot  illumination  in  thbib  Christian  cnrntSE.  If  we 
would  order  our  Christian  life  according  to  the  will  of  our  Divine  Master,  we  must  not 
conteat  ourselves  with  regulating  our  daily  conduct  by  the  rules  and  maxims  which 
are  current  in  the  circles  in  which  we  move,  or  by  the  notions  of  propriety  we  happen 


86*  THE  BOOK  OP  THE  PROPHET  ISAIAH.        [cm.  l  1—11. 

to  have  formed  from  our  elders  and  associates.  We  are  bound  to  ask  and  to  considei 
what  the  will  of  Christ  is,  as  revealed  in  his  Word  and  as  illustrated  in  his  life;  and 
we  are  bound  to  seek  the  illumination  of  his  Divine  Sjiirit.  Otherwise,  we  shall  walk 
along  a  very  much  lower  level  than  our  Lord  intended  us  to  take.  And  though  we  be 
not  finally  condemned,  yet  will  the  time  come  when  we  shall  awake  to  our  grievous 
error,  and  be  afflicted  with  a  profound  regret. 

II.  Those  who  persist  in  constkuctino  theib  own  thbolooy.  God  has  revealed 
himself  to  us  in  Je.sus  Christ;  in  h  m  and  through  him  we  know  his  nature,  his  dis- 
position, his  will  concerning  us;  we  know  the  way  by  which  we  can  regain  his  favour, 
return  to  his  likeness,  ascend  to  his  home  in  heaven.  But  there  are  those  who  will  not 
learn  and  live ;  who  proudly  turn  away  from  the  Teacher  that  came  from  God  to  tell  ui 
of  the  holy  Father  of  man.  They  prefer  to  construct  their  own  theology;  it  is  an 
utterly  unsatisfying  one;  it  is  not  the  Bread  of  life,  but  the  ashes  of  disappointment. 
And  they  pay,  in  a  great  and  awful  privation,  the  penalty  of  their  folly  and  their  sin. 

III.  Those  who  will  not  learn  fbou  God  the  meanino  and  the  worth  of 
human  life.  What  are  we  here  for?  Can  anything  be  made  of  the  mortal  life  we 
are  living  ?  Is  everything  vanity  ?  May  we  treat  our  life  as  a  game  to  be  played  out ; 
or  as  a  mart  where  all  things  can  bo  turned  into  money ;  or  as  a  selfish  scramble  in 
which  the  strongest  and  swiftest  secure  the  best  prizes?  There  are  many  that  say, 
"  Who  will  show  us  any  good  ?  Life  is  not  worth  living."  They  walk  in  the  light 
of  the  poor  sparks  their  own  wit  has  kindled.  They  will  "  lie  down  in  sorrow  j "  they 
will  come  to  mourn  their  great  mistake,  to  reproach  themselves  for  the  greatness  of 
their  folly,  the  seriousness  of  their  sin.  For  all  the  while  that  they  were  cynically 
dismissing  their  opportunities,  there  was  shining  on  their  life  the  light  that  comes 
from  heaven.  Christ  was  inviting  them  to  make  of  their  earthly  life  a  holy  sacrifice 
unto  the  living  God,  a  noble  and  valuable  service  to  their  fellow-men,  a  time  of  pure 
and  sacred  joy,  a  discipline  that  would  train  the  docile  and  obedient  sprit  for  a  broader 
sphere  and  a  brighter  life  in  a  higher  kingdom.— G. 

Vet.  1. — Selling  ourselves.  "  For  your  iniquities  have  ye  sold  yourselves."  Reference 
is  to  the  right  which  fathers  in  the  East  possessed,  of  selling  their  children  into  slavery; 
and  also  to  the  power  of  judges  to  condemn  malefactors  to  slavery.  The  Jews  sold 
themselves  to  work  wickedness,  and  the  judgment  which  came  upon  then),  in  their 
being  sold  into  the  hands  of  their  Babylonian  enemies,  was  consequently,  in  fact,  their 
own  work.  They  might  say  that  they  uiere  sold;  God  convicts  them  by  reminding 
them  of  the  truth  they  preferred  not  to  see.  The  deeper  truth  was  that  they  gold 
themselves.  Illustrate  from  Goethe's  drama  of  'Faust.'  In  Scrijiture  a  man  who  is 
fully  resolved  on  a  course  of  action,  is  said  to  have  "sold  himself"  to  that  course  (see 
1  Kings  xxi.  20) ;  and  a  Divine  judgment,  which  takes  form  as  the  conquest  of  a  nation 
by  its  enemies,  is  called  a  "  selling  "  to  the  enemy  (see  Judg.  ii.  14 ;  x.  7).  St.  Paul 
even  uses  the  same  figure  in  Rom.  vii.  14,  saying,  "  The  Law  is  spiritual :  but  I  am 
carnal,  sold  under  sin."  The  figure  suggests  that,  by  giving  himself  up  to  wilfulness, 
self-iniiulgence,  and  sin,  a  man  expects  to  get  a  price,  and  deludes  himself  into  the  idea 
that  the  price  will  be  worth  the  risk.   Practical  applications  may  be  made  by  considering — 

I.  Man,  the  seller.  1.  What  has  he  to  sell  ?  Himself — his  powers,  time,  gifts, 
relationships,  influence,  and  possibilities.  2.  Has  he  any  right  to  sell?  No  real  right, 
but  an  apparent  right.  It  is  the  first  sign  of  man's  going  wrong,  that  he  claims  the 
right  to  sell  himself,  or  do  what  he  pleases  with  his  life.  A  man  is  really  nut  his  own. 
He  has  nothing  that  is  his  own,  and  so  he  has  nothing  to  selL  He  must  take  himself 
out  of  the  hands  of  God  before  he  can  sell  himself  to  anybody ;  and  the  possibility  of 
doing  this  is  the  peril  involved  in  trusti  ng  man  with  a  Mmitei  free-will,  IStill,  it  should 
be  clearly  seen  that,  when  any  man  sells  himself,  he  sells  stolen  property,  for  a  man  is 
not  his  own— he  b  Gkid's. 

IL  Self,  the  buteb.  It  is  the  custom  to  personify  evil,  and  call  it  Satan,  and  in 
the  early  stages  of  religious  knowledge  such  personifications  are  helpful.  But  the  worsi 
Satan,  the  true  Mammon,  is  Self.  He  is  the  purchaser ;  and  no  slave-master  ever  figurec 
the  tyranny  with  which  "Self  rules  the  slaves  he  purchases. 

"  He  is  the  free  man  whom  the  truth  makes  free. 
And  all  are  slaves  besides  " 


CH.I..1— 11.]       THE  BOOK  OF  THE  PEOPHET  ISAIAH.  266 

III.  PLEABtJRB,  THE  FRIOE.  Self-gratification,  indnlwence  of  the  lower  over  the 
higher  powers  and  faculties.  Is  the  price  ever,  even  at  first,  worthy  of  the  thing  sold? 
Christ  has  redeemed  us  from  this  slavery  to  self.  The  purchase  price  is  spoken  of  as 
"  his  own  hlood."  Redeeming  U8  for  himself  is  really  buying  back  for  ui  our  own  true 
selves. — R.  T. 

Ver.  4. — Wordi  in  season.  The  ability  to  speak  suitable  words,  timely,  wise,  and 
helpful,  is  God's  gift,  and  one  of  his  best  gifts,  which  we  should  covet  earnestly.  "  A 
word  fitly  spoken  is  like  apples  of  gold  in  baskets  of  silver  "  (Prov.  xxv.  11).  We  are 
often  pleasantly,  and  often  sadly,  reminded  how  words  which  we  spoke  years  ago  lie  in 
the  memories  of  those  who  heard,  and  have  exerted  continuous  influence  for  weal  or 
woe.  And  there  are  few  of  us  who  look  back  over  life  without  regret  that  golden 
opportunities  for  speaking  helpful  words  were  missed.  "  What  awakened  you  ?  "  said  a 
Christian  minister  on  one  occasion  to  a  young  friend.  "  It  was  what  you  said  to  me 
one  evening  coming  out  of  the  lecture-room.  As  you  took  me  by  the  band,  you  said, 
'  Mary,  one  thing  is  needful.'  You  said  nothing  else,  and  passed  on ;  but  I  could  not 
forget  it,"  It  was  a  word  spoken  in  the  Spirit,  and  the  Lord  accompanied  it  with 
saving  power.  ,  The  words  commendeii  by  the  prophet  are  more  especially  those  spoken 
to  the  weary ;  but  Scripture  connects  a  very  wide  meaning  with  that  term.     It  includes 

(1)  him  that  is  weary  with  the  overtoil  of  life ;  (2)  him  that  is  weary  of  the  common- 
ness and  comparative  meanness  of  labour;  (3)  him  that  is  weary  through  the  per- 
plexities and  diflSculties  of  life ;  (4)  him  that  is  weary  through  prolonged  bearing  of 
pain ;  (5)  him  that  is  weary  in  well-doing ;  and  (6)  him  that  is  weary  of  the  strife 
with  sin. 

"  Lost  for  want  of  a  word — 
A  word  that  you  might  have  spoken  I 

Who  knows  what  eyes  may  be  dim, 
Or  what  hearts  may  be  aching  and  broken  7* 

Words  In  season  may  he — 

I.  WoHDS  OF  CHEER.  Brightly  toned.  Full  of  hope.  The  words  of  those  who  can 
see  the  "bright  side  of  the  shield,"  and  find  a  smile  resting  like  soft  sunlight  on 
everything.  In  our  "  beariug  "  and  our  "doing  "  we  feel  thankful  to  all  who  can  speak 
cheerily  to  us. 

II.  Words  of  wabnins.  Spoken  by  the  far-sighted  men,  who  can  see  the  issues 
of  our  conduct,  to  which  we  are  blind. 

III.  Words  of  counsel.  Wise ;  prudent.  The  issue  of  large  knowledge ;  quick 
observation ;  varied  experience  ;  established  character. 

IV.  Words  of  reproof.  Brave  words,  that  show  us  our  faults.  "  Faithful  are  the 
wounds  of  a  friend." 

V.  Words  of  comfort.  The  human  agency  through  which  God  gives  us  the  resting 
of  his  "  everlasting  arms."    Words  are  "  out  of  season  "  when  they  are  (1)  unadapted ; 

(2)  untimely.  They  are  always  out  of  season  when  they  find  expression  for  pride  of 
self  rather  than  for  care  of  others. — B.  T. 

Ver.  6. — Contumely  endured  in  God's  service.  This  is  part  of  a  soliloquy  of  Messiah, 
and  in  it  he  dwells  upon  the  sufferings  which  would  attend  his  effort  to  carry  out 
obediently  his  Divine  mission ;  and  upon  his  confidence  that  God  would  uphold  his 
Servant  through  all  the  suffering  and  shame.  This  passage  should  be  compared  with 
Ps.  xxii.  and  ch.  liii.  The  point  more  especially  presented  in  this  verse  is  the  insult 
offered  to  Christ  in  the  closing  scenes  of  his  life.  This  insult  seems  the  strangest  part 
of  our  Lord's  life-experience ;  but,  if  he  had  not  known  it,  he  could  not  have  been  "  in 
all  points  tempted  like  us."  The  scenes  here  prophesied  are  narrated  in  Matt.  xxvi. 
67,  68iXXviL  26—30;  Mark  xiv.  65;  xv.  15—20;  Luke  xxii.  63—65;  xxiiL  11'; 
John  xviii.  22,  23 ;  xix.  1 — 3.  Three  forms  of  indignity  are  mentioned — smiting,  or 
scourging;  plucking  of  hair;  and  spitting.  Each  must  be  estimated  in  the  light  of 
historical  descriptions  and  Eastern  sentiments. 

I.  ScouRQiNO.  The  severity  and  barbarity  of  a  Roman  scourging  has  been  brought 
out  by  Dr.  C.  Geikie,  who  say^, "  Jesus  was  now  seized  by  some  of  the  soldiers  standing 
near,  and,  after  being  stripped  to  the  waist,  was  bound  in  a  stooping  posture,  hia  hands 


256  THE  BOOK  OF  THE  PROPHET  ISAIAH.        [oh.  1. 1— 11 

behind  his  back  to  a  post,  or  low  pillar,  near  the  tribunal.  He  was  then  beaten  till 
the  soldiers  chose  to  stop,  with  knots  of  rope  or  plaited  leather  thongs,  armed  at  the 
ends  with  acorn-shaped  drops  of  lead,  or  small  sharp-pointed  bones.  In  many  cases, 
not  only  was  the  back  of  the  person  scourged  out  open  in  all  directions ;  even  the  eyes, 
the  face,  and  the  breast  were  torn  and  cut,  and  the  teeth  not  seldom  knocked  out. 
The  judge  stood  by,  to  stimulate  the  sinewy  executioners  by  cries  of  '  Give  it  him  ! ' 
but  we  may  trust  that  Pilate,  though  his  office  required  his  presence,  spared  himself 
this  crime.  Under  the  fury  of  the  countless  stripes,  the  victims  sometimes  sank, 
amidst  screams,  convulsive  leaps,  and  distortions,  into  a  senseless  heap;  sometimes 
died  on  the  spot ;  sometimes  were  taken  away,  an  unrecognizable  mass  of  bleeding  flesh, 
to  find  deliverance  in  death,  from  the  inflammation  and  fever,  sickness  and  shame." 
Few  New  Testament  readers  duly  appreciate  the  sufferings  which  Messiah  endured  in 
the  judgment-hall.  The  cross  so  fills  their  vision  that  they  fail  to  see  how  much  he 
endured  before  the  cross  and  its  final  strain  and  agony  were  reached. 

II.  Plucking  the  haib.  Easterns  have  great  respect  for  the  beard,  and  plucking 
it  was  as  extremely  insulting  as  it  was  extremely  painful.  Eastern  sentiment  on  this 
matter  may  be  illustrated  by  the  treatment  of  David's  ambassadors,  one-half  of  whose 
beards  were  shaven  off  (2  Sam.  x.  5).  See  also  David's  action  when  he  would  feign 
madness  (1  Sam.  xxi.  13 ;  comp.  2  Kam.  xix.  24  ;  Ezra  ix.  3). 

III.  Spitting.  This  was  the  Eastern  expression  of  contemptuous  abhorrence;  and 
so  Job  poetically  expresses  his  sense  of  the  treatment  he  had  received,  by  saying, 
"  They  abhor  me,  they  flee  far  from  me,  and  spare  not  to  spit  in  my  face  "  (Job  xxx. 
10).  Hanway,  in  his  book  of  travels,  says,  "This  instance  of  contempt  and  reproach 
offered  to  Christ  was  at  the  same  time  an  expression  of  malice  and  a  compliance  with 
custom.  The  practice  has  descended  to  later  generations;  for  in  the  year  1744,  when 
a  rebel  prisoner  was  laid  before  Nadir  Shah's  general,  the  soldiers  were  ordered  to  spit 
in  his  face — an  indignity  of  great  antiquity  in  the  East."  And  Gadsby  tells  us  that 
"  spitting  in  the  face  is  still  practised  as  a  mark  of  contempt.  An  officer  in  Cairo  had 
two  Circassian  concubines  who  died  suddenly.  He  charged  his  wife  with  being  the 
cause  of  their  death,  when  she  spat  in  his  face.  He  drew  his  sabre  and  killed  her. 
Mehemet  Ali  once  spat  in  the  face  of  one  of  his  officers,  because  he  used  his  wife  badly." 

The  practical  application  of  the  fact  that  Messiah  bore  such  insults  in  doing  his 
work  may  be  made  on  the  following  lines.  1.  God's  message,  sent  by  us,  may  be  an 
offence  to  men.  2.  If  it  is,  they  will  be  very  likely  to  persuade  themselves  that  we 
are  the  offence.  3.  And  when  they  take  up  that  notion,  they  will  be  sure  to  vent  on 
us  the  feeling  which  they  have  asiainst  the  message.  But  this  is  apostolic  consolation : 
"  If  ye  be  reproached  for  the  Name  of  Christ,  happy  are  ye ;  for  the  Spirit  of  glory  and 
of  Ood  resteth  upon  you." — E.  T. 

Ver.  7. — God's  lidp  in  time  of  need,  "For  the  Lord  Gbd  will  help  me."  This  one 
assurance  suffices,  and  gives  the  Servant  of  Jehovah  an  indomitable  strength.  "  Against 
the  crowd  of  mockers  he  places  Adonai  Jehovah."  "Those  whom  God  employs  he  will 
assist,  and  will  take  care  they  want  not  any  help  that  they  or  their  work  call  for.  God, 
having  laid  help  upon  his  Son  for  us,  gave  help  to  him,  and  his  hand  was  all  along 
with  the  Man  of  his  right  hand  "  (Matthew  Henry).  "  Greater  is  he  who  is  with  us 
than  all  that  can  be  against  us." 

"Ood  is  my  strong  Salvation: 
What  foe  have  I  to  fear?" 

John  Ashworth,  in  his  '  Strange  Tales,'  dwells  on  the  satisfying  fulness  of  the  short 
and  simple  prayer,  "  Lord,  help  me  1 "  It  will  fit  in  everywhere  and  to  everything. 
It  sums  up  all  our  need.  It  appropriately  meets  us  whatever  may  he  our  circum- 
stances. In  the  text,  the  special  need  of  Divine  help  is  felt  in  the  doing  of  Gkod's 
work.  If  we  are  resolutely  set,  as  Christ  was,  upon  doing  and  fiiiishing  just  that  which 
God  has  given  us  to  do,  then — 

I.  Wk  If  ay  meet  with  indifference.  And  this  is  often  harder  to  bear  than  opposi< 
tion.  Men  pass  us  by.  We  are  not  interesting.  We  are  a  "  voice  crying  in  the  wilder- 
nesk."  Sometimes  we  are  behind  our  age,  and  God  has  bidden  us  remind  men  of  things 
they  ought  not  to  have  lost ;  and  then  they  pass  us  by  as  old-fashioned.     Sometimei 


OH.  L.  1—11,]        THE  BOOK  OP  THE  tBOPHET  ISAIAH.  267 

we  are  called  to  be  critics  of  the  age  in  which  we  live ;  and  then  men  pass  us  by  because 
we  annoy  them  by  showing  up  their  faults.  And  sometimes  we  are  before  our  age, 
and  prepare  for  the  changes  that  are  to  come;  and  then  men  pass  us  by,  with  a  smile 
at  our  unpractical  talk,  and  call  us  "  foolish  dreamers."  But  we  must  witness  on, 
whether  men  will  or  will  not  hear ;  and  God  will  be  sure  to  keep  us  cheerful. 

II.  We  mat  meet  with  opposition.  Messengers  for  God  usually  do.  It  is  a  bad 
sign  when  all  men  speak  well  of  them.  God's  messages  are  always  likely  to  offend 
self-seeking  men,  and,  as  a  consequence,  God's  messengers  have  to  suffer.  But  God's 
help  will  tide  us  over  all  times  of  trial.  We  only  have  to  learn  the  holy  lesson  "  how 
great  things  we  must  suffer  for  his  sake."  God's  help  is  our  unfailing  support — a  "  rock 
that  cannot  move."  The  help  of  God  stands  always  waiting  for  us  as  promise.  It 
never  actually  comes  to  us  until  the  need  has  arrived  for  it.  Then  we  find  it  is  always 
ready.  The  grace  is  there,  for  the  day,  for  every  day.  "  We  can  do  all  things  through 
Christ  which  strengtheneth  us." — B.  T. 

Ver.  8. — Uie  Justifier's  protection.  "  Near  is  he  that  justifieth  me."  Reference  is  to 
the  Servant  of  Jehovah,  whom  we  identify  as  the  Messiah.  The  associations  of  our 
Lord's  trial  and  death  may  suggest  that  he  was  a  malefactor.  God  allows  no  such 
impression  to  remain.  He  justifies  him,  by  raising  him  from  the  dead  and  granting 
him  full  acceptance.  He  declares  him  to  have  been  innocent  and  righteous.  The 
security  of  those  who  have  a  standing  in  Christ  lies  in  the  plea  made  for  them  by  their 
Justifier  (see  Bom.  viii.  33,  34).  (For  the  earlier  form  of  appeal  to  God  as  Justifier,  see 
Job  and  David :  Job  xxvii.  5 ;  Ps.  xzviii.  20,  etc.)  Compare  the  expressions,  "  It  is 
God  that  justifieth ; "  "  Baised  again  for  our  justification ;  "  "  Justified  in  the  Spirit." 
"  The  Father  justified  him  when  he  accepted  the  satisfaction  he  made  for  the  sin  of  man, 
and  constituted  him  '  the  Lord  our  Righteousness,'  who  was  made  sin  for  us."  It  is 
not,  however,  the  doctrine  of  justification  which  is  first  suggested  by  the  text.  Its 
reference  is  to  the  confidence  which  a  wronged,  slandered,  persecuted  good  man  may 
have,  that  God  will  stand  by  him,  and  in  due  time  justify  him,  bringing  forth  his 
righteousness  as  the  light.  Our  Lord  and  bis  servants  may  say,  with  misrepresented 
Job,  "  I  know  that "  God,  my  Ooel,  "  my  Redeemer,  liveth." 

L  God  justifies  bt  giving  the  inwaed  witness  of  his  acckptXnce.  It  is  plain 
that  he  gave  such  witness  to  Christ  in  his  last  hours.  Even  in  the  dreadful  sense  of 
"  being  forsaken,"  our  Lord  could  say,  "  My  God,  mi/  God,"  and  commit  himself  into 
the  Father's  hands.  Before  Pilate  he  held  such  confidence  in  God's  approval  that  he 
could  calmly  reply  to  him, ''  Thou  couldest  have  no  power  at  all  against  me  unless  it 
were  given  thee  frum  above."  A  divinely  whispered  "  Pear  not,"  from  our  Justifier, 
enables  us  to  bear  all  things. 

II.  God  justifies  by  the  lasting  impression  the  good  man  produces.  Hlustrate 
from  the  exclamation  of  the  centurion,  "  Truly  this  was  the  Son  of  God."  A  careful 
estimate  of  the  inward  struggles  of  Saul  of  Tarsus  brings  to  view  a  deep  feeling  that 
the  claims  of  Jesus  of  Nazareth  possibly  might  be  true.  The  good  man  only  gains 
more  power  when  his  goodness  is  shown  on  a  background  of  persecutions. 

III.  God  justifies  by  the  final  results  of  the  good  man's  work.  The  alander- 
ing  and  the  suffering  pass,  but  the  work  a  man  does,  and  the  witness  a  man  makes, 
abide.  Men  mistook  the  Christ.  We  know  the  results  of  his  work,  and  they  become 
the  fullest  justification  of  him. — B.  T. 

Ver.  10. — Counsel/or  those  who  wcdk  in  the  dark.  "  Let  him  trust  in  the  Name  of 
the  Lord,  and  stay  upon  his  God."  Christians  "  walk  in  darkness  when  their  evidence!! 
for  heaven  are  clouded,  their  joy  in  God  is  interrupted,  the  testimony  of  the  Spirit  is 
suspended,  and  the  light  of  God's  countenance  is  eclipsed."  The  first  reference  of  this 
passage  is  to  the  anxieties  of  the  latter  part  of  Hezekiah's  reign,  when  national  dangers 
were  great,  and  many  political  parties  existed,  one  recommendtr^  one  course,  and  one 
another.  It  was  very  diflacult  to  decide  what  course  to  take.  Good  men,  who  wanted 
to  do  light,  "  walked  in  darkness."  Use  the  figure  of  going  an  unknown  path  on  a 
dark  night.  We  only  feel  safe  as  we  hold  some  one's  hand,  and  let  him  guide  us.  God 
is  the  true  Guide,  and  darkness  and  light  are  both  alike  to  him.  There  is  a  sense  in 
which  one  must  always  be  walking  in  the  dark.  "  We  are  not  sufiBcient  of  ourselvei 
ISAIAH — n.  ■ 


2S8  I'fite  BOOK  OS*  THte  tBOPSET  ISAIAH.        [ch.  l.  1— ll 

even  to  think  anything  as  of  ourselves.''  "It  is  not  in  man  that  walketh  to  direct  his 
steps."  We  can  never  see  more  than  one  step  at  a  time.  The  future  is  altogether 
unknown.  If  we  were  sure  of  ourselves,  we  can  never  be  sure  of  others.  There  is  no 
possibility  of  our  knowing  how  they  will  act  under  given  circumstances.  Only  in 
rague  and  uncertain  ways  can  we  ever  plan,  for  all  our  plans  are  formed  in  the  <^rk. 
It  is  God's  law  for  us  that  we  shall  walk  through  life  in  the  dark.  The  question  is — 
Must  we  walk  alone  t  That  question  our  text  answers.  No ;  we  may  stay  ourselves 
on  our  God.  Illustrate  by  the  artistic  conception  of  Noel  Paton  concerning  the  guide 
through  the  death- valley,  in  bis  'Mors  Janua  Vitse'  picture.  God  would  have  us 
cherish  the  spirit  which  says — 

"  I'd  rather  walk  in  the  dark  with  God 
Than  go  alone  in  the  light." 

The  "  Name  of  God,"  in  which  we  are  to  tmst,  is  the  name  of  a  safe  Guide — so  the  ages 
say,  so  the  saints  of  all  the  ages  say.  He  is  the  Great-Heart  for  pilgrims,  whether  they 
walk  on  the  hill-ridges  of  prosperity  in  the  light,  or  along  the  valleys  of  fear  and 
trouble,  where  the  shadows  lie  thick  and  heavy. — R.  T. 

Ver.  11. — Disappointed  self-trust.  Various  interpretations  of  the  fire  here  referred 
to  have  been  given.  Probably  the  allusion  is  to  the  orditiary  domestic  fire,  taken  as  a 
figure  for  the  various  comforts  and  supports  which  men  can  find  for  themselves.  A 
self-kiudled  fire  contrasts  with  divinely  given  light.  Matthew  Henry  says,  "They 
place  their  happiness  in  their  worldly  possessions  and  enjoyments,  and  not  in  the  favour 
of  God.  Creature-comforts  are  as  sparks,  short-lived  and  soon  gone;  yet  the  children 
of  this  world,  while  they  last,  warm  themselves  by  them,  and  walk  with  pride  and 
pleasure  in  the  light  of  them.  Those  that  make  the  world  their  comfort,  and  their  own 
righteousness  their  confidence,  will  certainly  meet  with  a  fatal  disappointment,  which 
will  be  bitterness  in  the  end."  The  figures  of  the  verse  may  receive  explanation  from 
the  Eastern  fires  made  with  grass,  which,  while  burning,  emits  many  a  dancing  spark, 
that,  after  a  vain  promise  to  enliven  the  surrounding  gloom  for  a  moment,  suddenly 
sink  into  darkness.  The  wet  and  shivering  inmates  of  the  hovel  seek  for  light  and 
heat  by  crowding  close  to  the  blazing  hearth,  but  after  many  fruitless  attempts,  and  the 
consumption  of  their  stock,  they  are  compelled  to  retire  to  their  ill-covered  pallets — 
"  they  lie  down  in  sorrow."    Let  the  subject  be  self-confidence. 

I.  The  show  it  makes.  A  man  in  the  power  of  it  starts  out  bravely ;  defies  the 
darkness ;  and  easily  overcomes  first  difficulties.  The  early  efforts  of  self-reliant  people 
attract  attention  and  excite  hope.  We  like  to  see  the  working  of  energy  and  strong 
wilL 

II.  The  fleasube  it  brinos.  To  feel  power ;  to  find  that  men  yield  to  oni  resolute- 
ness, and  that  circumstances  are  mastered  by  our  energy. 

HI.  The  brevity  of  its  successes.  For  our  strength  does  not  endure.  The  strain 
of  life  steadily  increases.  Circumstances  at  last  prove  greater  than  we  are.  We  cannot 
do  the  things  that  we  would.  Peters,  who  for  a  while  can  gird  themselves,  by-and-by 
find  that  another  must  gird  them.  Do  what  we  may,  we  cannot  keep  the  fire  of  self- 
trust  steadily  burning. 

IV.  The  miseby  when  buccbss  changes  to  rAiLUBS.  As  it  surely  does  when 
God  puts  his  hand  upon  us,  damps  the  fire,  puts  out  the  light  we  have  made,  keeps 
away  his  light,  and  leaves  us  alone,  cold,  smitten  :  to  feel  with  such  a  one  as  Byron — 

**  The  worm,  the  canker,  and  the  grief  are  mine  alone." 
Impress  the  follj  and  the  daogef  of  self-trust  by  the  figures  given  in  Jer.  xriL  6— & 


3H.U.1— 23.]        THE  BOOK  OF  THE   PROPHET  ISAIAH. 


259 


EXPOSITION. 


OHAPTEE  LL 


Ven.  1 — 8. — An  Address  to  Faithful 
Ibrajx,  sugqesting  Topics  of  Comfobt. 
The  addresd  consists  of  three  nearly  eqnal 
strophes  or  stanzas,  each  commencing  with 
a  call,  Shim'u  ilai,  "  Hearken  unto  me,"  or 
Baqshibu  ilai,  "  Attend  to  me."  The  pro- 
phet appears  to  be  the  speaker,  and  to  ad- 
dress himself  to  the  more  faithful  portion  of 
the  people. 

Yer.  1. — ^Te  that  follow  after  righteous- 
ness ;  i.e.  "  ye  that  endeavour  to  lead  right- 
eous liyes"  (comp.  ver.  7).  Ye  that  seek 
the  Lord.  And  do  not  "  seek  after  idols," 
as  too  many  of  the  exiles  did  (oh.  xl.  19  ; 
xli.  7;  xliv.  9—20;  xlvi.  5— 8,  etc.).  look 
onto  the  rook  .  .  .  the  hole ;  i.e.  look  back 
at  your  past  history,  especially  at  the  early 
beginnings  of  it.  Consider  from  what  a  slight 
and  poor  commencement— an  aged  man  and 
a  barren  woman  (ver.  2) — ye  were  raised  up 
to  be  God's  people,  a  numerous  nation,  a 
multitude  like  the  sand  of  the  sea.  How 
came  this  result  about?  Was  it  not  simply 
by  the  blessing  of  God? 

Ver.  2. — I  called  him  alone ;  or,  I  called 
him  when  he  was  but  one;  i.e.  before  he 
had  any  children  (comp.  Ezek.  xxxiii.  24, 
."Abraham  was  one,  and  he  inherited  the 
land  ").  And  blessed  him  (see  Gen.  xxiv.  1, 
35).  And  increased  him ;  i.e.  "  made  him  a 
father  of  many  nations  "  (Gen.  xvii.  5).  If 
God  could  multiply  the  progeny  of  one  man, 
much  more  could  he  make  a  flourishing 
nation  out  of  the  exiles,  who,  though  but  a 
"  remnant "  of  the  pre-Oiptivity  Israel,  were 
yet  many  thousands  in  number  (see  Ezra 
ii.  64). 

Ver.  3. — The  Lord  shall  comfort  Zion 
(comp.  oh.  xl.  1 ;  xlix.  3 ;  li.  12 ;  lii.  9,  etc.). 
Literally,  the  word  used  is  has  comforted ; 
i.e.  has  so  determined  the  matter  in  his 
counsels  that  it  may  be  considered  as  already 
accomplished.  Her  waste  places  .  .  .  her 
wilderness  .  .  .  her  desert.  Though  Nebu- 
chadnezzar "left  of  the  poor  of  the  land  to 
be  vinedressers  and  husbandmen  "  (2  Kings 
XXV.  12;  Jer.  lii.  16),  yet  the  population 
wag  not  sufScient  to  maintain  cultivation 
generally.  Thus,  much  of  Judssa,  during 
the  absence  of  the  exiles,  became  a  "  wilder- 
ness "  and  a  "  desert "  (see  Ezek.  xxxvi.  34). 
Like  Eden  .  .  .  like  the  garden  of  the  Lord. 
The  Prophet  Joel  compares  Judrea  before  its 
desolation  to  "  the  garden  of  Eden  "  (ii.  3)  ; 
and  Ezekiel,  like  Isaiah,  prophesies  tliat  it 
shall  once  more  become  "like  the  garden 
of  Eden,"  when  the  exiles  have  returned 


lo  it  (xxxvii.  35).  With  the  last-named 
writer,  Eden  represents  all  that  is  glorioui, 
not  in  nature  only,  but  in  art  (xxviii  13 ; 
xxxi.  8,  9,  16,  18).  The  voice  of  melody 
(comp.  eh.  xxxv.  10,  and  infra,  ver.  11).  As 
music  ceases  out  of  the  land  in  time  o( 
affliction  (ch.  xxiv.  8),  so  when  a  "  time  of 
refreshing  from  the  Lord "  arrives,  there  is 
at  once  singing  and  '•  melody  "  (comp.  Eev. 
V.  8 ;  xiv.  2 ;  xv.  2). 

Ver.  4. — Hearken  unto  me;  rather,  attend 
to  me — a  stronger  term  than  "  hearken  " — 
attend,  and  hear  of  a  greater  blessing  than 
the  restoration  of  the  land  of  Judah  to  cul- 
tivation and  fruitfulness.  God,  enthroned 
anew  in  Zion,  will  from  thence  send  forth 
his  light  and  his  truth  to  the  nations,  will 
make  his  Law  known  to  them,  and  allow  them 
to  partake  of  his  salvation.  0  my  nation. 
Some  manuscripts  have  "O  ye  nations." 
But  the  reading  is  undoubtedly  a  wrong 
one.  A  law  shall  proceed  from  me.  The 
Christian  "law  " — the  new  covenant — is  pro- 
bably intended.  This  became,  by  the  preach- 
ing of  the  apostles,  a  light  of  the  people,  or 
rather,  of  the  people*. 

Ver.  5. — My  righteousnesB  is  near;  my 
salvation  is  gone  forth.  '■  One  day  is  with 
the  Lord  as  a  thousand  years,  and  a  thousand 
years  as  one  day  "  (2  Pet.  iii.  8).  Isaiah 
always  speaks  as  if  the  Messianic  kingdom 
was  to  supervene  almost  immediately  on  the 
return  of  the  exiles  to  Palestine.  It  was 
not  revealed  to  him  that  there  would  be  an 
interval  of  from  five  hundred  to  six  hundried 
years  between  the  two  events.  By  God's 
"  righteousness  "  here  we  must  understand 
his  righteous  plaos  for  the  redemption  of 
his  people  through  CShrist,  and  for  the  pun- 
ishment of  those  who  resist  his  will  and 
remain  impenitent.  The  salvation  and  the 
judgment  are  the  two  parts  of  the  "  right- 
eousness." The  isles  shall  wait  upon  me 
(oomp.  ch.  xli.  1,  5;  xlii.  4,  10,  12;  xlix.  1 ; 
Ix.  9,  etc. ;  and  the  comment  on  cl^.  xIU,  4). 
On  mine  arm  shall  they  trust  God's  "  arm  " 
is  his  executive  power — that  might  by  which 
he  effects  his  purposes.  The  "isles"  or 
"  countries  "  that  have  been  expecting  the 
coming  of  a  Deliverer  will  have  faith  in  his 
power  to  redeem  and  save  them.  Christianity 
was  received  with  more  readiness  by  the 
Gentiles  than  by  the  "peculiar  people" 
(Acts  xi.  21;  xiii.  42,  46;  xiv.  1,  2;  xvii. 
4,  5 ;  xviii.  6,  etc.). 

Ver.  6. — Lift  up  your  eyei  to  the  heavena. 
Look  to  that  which  seems  to  yon  most 
stable  and  most  certain  to  endure — the  vast 
firmament  of  the  heavens,  and  the  solid 
earth  beneath  it,  of  which  God  "bean  up 
the  pillars  "  (Ps.  Ixxv.  8).    Both  these,  and 


260 


THE  BOOK  OF  THE  PROPHET  ISAIAH.        [oh.  ix  1—23 


man  too,  are  in  their  nature  perishable,  and 
will  (or  may)  vanish  away  and  ceaee  to  be. 
But  God,  and  his  power  to  save,  and  his 
eternal  law  of  right,  can  never  pass  away, 
but  must  endure  for  evermore.  Let  Israel 
be  sure  that  the  righteous  purposes  of  God 
with  respect  to  their  own  deliverance  from 
Babylon,  and  to  the  conversion  of  the  Gen- 
tiles, stand  iirm,  and  that  tlioy  will  most 
certainly  be  accomplished.  The  heavens 
shall  vanish  away  like  smoke  (comp.  Ps.  cii. 
26 ;  Matt.  xxiv.  35 ;  2  Pet.  iii.  10—12).  And 
the  earth  shall  wax  old  like  a  garment.  So 
also  in  Ps.  cii.  26  and  Heb.  i.  11.  The  new 
heaven  and  new  earth  promised  by  Isaiah 
(Ixv.  17;  Ixvi.  22),  St.  Peter  (2  Pet.  iii.  13), 
and  St.  John  (Eev.  xxi.  1)  are  created  in  the 
last  times,  because  "the  first  heaven  and 
the  first  earth  have  passed  away."  They  that 
dwell  therein  shall  die  in  like  manner.  Dr. 
Kay  observes  that  the  Hebrew  text  does  not 
say,  "  in  like  manner,"  but  "  as  in  like  man- 
ner." Man  is  not  subject  to  the  same  law 
of  perishablenesB  as  the  external  world,  but 
to  a  different  law.  External  things  simply 
"pass  away"  and  are  no  more.  Man  dis- 
appears from  the  earth,  but  continues  to 
exist  somewhere.  He  has,  by  God's  gift,  a 
life  that  is  to  be  unceasing. 

Ver.  7. — Hearken  unto  mo,  ye  that  know 
righteonsness,  The  highest  grade  of  faith- 
fulness is  here  addressed — ^not  those  who 
"  seek"  (ver.  l),but  those  who  have  found — 
who  "knotc  righteousness,"  and  have  the 
"law"  of  God  in  their  "hearit."  Such 
persons  may  stiU  be  liable  to  one  weakness 
— they  may  "  fear  the  reproach  of  men." 
The  prophet  exhorts  them  to  put  aside  tiiis 
fear,  remembering  (1)  the  nothingness  of 
humanity,  and  (2)  the  eternity  and  im- 
perishableness  of  God's  judgments. 

Vor.  8. — The  moth  shall  eat  them  (comp. 
ch.  1.  9).  If  men  themselves  never  wholly 
pass  away  (see  the  comment  on  ver.  6),  yet 
it  is  otherwise  with  their  judgments.  These 
perish  absolutely,  disappear,  and  are  utterly 
forgotten. 

Vers.  9 — 11. — An  Appeal  op  the  Prophet 
TO  God  to  arouse  himsele,  with  a  Promise 
op  Israel's  Eestoeation.  There  has  been 
much  doubt  as  to  the  utterer  of  this  "  splen- 
did apostrophe."  Zion,  the  prophet,  the 
angels,  Jehovah,  and  God  the  Son  pleading 
with  God  the  Fatlier,  have  been  suggested. 
To  ns  it  seems  simplest  and  best  to  assign 
the  passage  to  the  prophet. 

Ver.  9. — ^Awake,  awake  (oomp.  Pb.  vii.  6 ; 
XXXV.  23;  xliv.  23;  Ixxviii.  65).  When 
God  neglects  the  prayers  and  supplications 
of  his  people,  he  is  spoken  of  as  "  asleep," 
and  n^ing  to  be  awoke  by  a  loud  cry. 
The  anthropomorphism  is  obvious,  and  of 


course  not  to  be  taken  literally  (see  1  Kings 
xviii.  27,  ad  fin.).  Put  on  strength.  Gird 
the  strength  to  thee  (Ps.  xciii.  1)  which 
thou  hadst  laid  aside  while  thou  wert  asleep. 
Art  thon'not  it  that  hath  cut  Bahab  1  rather, 
was  it  not  thou  that  didst  cleave  Bahab  in 
piecesi  Here,  as  iu  Ps.  Ixxxvii.  4  and 
Ixxxix.  10,  "  Bahab "  would  seem  to  be  a 
symbolical  expression  for  Egypt.  "  Eahab  " 
is  literally  "pride,"  or  "the  proud  one." 
The  event  alluded  to,  both  here  and  in  Ps. 
Ixxxix.  10,  is  the  destruction  of  Pharaoh's 
host  in  tlie  Bed  Sea  (see  ver.  10).  And 
wounded  the  dragon,  "The  dragon"  is 
another  symbol  of  the  Egyptian  power 
(comp.  Ezek.  xxix.  3,  "  Pharaoh,  King  of 
Egypt,  the  great  diagon  that  lieth  in  the 
midst  of  his  rivers").  Originally  designating 
God's  grtat  enemy,  Satan  (Gen.  iii.  14; 
Bev.  xii.  7 — 9 ;  xx.  2),  it  is  a  term  which 
comes  to  be  applied  to  the  adversaries  of 
the  Almighty  generally. 

Ver.  10. — Art  thou  not  it  which  hath  dried 
the  sea  ?  rather,  was  it  not  thou  that  didtl 
dry  up  the  seal  (comp.  Exod.  xiv.  21,  22). 
The  waters  of  the  Bed  Sea  are  called  those 
of  "the  great  deep,"  because  they  are  a 
portion  of  the  circumambient  ocean,  not  a 
tideless  land-locked  basin,  like  the  Medi- 
terranean. That  hath  made;  rather,  that 
maiJest.  The  allusion  is  to  the  single  occa- 
sion of  the  passage  of  the  Bed  Sea  by  the 
Israelites. 

Ver.  11, — The  redeemed  of  the  Lord  (see 
the  comment  on  ch.  xxxv.  10,  where  the 
same  passage  occurs  with  scarcely  any  varia- 
tion). Isaiah  is  not  averse  to  repetitions 
(see  ch.  V.  25;  ix.  12,  17,  21;  x.  4;  xi.  1; 
Ixv.  25 ;  xlviii.  22 ;  Ivii.  21,  etc.).      • 

Vers.  12 — 16. — An  Address  op  God  to 
HIS  Captive  People.  There  is  no  very  clear 
connection  between  this  passage  wnd  the 
preceding,  to  which  it  is  certainly  not  an 
answer.  God  comforts  the  captives  under 
the  oppreasiou  which  they  are  suffering  (1) 
by  reminding  them  of  their  oppressors'  weak- 
ness and  Ehort-livedness ;  (2)  by  assuring 
them  of  speedy  deliverance  (ver.  14);  and 
(3)  by  impressing  upon  them  his  owa  power 
as  shotvn  in  the  past,  which  is  a  guarantee 
that  he  will  protect  them  in  the  future  (vers. 
15, 16). 

Ver.  12. — I  am  he  that  oomforteth  yon 
(comp.  ver.  3,  and  the  comment  ad  loe.)- 
Who  art  thoul  Art  thou  a  poor,  weak, 
powerless,  unprotected  people,  which  might 
well  tremble  at  the  powerful  Babylonians : 
or  art  thou  not  rather  a  people  under  the 
special  protection  of  Jehovah,  bound,  there- 
fore, to  fear  no  one?  As  grass  (comp.  eh. 
xxxvii.  27;  xl.  6— «). 


ra.  LI.  1—23.]        THE  BOOK  OP  THE  PROPHET  ISAIAH. 


261 


Ver.  13.-  -And  forgettest  the  lord  thy 
Hitkei.  It  is  not  so  much  apostasy  as  want 
of  a  liyely  and  pi'actical  faith  with  which 
captive  Israel  is  here  reproached.  They  did 
not  deny  God — they  only  left  him  out  of 
sight,  neglected  him,  forgot  him.  That  hath 
stretched  forth  the  heavens  (comp.  ch,  xl.  22 ; 
xlii.  5;  xliv.  24;  xlv.  12,  etc.).  And  laid 
the  foundations  of  the  earth  (see  ch.  xlviii. 
13 ;  Ps.  cii.  25 ;  Heb.  i.  10).  And  hast  feared 
continually  .  .  .  because  of  the  fury  of  the 
oppressor.  (On  the  sufferings  of  the  Israelites 
under  their  Babylonian  oppressors,  see  the 
comment  on  ch.  xlii.  22,  and  again  on  ch. 
xlvii.  6.)  By  the  present  passage  it  would 
appear  that  life  itself  was  not  safe  from  their 
cruel  fury,  when  their  victims  had  exas- 
perated them.  Where  is  the  fury  of  the 
oppressoi '  \11  their  violence  and  rage  will 
come  to  nought,  when  they  in  their  turn 
become  subject  to  the  conquering  Persians. 

Ver.  14. — The  captive  exile  hasteneth  that 
he  may  be  loosed;  rather,  he  that  is  herd 
down  hasteneth  to  he  released ;  i.e.  such  of  the 
exiles  as  were  cramped  and  bent  by  fetters, 
of  by  the  stocks,  would  speedily,  on  the  fall 
of  Babylon,  obtain  their  release.  They 
would  not  "  die  unto  the  pit,"  i.e.  so  as  to_ 
belong  to  the  pit  and  to  be  cast  into  it,  but 
would  live  and  have  a  sufficiency  of  sus- 
tenance. 

Ver.  15. — But  I  am  the  Lord  thy  Ood,  that 
divided  the  sea ;  rather,  for  I,  the  Lord  thy 
God,  am  he  that  divided  tlte  sea  (comp.  ver. 
10).  The  reference  is  once  more  to  the  great 
mlrat^Ie  wrought  at  the  Exodus,  when  the 
Eed  Sea  was  "  divided  "  before  the  host  of 
Israelites  (Exod.  xiv.  21 ;  comp.  Fs.  Ixxiv. 
13).  Whose  waves  roared  (see  Exod.  xiv. 
27;  XV.  10). 

Ver.  16. — And  I  have  put  my  words  in  thy 
mouth.  Some  commentators  detach  this 
verse  altogether  from  the  preceding  passage, 
and  regard  it  as  a  fragment  intruded  here 
out  of  its  proper  place  by  some  unaccountable 
accident.  From  the  close  resemblance  of 
the  expressions  used  to  those  in  ch.  xlix.  2, 
they  consider  that  the  person  addressed  must 
be  "the  Servant  of  Jehovah,"  and  hence 
conclude  that  the  verse  "originally  stood  in 
some  other  context "  (Cheyne).  It  is,  how- 
ever, quite  possible  to  regard  Israel  as  still 
addressed ;  since  Israel  too  was  the  recipient 
of  God's  words  (see  ch.  lix.  21),  and  was 
protected  by  God's  hand  from  destruction, 
and  kept  in  existence  until  the  liappy  time 
should  come  when  God  would  create  a  new 
heaven  and  a  new  earth  (ch.  Ixv.  17)  for 
Israel's  dwelling-place,  and  say  unto  Zion — 
<.«.  to  the  "  new  Jerusalem  "  (Rev.  xxi.  2) — 
Then  art  my  people.  This  crowning  promise 
well  terminates  the  comforting  address  where- 
with Jehovah  at  this  time  saw  fit  to  cheer 
and  encourage  his  captive  people. 


Vers.  17 — 23.— An  Address  of  the  Pro- 
phet TO  Jerusalem.  The  comfort,  atforded 
to  Israel  generally  is  now  concentrated  on 
Jerusalem.  Her  condition  during  the  long 
period  of  the  Captivity  is  deplored,  and  her 
want  of  a  champion  to  assert  her  cause  and 
raise  her  out  of  the  dust  is  lamented  (vers. 
17 — 20).  After  this,  an  assurance  is  given 
her  that  the  miseries  which  she  has  suffered 
shall  pass  from  her  to  her  great  enemy,  by 
whom  the  dregs  of  the  "  cup  of  trembling  " 
shall  be  drained,  and  the  last  drop  wrung 
out  (vers.  21—23). 

Ver.  17. — Awake,  awake  (comp.  ver.  9 
and  ch.  lii.  1).  Isaiah  marks  the  breaks  in 
his  prophecy,  sometimes  by  a  repetition  of 
terminal  clauses,  which  have  the  ettect  of  a 
refrain  (eh.  v.  25;  ix.  12,  17,  21;  x.  4;  and 
xlviii.  22;  Ivii.  21);  sometimes  by  a  repetition 
of  initial  clauses  of  a  striking  chamcter  (ch. 
V.  8,  11,  20 ;  xiii.  1 ;  xv.  1 ;  xvii.  1 ;  xix.  1 ; 
xxi.  1, 11 ;  xxli.  1 ;  xxiii.  1 ;  xxviii.  1 ;  xxix. 
1 ;  XXX.  1 ;  xxxi.  1 ;  xxxiii.  1 ;  xlviii.  1,  12, 
16;  1.  4,  7,  9,  etc.).  Here  we  have  thrice 
over  "Awake,  awake" — not,  however,  an 
exact  repetition  in  the  Hebrew,  but  a  near 
approach  to  it — each  summons  forming  the 
commencement  of  a  new  paragraph  or  sub- 
section. Which  hast  druiilr  at  the  hand  of 
the  Lord  the  cup  of  his  fury.  The  cup  of 
God's  fury  was  poured  out  on  Jerusalem 
when  the  city  was  taken  by  Nebuchadnezzar, 
the  temple,  the  royal  palace,  and  the  houses 
of  the  nobles  burnt  (2  Kings  xxv.  9),  the 
walls  broken  down  (2  Kings  xxv.  10),  and 
the  bulk  of  the  inhabitants  carried  away 
captive  to  Babylon  (2  Kings  xxv.  11;  comp. 
2  Ohron.  xxxiv.  25 ;  Jer.  xlii.  18 ;  xliv.  6 ; 
Ezek.  xxii.  31,  etc.).  "The  cup  of  God's 
fury"  is  an  expression  used  by  Jeremiah 
(xxv.  15).  The  dregs  of  the  cup ;  rather, 
perhaps,  the  gdblet-nup  (Cheyne),  or  the 
out-swollen  cup.  It  is  the  fulness  of  the 
measure  of  Jerusalem's  punishment,  not  its 
character,  which  is  pointed  at. 

Ver.  18. — None  to  guide  her.  From  the 
time  that  Johanan,  the  son  of  Kareah,  and 
the  other  "  captains  of  the  forces,"  quitted 
Judaea  and  fled  into  Egypt,  taking  with 
them  Jeremiah  and  Baruch  (Jer.  xliii.  5 — 7), 
there  was  no  one  left  in  the  country  with 
any  authority  or  any  ability  to  direct  affairs. 
The  city,  no  doubt,  suffered  by  this  state 
of  things,  becoming  more  ruined  and  more 
desolate  than  it  would  have  been  otherwise. 
Had  Johanan  and  the  Jews  under  him  re- 
mained in  the  land,  God  had  promised  to 
"  build  them,  and  not  pull  them  down ; "  to 
"  plant  them,  and  not  pluck  them  up  "  (Jer. 
xlii.  10).  Thus  Jerusalem's  extreme  desola- 
tion was  not  wholly  the  result  of  the  Baby- 


262 


THE  BOOK  OF   THE   PROPHET  ISAIAH.        [oh.  li.  1—11 


Ionian  conquest,  but  was  partly  due  to  the 
after-misconduct  of  the  Jews  left  in  the 
country. 

Ver.  19. — These  two  things.  What  are 
the  "  two  things,"  it  is  asked,  since  four  are 
mentioned— desolation,  and  destraotion,  and 
the  famine,  and  the  sword)  The  right 
answer  seems  to  be  that  of  Aben  Ezra  and 
Kimohi,  that  the  two  things  are  "desola- 
tion," or  rather  "  wasting"  within,  produced 
by  "  famine  ;  "  and  "  destruction  "  without, 
produced  by  "the  sword."  Who  shall  be 
sorry  for  thee  f  rather,  who  will  mourn  with 
thee  f  Jerusalem  is  without  friends ;  no  man 
condoles  with  her  over  her  misfortunes.  God 
alone  feels  compassion;  but  even  he  scarce 
knows  how  to  comfort.  By  whom  1  rather, 
how  f  (comp.  Amos  vii.  2,  5). 

Ver.  20. — Thy  sons  have  fainted,  they  lie ; 
rather,  thy  tont  fainted ;  they  lay.  The 
prophet  describes  the  siege  and  capture  of 
Jerusalem  as  past,  because  his  standpoint 
is  the  time  of  the  Captivity.  He  depicts  the 
inhabitants  of  Jerusalem  as  "  faint "  through 
famine,  imd  so  weak  that  they  lie  prostrate 
about  the  streets.  As  a  wild  bull  in  a  net ; 
rather,  like  a  gazelle  in  a  net — panting,  ex- 
hausted, incapable  of  the  least  resistance. 
They  are  full  of  the  fury  of  the  Lord ;  i.e. 
tlie  fury  of  the  Lord  has  been  fuUy  poured 
out  upon  them. 


Yer.  21. — Drunken,  but  not  with  wini 
(comp.  ch.  zxix.  9;  and  see  above,  ver.  17, 
which  shows  that  the  appearance  of  drunken- 
ness had  been  produced  by  Jerusalem  drink- 
ing the  cup  of  God's  wrath). 

Ver.  22.— The  Lord  .  .  .  that  pleadeth  the 
cause  of  his  people  (comp.  Jer.  1.  34,  which 
contains  an  allusion  to  this  passage).  Ai 
his  people  have  a  relentless  adversary,  who 
accuses  them  continually,  and  pleads  against 
them  (Bev.  xil,  10),  so  it  is  needful  that  they 
should  have  an  untiring  advocate.  God 
himself  is  this  Advocate.  The  dregs  of  the 
onp  (see  the  comment  on  ver.  17,  ad  fin.). 

Ver.  23. — I  will  pat  it  into  the  hand  of 
them  that  afflict  thee.  Babylon,  the  op- 
pressor of  Judab,  eball  in  her  turn  be  made 
to  drink  of  the  cup  of  which  Judah  had  so 
long  drunk,  and  shall  suffer  nearly  the  same 
woes  which  she  had  inflicted.  Meanwhile, 
Judah  should  cease  to  drink  of  the  cup,  and 
have  "a  time  of  refreshing."  Bow  down, 
that  we  may  go  over;  i.e.  "submit  your- 
selves to  the  uttermost,  that  we  may  put 
upon  you  the  most  extreme  indignity."  The 
metaphor  is  drawn  from  the  actual  practise 
of  conquerors,  who  made  captive  kings  pros- 
trate themselves,  and  placed  their  feet  upon 
their  necks,  or  otherwise  trampled  upon 
them  (see  Josh.  x.  24;  and  comp.  'Ancient 
Monarchies,'  toL  iiL  p.  7). 


HOMILETICa 

Ver.  7. — The  servants  of  Ood  must  not  fear  the  reproach  cfmen.    The  reproach  of 

men  is  a  thing  of  small  account — 

I.  Becadsb  men  are  apt  to  be  mistaken  in  their  judgments.  The  bulk  of 
men  have  no  wish  even  to  be  fair  in  their  judgments.  They  praise  and  blame,  acquit 
and  condemn,  either  as  their  own  interest.s — party  or  other — are  concerned,  or  some- 
times quite  at  random,  according  as  the  fancy  takes  them.  Even  such  as  wish  to  be 
fair  very  often  misjudge,  either  (1)  from  a  want  of  capacity  to  judge  aright  in  a 
delicate  case;  or  (2)  from  not  possessing  sufficient  data  upon  which  to  form  a  right 
judgment.  It  is  to  be  remembered  that  men's  motives  are  hidden,  and  can  only  be 
guessed  at  by  others ;  yet  the  motive  is  the  main  point  in  an  action,  and  that  on  which  its 
moral  character  almost  wholly  depends.  If  we  mistake  the  motive,  we  may  condemn 
severely  what,  if  we  had  really  known  the  motive,  we  should  have  highly  praised. 

II.  Because  men's  judgments  bo  frequently  chakge.  The  idol  of  a  nation 
to-day  becomes  their  detestation  to-morrow ;  or,  if  not  to-morrow,  at  any  /ate  within 
a  few  years.  Nothing  is  more  fickle  than  the  popular  voice,  which  will  cry  one  day, 
"  Hosanna  to  the  Son  of  David!"  and,  a  week  later,  "Crucify  him!  crucify  himl"  The 
opinion  formed  of  a  man  by  his  contemporaries  is  frequently  reversed  by  posterity ; 
and  even  posterity  is  not  always  steadfast,  a  later  age  often  contradicting  the  decisions 
of  an  earlier.  Historic  characters,  long  condemned  with  almost  absolute  unanimity, 
are  rehabilitated  from  time  to  time  by  clever  writers,  and  are  given  niches  in  the 
Valhalla  of  the  future. 

III.  Because  man  himself  is  altogether  so  fleeting,  bo  weak,  kscd  so  little 
WORTHY  of  regard.  " Coaso  ye  from  man,  whose  breath  is  in  his  nostrils:  for 
wherein  is  he  to  be  accounted  of?  "  (ch.  ii.  22).  At  the  best,  what  is  human  praise  ot 
blame  ?  An  opinion,  founded  on  imperfect  data,  which  can  at  most  affect  us  during 
the  brief  term  of  our  sojourn  here.    What  are  reproaches  and  revilings  ?    The  weak 


cti.  u.  1— 23.]        TfiE  fiOOK  OP  THE  PIIOPHET  ISAlAfi. 


ways  which  men  have  of  venting  their  spite  or  their  ill  humour,  when  some  one,  of 
whom  they  know  very  little,  has  acted  otherwise  than  they  expected  or  wished. 
"Hard  words,"  it  is  often  remarked,  "break  no  bones."  Human  censure  is  but  a 
breath.  Why  should  we  allow  it  to  affect  us  at  all  ?  It  does  not  matter  what  men 
think  of  us,  but  what  God  thinks.  No  one  was  ever  more  reviled  than  the  One  only 
perfect  Man  whom  the  world  has  ever  seen. 

Ver.  11. — No  sorrow  nor  mourning  in  the  final  kingdom  of  the  Redeemer.  The 
promise  hero  set  forth  with  all  brevity  is  graciously  expanded  in  the  revelation  of  St. 
John,  and  is  inexpressibly  com'brting  to  grieved  and  harassed  souls.  "  Behold,  the 
tabernacle  of  God  is  with  men,"  says  the  apostle,  "and  he  will  dwell  with  them,  and 
they  shall  be  his  people,  and  God  himself  shall  be  with  them,  and  be  their  God.  And 
God  shall  wipe  away  all  tears  from  their  eyes;  and  there  shall  be  no  more  death, 
neither  sorrow  nor  crying,  neither  shall  there  be  any  more  pain :  for  the  former  things 
are  passed  away"  (Rev.  xxi.  3,  4).     It  may  be  well  to  consider — 

I.  The  causes  of  the  chakgb.  The  apostle  notes  two  causes  of  the  change. 
1.  There  is  no  more  death.  The  "  first  death  "  is  past,  and  the  "  second  death"  is  not 
for  those  who  have  attained  to  the  glnries  of  the  Bedeemer's  final  kingdom.  They  are 
secure  of  "  life  for  evermore."  2.  There  is  no  more  pain.  No  bodily  pain,  since  the 
resurrection-body  shall  not  be  liable  to  any  of  those  pains  and  sufferings  which  cause 
our  present  body  to  be  a  burden  to  us  here  below.  No  mental  pain,  since  the  mind 
shall  be  at  rest,  securely  stayed  upon  him  who  has  given  it  life,  and  who  is  its  Life. 
To  these  causes  we  may  add  two  more :  3.  There  is  no  more  parting :  no  njore  separa- 
tion of  loving  souls,  no  more  loss  of  friends,  or  parents,  or  children,  or  wife,  or  brother, 
or  sister ;  no  more  tearing  of  heartstrings  through  such  separation ;  no  more  giving  or 
receiving  of  last  adieus.  4.  And  there  is  no  more  sin.  "  Old  things  have  passed  away ; 
all  things  have  become  new."  New  hearts  have  been  given  to  the  redeemed — hearts 
that  are  "  from  sin  set  free ; "  hearts  sprinkled  with  the  blood  of  Christ,  and  so  made 
clean  and  pure.  The  sense  of  sin  is  gone;  shame  is  gone;  remorse,  regret,  are  gone; 
and  so  the  worst  of  all  the  pains  of  which  man  is  susceptible  are  fled  away. 

IL  Th«  gebatness  of  the  change.  This  world  is  well  called  "  a  vale  of  tears." 
Pain  and  suffering  cling  to  us  throughout  the  whole  course  of  our  lives  from  cur 
first  breath  to  our  last.  We  enter  life  with  a  cry.  All  the  bodily  functions  are  painful, 
till  use  dulls  the  pain.  Life  is  little  but  "  labour  and  sorrow,"  disappointment  and 
illusion.  Hunger,  thiist,  toil,  weariness,  cold,  heat,  desire,  passion,  accompany  us 
through  the  whole  of  our  worldly  existence,  and  are  all  of  them  pains.  All  of  us 
experience  sickness  at  times,  and  many  of  us  have  chronic  ailments  which  never  quit 
us,  and  from  which  we  suffer  constantly,  more  or  less.  There  is  so  much  misery  in  life 
that  numbers  quit  it  voluntarily,  and  thousands  more  would  do  the  same  were  they 
not  restrained  by  a  religious  motive.  Can  a  greater  change  be  imagined  than  a  transfer 
from  "  the  miseries  of  this  sinful  world  "  to  the  glories  of  the  heavenly  kingdom  ? 

"There  is  a  blessed  home 

Beyond  this  land  of  woe^ 
Where  trials  never  come, 

Nor  tears  of  anguish  flow ; 
Where  faith  is  lost  in  sight. 

And  patient  hope  is  crown'dt 
And  everlasting  light 

Its  glory  throws  around. 

•Look  up,  ye  saints  of  Ood, 

Nor  fear  to  tread  below 
The  path  your  Saviour  trod 

Of  daily  toil  and  woe. 
Walt  but  a  little  while 

In  uncomplaining  love. 
His  own  most  gracious  smile 

Bhall  welcome  yuu  above." 

IIL  Tes  BUC88KDKE88  OF  THE  CHANGE.  It  is  scarcely  necessarx  to  enlarga  on  this 
— it  is  involved  in  all  that  has  been  said.  On  the  one  hand,  pain,  grief,  labour,  sickness, 


264  THE  BOOK  OP  THE  PROPHET  ISAIAH.        [oh.  u.  1—21 

partings,  tears,  qualms  of  conscience,  fear  of  comin?  evils,  sense  of  sin  ;  on  the  other, 
rest,  peace,  the  sense  of  pardon,  of  security,  of  God's  favour,  of  God's  love ;  no  more 
vicissitudes,  no  more  partings,  no  more  lapses  into  sin — one  constant,  unending  life  of 
perfect  peace  and  restful  joy,  in  the  midst  of  those  we  love,  and  in  the  continual 
presence  and  sight  of  him  who  so  loved  us  as  to  die  for  us  I 

"  O  Paradise,  O  Paradise, 

'Tis  weary  waiting  here ; 
We  long  to  be  where  Jesus  ii, 

To  feel  and  see  him  near— 
Where  loyal  hearts  and  true 

Stand  ever  in  the  light, 
All  rapture  through  and  thiongh. 

In  Uod's  most  holy  sight," 

Vers.  12 — 16  — A  fust  confidence  in  Ood  is  a  security  against  cowardly /eon.  Men 
"fear  continually  every  day  "  because  of  the  emnity,  or  fury,  or  malignity,  or  cunning, 
of  those  who  oppress  them,  or  of  those  who  would  fain  oppress  them.  They  tremble 
before  the  wrath  of  men  ;  they  give  little  thought  to  the  wrath  of  God.  Half  the  sins 
that  are  committed  spring  from  cowardice — a  short-sighted  cowardice,  which  consists 
in  fearing  those  who  can,  at  most,  "  kill  the  body,"  and  not  fearing  him  who  after 
death  can  "  destroy  both  body  and  soul  in  hell "  (Matt.  v.  28).  A  just  confidence  in 
God  will  secure  us  against  such  cowardice,  since  it  will  make  us  feel — 

I.  Reliance  upon  God's  will  to  save  vs.  God's  mercy  is  "  over  all  his  works," 
over  man  especially ;  in  a  peculiar  manner  over  such  as  love  him  and  trust  in  him.  Ha. 
will  not  suffer  them  to  be  tried  "above  that  they  are  able."  He  loves  them,  and 
watches  over  them,  and  sympathizes  with  their  sufferings,  and  counts  their  wrongs, 
and  hears  their  groans  (Exod.  ii.  23),  and  "knows  their  sorrows"  (Exod.  lii.  7). 
Oppressors  are  hateful  to  him  (ch.  i.  23 ;  iii.  15 ;  v.  7,  etc.).  They  provoke  him  to 
send  upon  them  "  swift  destruction."  The  greater  their  fury,  the  more  they  rouae 
against  them  God's  indignation,  and  the  closer  their  destruction  draws  nigh. 

II.  Reliance  upon  God's  power  to  save  us.  Men  are  finite;  God  is  infinite. 
Man  is  the  creature  of  a  day ;  God  is  "  from  everlasting  to  everlasting."  Man  fades  as 
grass;  God  is  "  strong  in  power"  (ch.  xl.  26),  unwearied,  unfailing.  The  "  fierceness  of 
man  turns  to  God's  praise,"  for  that  fierceness  he  is  able  at  any  moment  to  "  refrain  " 
(Ps.  Ixxvi.  10).  He  who  "  has  stretched  out  the  heavens  and  laid  the  foundations  of 
the  earth,"  and  created  man  and  placed  him  on  the  earth,  and  alone  sustains  him  in 
life,  can  at  any  time  sweep  him  into  nothingness,  destroy  him,  and  make  "  all  his 
thoughts  perish." 

Ver.  22. — Ood  pleads  the  cause  of  his  people.  How  can  Qoi,  it  may  be  asked,  be 
at  once  Judge  and  Advocate  ?  Can  he  plead  at  his  own  tribunal ;  entreat  himself  to 
show  mercy;  deprecate  his  own  anger?  If  not,  before  what  tribunal  does  he  plead? 
whose  mercy  does  he  entreat  ?  whose  anger  does  he  deprecate  ?  The  prophet  himseli 
could,  perhaps,  scarcely  have  explained  his  own  words ;  but  the.  Holy  Spirit  who 
inspired  them  knew  exactly  in  what  sense  they  were  true.  The  riddle  has  to  be  solved 
by  the  consideration  of  the  distinction  of  Persons  in  the  Godhead.  Ood  the  Father  is 
the  Judge  of  man,  before  whose  tribunal  all  men  must  one  day  appear.  God  the  Son  is 
the  Advocate  (1  John  ii.  1),  who  pleads  with  the  Father  on  their  behalf,  intercedes  ior 
them  (Heb.  vii.  25),  deprecates  the  Father's  wrath,  implores  his  mercy,  entreats  lor 
and  obtains  their  pardon.  Satan,  on  the  one  side,  accuses  (Rev.  xii.  10)  ;  bat  on  the 
other,  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ  defends.  He  defends  his  own,  and  he  overcomes  by  hii 
own  blood  (Hev.  xii.  11),  wherewith  he  has  washed  away  their  sins.  He  "justifieth" 
(Bom.  yiiL  SS),  and  then  "  who  is  he  that  condemneth  ?      Assuredly,  no  onOi 


HOMILIES  BY  VARIOUS  AUTHORa 

Ten.  1-^.— Instructions  to  the  spiritual  Israd.     Tlie  people  are  ttescrfbed  •; 
"  possessing  righteousness,"  ije.  following  a  way  of  life  in  accordance  with  the  Divine 


CH.  LL  1—23.]        THE  BOOK  OF  THE  PROPHET  ISAIAH.  265 

commands ;  and  "  seeking  Jehovah,"  t.e.  attending  to  all  that  his  mind  approves  and 
his  will  commands. 

L  Thk  lesson  op  their  origin.  They  had  been,  as  it  were,  hewn  from  a  rock  and 
dug  out  of  a  pit.  The  allusion  is  to  Abraham.  They  had  sprung  from  one,  and  him 
as  good  as  dea^  (Heb.  xi.  12).  They  had  been  as  rough  as  unhewn  materials  fresh 
from  the  quarry  when  Jehovah  took  them  in  hami  for  his  moulding.  He  had  formed 
the  nation  out  of  its  primary  mateiials — had  taken  Abraham  and  Sarah  from  a  distant 
land,  and  formed  them  into  a  nation  for  his  own  purpose.  And  then  the  argument  is 
that  he  who  had  done  this  in  the  past  was  able  to  do  as  great  things  in  the  future — to 
restore  the  people  from  captivity  to  their  own  land.  The  words  may  be  applied  more 
generally  (cf.  Matt.  iii.  9,  "  God  is  able  to  raise  np  of  these  stones  ch  Idren  unto 
Abraham  ").  From  the  rudest  material  God  can  fashion  masterpieces  of  grace.  The 
greatest  sinner  may  furnish  the  elements  of  character  for  the  greatest  saint.  In  any 
true  and  humble  view  of  his  condition  the  Christian  will  feel  that  the  language  is 
apposite  to  himself.  "He  was  found  in  his  natural  state  as  a  block  of  marble;  he  was 
moulded  and  formed  by  the  agency  of  th"e  Holy  Spirit ;  he  was  fitted  into  the  spiritual 
temple.  Christians  owe  all  the  beauty  and  grace  of  their  Christian  deportment  to  him. 
This  is  an  argument  to  prove  that  they  are  dependent  on  him  for  all  that  they  have, 
and  that  he  will  keep  them  and  accomplish  all  his  purposes  by  them.  He  who  has 
transformed  them  from  rough  ^.nd  unsightly  blocks  to  polished  stones  fitted  for  his 
spiritual  temple  on  earth,  is  able  to  keep  them  still,  and  to  fit  them  wholly  for  hia 
temple  above." 

II.  Comfort  for  the  FniOBB.  1.  External  blessings.  The  ruined  places  of  Zion 
are  to  be  restored,  the  present  wilderness  of  Judsea  to  be  transformed  into  a  garden  of 
Eden — a  scene  of  joy,  thanksgiving,  and  music.  The  idea  of  a  terrestrial  paradise  enters 
into  the  lore  of  other  nations.  Arab  legends  tell  of  a  garden  in  the  East,  on  a  mount 
of  jacinth,  inaccessible  to  man,  of  rich  soil  and  equable  temperature,  well  watered  and 
abounding  in  trees  and  flowers  of  rare  colours  and  fragrance.  "  In  the  background  of 
man's  visions  lay  a  paradise  of  holy  joy,  secured  from  profanation  and  inaccessible  to 
the  guilty  ;  full  of  objects  fitted  to  delight  the  senses  and  elevate  the  mind  ;  a  paradise 
that  granted  to  its  tenant  rich  and  rare  immunities,  and  fed  with  its  perennial  streams, 
the  tree  of  life,  and  immortality  "  (Hardwick).  There  is  no  reason  why  we  should  not 
think  of  heaven  under  such  a  figure ;  and  every  happy  renewal  of  the  soul  by  Divine 
grace  may  be  termed  a  transformation  of  the  waste  and  desert  of  the  heart  into  the 
garden  of  God.  2.  Spiritual  blessings.  "  Enthroned  anew  in  Israel,  Jehovah  shall 
send  forth  his  light  and  his  truth  among  the  distant  nations."  His  righteousness  is 
new — which  means  "  his  consistent  adherence  to  his  revealed  line  of  action  which 
involves  deliverance  to  faithful  or  at  least  repentant  Israel,  and  destruction  to  those 
whs  thwart  his  all-wise  purposes."  "  Mine  arms  shall  judge  the  peoples  "  includes 
"  the  darker  side  of  Jehovah's  righteousness  "  (Cheyne).  The  countries  "  shall  wait " 
for  Jehovah,  and  trust  upon  his  "  arm,"  ».e.  his  mighty  help.  Distant  lands  shall 
become  interested  in  the  true  religion,  and  acknowledge  and  worship  the  true  God. 
3.  The  eternity  of  God's  sahation.  The  order  of  the  world  is  elsewhere  described  in 
Scripture  as  everlasting  (Gen.  viii.  21,  22  ;  ix.  9 — 11 ;  xlix.  26  ;  Ps.  cxlviii.  6).  The 
heavens  and  the  earth  appear  to  be  firm  and  fixed.  Yet — against  all  appearance  and 
probability,  against  all  that  specious  constanoy^they  are  doomed  to  vanish  away. 
The  most  mighty  and  fixed  of  created  things  must  disappear ;  but  the  promise  of  God 
18  unfailing.  This  is  one  of  the  finest  passages  in  all  poetry.  The  heavens  are  to 
"  glide  away,"  disappearing  like  wreaths  of  smoke  in  the  air  (cf.  ch.  xxxiv.  4 ;  Heb. 
i.  11, 12 ;  Ps.  cii.  26 ;  2  Pet.  iii.  10—12).  The  Hebrew  was  wont  to  look  upon  the 
sky  as  a  "  firmament,"  a  solid  overarching  vault.  Yet  here  it  seems  thin  as  a  soap- 
bubble,  which  the  breath  of  a  child  may  blow  into  nothingness.  There  are  times 
when  the  soul  is  sick  (like  Uamlet),  and  all  the  magnificence  of  the  heavens  seems  to 
pall  upon  it— a  faint  that  the  soul  feels  it  partakes  of  a  life  higher  than  that  of  the 
natural  world.  There  are  times  when  the  soul  triumphs  in  the  transiency  of  the  natural 
world,  conscious  that  it  enjoys  an  immortality  in  common  with  the  Eternal.  "  The 
earth  shall  fall  to  pieces  like  a  garment,  and  the  dwellers  therein  shall  die  like  gnats  ; 
but  my  salvation  shall  be  for  ever,  and  my  righteousness  shall  not  be  annulled."  It  is 
not  the  contempt  uf  a  self-poised  soul  for  the  material  world  and  its  dimensions  and  its 


266  THE   BOOK   OF  THE  PEOPHET  ISAIAH.        [oh.  u.  1— 2a 

splendours ;  but  the  joy  of  a  trustful  soul  in  afflance  with  the  Saviour-God.  That  this 
world  will  pass  away,  and  that  God  will  remain,  are  certain.  But  of  what  comfort  is 
this  to  me,  unless  I  am  united  to  the  Eternal  ?  He  by  whose  will  material  things 
perish  and  pass  away  is  he  by  whose  will  the  soul  is  redeemed  and  saved  for  ever.  To 
live  in  faith  upon  God  is  to  live  the  life  of  intellect  and  the  life  of  love,  neither  of 
which  can  pass  away;  for  they  belong  to  the  eternal  essences.  In  such  assurance 
material  things  may  be  seen  evaporating,  heaven  turning  to  smoke,  earth  becoming  as 
a  tattered  robe,  "  ocean's  self  turning  dry ; "  while  we  ourselves  pass  to  him  who 
has  been  and  will  be  the  Dwelling-place  and  the  Saviour  of  all  successive  genera- 
tions,— J. 

Vers.  9 — 11. — l%e  arm  of  Jehovah.  Either  the  people  call  on  Jehovah,  or  he  is 
concerned  as  calling  on  himself  to  awake  and  rouse  up  his  might  for  the  defence  of 
his  people  as  in  the  days  of  old. 

I.  The  akm  op  Jehovah  as  symbolic  of  his  power.  It  is  the  symbol  of  spiritual 
power  opposed  to  that  of  darkness,  death,  the  under-world.  He  is  said  to  have  "  smitten 
Rahab,  and  wounded  the  dragon."  Commonly  this  has  been  understood  of  Egypt,  but 
the  reference  seems  to  be  more  general.  It  was  in  ancient  thought,  generally,  the 
property  of  a  god  to  be  the  slayer  of  monsters,  who  all  of  them  represent  hellish 
influences.  It  is  spiritual  power  opposed  to  worldly  violence.  He  had  dried  up  the  sea, 
the  wateitl  of  the  great  deep,  and  made  therein  a  way  for  the  released  to  pass  over. 
Egypt  was  the  dark  historic  memory  of  the  people.  Its  king  might  well  be  compared 
with  the  fiendish  monster  of  darkness  (Ezek.  xxix.  3;  xxxii.  2;  Ps.  xxziv.  13,  11). 
And  so  the  passage  of  the  Red  Sea  was  the  standing  symbol  of  deliverance,  of  redemp- 
tion (see  Ps.  cv.).  And  in  our  own  hymns  and  sacred  allusions  Egjpt  stands  for  the 
bondage  of  sin,  the  captivity  of  the  mind  to  sense,  to  the  devil.  And  the  passing  over 
the  Ked  Sia  may  be  fitly  symbolic  of  salvation  by  grace,  of  regeneration  or  conversion. 
The  argument  is  from  the  past  to  the  future.  The  God  who  had  overcome  all  obstacles 
in  the  way  of  their  deliverance  from  Egypt  Was  able  to  overcome  all  obstacles  in  the 
way  of  their  deliverance  from  Babylon.  He  might  be  expected  again  to  manifest  his 
mercy,  and  save  the  nation  from  oppression.  And  so,  in  general,  the  argument  holds 
good  for  the  Church  and  for  the  individual :  "  Because  thou  hast  been  my  Refuge, 
under  the  shadow  of  thy  wings  I  will  put  my  trust."  The  principle  is  ever  applicable. 
All  God's  past  interpositions  on  behalf  of  his  people  constitute  an  argument  that  he 
will  continue  to  regard  them. 

II.  Tub  future  seen  by  the  light  of  the  past.  1.  TSe  ransomed  of  Jehovah  shall 
return.  Ihe  power  that  lies  in  the  word  "redeemed,"  "ransomed  " !  AH  the  notions 
of  love,  sacrifice,  purchase,  that  are  connected  with  itl  The  assurance  that  flows  from 
the  realization  of  such  a  state!  God  will  not  desert ;  he  cannot  lose  those  whom  he  has 
made  by  so  many  ties  his  own,  2.  The  joy  of  the  return.  "  The  custom  of  singing  on 
a  journey  is  still  common  in  the  East.  It  relieves  the  tediousness  of  a  journey  over 
extended  plains,  and  stirs  the  camels  to  greater  speed.  So  the  long  tedium  of  the  way 
from  Babylon  shall  be  cheered  by  songs  expressive  of  gladness  and  praise."  "  We  are 
travelling  home  to  Ood."  We  are  vmder  the  guidance  of  a  good  Pastor,  who  goes  before, 
who  knows  his  sheep ;  of  a  Leader  of  salvation  who  has  released  his  people,  and  will 
crown  his  work  of  redemption  by  glorification. 

"  Then  let  our  songs  abonnd, 
And  every  tear  be  dry." 

We  are  on  the  way  to  new  releases  and  fresh  redemptions  from  ill.— J. 

Vers.  12 — 16. — Expostulation  against  imbelief.  If  the  Eternal  be  the  Fttstor  and 
the  Comforter  of  Israel,  what  has  Israel  to  fear  ? 

I.  The  natural  timidity  of  the  heart.  We  are  cravens,  all  of  us.  We  stand 
in  dread  of  our  own  image ;  we  quail  before  "  frail  man  that  dieth,  and  the  son  of  the 
earth-born  who  is  given  up  as  grass."  A  frown  makes  us  tremble ;  a  menace  unmans 
us.  We  are  the  slaves  of  custom  and  opinion.  Anxiety  is  ever  conjuring  up  dangers 
which  exist  not,  and  forecasting  calamities  which  do  not  occur.  So  were  the  Jews 
"ver  "  on  the  tenter-hooks  of  expectation.    When  the  •  aiming '  of  the  enemy  seems  t« 


OH.  LI.  1—23.]       THE  BOOK  OF  THE  PROPHET  ISAIAH.  261 


fail,  their  spirits  rise;  when  it  promises  to  succeed,  they  fall."    How  much  do  we  all 
suffer  from  "  ills  that  never  arrive  "  ! 

II.  Timidity  oobrbotbd  by  religion.  Its  cause  Is  touched — forgetfulness  of  God, 
Isforgetfulness  the  result  of  want  of  faith,  or  the  oriuin  of  faithlessness  ?  Both  may  be 
true.  Faith  needs  to  be  fed  from  memory,  and  memory  exerts  its  proper  activity 
under  the  instigation  of  faith.  Old  truths  need  constantly  to  he  recalled,  and  to  become 
new  truths  through  the  act  of  attention — the  "giving  heed  to  the  things  we  hava 
heard,  lest  at  any  time  we  let  them  slip."  That  God  is  Creator  of  heaven  and  earth  is 
an  elementary  tiuth  of  religion.  How  much  may  be  deduced  from  it !  He  who  made 
the  earth  made  the  nations  that  dwell  on  the  face  of  it ;  therefore  made  Israel,  and 
every  member  of  Israel.  God  creates  to  preserve.  His  character  of  Deliverer  flows  from 
that  of  Creator.  There  is,  then,  hope  for  the  fettered  captive.  For  he  who  is  Almighty 
in  nature  is  equally  so  in  the  sphere  of  human  life.  Ho  who  raises  storms  is  able  to 
still  them,  so  that  his  friends  have  no  cause  to  fear.  The  commitment  of  the  truth  to 
the  Jewish  people,  their  protection  and  restoration,  seems  to  be  compared  to  the  vast 
work  of  creation.  The  lesson  for  the  timid  apprehensive  heart  is  to  learn  that  Omni- 
potence is  engaged  in  its  protection  and  defence. 

"  This  awful  God  is  ours. 
Our  Father  and  our  Friend." 

J. 

Vers.  17 — 23. — Enantragement  for  Jerusalem.  The  prophet,  or  chorus  of  prophets, 
is  supposed  to  salute  the  holy  city  with  a  cheering  cry. 

I.  Pictures  op  distbess.  The  draught  from  the  cup  of  Divine  wrath.  "  The  cup 
of  his  fury  " — "  the  goblet-cup  of  reeling."  These  are  figures  for  the  horror  and  hewilder- 
ment  caused  by  a  great  catastrophe.  It  is  "  to  drink  the  wine  of  astonishment  "  (Ps. 
Ix.  3;-  Ezek.  xxiii.  2).  Then  there  is  utter  helplessness.  No  guide  for  Jerusalem  to  be 
found  in  all  hei  sons;  no  strong  and  helping  hand  to  grasp  hers  in  the  hour  of.  her 
dire  need.  Desolation,  death,  famine,  and  sword — the  latter  without,  the  former  within 
(Ezek.  vii.  15) — such  is  the  state  of  the  city.  The  afflicted  mother  and  her  sons.  It  is  a 
picture  resembling  that  of  Niobe  and  her  doomed  offspring.  The  sons  of  this  mother- 
city  swoon,  and  lie  at  the  corners  of  the  streets.  "Israel  the  mountain  people  is 
likened  to  a  gazelle,  which  all  its  swiftness  and  grace  have  not  saved  from  the  hunter's 
snare."    All  these  things  are  signs  of  "  the  fury  of  Jehovah,  the  rebuke  of  God." 

II.  Unexpected  bnoouragement.  "  The  transition  from  threatening  to  promise  is 
marked  by  "  therefore  "  (ch.  x.  24 ;  xxvii.  9 ;  xxx.  18).  The  Lord  Jehovah,  the  God  who  is 
the  Advocate  of  his  people,  speaks.  This  cup,  which  makes  men  reel  with  the  madness  of 
bewilderment,  shall  be  taken  from  them,  and  put  into  the  hands  of  their  tormentors — the 
proud  conquerors  who  had  placed  their  feet  upon  their  necks  (cf.  Josh.  x.  24 ;  Ps.  cxxix. 
3).  Such  sudden  transitions  remind  us  of  the  fact  of  providence,  and  of  the  coincidence 
of  human  extremity  with  Divine  opportunity.  God  will  not  leave  himself  at  any  age 
without  a  witness  in  the  world — which  shall  see  that  the  hand  of  Divine  power  is  not 
shortened,  nor  the  bowels  of  Divine  goodness  straitened ;  but  that  God  is  as  able  and 
ready  to  save  his  Church  as  ever.  "  The  difSculty  of  affairs  has  baflded  and  laughed  at 
all  resistances  of  created  power,  and  so  made  the  omnipotent  Author  of  the  deliverance 
visible  and  conspicuous." — J. 

Ver.  2. — Ancient  memories.  "  Look  unto  Abraham  your  father."  It  is  wise  to 
surround  the  young  with  the  statues  of  great  and  brave  and  wise  men,  and  to  have 
hanging  in  the  halls  of  a  nation  the  portraits  of  their  true  leaders.  So  in  the  Hebrews 
we  are  in  a  chamber  of  inspired  images  of  the  heroes  and  heroines  of  faith. 

I.  The  eye  is  always  on  bomb  object.  We  are  looking  always  to  objects  that 
elevate  or  that  debase  us.  Israel  at  this  time  was  looking  to  military  leaders,  longing 
for  some  Messiah  who  should  gather  together  a  power  sufBcient  to  break  the  iron  yoke 
of  oppression.  They  were  looking,  not  to  the  faithful  Abrahams,  but  to  the  warrior 
Sauls.     The  eye  thus  becomes  a  window  to  the  heart. 

II.  They  had  forgotten  theib  ancient  power.  Abraham  was  a  man  of  faith. 
He  believed  in  God,  and  he  lived  a  life  of  faith  in  God.    When  the  spirit  of  Abn^am 


268  THE  BOOK  OF  THE  PROPHET   ISAIAH.        [oh.  li.  1— 2a 

filled  their  hearts,  then  they  acted  as  men  who  helieved  that  "  righteotisness  exalteth  a 
oation."  The  true  Hebrew  power  was  righteousness.  Their  psalms  glorified,  not  the 
sword,  but  the  moral  Law  of  God.  The  right  hand  of  the  Most  High  was  with  them 
when  they  were  a  nation  that  loved  righteousness  and  hated  iniquity.  "  Therefore  God, 
thy  God,  hath  exalted  thee  above  thy  fellows."  The  call  to  all  godly  men  in  erery  age 
is, "Look  to  Abraham."— W.  M.  S. 

Ver.  12. — Qod  the  Comforter,  "  I,  even  I,  am  he  that  oomforteth  you."  All 
depends  upon  who  it  is  that  comforts  us  in  the  great  crises  of  life.  We  are  so  apt  to 
lean  on  those  that  excuse  our  weaknesses  and  comfort  us  in  our  sins. 

I.  God  himself  is  a  Comfoetbb.  This  is  his  nature.  There  is  emphasis  in  it.  "  I 
even  1" — the  Lord  of  hosts;  the  God  of  whom  it  is  said,  "There  is  nothing  too  hard 
for  the  Lord."  We  gain  comfort  when  we  gain  confidence.  It  is  faithlessness  that 
makes  us  feeble.  Let  us  read  the  revelatioa  of  what  God  is,  and  study  the  history  of 
what  God  has  done  for  his  saints  in  every  age,  and  we  shall  find  comfort. 

II.  Man  at  the  best  is  but  man.  Why  be  afraid  of  him?  Study  yourself, 
your  failings,  timorousness,  and  frailty,  and  be  sure  that  your  brother  man  is  just  like 
this.  1.  We  are  unreasonahly  afraiA  of  men.  Their  power  is  limited.  Their  pretension 
is  greater  than  their  power.  Do  not  be  deceived  by  appearances.  2.  We  are  the  subjects 
offorgetfulness.  "  Man  shall  be  madeas  grassl"  We  cannot  have  a  better  imageof  the 
feebleness  of  human  strength.  We  think  too  much  of  man,  and  forget  the  Lord  om: 
Maker.  Look  at  the  heavens.  Look  at  the  foundations  of  the  earth.  What  can  shake 
what  God  upholds?  "  Where  is  the  fury  of  the  oppressor?"  Ask  Pharaoh ;  and  be  at 
rest.— W.  M.  S. 

Ver.  13. —  2%e  nervous  temperament.  "Hast  feared  continually  every  day."  We 
are  not  all  constituted  alike.  The  instrumentalities  by  which  the  great  soul  within  us 
does  its  work  are  diverse  in  quality.  In  a  material  sense  we  are  but  dust,  yet  the 
dust  itself  has  more  steel  in  it  with  some  than  with  others.  Many  have  iron  nerves 
and  hereditary  health,  whioli  make  them  strangers  to  the  trepidations  of  others.  They 
never  vvalk  those  caves  of  terrible  gloom  in  which  others  often  are  doomed  to  wander, 
nor  have  they  felt  the  sensitiveness  which  often  turns  the  experiences  c.f  life  into  torture. 
We  are  to  meditate  now  on  the  nervous  temperament,  and  to  study  especially  the  rela- 
tion which  the  gospel  occupies  in  relation  to  it.  There  may  be  other  anodynes  of  con- 
solation, physical  and  mental ;  but  my  argument  will  be  this — that  the  religion  nf  Christ 
stands  in  special  relationship  of  solace  and  succour  to  those  who  feel  with  the  psalmist, 
"  I  am  feeble  and  sore  broken,  because  of  the  disquietness  of  my  heart."  We  cannot 
help  being,  in  one  sense,  what  we  were  born.  The  mimosa  plant  cannot  avoid  being  a 
mimosa  plant,  and  nothing  else.  The  sensitiveness  of  a  highly  wrought  nervous  system 
is  born  with  many,  and,  do  what  they  will,  they  must  carry  it  with  them  to  the  grave. 
Often  misunderstood  and  misrepresented,  often  verging  on  despair,  they  are  bowed  down 
greatly,  and  go  mourning  all  the  day  long.  Much  depends,  of  course,  on  the  law  of 
association,  and  on  relationships  of  persons  and  things.  Much,  too,  depends  on  religious 
ideas.  There  is,  for  instance,  a  form  of  piety  sincere  enough  in  itself  which  feeds  per- 
petual introspection,  and  is  ever  tremulous  concerning  its  own  state.  How  different 
this  from  the  rest  which  comes  from  entire  trust  in  Christ  1  Then,  aaain,  there  are 
human  relationships  which,  instead  of  being  ministrants  of  consolation,  strain  the  heart 
and  irritate  the  nerves.  Oh,  the  depression  that  must  come,  the  anxiety  that  will  do 
its  wear  and  tear,  which  is  derived  from  alliance  with  unthankful  and  foreboding  hearts, 
from  fellowship  with  those  who,  if  they  do  not  consciously  know  the  science  of  dis- 
heartenment,  are  at  all  events  a«  fait  at  its  practice  1  When  Moses  spake  with  Israel 
on  this  side  Jordan  in  the  wilderness,  he  had  in  his  thought  the  carping  spirit  of  those 
whose  criticism  suggests  difficulty  and  danger  too  great  to  be  overcome.  Some  men 
always  see  lions  in  the  way,  and  do  an  anticipative  roaring  themselves.  Thus  he  spoke 
of  some  who  said,"  Whither  shall  we  go  up?  our  brethren  have  discouraged  our -heart, 
saying,  The  people  are  greater  and  taller  than  we ;  the  cities  are  great  and  walled  up  to 
heaven."  What  an  insight  this  gives  on  those  whose  imagination  cresitea  giants!  Now 
though  we  may  apply  specially  the  words  of  our  text  to  a  nervous  temperamentr— 
they  simply  represent  a  special  occasion  of  depretsiou  in  the  prophet's  life ;  they 
represent  inward  fears.  ■ 


OH.  u.  1—23.]       THE  BOOK  OF  THE  PROPHET  ISAIAH.  269 

L  Thb  TBUis  PHII1O8OPHT  OF  LIFE  IS  LITB  TS  CmtiBT.  Not  in  Be1£  Not  in  society. 
But  in  CIiriBt.  We  must  go  out  of  ourselves,  out  of  our  "  moods  "  and  "  feelings,"  that 
we  may  look  unto  Christ  and  be  saved !  I  am  speaking  of  those  who  are  ever  nervously 
anxious  and  sensitive.  First  of  all  about  their  salvation,  which,  alas  I  is  like  a  "  vari- 
able quantity  "  with  them.  But  I  wish,  also,  to  apply  the  idea  to  human  life.  Christ 
is  a  perfect  Brother  as  well  as  a  perfect  Saviour.  Redemption  is  his.  Yes ;  and  so  is 
common  home-life ;  so  is  the  gift  of  daily  bread.  The  great  realm  of  providence  is 
under  his  sceptre.  J..  Meditate  well  on  this  dual  aspect  of  the  stihject.  First  of  all,  when 
you  are  tempted  to  be  morbid  analysts  of  your  own  spiritual  state,  to  use  the  scales  of 
weight  and  measurement  for  the  depth  of  your  love  and  the  height  of  your  faith. 
There  can  be  no  escape  from  trepidatory  alarms  so  long  as  we  apply  aquafortis  to  the 
gold  of  our  affection,  so  long  as  we  microscopically  survey  the  minutias  of  our  neglected 
duties  and  our  multitudinous  sins.  We  must  ponder  the  consolatory  words, "  As  Moses 
lifted  up  the  serpent  in  the  wilderness,  even  so  must  the  Son  of  man  be  lifted  up:  that 
whosoever  believeth  in  him  should  not  perish,  but  have  eternal  life."  And  this  argument 
applies  as  much  to  the  ordinary  life  of  every  day.  Do  things  happen  to  us,  or  are  our 
times  in  God's  hands  ?  Our  dread  of  fatalism,  with  its  results  of  inertia  and  indifference, 
has  sometimes  hindered  that  quiet  trust  in  God  which  is  the  secret  of  all  true  strength. 
Events  are  in  his  hand.  You  cannot  make  one  hair  black  or  white,  or  add  one  cubit 
to  ytsur  stature.  You  will  become  worn  and  weary  by  retrospective  fears.  And  what 
po\(ur  have  you  over  the  dark,  deep  waves  of  coming  tribulation,  or  over  the  advent- 
hours  of  grief  and  death  ?  Be  wise.  Resolve  with  promptitude.  Persevere  with  energy. 
Rise  early  with  alacrity  for  the  service  of  the  day,  but  cast  all  anxious  thoughts  of 
to-morrow  on  your  Lord.  2.  /  do  not  say  that  so  doing  all  your  fears  will  cease.  No 
act  of  faith  is  so  complete  as  to  shut  out  all  weakness  of  the  soul.  But  I  do  say  this 
will  be  your  most  perfect  anodyne.  Other  things  will  help.  The  bracing  air,  the 
oxygen  and  ozone  of  the  «ea-coast,  may  tone  your  nerves,  but  it  cannot  create  new  ones. 
The  gospel  can  do  the  most,  but  even  that  cannot  reorganize  the  physical  frame,  so 
fearfully  and  wonderfully  made ;  but  its  atmosphere  is  the  best  one  for  bracing  the 
heart  and  soothing  the  fretted,  irritated  nerve. 

II.  There  is  continuity  or  feab.  We  none  of  us  know  how  frail  we  are  till  trial 
comes.  The  blooming  maiden  little  thought  that  care  would  so  soon  write  itself  on  her 
forehead,  and  that  the  silvery  lines  would  so  early  be  discovered  in  her  hair.  Yet  so  it 
is.  A  mother  now,  she  has  had  to  endure  the  anxieties  of  home  and  the  agonies  of 
bereavement.  There  are  some  constitutions  that  can  brave  much ;  they  keep  hale  and 
well,  with  the  pulse  even  and  the  eye  bright,  amid  difficulties  that  would  overwhelm 
others.  Let  them  thank  God  for  the  perfectness  of  the  physical  frame.  But  there 
are  some  that  only  looh  robust  and  bright,  and  when  tribulation  comes  their  strength 
gives  way  with  marvellous  rapidity.  The  physician  says  the  vascular  system  is  excel- 
lent, the  muscles  strong,  the  frame  perfect,  but  the  nervous  system  is  fragility  itself. 
1.  Advent-days  of  trouble  do  come.  Even  sin  in  its  first  consciousness  overwhelms  ^ome 
with  fear  and  trembling.  A  great  horror  overwhelms  them.  The  invisible  realm  of  the 
spirit  is  suddenly  revealed  to  them,  and  where  before  they  saw  nothing  hideous  or  evil, 
now  reptiles  crawl  I  Yes ;  there  is  a  revelation  of  sin  now  as  of  old.  We  know  what 
the  first  sight  of  accident  or  death  is :  how  severely  it  shocks  the  senses  of  a  child  1  So 
sin  may,  and  does,  come  with  an  overwhelming  consciousness  of  guilt  on  some  minds. 
The  old  cry  is  heard,  "  Depart  from  me ;  for  I  am  a  sinful  man,  0  Lord ! "  How 
terrible,  then,  if  such  souls  fall  into  the  hands,  not  oi  wise  physicians,  but  of  unwise 
irritators  of  the  evil  1  The  nerves  will  break  down,  and  have  broken  down  in  thousands 
of  cases,  and  mania  ensues.  Study  the  history  of  monasteries  and  convents.  Study 
the  history  of  some  revivals.  The  meditevalists  worked  upon  many  delicate  nervous 
systems  by  their  hideous  pictures  of  hell  and  by  their  fearful  harangues  concerning  it. 
Nor  has  the  modern  Church  escaped  the  danger.  At  once  the  anxious  soul  should  be 
led  to  him  who  says, "  Daughter,  Je  of  good  cheer ;  thy  sins  be  forgiven  thee."  2.  There 
are  seasons  when  unforeseen  calamity  comes.  No  fleecy  cloud  presages  the  coming 
storm,  no  floating  seaweed  tells  how  near  the  vessel  is  to  the  rocks ;  but  swift  as  the 
"  bore "  that  rushes  up  the  Hooghly  fiwm  the  Ganges,  the  water  sweeps  in  with  a 
swell,  and  engulfs  the  precious  freights  of  unanchored  vessels  in  its  broadening  wave. 
There  are  seasons  when  the  nerves  are  made  intensely  sensitive.    The  heart  is  pierced 


270  THE  BOOK  OF  THE  PBOPHET  ISAIAH.        [oh.  li.  1—28 

by  the  coldness  and  neglect  of  some  familiar  friend.  The  spirit  droops.  Ingratitude 
luks  wounded,  neglect  has  chilled,  cruelty  has  crushed,  and  enmity  has  tried  to  slay 
reputation  and  renown.  "  The  spirit  of  a  man  can  sustain  his  infirmity,  but  a  wounded 
spirit  who  can  bear?"  Who?  Certainly  not  t^le  anxious  temperament.  Surely  at 
such  times  it  is  heart-rest  to  know  the  Brother  born  for  adversity,  the  Friend  that 
sticketh  closer  than  a  brother ;  then  is  the  hour  to  feel  the  warm  radiance  of  the  love 
of  Christ.  One  smile  from  the  Saviour  then  is  worth  all  the  honour  and  flattery  of 
a  fickle  world.  Doubt  simply  means  misery  and  darkness  to  the  anxious  temperament. 
And  in  such  a  world  as  this,  where  we  never  know  what  a  day  or  an  hour  may  bring 
forth,  surely  it  is  wise  to  obey  the  counsel  concerning  Q-od,  "  Acquaint  now  thyself  with 
him,  and  be  at  peace." 

III.  Thebb  may  be  ministrations  that  are  human  as  well  as  Divine.  We  can 
]ierform  miracles  of  healing,  not  in  the  old  sense,  but  wonders  of  restorative  powers  are 
withJa  our  reach.  Is  it  a  child  that  is  nervous  and  sensitive  ?  See  to  it,  0  parent, 
that  you  early  discern  the  difference  between  that  little  trembling  spirit  and  the 
stronger  brother.  Is  it  a  life-companion  ?  See  that  you  do  not  treat  this  sensitiveness 
as  a  mere  weakness  to  be  cured  by  physical  agencies  alone — the  best  curative  will  be  a 
cheerful  mind  within,  working  outwards.  I.  Settled  melancholy  is  terrible,  and  it  often 
prevails.  Try  and  avert  it  by  all  ministries  of  hope  and  cheer  and  comfort  that  you 
can  command  Try  and  do  as  Wilberforce  is  said  to  have  done — bring  a  ray  of  sun- 
shine across  every  threshold  you  cross.  We  talk  about  courage,  but  we  do  not  yet 
fully  understand  its  true  philosophy.  It  is  altogether  a  reJaM  thing.  Ifconstitution- 
»lly  brave — that  is  not  the  highest  courage.  It  is  easy  for  some  who  are  bom  strong  to 
be  physically  brave ;  it  is  easy  for  some  to  be  determined  and  defiant ;  it  does  not  spoil 
their  rest  at  night  to  fight  battles  for  themselves  or  others.  But  with  the  nervous 
temperament  to  act  out  all  the  truth  that  is  in  them  is  a  costly  afiair ;  it  tears  their 
strength  to  pieces.  With  them  to  bear  the  slight  of  neglect,  or  the  wound  of  insult,  is 
like  a  crown  of  thorns  on  the  heart.  With  them  happiness  itself  is  as  the  life  of  a 
plant  which  has  its  nerve-centres  in  other  hearts.  The  best  medicine  for  many  is  to 
be  understood  and  appreciated.  You  cannot  talk  down  or  laugh  down  nervousness. 
You  cannot  even  argue  down  the  sensitivenes.s  that  springs  from  it.  You  cannot  do  all 
you  desire  to  do  even ;  but  you  can  do  much  ;  and  the  evening  of  life  will  bring  you  no 
sweeter  reward  than  for  your  Lord's  sake  to  have  fulfilled  the  scriptural  command, 
"Bear  ye  one  another's  burdens,  and  so  fulfil  the  Law  of  Christ."  2.  Chrisfs  spirit  is 
little  understood;  and  sometimes  little  honoured.  You  have  but  to  study  life  to  see  how 
much  hardness  and  cruelty  there  is  in  it.  Begin  at  the  beginning.  Take  school  life — 
public  school  life!  How  are  boys  trained?  Why,  to  admire  the  daring  and  defiant, 
to  humiliate  the  weak,  to  laugh  at  sensibility  as  womanish,  to  deal  with  one  another  as 
brutes,  where  the  strongest  is  lord.  And  it  is  said  bome-petting  is  cured  by  such 
means.  Cured  ?  I  believe  that  Christ's  book  of  record  will  contain  martyr-lives  of 
school-days  more  terrible  than  the  martyrdoms  once  and  for  ever  made  at  the  stake. 
Grown-up  men  do  not  like  to  talk  of  such  things ;  but  many  look  back  with  a  creeping 
sense  of  horror  at  their  school-time.  The  nervous  and  the  sensitive  have  had  their 
natures  repressed  and  their  hearts  brushed,  who  entered  public  schools  with  beautiful, 
child-like,  Christ-like  spirits.  Take  a  nation.  Even  when  it  is  called  Christian,  how 
often  is  it  braggart,  defiant,  imperious,  proud  of  military  strength !  how  little  concilia- 
tion to  smaller  nations! — that  is  thought  to  be  unworthy  of  imperial  greatness  I  We 
have  to  live  and  teach  the  cross,  in  its  spirit  as  well  as  in  its  doctiine ;  in  its  beautiful 
revelation  that  he,  the  Highest  and  Strongest  of  all,  suffered  for  us ;  that  he  was 
despised  and  rejected  of  men  for  us ;  that  he  gave  himself  for  us.  Remember,  then, 
that  you  stand  in  Christian  relationship  to  the  timorous,  the  sensitive, and  the  anxious, 
and  ever  seek  to  manifest  the  spirit  of  him  who  would  not  break  the  bruised  reed. 

IV.  There  must  be  a  study  of  the  disease  to  understand  the  remedies.  That 
is  why  I  ask  you  to  meditate  on  the  nervous  temperament.  How  unreal  are  its 
images  I  How  it  trembles  at  the  idea  of  solitude !  How  it  fears  to-morrow !  How  it 
bows  in  gloom  before  the  advent  of  disease  or  death  l  You  cannot  see  tlie  delicate  net- 
work of  nerves ;  you  cannot  understand  the  mysterious  functions  of  the  brain.  We  are 
fearfully  as  well  as  wonderfully  made  ;  then  let  us  remember  how  easily  nervousness  is 
promoted  by  self-indulgence  and  sloth,  by  morbid  books,  by  strange  tales  told  in  child 


TH.  u.  1—23.]       THE  BOOK  OF  THE  PROPHET  ISAIAH.  271 

hood,  by  companionship  with  those  who  take  foreboding  views  of  life,  and  by  the 
(iomination  of  "  fixed  ideas"  so  difficult  to  shake  off.  And  all  cannot  afford  change  of 
scene  and  change  of  clime.  1.  It  is  not  in  medicine  to  cure  all  this.  It  may  alleviate, 
but  it  cannot  recreate.  Earthly  appliances  are  wise  in  their  own  way ;  but  the  gospel 
of  Christ  is  the  relieving  power — that  alone  brings  out  fully  the  blessed  revelation  of  the 
fatherhood  of  God.  From  the  lips  that  cmnot  lie  we  hear  the  all-sustaining  words, 
"  He  that  hath  seen  me  hath  seen  the  Father."  Christ  is  the  great  Physician.  He 
can  cure  the  very  leprosy  of  sin,  and  make  the  Gebazis  whole,  so  that  the  trembling 
child  of  guilt,  whose  sin  has  been  of  deepest  dye,  may  hear  the  consoling  words,  "  Son, 
be  of  good  cheer:  thy  sins  be  forgiven  thee."  Christ  can  say  to  the  leper,  "Be  thou 
clean."  He  gave  purity  to  the  penitent's  heart,  and  peace  to  the  publican  with  con- 
science distracted  about  ill-gotten  gains ;  for  "  he  is  able  to  save  to  the  uttermost  all  that 
come  unto  God  by  him."  2.  Christ  alone  can  interpret  life  in  all  its  fulness  and  mean- 
ing. He  knows  how  sad  is  hopelessness.  He  came  not  to  save  alone  the  hale,  the 
righteous,  the  strong.  Ho  came  also  to  take  the  lambs  in  his  arms,  and  to  carry  them 
in  his  bosom.  Blessed  Christ!  Would  be  ever  make  amusement  out  of  the  nervous 
weaknesses  of  some?  Would  he  ever  say,  "  It  cannot  be  helped;  physical  law  is 
imperious,  and  must  hold  on  its  way  "  ?  Would  he  not  rather  comfort  and  help  the 
weak-hearted  ?  Sometimes  a  sense  of  rectitude  sustains  us  in  trouble,  for  unquestion- 
ably the  upright  Corinthian  columu  can  bear  a  greater  weight  than  the  leaning  one. 
That  erect  attitude  of  the  soul  which  the  Scriptures  call "  uprightness  "  will  enable  many 
a  man  to  be  strong.  But  this  cannot  do  all.  We  have  all  sinned,  and  come  short  of 
the  glory  of  God ;  and  we  have  sinned  against  each  other  also.  We  want,  above  all  else, 
a  Saviour.  Some  suspect  their  own  motives,  and  are  questioners,  not  of  their  Lord's 
Divinity,  but  of  their  own  sincerity.  Yea  1  and  some  are  sensitively  anxious  concerning 
the  very  foundations  of  their  first  repentance  towards  God,  and  their  faith  in  the  Lord 
Jesus  Christ.  Study,  then,  Christ's  infinite  compassion,  his  perfect  knowledge  of  every 
human  heart — ^yes,  of  yours.  "  Cast  thy  burden  upon  the  Lord,  and  he  shall  sustain 
thee."  Never  rest  in  yoMrsfZ^alone.  Wait  and  pray!  Not  for  ever  will  you  tremblingly 
hear  the  burden  of  nervous  sensibility.  Not  for  ever  will  the  immortal  spirit  dwell  in 
so  frail  a  tabernacle.  In  God's  own  good  time,  you  will  be  clothed  upon  with  your 
house  from  heaven.  The  day  will  come  when  the  poor  harp  will  be  festrung,  sorrow 
and  sighing  will  be  done  away  ;  and  there  shall  be  no  night  there. — ^W.  M.  S. 

Ver.  3. — "  The  garden  of  the  Lord"  The  Lord  would  comfort  Zion,  and  make  her 
wilderness  like  Eilen,  her  desert  like  the  garden  of  the  Lord;  joy  and  gladness  would 
be  found  therein.  The  expression,  "  garden  of  the  Lord,"  signified  everything  that  was 
choice,  inviting,  eligible,  that  ministered  to  peace  and  satisfaction.  It  may  be  taken 
as  suggestive  of  the  Church  of  Christ,  which  ought  to  be,  to  the  outside  and  unreclaimed 
world,  what  the  cultivated  garden  is  to  the  surrounding  wilderness.  The  Church — 
each  separate  Church — of  Christ  should  be  as  the  garden  of  Lord  in  respect  of — 

I.  CuLTDKE,  Divine  and  human.  The  garden  is  marked  out  from  other  spaces  by 
the  superior  culture  which  it  receives ;  every  square  inch  of  it  has  attention  from  the 
gardener's  hand.  The  ideal  garden  is  carefully  and  regularly  weeded,  digged,  planted, 
pruned,  etc.  The  Church  of  Christ  should  show  the  signs  of  heavenly,  of  spiritual 
culture.  On  it  the  Divine  Husbandman  has  bestowed  the  greatest  care.  He  has 
wrought  upon  it,  suffered  for  it,  watched  over  it,  tended  it  with  wondrous  condescen- 
sion and  inexhaustible  love.  Uuman  culture  has  also  been  expended  upon  it :  the 
ministry  of  man,  the  watchful  love,  the  earnest  prayer,  the  faithful  admonition,  the 
solemn  vows  of  its  own  members,  have  been  given  to  improve  and  perfect  it :  it  is,  or 
it  should  be,  well-cultivated  ground. 

II.  Sboubitt.  The  garden  is  fenced  on  all  sides,  that  no  wild  animal,  that  no 
intruder  of  any  kind,  may  enter,  to  steal  or  to  ravage.  The  Church  of  Christ  should 
be  a  sphere  of  the  greatest  possible  security.  In  it  there  should  be  no  occasion  to  be 
dreading  the  presence  of  the  marauder,  of  "  the  thief  who  comes  ...  to  steal  or  to 
destroy,"  of  the  enemy  that  undermines  faith,  or  that  wins  away  holy  love,  or  that 
deadens  sacred  zeal.  There  we  should  be  free  to  walk  without  apprehension,  without 
fear  of  harm. 

III.  Beauty.    We  aim  to  make  our  gardens  as  beautiful  as  the  finest  taste  ou 


272  THE   BOOK   OF   THE  PROPHET   ISAIAH.        [oh.  u.  1—23. 

make  them;  to  exclude  all  that  is  unsightly,  and  so  to  introduce  and  arrange  everything 
that,  in  part  and  in  whole,  it  shall  be  attractive  and  inviting.  From  the  Church 
of  Christ  should  be  excluded  all  that  is  distasteful  to  the  Divine  Lord — all  that  is 
irreverent,  untruthful,  discourteous,  ungenerous,  inconsiderate.  Within  the  Church 
should  grow  and  flourish  all  these  graces  of  the  Spirit  of  God  which  are  fair  and  comely 
in  the  sight  of  God  and  man. 

IV.  Prditfolness.  What  the  fruitage  of  the  productive  garden  is  to  the  house- 
holder, that  the  many-sided  usefulness  of  the  active  and  earnest  Church  ig  to  the  Lord 
of  the  vineyard. 

V.  Variety.  That  is  a  poor  and  imperfect  garden  in  which  are  only  two  or  three 
kinds  of  flowers,  and  where  the  beds  and  lawns  are  laid  out  so  as  to  suggest  monotony. 
That  is  a  poor  and  imperfect  Church  where  only  one  or  two  orders  of  intelligence  or 
moral  excellence  or  piety  are  found.  Our  Lord  does  not  want  to  see  all  the  flowers 
and  shrubs  and  trees  in  his  garden  cut  and  trimmed  so  as  to  l>e  of  an  unvarying 
pattern. 

VI.  Peace  and  happiness.  We  associate  with  the  garden  the  thought  of  tran- 
quillity and  peace.  It  is  the  abode  of  domestic  felicity ;  there  friendship  spends  its 
golden  hours ;  it  is  the  resort  of  happy  love.  The  Church  should  be  the  home  of  peace 
and  joy.  To  it  we  should  be  glad  to  retire  from  the  bustle  and  strife  of  life ;  in  its  fold 
we  should  find  the  purest  and  the  sweetest  satisfaction  which  earth  can  yield.  There 
have  been  Churches  which  might  justly  be  called  the  arena  of  conflict  or  the  wilderness 
of  neglect.  The  ideal  Church — that  at  which  we  should  aim,  and  for  which  we  should 
strive  and  sacrifice — is  one  that  might  be  appropriately  designated,  "  The  garden  of  the 
Lord."— C. 

Vers.  7, 8, 12, 13. — A  ewre  criterion  of  eharaeter,  etc    This  address  of  Jehovah  to 

the  good  and  worthy  among  his  people  contains — 

I.  A  BUBB  CRITERION  OF  CHARACTER.  1.  It  is  Well  to  be  hearers  of  God's  Word.  All 
the  Jews  were  that ;  they  were  all  the  children  of  privilege.  This,  however,  was  by  no 
means  sufficient  to  prove  that  they  were  the  children  of  God.  2.  It  is  better  to  know 
his  Word  and  to  understand  his  will.  It  says  something  for  us  if  we  can  be  thus 
addressed,  "  Ye  that  know  righteousness."  But  there  are  many  who  clearly  apprehend 
their  duty,  and  who,  for  one  reason  or  another,  refrain  from  doing  it.  3.  The  certain 
test  of  spiritual  worth  is  that  God's  Law  is  in  the  heart :  "  In  whose  heart  is  my  Law." 
They  who  can  say  with  the  psalmist, "  Oh  how  love  I  thy  Law !  it  is  my  meditation  all 
the  day  "  (Ps.  cxix.  97,  111) ;  who  esteem  God's  precepts  as  more  desirable  than  gold 
and  more  sweet  than  honey  (Ps.  xix.  10) ;  who  delight  to  xio  his  will,  for  his  Law  is 
within  their  heart,  the  object  of  their  affection,  the  source  of  their  joy,  the  well-spring 
of  their  comfort,  the  treasury  of  their  hope ; — these  are  they  whom  God  loves  and 
honours;  and  theirs  is  the  kingdom  of  heaven  (see  John  xiv.  15,  16,  21,  23; 
Matt.  vii.  21). 

II.  A  PROBABLE  INCIDENT  OF  A  FAiTHruL  LIFE.  "  Fear  ye  DOt  the  reproach  of  men, 
neither  be  ye  afraid  of  their  revilings."  It  is  highly  probable,  indeed  morally  certain, 
that  if  We  are  thoroughly  loyal  to  our  Lord  and  true  to  our  own  convictions  we  shall 
incur  the  secret  dislike  and  also  the  active  opposition  of  men.  Implicitly,  if  not 
explicitly,  we  shall  condemn  their  theories  and  their  doings,  and  they  will  turn  upon  us 
in  anger  or  in  self-defence.  He  who  never  comes  into  sharp  collision  with  the  senti- 
ments and  habits  of  wicked  men  must  either  live  a  life  of  very  unusual  seclusion  or 
else  have  grave  reason  to  suspect  his  fidelity  to  Christ. 

III.  Two  DECISIVE  CONSIDERATIONS.  I.  Fidelity  to  conviction  means  the  preference 
of  God  to  man.  Men  are  saying,  "  Hearken  unto  us " — unto  us,  thy  fellows,  thy 
partners,  thy  confederates;  unto  us  who  will  share  thy  responsibility  and  thy  sin,  and 
perish  with  thee  when  thou  fallest.  But  God  is  saying,  "  Hearken  unto  me  " — unto  me, 
thy  Creator,  thy  Benefactor,  thy  Divine  Friend.  A  Divine  Saviour  is  saying  unto  us, 
"  Follow  me,"  in  the  paths  of  purity,  of  integrity,  of  piety,  of  consecration  (see  vers. 
12,  13).  2.  Fidelity  to  conviction  means  ultimate  triumph,  but  unfaithfulness  means 
final  ruin.  The  devices  of  iniquity  will  come  to  nought,  and  the  guilty  themselvei 
will  perish.  "The  moth  shall  eat  them  up  like  a  garment."  But  "  he  that  doeth  the 
will  of  God  ahideth  for  ever."    "  Qod's  righteousness  shall  be  for  eyer,"  and  they  who 


JH.LL1— 23.]       THE  BOOK  OP  THE  PROPHET  ISAIAH.  273 

are  loving  and  living  it  shall  never  be  confounded.  Theirs  b  the  present  favour  and 
everlasting  friendship  of  the  Eternal — C. 

Vers.  9, 10. — The  force  in  reserve.  It  has  been  said  that  the  battle  goes  to  him  who 
has  the  best  force  in  reserve.  The  general  who  brings  all  his  regiments  to  the  &ont 
may  expect  to  be  beaten  ;  but  he  who  holds  a  strong  force  in  reserve  may  look  for 
victory.  In  the  great  spiritual  struggle  now  proceeding,  the  people  of  God  have  in 
reserve  that  on  which  they  can  and  will  fall  back  with  infinite  advantage  to  their  cause. 

I.  Our  ueobnt  need  op  effectual  succouk.  The  battle  seems  to  go  against  us. 
We  note :  1.  The  prevalence  of  evil — of  poverty,  of  misery,  of  vice,  of  crime,  of  unbelief, 
of  superstition,  of  gross  idolatry.  2.  The  comparative  failure  of  the  Church  to  subdue  it. 
Looking  at  the  entire  field  of  activity,  we  are  obliged  ti)  own  that  complete  victory  is 
a  very  long  way  off;  that  the  millions  of  men  and  women  whom  the  gospel  has  not 
reached,  and  those  other  millions  whose  spirit  and  whose  lile  it  has  not  succeeded  in 
transforming,  present  a  view  which  is  very  disappointing.  Or  looking  at  particular 
fields  of  Christian  work,  either  at  home  or  abroad,  regarding  the  towns  and  villages  of 
our  own  land,  we  do  not  find  that  the  truth  of  God  has  the  redeeming  and  elevating 
influence  which  answers  to  our  hopes.  We  are  not  conquering  the  evil  which  surrounds 
and  assails  us ;  our  heart  sinks  at  the  thought  of  the  stupendous  work  before  us,  which 
seems  to  grow  rather  than  to  lessen,  spite  of  all  our  struggle. 

II.  The  Divine  force  in  reserve.  Behind  us  is  the  arm  of  the  Lord,  and  on  this 
we  lean.  1.  It  is  a  great  thing  that  we  are  armed  with  a  truth  which  is  so  fitted  to  do 
the  renewing  work  on  which  we  are  engaged,  a  truth  which  so  exquisitely  meets  the 
necessities  of  the  human  soul.  2.  It  is  a  great  thing  that  this  truth  &u  triumphed 
gloriously  in  the  case  of  individual  men,  families,  tribes,  and  even  nations.  3.  But  our 
last  and  best  hope  is  in  the  presence  and  power  of  God.  "  The  Lord  of  hosts  is  with  us, 
the  God  of  Jacob  is  our  Befuge."  There  are  two  sustaining  thoughts  here.  One  is  that 
Almighty  God  cannot  be  defeated.  The  "arm  of  the  Lord"  is  the  power  of  the 
Omnipotent;  it  is  the  overcoming  energy  of  him  who  is  the  Source  of  all  might 
and  strength,  and  in  whom  reside  all  riches  and  all  resources  whatever.  The  other  is 
that  God  has  shown  the  exceeding  greatness  of  his  power  many  times  before,  and  can 
work  as  glorious  marvels  in  the  future  as  in  the  past.  He  who  smote  Egypt  could  slay 
Assyria ;  he  who  made  a  passage  across  the  sea  could  open  a  way  from  Babylon  to 
Jerusalem.  The  God  who  has  smitten  the  idolatries  of  Europe  can  slay  the  super- 
stitions of  Asia.  He- who  has  turned  the  sensuality  and  savagery  of  the  islands  of  the 
sea  into  purity  and  peace  can  and  will  overcome  the  mightiest  obstacles  which  remain, 
subdue  the  most  hostile  forces,  and  cause  the  "  armies  of  Israel  "  to  be  crowned  with 
victory.  (1)  Strive  with  all  strenuousness  and  self-sacrifice,  as  if  everything  depended 
on  our  fidelity.    (2)  Look  with  confidence  to  the  action  of  the  arm  of  Omnipotence. — C. 

Vers.  17 — 23. — Spiritual  stupefaction.  The  passage  presents  one  of  the  most  pitiable 
of  all  possible  spectacles — a  nation  reduced  to  utter  helplessness  and  prostration,  lying 
like  one  that  is  brought  down  by  intoxication  to  a  motionless  stupidity.  We  learn 
from  this  picture,  and  from  the  opening  summons  and  concluding  promise — 

L  That  the  human  spirit  as  weix  as  the  human  body  is  subject  to  btupe- 
FAOTioN.  It  is  a  striking  and  suggestive  fact  that  the  very  thing  which  at  first 
excites  will  ultimately  stupefy.  This  is  notoriously  the  case  with  intoxicants ;  these  first 
stimulate,  then  dull  and  deaden  the  system.  It  is  also  true,  though  in  a  less  degree,  of 
those  things  which  are  called  narcotics :  both  opium  and  tobacco  at  first  awaken  and 
enlarge  faculty;  but  this  condition  soon  passes  away,  and  is  succeeded  by  one  of 
depression,  inactivity,  and  (in  the  case  of  the  more  noxious  drug)  stupor  and  insensi- 
bility. So  is  it  with  things  which  act  hurtfully  upon  the  soul.  At  first  they  excite, 
then  they  blunt  and  deaden.    This  applies  to :  1.  Continuous  enjoyment  of  any  kind. 

2.  Excessive  responsibilities,  demanding  exertion  beyond  the  power  to  maintain  them. 

3.  Heavy  and  repeated  trials.  It  was  from  this  last  that  Israel  was  suffering.  The 
nation  had  been  required  to  drink  of  the  cup  of  Divine  retribution,  and,  owing  to  her 
persistency  in  evil,  had  been  compelled  to  drain  that  cup.  Beside  the  two  evOa  speci* 
ned  (yer.  19),  desolation  or  famine  and  the  violence  of  the  enemy,  was  the  sense  of  hei 
uttar  frtondleHneas  (rer.  18);  and  in  .addition  to  this  was  her  abject  humiliation  (ver.  3t>), 

IMUlB— B.  » 


274  THE  BOOK  OP  THE  PROPHET  ISAIAH.        [ch.  li.  1—23. 

These  calamities  would  account  for  her  pitiable  despondency,  her  attitude  of  despair. 
The  sore  and  accumulated  trials  which  sometimes  befall  individual  men  may  not  justify, 
but  they  explain,  the  complete  brokenness  and  despondency  of  their  spirit.  They  give 
themselves  up  as  those  abandoned  to  an  evil  course  and  a  fatal  doom ;  they  are  in  a 
state  of  spiritual  Btupefaction. 

II.  That  the  strongest  and  sharpest  summons  to  arouse  is  the  friendliest 
VOICE  WE  CAN  then  HEAR.  "  Awakc,  awake,  stand  up."  These  are  the  words  of  the  God 
of  Israel.  And  from  whomsoever  or  from  whatsoever  shall  come  the  summons  to  arouse 
ourselves  from  a  guilty  and  perilous  spiritual  torpor,  hoivever  harsli  be  the  tone,  how- 
ever startling  be  the  terms  of  the'  awakening,  that  voice  is  of  the  friendliest,  and  ma_\ 
be  taken  to  be  none  other  than  the  voice  of  God. 

III.  That  for  the  nation  or  the  spirit  that  hearkens  and  arises  there  mat 
BE  COMPLETE  RECOVERY.  (Vcrs.  22,  23.)  Jehovah  would  turn  humiliation  into  triumph 
for  his  people,  arrogance  into  disaster  for  her  enemies.  As  complete  a  reversal,  though 
of  an  entirely  different  kind,  will  God  grant  to  those  who  arouse  themselves  from 
spiritual  torpor  and  walk  in  his  ways :  for  them  shall  be  peace  instead  of  insensibility  ; 
holy  use/ulnest  instead  of  disgraceful  helplessness ;  sacred  joy  instead  of  a  miserable 
despair. — 0. 

Ver.  1. — Lesson*  of  the  past.  This  passage  has  been  somewhat  misused.  The  appeal 
is  not  made  to  the  miserableness  of  our  spiritual  condition  before  receiving  the  Divine 
redemption.  It  is  simply  a  recalling  of  the  early  history  of  the  race,  and  an  appeal 
that  the  goodness,  care,  and  mercy  of  God  to  the  first  progenitors  of  the  race  should  be 
recognized.  The  wonder  involved  in  the  origin  of  Israel  may  be  treated  as  a  ground 
of  faith  in  its  restoration  and  perpetuity.  Cheyne  gives  the  meaning  thus  :  "  Unlikely 
as  the  fulfilment  of  such  exceeding  great  and  precious  promises  may  seem,  it  is  not 
more  unlikely  than  the  original  wonder  of  a  great  nation  being  descended  from  one 
man,  and  him  as  good  as  dead."  Abraham  may  be  understood  by  the  "  rock,"  and 
Sarah  by  the  "pit."  Look  unto  Abraham,  and  see  what  he  got  by  trusting  in  the 
promise  of  God,  and  take  example  by  him  to  follow  Gbd  with  an  implicit  faith.  The 
metaphors  are  taken  from  the  quarry,  and  express  the  general  idea  of  extraction  or 
descent.  Betrospection  is  an  important,  though  difScult  and  dangerous.  Christian  duty. 
It  ought  to  (1)  deepen  our  humility  ;  (2)  inflame  our  love;  (3)  stimulate  our  obedi- 
ence; and  (4)  perfect  our  dependence  aud  trust.  But  it  may,  and  often  does,  nourish 
that  subtle  form  of  spiritual  pride  which  poisons  the  soul,  and  which  is  peculiarly 
difficult  to  cure.  We  only  recall  the  past  healthily  when  it  is  our  set  purpose  to  find 
the  traces  of  Gh)d's  gracious  working  in  it  all.     Studied  aright — 

I.  The  past  tells  op  our  iksignifioancb.  Compare  the  wonder  over  the  insigni- 
ficance of  Israel  in  its  beginnings.  So  of  the  Christian  Church.  It  began  with  the 
one  or  two  who  responded  to  the  call  of  Christ.  Some  of  us  began  our  Christian  lives 
in  childhood,  some  in  ignorance,  and  some  when  self-indulgence  bad  marred  the  powers 
we  possessei    All  of  us  can  say,  "  Chosen  not  for  good  in  rae." 

II.  The  past  tells  of  God's  care  and  mercy.  We  have  been  led,  guided,  pro- 
vided for,  chastised,  and  taught,  even  as  Israel  was.  God's  first  dealings  seem  to  ui 
a  key  to  all  his  dealings. 

III.  The  past  tells  of  our  wilfulnesses.  Israel  could  never  look  back  without 
remembering  his  "  way  in  the  wilderness."  Their  past  was  full  of  murmurings  and 
rebellions. 

IV.  The  past  tells  of  God's  redemptions.  Exactly  the  name  for  God  is  mtr 
Bedeemer.  And  the  long  and  varied  past  assures  us  that  he  will  ever  be  to  us,  iu 
all  times  of  need,  what  he  always  has  been. — B.  T. 

Ver.  4. — God^s  revelation  a  light.  "  I  will  make  my  judgment  to  rest  for  a  light 
of  the  people."  The  terms  "law"  and  "judgment"  are  designed  to  include  all  forms 
of  Divine  revelation — the  various  ways  in  which  the  Divine  will  is  made  known  to 
man.  Revelation  means  light.  It  is  a  mistake  to  assume  that  there  are  things  revealed 
wMch  are  not  intended  for  our  comprehension ;  they  are  revealed  precisely  with  tha 
purpose  of  unfolding  so  that  we  might  understand  them.  There  are  hidden  and  secret 
thingi^  but  Mosei  carefully  distinguishes  them  from  the  revealed  things,  laying  thus : 


ei-u,  1— 53.J        TflE  Book  OF   THE   PROPIlBT  ISAIAS.  27S 

"The  secret  things  belong  unto  the  Lord  our  God :  put  the  things  which  are  nrealed 
belong  unto  us  and  to  our  children  for  ever,  that  wfe  may  do  all  the  words  of  this 
Law  "  (Deut.  xxix.  29).  Only  this  much  is  true — ^revelation  is  not  light  to  every  age 
equall] .  Some  things  seem  mysterious  at  one  time  that  are  clear  enough  at  another. 
Aiid  in  each  fresh  generation  we  may  say — 

"  The  Lord  hath  yet  more  light  and  truth 
To  break  forth  from  his  Word." 

This,  at  least,  we  may  assert,  prove,  and  illustrate — in  all  essential  matten  relating 
to  moral  conduct  and  religious  faith,  God's  revelation  is  light. 

I.  God's  revelation  is  wrht  that  shows  up  sin.  1.  It  gives  us  proper  appre- 
hensions of  God  himself,  and  shows  sin  by  our  contrast  with  him.  2.  It  unfolds  before 
UR  the  graciousness  of  his  relations  with  us,  and  convicts  of  sin  as  it  makes  us  feel  the 
weakness  of  our  response  to  such  relations  (Dan.  v,  23,  last  clause).  3.  It  declares 
to  us  the  laws  by  which  both  our  conduct  and  our  spirit  ought  to  be  ruled ;  and  by  the 
Law  is  the  knowledge  of  sin.  4.  It  presents  to  us  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ  as  the  Gift 
of  God;  and  "this  is  the  condemnntion,  that  light  is  come  into  the  world,  and  men 
love  darkness  rather  than  light,  because  their  deeds  are  evil." 

II.  God's  revelation  is  light  that  shows  the  way  out  op  bin.  1.  By  removal 
of  the  penalties  it  has  involved.  2.  By  restoring  the  broken  relations  it  has  caused. 
3.  liy  changing;  the  spirit  of  the  sinner — melting  him  to  penitence,  quickening  him 
to  believe.  Illustrate  one  feature  from  the  parable  of  the  "prodigal  son,"  and  other 
features  by  such  passages  as  Rom.  iii.  19 — 26 ;  v.  8 — 10. 

ni.  God's  revelation  is  light  that  shows  the  way  for  those  redeemed  fbou 
SIN.  Theie  is  the  "  way  of  holiiiess  "  in  which  they  have  to  walk.  There  is  a  sancti- 
fying, through  cares  and  chastisements,  which  they  have  to  experience.  There  i*  a 
personal  and  practical  application  of  the  Christian  principles  to  the  details  of  common 
life  which  has  to  be  made.  And,  for  all  this,  God's  Word  is  a  "  lamp  unto  our  feet, 
and  a  light  unto  our  path." — R.  T. 

Ver.  6. — Things  earthly  and  things  spiritual.  "  They  that  dwell  therein  shall  die 
in  like  manner;  but  my  salvation  shall  be  for  ever."  Some  render,  "Shall  die  like 
gnats ; "  that  is,  shall  live  their  little  day,  and  then  pass  away  (comp.  Ps.  cii.  26 ;  Matt. 
xxiv.  35 ;  2  Pet.  iii.  10 — 13).  We  get  one  of  our  chief  impressions  of  the  value  of  a 
thing  out  of  the  length  of  time  that  it  will  last.  Permanence  is  one  of  the  principal 
notes  of  value.  The  insect  that  hums  through  the  air  of  one  summer's  evening  is 
comparatively  worthless;  the  elephant  that  lives  through  a  hundred  years  is  valuable. 
The  wayside  weed  that  lives  its  brief  months  is  worthless ;  the  giant  oak  that  outlives 
the  storms  of  generations  is  valuable.  And  so  our  idea  of  extreme  value,  of  absolutely 
priceless  worth,  is  put  into  the  figure  of  permanence — eternal,  abiding,  and  continuing. 
The  highest  conceivable  good  is  eternal  life ;  the  worst  conceivable  woe  is  eternal  death. 
This  note  of  value  tests  things  earthly ;  they  are  short-lived,  and  comparatively 
worthless.  It  tests  things  spiritual ;  they  are  long-lived,  good,  cannot  die,  and  they 
alone  are  truly  worthy  of  the  pursuit  of  those  m  whom  God  has  breathed  the  breath 
of  life.  1.  The  material  heavens  and  material  earth  are  the  types  of  all  material 
things.  They  are  the  "  treasure  on  earth,"  which  moth  or  rust  are  always  corrupting, 
which  thieves  are  constantly  breaking  through  to  steal.  "  Here  we  have  no  continuing 
city  "  (see  the  force  of  this  in  view  of  the  ruins  of  great  ancient  cities  which  abound 
in  the  East).  "  The  fashion  of  this  world  passeth  away."  The  world  is  a  moving 
panorama.  The  generations  go  by  like  the  ships  that  sail  to  the  West.  "  The  place 
that  knows  us  now  must  soon  know  us  no  more  for  ever."  Everything  on  which  the 
earthly  stamp  rests  is  in  its  very  nature  fading.  There  is  no  safe  holding  of  what  wo 
only  get,  only  become  possessed  of.  2.  But  "  salvation  "  and  "  righteousnesi"  are  the 
types  of  spiritual  things.  They  bear  relation  to  the  man  himself,  and  not  to  his  mere 
circumstances  or  surroundings.  We  can  keep  for  ever  only  that  which  we  are. 
Character  is  our  "  treasure  in  heaven,  which  neither  moth  nor  rust  doth  corrupt,  and 
which  no  thieves  can  break  through  and  steal."  But  the  yet  higher  truth — ^Uie  one 
concerning  which  we  need  to  gain  ever  new  impressions — is  that  we  can  only  hope  to 
hold  on  for  ever  that  which  we  are  through  Divine  grace;  that  which  we  are  through 


276  THE   BOOK   OF   THE  PROPHET   ISAIAH,        [oh.  u.  1— »3. 

the  Divine  redeemiuga  and  sanctifyings.  God's  "  salvation  shall  be  for  ever;  and  hie 
righteousness  shall  not  be  abolished,"  as  the  salvation  is  wrought  in  us,  and  the 
righteousness  shines  from  us. — B.  T. 

Vers,  t,  12, 13. — "Fear,"  and  "  Fear  not."  "Pear  ye  not  the  reproach  of  man; " 
"  Afraid  of  a  man  that  shall  die;"  "  Porgettest  the  Lord  thy  Maker."  It  has  been  said, 
"  Fear  God,  and  thou  shalt  have  none  else  to  fear."  And  the  apostle,  glorifying  the  fear 
of  God  by  calling  it  love,  says,  "  Perfect  love  casteth  out  fear."  The  immediate  connec- 
tion of  the  passage  is  Israel's  fear  of  the  Babylonians.  But  they  need  not  have  feared 
if  they  had  looked  to  the  "  Lord  as  their  Defence,  and  to  the  God  of  Jacob  as  their 
Eefuge" — unto. the  Lord  who  "could  perform  all  things  for  them."  "Let  not  those 
who  embrace  the  gospel  righteousness  be  afraid  of  those  who  will  call  them  Beelzebub, 
and  will  say  all  manner  of  evil  against  them  falsely.  Let  them  not  be  afraid  of  them  ; 
let  them  not  be  disturbed  by  these  opprobrious  speeches,  nor  made  uneasy  by  them, 
as  if  they  would  be  the  ruin  of  their  reputation  and  honour,  and  they  must  for  ever 
lie  under  the  load  of  them.  Let  them  not  be  afraid  of  their  executing  their  menaces, 
nor  be  deterred  thereby  from  their  duty,  nor  frightened  into  any  sinful  compliances, 
nor  driven  to  take  any  indirect  courses  for  their  own  safety.  Those  can  bear  but  little 
for  Christ  that  cannot  bear  a  hard  word  for  him  "  (Matthew  Henry). 

I.  NatubaIi  feab  of  mak.  Because  the  conquest  of  man  by  the  spirit  of  self, 
self-will,  self-pleasing,  has  set  every  man,  in  greater  or  less  degree,  upon  getting 
advantage  over  his  brother ;  and  so  we  all  go  in  suspicion  and  fear  of  one  another. 
Illustrate  from  the  jealousies  and  rivalries  of  society,  the  competitions  of  business,  the 
ambitions  and  conflicts  of  nations.  Governments  are  organizations  to  keep  within 
safe  limits  men's  fears  of  one  another.  The  only  natural  triumph  over  such  fear  is 
for  men  to  become  possessed  with  the  idea  of  urving  one  vmother,  instead  of  taking 
advantage  of,  and  getting  something  out  of,  one  another.  George  MacJonald  has 
a  dream  in  one  of  his  works  ('  Wingfold,  Curate '),  in  which  heaven  is  pictr^red  as  busy 
earth,  just  as  we  know  it,  only  everybody  is  set  upon  serving  his  neighbour,  and 
nobody  ever  gets  the  idea  of  making  his  neighbour  serve  him.  Nobody  has  anything 
to  fear  in  such  a  heaven  or  in  such  an  earth. 

II.  Proper  fbab  of  God.  That  must  be  supreme.  It  must  be  the  fear  that  draws 
us  near  to  him  in  trust ;  that  gives  us  the  joy  of  obeying  and  following  him ;  and  that 
really  is  filial  love.  That  fear  is  a  sanctifying  force  to  us,  just  as  reverent  fear,  of  his 
father  mightily  helps  the  boy  to  do  right.  That  fear  is  a  resting,  quieting  influence 
upon  us ;  it  makes  us  feel  safe  as  the  boy  feels  in  the  storm,  if  the  father  whom  he  fears 
is  at  the  helm.— B.  T. 

Ver.  11. — J<yy-song  on  the  way  to  Zion.  (See  ch.  xxxv.  10.)  There  may  be  an 
allusion  to  the  custom,  so  common  in  the  East,  of  singing  upon  a  journey,  particularly 
with  a  view  to  quicken  the  pace  of  th6  camels.  Bush  writes,  "  We  should  not  have 
passed  this  plain  so  rapidly,  but  for  the  common  custom  of  the  Arabs  of  urging  on  their 
;amels  by  singing.  The  effect  is  very  extraordinary ;  this  musical  excitement  increases 
their  pace  at  least  one-fourth.  Pirst  one  camel-driver  sings  a  verse,  then  the  others 
answer  in  chorus.  It  reminded  me  somewhat  of  the  Yenetian  gondoliers.  I  often 
asked  the  camel-drivers  to  sing,  not  only  to  hasten  our  progress,  but  also  for  the 
pleasure  of  hearing  their  simple  melodies  I  Some  of  their  best  songs  possess  a  plaintive 
sweetness  that  is  almost  as  touching  as  the  most  exquisite  European  airs."  And  Pitts, 
in  describing  the  oider  of  the  caravans,  tells  us,  "  Some  of  the  camels  have  bells  about 
their  necks,  and  some  about  their  legs,  like  those  which  our  carriers  put  about  their 
fore-horses'  necks,  which,  together  with  the  servants  (who  belong  to  the  camels  and 
travel  on  foot)  singing  all  night,  make  a  pleasant  noise,  and  the  journey  passes  away 
delightfully."  The  picture  is  of  the  return  of  Israel  from  captivity  to  Jerusalem.  It 
is  an  ideal  picture  of  what  might  have  been,  but  the  actual  circumstances  of  the  return 
came  very  far  short  of  the  pictured  ideal.  As  an  earlier  homily  has  dealt  with  this 
verse,  only  a  &esh  line  of  thought  need  be  suggested.  It  is  that  through  all  the 
Christian  pilgrim- way  there  ought  to  be  joy  and  song ;  the  "joy  of  the  Lord  cui 
Strength." 

I.  Thk  jot  or  BEanmnte  a  Chbistiah  unu     This  ia  usually  an  inttnaa  Joy, 


OH.  IX 1—23.]       THE  BOOK  OF  THE  PKOPHET  ISAIAH.  271 

bom  of  the  freshness  of  our  experience,  the  brightness  of  our  newly  kindled  hope, 
and  our  ignorance  of  the  conflict  which  the  Christian  life  must  witness.  It  is  the  joy 
of  the  ransomed.  Illustrate  from  the  freed  slave.  It  is  the  joy  of  the  delivered. 
Illustrate  by  song  of  Israel  on  the  Bed  Sea  shore.  People  usually  set  out  on  an 
expedition  with  much  song  and  hope. 

II.  Joy  on  the  way  in  Christian  livino.  This  is  a  calmer  joy ;  found  rather 
in  what  God's  grace  proves  able  to  do  for  us,  than  in  any  circumstances  through 
which  we  pass;  for  the  way  itself  is  olten  rough  and  hard — we  can  seldom  sing 
about  it. 

III.  Jot  at  the  end  when  home  is  won.  Illustrate  by  Moore's  'Paradise  and 
thePeii'— 

"  Joy?  joy  for  6^6r  I  the  work  is  done, 
The  gate  is  passed,  and  heaven  is  won." 

True  joy,  be  it  remembered,  is  not  a  fitful  response  to  circumstances,  but  an  ever- 
bubbling  and  upspringing  soul-well. — B.  T. 

Ver.  16. — Man,  God's  agent.  "  I  have  put  my  words  in  thy  mouth,  and  I  have 
covered  thee  in  the  shadow  of  mine  hand."  This  statement  was  most  perfectly 
realized  in  the  ideal  Man,  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  who  could  say,  "  The  words  that 
I  speak  unto  you  I  speak  not  of  myself;  but  the  Father  that  dwelleth  in  me,  he  doeth 
the  works."  _  Possibly  the  figures  in  the  text  are  designed  to  represent  the  re-establish- 
ment of  Jerusalem  as  the  centre  of  a  restored  Jewish  nation,  and  God  likens  this 
to  the  putting  up  of  a  fallen  tent,  and  intimates  that  his  faithful  ones  should  be  used 
as  his  agents,  in  setting  up  the  poles,  driving  in  the  pegs,  and  straining  the  cords. 

L  Man's  fowehs  fitted  fob  God'b  sebvice.  God  made  him,  adapted  him,  and 
endowed  him,  precisely  with  a  view  to  service.  We  recognize  a  design  and  an  airi 
in  everything  God  has  made.  We  set  before  ourselves  a  distinct  purpose  in  anything 
we  make — it  is  to  serve  u».  Because  man  has  the  trust  of  what  he  calls  "  indepen- 
dence" and  "free-will,"  he  does  not  cease  to  be  God's  servant,  God's  agent;  though, 
turning  his  free-will  into  self-will,  he  too  often  spoils  his  powers,  and  renders  them 
unfit  for  God's  service.  Each  one  of  us  ought  to  find  out  precisely  the  powers  with 
which  we  are  endowed ;  and  in  the  line  of  them  we  must  look  for  our  spheres  and 
our  work.    What  we  can  do,  that  we  must  do  for  God. 

n.  Man's  powers  ought  to  be  at  God'b  disposal.  The  call  should  be  heard  by 
us  each  new  morning,  "Who  is  willing  to  Cdnsecrate  himself  tliis  day  nnto  the  Lord?" 
God  should  have  first  choice  of  our  service.  It  should  ever  be  enough  to  us  that  God 
calls.  "  As  the  eyes  of  a  servant  ...  to  the  hand  of  the  .master,  so  our  eyes  should 
wait  on  God."  The  practical  rule  of  life  should  be  this — "  E  belong  to  God.  My 
service  is  for  him,  my  leisure  may  be  for  others  and  myself." 

III.  Man's  fowebs  are  in  God's  use.  It  is  not  a  question  that  he  may  use  us, 
he  does  use  us,  we  are  his  voice,  his  sword,  his  staff.  He  is  now  working  out  his 
purposes  on  earth  by  human  agencies.  Nothing  alters  the  fact;  but  the  joy  of  being 
willing  workers  may  be  ours.  And  our  doings  are  ennobled  when  we  can  see  them 
to  be  God's  doings  by  us.  Man  realizes  his  noblest  individuality,  the  design  of  his 
being,  only  as  thus  he  is  willing  to  be  mouthpiece  for  God,  and  to  be  covered  in  the 
shadow  of  God's  hand,  as  he  plants,  or  digs,  or  builds. — B.  T. 

Ver.  22. — Ood  our  Advocate  with  himself.  "  Thus  saith  the  Lord  Jehovah,  and  thy 
Gk)d  who  is  the  Advocate  of  his  people."  He  will  plead  for  his  people  when  none  else 
will  plead  (comp.  ch.  Ixiii.  5).  In  this  we  find  a  foreshadowing  of  the  idea  of  Chrbt 
as  our  Advocate  with  God,  which,  most  deeply,  most  spiritually  apprehended,  is  God 
pleading  with  God — God  an  Advocate  with  himself.    This  may  be  worked  out  thus — 

I.  Jesus  pleads  fob  us  with  God.  "There  is  one  God,  and  one  Mediator 
between  God  and  man,  the  Man  Christ  Jesus ; "  "  If  any  man  sin,  we  have  an 
Advocate  with  the  Father,  Jesus  Christ  the  Bighteous." 

XL  But  Jesus  is  God.  "  In  him  dwelleth  all  the  fulness  of  the  Godhead  bodily." 
"The  Word  was  God."  He  was  God  "manifest  in  the  flesh."  "The  Brightness  of 
the  Father's  glory,  and  express  Image  of  his  Person." 

UL  Thkh  this  is  God  fleadino  with  God.     It  is  a  way  of  figuring  for  our 


278 


tilE  BOOK  OP  THE  PBOPHteT   ISAIAB.      [oh.  lii.  1—15 


ipprelieiision  what  seems  to  be  the  fact,  that  Qod  holds  argument  with  himielf. — 

K.  T. 

Ver.  23. — Divine  judgment  on  persecutors.  "  Thou  hast  laid  thy  body  as  the 
ground,  and  as  the  street,  to  them  that  went  over."  This  is  a  figure  for  the  last 
humiliation  of  an  Eastern  conquest.  Joshua  called  his  captains,  and  even  his  soldiers, 
to  put  their  feet  upon  the  necks  of  the  conquered  kings  (Josh.  x.  24).  Matthew 
Arnold's  note  on  this  verse  is  as  follows :  "  A  trait  of  the  humiliation  of  the  conquered 
and  the  insolence  of  the  conqueror  in  Eastern  kingdoms.  So  it  is  related  that  when 
Sapor,  King  of  Persia,  got  on  horseback,  the  Roman  Emperor  Valerian  had  to  kneel 
down,  and  make  his  back  a  step  for  him."  Henderson,  quoting  from  Ibn  Batuta,  says 
that  "  when  the  negroes  who  appeared  before  the  black  sultan  at  Mali,  in  Nigritia,  fell 
down,  they  laid  bare  their  backs,  and  covered  their  heads  with  dust,  as  tokens  of  the 
most  profound  submission."  Further  illustration  may  be  found  in  the  Eastern  custom 
called  the  dosth,  which  is  still  prevalent,  or  only  very  recently  extinct.  Dervishes 
lay  themselves  down  side  by  side  on  the  grouml,  backs  upward,  legs  extended,  and 
their  arms  placed  together  b  nenth  their  foreheads.  Over  these  the  sheikh  on  horse- 
back rides.  The  assurance  made  is  that  the  enemies  and  persecutors  of  Israel,  and 
notably  Babylon,  should  be  made  to  drink  of  the  same  bitter  cup  that  they  had  made 
Israel  drink  so  deeply  And  Babylon  had  to  taste  the  bitterness  of  captivity.  Very 
striking  facts  are  narrated  concerning  the  Divine  retributions  which  persecutors  have 
suffered,  and  though  some  may  be  but  imaginative  creations  under  impressions  of 
what  ought  to  he,  there  are  sufficient  cases  that  are  strictly  historical  to  convince  us 
that,  in  this  sphere,  "though  hand  join  in  hand,  tlie  wicked  do  not  go  unpunished ;" 
and  not  infrequently  what  is  known  as  "  poetical  justice  "  is  meted  ,out  to  them  even 
in  this  life.  If  the  persecutor  should  escape  the  retribution,  the  judgment  comes  upon 
his  fame.  After-generations  say  worse  things  of  persecutors  than  of  any  of  the 
ancestors.  They  live  in  the  execration  of  the  ages.  Yet  the  persecutor  can  never 
permanently  harm  the  Church.  Its  conquest  is  well  assured,  and  that  conquest 
involves  the  judgment,  humiliation,  and  degradation  of  the  persecutors,  who  shall 
have  measured  to  them  what  they  meted  out  to  others;  for  "our  God  is  known  by  the 
judgments  which  he  executeth." — ^B.  T. 


EXPOSITION. 


CHAPTER  LII. 


Ver«.  1 — 6. — ^FcBTHEB  Address  of  the 
Prophet  to  Jekxjsalbm.  Ziori  is  exhorted 
to  rise  from  the  dust,  throw  off  her  bonds, 
and  assert  her  freedom  (vers.  1,  2).  God 
will  deliver  her  from  this  third  captivity 
for  his  Name's  sake,  which  her  oppressors 
blaspheme  (vers.  3 — 6). 

Ver.  1. — Awake,  awake;  put  on  thy 
strength  (comp.  ch.  li.  9).  God  can  help 
those  only  who  help  themselves.  The 
"arm  of  the  Lord"  having  been  called 
upon  to  "put  on  strength"  in  order  to  help 
Zion,  Zion  is  now  exhorted  to  do  her  part, 
and  put  on  her  own  strength.  Nor  is  she 
to  stop  there  :  she  is  further  to  put  on  her 
beautiful  garments — to  array  herself  in  the 
glorious  robes  which  beflt  her  as  a  royal 
and  a  holy  city,  and  show  herself  once  more 
a  queen,  instead  of  being  content  to  remain 
grovelling  as  a  captive  (oh.  li.  20,  21). 
Hencefortii  there  shall  no  more  come  into 
thee  the  nnoircnmcised.     Foreigners  shall 


no  more  visit  Jemsalem  to  injure  her  or 
exult  over  her  misfortunes  (comp.  Joel  iii. 
17).  When  the  influx  of  the  Gentiles 
comes  (ch.  xlii.  6;  xlix.  6,  22,  etc.),  it  will 
be  one  of  Gentiles  who  are  "  circmnbised  in 
heart  and  lips,"  and  no  longer  "unclean" 
(Acts  X.  15). 

Ver.  2. — Shake  thyself  from  the  dust 
(compare  the  opposite  command  given  to 
Babylon,  "  Come  down,  sit  in  the  dust " 
ch.  xlvii.  1).  Zion  was  to  arise,  shake  from 
her  all  trace  of  the  dust  in  which  she  had 
been  so  long  lying,  and  then  calmly  seat 
herself  upon  a  seat  of  dignity.  Loose  thy- 
self from  the  bands  of  thy  neck.  The 
Hebrew  text  has,  "  The  bands  of  thy  neck 
are  unloosened;,"  i.e.  I  have  caused  thy 
chains  to  fall  from  thee — thou  hast  only  to 
"rise,"  and  thou  wilt  find  thyself  free. 
Captives  in  ancient  times  were  often 
fastened  together  by  a  thong  or  chain 
passed  round  their  necks  (see  Bawlinson, 
'  History  of  Ancient  Egypt,'  vol.  i.  p.  473). 
Daughter  of  Zion.  The  prophet  passes,  by 
an  easy  transition,  from   the  city  to   tba 


cH.  Lii.  1— 15.]      THE   BOOK   OP  THE   PEOPHET  ISAlAH. 


2?!) 


nation,  which  continues  to  be  the  object 
o(  address  in  the  remainder  of  the  discourse. 

Ver.  3. — Ye  have  sold  yourselves  for 
naught ;  rather,  for  nought  were  ye  sold, 
God  received  nothing  when  he  allowed  his 
people  to  become  the  slaves  of  the  Baby- 
lonians. He  took  no  price  for  thorn  (see 
oil.  1. 1),  and  therefore  is  free  to  claim  tbem 
back  without  payment  (oomp.  ch.  xlv.  13). 
He  has  but  to  say  the  Vrord;  and  be  is 
about  to  say  it. 

Ver.  4. — My  people  went  down  .  .  .  into 
I^STPt  •  •  •  the  Assyrian  oppressed  them. 
Isra^  had  experienced  three  captivities. 
They  "  went  down  "  voluntarily  into  Egypt, 
on  invitation,  to  sojourn,  and  were  there 
cruelly  and  unjustly  reduced  to  a  servile 
condition  (Exod.  i.  13,  14).  They  (or  a 
great  part  of  them)  were  violently'carried 
into  captivity  by  the  Assvrian  kings, 
Tiglath-Pileser  (2  Kings  x\'.  29),  Sargon 
(2  Kings  xvii.  6),  and  Sennacherib  (2  Kings 
xvlii.  13 ;  '  Bponym  Canon,'  p.  184),  who, 
without  cause,  grievously  "oppressed"  them. 
Now  they  are  suffering  under  a  third 
captivity  in  Babylonia.  What  is  to  be  the 
Divine  action  imder  these  :iTcumstaiice8  ? 

Ver.  5. — What  have  I  here  t  rather,  what 
have  I  to  do  here  f  i.e.  what  is  the  task  be- 
fore me — the  work  that  I  have  to  perform  ? 
ITiere  are  three  principal  considerations  by 
which  the  answer  to  this  question  has  to 
be  determined.  (1)  The  Babylonians  have 
obtained  pussession  of  the  Israelites  witliout 
purchase — for  nought;  (2)  they  use  their 
authority  harshly  and  brutally;  and  (3) 
they  continually  blaspheme  the  Name  of 
Jehovah.  All  three  are  grounds  for  bring- 
ing the  captivity  to  an  end,  and  coming 
forward  with  the  cry  of  a  deliverer,  "  Here 
I  am."  Make  them  to  howl ;  rather,  howl ; 
i.e.  insult  over  the  captives  with  shouts  and 
yells  of  triumph.  The  prophet  is  speaking 
of  the  Babylonian  oppressors,  not  of  the 
native  "rulers,"  who  exercised  a  certain 
amount  of  authority  over  the  captives  (see 
Delitzsch  and  Gheyne).  My  Name  ...  is 
blasphemed.  Cruel  taskmasters  vexed  the 
captives  by  insulting  their  God. 

Ver.  6.  —  Therefore.  Because  of  the 
"howling"  and  the  "blasphemy."  My 
people  shall  know  my  Name;  i.e.  "my  people 
shall  know  by  practical  experience  that  I 
am  all  that  my  name  of  El  or  Elohira — '  the 
Strong,'  'the  Powerful' — implies."  They 
shall  know  in  that  day.  The  "  day  "  when 
God  would  come  to  their  help  and  deliver 
them  from  their  oppressors — when  they 
would  call  upon  ^m,  and  he  would 
manifest  himself  (ch.  Iviii.  9),  responding 
to  their  appeal  as  distinctly  as  though  he 
said,  "  Here  I  am," 

Vers.  7 — 12. — ^A  Vision  of  the  Day  op 
DauTiBAMOi.      The    prophet    eeea    the 


messenger  pome  bounding  over  [the  moun- 
tains of  Judsea,  to  bring  the  news  to  Jerusa- 
lem that  her  deliverance  is  come  (ver.  7). 
The  angelic  watchers  sing  with  joy  (ver.  8). 
The  prop!  let  calls  upon  the  waste  places  of 
Jerusalem  to  do  the  same,  and  dwells  on 
the  greatness  of  the  mercy  wrought  (vers. 
9,  10).  Finally,  he  exhorts  the  exiles  to 
avail  thtmsc-lves  of  the  permission  to  quit 
Babylon,  and  prophesies  that  they  will  go 
forth  in  peace,  without  hurry,  under  the 
guidance  and  protection  of  God  (vers.  11, 
12). 

Ver.  7. — How  beautiful  upon  the  moun- 
tains are  the  feet  of  him  that  bringeth  good 
tidings,  that  publisheth  peace !  (comp.  Nah. 
i  15,  which  is  almost  a  repetition  of  the 
passage).  The  primary  meaning  is  un- 
doubtedly that  assigned  to  the  words  in  the 
introductory  paragraph ;  but  this  does  not 
hinder  there  being  also  a  secondary  mean- 
ing, viz.  the  Messianic  one  of  Bom.  z.  15. 
Jerusalem's  deliverance  is  a  type  of  the 
redemption  of  the  world  by  Christ.  That 
saith  unto  Zion,  Thy  Gpd  reigneth !  So  long 
as  Israel  was  in  captivity,  and  Jerusalem 
in  ruins,  God's  earthly  sovereignty  (1  Sam. 
xii.  12)  was  in  abeyance.  The  moment  that 
the  Jews  were  set  free  and  allowed  to  return 
and  to  rebuild  their  city,  his  soverSigiity 
was  reestablished. 

Ver.  8. — ^Thy  watchmen  shall  lift  up  the 
Toioe ;  literally.  The  voice  of  thy  watchers. 
TJiey  have  lifted  up  the  voice ;  they  sing  (or, 
shout  joyfully,  Kay)  together.  The  "  watch- 
men "  are  regarded  by  some  as  the  prophets 
of  the  Captivity-time  (Delitzsch),  by  others 
as  the  faithful  who  "  waited  for  the  redemp- 
tion of  Israel"  (Kay);  but  are  considered 
by  the  best  critics  (Cheyne,  Alexander)  to 
be  "supersensible  beings,"  or,  in  other 
words,  angels,  who  "  watch "  over  the  for- 
tunes of  Israel,  and  sympatliize  with  their 
weal  and  woe  (see  Dan.  iv.  13,  17,  23,  etc.). 
These  "  watchers"  now  "  sing"  or  "  shout" 
with  joy.  They  shall  see  eye  to  eye  (compare 
the  "face  to  face"  of  Numb.  xiv.  14;  Deut. 
xxxiv.  10).  The  "  watchers  "  would  watch 
closely  God's  dealings  with  his  Church,  and 
would  see  them  as  clearly  as  a  man  sees  his 
friend  when  he  looks  into  his  face.  When 
the  Lord  shall  bring  again  Zion.  It  is, 
perhaps,  best  to  translate,  with  Houbigant 
and  Mr.  Cheyne,  "  When  the  Lord  shall 
return  to  Zion."  The  prophet  sees  God  as 
the  Leader  of  his  people,  not  merely  by  his 
providence  bringing  them  back,  but  "re- 
turning" at  their  head  (oomp.  ver.  12). 

Ver.  9. — Ye  waste  places  of  Jerusalem 
(oomp.  ch.  xliv.  26;  xlii.  19;  Ixiv.  10, 11). 
The  city  had  not  been  wholly  destroyed.  Only 
the  temple,  the  royal  palace,  and  ue  housei 


2«0 


THE  BOOK  OF  THE  PROPHET  ISAIAH.      [ch.  lh.  1—15 


of  the  nobles  had  been  "burnt  with  fire" 
(2  Kings  XXV.  9  ;  2  Chron,  xxxvi.  ID).  The 
poorer  houses  had  been  left.  Even  these, 
however,  must  in  the  space  of  fifty  years 
have  for  the  most  part  fallen  into  decay. 
The  ruins  are  now  called  upon  to  join  in 
the  general  chorus  of  rejoicing,  as  they  rise 
from  their  ashes.  Hath  comforted  .  .  .  hath 
redeemed.     Perfects  of  prophetic  certitude. 

Ver.  10. — The  nations  .  .  .  the  ends  of  the 
earth.  It  may  well  add  to  the  general  joy 
that  the  work  wrought  for  Israel  is  not  "  a 
thing  done  in  a  corner,"  but  one  on  which 
tlie  eyes  of  the  "  nations  "  have  been  turned, 
and  to  which  the  attention  of "  the  ends  of 
the  earth  "  has  been  called  (comp.  ch.  xli. 
5).  The  holy  arm  of  Jehovah,  made  bare 
for  battle,  has  been  seen  far  and  wide.  The 
world  has  stood  to  gaze  at  the  contest  be- 
tween Persia  and  Babylon. 

Ver.  11. — Go  ye  out  from  thence;  i.e. 
"  from  Babylon  " — ^the  standpoint  of  the  pro- 
phet in  the  present  chapter  being  Jerusalem. 
When  the  time  came,  earnest  exhortations 
to  depart  would  be  found  not  superfluous, 
for  there  would  be  an  indispusition  on  the 
part  of  some  to  quit  their  possessions,  and 
of  others  to  affirout  the  perils  of  the  way. 
Touch  no  unclean  thing.  Bring  with  you 
none  of  the  Babylonian  idols,  none  of  the 
Babylonian  charms,  spells,  and  the  like 
(see  the  comment  on  ch.  xlvii.  9).  Be  ye 
clean;  rather,  purify  yourselves.  The  de- 
parting captives  generally  are  called  upon 
to  avoid  polluting  themselves  with  the 
iiuclean  things  of  Babylon ;  but  for  those 
who  bear  the  vessels  of  the  Lord  this  nega- 
tive purity  is  insufficient.  They  are  for- 
mally to  "  purify  themselves "  (2  Chron. 
xxix.  34)  before  undertaking  their  sacred 
office.  By  "the  vessels  of  the  Lord"  we 
must  understand  those  which  Kebuchad- 
uezzar  carried  off  from  the  temple  (2  Kings 
XXV.  14 — 16 ;  Dan.  i.  2),  and  which,  on  the 
return  of  the  Jews  from  captivity,  were 
restored  by  Cyrus  (Ezra  i.  7 — 11)  and 
Artaxerxes  (Ezra  viii.  25 — 34). 

Ver.  12.— With  haste  ....  by  flight.  As 
at  the  going  forth  from  Egypt  (Exod.  xii. 
33;  xvi.  5).  Then  they  were  "thrust 
out ; "  now  there  would  be  no  need  of 
hnrry.  They  would  have  the  free  per- 
mission of  their  sovereign  to  depart  at  their 
own  time,  and  might  proceed  with  calm 
deliberateness.  God  would  go  before  them, 
as  he  did  on  that  former  occasion  (Exod. 
xiii.  21),  though  not  now  visibly;  and  ha 
would  also  defend  them  iiom  attacks  by 
the  way,  being  at  once  their  Guide  and  their 
Bereward,  or  Rearguard. 

Vers.  13 — 15. — Pbelude  to  the  "  Gbeat 
Passhwal."  It  is  generally  allowed  by 
modem  oonunentatora  that  this  passage  i« 


more  closely  connected  with  what  follows 
it  than  with  what  precedes.  Some  would 
detach  it  altogether  from  ch.  lit  and  attach 
it  to  ch.  liii.  But  this  is  not  necessary. 
The  passage  has  a  completeness  in  itself. 
It  is  a  connecting  link.  The  exaltation  of 
Israel,  the  collective  "  Servant  of  the  Lord  " 
(ch.  xliv.  1,  21),  brings  to  the  prophet's 
mind  the  exaltation  of  the  individual 
"Servant"  (oh.  xlii.  1—7;  xliii.  10;  xlix. 
1 — 12),  through  which  alone  the  full  ex- 
altation of  I~r!iel  is  possible.  He  is  bound 
to  complete  his  account  of  the  individual 
"  Servant "  by  telling  of  his  exaltation,  and 
of  the  road  which  led  to  it.  This  is  done 
in  ch.  liii.,  in  what  has  been  called  the 
"  Great  Passional."  But  the  "  Great  Pas- 
sional." needs  a  "prelude,"  an  "introduc- 
tion," if  only  as  indicative  of  its  greatness. 
And  this  prelude  we  have  here,  in  these 
three  verses,  which  briefly  note  (1)  the  fact 
of  the  exaltation ;  (2)  the  depth  of  the 
humiliation  preceding  it;  and  (3)  the 
far  -  extending  blessedness  which  shall 
result  to  the  world  from  both. 

Ver.  13. — My  Servant  shall  deal  prudently ; 
rather,  shall  deal  vnsdy ;  i.e.  shall  so  act 
throughout  his  mission  as  to  secure  it  the 
most  complete  suooess.  "  Wisdom  is  justi- 
fied of  her  children,"  and  of  none  so  entirely 
justified  as  of  him  "in  whom  were  all  the 
treasures  of  wisdom  and  knowledge  bid 
away"  (Col.  ii.  3).  Exalted  and  extolled; 
or,  high  and  lifted  up — the  same  expressions 
as  are  used  of  the  Almighty  in  ch.  vi.  1  and 
Ivii.  15.  Even  there,  however,  seems  to  th( 
prophet  not  enough ;  so  he  adds,  "  and  ex- 
alted  exceedingly"  (comp.  ch.  liiL  10 — 12 
and  Phil.  ii.  6—9). 

Ver.  14. — As  many  were  astonied  at  thea 
The  world  was  "astonied"  to  see,  in  One 
come  to  deliver  it,  no  outward  show  of 
grandeur  or  magnificence,  no  special  beauty 
or  "  comeliness"  (oh.  liii.  2),  but  a  Presence 
unattractive  to  the  mass  of  men  at  all  times, 
and  in  the  end  so  cruelly  marred  and  dis- 
figured as  to  retain  scarcely  any  resemblance 
to  the  ordinary  form  and  face  of  man.  The 
prophet,  as  Delitzsch  says,  sits  at  the  foot 
of  the  cross  on  Calvary,  and  sees  the 
Redeemer  as  he  hung  upon  the  accursed 
tree,  after  he  had  been  buffeted,  and 
crowned  with  thorns,  and  smitten,  and 
scourged,  and  crucified,  when  his  face  mat 
covered  with  bruises  and  with  gore,  and 
his  frame  and  features  distorted  with  agony. 

Ver.  15. — So  shall  he  sprinkle  many 
nations.  The  Septoagint  has,  "So  ibaU 
uutBy  nation*  marvel   at  him;"  and  this 


cn.Ln.  1— 15.]      THE  BOOK  OF  THE  PROPHET  ISAIAH. 


281 


translation  is  followed  by  Oesenius  and 
Ewald.  Mr.  Cheyne  thinks  that  the  pre- 
sent Hebrew  text  is  corrupt,  and  suggests 
that  a  verb  was  used  antithetical  to  the 
"astonied"  of  ver.  14,  expressing  "joyful 
surprise."  It  is  certainly  hard  to  see  how 
the  idea  of  "  sprinkling."  even  if  it  can  mean 
"purifying,"  comes  in  here.  Kings  shall 
■but  their  mouths  at  him;  rather,  beeauie 


of  him.  In  revereptial  awe  of  his  surpass- 
ing greatness  (comp.  Micah  vii.  16).  That 
which  had  not  been  told  them  shall  they  see. 
They  will  learn  the  facts  of  Christ's  humili- 
ation, sufferings,  death,  resurrection,  and 
ascension  to  heaven— events  that  it  had 
never  entered  into  the  heart  of  man  to  con- 
ceive, and  of  wliich,  therefore,  no  tongoe  had 
ever  spoken. 


HOMILETICS. 

Vers.  1,  2. — God  helps  those  who  help  themselves.  It  is  a  law  of  God's  providence  tc 
require  of  men,  as  conditional  to  his  assisting  them,  some  corresponding  effort.  "  Ask, 
and  it  shall  be  given  you  ;  seek,  and  ye  shalL  find ;  knock,  and  it  shall  be  opened  unto 
you  "  (Matt.  vii.  7).  He  is  always  ready  to  give  ;  but  he  will  have  men  stretch  out 
their  hand  to  receive.  For  the  careless  and  the  apathetic,  he  will — perhaps  we  might 
say,  he  can— do  nothing.  Thus  he  calls  men  into  his  Church,  but  they  must  arise 
and  obey  the  call;  he  offers  them  grace,  but  they  must  use  the  means  of  grace;  he  is 
willing  to  grant  them  eternal  life,  but  upon  this  life  they  must  "  lay  hold"  (1  Tim.  vi. 
12).  When  he  delivered  his  people  out  of  Egypt,  he  required  them  to  "  rise  up,  and  go 
forth,"  and  make  long  and  toilsome  marches  through  a  dreary  wililerncss;  and  only  after 
forty  years  of  effort  did  he  bring  them  to  Canaan.  So,  too,  when  he  would  deliver 
them  from  Babylon,  those  only  were  delivered  who  braced  themselves  for  a  great  exer- 
tion, left  all  that  they  had,  affronted  peril  (Ezra  viii.  31),  undertook  the  difficult  and 
wearisome  journey  (cb.  xliii.  19)  from  Cbaldea  to  Palestine.  The  reason  would  seem 
to  be  that  God,  in  all  his  dealings  with  man,  is  disciplining  him  and  training  him, 
eliciting  the  good  that  is  in  him,  and  causing  it  to  acquire  strength  by  active  exercise, 
thus  fitting  him  for  a  higher  state  of  existence  than  the  present,  and  leading  him  onward 
toward  the  perfection  which  he  designed  him  to  reach. 

Ver.  11. — The  special  need  of  purUy  in  them  that  bear  the  vessels  of  the  Lord.  It  is 
the  duty  of  all  to  avoid  impurity,  to  "  touch  no  unclean  thing,"  to  "  perfect  holiness  in 
the  fear  of  God."  But  a  special  purity  is  required  of  those  who,  by  holding  any  sacred 
office,  are  brought  nearer  to  God  than  others,  and  as  it  were  serve  continually  in  his 
presence.  Hence  the  numerous  directions  in  the  Jewish  Law  with  respect  to  the 
priests — their  consecration,  their  ablutions,  their  vestments,  their  sin  offerings,  and  the 
like  (Lev.  viii.  2 — 35 ;  ix.  1 — 24).  Hence,  moreover,  such  injunctions  as  the  following  : 
"  Do  not  drink  wine  nor  strong  drink,  thou  [Aaron],  nor  thy  sons  with  thee,  when  ye 
go  into  the  tabernacle  of  the  congregation,  lest  ye  die :  it  shall  be  a  statute  for  ever 
throughout  your  generations :  that  ye  may  put  difference  between  holy  and  unholy, 
and  between  unclean  and  clean"  (Lev.  x.  9,  10).  "  I'hey  [the  priests]  shall  not  make 
baldness  upon  their  head,  neither  shall  they  shave  off  the  corner  of  their  beard,  nor 
make  any  cuttings  in  their  flesh.  They  shall  be  holy  unto  their  God,  and  not  profane 
the  Name  of  their  God :  for  the  offerings  of  the  Lord  made  by  fire,  and  the  bread  of 
their  God  they  do  offer :  therefore,  shall  they  be  holy  "  (Lev.  xxi.  5,  6).  "  He  that  is 
the  high  priest  among  his  brethren,  upon  whose  head  the  anointing  oil  was  poured, 
and  that  is  consecrated  to  put  on  the  garments,  shall  not  uncover  his  head,  nor  rend 
his  clothes;  neither  shall  he  go  in  to  any  dead  body,  nor  defile  himself  for  his  father,  or 
for  his  mother ;  neither  shall  he  go  out  of  the  sanctuary,  nor  profane  the  sanctuary  of 
his  God ;  for  the  crown  of  the  anointing  oil  of  his  God  is  upon  him :  I  am  the  Lord. 
And  he  shall  take  a  wife  in  her  virginity  "  (Lev.  xxi.  10 — 13).  Everything  approaching 
to  uncleanness  is  to  be  carefully  eschewed  by  such  as  minister  in  holy  things ;  they 
are  to  be  under  a  law  more  strict  than  that  which  binds  ordinary  men ;  they  are  to 
avoid  everything  at  which  weak  brethren  might  take  exception — to  shrink  from  even 
the  shadow  of  an  impure  stain.  Many  things  are  harmless  in  the  ordinary  layman 
which  are  not  harmless  in  the  clergyman,  who  is  especially  bound  to  "  walk  warily," 
to  be  a  pattern  to  the  flock,  to  abstain  from  even  the  appearance  of  evil,  to  "lal  not  his 
|ood  be  evil  spoken  of  (Rom.  xiv.  16). 


282  THE  BOOK  OP  THE  PROPHET  ISAIAH,      [oh.  Ln.  1—16. 

Ver.  13. — The  wisdom  of  Messiah's  life  upon  earth.  Perhaps  nothing  shows  mora 
clearly  the  perfect  "  wisdom  "  of  our  Lord's  life  upon  earth  than  the  fact  that,  among 
all  his  detractors,  not  one  has  been  able  to  point  out  any  unwisdom  in  any  part  of  it. 
Almost  all  men  do  unwise  things,  things  which  they  regret  to  have  done,  things  which 
do  them  harm,  which  injure  instead  of  promoting  the  objects  that  they  have  in  view. 
But  our  Lord's  whole  course  was  guided  by  the  most  perfect  wisdom  (ch.  xi.  2).  Wisely 
he  conformed  in  all  respects  to  the  Jewish  Law,  though  he  was  above  the  Law.  Wisely 
he  led,  not  the  ascetic  life,  but  the  life  of  ordinary  humanity.  Wisely  he  chose  his 
disciples  among  those  who  were  poor  and  ignorant  and  powerless,  so  that  it  might  be 
evident  they  did  not  convert  the  nations  by  their  natural  gifts,  but  by  wielding  a 
supernatural  influence.  Wisely  he  declined  to  be  made  an  earthly  king,  so  that 
ambition  cannot  be  laid  to  his  charge.  Wisely  he  submitted  himself  to  the  powers  that 
be,  that  neither  revolutionist  nor  anarchist  might  be  able  to  make  a  shelter  of  his 
example.  Wisely  he  covered  himself  with  a  cloud,  hid  up  his  glory,  did  his  great 
miracles  comparatively  in  secret  (John  vii.  4),  let  the  knowledge  of  his  true  Divinity 
steal  upon  men  by  degrees.  The  wisdom  wherewith  he  executed  his  mission  is  seen 
in  the  success  of  that  mission.  How  quickly  did  the  "  little  flock  "  grow  into  a  Church 
to  be  counted  by  thousands  (Acts  ii.  41 ;  iv.  4),  and  the  thousands  become  tens  of 
thousands,  and  the  tens  of  thousands  increase  into  millions,  until  the  whole  Roman 
empire  was  converted,  and  the  "  kingdoms  of  the  world  became  the  kingdoms  of  the 
Lord,  and  of  his  Christ "  (Rev.  vi.  15) !  And  what  but  infinite  wisdom  could  have 
inspired  a  teaching  which  should  attract  both  Jew  and  Gentile,  both  civilized  man 
and  barbarian,  both  haughty  noble  and  down-trodden  slave ;  which  should,  n  moreover, 
suit  alike  the  requirements  of  both  ancient  and  modem  times,  and  be  as  much  valued 
in  the  nineteenth  century  after  its  publication  as  in  the  first?  By  the  wisdom — ' 
"  science  falsely  so  called  "  (1  Tim.  vi.  20) — of  Greece  and  Rome  "  the  world  knew  not 
God  "  (1  Cor.  i.  21) ;  by  the  wisdom,  the  true  wisdom,  of  Christ  the  whole  civilized 
and  much  of  the  barbarian  world  now  knows  God.  The  result  is  the  effect  of  that 
"  prudent  dealing,"  or  true  wisdom  in  act  and  word,  which  Jesus  Christ,  the  "  Servant 
of  Jehovah,"  showed  forth  during  the  three  and  thirty  years  of  his  life  upon  this 
earth. 

HOMILIES  BY  VARIOUS  AUTHORS 

Vers.  1 — 12. — The  redemption  of  Jerusalem.  I.  The  summons.  It  comes  from  the 
Divine  representatives.  She  had  been  called  upon  to  arise  and  to  stand  up,  and  now 
she  is  to  put  on  her  strength  and  her  robes.  "  Strength  returns  to  Zion  when  the  arm 
of  Jehovah  is  mighty  within  her."  It  is  useless  to  counterfeit  the  semblance  of  strength 
which  does  not  exist.  Nor  is  strength  merely  a  matter  of  the  will ;  but  there  ever  is 
a  secret  fund  of  strength  in  the  hearts  of  those  who  know  that  God  has  not  forsaken 
them.  In  a  sense,  hope  comes  to  those  who  rouse  themselves  from  dejection,  and  "  power 
to  him  that  p<iwer  exerts."  The  highest  success  promised  is  to  human  endeavour,  and 
is  not  to  be  enjoyed  without  human  endeavour.  The  beautiful  garments  are  to  be  pu'; 
on  in  preparation  for  the  era  of  moral  beauty  and  holiness.  There  is  a  true  symbolisn\ 
in  dress.  There  is  a  garb  appropriate  to  mourning  and  woe ;  another  attire  becomes  thi! 
spirit  of  gladness  and  expectation.  And  there  is,  so  to  speak,  a  dress  of  the  soul — a 
habit  of  the  mind  which  expresses  the  hope  of  better  things  even  amidst  darkness  and 
disappointment.  As  there  were  robes,  figuratively  speaking,  which  became  a  holy  and 
priestly  city ;  as  there  were  seemly  robes  lor  Aaron  the  priest ; — even  so  lor  him  who 
looks  upon  himself  as  a  "  king  and  priest  unto  God,"  there  is  a  suitable  heaving  and 
character,  determined  by  the  sense  of  the  high  destiny  in  store.  "  Every  man  that 
hath  this  hope  in  him  purifieth  himself,  even  as  he  is  pure."  So  high  a  destiny  is  in 
store  for  Jerusalem ;  no  more  are  the  unclean  to  enter  her  sacred  precincts  (cf.  Joel  iii. 
17),  but  only  the  worshippers  of  the  true  God.  Typically,  the  promise  points  to  future 
times,  when  the  Church  of  God  shall  be  pure  as  when,  in  the  great  world-harvest,  the 
tares  shall  be  gathered  out,  and  the  wheat  be  gathered  into  the  eternal  garner.  Let, 
then,  Jerusalem  shake  herself  from  the  dust — from  that  posture  which  expresses  mourn- 
ing and  humiliation  (Job  ii.  13),  and  take  a  lofty  and  honourable  place.  "  Ascend  thy 
lofty  se«tl "  (Louth).    "  Arise  and  sit  trect "  (Noyes).     "  Rise,  sit  upon  the  throne  oi 


CB.UI.1— 16.]     THE  BOOK  OF  THE  PROPHET  ISAIAH.  283 

thy  glory  "  (Chaldee).  She  is  to  shake  the  chains  from  her  limbs,  for  her  captivity  is 
drawing  to  an  end.  Has  she  been  sold?  Nay ;  Jehovah  has  received  naught  for  her. 
"  It  is  not  a  sale,  but  only  a  temporary  transfer."  He  can  receive  them  back  and  renew 
his  covenant  with  them.  •'  Yon  shallbe  redeemed."  There  was  to  be  a  remarkable  proof 
of  the  power  and  sovereignty  of  God.  For  usually  slaves  and  captives  are  not  given  up 
without  a  ransom.  That  they  may  expect  this  to  be  done,  Jehovah  reminds  them  of 
what  has  been  done.  He  who  had  delivered  from  Egypt  could  deliver  also  from  Babylon. 
And  the  like  applies  to  the  sufferings  under  Sargon,  and  Sennacherib,  and  Tiglath-Pileser. 
And  now  what  was  fitting  for  him  to  do  in  the  case  of  the  third  great  captivity,  that  of 
Babylon  ?  He  has  come  down  to  see  and  consider.  And  the  result  is  that  he  "  musl 
return  to  Jerusalem,  else  his  gracious  purposes  will  be  frustrated.  But  in  its  present 
state  he  cannot  do  so ;  therefore  Jerusalem  must  arise  from  its  humiliation."  In  their 
pride  and  contumely,  the  Babylonians  both  oppress  the  people  and  blaspheme  the  Name 
of  their  God.  Another  reason,  then,  for  his  interposition.  There/ore — for  all  these  reasons 
— the  people  shall  know  his  Name,  shall  experience  what  it  is  to  have  a  God  whose 
Name  is  Jehovah ;  as  in  the  days  of  deliverance  from  Egypt.  He  is  One  who,  in  answer 
to  the  people's  cry,  responds,  "  Here  am  II"  Thus  the  leading  thought  remains,  that 
Israel  is  Jehovah's  people,  and  he  is  their  God.  "  Enclosed  by  God  from  amidst  all 
other  nations,  to  be  the  seat  of  his  worship,  and  the  great  conseivatory  of  all  the  sacred 
oracles  and  means  of  salvation.  The  Gentiles  might  be  called  God's  own,  as  a  man 
calls  his  hall  or  his  parlour  his  own,  which  yet  others  pass  through  and  make  use  of ; 
but  the  Jews  were  so  as  a  man  accounts  his  closet  or  his  cabinet  his  own — that  is,  by  a 
peculiar  incommimicable  destination  of  it  to  his  own  use."  And  again,  "  The  whole 
work  of  man's  redemption  carries  in  it  the  marks,  not  only  of  mercy,  but  of  mercy 
acting  by  an  unaccountable  sovereignty.  He  gives  the  world  to  know  that  his  own 
will  is  the  reason  of  his  proceedings.  If  the  sun  is  pleased  to  shine  upon  a  turf,  and 
to  gild  a  dunghill,  when  perhaps  he  looks  not  into  the  chamber  of  a  prince,  we  cannot 
accuse  him  of  partiality.  The  short  but  significant  saying,  'May  I  not  do  what  I 
will  with  mine  own  ? '  being  a  full  and  solid  answer  to  all  such  objections  "  (South). 

II.  Visions  of  bkdemption.  "  The  prophet  passes  into  an  ecstasy.  What  he  sees 
with  the  inner  eye  he  expresses  pictorially.  He  has  told  us  already  of  the  ideal  Zion 
ascending  a  high  mountain,  and  acting  as  herald  of  the  Divine  Deliverer.  Now  he 
varies  the  picture.  It  is  Zion  to  whom  the  herald  is  seen  to  come — bounding  over  the 
mountains"  (Cheyne).  The  feet  give  a  greeting  before  the  mouth  utters  it  (Stier). 
The  soul  of  prophet  and  of  poet  delights  in  the  mountains;  they  give  forth  in  visible 
form  the  sublimity  with  which  his  soul  is  charjied  (cf,  Ezek.  vi.  1).  The  mountains 
speak  of  the  eternity  of  God ;  upon  them  the  epiphany  of  the  Deliverer  may  in  a  sense 
be  expected,  as  they  silently  speak  of  his  righteousness,  of  a  constancy  which  is  not 
to  be  moved.  How  welcome  the  messenger  who  tells  of  the  fall  of  a  city  of  the 
oppressors  (Nah.  i.  15),  such  as  Nineveh  I  How  still  more  welcome  he  who  comes  to 
bear  tidings  from  the  spiritual  world  to  the  spirits  of  men  (Rom.  x.  15 ;  Eph.  vi.  15) ! 
The  proclaimer  of  peace  is  at  hand,  and  "peace"  is  another  word  for  "salvation."  But 
there  can  be  neither  peace  nor  salvation  in  this  distracted  world,  except  under  a  strong 
government — the  government  of  the  King  of  kings.  Now  the  tidings  are  that  "  God 
has  resumed  the  crown  which  he  had  laid  aside."  "  Thy  God  has  become  King  I " 
Celestial  watchers  are  heard,  lifting  .up  their  voices  with  a  ringing  cry,  as  they  from 
their  liigh  seat  behold  the  return  of  Jehovah  to  Zion.  They  "note  every  advance  of 
the  kingdom  of  God,  seeing  it  eye  to  eye,  as  a  man  looks  into  the  face  of  his  friend ; 
so  near  are  the  two  worlds  of  sight  and  of  faith  **  (Cheyne).  The  return  of  Jehovah 
to  Zion  means  the  return  of  spiritual  power  and  joy  and  freedom.  All  earthly  relations 
melt  away  into  the  spiritual  realities.  The  real  banishment  is  the  separation  of  the  soul 
from  God;  the  true  return  from  exile  is  when  the  soul  can  say,  "God  exists;  God  is 
near — is  for  me."  Bondage  is  in  ourselves ;  redemption  and  comfort  are  when  we  realize 
again  that  there  is  another — a  "  Not-ourselves  that  makes  for  righteousness,"  an  Eternal 
Love,  in  shoit,  in  the  sense  of  which  all  limitation  must  be  forgotten.  Jehovah  has 
bared  his  holy  arm  for  action  in  the  face  of  all  the  nations  ;  and  the  whole  world  has 
seen  the  salvation  of  God.  Then,  in  prospect  of  such  a  redemption,  what  should  be 
the  conduct  of  the  faithful?  They  must  refuse  to  touch  the  unclean  thing;  they  must 
be  purified  and  b(>came  pnie.     They  must  regard  themselves  as  armour-bearers  ol 


284  THE  BOOK  OF  THE   PROPHET  ISALAJL      [cm  lh.  1—15. 

Jehovah,  since  he,  as  a  man  of  war,  is  going  forth  to  fight  the  battles  of  his  people,  and 
to  establish  his  kingdom  in  the  earth.  The  king,  upon  solemn  occasions,  had  with  him 
a  troop  of  armour-bearers  (1  Kings  xiv.  28).  And  so  must  he,  to  whom  the  shields 
of  the  whole  earth  belong  (Ps.  xlvii.  10),  be  followed  by  his  band  of  faithful  warriors. 
And  not  again  in  hurrying  fearfulness,  as  in  the  days  of  the  exode  from  Egypt,  but 
rather  with  the  calm  and  solemn  march  of  troops  who  are  marching  to  assured  victory 
are  they  to  go  forth  from  Babylon.  The  apfilication  was  made  by  St.  Paul,  and  evei 
may  be  made,  to  Christians  (2  Cor.  vi.  17, 18).  Babylon  is  a  type  of  the  world ;  the 
necessity  of  "  coming  out "  from  that  Babylon  is  the  necessity  of  the  disciples  of  Jesus 
separating  themselves  from  the  evil,  that  is  in  the  world.  So  in  Bev.  xviii,  i  Babylon 
stands  for  the  evil  course  of  the  present  world — the  spirit  of  pride  and  impurity  and 
persecution.  If,  instead  of  armour-bearers,  the  rendering  "bearers  of  the  vessels  of 
Jehovah  "  be  preferred,  then  the  allusion  will  be  to  the  priests  and  Levites  (Numb.  i. 
50 ;  iv.  15).  Upon  such  ofiScials  the  obligation  to  be  holy  rests.  Whether  in  war,  or  in 
the  peaceful  service  of  tabernacle  or  temple,  the  principle  is  the  same.  Men  set  apart 
to  such  service  are  bound  to  illustrate  their  office  by  an  apartness  of  manners  and  of 
life.  A  select  calling  implies  a  select  spirit.  It  has  not  been  "  finely  touched "  except 
to  "  fine  issues."  There  may  be  an  allusion  in  the  "vessels"  to  Ezra  i.  7,  8,  or  the 
facts  there  mentioned.  How  marked  is  that  "  boundless  exhilaration  "  which  belongs 
to  these  prophecies  of  restored  Jerusalem  1  "  Much  good  poetry  is  profoundly  melan- 
choly ;  now  the  life  of  the  people  is  such  that  in  literature  they  require  joy.  If  ever 
that  'good  time  coming,'  for  which  they  long,  was  presented  with  energy  and  magnifi- 
cence, it  is  in  these  chapters ;  it  is  impossible  to  read  them  without  catching  its  glow. 
And  they  present  it  truly  and  with  the  true  conditions.  It  is  easy  to  misconceive  it  on 
a  first  view,  easy  to  misconceive  its  apparent  condition ;  but  the  more  these  chapters  sink 
into  the  mind  and  are  apprehended,  the  more  manifest  is  the  connection  with  universal 
history,  the  key  they  offer  to  it,  the  truth  of  the  ideal  they  propose  for  it "  (Matthew 
Arnold). — J. 

Ver.  13 — ch.  liii.  3. — The  Servant  of  Jehovah :  his  wondrous  career.  "  Behold  1 " 
A  new  and  remarkable  object  calls  for  attention.  It  is  the  "  Servant  of  Jehovah." 
He  has  been  humiliated  and  rejected,  but  he  is  on  his  way  to  exaltation  and  honour. 

I.  His  felicitous  wisdom.  There  enters  into  the  idea  of  the  word  here  used, ^rospenty 
and  good  success,  as  in  Josh.  i.  8 ;  Jer.  x.  21.  For  wisdom,  the  devout  wisdom,  the 
wisdom  of  duty  in  obedience  to  the  Divine  commands,  alone  can  bring  that  good  success. 
Compare  what  is  said  of  the  Righteous  Branch  in  Jer.  xxiii.  6 ;  and  see  also  for  the  word, 
2  Kings  xviii.  7 ;  Prov.  xvii.  8.  Some  render  the  words  "shall  be  intelligent ; "  others, 
"  shall  be  prosperous."  The  description  applies  to  any  who  are  endued  with  the  Divine 
Spirit  for  practical  ends. 

II.  His  exaltation.  There  is  a  heaping  up  of  verbs  denoting  exaltation — he  shall 
be  high,  and  lifted  up,  and  lofty  exceedingly.  The  hij^hest  pitch  of  honour,  the  loftiest 
possible  rank,  shall  be  his,  and  that  in  view  of  the  universe.  The  right  hand  of  God — 
the  subjection  of  angels  and  authorities  and  powers,  and  every  name  that  is  named — are 
similar  images(Markxvi.  19;  Eph.i.  20— 22;  PliiLii.  9;  1  Pet.  iii.  22).  If  the  Servant 
be  not  the  Messiah,  at  least  very  similar  language  is  used  of  him  (Ps.  Ixxxix.  27).  The 
exaltation  bears  a  direct  relation  to  the  previous  humiliation.  The  last  would  become 
first ;  the  most  despised  would  yet  become  the  most  honoured.  Having  volunteered  for 
the  lowest  place  on  behalf  of  man's  good,  he  would  be  exalted  by  the  Divine  hand  to 
the  highest  possible.  Once  men  were  stupefied  as  they  looked  on  his  disfigured  form, 
hardly  bearing  the  semblance  of  a  man.  So  did  Job's  friends  stand  aghast  as  they 
beheld  him  Irom  a  distance  in  his  misery.  But  there  shall  be  a  magnificent  contrast. 
Kings  shall  yet  be  dumb  for  admiration  in  his  presence — owning  his  superior  dignity 
(Job  xxix.  9 ;  xl.  4).  They  will  be  eye-witnesses  of  things  which  had  been  previously 
inconceivable  (cf.  also  Micah  viii.  16 ;  Ps.  cxlvii.  42 ;  Job  v.  16). 

III.  Revelation  in  this  contrast.  The  popular  heart  has  everywhere  delighted 
in  Buch  contrasts,  between  princely  greatness  and  lowly  guise  or  disguise.  So  the  Greek 
Odysseus,  on  his  return,  is  seen  sitting  lowly  amidst  the  ashes  of  his  hearth.  And  the 
Indians  (Lyall, '  Asiatic  Studies ')  relish  in  the  highest  degree  such  representations.  We 
nut  only  love  surprise,  but  we  feel  that  it  ie  a  Divine  method  to  work  by  niipriiie. 


OH.  UL  1—16.]      THE  BOOK  OP  THE  PROPHET  ISAIAH.  285 

"  Power  keeps  quite  another  road  than  the  turnpikes  of  choice  and  will,  namely,  the 
gubterranean  and  invisible  tunnels  and  channels  of  life.  Life  is  a  series  of  surprises. 
Ck>d  delights  to  hide  from  us  the  past  and.  the  future.  '  You  will  not  remember,'  he 
seems  to  say, '  and  you  will  not  expect.'  Every  man  is  an  impossibility  until  he  is 
bom,  everything  impossible  until  we  see  a  success.  The  ardours  of  piety  agree  at  last 
with  the  coldest  scepticism,  that  nothing  is  of  ourselves  or  our  works— that  all  is  of 
Gk)d.  There  is  nothing  at  last  in  success  or  failure,  but  more  or  less  of  vital  force 
supplied  from  the  Eternal.  The  results  of  life  are  uncalculated  and  incalculable  " 
(Emerson). 

IV.  HxTMAN  INCREDULITY  ABASHED.  How  few  believed  the  prophecies  concerning 
the  Servant  I  How  few  had  eyes  to  see  "  such  supramundane  sights,  when  nothing 
on  earth  seemed  to  suggest  them "  1  to  discern  the  arm  of  Jehovah,  that  mysterious 
Divine  Power,  in  its  secret  working  1  They  were  blinded  by  the  evidence  of  the  senses. 
He  was  as  a  slight  and  insignificant  plant — but  a  shoot  or  sucker  from  the  root 
brought  up  out  of  Egypt  Without  that  winning  grace  or  imposing  majesty  that 
might  have  been  expected,  be  failed  to  captivate  men's  hearts.  He  seemed  isolated,  sad 
sick,  and  men  fled  from  his  presence  as  it'  he  had  been  a  leper.  But  the  result  shows 
how  little  Providence  recks  of  our  poor  logic  of  appearances,  our  connections  of  cause 
and  effect.  Life  is  not  so  plain  a  business  as  it  appears.  "  Presently  comes  a  day, 
with  its  angel-whisperings,  which  discomfits  the  eoncluaions  of  nations  and  of  years  I" 
We  boast  of  our  common  sense  and  experience ;  yet  there  is  a  Divine  element  ever  at 
work  to  defeat  our  calculations  and  to  astound  us  with  its  operations.  The  lesson  is  to 
be  ever  waiting  and  expecting — ever  looking  up  for  manifestations  of  that  Divine 
wisdom  which  hides  to  reveal  itself,  that  Divine  power  which  is  energizing  unspent 
when  all  our  resources  are  at  an  end,  that  Divine  beauty  which  lurks  beneath  the 
dimmest  forms  and  the  meanest  disguises. — J. 

Ver.  7. — Beautiful  messengers.  "  How  beautiful  upon  the  mountains,"  6tc.  I  Not 
so  with  the  warrior.  His  garments  are  dyed  in  blood;  his  track  is  over  desolated 
cornfields  and  ruined  vineyards.     Look  at  the  footsteps  of  the  servants  of  God. 

I.  The  messengeeb.  They  are  not  self-inspired  or  self-commissioned.  They  are 
sent  of  God.  From  Jerusalem  the  apostles  are  to  go  forth ;  over  her  all-surrounding 
mountains  they  go  to  tell  the  story  of  the  angels'  song,  the  Messiah's  ministry,  and 
the  redeeming  cross.  How  beautifol  1 — to  publish  peace  1  1.  Peace  between  man  and 
man.  2.  Peace  between  God  and  man.  3.  Peace  between  nation  and  nation.  4. 
Peace  in  a  man's  own  soul. 

II.  The  mbssaoe.  "  Good  tidings  of  good,  that  publisheth  salvation."  Blessed  word  I 
But  how  often  narrowed  and  marred  through  human  interpretation  I  1.  We  are  saved 
fr<ym  mvrselves.  And  this  salvation  is  going  on  within  us  day  by  day,  as  we  grow  in 
grace.  2.  We  are  saved  from  guilt.  As  we  can  only  be  by  an  atonement  where  the 
offering  is  without  spot.  3.  We  are  saved  from  all  that  is  inimical  in  the  evO  that  is 
ivithout  us.  For  the  Saviour  knows  our  enemies,  is  stronger  than  our  enemies,  and  will 
subdue  them  under  his  feet.  "  Thy  Ood  reignefh,"  and,  mystery  of  mysteries,  the  cross 
is  his  sceptre.     "  I,  if  I  be  lifted  up,  will  draw  all  men  unto  me." — W.  M.  S. 

Ver.  1. — The  strength  of  the  Chwrch.  The  Zion  of  Old  Testament  Scripture  is  the 
Christian  Church  of  the  New.  We  have  here,-  therefore,  a  commanding  summons  to 
clothe  ourselves,  as  Churches  of  Christ,  with  the  strength  which  is  especially  our  own  : 
"  Put  on  thy  strength,  0  Zion." 

I.  In  what  the  stbength  of  the  Chuboh  consists.  Not,  as  we  are  too  apt  to  imagine, 
in  wealth,  in  territory,  in  buildings,  in  material  defences  of  any  kind :  all  this  is  the 
strength  of  the  world,  but  not  of  the  Church.  Its  strength  is  in :  1.  Steadfastness  in 
truth  and  holiness.  The  reed  by  the  river-side,  shaken  with  every  ripple  of  the  water, 
bent  with  every  breath  of  the  breeze,  is  the  type  of  weakness;  the  massive  granite 
rock,  against  which  the  waves  of  centuries  have  dashed,  but  which  remains  unmoved 
from  base  to  summit,  is  the  type  of  strength,  Jesus  Christ  wants  his  Church  to  be 
strong,  in  that  it  stands  fast  (1)  in  the  truth  (Eph.  iv.  14 ;  1  Cor.  xvi.  3 ;  Phil.  i.  27) ; 
(2)  in  spiritual  freedom  (Gal.  v.  1) ;  (8)  in  holiness.  The  very  success  of  the  Church 
has  occasioned  danger  here.    There  is  much  less  of  gross  iiuquity  in  modern  society 


286  THE  BOOK  OF  THE  PROPHET  ISAIAH.      [ch.  lil  1—16. 

than  in  past  times.  The  distinction  between  the  people  of  God  and  the  enemies  of  hi« 
truth  is  not  so  apparent.  The  spirit  of  worldliness  does  not  show  itself  in  such  maligDant 
forms.  Evil,  by  "  losing  all  its  grossness,"  has  lost  half  its  hideousness,  and  is  therefore 
more  seductive  and  successful  than  it  was.  The  Church  needs  to  be  peculiarly  strong 
in  holiness  to  repel  the  insidious  attacks  of  our  day  on  its  purity.  2.  Fruit/ulnegs,  The 
strength  of  the  fruit-beariug  ti  ee  is  in  bearing  much  and  good  fruit.  Herein  is  God 
glorified  in  us,  as  a  Church,  that  we  "  bear  much  fruit."  'What  fruits  does  a  strong 
Church  bear  ?  Those  of  pure  and  gentle  thoughts,  of  kind  and  generous  feelings,  of 
true  and  hel|>ful  words,  of  upright  and  honourable  deeds,  of  acceptable  and  spiritual 
worship.  3.  Usefulness,  The  strongest  object  we  know  of  is  the  sun ;  and  its  strength 
is  found  in  radiating  life-giving  light  and  heat,  century  after  century  ;  it  is  the  strength 
of  ciaseless,  unnieasurable  beneficence.  To  this  strength  Christ  is  calling  his  people. 
They  are  to  be  clothed  with  and  to  exercise  this  benign  and  blessed  power  ;  they  are  to 
be  dislribuiing  on  every  hand,  to  instruct  the  ignorant,  tu  comfort  the  sorrowful,  to  guide 
the  perplexed,  to  reclaim  the  fallen,  to  bring  into  the  kingdom  of  God  them  that  are 
afar  off. 

II.  The  way  to  beoube  it.  Physical  strength  cannot,  indeed,  be  assumed  at  will ; 
but  it  can  be  a'  tained  by  a  sick  man  arousing  himself  from  his  lethargy,  sloth,  and  folly, 
and  adopting  the  incisures  which  minister  to  bodily  well-being.  Let  the  spiritually 
feeble :  1.  Take  dtte  spiritual  nourishment.  The  Bread  of  life,  the  Water  of  life,  invigo- 
rating privileges,  are  within  our  reach.  2.  Take  due  spiritual  exercise.  To  him  that 
bath  is  given,  and  the  man  who  labours  imperfectly  at  first  will  gain  strength  and  skill 
as  he  puts  out  his  power;  every  effort  to  do  good  is  so  much  strength  gained  for 
future  usefulness  as  well  as  so  much  power  put  forth  in  present  activity.  3.  Seek  the 
inspiring  influences  which  coma  from  God :  "  They  that  wait  on  him  shall  renew  their 
strength."— C. 

Ver.  1.^ — The  leauty  of  the  Church.  We  are  more  apt  to  thank  Gkid  for  the  bounty 
than  for  the  beauty  of  the  earth  ;  but  if  one  is  the  more  necessary,  the  other  is  the 
higher  gift  of  the  two ;  if  the  one  satisfies  the  cravings  of  the  body,  the  other  ministers 
to  the  lounger  and  the  thirst  of  the  soul.  With  what  lavish  hand  has  God  supplied  it  I 
What  colour,  what  variety,  what  elegance,  what  symmetry,  what  loveliness,  and  what 
grandeur  on  the  surface  of  the  earth,  in  hill  and  mountain,  in  sea  and  sky !  And  if  we 
appreciate  the  beauty  of  his  handiwork,  does  not  he  delight  in  the  beauty  of  our 
service  ?  does  not  he  say  to  us, "  Put  on  thy  beautiful  garments  "?  What  are  the  beautiful 
garments  of  the  Church  of  Christ';  what  is  it  that  makes  it  attractive  and  comely  in  his 
pure  sight? 

L  Spieitualttt  in  its  wobbhip.  It  is  better  to  worship  God  in  a  beautifiil  structure 
than  in  a  bam ;  in  skilful,  artistic  song  than  with  unregulated  voice ;  in  becoming 
language  than  in  distracted  exclamations.  It  is  better,  leoause  (1)  we  ought  to  give  to 
a  Divine  Saviour  the  very  best  we  can  bring,  and  therefore  our  taste  and  culture  rather 
than  our  crudeness  and  our  vulgarity ;  and  because  (2)  we  should  seek  to  attract  by 
excellency  to  the  house  of  the  Lord,  and  not  repel  by  unsightliness  and  discord.  But 
this  is  not  the  bi!.vuty  for  which  Christ  looks :  the  beauty  of  the  Church's  worship  is  in 
its  genuineness,  its  spiriiualily,  its  inward  and  intrinsic  worth  (see  Ps.  1. 14;  John  iv. 
23, 24;  Heb.  xiii.  15).  The  leverent  thought,  the  hallowed  feeling,  the  solemn  vow,  the 
consecrated  spirit,  the  song  which  comes  from  a  grateful  heart,  the  attitude  of  earnest 
docility  that  longs  to  learn  that  it  may  hasten  to  obey,— these  are  the  beautiful  gnr- 
ments  of  devotion. 

II.  Excellency  of  life.  A  gDod  profession  is  a  good  thing,  but  integrity  of  cHa- 
racter  and  blamelessness  of  life  is  a  better  thing.  The  uprightness  which  would  rather 
suffer  than  sin;  the faith/ulnei's  that  keeps  tlie  unremunerative  engagement;  thepurit)/ 
that  repels  the  ugly  thouglit  as  well  as  the  filthy  word  and  tlie  foul  action ;  the  truthful- 
ness which  prefers  to  oliend  man  rather  than  to  grieve  the  Spirit  of  God ;  the  generosity 
which  loses  all  i-»ght  of  self  in  the  needs  and  cries  of  weakness  or  sorrow ; — these  are 
ihe  beautiful  garnafcnts  in  which  the  Divine  Lord  would  see  his  servants  clothed. 

III.  Dbvotedness  of  labour.  Much  more,  in  quantity,  is  now  done  in  Christ's 
name  than  heretofore.  But  whether  the  life  of  the  Church  is  so  much  the  fairer  in  its 
Master's  view  depends  chiefiy  on  the  spirit  of  its  service.    If  our  work  in  the  sanctuary, 


OH.LII.  1— 16.]      THE  BOOK  OF  THE  PROPHET  ISAIAH.  2«7 

or  the  Sunday  school,  or  the  committee-room,  or  the  cottage,  be  perfunctory,  constrained, 
tinged  or  it  may  be  coloured  with  self-seeking,  unspiritual,  there  is  but  little  beauty  in 
it  in  the  sight  of  the  Pure  One.  We  should  aim  to  make  our  whole  life  beautiful  in 
»he  Sight  of  our  Saviour ;  let  obedience  be  prompt  and  cheerful,  the  discharge  of  duty 
conscientious  and  thorough ;  let  submission  be  ready  and  unrepining,  liberality  generous 
and  hearty,  courtesy  cordial  and  graceful,  etc.  So  shall  we  be  arrayed  in  beautiful 
garments.— 0. 

Ver.  2. — The  dignity  of  the  Church.  Jerusalem  was  to  arise  from  the  dustof  humiliation, 
and  to  sit  down  "  with  dignity  and  composure  "  on  a  seat  of  honour,  taking  her  true  posi- 
tion among  the  nations  of  the  earth.  The  Church  of  Christ  is  called  to  rise  from  any 
undignified  position  into  which  she  may  have  fallen,  and  to  assume  one  that  is  in  keeping 
with  her  origin  and  her  estate.  But  the  question  is,  in  what  the  dignity  of  the  Ghvirch 
coniists.  It  is  clear  that  dignity  has  various  applicatiouB,  according  to  its  subject.  The 
dignity  of  a  sovereign  is  in  one  thing;  that  of  a  scholar  is  in  another  thing;  that,  again, 
of  a  servant  is  something  quite  different.  It  is  not  found  in  any  particular  deportment  or 
in  any  especial  surroundiugs.  The  Church  that  seeks  to  secure  its  dignity  by  attaching 
to  itself  those  external  honours  or  trappings  which  worldly  kingdoms  demand  for  the 
mnjiitenance  of  their  honour  completely  mistakes  its  position.  To  be  truly  digni6ed  is 
to  ilct  in  a  way  that  is  worthy  of  our  origin  and  in  harmony  with  our  position.  The 
true  dignity  of  the  Church  is  realized  by  its  acting  in  a  way  that  becomes  the  oflspring 
of  Christ,  and  that  is  suited  to  an  institution  which  exists  to  illustrate  his  truth  and  to 
extend  his  reign.  It  consults  its  dignity  and  commends  itself  to  the  honour  of  the 
wise  when — 

I.  It  hakes  its  appeal  to  the  human  judoment,  and  not  to  superstitious  fears. 

II.  It  belies  on  the  attachment  of  its  fbiends  for  the  necessities  of  its  existence. 
HI.  It  befuseb  to  count  impossible  that  which  its  Master  chakqes  it  to 

ACCOMPLISH,  viz.  the  subjection  of  the  whole  world  to  his  sway. 

IV.  It  listens  without  alarm  to  the  pbgdiotions  of  its  foes,  and  goes  calmly 
and  energetically  on  its  way  of  holy  service. — 0. 

Vers.  2 — 9. — The  liberty  of  the  Church.  "  Loose  thyself  from  the  bands  of  thy  neck, 
O  captive  daughter  of  Zion." 

I.  The  bioht  of  the  Church  to  liberty.  The  sight  of  the  daughter  of  Zion  in 
chains  was  very  pitiable  in  the  prophet's  eye.  How  much  more  grievous  the  spectacle 
of  a  Christian  Church  in  bondage,  enslaved  and  oppressed !  The  Christian  Church, 
being  composed  of  those  who  have  received  Jesus  Ohrist  as  their  Lord  and  Saviour, 
«nd  being  call6d  into  existence  for  the  purpose  of  extending  a  spiritual  kingdom 
amongst  men,  cannot  possibly  submit  itself  to  the  rule  of  the  world  without  abdicating 
its  functions  and  forfeiting  its  essential  privileges.  It  has  a  native,  Clirist-givi.'n  right 
to  decide  upon  its  own  constitution,  to  choose  its  own  officers,  to  worship  God  according 
to  its  own  convictions,  to  act  freely  upon  the  world  in  disseminating  its  principles.  It 
is  oppressed  and  (more  or  less)  enslaved  when  authority  presumes  to  dictate,  or  when 
rank  or  wealth  claims  to  direct,  in  these  high  and  spiritual  matters. 

II.  The  limitations  of  its  fbeedom.  The  Church  is  not  free  to  "do  what  it 
likes"  in  all  these  matters;  that  is  licence,  not  liberty.  Its  freedom  is  limited  by  the 
will,  and  defined  by  the  word,  of  its  Divine  Lord.  Under  all  circumstances,  it  is  bound 
to  consider  what  Christ  would  have  it  do.     Beyond  his  will  it  may  not  move. 

III.  Its  attitude  under  oppeession.  1.  A  patient  submission  to  the  absolutely 
inevitnble.  In  early  Christian  times,  and  under  the  domination  of  tyrannical  powers 
since  then,  the  Church  has  had  to  accept  such  share  of  liberty  as  was  allowed,  patiently 
and  devoutly  waiting  for  an  extension.  2.  A  calm,  brave  assertion  of  its  duty  to  its 
Lord;  often  under  censure,  hardship,  cruel  suffering.  3.  A  seizure  of  the  earliest 
opportunity  to  enter  upon  its  right.  "  Loose  thyself,"  God  says  to  his  people.  When 
the  bonds  can  be  broken,  break  them;  when  the  door  can  be  opened,  unbar  it ;  when 
the  way  is  clear  to  holy  liberty,  take  it  without  hesitation  or  delay. 

IV.  Its  exultation  ts  the  hour  of  release.  (Vers.  7 — 10.)  The  prophet  foresees 
the  liberation  of  Israel,  and  breaks  out  into  a  strain  of  surpassing  eloquence  and  joy. 
nvhibly  tha  escape  from  bondage  to  freedom  is  calculated  to  excite   the  keenest 


2aa  THE   BOOK  OF  THE  PROPHET   ISAIAH.      [oh.  m.  1— IR 


transports  of  delight  of  which  the  human  heart  is  capable.  So  has  it  been  in  many 
hundreds  of  instances  of  individi  al  release,  and  so  it  has  been  in  cases  of  national  and 
of  ecclesiastical  deliverance.  Sjieech  and  song  have  been  far  too  feeble  to  utter  the 
rapture  of  the  hour.  At  such  a  time  the  best  forms  which  abounding  aud  overwhelming 
joy  can  take  are :  1.  Gratitude  to  God,  showing  itself  in  praise.  It  is  the  Lord  whose 
movidence  opens  the  way,  whose  arm  strikes  off  the  shackles  (see  vers.  3,  6, 10).  2. 
Kecognition  of  the  fact  that  liberty  is  useless,  and  even  dangerous,  unless  it  is  well 
Employed,  and  a  consequent  determination  to  spend  the  acquired  freedom  in  holy 
service.— C. 

Vers.  11, 12. — Christian  pUgrimage.  We  may  regard  the  departure  and  journey  of 
the  Israelites  from  Babylon  to  Jerusalem  as  pictorial  of  our  departure  from  the  "  far 
country  "  of  sin  for  the  heavenly  Zion.     Thus  considered,  we  are  taught — 

I.  'i'HAT  EHTRANCE  ON  THE  NEW  PATH  BHOULD  BE  AN  ACT  OF  OBEDIENCE  AB  WELL 

AS  WISDOM.  It  was  an  eminently  wise  thing  on  the  part  of  the  Israelites  to  return 
to  Jerusalem.  Whatever  interests,  pecuniary  or  social,  they  may  have  formed  in  exile, 
their  true  heritage  was  in  the  land  of  their  fathers;  the  politic  in  their  policy  remained, 
but  the  wise  in  their  wisdom  left.  1'his,  however,  was  not  the  only  or  the  main 
inducement.  They  were  called  to  return  as  B.a  €u:t  of  obedience.  The  Lord  their  God 
summoned  them.  It  was  a  Divine  voice  that  said,  "Depait  ye,  depart  ye,  go  ye  out 
from  thence."  Our  true  interest  demands  that  we  should  leave  "  the  City  of  Destruction  " 
and  seek  "another  which  is  an  heavenly."  Only  a  false  prudence  detains;  wisdom, 
deep  and  true,  urges  to  depart.  But  this  is  not  the  only  consideration.  God  our 
Divine  Father,  Jesus  Christ  our  righteous  Lord,  commands  us.  He  calls  us  to  leave 
the  kingdom  of  unrighteousness  and  to  enter  the  path  of  holy  service.  To  linger  is  to 
be  guiltily  disobedient ;  to  set  forth  is  to  do  the  will  of  God. 

II.  That  bntbanoe  on  Christian  filobihaoe  should  be  an  act  of  deliberate 
CONVICTION.  "Ye  shall  not  go  out  with  haste."  There  should,  indeed,  be  no  delay; 
but,  on  the  otb«r  hand,  there  should  be  no  hurry.  More  than  once  Jesus  Christ  checked 
the  advances  of  disciples  who  were  acting  on  impulse  rather  than  conviction  (Matt. 
viii.  18 — ^22 ;  Luke  xiv.  28 — 33).  Do  not  take  the  greatest  step  which  can  possibly  be 
taken  without  earnest  thought,  deep  deliberation,  repeated  prayer. 

in.  That  Chbistian  pilgrimage,  especially  the  direct  bbrvick  of  GJod, 
should  be  oeabaoterized  bt  pubitt.  "  Touch  no  unclean  thing ;  ...  be  ye  clean, 
that  bear  the  vessels  of  the  Lord."  The  Israelites  were  not  to  soil  their  hands  with 
any  forbidden  or  ill-acquired  treasures ;  and  the  Levites  were  to  take  peculiar  care  that 
their  hands  were  clean,  for  they  would  bear  the'  sacred  vessels  of  the  temple.  All 
Christian  men  must  see  to  it  that  their  hearts  are  tDcorrupted  and  their  hands  undefiled 
by  the  many  evils  which  are  in  the  world.  Anything  like  covetousness,  envy, 
unchaatity,  intemperance,  vindictiveness,  makes  service  unworthy,  and  Divine  worship 
unacceptable.  By  watchfulness  and  prayer  let  the  ministers  of  Christ,  more  especially, 
cleanse  their  hearts  and  their  hands. 

IV.  That  the  ouabdiakship  of  GJod  mat  be  counted  upon  all  the  way.  "  The 
Lord  will  go  before  you ;  and  the  God  of  Israel  will  be  your  rereward; "  i.e.  there  shall 
be  a  complete  defence  from  danger ;  though  enemies  should  threaten  you  before  and 
behind,  you  shall  find  an  ample  security  in  God.  We  find  ourselves  assailed  by  spiritxial 
perils  coining  from  opposite  quarters :  we  are  tempted  by  fanaticism  on  the  one  side 
and  by  indifference  on  the  other;  by  pietism  and  secularism;  by  presumption  and 
distrust;  by  undue  asceticism  and  laxity;  by  superstition  and  scepticism;  but  if  we 
are  obedient  and  reverent  in  spirit,  our  God  will  be  a  shield  against  every  foe. — 0. 

Vers.  13 — 16. — The  wisdom  of  suffering  service.  The  fact  that  these  and  the 
following  verses  refer  to  the  Messiah  is  no  reason  why  we  should  not  find  in  them 
practical  lessons  for  the  guidance  of  our  own  lii'e,  the  culture  of  our  own  character. 
For  Christ  c»me,  n«t  only  to  do  for  us  a  work  which  we  could  not  possibly  do  ourselves, 
but  also  to  be  the  Exemplar  whom  we  are  to  follow  in  the  paths  of  righteousness  and 
peace. 

I.  OuB  FIKBT  OABB  SBOOU)  BE  TO  BEKYK.  He  who  is  the  Anointed  of  the  Lord, 
the  Highest  among  the  highest,  is  spoken  of  as  "my  Servant."  And  fr«n  the  begkiaing 


0H.Ln.  1— 15.]      THE  BOOK  OP  THE  PROPHET  ISAIAH.  289 


to  the  end  of  bis  cours^e  he  thought  and  spoke  of  himself  as  of  One  that  "  was  sent," 
that  was  charged  to  do  an  appointed  work.  The  spiritual  greatness  he  manifested  was 
in  giving  himself  up  to  the  service  of  mankind.  "I  am  among  you  as  he  that  serveth.'' 
We  should  count  it  not  our  dishonour  but  our  honour  that  we  live  to  serve.  We  act 
worthily  of  him  from  whom  we  came,  and  of  that  One  who  was  the  very  Son  of  man, 
when  we  spend  our  faculties  in  humble,  holy  service.  We  miss  the  end  of  our  being 
and  take  the  lowest  rank  that  can  be  taken  when  we  fail  to  serve  God  and  our  kind. 
We  commit  the  greatest  wrong  and  we  make  the  supreme  mistake. 

II.  As  SERVANTS  WE  MUST  BE  WILLING  TO  SUFFER.  A  good  soldicr  endurcs  hardship 
and  runs  great  risks.  A  good  servant  of  God  will  be  prepared  to  do  the  same.  Jesus 
Christ  went  on  to  the  work  before  him  by  surrendering  himself  to  the  blows  and 
buffetings  that  awaited  him.  He  endured  enough  sorrow  to  change  his  countenance ; 
he  went  through  tiials  enough  to  leave  a  deep  mark  upon  his  outer  manhood.  He  did 
not  stop  to  inquire  how  many  or  bow  grievous  were  the  afflictions  in  store  for  him. 
The  only  thing  he  asked  about  was  the  Father's  will  and  the  world's  necessity.  If  we 
are  true  servants  of  our  Saviour  and  of  mankind,  this  will  be  our  spirit  too. 

III.  Suffering  sbrviob  will  be  followed  by  blessed  exaltation.  According 
to  the  severity  of  the  suffering  was  the  greatness  of  the  exaltation  with  the  holy 
Servant  of  Jehovah  (vers.  14,  15).  To  the  depth  of  his  humiliation  answered  the 
height  of  bis  uplifting,  to  the  gloom  of  the  darkened  path  on  earth  the  glory  of  the 
heavenly  home.  So  shall  it  be  with  us :  if  we  sufifer  with  our  Lord  we  shall  reign  with 
him;  and  as  we  suffer  so  shall  we  reign.  The  deeper  we  go  beneath  the  waves  of 
sacrificial  suffering  the  higher  shall  we  rise  in  the  celestial  kingdom.  Herein  is  heavenly 
wisdom.  Had  Jesus  Christ  elected  to  take  the  crown  which  was  offered  him  at  the 
outset  (see  Matt.  iv.  8),  he  might  have  gained  some  glories  without  the  shame  through 
which  he  passed.  But  he  would  have  forfeited  the  "many  crowns"  he  now  wears  and 
will  for  ever  wear.  But  God's  Servant  "  dealt  prudently,"  i.e.  chose  wisely  and  not 
with  superficial,  short-sighted  policy ;  and  now  he  is  "  exalted  and  extolled  and  made 
very  high."  Let  it  be  our  wisdom,  after  him,  to  choose  suffering  service,  looking  for 
the  large  and  the  long,  though  it  be  the  far,  reward  of  reigning  in  glory  by  the  side  and 
m  the  service  of  our  Saviour. — 0. 

Vers.  1,  2. — The  restored  castaway.  "Arise,  and  sit  down  ...  0  captive  daughter 
of  Zion."  "  The  verses  are  a  poetical  description  of  the  liberation  of  a  female  captive  from 
degrading  slavery,  and  it  is  designed  to  represent  the  complete  emancipation  of  the  Church 
h.yca  tyranny  and  persecution."  The  call  is  peculiar  as  judged  by  Western  associations, 
but  quite  natural  in  view  of  Eastern  habits.  The  female  is  pictured  as  crouching  on 
the  ground,  huddled  in  the  dust,  in  the  depressed  and  miserable  attitude  of  the  slave. 
She  is  called  to  "  arise,"  shake  off  the  dust  of  her  degradation,  put  ou  beautiful  garments, 
and  sit  down  like  a  lady.  Jerusalem,  or  Zion,  as  it  is  called,  is  regarded  as  a  "cast- 
away," given  over  for  a  time,  by  God,  into  the  power  of  the  Babylonians.  Now  her 
restoring-time  has  come.  She  is  to  put  on  again  the  garments  of  beauty,  which  belonged 
to  her  as  the  priestly  queen  of  cities.  Jowett  puts  the  point  of  these  verses  in  the 
following  sentences :  "  The  captive  daughter  of  Zion,  brought  down  to  the  dust  of 
suffering  and  oppression,  is  commanded  to  arise  and  shake  herself  from  that  dust ;  and 
then,  with  grace,  and  diguity,  and  composure,  and  security,  to  sit  down;  to  take,  as  it 
were,  aiain  her  seat  and  rank  amid  the  company  of  the  nations  of  the  earth,  which  had 
before  afflicted  her  and  trampled  her  to  the  earth."  Dealing  with  the  truths  suggested 
in  their  applications  to  us,  we  consider — 

I.  God  in  the  stern  exfebienoes  of  life.  We  lose  much  by  not  carefully 
discriminating  the  kinds  of  things  that  are  gathered  up  into  the  word  "afSiction." 
Disasters  and  failures — ^the  various  forms  of  trouble  that  come  in  our  outward  sphere  of 
relations — give  us,  and  are  intended  to  give  us,  quite  other  ideas  of  God  than  we  get 
from  bodily  pains  or  bereavements.  To  see  God  in  a  captivity,  a  slavery,  a  business 
ruin,  is  an  altogether  harder  thing  than  to  see  God  in  a  disease  or  a  family  anxiety. 
The  danger  of  Israel  while  in  Babylon  was  that  it  might  wrongly  regard  God's  stem 
dealmg,  and,  helplessly,  hopelessly  grovel  in  the  dust  of  despair.  And  still  there  is  the 
grave  danger  of  our  responding  by  hardnest,  ttvJbhomntu,  setf-wiUedness,  when  Qni'a 
ways  with  us  seem  stem.  But  the  stem  may  be  the  precise  expression  of  perfect  love 
KAIAH — ^n.  u 


290  THE   BOOK  OF  THE  PROPHET   ISAIAH.      [oh.  lu.  1—16. 

finding  adaptations  and  adjustments.  A  distinction  may  be  helpfully  made  between 
Qtxi's  work  of  softening  aud  God's  work  of  humbling.  We  may  see  the  softening  work 
illustrated  in  Job  or  in  Hezekiab.  We  may  see  the  humbling  work  illustrated  ia 
Manasseh,  who  must  be  dragged  off  into  captivity,  and  feel  the  bitterness  of  the  prison- 
house;  or  in  Israel  as  a  corrupt,  self-willed  nation,  which  must  feel  what  it  was  for  the 
Babylonian  "  iron  to  eat  into  its  soul." 

IL  God  limiting  the  stern  expbbienobs  or  life.  As  a  rule,  such  Divine  dealingi 
are  not  greatly  prolonged.  It  is,  indeed,  in  the  very  nature  of  them  that  they  should 
not  be  long  continued.  They  are  like  punishment  by  whipping,  which  is  soon  over 
and  done  with.  Relatively  to  the  life  of  a  nation,  seventy  years  of  captivity  is  only  a 
"  little  while."  And  in  a  later  verse  of  this  prophecy  we  find  God  exactly  expressing 
how  limited  his  stern  experiences  had  been :  "  In  a  little  wrath  I  hid  my  liace  from  thee 
for  a  moment."  And  the  expression  of  the  apostle  most  strictly  applies  to  this  class 
of  Divine  dealings :  "  Our  light  affliction,  which  is  but  for  a  moment."  If  we  come, 
then,  into  God's  stem  hands,  they  are  our  Father's  hands,  and  love  will  strictly  limit 
the  stem  dealings  to  the  "  needs  be ; "  and  this  great  confidence  may  quiet  our  souls 
and  give  peace,  even  while  we  suffer,  or  endure,  or  struggle. 

m.  God  restorino  from  the  stern  expekienceb  of  life.  Zion  is  restored; 
Jemsalem  is  rebuilt ;  Manasseh  comes  back  to  his  throne ;  Job's  latter  end  is  brighter 
than  his  beginning.  Justice  is  God's  strange  work,  mercy  is  his  delight.  Above  every- 
thing else  he  is  the  Redeemer,  the  Restorer,  finding  ever  more  joy  in  restoring  than 
we  can  find  in  being  restored.  It  is  as  if  he  were  glad  with  infinite  gladness  when  he 
can  take  the  cloud  away,  and  let  his  smile  break  through  again  upon  us.  What  seem 
to  us  extravagant,  ecstatic  pictures  of  the  restoreil  glory  of  the  Jewish  nation,  are 
really  intended  to  impress  on  us  what  a  joy  God  finds  in  his  redeemings.  This  is 
expressed  for  us  in  the  assurance  of  the  Lord  Jesus,  that  "  there  is  joy  in  the  presence 
of  the  angels  of  God  over  one  sinner  that  repenteth."  And  so  far  as  we  are  really  good, 
and  like  God,  we  find  singular  pleasure  in  putting  things  straight  again,  in  reconcilia- 
tions, in  helping  others  to  recover  themselves  and  start  afresh. 

IV.  Man  responding  gladly  to  the  new  jot  of  God's  bestobations.  To  this 
Gk)d  calls  in  our  text.  It  is  as  if  he  had  said,  "  I  am  glad ;  now  be  you  glad."  There 
could  be  restorings,  accept  them  at  once,  and  lovingly  and  thankfully.  Rise  up  out  of  all 
those  depressions  and  despairings  of  captivity.  Shake  the  very  dust  of  the  old  troubles 
off.  Dress  in  festal  robes.  Sing  joy-songs.  Realize  your  swiftly  coming  honours. 
"  Lift  up  your  heads,  for  your  redemption  draweth  nigh."  Sit  down  in  stately,  royal 
style,  as  if  the  promise  were  possession,  and  you  entered  on  it  when  God  gave  his 
assurances.  How  sadly  we  fail  in  hesitating  about  the  acceptance  of  what  God  gives  1 
— E.T. 

Ver.  8, — A  priceless  redemption,  "  Ye  shall  be  redeemed  without  money."  This 
truth  is  more  fully  stated  in  ch.  Iv.  1.  Here  we  only  note  two  senses  in  which  God's 
redemption  of  Israel  from  the  captivity  of  Babylon,  and  of  us  from  the  captivity  of 
t&n,  may  be  called  a  priceless  redemption. 

I.  Because  its  value  is  beyond  ant  pbioe  man  can  find.  A  man  may  hear  of 
a  "  pearl  of  great  price,"  and  be  willing  to  sell  all  else  that  he  may  have  in  order  to  get 
possession  of  it.  But  i  edemption  is  a  pearl  of  such  price  that  no  man'»  all  could  suffice 
for  its  purchase.  Illustrate  what  returning  to  a  regenerate  Jerusalem  was  for  tue 
captives.  And  what  had  they  by  which  they  could  buy  such  a  national  restoration  ? 
What  relation  would  it  bear  to  the  matter  if  they  put  all  their  wealth  together?  And 
we  are  not  redeemed  from  sin  with  "  corruptible  things,  such  as  silver  and  gold,"  bo 
that  we  could  recompense  him  who  gave  the  silver  and  gold  for  us,  by  giving  him  our 
silver  and  gold ;  "  but  with  the  precious  blood  of  Christ,"  the  value  pf  which  no  human 
scales  can  measure,  and  which  no  human  wealth  could  buy.  The  price  of  our  redemp- 
tion is  "  beyond  all  measure  of  so  much."  Compare  the  poetical  estimate  of  the  value 
of  "  wisdom,"  in  Job  xxviii.  12 — 19. 

IL  Because  it  i8  given  without  asking  ant  pbioe  at  all.  We  could  not  pty 
the  price.  We  should  not  have  it  at  a  price,  if  we  could  pay.  It  cannot  be  bought, 
niustrate  how  men  put  a  fictitious  price  on  things  which  they  do  not  wish  to  sell ;  and 
how  (hey  refuse  to  name  any  price  at  all  when  they  are  determined  that  the  thing  shall 


CH,  LH.  1— 15.]      THE  BOOK  OF  THE  PKOPHET  ISAIAH.  291 

be  a  free  gift.  So  God's  redemption  is  priceless,  for  he  does  not  want  to  sell.  Nay,  it 
is  priceless,  for  it  can  only  be  received  as  a  gifl.  "  God  bath  given  unto  us  eternal  life, 
and  this  life  is  in  bis  Son."  How  strange  that  this  very  "  pricelessness  "  should  be  our 
greatest  stumbling-block !  We  have  a  saying  that  "only  nothing  worth  can  be  got  for 
nothing  ; "  and  we  find  ourselves  applying  it  to  God's  free  gift  of  salvation.  To  illustrate 
this  very  human  weakness,  a  man  bought  the  entire  stock  of  a  herring-vendor,  and  sent 
aim  round  a  district  of  poor  people,  to  cry,  "Herrings  for  nothing!"  and  give  them 
away.  He  was  laughed  to  scorn,  and  not  one  person  was  found  willing  to  receive.  It 
is  hard  to  believe  that  a  priceless  redemption  is  offered  to  us  "  without  money  and  with- 
out price." — B.  T. 

Ver.  6. — Knowing  Ood^s  Name.  By  that  is  meant  finding  out  for  ourselves  all  that 
is  involved  in  his  Name ;  proving  for  ourselves  what  he  can  and  will  do,  even  for  us. 
The  prophet  has  recalled  to  mind  the  deliverance  from  Egypt,  and  is  full  of  the 
revelation  which  was  then  made,  to  Moses,  of  God's  Name.  Elsewhere  it  has  been 
ihown  that  God's  Name  is  twofold.  1.  An  incommunicable  name — a  bare  assertion  of 
existence,  "  Jehovah,  I  am."  2.  A  relational  name,  that  sets  us  upon  observing  what 
God  has  done  and  does.  "  The  God  of  Abraham,  of  Isaac,  and  of  Jacob."  Now  we 
gain  illustration  from  another  incident  in  the  Mosaic  history.  Moses,  in  one  of  the 
sternest  experiences  of  his  life,  asked  for  the  infinite  comforting  of  being  shown  the 
LmrcPs  glory ;  and  this  was  the  Divine  response,  "  I  will  make  all  my  goodness  pass 
before  thee,  and  I  will  proclaim  the  Name  of  the  Lord  before  th§e."  Evidi  ntly  the 
adequate  impression  of  God's  goodness  is  "  knowing  God's  Name."  And  the  special 
point  of  goodness  dwelt  on  in  our  text  is  the  goodness  that  restores  us  from  the 
consequences  of  our  own  follies  and  sins. 

I.  "The  knowledge  or  God's  Name  that  comes  by  betelation.  This  is  mainly  a 
head  knowledge,  and  does  not,  of  necessity,  influence  the  spirit  or  the  conduct. 

II.  The  knowledge  op  God's  Name  that  comes  through  the  experiences  op 
OTHERS.  1.  As  recorded  in  the  Word.  2.  As  met  with  in  life.  This  is  helpful,  but  it 
is  secondary  knowledge.  And  the  response  we  make  to  it  is  goodness  upon  other 
people's  persuasion,  and  is  only  likely  to  last  so  long  as  the  persuasion  lasts.  Like  the 
parasite,  we  are  good  just  as  long  as  we  have  somebody  else's  life  to  drink  of. 

III.  The  knowledge  of  God's  Name  that  comes  through  our  own  experiences. 
We  never  really  know  God  until  we  know  him  for  ourselves,  by  our  own  soul-sight  and 
soul-touch.  This  is  well  expressed  by  the  saint  of  old,  "  I  have  heard  of  thee  by  the 
hearing  of  the  ear :  but  now  mine  eye  seeth  thee.  Wherefore  I  abhor  myself,  and  repent 
in  dust  and  ashes."  In  the  text  God  assures  his  people  that  his  restoring  mercies  shall 
be  a  personal  revelation  of  himself  to  them;  and,  knowing  him,  they  shall  know  the 
full  joy  of  full  trust.— R.  T. 

Ver.  7. — 2%e  message  glorifying  the  messengers.  Immediate  reference  is  to  the  heralds 
who  go  on  in  advance  of  the  returning  exiles  to  proclaim  to  Jerusalem  that  "  the  time 
to  favour  her,  yea,  the  set  time  lias  come."  And  to  those  who  send  the  heralds, as  well 
as  to  those  who  receive  them,  they  seem  beautiful  for  the  sake  of  their  message.  And 
this  is  the  only  worthy  reason  for  glorying  in  the  ministers  of  Christ — we  love  them 
"  for  their  work's  sake  "  (see  St.  Paul's  use  of  this  verse  in  relation  to  the  first  preachers 
of  the  gospel,  in  Rom.  x.  15).  In  the  poetical  style  of  the  East,  the  watchmen  are 
represented  as  standing  upon  their  watch-tower,  or  post  of  observation,  and  stretching 
their  vision  to  the  utmost  point  of  the  horizon,  as  if  in  ea^er  expectation  of  a  news- 
bearing  messenger.  On  a  sudden  the  wished-for  object  appears  in  sight,  on  the  summit 
of  the  distant  mountain,  speeding  his  rapid  way  to  the  city,  wl)ile  the  watchmen, 
anticipating  the  tenor  of  his  tidings,  burst  forth  in  a  shout  of  gratiilation  and  triumph. 
The  imagery  strikingly  represents  the  expectant  attitude  and  heedful  vigilance  of  the 
believing  part  of  the  teachers  and  pastors  of  the  nation  of  Israel  on  the  eve  of  the 
Messiah's  manifestation.  Illustrating  the  precise  point  indicated  in  the  heading  of  this 
homily,  we  note — 

I.  'The  snare  of  a  minister  is  setting  himself  before  his.  message.  Even  «■ 
apostle  felt  the  power  of  this  temptation,  and,  having  overcome  it,  he  says,  "  We  preach 
not  ourselves,  but  Christ  Jesus  the  Lord."    The  snare  is  felt  especially  when  there  ia 


292  THE  BOOK   OF   THE  PROPHET   ISAIAH.       [oh.  lh.  1— 1& 

pride  of  intellect;  a  notion  of  remarkable  individuality;  the  conceit  of  genins;  a 
rhetorical  deliveiy;  or  a  popular,  attraciive  power.  We  are  sometimes  obliged,  with 
grieved  hearts,  to  acknowledge  that,  in  those  to  whom  we  listen,  there  is  "  more  of  the 
man  than  the  message."  The  messenger  may  stand  in  front  of  the  King.  All  workers 
for  Christ  need  to  deal  watchfully  with  themselves,  lest  they  he  overcome  of  this  fault, 
and  find  the  people  forgetting  themselves  in  the  flattery  of  the  herald.  Popular 
preachers  are  in  sore  need  of  great  grace.  Self-conceit  takes  strangely  subtle  forms 
when  it  enters  in  and  dwells  with  God's  ministers. 

IL  This  jot  of  a  minister  when  he  can  lose  himself  in  the  globt  op  hib 
MESSAGE  Compare  Samuel  Eutherford's  exclamation,  "  God  is  my  witness,  that  your 
salvation  would  be  two  salvations  for  me,  and  your  heaven  two  heavens  for  me."  Our 
Lord  Jesus  Christ  ever  stood  back,  and  let  his  Father  speak  to  men  through  him ;  and 
we  shall  never  know  the  joy  of  our  work  until  we  also  can  stand  back — right  back — 
and  let  Christ  speak  to  men  through  us. — R.  T. 

Ver.  10. — The  world  taught  through  Ood^s  dealings  with  his  people.  In  every  age 
God's  elect  people  are  set  in  the  world's  eye ;  God's  ways  with  them  are  revelations  of 
himself  to  all  onlookers.  The  world  is  educated,  elevated,  by  means  of  its  elect  nations, 
just  as  the  social  range,  the  Church  sentiment,  the  doctrinal  beliefs,  and  the  family  life 
are  raised  and  toned  by  God's  elect  sons  and  daughters.  In  this  sense  "  no  man  liveth 
unto  himself;"  no  national  experience  is  limited  to  the  nation;  God's  salvations  of 
some  are  intended  to  be,  and  are  adapted  to  be,  in  varied  senses,  salvations  for  all. 
"  The  Lord  makes  bare  his  holy  aim  in  the  eyes  of  all  the  nations."  The  figure  of 
"  making  bare  the  arm"  is  explained  by  the  Eastern  custom  of  wearing  long  and  loose 
robes,  and  by  the  ancient  custom  of  hand-to-hand  conflict.  "The  warrior,  preparing 
for  actica,  throws  off  his  mantle,  tucks  up  the  sleeve  of  his  tunic,  and  leaves  his  out- 
stretched arm  free."  The  prophet  is  thinking  of  the  way  in  which  news  of  the  crossing 
of  the  Red  Sea  spread  abroad  among  the  nations  then  in  Canaan,  carrying  great 
impressions  of  the  august  and  awful  power  of  Jehovah,  the  God  of  the  Jews.  In  a 
similar  but  smaller  way,  the  return  from  Babylon  was  noised  abroad  among  the 
nations,  carrying  impressions  of  God's  faithfulness  to  his  promise.  And  so  with  the 
salvation  in  Christ  Jesus,  which  was  but  suggested  and  foreshadowed  by  all  the  previous 
deliverances ;  it  was  for  the  whole  world,  though  it  found  its  first  sphere  in  the  Jewish 
nation.    "  Beginning  at  Jerusalem,"  of  it  this  must  be  thought  and  said-^ 

"  Salvation  I  let  the  echo  fly 
The  spacious  earth  around." 

This  topic  is  suited  for  a  nussionary  sermon,  and  familiar  truths  may  be  set  under  the 
following  headings. 

I.  News  ov  salvation  in  Cheist  desekvb  to  bk  known.  It  is  the  "great 
salvation,"  the  "common  salvation,"  the  "only  salvation;"  for  there  is  "none  other 
name  under  heaven,  given  among  men,  whereby  we  can  be  saved."  It  la  a  full 
salvation  and  a  free  salvation. 

IL  Nbws  op  salvation  in  Chbist  will  bubelt  be  known.  Whether  we  are 
pleased  to  aid  the  spreading  or  not.  The  word  is  running  very  swiftly.  Like  the 
sunshine,  its  light  "is  going  out  into  all  the  world."  Illustrate  the  spreading  of  the 
gospel,  and  its  ameliorating  and  ennobling  influences. 

in.  Wk  mat  have  the  jot  of  making  that  salvation  known.  Show  in  what 
practical  ways,  and  plead  for  direct  personal  interest  in  all  missionary  work. — B.  T. 

Ter.  11. — Cleanness  a  condition  of  service.  "Be  ye  dean,  that  bear  the  vessels  of 
the  Lord."  The  expression  recalls  the  importance  attached  in  the  Jewish  economy  to 
the  preparation  of  the  priests  and  Levites  for  solemn  tabernacle  engagements.  They 
were  required  to  "sanctify  themselves"  before  undertaking  any  ritual  service,  because 
the  impression  of  the  holiness  of  the  work  must  rest  on  them,  and  be  made  through 
them  vpon  the  people.  So  when  the  captives  were  about  to  return  to  their  own  land, 
as  monuments  of  Divine  restorings  and  salvations,  due  impressions  must  be  made  oi 
the  holiness  God  demanded  of  all  who  served  him,  and  the  responsibility  lay  especially 
on  the  Levites  of  making  this  impression.     They  may  be  taken  as  types  of  all  thow 


OH,  m,  1—16.]      THE  BOOK  OF  THE  PROPHET  ISAIAH.  293 

who  are  now  engaged  in  Christ's  service — to  whom  he  has  committed  any  trusts.  The 
question  is  gonietimes  discussed,  in  view  of  the  notion  of  apostolical  succession,  whether 
a  man  who  is  morally  bad  can  ofScially  communicate  Divine  grace.  We  do  not 
venture  an  opinion  on  such  a  question,  but  we  do  say  that,  to  light  feeling  men  and 
women,  the  connection  between  personal  wickedness  and  pious  work  is  offensive  and 
distressing..  Our  souls  revolt  from  the  association  of  the  two  things,  and  respond  to 
the  demand  of  the  text  for  personal  purity  in  all  who  attempt  to  do  God's  work  in  the 
world.     Two  things  may  be  dwelt  on. 

I.  Cleanness  as  harmony  with  cub  work.  We  seek  for  harmony  everywhere. 
In  arranging  colours  of  dress  or  fittings  of  house.  In  the  relation  of  man's  profession 
and  bis  conduct;  between  a  man's  work  and  the  spirit  in  which  be  does  it.  Broken 
harmony  is  unpleasirig  to  us.  Clean  work  calls  for  clean  hands.  Now,  God's  work, 
whatever  form  it  takes,  is  holy  work ;  and  we  never  undertake  it  aright,  save  as  due 
impressions  of  its  holiness  rest  upon  us.  God  himself  is  most  holy.  His  gospel  most 
holy.  Immortal  souls,  as  objects  of  his  redeeming  love,  most  holy.  The  Word  that 
brings  healing  and  life  most  holy.  And,  therefore,  everybody  who  comes  into  relation 
with  these  Divine  persons  and  things  ought  to  be  toned  in  harmony  with  them.  Open 
how  this  presses  on  us  the  importance  of  spiritual  culture. 

II.  Cleanness  as  fitness  fob  oub  wokk,  and  povraiB  in  doino  it.  It  is,  in  fact, 
our  eiidowment.  We  often  think  of  holiness  as  quality,  but  we  need  to  discern  that  it 
is  power,  and  our  best  power ;  the  feather  that  wings  our  arrow ;  the  nerve-force  that 
gives  energy  to  our  blow ;  the  mesmeiic  influence  before  which  even  stern,  hard  souls 
must  yield.  The  pure  do  the  best  work  in  the  world  for  God.  Saintly  souls  are  almost 
almighty.— B.  T. 

Ver.  14. — Surprise  at  the  appearance  of  OotTa  Servant.  Whatever  may  be  the 
immediate  and  historical  reference  of  this  term  "  servant,"  of  this  we  may  feel  quite  sure — 
the  full  reference  must  be  to  Messiah,  and  to  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ  as  Messiah.  Now, 
it  is  certainly  singular  that  no  trustworthy  traces  of  the  appearance  of  our  Lord  have 
come  down  to  us.  Everybody  may  imagine  for  himself  what  were  the  features  and 
expression  of  his  Divine  Master;  and  it  is  better  that  our  free  imaginations  should 
have  no  limitations  to  the  representation  of  any  artistic  genius.  We  remember  in  an 
exhibition  observing  a  number  of  paintings  of  the  thorn-orowned  head.  The  fuces  of 
our  Lord  precisely  differed  according  as  the  artist  was  Spanish,  Italian,  or  English, 
or  had  made  the  uncertain  attempt  of  creating  a  face  of  Jewish  type.  All  that 
Scripture  asserts  is  that,  so  far  as  face  and  form  were  concerned,  there  was  nothing 
arresting  about  Christ;  you  might  have  passed  him  by  as  a  common  man.  It  is  even 
suggested  that,  as  with  his  servant  Paul,  men  might  have  rudely  SMd  that  his  "  bodily 
presence  was  contemptible."  Dean  Plumptre  remarks,  "  These  words  (of  ver.  14)  conflict 
strangely  with  the  type  of  pure  and  holy  beauty  with  which  Christian  art  has  made  ua 
familiar  as  its  ideal  of  the  Son  of  man.  It  has  to  be  noted,  however,  that  the  earlier 
forms  of  that  art,  prior  to  the  time  of  Constantine,  and,  in  some  cases,  later,  represented 
the  Christ  as  worn,  emaciated,  with  hardly  any  touch  of  earthly  comeliness;  and  that 
it  is  at  least  possible  that  the  beauty  may  have  been  of  expressioa  rather  than  of 
feature  or  complexion." 

I.  What  Messiah  was — in  fact.  In  no  way  striking.  Not  aristocratic-looking,  or 
handsome,  or  big.  Just  a  man,  simple,  undistinguished-looking.  Dekker,  one  of  our 
early  English  poets,  says — 

"The  best  of  men  that  e'er  wore  earth  about  him  was  a  snfTenr, 
A  soft,  meek,  patient,  humble,  tranquil  spirit, 
The  first  true  gentleman  that  ever  breathed." 

n.  'What  Messiah  was — conteaby  to  expectation.  Jewish  hopes  fashion  a  hero- 
king,  a  patriot  like  Judas  Macoabaeus,  a  restorer  of  David's  line  of  kings.  Instead,  he 
was  a  simple  Man,  who  lived  a  life;  a  Sufferer  who  bore  a  burden  of  peculiar  sorrows; 
a  Man  who  seemed  to  end  his  life  in  failure  and  shame. 

IIL  Why  was  Messiah  thus  diffbbent  to  all  expectation  of  him  ?  Because 
men  are  so  enslaved  to  the  literal,  the  temporal,  the  earthly.  There  was  nothing  in  the 
Man  to  attract,  because  God  would  have  us  feel  the  attractions  of  the  Divine  Saviour. 
— B.  1. 


294 


THE  BOOK  OF   THE   PROPHET  ISAIAH,     [oh.  mi.  1- 12. 


EXPOSITION. 


CHAPTER  LUL 
The  Passional,  oe  the  Gbbat  Pbopheot 

OF  THE  SUFPEEINGS  OF   ChBIST,  AND  OF  HIS 

Later  Exaltation.  Polycarp  the  Lysian 
calls  this  chapter  "  the  golden  passional  of 
the  Old  Testament  evangelist."  Delitzsoh 
says  of  it,  "  It  is  the  centre  of  this  wonderful 
book  of  consolation  (eh.  xl. — Ixvi.),  and  is 
the  most  central,  the  deepest,  and  the  loftiest 
thing  that  the  Old  Testament  propliecy,  out- 
stripping itself,  has  ever  achieved  "  ('  Com- 
mentary on  Isaiah,'  vol.  ii.  p.  803).  Mr, 
Urwick  remarks  on  it,  "Here  we  seem  to 
enter  the  holy  of  holies  of  Old  Testament 
prophecy — ^that  sacred  chamber  wherein  are 
pictured  and  foretold  the  sufferings  of  Christ 
and  the  glory  which  should  follow "  ('  The 
Servant  of  Jehovah,'  p.  65). 

The  Messianic  interpretation  of  the  chap- 
ter was  universally  acknowledged  by  the 
Jews  until  the  time  of  Aben  Ezra  (about  a.d. 
1150).  It  was  also  assumed  as  indisputable 
by  the  Christian  Fathers.  Almost  all  Chris- 
tian expositors  down  to  the  commencement 
of  the  nineteen'th  century  took  the  same 
view.  It  was  only  under  the  pressure  of 
the  Christian  controversy  that  the  later  Jews 
abandoned  the  traditional  interpretation,  and 
applied  the  prophecy  (1)  to  Jeremiah;  (2) 
to  Josiah;  (3)  to  the  people  of  Israel.  In 
the  present  century  a  certain  number  of 
Christian  commentators  have  adopted  one 
or  other  of  the  late  Jewish  theories,  either 
absolutely  or  with  modifications.  It  is  im- 
possible to  examine  and  refute  their  argu- 
ments here.  We  must  be  content  to  repeat 
wliat  was  urged  in  the  introductory  para- 
graph to  ch.  xlii.,  namely :  (I)  that  the  por- 
traiture of  "the  Servant  of  the  Lord"  in 
this  place  has  so  strong  an  individuality 
and  such  marked  personal  features  that  it 
cannot  possibly  be  a  mere  personified  collec- 
tive— whether  Israel,  or  faithful  Israel,  or 
ideal  Israel,  or  the  collective  body  of  the 
prophets ;  and  (2)  that  it  goes  so  infinitely 
beyond  anything  of  which  a  mere  man  was 
ever  capable,  that  it  can  only  refer  to  the 
unique  Man — the  God-Man — Christ.  It  is, 
moreover,  applied  directly  to  Christ  in  Matt. 
viii.  17 ;  Mark  xv.  28 ;  Luke  xxii.  37 ;  John 
xii.  37,  38;  Acts  viii.  32,  33;  Bom.  x.  16; 


and  1  Pet.  ii.  24,  25.  The  Messianio  inter- 
pretation is  maintained,  among  modems,  by 
Hengstenberg,  Keil,  Umbreit,  (Ehler,  De- 
litzsch,  Eay,  Cheyne,  Henderson,  Alexan- 
der, Urwick,  and  others. 

Ver.  I.— Who  hath  believed  1  Isaiah  felt 
that  he  spoke,  mainly,  to  unbelieving  ears 
(see  above,  ch.  xxviii.  9 — 15;  xxix.  10 — 15; 
XXX.  9 — 11;  xlii.  23,  etc.).  The  unbelief 
was  likely  to  be  intensified  when  so  mar- 
vellous a  prophecy  was  delivered  as  that 
which  he  was  now  commissioned  to  put 
forth.  Still,  of  course,  there  is  rhetorical 
exaggeration  in  the  question,  which  seems 
to  imply  that  no  one  would  believe.  Onr 
report ;  literally,  that  which  has  been  heard 
by  tt$.  But  the  word  is  used  technically 
for  a  prophetic  revelution  (see  ch.  xxviii.  9, 
19;  Jer.  xlix.  14).  Here  it  would  seem  to 
refer  espeoially  to  the  Messianic  propheoie* 
delivered  by  Isaiah.  To  whom  is  the  aim 
of  the  Lord  revealed)  The  "arm  of  the 
Lord,"  which  has  been  "  made  bare  in  tba 
eyes  of  all  the  nations"  (oh.  lii.  10),  yet 
requires  the  eye  of  faith  to  see  it.  Many 
Jews  would  not  see  the  working  of  God's 
providence  in  the  victories  of  Cyrus,  or  in 
tlie  decision  to  which  he  came  to  restore 
the  Jews  to  their  own  country.  Unbelief 
can  always  assign  the  most  plainly  provi- 
dential arrangements  to  happy  accident. 

Ver.  2.— For  he  shall  grow  upj  rather, 
now  he  grew  up.  The  verbs  are,  all  of  them, 
in  the  past,  or  completed  tense,  until  ver.  7, 
and  are  to  be  regarded  as  "  perfects  of  pro- 
phetic certitude."  As  Mr.  Cheyne  remarks, 
"All  has  been  finished  before  the  founda- 
tions of  the  world  in  the  Divine  counsels." 
Before  him;  i.e.  "before  Jehovah  "—under 
the  fostering  care  of  Jehovah  (comp.  Luke 
ii.  40,  52).  God  the  Father  bad  bis  eye 
ever  fixed  upon  the  Son  with  watchfulness 
and  tenderness  and  love.  As  a  tender 
plant;  literally,  as  a  sapling,  or  at  a  sucker 
(comp.  Job  viii.  16;  xiv.  7;  xv.  30;  Ps. 
Ixxx.  12;  Ezek.  xvii.  4,  22;  Hog.  xiv.  6). 
The  "branch"  of  ob.  xi.  1,  10— a  differ- 
ent word — has  nearly  the  same  meaning. 
The  Messiah  will  be  a  fresh  sprout  from 
the  stump  of  a  tree  that  has  been  felled; 
i.e.  from  the  destroyed  Davidic  monarchy. 
As  a  root  (so  oh.  xi.  10;  Rev.  v.  5). 
The  "sapling"  ftom  the  house  of  David 
shall  become  the  "  root "  out  of  whieh  his 
Church  will  grow  (comp,  Jolm  zr.  1 — 6). 
Out  of  a  dry  gronnd.  Sitkev  ant  of  the 
"  dry  ground  "  of  a  corrupt  age  and  nation, 
or  out  of  the  arid  soil  of  humanity.  In  the 
East  it  is  not  uunaual  to  see  a  tall  succulent 
plant  growing    from  a  soil   which    seems 


OH.  Lia  1—12.]     THE  BOOK  OP  THE  PROPHET  ISAIAH. 


295 


utterly  devoid  of  moistnie.    Such  plants 
have  roots  that  stiike  deep,  and  draw  their 
nourishment  from  a  hidden  source.    He  hath 
no  form  nor  comeliness;  rather,  he  had  no 
form  nor  majetty.    It  is  scarcely  the  pro- 
phet's intention  to   describe  the  personal 
appearance  of  our  Lord.    What  he  means 
is  that  "  the  Servant "  Vfould  have  no  splen- 
did surroundings,  no  regal  pomp  nor  splen- 
dour— nothing  about  him  to  attract  men's 
eyes,  or  make   them  thinl:   him   anything 
extrnordinary.     It  is  impossible  to  suppose 
that  there  was  not  in  his  appearance  some- 
thing of  winning  grace  and  quiet  majesty. 
But  it  was  of  a  kind  that  was  not  adapted 
to  draw  the  gaze  of  the  multitude.    And 
when  we   shall   see   him.    Bome   connect 
this  clause  with  the  preceding,  and  translate, 
"  He  hath  no  form  nor  comeliness,  that  we 
should  regard    him;    no  beauty,   that   we 
should  desire  him "  (Lowth,  Vitringa,  Ge- 
senius,  EwaW,  Knobel,  Henderson,  Urwiok. 
But  Stier  Delitzsch,  Kay,  and  Mr.  Oiieyne 
prefer  the  construction  found  in  the  Autho- 
rized Version).    No  beauty;   literally,  no 
lighUineea;  i.e.  nothing  to  attract  the  eye 
or  arrest  it.    The  spiritual  beauties  of  holy 
and    sweet  expression  and  majestic  calm 
conld  only  have  been  spiritually  discerned. 
Yer.  3. — He  is  despised;  rathisr,  was  de- 
tpiged  (comp.  ch.  xlix.  7  and  Ps.  xxii.  6). 
Men's  contempt  was  shown,  partly  in  the 
little  attention  which  they  paid  to  liis  teach- 
ing, partly  in  their  treatment  of  him  on  the 
night  and  day  before  the  Crucifixion  (Matt. 
XXV.  67,  68 ;  xxvi.  29—31 ;  Mark  xiv.  65 ; 
XV.  18,  19,  etc.).    Rejected  of  men;  rather, 
perhaps,  forsaken  of  men — "  one  from  whom 
men    held    themselves    aloof"    (Cheyne); 
comp.  Job  xix.  14.     Our  Lord  had  at  no 
time  more  than  a  "  little  flock  "  attached  to 
him.    Of  these,  after  a  time,  "  many  went 
back,  and  walked  no  more  with  him  "  (John 
vi.  66).    Some,  who  believed  on  him,  would 
only  come  to  him  by  nisht  (John  iii.  2). 
All  the  "  rulers "  and  great  men  held  aloof 
from  him  (John  vii.  48).     At  the  end,  even 
his  apostles  "  forsook  him,  and  fled  "  (Matt. 
xxvi.  56).    A  Man  of  sorrows.    The  word 
translated  "sorrows"  means  also  pains  of 
any  kind.    But  the  beautiful  rendering  of 
our  version  may  well  ttaud,  since  there  are 
many  places  where  the  word  used  certainly 
means   "sorrow"   and    nothing    else   (see 
Exod.  iii.  7 ;  2  Chron.  vi.  29 ;  Fs.  xxxii.  10 ; 
xxxviii.  17;   Eccles.  i.  18;    Jer.  xxx.  15; 
xlv.  3;   Lam.  i.  12,  18,  etc.).    Aquila  well 
translates,  &t/Spa  a\yriS6vaiv.    The  "  sorrows  " 
of  Jesus  appear  on  every  page  of  the  Gos- 
pels.   Acquainted  with  grief ;  literally,  w«<i 
tidme»§i  but  as  eeger  and  agritudo  are  ap- 
plied in  Latin  both  to  the  mind  and  to  the 
body,  so  lehSli,  the  word  here  used,  would 
te  m  to  be  in  Hebrew  (iee  Jer.  vi.  7;  x.  19). 


The  translation  of  the  Authorized  Venioa 
may  therefore  be  retained.  We  hid  as  it 
were  our  faces  from  him ;  literally,  and  tJiera 
was  ai  it  were  the  hiding  of  the  face  from 
him.  Some  suppose  the  hiding  of  God's 
face  to  be  intended ;  but  the  context,  which 
describes  the  treatment  of  the  Servant  by 
his  fellow-men,  makes  the  meaning  given  in 
our  version  far  preferable.  Men  turned 
their  faces  from  him  when  they  met  him, 
would  not  see  him,  would  not  recognize  him 
(comp.  Job  xix.  13—17 ;  xxx.  10).  Despised. 
A  repetition  very  characteristic  of  Isaiah 
(see  ch.  i.  7 ;  iii.  12 ;  iv.  3 ;  vi.  11 ;  xiv.  25 ; 
XV.  8;  xvii.  12,  13,  etc.). 

Ver.  4. — Surely  he  hath  bome  our  griefs ; 
or,  surely  they  were  our  grief*  which  he  bore. 
Tlie  pronouns  are  emphatic.  Having  set 
forth  at  length  the  fact  of  the  Servant's  hu- 
miliation (vers.  2,  3),  the  prophet  hastens  to 
declare  the  reason  of  it.  Twelve  times  over 
within  the  space  of  nine  verses  he  asserts, 
with  the  most  emphatic  reiteration,  that 
all  the  Servant's  sufferings  were  vicarious, 
bome  for  man,  to  save  him  from  the  conse- 
quences of  his  sins,  to  enable  him  to  escape 
punishiuent.  The  doctrine  thus  taught  in 
the  Old  Testament  is  set  forth  with  equal 
distinctness  in  the  New  (Matt.  xx.  28 ;  John 
xi.  50 — 52;  Rom.  iii.  25;  v.  6 — 8;  viii.  3; 
2  Cor.  V.  18—21;  viii.  9;  Gal.  iii.  13;  Eph. 
i.  7 ;  1  Pet.  ii.  24,  eta),  and  forms  the  hope, 
the  trust,  and  the  consolation  of  Christians, 
And  carried  our  sorrows.  The  application 
which  St.  Mattliew  makes  of  this  passage 
to  our  Lord's  miracles  of  healing  (viii,  17) 
is  certainly  not  the  primary  sense  of  the 
words,  but  may  be  regarded  as  a  secondary 
application  of  them,  Christ's  suiferings 
were  the  remedy  for  all  the  ills  that  flesh 
is  heir  to.  Tet  we  did  esteem  Mm  stricken, 
smitten  of  Ood.  They  who  saw  Christ 
suffer,  instead  of  understandmg  that  he  was 
bearing  the  sins  of  others  in  a  mediatorial 
capacity,  imagined  that  he  was  suflering  at 
God's  hands  for  his  own  sins.  Hence  they 
scoffed  at  him  and  reviled  him,  even  in  his 
greatest  agonies  (Matt,  xxvii.  39 — 14).  To 
one  only,  and  him  not  one  of  God's  people, 
was  it  given  to  see  the  contrary,  and  to 
declare  aloud,  at  the  moment  of  the  death, 
"  Certainly  this  was  a  righteous  Man  "  (Luke 
xxiii.47). 

Yer.  5. — But  he  was  wounded  for  our 
transgressions.  This  verse  contains  four 
asseverations  of  the  great  truth  that  all 
Christ's  sufferings  were  for  us,  and  consti- 
tuted the  atonement  for  our  sins.  The  form 
is  variuil,  but  the  truth  is  one.  Christ  was 
"  wounded  "  or  "  pierced"  (1)  by  the  thorns; 
(2)  by  the  nails ;  and  (3)  by  the  spear  of  the 
soldier.  The  wounds  inflicted  by  the  nails 
caused  his  deaih.  He  was  bruised;  or, 
enuhed  (cnmp  <>h.  iii.  IS;  six.  10;  Ivii.  15. 


296 


THE   BOOK   OF   THE   PBOPHET   ISAIAH,     [oh.  un.  1—12. 


Ps.  Ixxii.  4).  "  No  stronger  ezpresBion 
could  be  found  in  Hebrew  to  denote  severity 
of  suffering — suffering  unto  death"  (Ur- 
wick).  The  chastisement  of  our  peace  was 
upon  Mm;  i.e.  "the  chastisement  which 
brought  us  peace,"  which  put  a  stop  to  the 
enmity  between  fallen  man  and  an  offended 
God — which  made  them  once  more  at  <yne 
(comp.  Eph.  ii.  15=— 17,  "  Having  abolished 
in  his  flesh  the  enmity,  even  the  Law  of 
commandments  contained  in  ordinances ;  for 
to  make  in  himself  of  twain  one  new  man, 
BO  malting  peace ;  and  that  he  might  recon- 
cile both  unto  Gcod  in  one  body  by  the  cross, 
having  slain  the  enmity  therAy :  and  came 
and  preached  peaee  to  you  which  were  afar 
off;"  Col.  i.  20,  "Having  made  peace 
through  the  blood  of  his  cross,  by  him  to 
reconcile  all  things  unto  himself").  With 
his  stripes  we  are  healed;  rather,  we  were 
healed  (comp.  1  Pet.  ii.  24,  "By  whose 
stripes  ye  were  healed  ").  Besides  the  blows 
inflicted  on  him  with  the  hand  (Matt.  zxvi. 
27)  and  with  the  reed  (Matt,  xxvii.  30), 
our  Lord  was  judicially  scourged  (Matt, 
xxvii.  26).  Such  scourging  would  leave  the 
"  stripe-marks  "  which  are  here  spoken  of. 

Ver.  6. — All  we  like  sheep  have  gone 
astray.  "All  we "  means  either  the  whole 
nation  of  Israel,  which  "went  aslray"  in 
the  wilderness  of  sin  (Ps.  ovii  4 ;  cxix.  176 ; 
Ezek.  xxxiv.  6),  or  else  the  whole  race  of 
mankind,  which  had  wandered  from  the 
right  path,  and  needed  atonement  and  re- 
demption even  more  than  Israel  itself.  We 
have  turned  every  one  to  his  own  way.  Col- 
lectively and  individually,  the  whole  world 
had  sinned.  There  was  "  none  that  did 
good  "  absolutely — "no,  not  one"  (Ps.  xiv.  3). 
All  had  quitted  "  the  way  of  the  Lord  "  (oh. 
xl.  3)  to  walk  in  their  "own  ways"  (ch. 
Ixvi.  3).  The  Lord  hath  laid  on  him ;  lite- 
rally, tlie  Lord  caused  to  light  upon  him.  God 
the  Fathtr,  as  tlie  primary  Disposer  of  all 
things,  lays  upon  the  Son  the  burden,  which 
the  Son  voluntarily  accepts.  He  comes 
into  the  world  to  do  the  Father's  will.  He 
prays  to  the  Father,  "Let  this  cup  pass 
from  me :  nevertheless  not  as  I  will,  but  <m 
thou  wilt"  (Matt.  xxvi.  39).  So  St.  John 
says  that  tbe  Father  "  sent  the  Son  to  be 
the  Propitiation  for  our  sins"  (1  John  iv. 
10).  And  St.  Paul  tells  us  that  God  (the 
Father)  "made  him  to  be  sin  for  us  who 
knew  no  sin"  (2  Cor.  v.  21).  It  does  not 
lessen  the  Son's  exceeding  mercy  and  loving- 
kindness  in  accepting  the  burden,  that  it 
was  laid  upon  him  by  the  Father.  The 
iniquity  of  us  all  (compare  the  initial  "  All 
we").  The  redemption  is  as  universal  as 
the  sin,  at  any  rate  potentially.  Christ  on 
the  cross  made  "  a  fuU,  perfect,  and  sufBoient 
Morifioe ...  for  the  sins  of  the  whole  world." 
Yer.7. — Eewasoppresied.  An  Israel  under 


the  Egyptian  taskmasters  (Exod.  iii.  7).  Th< 
cruel  ill  usage  in  the  high  priest's  house,  and 
before  Herod  is,  perhaps,  specially  pointed 
at.  He  was  afSicted ;  rath(  r,  he  abased  him- 
self (comp.  ch.  zxxi.  4  and  Exqd.  x.  3).  The 
position  of  the  emphatic  pronoun  (Au')  be- 
tween the  first  participle  and  the  seconi\ 
detaches  the  second  clause  from  the  first 
and  conjoins  it  with  the  third.  Otherwise 
the  rendering  of  the  Authorized  Version 
might  stand.  Translate,  He  wot  oppressed, 
but  he  abased  himself  and  opened  not  his 
mouth.  The  silence  of  Jesus  before  his 
judges  (Matt.  xxvi.  22,23;  xxvii.  14),  when 
he  could  so  easily  have  vindicated  himself 
from  every  charge,  was  a  self-abasement. 
It  seemed  like  an  admission  of  guilt.  He 
opened  not  his  month  (comp.  Ps.  zxzviii. 
13,  14;  xxxix  2,  9).  The  contrast  of  the 
Servant's  silence  and  passivity  with  men's 
ordinary  vehemence  of  self-assertion  under 
ill  usage  is  most  striking.  Who  was  ever 
silent  but  he  under  sUch  extremity  of  provo- 
cation? (For  a  contrast,  see  the  account  of 
the  Jewish  martyrdoms  in  2  Mace,  vii.)  He 
is  brought  as  a  lamb ;  rather,  a»  the  lamb. 
The  Paschal  lamb  is,  perhaps,  intended,  or, 
at  any  rate,  the  lamb  of  sacrifice.  The  pro- 
phet has  often  seen  the  dumb,  innocent 
lamb  led  in  silence  to  the  altar,  to  be  slain 
there,  and  thinks  of  that  touching  sight. 
It  was  probably  the  use  of  this  imagery 
here  which  caused  the  Baptist  to  term  our 
Lord  "  the  Lamb  of  God,  which  taketh  away 
the  sin  of  the  world"  (John  i.  29).  As  a 
sheep  before  her  shearers.  A  second  image, 
a  reflex  of  the  first,  somewhat  weaker,  as  so 
often  in  Isaiah  (ch.  1.  22, 80 ;  t.  18, 24 ;  viiL 
14;  X.  24,  27,  34;  xL  8;  xia  14;  uiv.  13; 
xxv.  7,  etc.). 

Yer.  8. — ^He  was  taken  from  prison  and 
from  judgment;  rather,  by  oppression  and 
a  judgment  uias  he  taken  away  ;  i.e.  (as  Dr. 
Kay  says)  "by  a  violence  which  cloaked 
itself  under  the  formalities  of  a  legal  pro- 
cess." The  Septuagint  Version,  which  is 
quoted  by  Philip  the  deacon  in  the  Acts 
(ch.  viii.  33),  must  have  been  derived  from 
quite  a  different  text.  It  preserves,  how- 
ever, the  right  rendering  of  the  verb,  "was 
he  taken  away,"  i.e.  removed  &om  the  earth. 
Who  shall  declare  his  generation  1  literally, 
his  generation  who  eoruiderethl  The  mean- 
ing is  obscure.  Dr.  Eay  understands  by 
"his  generation,"  his  lifetime  or  his  life, 
comparing  oh.  xxxviii.  12,  "  Mine  age  is  de- 
parted," where  tlie  same  word  is  used  and 
accompanied  by  a  pronominal  su£Sx,  Mr. 
Urwick  suggests  that  it  includes  (1)  his 
origin;  (2)  his  earthly  life;  and  (8)  his 
everlasting  reign  in  heaven.  Others  (De- 
litzsch,  Oesenins,  Cheyne)  take  "  his  gaoe- 
ration"  to  mean  "  the  men  of  his  generaBnn," 
and  join  the  elanso  with  what  fUlmni;  "  As 


»H.  mi.  1—12.]     THE  BOOK  OF  THE  PROPHET  ISAIAH. 


297 


for  those  of  hi>  generation,  which  of  tliem 
oonaidered  that  he  was  cut  off,"  etc.?  He 
was  out  off;  i.e.  taken  away  before  his  time, 
out  down  like  a  flower  (comp.  Job  xiv.  2 ; 
Lam.  iiL  M;  Kzek.  xxxvii.  11).  The  land 
of  the  living.  The  present  world,  the  earth 
(see  oh.  xxxviii.  11 ;  and  comp.  Job  xxviii. 
13;  Ps.  xzvii.  13;  Ui.  5;  cxvi.  9;  oxiii.  2; 
Jer.  xi.  19).  Tot  the  transgression  of  my 
people  was  he  stricken.  The  sentiment  is 
the  same  as  in  ver.  5,  bnt  with  the  differ- 
ence that  there  it  was  suffering  only,  here 
it  is  death  itself,  which  the  Servant  endures 
for  man.  "My  people"  may  be  either 
**  Ood's  people  "  or  "  the  prophet's  people," 
according  as  the  speaker  is  regarded  as 
Isaiah  or  Jehovah.  Jehovah  certainly  be- 
comes the  Speaker  in  vers.  11,  12, 

Ver.  9, — And  he  made  his  grave  with  the 
wicked ;  rather,  iliey  assigned  him  hie  grave 
with  the  vnehed.  The  verb  is  used  imperson- 
ally. Those  who  condemned  Christ  to  be 
crucified  with  two  malefactors  on  the  com- 
mon execution-ground — "the  place  of  a 
skull" — ^meant  his  grave  to  be  "with  the 
wicked,"  with  whom  it  would  naturally 
have  been  but  for  the  interference  of  Joseph 
of  Arimathna,  Crucified  persons  were  buried 
with  their  crosses  near  the  scene  of  their 
crucifixion  by  the  Romans,  And  with  the 
rich  in  his  death ;  or,  and  (he  was)  with  a 
rieh  one  after  his  death.  In  the  preceding 
clause,  the  word  translated  "  the  wicked  " 
is  plural,  bnt  in  the  present,  the  word  trans- 
lated "the  rich"  is  lingalar.  The  expres- 
sion translated  "  in  his  death  "  means  "  when 
he  was  dead,"  "  after  death  "  (comp.  1  Elings 
xiii.  31 ;  Ps.  vi,  5),  The  words  have  a 
singularly  exact  fulfilment  in  the  interment 
of  our  Lord  (Matt,  xxvii.  57 — 60).  Because. 
The  preposition  used  may  mean  either  "  be- 
cause "  or  "  although."  The  ambiguity  is, 
perhaps,  intentional.  He  had  done  no  vio- 
lence ;  or,  no  wrong  (see  Gen,  xvi.  5 ;  1 
Ohron.  xii,  17;  Job  xix.  7;  Ps.  xxxv,  11 
(margin) ;  Prov.  xxvi.  6).  The  LXX,  give 
avofila,  while  St,  Peter  renders  the  word 
used  by  afiaprla  (1  Pet.  ii,  22).  The  sin- 
lessness  of  Christ  is  asserted  by  himself 
(John  viii,  46),  and  forms  the  main  argu- 
ment in  the  Epistle  to  the  Hebrews  for  the 
superiority  of  the  new  covenant  over  the  old 
(Heb.  vii,  26—28;  ii.  14),  It  is  also  wit- 
nessed to  by  St,  Peter  (1  Pet,  ii.  22),  by  St, 
Paul  (2  Cor,  v.  21),  and  by  St.  John  (1  John 
iii,  5),  As  no  other  man  was  ever  without 
sin,  it  follows  that  the  Servant  of  the  pre- 
sent chapter  must  be  Jesus, 

Ver.  10,— Yet  it  pleased  the  Lord  to  braise 
him  (see  the  comment  on  ver,  6,  ad  Jin.). 
The  sufferings  of  Christ,  proceeding  from 
the  "determinate  counsel  and  foreknow- 
ledge of  God"  (Acts  ii,  23),  and  being  per- 
miUed  by  him,  were  in  some  sort  his  doing. 


It "  pleased  him,"  moreover,  that  they  should 
be  undergone,  for  he  saw  with  satisfaction 
the  Son's  self-sacrifice,  and  he  witnessed 
with  joy  man's  redemption  and  deliverance 
effected  thereby.  He  hath  put  him  to  grief; 
rather,  he  dealt  grievously — a  sort  of  hendi- 
adyi.  "He  bruised  him  with  a  grievous 
bruising,"  When  thou  shalt  make  his  soul 
an  offering  for  sin.  It  is  proposed  (Ewald, 
Cheyne),  by  the  alteration  of  a  letter,  to 
make  the  passage  run  thus :  "When  he  shall 
make  his  soul  an  offering,"  etc.,  and  argued 
that  "  he  who  offers  the  Servant's  life  as  a 
sacrifice  must  be  the  Servant  himself,  and 
not  Jehovah"  (Cheyne).  No  rloubt  the 
Servant  did  offer  his  own  life  (see  Matt.  xx. 
28, "  He  gave  his  soul  a  ransom  for  many"); 
but  that  fact  does  not  preclude  the  possi- 
bility of  the  Father  having  also  offered  it. 
"Believest  thou  not,"  said  our  Lord  to 
Philip,  "  that  I  am  in  the  Father,  and  the 
Father  in  me?  The  words  that  I  speak 
unto  you  I  speak  not  of  myself:  but  the 
Father  that  dwelleth  in  me,  he  doeth  the 
works  "  (John  xiv.  10).  This  perienchoresit, 
as  the  ancient  theologians  called  it,  makes 
it  possible  to  predicate  of  the  Father  almost 
all  the  actions  which  can  be  predicated  of 
the  Son — all,  in  fact,  excepting  those  which 
belong  to  the  Son's  humanity,  or  which  in- 
volve obedience  and  subordination.  As  the 
Father  had  "  laid  on  Christ  the  iniquity  of 
us  all "  (ver,  6),  as  he  had  "  bruised  him 
and  put  him  to  grief,"  so  he  might  he  said 
to  have  "  made  his  soul  an  offering  for  sin," 
All  was  settled  in  the  Divine  counsels  from 
all  eternity,  and  when  the  ideal  became  the 
actual,  God  the  Father  wrought  with  God 
the  Son  to  effectuate  it.  "Offerings  for 
sin,"  or  "guilt  offerings,"  were  distinct 
from  "sin  offerings."  The  object  of  the 
former  was  "satisfaction,"  of  the  latter 
"  expiation."  The  Servant  of  Jehovah  was, 
however,  to  be  both.  "As  in  ver.  5  the 
Divine  Servant  is  represented  as  a  Sin  Offer- 
ing, his  death  being  an  expiation,  so  here 
he  is  described  as  a  Guilt  Offering,  his  death 
being  a  satisfaction  "  (Urwick, '  The  Servant 
of  Jehovah,'  p,  151).  He  shall  see  his  seed. 
The  "  seed  "  of  a  teacher  of  religion  are  his 
disciples.  St.  Paul  speaks  of  Onesimus  as 
one  whom  he  had  "begotten  in  his  bonds" 
(Philem.  10),  He  calls  himself  by  implica- 
tion the  "  fathei ''  of  his  Corinthian  converts 
(1  Cor.  iv.  15),  Both  he  and  St.  John  ad- 
dress their  disciples  as  "little  children" 
(Gal,  iv,  19  ;  1  John  ii.  1, 18,  25  ;  iii.  7.  18 ; 
iv,  4;  V.  21),  It  had  long  previouslv  been 
promised  that  "a  st&l  should  serve"  Mes- 
siah (Ps.  xxii.  30).  Our  Lord  himself  occa- 
sionally called  his  disciples  his  "children" 
(Mark  x.  24 ;  John  xxi.  4).  He  has  always 
"  seen  his  seel "  in  his  true  followers.  He 
shall  prolong  his  days.    A  seeming  contra- 


THE  BOOK  OP  THE  PROPHET  ISAIAH,  [oh.  un.  1—12. 


dietion  to  the  itatement  (ver.  8)  tbat  he 
should  be  "  out  off"  out  of  the  land  of  the 
living;  and  the  more  surprising  because 
his  death  is  made  the  condition  of  this  long 
life :  "  When  thou  shalt  make  his  soul  an 
offering  [or, '  eacrifice ']  for  sin,"  then  "  he 
■hall  prolong  his  days."  But  the  resurrec- 
tion of  Christ,  and  his  entrance  upon  an 
immortal  life  (Bom.  vi.  9),  after  offering 
himself  as  a  Sacrifice  upon  the  cross,  exactly 
meets  the  difSoulty  and  solves  the  riddle 
(comjf.  Rev.  i.  18).  The  pleasure  of  the 
Lord  shall  prosper  in  his  hand.  "In  his 
hand"  means  "by  his  instrumentality." 
The  "pleasure  of  tlie  Lord"  is  God's  ulti- 
mate aim  and  end  with  respect  to  his 
universe.  This  would  "  prosper " — i.e.  be 
advanced,  wrought  out,  rendered  effectual — 
by  the  instrumentality  of  Christ.  "  Taking 
the  verse  as  a  wliole,  it  sets  forth  (1)  the 
origin,  (2)  the  nature,  and  (3)  the  result 
of  the  Saviour's  sufferings.  Taking  the  la^it 
clause  by  itself,  we  hare  (1)  the  Divine 
complacency  in  the  purpose  of  human  sal- 
vation ;  and  (2)  the  successful  issue  of  that 
purpose  as  administered  by  the  Messiah  " 
(Urwiok,  'The  Servant  of  Jehovah,'  p.  153). 
Ver.  11. — Ho  shall  see  of  the  travail  of 
his  soul,  and  shall  be  satisfied;  rather,  he- 
came  of  the  travail  of  his  soul  he  shall  see, 
and  he  satisfied  (comp.  Phil.  ii.  7 — 11,  "  He 
made  himself  of  no  reputation,  and  took 
upon  him  the  form  of  a  servant,  and  was 
made  in  the  likeness  of  men;  and  being 
found  in  fashion  as  a  man,  he  humbled  him- 
self, and  became  obedient  unto  death,  even 
the  death  of  the  cross.  Wherefore  God  also 
liath  highly  exalted  him,  and  given  him  a 
Name  which  is  above  every  name :  that  at 
the  Name  of  Jesus  every  knee  should  bow, 
of  things  in  heaven,  and  things  in  earth, 
and  things  under  the  earth  ;  and  that  every 
tongue  should  confess  that  Jesus  Christ  is 
Lord,  10  the  glory  of  God  the  Father  ").  No 
cro»8 — no  crown.  First  suffering,  then  glory. 
Because  Christ  suffered,  and  was  bruised, 
and  put  to  grief,  and  made  a  sacjifice  for 
■in  ;  because  of  all  this  "  travail  of  his  soul," 
— therefore  it  was  given  him  to  see  the  happy 
results  of  his  sufferings — the  formation  of 
that  Church  which  will  live  with  him  for 
ever  in  heaven  (Rev.  vii.  4 — 17),  and  there- 
with to  be  "satisfied."  tiy  his  knowledge 
jhall  my  righteous  servant  justify  many ;  t.«, 
"by  his  knowledc^e  of  the  Divine  counsels 
and  purpose,  which  he  will  impart  to  hia 
disciples,  shall  my  righteous  Servant  justify 
many"  (literally,  the  many),  or,  in  other 
words,  "turn  them  from  sin  to  righteous- 
ness" (comp.  Dan.  xii.  3).  Nothing  is  so 
effectual  in  turning  men  to  righteousness  as 
teaching  them  the  true  knowledge  of  God 
—  his  nature,  his  purposes  with  regard  to 
them,  his   feelings  towards  them.     Christ, 


from  his  own  knowledge,  gave  men  thii 
knowledge,  and  so  did  all  that  could  be 
done  to  draw  them  to  his  B'ather.  And  his 
efforts  were  not  without  result.  The  fruit 
of  his  teaching  has  been  the  justification  of 
many — ay,  of  "the  many,"  as  both  Isaiah 
and  St.  Paul  (Eom.  v.  19)  testify.  For  he 
shall  bear  their  iniquities ;  rather,  and  their 
iniquities  he  himself  shall  hear.  The  initial 
vau  of  the  clause  is  not  "  causal,"  but  merely 
connective.  There  are  two  main  things 
which  Christ  does  for  his  people — he  makes 
them  righteous  by  infirgfng  into  them  of 
his  own  righteousness;  and  he  bears  the 
burden  of  their  iniquities,  taking  them  upon 
himself,  and  by  his  perpetual  intercession 
obtaining  God's  forgiveness  of  them.  As 
Delitzscli  says,  "  His  continued  taking  ot 
our  trespasses  upon  himself  is  merely  the 
constant  presence  and  presentation  of  his 
atonement,  which  has  been  offered  once  for 
all.  The  dead  yet  living  One,  because  ot 
his  one  self-sacrifice,  is  an  eternal  Priest, 
who  now  lives  to  distribute  the  blessings 
which  he  has  acquired  "  ('  Commentary  on 
Isaiah,'  vol.  ii.  p.  338). 

Ver.  12. — Therefore  (see  the  comment  on 
ver.  11,  sub  init).  ViU  I  divide  him  a  por- 
tion with  the  great;  i.e.  "I  will  place  him 
among  the  great  conquering  ones  of  the 
earth  " — an  accommodation  to  human  modes 
of  thought  analogous  to  the  frequent  com- 
parison of  Christ's  kingdom  with  the  king- 
doms of  the  earth  (Dan.  ii.  44 ;  vii.  9 — 14, 
etc.).  The  apostle  goes  deeper  into  the  true 
nature  of  things  when  he  says, "  Therefore 
also  hath  God  highly  exalted  him,  and  given 
him  a  Name  which  is  above  every  name " 
(Phil.  ii.  9).  He  shall  divide  the  spoil  with 
the  strong.  A  repetition  of  the  thought  in 
the  preceding  clause  (comp.  Prov.  xvi.  19). 
Because  he  hath  poured  out  his  soul  unto 
death,  Christ  not  only  died  for  man,  but, 
as  it  were,  "  poured  out  his  soul "  with  his 
own  hand  to  the  last  drop.  The  expression 
emphasizes  the  duration  and  the  voluntari- 
ness of  Messiah's  sufferings.  And  he  was 
numbered  with  the  transgressors ;  rather, 
and  he  was  reckoned  luiih  transgressors  (see 
Luke  xxii.  37,  MerA  av6fi.av  iKoyMri,  where 
our  Lord  applies  the  words  to  himself). 
Christ  was  condemned  as  a  "  blasphemer " 
(Matt.  xxvi.  65),  crucified  with  malefactors 
(Luke  xxiii.  32),  called  "  tliat  deceiver" 
(Matt,  xxvii.  G3),  and  regarded  generally 
by  the  Jews  as  accursed  (Deut.  xxi.  23). 
And  he  hare  the  sin  of  many ;  rather,  and 
himself  hare  the  sin  of  many  (compare  the 
last  clauses  of  vers.  6  and  11 ;  and  see  also 
Heb.  ix.  27).  And  made  intercession  for  the 
transgressors.  The  future  is  used,  with  vau 
conversive,  instead  of  the  preterite,  to  mark 
that  the  act,  though  begun  in  the  past,  if 
inchoate  only,   and  not    completed.      'The 


CH.  Lui.  1— 12,]     THE  BOOK  OF  THE   PROPHET  ISAIAH. 


299 


"  intercession  for  transgressors "  was  begun 
upon  the  cross  with  the  coini)assionate 
words,  "  Father,  forgive  them ;  for  they 
%M>w  not  what  they  do"  (Luke  zziii.  34): 


But  it  has  continued  ever  since,  and  will 
continue  until  the  last  day  (see  Bom.  viii. 
31;  Heb.  Tii.  25). 


H0MILBTIC8. 

Veri.  2 — 11. — "  The  tufferinga  of  Jesus."  It  is  the  great  object  of  Isaiah,  in  this 
chapter,  to  declare  to  his  countrymen  (1)  that  the  Messiah  would  be  a  suffering  Messiah ; 
(2)  that  his  sufferings  would  be  vicarious ;  and  (3)  that  they  would  have  a  propitiatory 
or  atoning  character. 

I.  The  Messiah  a  snFFEBma  Messiah.  Hitherto  Isaiah  bad  looked  upon  the 
])roniised  Bedeemer  on  thie  side  of  his  glories  and  his  triumphs.  His  names  were  to  be 
"ImiKanuel,"  or  "God  with  us"  (oh.  vii.  14),  "  \^k)nderful,"  "Counsellor,"  "The 
Mighty  God,"  "  The  Everlasting  Father,"  "  The  Prince  of  Peace  "  (ch.  ix.  6).  ''  Of  the 
increase  of  his  government  and  peace  there  was  to  be  no  end,  upon  the  throne  of  David, 
to  order  it,  and  to  establish  it  with  judgment  and  with  justice  from  henceforth  even  for 
ever"  (ch.  ix.  7).  "  The  Spirit  of  the  Lord  was  to  be  u|)on  him  . . .  and  with  righteous- 
ness was  he  to  judge  the  poor,  and  to  reprove  with  equity  for  the  meek  of  the  earth, 
and  to  smite  the  earth  with  the  rod  of  his  mouth,  and  with  the  breath  of  his  lips  to 
slay  the  wicked  "  (ch.  xi.  2 — 4).  He  was  to  "bring  forth  judgment  to  the  Gentiles" 
(ch.  xlii.  1) ;  he  was  not  to  "  fail  nor  be  discouraged  "  (ch.  xlii.  4) ;  he  was  to  be 
"  upheld  ever  by  God's  hand  "  (ch.  xlii.  6) ;  "  the  isles  were  to  wait  for  his  Law  "  (ch. 
xlii.  4).  But  now  the  prophet  has  to  speak  in  another  strain.  Psalms  probably 
written  before  his  time  (as  Ps.  ii.,  xxii.,  xxxi.,  xl.,  Ixix.,  etc.)  had  partially  drawn  aside 
the  veil,  and  given  indications  that  the  career  of  the  Deliverer  would  not  be  all  glory  or 
all  triumph.  But  it  was  difficult  to  determine  how  far  they  were  historical,  how  far 
prophetic.  It  was  a  part  of  Isaiah's  mission  to  reveal,  in  language  that  could  scarcely 
be  mistaken,  the  darker  aspect  of  Messiah's  coming,  the  "contradiction  of  sinners" 
which  he  would  encounter,  and  its  consequences.  Messiah  was  to  be  "  despised,"  "  for- 
saken "  (ver.  3),  "  pierced,"  "  crushed,"  made  sore  with  "  stripes  "  (ver.  5),  "  oppressed  " 
(ver.  Y),  "  cut  off"  before  his  time,  "  stiicken  "  (ver.  8),  "  dealt  with  grievously  "  (ver. 
10).  He  was  to  be  condemned  by  an  iniquitous  "judgment"  (ver.  8),  to  be  "  brought 
IS  a  lamb  to  the  slaugliter "  (ver.  7),  to  be  "  assigned  his  grave  with  the  wicked " 
(ver.  9),  and  "  reckoned  with  transgressors  "  (ver.  12).  His  earthly  life  was  to  be  such 
as  would  be  best  summed  up  in  the  brief  phrase,  "  A  Man  of  sorrows,  and  acquainted 
with  grief"  (ver.  3). 

II.  The  suFFBBDfQS  OF  Messiah  vioaeious.  Men  make  a  difficulty  about  vicarious 
suffering ;  but  half  the  suffering  in  the  world  is  of  this  nature.  Who  that  watches  by 
a  sick-bed,  and  supports  and  props  the  sufferer,  and  stays  unmoved  in  a  cramped  posi- 
tion not  to  disturb  the  sick  one's  snatch  of  slumber,  bnt  suffers  to  assuage  or  remove 
another's  pain  ?  Who  that,  hungry  himself,  passes  on  to  another  the  food  that  he  might 
eat  himself,  but  does  the  same?  What  mother  but  bears  a  thousand  discomforts  to 
shield  her  child  from  them?  What  soldier  but  tries  to  take  himself  the  blow  which 
he  sees  must  otherwise  prostrate  his  chief?  How  are  the  young,  who  rush  into  ruinous 
extravagance  which  would  cripple  them  for  life,  saved  but  by  a  father  or  a  guardian 
taking  on  him  the  grievous  trouble  of  paying  the  debts  incurred  ?  What  do  not  refined 
ladies  undergo  to  rescue  and  recover  those  among  their  sisters  who  have  fallen  ?  Men's 
and  women's  kindness  of  heart  is  continually  leading  them  to  undergo  vicarious  suffer- 
ing ;  nor  is  there  often  any  other  way  by  which  the  sufferings  of  our  fellow-creatmes 
can  bo  removed.  If  I  take  the  load  that  is  galling  another's  back  and  put  it  on  my 
own,  I  do  it  with  the  full  knowledge  that  my  back  will  soon  ache.  If  I  transfer  my 
wraps  to  a  sick  fellow-traveller  on  a  wintry  day,  1  am  quite  aware  that  the  cold  will 
clutch  me  instead  of  him.  The  vicarious  character  of  Messiah's  sufferings  is  the  direct 
subject  of  seven  distinct  assertions  :  (1)  "  He  hath  borne  our  griefs ; "  (2)  "  He  hath 
carried  our  sorrows ; "  (3)  "  He  was  wounded  for  our  trans^iresstons ;  "  (4)  "  He  was 
bruised  for  our  iniquities ; "  (5)  "  The  chastisement  of  our  peace  was  upon  him  ; "  (6) 
"  With  his  stripes  we  are  healed "  (vers.  4,  6) ;   (7)  "  For  the  transgression  of  my 


300  THE  BOOK  OF  THE  PROPHET  ISAIAH,     [oh.  Lin.  1—12. 

people  was  ho  stricken "  (ver.  8).  It  is  indirectly  implied  in  four  others :  (1)  "  The 
Lord  hath  laid  on  him  the  iniquity  of  us  all ; "  (2)  "  Thou  shalt  make  his  soul  an 
oifering  for  sin;"  (3)  "He  shall  bear  their  iniquities;"  (4)  "He  bare  the  sins  of 
many  "  (vers.  6, 10—12). 

III.  The  suffebinos  of  Messiah  propitiatoet.  The  idea  of  propitiation  is 
implied  in  the  three  passages  where  Messiah  is  said  to  have  borne  the  sins  of  men.  No 
otherwise  can  one  man  bear  the  sin  of  another  than  by  doing  something  which  pro- 
pitiates him  whom  the  sin  has  offended.  But  it  is  further  distinctly  asserted  in  ver.  10, 
when  it  is  said  that  the  soul  of  the  Servant  should  be  "  made  an  offering  for  sin."  As 
the  whole  notion  of  offering  for  sin  was  grounded  on  the  idea  of  expiation,  so  it  was 
now  made  plain  that  the  real  expiation,  the  real  atonement,  the  real  propitiation,  to 
which  the  entire  ritnal  system  of  the  Israelitish  nation  pointed,  was  the  offering  up  ol 
that  "  righteous  Servant "  of  the  Lord,  who,  "  haying  done  no  wrong,"  having  been 
guilty  of  no  "  guile,"  nevertheless  was  made  sin  for  man,  Ejpd  became  a  willing  and 
meritorious  Sacrifice.  "It  is  impossible  for  the  blood  of  bulls  and  goats  to  take  away 
sin  "  (Heb.  x.  4).  It  is  impossible  for  sinful  man  to  redeem  his  fellow-man  (Ps.  xlix. 
7,  8).  Only  One  who  was  without  sin,  "  holy,  harmless,  undefiled,  separate  from 
sinners"  (Heb.  vii.  26),  could  make  atonement  for  others'  sins;  only  One  who  was  per- 
fectly pure  himself  could  purify  them ;  only  One  who  needed  none  to  intercede  for  him 
could  intercede  for  bis  brethren.  It  is  strange  how  men  dislike,  and  kick  against,  and 
endeavour  to  explain  away,  the  doctrine  of  vicarious  suffering  and  substitution,  and  of 
atonement  made  for  man  by  the  blood  of  Christ.  Yet  why  should  this  be?  "The 
doctrine,"  as  Mr.  Urwick  says,  "  is  in  perfect  keeping  with  all  that  the  Jewish  cere- 
monial embodied,  and  with  the  teaching  alike  of  the  Bedeemer  himself  (Matt.  xx.  28 ; 
John  X.  11 ;  Luke  xxii.  20)  and  his  apostles,  St.  Paul  (Bom.  iii.  24 — 26),  St.  Peter 
(1  Pet.  ii.  24,  25),  and  St.  John  (1  John  ii.  2).  It  satisfies  the  Divine  holiness,  and  the 
demands  of  the  sinner's  own  conscience.  It  fully  recognizes  the  reality  of  sin  and  its 
exceeding  sinfulness,  whereas  all  other  attempted  explanations  tend  to  make  light  of 
sin,  or  at  least  to  represent  it  more  or  less  as  a  matter  of  human  weakness,  which  a 
good-natured  God  will  readily  pass  over  and  forgive  without  a  ransom.  It  presents 
the  way  of  salvation  as  simple  and  straightforward ;  all  can  imderstand  it ;  whereas 
other  attempted  explanations  of  the  efficacy  of  Christ's  redemptive  work  are  cloudy, 
indefinite,  mystified,  abstruse,  and  difficult  of  apprehension  even  by  the  learned"  (*  The 
Servant  of  Jehovah,'  pp.  129, 130). 


HOMILIES  BY  VARIOUS  AUTHORS. 

Veri.  4 — 6. — Uie  suffering  Servant  of  Jehovah.  I.  The  description  op  th»  BtTPFBR- 
mo.  It  depicts,  by  simple  force  of  language,  its  extreme  intensity — not  a  suffering 
springing  from  internal  weakness  of  nature,  and  so  withering  and  dying  like  a  lamp  for 
want  of  oil,  but  "  like  a  torch  in  its  full  flame  bent  and  ruffied,  and  at  length  blown 
out  by  the  breath  of  a  north  wind."  It  was  a  diffused  suffering,  according  to  the 
expression  of  the  psalmist,  "  like  water  in  his  bowels,  or  oil  in  his  bones."  "  In  his 
person  we  may  see  grief  in  its  height  and  supremacy,  triumphant,  crowned  and  arrayed 
in  purple,  grief  reigning  and  doing  the  utmost  that  it  was  able."  In  proportion  to  the 
fineness  of  the  nature  is  the  sensitiveness,  and  in  proportion  to  the  sensitiveness,  the 
capacity  for  suffering.  In  these  words,  "  stricken,  pierced,  afSicted,  crushed,  beaten 
with  stripes,"  we  have  a  cumulation  of  strong  touches  in  the  picture.  Add  to  this, 
"  smitten  of  God."  The  allusion  is  said  to  be  to  leprosy,  regarded  as  a  punishment 
for  grievous  sin  (Numb.  xii.  9,  10 ;  2  Kings  xv.  6 ;  Ps.  Ii.  7).  "  The  measure  of  every 
passion  is  the  operation  of  the  agent.  We  must  not  measure  the  Divine  strokes  by  the 
proportion  of  those  blows  which  are  inflicted  by  the  greatest  and  most  exasperated 
mortal.  Every  blow  inflicted  by  the  fiercest  tyrant  can  reach  no  further  than  the 
body,  and  the  body  is  but  the  dwelling-place,  not  any  part,  of  the  soul.  None  can 
reach  the  eonscience  but  be  who  made  it.  God  is  able,  merely  by  letting  a  few  drops 
of  his  wrath  fall  upon  the  guilty  conscience,  so  to  scald  with  a  lively  sense  of  sin,  that 
the  man  shall  live  a  continual  terror  to  himself.     His  own  breast  ^ball  epho  pe^l$  of 


OH.  LHi.  1— 12.j     THE   BOOK  OF  THE  PROPHET  ISAIAH.  801 

vengeance  to  Wm  every  hour.  Suffering  must  needs  be  grievous  when  infinite  justice 
passes  sentence,  and  infinite  power  does  execution  "  (South).  An  "  unparalleled  great- 
ness "  of  suffering  is,  then,  here  indicated. 

II.  The  vioabious  nature  op  the  surFERiNO.  He  hore  our  sicknesses;  "the 
first  of  twelve  distinct  assertions  in  this  one  chapter  of  the  vicarious  character  of  the 
sufferings  of  the  Servant."  They  are  "  because  of  our  rebellions "  and  of  "  our 
iniquities."  The  punishment  which  is  the  means  of  "  our  peace  "  and  welfare  fell  upon 
him  ;  we  have  been  healed  through  his  stripes.  The  iniquity  of  all  has  been  made  to 
light  upon  him.  "  As  the  avenger  of  blood  pursues  the  murderer,  so  punishment  by  an 
inner  necessity  overtakes  the  sinner  (Ps.  xl.  12 ;  Numb,  xxxii.  23 ;  cf.  Deut.  xxvii.  15). 
And  inasmuch  as  the  Servant,  by  Jehovah's  will,  has  made  himself  the  Substitute  of 
the  Jewish  nation,  it  follows  that  the  punishment  of  the  lalter  must  fall  upon  him." 
After  all  that  has  been  written  for  ages  upon  this  difficult  subject  of  vicarious  suffering 
or  punishmeiit,  there  remain  difBculties  not  to  be  surmounted  by  our  reason.  How 
can  punishment  be  transferred  ?  How  can  the  suffering  due  to  the  sinner  be  imposed 
upon  an  innocent  person?  How  can  any  honest  mind  admit  such  a  confiision  of 
relation,  even  were  it  offered,  as  a  means  of  escape  from  penalty?  The  answers  to 
these  questions  are  given  in  poetic  metaphors,  and  analogies  which  do  not  reach  to  the 
heart  of  the  matter,  and  forensic  quibbles  which  are  not  lovely  in  connection  with 
spiritual  matters.  For  all  that,  there  is  something  the  heart  of  all  men  fixes  upon  as 
lovely,  Divine,  adorable  in  the  idea  of  a  man  laying  down  his  life  for  his  brethren,  a 
patriot  for  his  country.  Much  of  this  deep  feeling  enters  iuto  the  old  legends,  often  of 
a  woman — an  Alkdstis,  a  Makaria,  an  H^sion^ ;  often  of  a  man — a  sou  of  M^sa,  King 
of  Moab,  a  Menoikeus,  a  Curtius.  If  we  begin  to  criticize,  we  lose  the  sense  and  spirit 
of  these  sweet  stories.  So  with  the  great  tradition  of  the  Servant  of  Jehovah,  and  with 
the  still  greater  tradition  by  which  our  lives  and  hearts  have  been  formed. 

in.  Application.  Every  Christian  thinks  of  Christ  when  he  reads  these  beautiful 
words.  Who  but  he  can  inspire  us  with  the  willingness  to  "  crucify  the  flesh,  with  the 
affections  and  lusts  "?  "  Nature,  indeed,  cannot,  will  not,  prompt  it ;  but  Christianity, 
which  rises  many  strains  above  nature,  must  and  will.  The  best  sacrifice  to  a  crucified 
Saviour  is  a  crucified  lust,  a  bleeding  heart,  and  a  dying  corruption.  Let  the  ambitioiu 
man  lay  his  pride  in  the  dust,  the  covetous  man  deposit  his  treasures  in  the  banks  of 
charity  and  liberality,  and  let  the  voluptuous  epicure  renounce  his  cups  and  his  whores, 
— and  this  will  be  a  present  to  Heaven  better  than  a  whole  hecatomb ;  nor  could  the 
fruit  of  his  body  Ml  so  grateful  a  sacrifice  upon  God's  altar  as  the  sin  of  hia  soul " 
(South).— J. 

Vers.  7 — 12. — Patience  and  the  Divine  purpose.  In  the  picture  of  the  Servant  of 
Jehovah  we  have  an  exemplification  of  the  force  of  quiet  endurance  which  prevails  over 
violence,  even  to  victory. 

L  An  example  of  submission  to  wronq.  The  slave-driver  (Exod.  iii.  7 ;  Job 
iiL  18),  or  the  exactor  of  a  tax  or  a  debt  (Deut.  xv.  2, 3 ;  2  Kings  xxiii.  35),  is  the  imiige 
of  oppression  'n  it<s  ui'gency  and  its  contumely.  And  the  silence  of  the  suffering  One 
eloquently  speaks  of  his  resignation  (Ps.  xxxviii.  14 ;  xxxix,  9).  The  gentle  uncom- 
plaining lamb  may  well  set  him  forth  "  with  power  at  his  disposal,  yet  as  meek  as  if  he 
had  no  power  ;  with  consciousness  of  impending  fate,  yet  calm  as  if  ignorant  of  it  " 
(cf.  Jer.  xi.  19  ;  1  Pet.  ii.  23).  The  idea  of  the  Lamb  of  God  in  the  New  Testament 
rests  in  part  upon  this  passage.  "  The  two  or  three  who  can  win  it  may  be  called 
victors  in  life's  confiict ;  to  them  belongs  the  regnwn  et  diadema  tutum."  His  was  the 
lot  represented  by  our  great  poet  as  tempting  in  its  extreme  anguish  to  thoughts  of 
suicide.  But  from  another  source  the  Servant  obtains  his  quietus.  He  was  not  sup- 
ported by  the  thought  that  the  meaning  of  his  sufferings  was  understood  and  laid  to 
heart  by  his  contemporaries.  They  did  not  see  that  for  the  rebellion  of  the  people  he 
was  stricken.  And  even  after  death  insult  pursued  his  memory  (cf.  Jer.  xxvi.  23). 
They  buried  his  body,  not  amidst  the  remains  of  his  departed  friends,  but  with  the 
wicked  and  the  criminal,  the  proud  deniers  of  God,  or  with  the  rich  and  haughty 
Gentiles.  This  was  the  last  mark  of  an  ignominy  (ch.  xiv.  19),  and  it  was  all 
undeserved.  How  mighty  the  contrast  of  appearances  and  results  I  The  despised  o 
men  is  in  reality  the  eternally  honoured  of  God. 


302  THE  COOK  OP  THE   PROPHET  ISATAH.      [cth.  lui.  1—12. 

II.  The  DrviKK  pubposb  akd  decree.  There  was  no  cruel  accident  or  misunder- 
Etanding  in  all  tliis;  it  was  the  result  of  Divine  deliberate  will-r-the  pleasure  of 
Jehovah.  The  Servant  was  to  lay  down  his  life  as  a  guilt  offering.  He  was  to  fulfil 
and  crown  the  idea  of  all  sacrifice  in  his  own  Person.  Restitution  was  to  be  made  for 
injured  rights  of  property.  Israel  had  beconie  de-consecrated.  Her  life  liad  been 
forfeited,  and  satisfection  must  be  rendered.  And  this  is  provided  in  the  self-dedication 
of  the  Servant.  And  the  result  will  be  that  he  will  become  the  Head  of  a  spiritual  pos- 
terity (cf.  Ps.  xxiL  30).  His  piety  will  be  rewarded  by  length  of  days.  Both  these  are 
figures  of  highest  blessing  among  the  Hebrews  (G-en.  xii.  2 ;  Deut.  vi.  2 ;  Ps.  xci.  16 ; 
cxxvii.  6 ;  cxxviiL  6 ;  Prov.  iii.  2 ;  xvii.  6).  He  will  be  promoted  to  a  scene  of  high 
spiritual  employment  (ch.  Hi.  13),  the  "  pleasure  of  Jehovah "  |.>ros|:ering  under  his 
conduct.  His  former  spiritual  agony  and  toil  of  spirit,  his  travail  (Ps.  xc.  10;  Job 
iii.  10;  Jer.  xx.  18;  Eccles.  ii.  11 — 20;  iv.  4 — 6  for  the  word),  will  be  abun(^ntly 
compensated  by  the  joy  of  contemplation  of  the  progressing  work  of  salvation,  as  the 
husbandman  is  satisfied  with  the  sight  of  the  harvest,  for  which  he  has  "sown  in 
tears."  On  the  foundation  of  his  sacrifice  and  his  teaching  many  will  be  redeemed 
from  sin  and  become  a  righteous  and  a  holy  people.  And  so,  without  bloodshed  and 
the  din  of  battle,  he  will  become  a  glorious  Conqueror, and  the  spiritual  kingdom  of  the 
Eternal  will  be  among  the  world-subduing  powers.  All  this  hecause  he  humbled  him- 
self, because  he  was  devoted,  lecause  he  loved. 

III.  Lessomb.  How  mighty  the  power  o!  patience  I  The  hero  of  God  is  not  clothed 
in  purple,  nor  fed  on  sweets ;  "  daily  his  own  heart  he  eats."  His  hope  sets  not  with 
the  setting  uf  suns ;  his  faith  is  earlier  in  its  rising  than  the  stars.  Amidst  all  his 
seeming  weakness  he  cannot  be  crushed  ;  and  the  blows  of  his  adversaries  mi^  their 
aim.    The  spiritual  element  is  immortal,  indefeasible,  finally  victorious, 

*  They  say,  through  patience^  chalk 

Becomes  a  ruby  stone ; 
Ah,  yes  1  but  by  the  true  heart's  blood 

The  ohalk  is  crimson  grown." 

Who  was  originally  meant  by  the  servant  of  Jeliovah  may  remain  obscure.  We  «t 
least  cannot  but  apply  the  representation  to  the  Captain  of  salvation,  the  Leader  and 
Finisher  of  faith,  who  endured  the  cross  for  the  joy  set  before  him.  And  also  to  every 
true  servant  of  the  Eternal,  who  feels  that  he  was  brought  into  the  world  to  witness  for 
the  truth  and  devote  himself  in  the  cause  of  love. 

<*  This  is  he  who,  felled  by  foes, 
Sprang  harmless  up,  leAreshed  by  Uowit 
He  to  captivity  was  sold. 
But  him  no  prison-bars  would  hold; 
Though  they  sealed  him  in  a  rook, 
Hountain-chains  he  can  unlock ; 
Thrown  to  lions  for  their  meat, 
The  crouching  lion  kissed  his  feet; 
Bound  to  the  stake,  no  flames  appalled. 
But  arched  o'er  him  an  honouring  vanlt. 
Tills  is  he  men  miscall  fate. 
Threading  dark  ways,  arriving  late, 
But  e'er  coming  in  time  to  crown 
The  truth,  and  hurl  wrong-doers  down.* 

Ver,  2.— The  depraved  eye.  "No  beauty  ihat  we  should  desire  him."  In  this 
prophetic  picture  of  the  Christ  the  question  arises,  "  Who  hath  believed  our  report?" 
What  wonderful  attestation  history  gives  to  this  1 — "He  came  unto  his  own,  and  his  own 
received  him  not."  Whether  the  words,  "  he  hath  no  form  nor  comeliness,"  apply  to 
the  physical  features  of  Christ,  we  cannot  say;  for  the  Jews  had  no  "art."  They 
interpreted  the  words,  "  Thou  shalt  not  make  to  thyself  .  .  .  the  likeness  of  anything 
that  is  in  heaven  above,  or  in  the  earth  beneath,"  not  as  an  injunction  against  "  idols 


CH.  Lilt  1— 12.J     THE  BOOK  OP  THE  PROPHET  ISAIAH.  303 

aloue,  but  against  all  statuary  and  all  art.  So,  though  we  have  the  likeneBses  of  the 
emperors  on  the  Roman  coins,  and  the  Greek  statues  of  Socrates  and  their  wise  men,  we 
have  no  likeness  of  Christ  or  his  apostles.  But  we  do  know  the  meaning  of  this, 
"  There  is  no  beauty  that  we  should  desire  him." 

L  The  etb  aduibes  only  what  the  heart  loves.  The  beauty  that  eye  desired 
was  quite  different.     It  was  superficial  and  carnal,  nut  inward  and  spiritual. 

XL  The  world  does  not  alter  its  taste.  The  classic  virtues  of  paganism — ^pride, 
self-reliance,  honour — are  more  prized  by  men  of  the  world  than  patience,  gentleness, 
pity,  forbearance,  and  charity.  Christ  is  not  beautiful  to  the  proud,  nor  to  the  selfish, 
nor  to  the  ambitious  and  the  vain.  Only  the  pure  in  heart  admire  and  love  him  I — 
W.  M.  S. 

Ver,  3. — The  rejected  Saviour.  "He  is  despised  and  injected  of  men;  a  Man  of 
sorrows,  and  acquainted  with  grief."  He!  Who?  The  incarnate  Lord,  who  has 
growa  up  in  childhood  as  a  "  tender  plant;"  who  is  the  one  "living  root,"  while  all 
others  are  the  dry  soil  of  a  decrepit  and  degenerate  humanity. 

I.  This  reveals  to  us  what  the  Hebrew  Church  was.  Christ  was  the  "  touch- 
stone" of  that  Church.  Its  conduct  to  him  made  manifest  to  what  a  condition  they 
had  come.  Think  of  the  contrast.  Pharisaism  was  triumphant — Christ  was  despised. 
The  outward,  the  formal,  the  ritual,  was  preferred  before  the  holy,  the  inward,  and 
the  spiritual,  Christ  was  "  rejected."  They  had  the  first  opportunity  of  welcoming 
the  "  Lord  from  heaven."  "  To  the  Jew  first."  How  learned  men  may  be  in  tradition ! 
how  well  acquainted  with  the  'Mishna'  and  the  'Gemara,'  and  yet  know  ail  of 
ancient  revelation  except  its  meaning!  The  great  gates  of  prophecy  open  wide  to 
let  the  true  King  through ;  and  then  treat  him  as  a  Pretender,  and  crown  him  with 
thomt. 

II.  This  reveals  to  us  what  Christ  was  on  the  human  side.  "  A  Man  of  sorrows." 
Think  of  his  exquisite  moral  sensitiveness  in  a  world  of  sin.  Think  of  his  tender 
human  sympathies  in  a  world  of  sorrow.  "Acquainted  with  grief."  Not  in  one 
special  form,  but  in  all  its  spheres,  that  he  mi^^ht  be  a  Brother  born  for  adversity. 
Acquainted  with  it.  So  that  he  had  daily  fellowship  with  it ;  not  passing  through  its 
transient  experiences,  but  familiar  with  it  as  the  companion  of  his  life. — W.  M.  S. 

Ver.  6. — The  Divine  atonement.  "But  he  was  wounded  for  our  transgressions,  he 
was  bruised  for  our  iniquities."  We  shall  never  understand  the  atonement.  Prom 
Anselm's  day  to  our  own  there  have  been  ever-changing  theories  of  it.  But  the  fact 
remains;  and,  mysterious  as  it  is,  we  learn  that  there  was  a  God  ward  aspect  of  it,  as 
well  as  a  manward  aspect.  But  into  "  the  cup  which  my  Father  huth  given  me  to 
drink  "  no  man,  no  angel,  can  look. 

I.  This  is  the  revelation  of  Divine  SACBiFiOEi.  "He  gave  himself."  But  he 
was  more  than  wounded  by  the  treatment  of  his  character,  and  by  the  contempt  of 
his  claims,  and  by  the  forsakings  of  his  own  disciples.  It  is  not  enough  to  say  that 
the  pride  of  the  Jew  and  the  scorn  of  the  Greek  and  the  power  of  the  Roman  crucified 
him.  He  was  "delivered  up  for  our  offences."  So  here  "the  chastisement  of  our 
peace  was  upon  him ;  and  with  his  stiipes  we  are  healed." 

XL  This  is  the  subject  of  eternal  sono.  Heaven  rings  with  the  grateful  acclaim, 
"Untohim  that  loved  us, and  washed  us  Irom  our  sins  in  his  own  blood,  ...  to  him  be 
glory  and  dominion  for  ever  and  ever."  And  the  presence  of  the  redeemed  there  at  all 
is  distinctly  stated  to  rest  upon  the  sacrifice  of  Christ.  Because  "  they  have  washed 
their  robes,  and  made  them  white  in  the  blood  of  the  Lamb,  therefore  are  they  before 
the  tlHone  of  God."  This,  at  all  events,  has  been  the  Catholic  teaching  of  Christendom 
in  all  ages;  and  fill  the  hymnology  of  the  Church  in  all  its  various  branches.  Roman 
and  Amglicsn,  Lutheran  and  Puritan,  have  united  in  a  common  adoration  of  the  cross 
and  passion,  thus  antedating  the  praises  of  eternity. — W.  M.  S. 

Yer.  2.~-The  attractive  and  the  unattractive  in  Jesus  Christ.  The  whole  passage  is 
exceedingly  remarkable  in  that  it  ascribes  to  one  man  qualities  and  surroundings 
which  are  so  opposed  to  one  another  that  they  seem  to  be  positively  inconsistent  with 
each  other.    And  the  difficulty  has  been  to  find  a  reconciliation.     But  all  perplexity 


301  THE  BOOK  OF  THE  PROPHET  ISAIAH,     [oh.  un.  1-12. 

disappears  when  they  are  referred  to  Jesus  Ohrist;  for  in  him  were  combined  features 
of  character  and  changes  of  circumstance  which  could  not  be  united  in  any  other 
child  of  man.  We  have  here  a  very  strong  statement  as  to  the  unattractive  and 
unpromising  appearance  of  the  Servant  of  Jehovah,  and  this  has  to  agree  and  does 
agree  with  the  power  and  the  dignity  which  are  afterwards  predicted  of  him  (vers.  10, 
12),  and  with  the  attractive  power  he  has  exercised  in  all  ages  of  the  world..  We  look 
at  both. 

L  The  unattractive  ik  Jesus  Christ.  He  grew  up  as  a  tender  twig  or  as  a  sprout 
that  struggles  for  life  in  a  dry  ground;  he  lacked  the  beauty  that  draws  attention,  the 
comeliness  which  wins  regard,  in  that :  1.  He  came  of  a  fallen  family.  2.  He  was  a 
native  of  a  despised  and  detested  nation,  probably  the  most  hated  and  contemned  of 
all  nations.  3.  He  was  brought  up  in  a  disreputable  village,  and  the  reproach  of  its 
dishonour  fell  on  him.  4.  He  was  untrained  in  the  learning  which  is  held  in  the 
highest  regard  among  men.  5.  He  made  no  pretence  to  be  a  deliverer  of  the  kind 
popularly  desired;  he  dispensed  with  military  arms,  ofBcers,  honours;  he  made  no 
attempt  to  effect  a  political  revolution ;  he  disregarded  and  even  shunned  mere  popular 
favour.  6.  He  taught  truth  which  was  above  the  appreciation  and  against  the  prejudices 
of  his  hearers ;  his  thought  was  too  profound  for  their  understanding,  his  aims  were 
too  broad  and  liberal  for  their  liking.  His  truth  still  cuts  across  the  prejudices, 
passions,  and  lowest  interests  of  men;  and  his  purpose  is  to  establish  a  kingdom  which 
is  far  too  spiritual  to  meet  the  sympathies  of  the  selfish  and  the  worldly.  Nevertheless, 
be  accomplished  his  purpose.  That  little  shoot  has  become  a  strong  tree,  the  strongest 
and  fairest  that  has  ever  grown,  the  leaves  of  which  are  for  the  healing  of  all  the 
nations.  That  One  in  whom  was  no  beauty  that  men  should  desire  him  ii  proving  to 
be  "  altogether  lovely." 

n.  The  attractive  in  Jesus  Christ.  What  is  there  in  him  that  draws  the  eyes 
and  wins  the  hearts  of  men  ?  1.  Elements  of  attraction  in  his  cliaracter.  His  patient 
dignity  in  moments  of  trial  and  provocation ;  his  gentleness  toward  the  young  and  the 
feeble;  his  interest  in  the  unworthy  and  unbefriended ;  his  magnanimity  toward  his 
enemies,  his  stainless  purity  of  heart  and  life ;  bis  compassion  for  the  suffering  and  the 
sorrowful,  etc.  2.  Elements  of  attraction  in  his  gospel.  He  offers  forgiveness  of  sin 
to  those  burdened  with  a  sense  of  guilt ;  rest  of  heart  to  those  who  are  spiritnally  weary ; 
holy  and  fruitful  activity  to  the  earnest  and  energetic ;  an  unfailing  friendship  to  the 
troubled  and  the  lonely ;  a  heavenly  home  to  the  tired  travellers  along  the  path  of 
life.— 0. 

Yer.  3. — Z%e  Man  of  sorrows.  We  feel  that  there  is  but  One  of  our  race  to  whom 
this  title  properly  belongs;  One  who  may  wear  it  as  a  crown  upon  his  brow,  inasmnch 
as  his  sorrows  do  him  higher  honour  than  the  most  conspicuous  success  ever  conferred 
on  human  spirit.  It  does  belong  to  him,  not  in  virtue  of  the  fact  that  bis  outward 
career  involved  more  cruel  hardships  than  those  ever  borne  before ;  but  in  virtue  of  the 
fact  that  his  spirit  was  such  as  to  make  his  endurance  mure  grievous  than  that  ever 
experienced  by  man.  It  was  Jesus  Christ's  capacity  of  sorrow  that  made  all  the 
difference.  Capacity  to  endure  rises  with  the  greatness  of  the  spiritual  nature;  the 
larger  the  nature,  the  greater  the  possibility  and  likelihood  of  suffering.  When,  there- 
fore, we  remember  that  Jesus  Christ,  as  a  perfect  Man,  had  the  fullest  and  keenest 
possible  sensibility  of  naturci  and  when  we  remember  that  the  Divine  was  so  associated 
m  him  with  the  human  as  immeasurably  to  deepen  and  enlarge  every  faculty  of  his 
sonl,  we  shall  see  that  his  capacity  of  sorrow  was  almost  boundless. 

L  The  sources  of  his  borrow,  lliese  were,  among  others :  1.  The  failure  on  the 
part  of  his  own  best  friends  to  understand  and  appreciate  him.  "  They  who  knew  him 
best  could  hardly  be  said  to  know  him;"  they  entered  only  a  very  little  way  into  his 
purpose,  and  could  not  sympathize  with  him  in  his  deeper  disappointments ;  "  he  trod 
the  wine-press  alone."  But  for  his  Father's  presence  he  often  was  absolutely  alone  (John 
xtL  32).  2.  The  frailty  and  even  the  treachery  of  his  disciples.  Those  who  followed 
him  and  called  him  Master  had  but  little  care  for  his  truth  or  love  for  himself.  La 
a  moment  of  simple  perplexity  of  mind  they  fell  away  from  him,  and  abandoned  his 
cause  {John  vi.  66).  One  of  his  disciples  grieved  his  spirit  by  distinct  denial,  and 
another  pierced  bis  heart  by  utter  and  open  treachery.    3.  The  malignity  of  his 


oa.  un.  1— 12.]     THE  BOOK  OF  THE  PROPHET  18AUH.  805 

enemks.  There  are  men  who  do  not  care  that  their  brethren  whose  confidence  they  have 
tried  to  win  are  cherishing  toward  them  the  bitterest  hatred ;  not  such  was  he  of  the 
tender  heart  and  loving  spirit,  4.  The  rejection  of  the  people.  He  wat  rejected  of 
men.  Several  men  and  women,  in  most  places  whither  he  went,  may  have  flocked  to 
hear  him ;  and  the  common  people  heard  him  gladly,  we  know.  But  be  had  to  acknow- 
ledge to  himself  that  his  principles  made  no  way,  that  his  truth  was  not  apprehended 
and  loved,  that  citizens  did  not  enrol  themselves  in  his  spiritual  kingdom.  6.  The 
near  presence  of  human  suffering  and  sorrow.  By  partaking  of  our  humanity  as  he  did, 
Jesus  came  into  the  closest  contact  with  the  pains,  the  privations,  the  deformities,  the 
diseases,  and  the  sorrows  of  mankind.  And  by  the  power  of  an  intense  and  living 
sympathy  he  made  these  his  own  (Matt.  viii.  17;  John  xi.  33,  35).  He  bore  them  on 
his  own  heart ;  they  weighed  upon  his  spirit  as  a  heavy  burden.  6.  A  deep  sense  of 
human  sin, culminating  in  a  sacrifice  for  it.  If  the  near  presence  of  sorrow  grieved  and 
troubled  him,  how  much  more  that  of  human  sin  in  all  its  forms !  With  our  lesser 
purity,  we  cannot  tell  how  painful  to  his  heart  was  the  sight  of  all  the  selfishness, 
hypocrisy,  greed,  worldliness,  malignity,  corruption  which  he  beheld,  most  of  it 
affecting  the  language  and  the  bearing  of  devotion.  Yet  with  all  these  sources  of 
sorrow,  there  were  not  wanting — 

II.  Si>BiNos  as  SACRED  JOY  IK  THK  HEABT  AKD  LIFE  OF  CUB  XjosD.  1.  Unbroken  com- 
munion  with  the  heavenly  Father.  2.  The  sincere  attachment  of  many  who,  though 
they  were  imperfect  disciples,  yet  trusted  and  loved  him  as  their  Teacher  and  Friend. 
3.  The  gratitude  of  many  whom  he  healed,  and  the  deeper  gratitude  of  many  whom  he 
saved.  4.  The  consciousness  of  faithful  fulfilment  of  his  great  mission,  6.  A  calm, 
profound  assurance  of  victory  through  death  and  shame  ^ohn  xii.  24,  32).  In  the 
heart  of  the  Man  of  sorrows  were  deep  springs  of  joy,  such  as  they  who  wounded  him 
and  triumphed  over  him  knew  not  of.  In  our  case,  as  in  his,  there  may  be  the  light 
of  a  blessed  peace  and  even  of  heavenly  joy  in  a  soul  that  moves  under  darkest  skies 
through  a  clouded  life. — C, 

Vers.  4,  6. — The  Divine  account  of  the  tufferingi  of  Ghritt.  In  these  words, 
which  remain  ever  fresh  and  sacred,  though  they  are  so  familiar  to  our  hearts,  we 
have — 

I.  A  SAD  AKD  BTBiKiNa  PiOTUBE.  It  Is  the  picture  of  the  Servant  of  the  Lord, 
wounded,  bruised,  chastened,  stricken.  We  cannot  fail  to  see  in  it  the  sufferings  of 
the  holy  Saviour.  We  see  him :  1.  Wounded  in  body ;  not  only  a-hungered  and  athirst, 
not  only  weary  with  long-continued  labours  and  without  the  promise  of  the  soft  pillow 
of  rest  when  the  day  was  done,  but  suffering,  beyond  this,  the  laying  on  him  the  hard, 
rough  hand  of  a  brutal  soldiery,  the  cruel  smiting  and  scourging,  the  piercing  of  hand 
and  foot  with  the  remorseless  nail,  the  pains  and  pangs  of  cruciSsion.  But  beyond 
this,  immeasurably  more  serious  and  more  severe  than  this,  we  see  him:  2.  Wounded 
in  spirit ;  bruised  in  soul  by  the  shortcoming,  the  inconstancy,  even  the  treachery  of 
his  own  friends,  by  the  superficiality  and  frailty  of  the  outer  band  of  his  disciples,  by 
the  intense  and  inappeasable  malignity  of  his  enemies,  by  the  sight  of  sickness  and 
sorrow,  by  the  pressure  and  burden  of  human  sin;  all  this  weight  of  evil  crushing  his 
holy  and  tender  spirit. 

n.  A  KATUEAL  BUT  A  FALSE  CONCLUSION.  "  We  did  esteem  him  stricken,  smitten 
of  God,  and  afflicted,"  i.e.  on  account  of  his  own  sins.  It  was  natural  that  men  should 
think  thus ;  there  are  facts  which  go  to  support  though  they  do  not  justify  it.  1.  It 
is  true  that  sin  and  suffering  are  very  closely  and  causally  connected.  All  sinners  are, 
as  such,  sufferers.  2.  It  is  true  that, as  a  rule^  great  sinners  are  great  sufferers.  It  was 
not  accidental  that  Antiochus  Epiphanes,  Herod  the  Great,  Philip  II.  of  Spain,  and 
other  men,  who,  like  them,  committed  enormities  of  wrong-doing,  endured  terrible  pains 
of  body  and  fearful  remorse  of  spirit.  But  it  does  not  follow  that  a  very  great  sufferer 
is  a  very  great  sinner.  For  it  is  also  true  (1)  that  some  of  the  purest  and  saintliest  of 
mankind  have  lieen  visited  with  severest  bodily  pains,  or  have  passed  through  raoet 
trying  troubles,  or  been  called  to  endure  heaviest  afSictions.  (%)  AaA  tb*t  the  great 
Teacher  warned  us  against  pushing  this  doctrine  to  a  perreruon  of  the  tauth  (Lake 
xiiL  3).  (3)  And  we  know  that  it  was  wholly  inapplicable  to  the  Lord  himself.  He 
who  suffered  more  than  auv  other  of  the  children  of  men  was  that  one  Son  of  man  who 
JSAIAK— n,  % 


dM  THE  BOOK  OF   THE   PROPHET  ISAlAH,     [oh.  trti.  1— 12. 

"did  oo  sin,  and  iu  whose  mouth  no  guile  was  fouad;"  he  was  the  innocent,  the  pure, 
the  just,  the  righteous  One. 

in.  The  Divine  account  of  it.  "  Surely  he  hath  borne  our  griefs,  and  carried  our 
sorrows  ...  he  was  wounded  for  our  transgressions,"  etc.  But  is  it  credible  or  is  it 
even  possible  that  the  innocent  One  would  or  could  suffer  for  us  the  guilty  ones?  Why 
not?  Being  such  a  One  as  he  is — the  pitiful,  compassionate,  magnanimous  One,  it  is 
exactly  what  we  might  expect  he  wouhi  do.  1.  Involuntarily,  we  are  continually 
bearing  one  another's  griefs.  One  sins  and  another  suffers,  beneath  every  gky  and  from 
generation  to  generation.  2.  Voluntarily  we  suffer  in  one  another's  stead.  The  father 
willingly  suffers  and  strives  that  his  son  may  not  endure  all  the  threatened  consequences 
of  his  guilty  folly ;  the  mother  eagerly  endures  greatest  privations  that  her  daughter 
may  be  spared  the  dishonour  which  is  her  due;  the  friend  gladly  shares,  halves  the 
trouble,  the  anxiety,  the  loss,  into  which  his  old  companion  has  fallen.  Just  as  men 
are  magnanimous  and  noble-minded,  so  do  they  carry  the  sorrows  of  their  felloVs,  si) 
are  they  willingly  wounded  and  bruised  for  the  transgressions  of  their  kindred  and 
their  friends.  And  if  we,  being  evil,  will  do  this,  how  much  more  our  Father  who  is  in 
heaven !  if  we,  whose  thoughts  and  ways  are  so  comparatively  low,  how  much  more  he 
whose  thoughts  and  whose  ways  are  as  much  higher  than  ours  as  the  heavens  are 
higher  than  the  earth  I  It  is  just  the  very  thing  we  should  look  for  from  the  heavenly 
Father. 

IV.  The  pbaotioal  conclusion.  That  we  should,  by  a  living  faith  in  the  Divine 
Redeemer,  avail  ourselves  of  the  work  he  wrought  when  he  suffereid  for  lis.  Otherwise 
we  shall  not  know  the  peace  and  rest  of  heart  which  he  came  to  secure  us. — 0. 

Ver.  6. — Departure  ar,d  distance  from,  Ood.  These  words,  though  very  pictorial  and 
poetical,  indicate  with  great  clearness  the  cardinal  truths  of  religion  and  even  of  Chris- 
tianity, and  they  express  for  us  the  thought  and  feeling  common  to  all  devout  spirits. 
We  see  in  them — 

I.  The  home  whence  we  have  defabted.  It  is  not  stated,  but  it  is  clearly 
implied,  that  the  fold  or  home  whence  we  have  gone  astray  is.  1.  That  of  God,  our 
Creator,  our  Father,  our  Divine  Friend ;  it  is  that  where  he  dwells,  where  he  rules,  where 
he  sheds  the  sunshine  of  his  presence  and  favour.  2.  It  is  that  of  righteousness ;  of 
gratitude,  of  love,  of  reverence,  of  obedience,  of  submission.  3.  It  is  that  ofpeaee ;  of 
spiritual  order,  rest,  joy. 

n.  The  different  paths  we  have  fubshed.  "We  have  turned  every  one  to  his 
own  way."  Siuful  error  takes  many  directions.  Sometimes  it  wanders  into  unbelief 
and  denial ;  sometimes  into  rehelliousness  of  spirit,  disdainfnl  rejection  of  Divine  claim ; 
at  other  times  into  a  sinful  indulgence,  in  one  or  other  of  its  various  forms ;  or  again 
into  a  guilty  negligence  and  unconcern,  or  a  criminal  procrastination  of  sacred  duty ; 
or  yet  again  into  a  hollow  and  worthless /orma^Mm,  which  has  the  show  of  piety  without 
the  substance  of  it.  But  in  these  various  paths  of  sin  there  is  one  thing  which  is  common 
to  all,  viz.  the  setting  up  of  the  human  will  against  the  will  of  God.  Every  one  of  us 
has  gone  his  own  way.  We  have  "  followed  the  devices  and  desires  of  our  own  hearts." 
We  have  determinately  set  our  own  inclination  against  the  will  of  God.  And  herein 
we  have — 

III.  The  guilt  which  we  have  all  incurred.  "  AU  we  .  .  .  have  gone  astray." 
Some  men  have  wandered  farther  away  from  Gk)d  than  others;  some  have  gone  in  an 
opijosite  direction  to  that  of  others ;  but  all  men  have  guiltily  preferred  their  own  way 
to  the  hame  and  the  fold  of  God.  All  have  forsaken  and  disregarded  and  grieved  him. 
And  thus  all  have  sinned ;  cHl,  without  exception ;  not  only  those  who  have  fallen  into 
gross  and  most  shameful  enormities,  but  they  also  who  have  kept  to  the  proprieties  of 
outward  behaviour,  and  have  observed  the  decencies  and  requirements  oif  the  religious 
life ; — all  have  withheld  from  God  what  is  his  due,  and  reserved  to  themselves  what  was 
not  theirs  to  keep. 

IV,  The  pbovision  God  has  made  for  our  betubn.  "The  Lord  hath  Iwd  on 
hun  the  iniquity  of  us  all."  This  does  not  signify  that  Jesus  Christ  bore  the  penalty 
due  to  all  human  sin — a  part  of  that  penalty  it  was  absolutely  impossible  that  the 
Innocent  One  should  bear.  It  means  that  the  redemptive  work  he  wrought,  and 
?rrougbt  by  his  submission  to  sorrow  and  death,  avails  for  every  child  of  man  who 


•B.  Liii.  1—12.]     THE  BOOK  OP  THE  PROPHET  ISAIAH.  807 

will  accept  it ;  it  means  that  in  Christ  is  forgiveness  of  sin,  acceptance  with  Qod, 
entrance  into  life  eternal  to  ereiy  one  who  numbly  but  heartily  receives  him  as 
Saviour  and  Lord. — 0. 

Ver.  7.— 2%«  aubmissive  spirit.  Those  who  have  a  high  appreciation  of  the  more  minute 
scriptural  correspondences  will  naturally  find  a  reference  here  to  the  fact  recorded  in 
Matt,  xxvii.  14.  But  we  prefer  to  dwell  on  the  submissiveness  rather  than  the  silence 
of  our  Lord,  on  the  inward  spirit  rather  than  the  outward  incident. 

I.  The  submissiveness  of  odr  Saviour's  spieit.  The  unspoken  word  of  repining  or 
reproach  was  of  real  value,  because,  in  him,  it  indicated  the  unquestioning  spirit,  the  unre- 
sentful  heart.  1.  The  ^rit  of  acquiescence.  There  is  a  silent,  sullen  acceptance  of  fate 
which  is  removed  from  the  spirit  of  obedient  acquiescence  as  far  as  evil  is  distant  from 
good.  Our  Lord's  was  the  obedient  spirit,  that  which  cheerfully  and  heartily  consented 
to  the  ordination  of  God.  With  willing  hand  he  raised  the  bitter  draught  to  his  lips, 
and  in  the  spirit  of  filial  readiness  he  uttered  those  strengthening  words, "  The  cup  which 
my  Father  has  given  me,  shall  I  not  drink  it?"  And  in  his  attitude  toward  man  there 
was  not  only  the  unresisting  hand,  but  also :  2.  The  itnresentful  heart.  He  did  indeed 
declaim  against  the  conduct  of  the  scribes  and  Pharisees  in  uncompromising  language 
(Matt,  zxiii.),  but  we  detect  no  note  of  personal  vindictiveness ;  he  is  affected  and 
inspired  throughout  by  pure  indignation.  When  he  is  illegally  and  shamefully  smitten 
there  is  no  touch  of  unholy  resentment  in  his  reply, "  If  I  have  spoken  evil,  bear  witness 
of  the  evil;  but  if  well,  why  smitest  thou  me?"  (John  xviii.  23),  And  who,  in  this 
connection,  can  fail  to  remember  the  magnanimous  prayer,  breathed  in  the  midst  of  the 
most  excruciating  pain,  "  Father,  forgive  them ;  for  they  know  not  what  they  do  "  ? 

II.  Thb  submission  which  Chbisi  asks  of  us.  He  demands  of  us:  1.  Absolute 
trust  in  the  wisdom  and  goodness  of  Gtod :  not  only  the  thankful  acceptance  of  what  is 
pleasant  and  prosperous,  and  the  unhesitating  acceptance  of  what  is  mysterious  and 
insoluble  by  our  human  understanding,  but  also  the  willing  acceptance  of  what  is 
painful,  grievous,  distressing  to  the  heart — the  cherishing  in  our  soul  of  an  absolute 
assurance  that,  however  dark  and  troublous  be  the  hour  that  is  passing  over  us,  Gh>d  is 
leading  us  by  the  right  way  to  the  heavenly  city.  2.  A  magnanimous  attitude  toward 
our  fellow-men.  (1)  The  absence  of  a  vindictive  spirit,  and  of  resentful  action  :  "  Love 
your  enemies ; "  "  Eesist  not  evil,"  etc.  Proceedings  taken  against  a  violation  of  human 
law  in  the  spirit  of  justice  are  not  inconsistent  with  the  unrevengeful  spirit  of  Christ. 
(2)  The  exercise  of  the  broadest  charity ;  in  our  judgment  of  men,  giving  credit  for  the 
pure  rather  than  the  impure,  the  worthy  rather  than  the  unworthy,  the  public  rather 
than  the  personal  motive.  (3)  The  practice  of  peacemaking;  interpo^ug  on  all  occa- 
sions that  offer  in  the  interest  of  peace.  (4)  The  readiness  to  forgive.  "  So  likewise 
shall  my  heavenly  Father  do  also  unto  you,  if  ye  from  your  }iearte  forgive  not  every 
one  his  brother  their  trespasses  "  (Matt,  xviii.  35).— G. 

Vers.  8 — 10. — 2%«  shortness  but  sufficiency  of  human  life,  "Who  shall  declare  his 
generation  ?  for  he  was  cut  off  out  of  the  land  of  the  living."  "  He  shall  see  his  seed, 
he  ihall  prolong  his  days."  Here  is  a  paradox  in  connection  with  our  Master  which 
finds  a  close  correspondence  in  another  connected  with  ourselves. 

L  The  bbbvitt  and  pbbpetuitt  of  oub  Lord's  caeebb.  It  was  indeed  true,  as 
the  prophet  foresaw,  that  "  he  was  cut  off,"  etc. ;  his  days  were  few ;  his  ministry  was 
brief — counted  by  months  rather  than  byyears.  There  did  not  seem  to  be  time  enough 
in  that  short  span,  in  a  course  so  quickly  run  and  so  suddenly  concluded,  to  accomplish 
anything  great  and  far-reaching.  But  how  wide  has  his  influence  proved  1  how  long  has  - 
his  Name  been  known  and  his  power  been  felt  I  How  has  he  "  prolonged  his  days  "  in 
the  institutions  he  has  founded  which  are  existing  now,  in  the  truth  he  announced 
which  i»  triumphing  to-day  over  all  other  theories,  in  the  spirit  he  communicated  which 
is  breathing  still  in  the  laws,  the  literature,  the  habits,  the  language  of  mankind  I  Who 
shall  declare  his  generation  ?  Does  he  not  "  see  his  seed  "  in  the  countless  children  of 
his  grace  who  flock  to  his  standard,  who  bless  his  Name,  who  call  him  Lord  and  Saviour 
and  Friend  I  He  who  was  so  soon  cut  off  from  the  land  of  the  living  is  proving 
himself  to  be  the  One  who  hath  immortality  as  no  other  son  of  man  hashad  or  ever 
vill  have. 


308  THE  BOOK  OF  THE  PBOPHBT  ISAIAH,     [oh.  un.  1—12, 

II.  The  seobtness  but  the  BUFnciENOT  or  oub  mobtal  ufk.  L  Our  life  below 
is  very  Irief.  Scripture  abundaatly  asserts  it;  observation  is  continually  confirming 
it ;  experience  is  painfully  proving  it.  It  is  not  only  brief,  so  far  as  the  actual  number 
of  our  years  is  concerned  when  compared  with  some  animal  life  or  with  angelic  existence, 
or  when  contrasted  with  God's  eternity ;  but  it  is  brief  so  far  as  our  own  consciousnesi 
is  concerned.  Its  conclusion  seems  to  come  with  great  rapidity  and  unexpectedness. 
In  the  curiosity  of  childhood,  the  eagerness  of  youth,  the  ambition  and  activity  of  early 
manhood,  the  cares  and  anxieties  of  prime  and  of  declining  days,  our  life  hurries  on 
and  passes  away,  and,  before  we  are  looking  for  it,  there  comes  the  last  summons  and 
the  day  of  departure.  2.  But,  short  as  it  is,  it  is  sufficient.  It  is  long  enough  for  na 
to  store  our  minds  with  heavenly  wisdom ;  to  become  reconciled  to  Qod  and  to  take 
our  stand  with  the  wise  and  holy ;  to  grow  into  the  likeness  of  our  Divine  Exemplar  ; 
to  bear  witness  to  the  truth  of  Christ ;  to  exert  an  influence  which  will  never  die.  Our 
truest  and  best  "  seed  "  are  not  found  in  the  children  and  grandchildren  who  are  born 
to  us,  but  in  the  spiritual  results  we  have  accomplished.  We  die  and  disappear,  and  the 
stone  on  which  our  name  is  carved  is  overthrown,  and  no  man  will  speak  of  us  again ; 
but  we,  too,  "  shall  prolong  our  days  "  in  the  holy  and  beautiful  characters  men  will  be 
forming  and  the  useful  lives  they  will  be  living,  because  of  the  witness  we  are  bearing 
here  and  the  work  we  are  doing  now.— 0. 

Ver.  12. — The  false  accusation.  "He  was  numbered  witt  the  transgressora."  The 
fact  that  he  who  was  the  Author  of  all  law  and  the  Judge  of  all  moral  agents  was  him- 
self classed  with  transgressors  is  most  suggestive ;  it  calls  our  attention  to  the  truth — 

I.  That  a  EiGHTEons  man,  though  he  is  righteous,  hat  be  oHABaED  with  wbomo. 
If  Jesus  Christ,  the  Righteous  One,  was  accused  of  sin,  how  much  more  may  we,  who 
are  only  comparatively  and  imperfectly  righteous,  be  so  charged  I 

II.  That  a  bighteoub  man  may,  in  virtue  of  his  righteousness,  be  accused  or 
WBONQ.  Jesus  Christ  was  charged  with  blasphemy  because  be  said  what  he  said  and 
acted  as  he  did  in  pursuance  of  his  great  and  beneficent  mission ;  he  was  accused  of 
fellowship  with  sin  because  he  was  bent  on  carrying  bis  gospel  of  grace  to  the  very 
worst  of  mankind  (Luke  xv.  2).  In  the  same  way,  a  good  man  may  lay  himself  open 
to  the  charge  of  transgression  in  virtue  of  his  very  excellency ;  a  devout  man,  because 
of  his  devotion,  to  the  charge  of  pietism  or  hypocrisy ;  a  zealous  man,  because  of  his 
ardour,  to  the  charge  of  fanaticism ;  a  courageous  man,  to  the  charge  of  rashness ;  • 
trustful  man,  to  the  accusation  of  presumption,  etc. 

in.  That  the  falsely  accused  have  thbee  obeat  comsolationb.  1.  The  approvkl 
of  their  own  conscience.  2.  The  knowledge  that  they  take  rank  with  their  great  Leader, 
who  was  himself  numbered  with  the  transgressors,  and  with  all  the  best  of  the  good  in 
every  age  and  land  (Matt.  v.  11,  12).  3.  The  assurance  that  they  have  the  commenda- 
tion and  the  sympathy  of  their  Divine  Lord.  Enemies  may  accuse  us ;  brethren  may 
fail  us;  notwithstanding,  "the  Lord  stands  with  us,  and  strengthens  us"  (2  Tim.  iy. 
16. 17).-C. 

Yer.  1.— Strange  reception  of  Divine  messages.  Cheyne  translates,  "Who  believed 
that  which  we  heard?  and  the  arm  of  Jehovah,  imto  whom  did  it  become  manifest f" 
Immediate  reference  is  to  the  attitude  of  the  people  towards  Isaiah's  assurances  of  God's 
restoring  mercies,  and  towards  his  call  to  prepare  themselves  for  returning  to  their  own 
land.  Further  and  fuller  leference  is  to  the  failure  of  Messiah  to  win  the  general 
acceptance  of  the  people,  to  whom  he  brought  the  glad  tidings  of  God's  "  so  great  love." 
Divine  messages  are  never  widely  welcomed.  Only  the/eware  ever  found  open-heuted, 
willing  to  heed  when  he  is  pleased  to  speak.  Effort  may  be  made  to  recognize  the 
reasons  for  so  strange  a  fact.  They  lie  in  men's  moral  dispositions,  and  hindering 
circumstances  or  prejudices.  The  mention  of  two  or  three  hindrances  may  suggest  a 
complete  analysis  of  men's  motives. 

L  Some  hen  abe  bceftioai..  Their  sphere  is  the  strictly  natural,  and  they  find 
instant  objection  to  every  claim  belonging  to  the  supernatural.  They  are  born  doubters, 
«nd  too  often  foster  and  culture  their  infirmity,  as  if  it  were  a  dignity  or  a  gift.  The 
specU  mistake  such  men  make  is  to  demand  too  much  evidence — evidence  of  unsuitable 
charaeter,  and  evidence  such  as  they  may  be  pleased  to  tkink  would  satisfy  them.  They 


8H.  uii.  1— 12.]     THE  BOOK  OP  THE  PROPHET  ISAIAH.  809 


want  natural  evidence  for  supernatural  truths  or  facts,  and  wonder  that  no  sign  can  be 
given  them,  and  fancy  themselves  justified  in  refusing  to  believe.  There  is  one  very 
easy  thing,  that  even  a  child  can  accomplish ;  it  is  this — -find  excuses  when  we  do  not 
want  to  obey. 

II.  Some  men  abb  uastkbftjIi.  They  like  to  have  life  in  their  own  control,  and 
cannot  do  with  God's  interfering  by  messages  and  commandments.  Such  men  are 
sure  to  resist  Grod's  messengers  and  ministers.  The  response  to  pastors,  who  point  out 
to  such  men  the  will  of  God  concerning  their  daily  life,  is  still  what  it  has  ever  been — 
"  Talk  on  your  abstract  things,  but  leave  my  life  alone."  God's  messages  always,  in 
one  form  or  another,  humble  the  pride  of^elf:  and  this  few  men  can  bear,  so  they 
resist  the  messenger. 

III.  Some  mem  abe  eastfui..  God  calls  to  some  doing,  some  duty.  It  may  be 
putting  away  sin ;  it  may  be  rendering  some  witness  ;  it  may  be  going  the  long  journey 
back  to  Jerusalem,  and  helping  to  build  the  old  wastes  and  raise  the  former  desolations. 
And  men  prefer  the  comforts  of  Babylon,  even  if  they  are  in  slavery  and  know  the 
defiling  contacts  of  idolatry.  Only  meek,  open,  willing,  and  obedient  souls  "  believe 
that  which  they  hear,  and  see  the  arm  of  the  Lord  made  manifest  to  them."  The  best 
things  are  ever  kept  for  meek  aouls. — B.  T, 

Yer.  Z.— Man's  disposition  to  refect  his  best  blessings.  Philip  the  evangelist,  from 
this,  and  the  connected  passage,  preached  unto  the  eunuch  Jesua.  This  is  sufficient 
reason  for  our  associating  it  with  Messiah.  The  chapter  concerns  the  human  life,  the 
sorrowful  experience,  the  shameful  death,  and  the  eternal  triumph  of  the  Son  of  God. 
The  story  of  the  Christ  can  be  gathered  up  and  expressed  in  a  sentence, "  He  is  despised 
and  rejected  of  men ;  a  Man  of  sorrows,  and  acquainted  with  grief."  The  personification 
of  heathen  pride  and  fear,  Herod  sought  to  slay  him  as  a  babe.  Bepresentatives  of 
tbe  wealth  and  learning  and  religion  of  their  age,  scribes  and  Sadducees  and  Pharisees 
rejected  him,  that  they  might  cleave  to  their  traditions.  The  common  people,  moved 
sometiiues  by  the  goodness  of  his  words  and  the  graciousness  of  his  deeds,  heard  him 
gladly,  cast  their  garments  in  his  way,  and  waved  palm  branches  with  hosannahs ;  but 
at  another  time  they  hurried  him  away  to  cast  him  headlong  from  an  overhanging  cliff, 
and  shouted,  "  Crucify  him ! "  Even  the  few  who  seemed  to  see  his  glory,  on  whom  some 
beams  of  his  Divine  splendour  rested,  even  they  forsook  him  in  the  hour  of  his  need, 
and  fled,  or  sold  tiim  for  luere  silver,  or  denied  him  with  oaths  and  curses.  He  passed 
on  to  Calvary  amid  rabble-shouts,  "  His  blood  be  on  us  and  on  our  children  I "  and 
there  he  hung,  despised  in  the  shame  of  the  cross ;  despised  as  they  passed  him  by, 
wagging  their  heads.  Bejected  as  they  cried,  "  We  have  no  king  but  Caesar!"  and  chose 
instead  of  him  a  murderer  and  thief.  Now,  the  world  has  never  known  anything  so 
passing  strange  as  that  despising  and  rejecting  of  God's  greatest  and  best  gift  to  men. 
To  realize  the  strangeness  of  this  fact,  consider — 

I.  The  Pebsom  and  the  obedentials  of  the  Bejeoted  One.  The  world  has  had 
many  impostors,  men  with  a  genius  for  making  claims  which  there  were  no  facts  to 
support.  In  the  spheres  of  medicine,  education,  politics,  and  religion,  there  have  been 
many  who  were  found  out  at  last,  and  rejected  of  men  as  untrue  and  unworthy.  No 
man  ever  claimed  such  a  position  and  such  rights  as  Jesus  did;  but  no  man  ever  gave 
such  abundant  and  satisfactory  proof  of  his  claims.  He  was  a  Divine  Messenger,  the 
appointed  Agent  for  securing  the  reconciliation  of  man  with  God ;  he  was  even  God 
himself,  manifest  in  the  flesh.  But  these  claims  were  duly  supported.  Christ  came 
at  a  time  and  in  a  manner  which  fitted  precisely  into  the  fore-given  prophecies,  which 
the  people  believed.  There  was  perfect  accordance  between  the  claims  he  made  and 
the  life  he  lived,  the  spirit  he  manifested  and  the  work  he  did.  His  character  was  so 
attractive  as  to  win  respect,  yet  so  perfect  as  to  excite  wonder.  He  had  the  power  over 
nattire  in  its  various  moods,  over  disease  in  its  various  forms,  and  over  death  in  its 
various  stages,  which  can  be  associated  only  with  the  Divine  Being.  And  yet  he  is 
"  despised  and  rejected  of  men."  Divine,  with  Divine  blessings  to  bestow ;  putting 
forth  Divine  power,  doing  a  Divine  work,  and  bringing  down  to  men  the  Divine  glory ; 
yet,  nevertheless,  despised  and  rejected.  Those  times  have  passed  away,  but  the 
credentials  of  Christ  have  only  multiplied  with  the  advancing  ages.  The  moral  miracles 
of  conversion  are  tar  stronger  proofs  of  Divine  power  than  any  physioal  miiacles  cm 


310  THE  BOOK  OP  THE  PROPHET  ISAIAH,     [oh.  wn.  1—12. 

be ;  and  yet  it  is  still  true  of  many,  "  He  is  despised  and  rejected ; "  "  They  hide  their 
faces  from  him." 

II.  The  fitness  of  Chbibt  to  ueet  the  deepest  human  needs.  The  needs  of  man 
as  man ;  and  the  needs  of  man  as  fallen,  sioful  man.  There  are  two  things  we  can  think 
of  as  left  in  our  nature,  relics  of  the  old  Eden-glory— the  wish  to  know  God,  and  the 
desire  to  find  what  is  good.  Wherever  there  is  the  conception  of  Qod  there  is  the 
inquiry,  "  Who  is  he  ?  What  is  he  ?  Where  is  he  ?  "  The  gods  many  of  heathen  huids 
are  attempted  answers  to  man's  cry  after  God.  Christ  met  this  want,  and  he  alone  has 
met  it.  In  his  Person  he  brings  God  down  to  the  sphere  of  our  human  scenes,  human 
thoughts,  human  language.  He  offers  his  earth-life  to  men  and  says  to  them,  "  Behold 
your  God ! "  You  see  men  pursuing  all  kinds  of  ends ;  they  are  seeking  the  supply  of 
the  great  want  of  their  nature,  they  are  trying  to  find  what  is  good.  But  the  pure,  the 
true,  the  self-denying,  was  never  so  set  before  men  as  in  the  earthly  life  of  the  Lord 
Jesus.  Yirtue  then  clothed  herself  in  human  garb.  It  is  only  half  a  truth  to  say, "  He 
did  no  sin,  neither  was  guile  found  in  his  mouth,"  for  he  was  the  positive  embodiment 
of  all  truth  and  grace  and  goodness.  And,  further  than  this,  Christ  also  met  the  con- 
ditions and  needs  of  man  as  fallen  and  sinful.  The  "  Fall "  has  left  on  man  a  sense  of 
separation  from  God.  We  have  not,  now,  a  consciousness  of  near  relations  and  happy 
fellowship  with  God  ;  Christ  came  to  restore  it  to  us,  by  taking  away  the  hindrances 
outside  us  and  in  us.  When  Jesus  came  to  our  world,  the  needs  of  fallen  sinful  man 
were  being  felt  more  pressingly  than  ever  before ;  the  world  was  anxiously  looking  for 
a  Revealer  and  Redeemer.  Jew  and  Gentile  united  in  the  ont-looking :  Jews  from  the 
helplessness  of  a  ceremonial  out  uf  which  the  li  fe  and  meaning  had  gone ;  Gentiles  from 
the  dissatisfaction  of  multiplying  senseless  idols.  And  yet,  though  Christ  brought  the 
supply  of  the  deepest  need  men  knew,  the  foot  remains,  "he  was  despised  and  rejected 
of  men."  Humanity  is  usually  keen  in  its  endeavour  to  secure  its  own  interests,  but 
here  it  strangely,  sadly  fails.  It  it  be  asked  wihy  it  fails  here,  we  can  only  say,  because 
Christ  brings  the  humbling  conviction  of  sin,  and  the  pride  of  men  resists.  We  are  all 
willing  to  have  our  needs  met  and  supplied ;  but  we  resist  the  idea  that,  as  guilty,  help- 
less sinners  before  God,  we  must  ask  for  mercy,  free,  sovereign  mercy. — B.  T. 

Vers.  4,  5. — Man^s  thoughtt  of  OoePt  Sufferer,  The  prophet  sets  before  as  an  unusual 
Sufferer,  and  bids  us  think  what  can  be  the  explanation  of  such  sufferings.  1.  It  might 
be  punishment  for  sin ;  as  was  David's  bitter  trial  in  the  matter  of  Absalom,  2.  It 
might  be  discipline  of  character ;  as  was  the  suffering  of  Job.  Neither  of  these  will 
suffice  for  the  case  that  Isaiah  presents.  3.  It  might  be  vicarious,  a  burden-bearing  for 
others.  This  only  will  8u£5ce  to  explain  the  unusual  woes  of  Messiah.  Treating  the 
subject  more  fully,  we  note— 

I.  Man's  explanations  of  the  mtbtebt  of  Ghbist^s  suffebinos.  "  We  did  esteem 
him  stricken,  smitten  of  God,  and  afSicted."  1.  Take  the  case  of  a  man  who  wm  told 
of  our  Lord's  Sufferings  and  death,  but  had  no  knowledge  of  his  personal  innocence. 
Such  a  man  would  know  that  God  has  established  a  direct  connection  between  sin  and 
suffering.  Suffering  is  the  universal  and  necessary  consequence  of  sin.  The  association 
is  plain  in  regard  to  our  bodily  nature.  Disregard  of  the  roles  of  health,  exposure  to 
changing  seasons,  or  indulgence  in  unwholesome  food,  are  certainly  followed  by  bodily 
suffering  and  peril.  Adam  sinned,  and  at  once  suffering  came,  in  the  upwelling  of 
passion,  the  hiding  of  God's  favour,  and  the  loss  of  Eden.  Cain  sinned,  and  suffering 
came,  as  remorse  and  disgrace.  David  sinned,  and  his  "  bones  waxed  old  through  his 
roaring."  Such  a  man,  then,  would  have  good  grounds  for  suspecting  sin  wherever  he 
found  suffering,  and  for  arguing  that  there  must  be  unusual  sin  if  there  is  unusual 
suffering.  Job's  friends  argned  thus;  and,  so  far  as  surface-truth  is  concerned,  they 
argued  fairly  enough.  We  cannot  wonder  if  the  man  should  say  that  Christ's  sufferings 
must  be  explained  on  the  ground  that  Christ  has  sinned,  and  is  bearing  the  natural  and 
necessary  consequences  of  his  transgressions.  To  the  casual  observer  there  was  nothing 
so  extraordinary  about  Christ's  sufferiugs  as  to  make  his  an  exceptional  case,  requiring 
an  exceptional  explanation.  He  was  condemned  after  trial  by  Pilate;  he  was  only 
treated  in  accordance  with  the  custom  of  the  age ;  he  made  high  pretensions,  he  called 
himself  "  King  of  the  Jews,"  and  so,  when  he  was  condemned,  the  Boman  soldiers 
taunted  him,  and  Jewish  fanatics  insulted  him.    And  such  a  man  would  hare  •  further 


OK.  uu.  1—12.]    THE  BOOK  OP  THE  PROPHET  ISAIAH.  «11 

right  to  say  that  God's  hand  of  Judgment  was  in  his  sufferings.  Human  laws,  if  they 
are  to  gain  the  respect  of  men,  must  be  regarded  as  applications  and  adaptations  of  God's 
law.  When  a  man  is  convicted  and  punished  by  human  law,  we  ought  to  feel  that  he 
is  pnnished  by  Ood.  Then,  as  Christ  was  delivered  up  to  death  by  Pilate,  the  adminis- 
trator of  law,  a  man  may  fairly  infer  that  Christ  was  "  smitten  of  Qod."  Thus  Jewish 
bigots  seem  to  have  thought  of  the  Nazarene  malefactor.  As  they  looked  oo  that 
crucified  group,  why  should  they  think  differently  of  the  ceutral  Sufferer?  Why  may 
they  not  say  of  all  the  three  what  the  one  robber  said  to  the  other,  "  We  indeed  suffer 
the  due  reward  of  our  deeds  "  ?  2.  -Take  the  case  of  a  man  who  has  some  knowledge 
of  Christ's  life,  and  some  impression  of  bis  personal  innocence.  Such  a  man  would 
regard  Christ  as  strangely  "afflicted;"  his  sufferings  were  calamities.  The  more  he 
knew  of  the  "  blessed  life  "  Jesus  had  lived,  the  more  would  he  feel  that  such  an  early 
and  such  a  humiliating  death  was  inconceivably  Siid — something  to  be  mourned  over, 
as  was  that  death  of  Ulric  Zwingle,  when  in  the  fulness  of  his  power  and  influence. 
Calamity,  that  is,  suffering  of  which  the  sufferer's  sin  is  not  the  immediate  cause,  is  no 
uncommon  thing  in  this  world.  The  tower  of  Siloam  fell,  and  buried  beneath  its  ruins 
some  of  the  people ;  but  our  Lord  reminds  us  that  those  who  perished  were  not  sinners 
above  all  that  dwelt  at  Jerusalem.  The  fall  was,  to  them,  a  "  visitation  of  God."  In 
this  way  the  man  might  fairly  luok  upon  the  innocent  Jesus,  and  say  he  fell  a  victim 
to  the  cruelty  of  his  enemies.  He  attacked  national  vices,  he  aroused  national  hatred ; 
he,  like  Socrates,  fell  through  the  wicked  schemes  of  vile  men.  If  the  man  knew  that 
he  was  the  Son  of  God,  co-equal  with  the  Father,  then  that  life  of  humiliation  and  death 
of  shame  must  take  place  among  the  mysteries  that  baffle  human  intelligence.  It  is 
the  mystery  which  has  been  hid  from  ages  and  firom  generations — a  mystery  which 
God  must  unfold,  or  it  never  can  be  unfolded. 

II.  God's  explanation  of  the  suffebinos  of  Chbist.  1.  God  maintains  man's 
view  that  the  sufferings  were  Ms  appointment.  The  special  connection  between  Christ 
and  God,  in  the  work  of  human  redemption,  may  be  argued  on  these  lines.  (1)  Christ 
claimed  to  be  a  commissioned  Agent  (.John  iv.  34 ;  vi.  38 ;  viii.  42).  (2)  God  himself 
bore  witness  to  Christ  as  his  Son  and  Messenger,  expressing  his  relation  to  and  interest 
in  the  work  which  Christ  came  to  do  (see  testimonies  at  our  Lord's  baptism  and 
transfiguration).  (3)  The  witness  of  both  the  previous  and  the  subsequent  revelation 
is  in  favour  of  the  connection  (see  Ps.  xl.  7 ;  1  John  iv.  14).  2.  The  sufferings  of 
Christ  bore  no  relation  to  his  own  personal  guilt  (see  2  Cor.  v.  21 ;  1  Pet.  ii.  22 ;  1 
John  iii.  6).  3.  God  distinctly  affirms  that  Christ  suffered  as  a  Substitute,  in  place  of 
guilty  men,  and  that  on  him  the  burden  and  penalty  of  our  transgressions  rested.  This 
is  God's  answer  to  the  supremely  important  question,  "  How  can  man  be  just  with 
God?"  (see  Eom.  iv.  25;  1  Pet.  iii.  18;  Heb.  ix.  28).— B.  T. 

Ver.  6. — Where  shall  iniquity  he  laid  f  Some  chapters  and  verses  of  the  Bible  are 
so  sacred  to  us  that  we  almost  fear  to  open  and  examine  them ;  and  yet  those  are  the 
very  portions  that  best  reward  a  loving  and  reverent  examination.  This  chapter  is  the 
gem  of  Isaiah's  writings.  This  verse  is  the  conclusion  to  which  the  prophet  comes,  as  he 
here  views  the  long  sad  story  of  the  Saviour's  sufferings.  "  The  Lord  hath  laid  on  him 
the  iniquity  of  us  all."    We  consider — 

I.  Man's  iniquity.  The  word  means  "  unequalness ; "  man  is  never  quite  the  same, 
never  quite  steady,  he  does  not  keep  the  straight  line,  and  this  indicates  a  wrong  state 
of  mind  and  heart.  Man's  iniquity  is :  (1)  Affirmed  in  Scripture.  "  All  flesh  has  cor- 
rupted his  way;"  "Who  can  say,  I  have  made  my  heart  clean?"  (see  Rom.  iii.).  (2) 
Universally  acknowledged,  both  by  individuals  and  nations  in  moments  of  alarm  (see 
Nineveh,  when  alarmed  by  the  preaching  of  Jonah).  St.  Paul,  in  Bom.  i.,  apart  from 
the  special  Divine  revelation,  convicts  men  of  iniquity  in  view  of  the  great,  unirersa], 
natural  laws  of  their  own  being  and  of  human  society.  Personally,  we  are  not  prepared 
to  deny  this  fact  of  human  iniquity ;  though,  to  so  many  of  us,  it  is  only  an  intellectual 
conception  without  any  moral  power  in  it.  We  resort  to  various  devices  in  order  to 
keep  off  personal  applications  and  convictions.  (1)  We  charge  the  evil  on  the  race. 
(2)  We  try  to  think  of  it  as  a  mere  disease  or  calamity.  (3)  We  procrastinate  over 
the  consideration  of  it.  It  would  be  altogether  wiser  to  face  it,  and  try  to  realise  it 
and  deal  with  it.    (1)  Observe  that  suggestive  figure  of  the  text,  "  sheep  gone  astray," 


iia  THE  BOOK  OP  THE  PROPHET  ISAIAH,     [oh.  lol  1— 12. 

It  brings  to  mind  ignorance,  wilfulness,  helplessness,  foolishness,  as  characteristics  of 
the  unrenewed  man.  (2)  Estimate  the  aggravations  of  human  iniquity.  If  God  were 
severe  or  unreasonable,  bravery  might  half  excuse  rebellion ;  but  our  Q-od  is  righteous- 
ness and  love.  (3)  Sin  finds  such  manifold  and  dreadful  forms  in  which  to  express 
itself  (see  list  in  Gal.  v.  19 — 24).  (4)  Human  iniquity  has  one  dreadful  root.  It  is 
wilful  self-love  and  self-pleasing.  "  God  is  not  in  all  their  thoughts ; "  "  Turned  to 
his  own  way ; "  "  The  God  in  whom  thy  breath  is  .  .  .  thou  hast  not  glorified."  Face, 
then,  the  fact  of  your  own  iniquity  before  God.  Be  true  to  yourself  about  it.  Ask— On 
whom  can  it  be  laid  ? 

II.  Man  beabinq  his  own  iniquity.  For  a  man  may  seriously  and  thoughtfully 
say — ^Why  cannot  I  bear  my  own  iniquities,  the  burden  of  their  penalty,  and  the  work 
of  securing  deliverance  from  their  power?  Fairly  consider,  then,  such  things  as  these. 
1.  Iniquity  grows,  involving  ever-increasing  physical  and  spiritual  penalties.  2. 
Iniquity  sets  going  a  train  of  evils  by  which  even  your  best  treasures  may  be  con- 
sumed. Do  what  you  will,  can  you  stop  them?  3.  Iniquity,  in  its  effects,  is  now 
seen  only  in  part,  and  day  by  day  ;  in  the  eternity  we  shall  have  to  see  it  at  once,  and 
as  a  whole.  Illustrate  by  the  vision  of  a  life  of  sin  that  comes  to  the  drowning.  Unlesf 
utterly  blinded  by  pride  and  self^worship,  no  man  would  ever  dare  to  say,  "I  can  bear 
my  own  burdens."  "  Though  thou  wash  thee  with  nitre,  and  take  thee  much  sope,  yet 
is  thine  iniquity  marked  before  me,  saith  the  Lord." 

III.  God  beabiko  man's  iniqititt  fob  eiu.  The  person  who  bore  was  Ood's  Christ, 
and  so  it  was  really  God  bearing.  This  expression  should  be  viewed  in  the  light  of  the 
figure  used  in  the  text — ^the  figure  of  the  shepherd  laying  on  the  nnder-shepherd  the 
duty  of  fetching  the  wandering  sheep  back,  and  setting  it,  free  of  evil,  self-willed  pro- 
pensities, in  the  fold  again.  That  work  was  the  "  burden  "  which  he  was  called  to 
bear.  So  God  laid  on  Christ  the  work  of  delivering  men  from  their  iniquity,  from  its 
consequences,  and  from  itself.  "  Himself  bare  our  sickneises,  and  carried  our  sorrows." 
He  took  on  him  man's  deliverance  from  sin,  and  spent  his  time  in  illustrative  healings 
of  men's  bodily  infirmities,  and  gave  his  life  in  the  endeavour  to  save  men  from  their 
sins.  Illustrate  by  showing  how  the  burden  of  the  slave-woe  was  laid  on  Wilberforce ; 
and  that  of  the  prison-woe  was  laid  on  Howard  and  Fry.  Any  man  who  is  actively 
concerned  for  a  degraded  class  really  bears  their  sins.  In  giying  Christ,  Qod  proposed 
the  saving  of  men  from  their  sins,  and  therefore  his  Son  was  named  the  significant  name 
of  Jesus.  God  laid  the  sin  on  Christ,  as  if  he  had  said,  "  I  charge  you  now  with  this 
supremely  difiicult,  but  most  blessed  work,  of  saving,  everlastingly  saving,  sinful,  wilful, 
ruined  men."  Plead,  in  conclusion,  with  each  one  thus :  Do  you  feel  yeur  iniquity  ?  Is 
it  your  bm'den?  Are  you  asking — ^What  can  be  done  with  it?  where  can  it  be  laid? 
Then  see,  the  living  Christ  is  charged  of  God  with  that  very  burden ;  it  has  been  laid 
upon  him :  it  is  laid  upon  him ;  be  can  be  the  living,  deliTering,  saving  Friend  eren  to 
you.— K.  T. 

Y^r.  7, — Jlu  triumph  «frihnet.  "Opened  not  his  month."  A  careful  study  of  the 
fivefold  examinations  of  our  Lord,  before  Annas,  before  the  Sanhedrin,  before  Filate, 
before  Herod,  and  before  Pilate  again,  will  bring  very  impressively  to  view  the  remark- 
able sUenees  of  our  Lord.  Sometimes  he  spoke,  never  more  than  brief  sentences.  But 
sometimes  no  word  could  be  drawn  from  him,  and  the  silence  was  either  convincing  or 
aggravating.  It  was,  however,  always  the  sign  that  our  Lord  had  supreme  command 
of  himself,  never  for  one  brief  moment,  amid  all  those  terrible  scenes,  losing  his  self- 
control.     We  notice  two  things. 

I.  When  a  man's  wobk  is  to  endube,  thebe  is  no  nseb  fob  svekch.  The  enduring 
is  the  speech  ;  and  it  can  seldom  be  helped  by  any  spoken  words.  Suffering  for  Qod 
has  its  own  voice,  and  does  not  want  any  utterance  by  the  lips.  lUustrsta  from 
sufferers  in  our  spheres  who  "  possess  their  souls  in  patience."  "  They  also  serve  who 
only  stand  and  wait."  Show  that  our  Lord's  active  work  was  bow  done ;  he  was  called 
to  bear,  endure,  suffer. 

n.  When  a  man  mat  not  speak,  his  wokk  is  done  bt  silehok.  He  shows  to  man 
an  example  of  self-control,  is  the  triumph  he  has  won,  which  enables  him  to  keep 
silence ;  ami  there  are  reproaches  and  convictions  and  humiliatieaa  in  simple  sileaoe, 
tli!(t  pierce  to  the  dividing  asunder  of  our  souls  as  no  spokmi  wwdi  can  do.    i«ni«tiBi«i| 


<m.  LIT.  1—17.]     THE  BOOK  OP  THE  PROPHET  ISAIAH. 


813 


wa  find  alMolutely  unendurable  the  silence  of  those  whose  silence  we  feel  to  be  reproof. 
Illustrate  Christ's  power  on  Peter,  on  Herod,  and  on  Pilate.  There  are  many  occasions, 
eyen  in  our  lives,  when  we  may  "  say  nothing,"  and  so  best  serve  God. — R.  T. 

V<r.  10.—^  mnd-offering.  This  prepares  us  to  see  that  the  real  sacrifice  for  sin, 
which  our  Redeemer  offered,  was  the  full  surrender  of  his  will,  his  idf,  to  GK>d,  which 
found  expression,  for  us  to  apprehend  it,  in  his  bodily  sufferings  (m  the  cross  (see 
Heb.  is.  14). 

L  Sm  18  A  BOUL-THINO.    It  is  not  an  act;  it  is  a  man  acting. 

II.  Penalty  is  a  soul-thing.    "  The  soul  that  sinneth,  it  shall  die." 

III.  Salvation  is  a  boiil-thino.  Christ  bore  the  soul-penalty;  Christ  brought 
life  for  dead  souls.  The  infinite  depth  of  Christ's  suffering  lay  hidden— in  behind— in 
the  Redeemer's  soul,  finding  only  once  what  seemed  a  suitable  utterance  in  human 
language,  and  that  a  cry  of  immeasurable  distress,  "My  Gk>d,  my  God,  why  hast 
thou  forsaken  me?"— R.  T. 

Ver.  11. — Satisfied  for  sore  travail.  When  the  sufferings  of  our  Lord  are  spoken  of 
in  Scripture,  they  are  usually  connected  with  his  exaltation  and  glory.  "  When  they 
testified  of  the  sufferings  of  Christ,  and  the  glory  that  .should  follow  ; "  "  It  is  Christ 
that  died,  yea  rather,  that  is  risen  again,  who  is  even  at  the  right  hand  of  God ; " 
"  Ought  not  Messias  to  suffer  these  things,  and  to  enter  into  his  glory  ? "  "  For  the 
suffering  of  death  crowned  with  glory  and  honour  1 "  "A  witness  of  the  sufferings  of 
Christ,  and  a  partake/  of  the  glory  that  shall  be  revealed."  But  the  idea  of  this  text 
is  not  so  much  the  glory  which  our  Lord  himself  shall  reach  through  his  work,  as  the 
benefits  and  blessings  which,  through  him,  shall  come  to  men.  Both  may  be  included 
in  the  treatment  of  this  theme. 

L  OuB  Lobd'b  satisfaction  in  the  personal  bebults  of  his  wobe.  He  has, 
through  it,  the  "  Name  which  is  above  every  name ; "  and  the  power  which  he  can  use 
for  larger  blessings,  "  giving  repentance  to  Israel,  and  remission  of  sins." 

IL  OuB  Lord's  satisfaction  in  the  results  of  his  work  in  itb  belation  to  God. 
To  see  the  lost,  prodigal  sons  and  daughters  of  God  turning  yearning  eyes  homewards, 
and  eayii^  "  Abba,  Father  1 "  must  be  satisfac'-'.on  indeed  to  him  who  came  that,  in  his 
sonship,  he  might  honour  the  Father. 

III.  Otm  Lobd's  batibfaotion  in  the  dibeot  bebultb  of  his  wobk  fob  hen. 
He  came  to  save.  He  rejoices  in  every  saved  one :  every  "  brand  plucked  from  the 
burning." 

IV.  Odb  Lobd'b  satisfaction  in  the  indirect  results  of  his  work  fob  man. 
To  save  a  man  from  sin  is  to  raise  and  ennoble  a  life,  to  give  new  tone  to  a  family,  to 
purify  all  the  relationships  of  society,  and  tu  redeem  a  nation,  and  to  save  the  world. 
Illustrate  from  what  Christianity  has  done  and  is  doing.  But  Christianity  is  an 
abstraction.  The  real  blessing  of  humanity  is  the  thousandfold  varied  influence  of 
the  men  and  women  whom  Christ  has  saved  from  wrath  and  sin.  He  has  present 
satisfaction  in  a  heaven  full  of  white-robed  saints,  in  a  Church  striving  to  keep  its 
white  garments  unspotted  from  the  world ;  and  in  the  expectation  of  the  time  when 
the  "  creature  also  shall  be  delivered  firom  the  bondage  of  corruption  into  the  glorious 
liberty  of  the  children  of  God."— R.  T. 


SEcnoa  IT.    A  Rshbwai.  or  Pbohibkb  to  Tbbael,  ooubined  wich  ExH(»TAnoN 

(oh.  LIV. — ^LVI.  8). 

EXPOSITION. 


CHAPTER  LIV. 

Ven.  1 — 10. — ^A  Pbomisb  to  Israel  of 
Great  Inobbasi,  and  of  God's  Persistent 
PboAotion.  There  is  do  close  connection 
between  this  chapter  and  the  last,  or  even 


between  this  section  and  the  preceding. 
Vers,  1 — 5  take  up  the  thought  of  cb. 
xlix.  19 — 21,  and  expand  it.  Israel  ia 
assured  of  a  great  enlargement  of  her 
numbers,  and  bidden  to  rejoice  there.! t. 
She    is    then    further    comforted    with     ■ 


Sl« 


THE  BOOK  OF  THE  PEOPHBT  ISAIAH,     [oh.  uy.  1—17 


promise  that  the  sbBll  never  be  forsaken 
(tots.  6—10). 

YeT.  1. — Sing,  0  barren.  Israel  in  cap- 
tivity is  addressed  as  "barren,"  because,  in 
the  time  of  suffering,  her  numbers  rather 
diminished  than  increased.  Still,  she  is 
bidden  to  "sing"  on  account  of  tlie  pros- 
pect that  is  opening  upon  her.  She  that  is 
now  desolate  and  solitary  will  soon  have 
more  children  thnn  she  formerly  had,  when 
the  was  a  married  wife,  enjoying  the 
fellowship  of  Jehovah,  her  Husband  (ver.  5). 
The  "children  "  spoken  of  are  in  part  those 
who  gathered  themselves  together  in  Jeru- 
salem and  the  adjacent  territory  after  the 
issue  of  the  decree  of  Cyrus  (1  Chron.  ix. 
2—34;  Ezra  ii.  1—65;  viii.  1—20;  Neh. 
vii.  6 — 72 ;  xi.  3 — 36),  but  mainly  such  as 
flocked  in  from  the  Gentiles,  both  before 
and  after  Christ's  coming  (see  ver.  3). 

Ver.  2. — Enlarge  the  place  of  thy  tent 
(comp.  ch.  xxxiii.  20  and  Jer.  x.  20).  The 
memory  of  the  old  nomadic  life  caused  the 
"  tent "  to  be  the  symbol  and  representative 
of  the  dwelling-plaoe  (comp.  1  Kings  xii. 
16).  Israel  will  have  so  many  more  children 
that  her  "  tent "  will  need  enlarging.  The 
curtains;  i.e.  the  tent-cloth  (comp.  Exod. 
xxvi.  and  xxxvi.,  where  the  word  used  occurs 
repeatedly).  Thy  cords  .  .  .  thy  stakes 
(oomp.  Exod.  xxxv.  18;  xxxix.  40,  etc.). 
The  ropes  and  tent-pegs,  which  kept  the 
tent-cloth  in  place,  are  intended.  The  en- 
largement of  the  tent  would  make  longer 
ropes  and  larger  pegs  necessary. 

Ver.  3. — For  thou  shalt. break  forth;  or, 
Hum  thalt  increate  (see  Gen.  xxx.  SO,  43; 
Exod.  i.  12).  An  ovi  rflow,  like  that  of  the 
bursting  out  of  water,  is  pointed  at.  On  the 
right  hand  and  on  the  left;  i.e.  "on  all 
sides"  (comp.  Gen,  xxviii.  14).  Thy  seed 
shall  inherit  the  Gentiles.  The  Christian 
Church  is  viewed  as  a  continuation  of  the 
Jewish  Church;  and  the  conversion  of 
nation  after  nation  to  the  gospel  is  regarded 
as  the  ext«:nsion  of  Jewish  dominion  over 
fresh  lands.  The  cities  of  these  lands — 
desolate  hitherto,  i.e.  without  godly  in- 
habitants— will  under  these  circumstences 
come  to  be  inhabited;  i.e.  will  be  peopled 
by  faithful  men. 

Ter.  4. — ^Thon  shalt  forget  the  shame  of 
thy  youth ;  rather,  of  thy  maidenhood ;  i.e. 
of  the  time  when  thou  wert  a  maiden,  before 
by  the  covenant  of  Sinai  Jehovah  became 
thy  Husband  (ver.  5).  The  "shame"  of 
this  period  was  the  Egyptian  bondage. 
Israel's  later  condition  would  be  such  that 
the  Tery  recollection  of  this  bondage  would 
fade  away  and  cease.  The  reproach  of  thy 
widowhood.  Israel  became  a  "  widow " 
when  Jehovah  withdrew  his  presence  from 
her,  when  the  Sheohinah  disappeared  from 
the  temple,  and  the  temple  itself  was  de- 


stroyed, and  Jerusalem  was  a  desolation, 
and  the  people  captives  in  a  far  land.  The 
special  "reproach  of  her  widowhood"  was 
the  Babylonian  captivity,  with  the  sins  that 
had  brought  it  about.  This  too  would  be 
forgotten  in  the  good  time  to  come,  amid 
the  glories  of  the  Messianic  kingdom. 

Ver.  5. — ^For  thy  Uaker  is  thine  Husband ; 
rather, /or  thy  H^uband  is  thy  Maker.  The 
verse  is  exegetical  of  the  terms,  "married 
wife"  in  ver.  1,  and  "  widowhood"  in  ver.  4. 
"I,"  says  the  prophet,  "have  called  thee 
married  and  widowed,  thereby  yoking  thee 
to  a  husband,  for  thou  hast  a  Hu.sband, 
namely,  thy  Maker."  (The  Hebrew  has 
both  words  in  the  plural,  to  accord  with  the 
following  Elohim^  This  relationship  of 
God  to  his  Church  is  often  asserted  by  the 
prophets  (Jer.  iiL  14 ;  xxxi.  32 ;  Hos.  ii.  19 ; 
Cant.  i.  4,  etc.),  and  lies  at  the  root  of  the 
oft-recurring  metaphor  by  which  idolatry 
is  called  "  lewdness,"  "  adultery,"  or  "  play- 
ing the  whore."  Thy  Redeemer  the  Holy 
One ;  rather,  thy  Redeemer  is  the  Holy  One. 
(On  the  title  itself,  see  the  comment  on  ch. 
i.  4.)  The  God  of  the  whole  earth  (comp. 
Ps.  xxiv.  1;  xlvii.  2,  7;  Ixxxiii.  18,  etc.). 
Materially,  he  was  always  this.  Now,  from 
this  time,  he  will  be  "  God  of  the  whole 
earth  "  morally ;  not  God  of  the  Jews  only, 
but  also  of  the  Gentiles  (see  Rom.  iii.  29). 

Ver.  6. — ^For  the  Lord  hath  called  thes; 
i.e.  recalled  thee  to  himself — summoned  thee 
to  return,  and  once  more  resume  the  ofSce 
of  a  wife.  As  a  woman  forsaken  and  grieved 
in  spirit ;  i.e.  as  one  whom  her  husband  has 
cast  ofi!  and  whose  spirit  is  grieved  by  the 
repudiation.  No  doubt  a  large  number  of 
the  captives  had  the  same  spirit  of  penitence 
as  Daniel  (Dan.  ix.  5—19).  A  wife  of 
youth.  One  wooed  and  won  in  youth,  there- 
fore more  dearly  loved,  more  regretfully 
repudiated,  more  joyfully  restored  when 
seen  to  be  penitent.  When  thon  wast 
refused;  rather,  when  she  has  been  cast  off. 
Jehovah  takes  back  Israel  into  the  old 
relationship,  as  a  man  takes  back  "  the  wife 
of  his  youth,"  when  she  has  been  for  a  long 
time  "  cast  off." 

Vers.  7,  8. — ^For  a  small  moment  have  I 
forsaken  thee.  The  sixty  or  seventy  years 
of  the  Captivity  were  but  as  a  moment  of 
time  compared  with  the  long  ages  diuing 
which  God  had  tenderly  watched  over  and 
protected  his  Chnroh,  and,  still  more,  com- 
pared with  the  eternity  during  which  he 
was  now  about  to  show  himself  her  constant 
Guardian  and  Protector.  There  had  been  a 
little  wrath ;  or  rather,  one  burst  of  wrath  ; 
and  then  MerOy  had  resumed  her  sway. 
The  face  hid  for  a  moment  had  been  allowed 
once  more  to  shine  upon  the  nflliuted  people; 
and  the  momentary  indignation  would  be 
followed  by,  and  swallowed  up  in,  ever- 


CH.  UT.  1—17.]    THE  BOOK  OF  THE  PROPHET   ISAIAH, 


315 


iMtiiig  Undnesa  (compaie  above,  oh.  xxvi.  20 
and  Ps.  XXX.  5,  "  His  anger  endaieth  but  a 
moment ;  in  hia  faTour  ia  life :  weeping  may 
endai«  for  a  night,  bnt  joy  oometh  in  the 
morning"). 

Yer.  9.— This  is  as  the  waters  of  Hoah 
onto  me.  The  existing  calamity — Israel 
submerged  in  tiie  flood  of  Babylonian  cap- 
tivity— is  as  it  were  a  repetition  of  the 
calamity  of  the  Deluge  in  Ood's  eyes.  Its 
object  is  to  purify  his  Church,  as  the  object 
or  the  Flood  was  to  purify  the  world.  A 
righteous  household  survived  in  the  one 
case;  a  righteous  remnant  would  go  forth 
in  the  other.  And  as  God  bound  himself 
in  Noah's  time  not  to  repeat  the  calamity 
of  the  Deluge,  so  now  he  binds  himself  not 
again  to  submerge  his  Church  in  a  captivity 
like  the  Babylonian.  It  has  been  said  that 
the  promise  was  not  kept,  since  the  Jewish 
Church  was,  in  a.d.  70,  carried  captive  by 
the  Bomans.  But  the  prophet  views  the 
Jewish  Church  as  continued  in  the  Christian, 
into  which  all  its  better  and  more  spiritual 
members  passed  at  the  first  preaching  of  the 
gospel ;  and  the  promise  here  made  is  thus 
paiallel  to  that  of  our  Lnrd, "  Upon  this  rock 
I  will  build  my  Church;  and  the  gates  of 
h«U  diall  not  prevail  against  it "  (Matt.  xvi. 
18).  Much  as  the  Christian  Church  has 
suffered  from  the  world,  it  has  never  been 
in  like  cases  with  the  Jewish  Church  in 
Babylon,  and,  as  God  is  faitliful,  never  will 
be  radnced  to  such  extremity.  As  X  have 
sworn;  is.  "pledged  myself."  It  does  not 
appear  from  Gen.  viii.  20—22  or  ix.  8—17 
that  God  actually  bodnd  himself  by  oath. 
So  have  I  sworn  tiiat  I  would  not  be  wroth 
with  thee,  nor  rebnke  thee.  That  is  to  say, 
not  to  the  same  extent,  not  so  as  to  visit  her 
with  the  same  punishment. 

Yer.  10. — ^Ihe  monntains  shall  depart  .  .  . 
bat  my  kindness  shall  not  depart  (oomp. 
Matt.  zxiv.  35,  <' Heaven  and  earth  shall 
pass  away,  but  my  words  shall  not  pass 
away*^  Everything  material  may  fail, 
depart,  perish ;  but  God's  promises  remain 
firm  and  secure  for  ever.  The  covenant  of 
my  peace ;  or,  my  covenant  of  pecux — any 
promise  which  God  makes  to  his  creatures 
for  their  advantage  (comp.  Numb.  xxv.  12 ; 
Ezek.  xxxiv.  25 ;  xxxvii.  26 ;  Mai.  ii.  5). 
Here  there  is  a  special  allusion  to  the 
promise  just  made  and  confirmed  by  oath 
(ver.  9). 

Yeirs.  11 — 17. — Tnie  Glory  of  the  Nbw 
JebuulIiBH,  and  the  Hapfinkss  or  rrs 
Inbakitaiits.  Hitherto  Israel  has  been 
addressed ;  now  the  direct  object  of  address 
is  Jemsalem.  The  eye  of  the  prophet 
passes^  however,  with  a  glance,  from  the 
actual  present  to  the  far-distant  future,  and 
sees  the  Zion  of  God  in  her  heavenly  setting, 


all  bedecked  with  preoions  stones,  as  she 
was  seen  by  the  exile  of  Patmos  more  than 
seven  centuries  later  (Rev.  xxi.  16 — ^21). 
After  briefly  describing  the  heavenly  city, 
he  passes  to  her  inhabitants,  and  promises 
them  peace,  protection,  and  righteousness. 

Yer.  11. — 0  thou  afiUoted  (comp.  ch.  xlix. 
14 — 17).  Jerusalem  is  seen  as  she  was 
during  the  Captivity — "  afflicted  "  by  God's 
hand,  vexed  with  all  his  storms,  and  not  yet 
comforted  (comp.  cb.  Ixiv.  10, 11).  Then  a 
fresh  vision  obliterates  the  mournful  sight. 
I  will  lay  thy  stones  with  fair  oolonrs; 
literally,  I  mitt-  lay  thy  stones  in  antimony  ; 
i.e.  I  will  give  them  a  setting  and  adornment 
like  that  which  beautiful  women  were  in 
the  habit  of  giving  to  their  eyes  when  they 
wished  to  attract  admiration  (see  2  Kings 
ix.  80).  Piik,  or  antimony,  was  used  to 
stain  both  the  upper  and  the  under  eyelid, 
in  order  to  increase  the  apparent  lustre  of 
the  eye,  and  so  impart  to  it  greater  beauty. 
The  passage  is  not  to  be  understood  as  im- 
plying that  coloured  marbles  were  ever  really 
set  in  antimony.  And  lay  thy  fonndationB 
with  sapphires ;  or,  make  thy  foundations  of 
mpphirea.  In  Bevelation  the  jtrtt  founda- 
tion is  "  jasper,"  the  second  "  sapphire " 
(Bev.  xxi  19).  Sapphire  was  the  founda- 
tion on  which  the  throne  of  God  appeared 
to  be  set,  when  it  was  seen  by  Moses,  Aaron, 
and  the  seventy  elders  (Exod.  xxiv.  10). 
The  throne  itself  had  the  appearance  of 
sapphire,  as  seen  by  Ezekiel  (i.  26;  x.  1). 
Sapphire  is  the  hue  of  heaven. 

Yer.  12. — I  will  make  thy  windows  of 
agates.  Most  moderns  translate,  "I  vrill 
make  thy  battlements,"  or  "thy  pinnacles 
of  rubies."  The  exact  meaning  is  very 
doubtful.  Thy  gates  of  oarbunoles.  In  the 
Bevelation  of  St.  John  the  gates  are  each  of 
them  composed  of  one  pearl  (Bev.  xxi.  21) — 
the  pearl  betokening  purity,  the  carbuncle 
the  glow  of  devotional  feeling.  We  must 
not  expect  consistency  in  descriptions  which 
are  entirely  allegorical.  All  thy  borders  of 
pleasant  stones ;  or,  all  thy  bouiidariei.  An 
enclosing  wall  seems  to  be  meant  (comp. 
Bev.  xxi.  17). 

Yer.  13.— All  thy  children  shall  be  taught 
of  the  Lord  (comp.  ch.  xliv.  3;  Jer.  xxxi.  33, 
34 ;  Ezek.  xi.  19 ;  Joel  ii.  28 ;  Acts  ii.  17, 
\8,  etc.).  Christians  are  all  of  them  "  taught 
of  God"  (John  vi.  45 ;  1  Thess.  iv.  9).  The 
"anointing,"  which  they  have  from  the 
Holy  Ghost, "  teaches  them,  and  is  truth,  and 
is  no  lie  "  (1  John  ii.  27),  and  causes  them 
to  "know  all  things  "  (1  John  ii.  20).  And 
great  shall  be  the  peace  of  thy  children. 
Messiah  was  to  be  "the  Prince  of  Peace" 
(ch.  ix.  6).  His  birth  heralded  the  coming 
of  "  pence  on  earth  "  (Luke  ii.  14>  So  fai 
forth  as  men  are  true  CSiristians,  does  peao 


31« 


THE  BOOK  OP  THE  PROPHET  ISAIAH,     [oh.  liv.  1— It 


reign  fai  the  eonaciencs  and  ihow  itielf  in 
the  life.  Externally  there  may  be  perseon- 
tion,  tnmnlt,  wars,  fightings ;  but  internally, 
in  each  heart,  there  will  be  a  "  peace  that 
PMses  all  understanding"  (Phil.' iv.  7). 
God  "  keeps  in  perfect  peace  "  those  "  whose 
■dnds  are  Eltayed  on  him"  (ch.  xsvi.  3). 

Ver.  14. — ^In  lighteonsness  shalt  thoa  he 
established;  rather,  through  righteousnem. 
"There  is  no  peace,  saith  my  Ood,  to  the 
wicked"  (eh.  xlviii.  22);  and  conversely, 
where  righteousness  abuunds,  peace  prevails, 
and  the  nation  "  is  established."  Thou  shalt 
he  far  from  oppression;  rather,  be  thou  far 
from  anxiety  (Delitzsch).  Thou  shalt  not 
fear ;  rather,  thou  needest  not  fear.  There 
is  no  danger — nothing  to  be  afraid  of. 
"  They  shall  not  hurt  nor  destroy  in  all  my 
holy  mountain  "  (ch.  xi.  9).  So  long  as  thou 
ait  "established  through  righteousness," 
there  shall  no  barm  happen  unto  thee. 

Ver.  IS. — Behold,  they  shall  surely  gather 
together,  etc.;  rather,  behoU,  should  they 
gather  thenudves  together;  i.e.  should  enemies 
collect  and  threaten  thee  with  harm,  be 
assured  that  the  attack  is  not  by  me — not 
my  doing — and  that,  therefore,  it  will  come 
to  nought.  All  those  who  gather  together 
against  thee  shall  fall — i.e.  stumble  and  be 
overthiown— through  striking  against  thee. 


The  rendering  of  the  Authorized  Version, 
"  for  thy  sake,"  is  quite  indefensible. 

Ver.  16. — Behold,  I  have  created,  eto. 
The  Oburch  is  encouraged  to  fear  no  danger 
by  being  reminded  that  all  power  to  do  hurt 
is  from  God.  Whether  it  be  the  smith  that 
forges  a  weapon,  or  the  waster  that  destroy! 
and  lays  waste  whole  countries,  or  any  other 
worker  of  woe  to  man,  all  are  equally  brought 
into  being,  and  sustained  in  life,  by  God. 
None  can  do  a  hurt  that  God  does  not  allow. 
The  smith  that  bloweth  the  coals.  In 
ancient  times  the  smith  worked  his  metal 
into  shape  by  the  help  of  a  blow  pipe,  which 
he  blew  himself  (see  Bosellini, '  Monumenti 
Oivili,'  pi.  51,  fig  4,  and  pi.  52,  fig.  4).  For 
his  work ;  or,  for  its  work;  i.e.  destruction. 
The  waster ;  i.e,  the  conquering  king,  such 
as  Tiglath-Fileser,  Sargon,  Sennacherib, 
Nebuchadnezzar,  Cyrus. 

Ver.  17. — No  weapon  .  .  .  every  tongue. 
Whether  weapons  are  used  against  Israel,  or 
whether  she  is  attacked,  as  in  Sennacherib's 
time,  by  "  the  tongue  that  speaketh  proud 
things  "(eh.  xxxvi:  4—20;  xxxvii.  10—13), 
the  result  will  be  the  same.  She  will 
triumph  over  her  enemies,  and  condemn 
them  or  put  them  to  shame.  Her  security 
is  her  righteousnesB,  which  she  derives  firom 
Jehovah  (oomp.  oh.  zlv.  24, 25). 


aOMILETIOS. 

Vers.  1 — 6. — 51l«  rdation  of  the  Church  to  Ood  that  of  a  wife  to  her  htaiband.  The 
analogy  set  forth  by  the  prophet  in  the  first  six  verses  of  this  chapter  is  one  to  which 
equal  prominence  is  given  in  the  Old  Testament  and  the  New.  It  forms  the  basis  of 
one  entire  book  of  the  Old  Scriptures — the  Canticles,  or  Song  of  Solomon.  It  pervades 
the  whole  teaching  of  the  prophets,  which  declares  apostasy  from  God  to  be  "  adultery  " 

gh.  Ivii.  3—5 ;  Jer.  Hi.  9 ;  v.  7  ;  xiii.  27 ;  xxiii.  10-14 ;  Ezek.  xvi.  32—36 ;  xxiiL  37 ; 
08.  iii.  1;  iv.  12—^14,  etc.).  It  ia  asserted  repeatedly  with  the  utmost  plainness 
(ver.  5 ;  Jer.  iii.  14 ;  xxxi.  32;  Hos.  ii.  16 — 20).  In  the  New  Testament,  it  ia  hinted 
at  in  the  Gospels  (Matt.  xxv.  1 — 10),  taught  plainly  in  the  Epistles  (2  Cor.  zi.  2;  Eph. 
V.  23 — 32),  and  made  part  of  the  imagery  of  the  Bevelation  of  St.  John  (xxi.  2,  9  ; 
xxii.  17).  The  only  difference  is  that,  in  the  Old  Testament,  the  "  husband  "  is,  vaguely, 
Jehovah  or  God ;  in  the  New  he  is,  definitely,  the  Second  Person  of  the  Trinity,  Christ. 
The  relationship  involves,  on  the  part  of  God:  1.  Love.  "Husbands,  love  your  wives, 
even  as  Christ  also  loved  the  Church  "  (Eph.  v.  25).  2.  Tender  guardianship  and  care. 
"The  Lord  nourisheth  and  cherisheth  the  Church"  (Eph.  v.  29).  3.  Exertion  of  a 
pnrifying  and  elevating  influence.  Christ  "  loved  the  Church,  and  gave  himself  for  it, 
that  he  might  sanctify  and  cleanse  it  with  the  washing  of  water  by  the  Word,  that  he 
might  present  it  to  himself  a  glorious  Church,  not  having  spot,  or  wrinkle,  or  any  such 
thing,  but  that  it  should  be  holy  and  without  blemish"  (Eph.  v.  26 — 27).  4.  Ever- 
lasting kindness — kindness  that  "  ehall  not  depart,"  or  be  withdrawn,,  for  ever  (ch.  liv. 
6,10).  On  the  part  of  the  Church  there  are  involved  corresponding  duties;  as:  1.  Love 
(1  John  iv.  16—21).  2.  Reverence  (Eph.  v.  33).  3.  Subjection.  "  As  the  Church  is 
■abject  unto  Christ,  lo  let  the  wives  he  to  their  own  husbands  iu  everything  "  (Eph.  v. 
24).  4.  Never-ending  fidelity.  The  desire  of  the  Church  should  be  towardls  bar  VotA, 
M  Ua  is  towards  her  (Cant  vii.  10),  incessantly. 


Var.  17. — UatCi  righteottmeu  ii  of  Ood.    Whatever  there  la  in  man  of  goodne 


OH.  uv.  1—17  J     THE  BOOK  OF  THE  PROPHET  ISAIAH.  317 

virtue,  sound  or  right  feeling,  high  aspiration,  spiritual  strength,  comes  to  him  from  the 
Almighty,  from  whence  descends  "  every  good  gift  and  every  perfect  gift "  (Jas.  i.  17). 
Original  righteousness  was  from  God  (Gen.  i.  27,  31).  When  man  fell,  and  "cor- 
rupted hia  way,"  recovery  was  impossible,  unless  Ood  both  devised  a  method  by 
which  it  should  be  possible,  and  also  superintended  the  working  of  his  own  method, 
and  at  each  step  made  it  effectual.  The  righteousness  of  the  servants  of  God  is  a 
douhle  righteousness,  imputed  and  infused ;  hut  both  come  equally  from  the  perfectly 
"  righteous  Servant"  (ch.  liii.  11),  who  alone  "justifies  many." 

I.  Imputed  righteouskess  is  of  God.  Imputed  righteousness  is  the  righteousness 
of  God ;  for  it  is  the  righteousness  of  Christ,  who  is  God.  Christ  is  made  to  us  "  wisdom, 
and  righteousness,  and  sanctiflcation,  and  redemption"  (1  Cor.  i.  30).  The  righteous- 
ness which  is  properly  his,  and  which  is  a  perfect  righteousness,  is,  through  our  mystic 
union  with  him,  imputed  to  us,  as  if  it  were  ours,  and  so  becomes  ours,  and  justifies 
us.  It  is  also  "  of  God,"  since  it  is  imputed  to  us  by  God.  God  the  Father  condescends 
to  look  upon  us  as  so  hound  up  in  his  Son  that  he  passes  on  to  us  the  merits  of  his  Son, 
and,  as  it  were,  makes  them  ours. 

II.  Infitbed  RioHTEOusNEsa  IB  OF  GoD.  lufuscd  righteousuess  is  the  work  of  the 
Holy  Spirit,  who  "  sanctifies  us,  and  all  the  elect  people  of  God."  It  admits  of  infinite 
degrees,  and  in  this  life  is  always  imperfect.  The  true  Christian  is  always  making 
progress  in  it,  adding  grace  to  grace,  going  on  from  strength  to  strength,  perfecting 
holiness  in  the  lear  of  God.  But  every  step  is  made  by  God's  help.  Without  him  man 
can  do  nothing.  Every  virtue  that  we  have  is  also  a  grace — a  grace  from  the  Divine 
point  of  view,  a  virtue  from  the  human ;  with  struggle  and  effort  acquired  by  man,  yet 
given  to  him  by  God.  Imputed  righteousness  is  that  which  justifies  us;  infused 
righteousness  is  that  which  sanctifies  us.  The  one  is  a  gift  to  us ;  the  other  is  a  gift  in 
us.  But  both  alike  are  the  gift  of  God  (see  Rom.  iii,  21 — 26 ;  t.  16 — 19 ;  1  Cor. 
IT.  7;  XT.  10  J  GaL  v.  22,  23 ;  Eph.  v.  9,  etc.). 


HOMILIES  BY  VARIOUS  AUTHORS. 

Yen.  1—17. — T%e  future  of  the  Church.  "  The  person  addressed  is  the  ideal  Zion, 
who  Is  practically  identical  with  the  ideal  or  spiritual  Israel." 

L  Her  fbcitfulnesb.  Nothing  to  an  Israelitish  mind  can  suggest  more  forcibly  the 
idea  of  desolation  and  sorrow  in  a  nation  or  spiritual  community  than  the  childless 
woman.  UistoricMy,  the  restored  exiles  may  be  referred  to;  physically  and  to  some 
extent  spiritually  Israelites,  but,  while  on  a  foreign  soil,  and  unbaptized  with  the 
Spirit,  their  union  was  not  complete.  In  a  wider  spiritual  application,  the  Church  of 
Qt)d,  in  the  Old  Testament,  confined  within  the  narrow  limits  of  the  Jewish  nation, 
and  still  more  so  in  respect  to  the  very  small  number  of  true  believers,  and  which 
seemed  sometimes  deserted  of  God  her  Husband  (Lowth).  (For  the  relation  of  the 
Church  to  God  under  the  figure  of  marriage,  cf.  ch.  Ixii.  5  ;  Rev.  xxi.  2—9 ;  xxii.  17; 
Ezek.  xVi.)  The  conversion  of  the  Gentiles  is  the  accession  of  a  vast  progeny  to  the 
spiritual  Israel — a  vast  extension  of  the  Church  of  God  (ch.  xlix.  20—22). 

n.  Hbr  enlargement.  The  figure  of  a  tent  is  employed.  The  canopy  or  coverings 
of  the  tent  arc  to  be  widened,  its  cords  lengthened,  and  the  tent-pins  made  strong.  The 
wandering  is  to  be  exchanged  for  the  permanent  habitation.  (For  the  image,  cf.  Jer. 
X.  20.)  The  boundaries  of  the  Church  are  to  be  enlarged  to  accommodate  the  vast 
accession  from  the  pagan  world.  On  all  hands  she  is  to  break  forth,  even  as  it  had  been 
promised  to  Jacob  (Gen.  xxviii.  14),  to  take  possession  of  the  nations,  and  inhabii. 
desolate  cities.  The  period  of  reproach,  figured  by  maidenhood  or  widowhood,  is  to 
come  to  aa  end. 

III.  Her  intimate  relation  to  God.  1.  He  is  Maker  and  Ooel,  Mediator  and 
Redeemer,  of  her  family  rights.  (For  the  Christian  application,  see  Eph.  ii.  19, "  Fellow- 
citizens  of  the  saints,  and  members  of  the  family  of  God.")  As  the  nearest  kinsman  Is 
bound  to  interpose  for  the  defence  of  members  of  his  family,  so  the  Almighty  is  bound 
to  avenge  and  succour  his  chosen.  In  his  Name,  Jehovah"  of  hosts,  is  found  a  further 
o-uarantee  of  his  saving  mercy  for  the  future.  It  means  that  he  is  God  of  the  whole 
earth,  that  his  glory  fills  the  creation.     (For  the  application  to  the  Christian  Church, 


318  THE  BOOK  OF  THE  PROPHET  ISAIAH,     [oh.  uv.  1—17. 

Bee  Rom.  iii.  29,  "God  of  the  Gentiles  also.")  2.  The  relation  of. marriage  in  ita 
DiviUe  application  points  to  an  indissoluble  and  eternal  union.  The  Church  may 
appear  in  times  of  distress  as  "  an  outcast  nnd  downcast  woman,''  divorced  from  her 
God.  But  "  even  many  an  earthly  husband  cannot  bear  to  see  the  misery  of  his 
divorced  wife,  ami  therefore  at  length  recalls  her :  how  much  more,  then,  Jehovah  1  " 
In  a  "  gush  of  wrath  "  it  was  that  his  face  was  hidden  from  her.  In  everlasting  kind- 
ness he  will  have  mercy;  the  sea  being  contrasted  with  the  momentary  outburst,  or 
"  gush  "  of  displeasure.  Never  shall  this  dispensation  of  wrath  be  repeated,  no  more 
than  that  of  Noah's  floods.  Mountains  are  symbolic  of  the  unchangeableness  of  the 
Eternal  (cf.  Ps.  xxxvi.  6;  Ixv.  6).  They  seem  to  be  the  solid  pillars  and  foundations  of 
the  earth.  They  may  totter;  but  the  loving-kindness  of  God  must  be  like  himself, 
eternal.  The  covenant  of  peace,  which  has  been  ratified  between  him  and  his  people, 
will  abide  amidst  all  vicissitudes  of  nature  and  of  history.  The  love  of  the  Eternal  is, 
then,  the  first  and  last  secret  of  all  things.  At  the  basis  of  the  universe  lies  law,  and 
law  itself  is  the  expression  of  love.  Law  wears  to  us  often  a  stern  face ;  it  is  the 
expression  of  wrath.  But  a  holy  wrath  is  itself  the  expression  cf  a  loving  heart.  He 
who  has  made  the  world  cannot  hate  it.  He  who  is  the  Author  of  the  soul  is  its 
affianced  Spouse  and  self-constituted  Protector.  Language  and  imagination  labour  in 
vain  with  so  immense  a  conception  as  that  of  the  Divine  love.  It  mnst  follow  from 
this  that  the  Church,  as  a  spiritual  and  mystical  community,  must  be  safe  through  all 
the  change  of  time. 

IV.  The  FonrBE  olobt  or  the  Church.  She  appears  under  the  figure  of  a  city, 
the  new  Jerusalem.  Her  brilliant  stones  will  be  set  in  a  beautifying  cement.  Her 
battlements  will  be  of  rubies,  her  gates  of  carbuncles,  her  outer  walls  of  precious  stones. 
Yet  this  will  only  be  the  outward  manifestation  of  an  inward  and  spiritual  glory.  The 
people  will  be  disciples  of  Jehovah  (cf.  Numb.  xi.  29;  Joel  ii.  28,  29),  that  is,  in  effect, 
prophets,  filled  with  utterance  as  with  inspiration.  Her  constitution  will  rest  upon  a 
sound,  because  a  moral  basis— on  righteousness,  on  fidelity  to  her  covenant  with  God. 
Not  being  built,  like  the  cities  of  the  heathen,  of  fraud  and  rapine,  oppression  and 
destruction  will  be  far  from  her  thoughts.  She  will  enjoy  security.  Should  any  foe 
presume  to  molest  her,  he  will  stumble — he  wiU  be  like  a  bUnd  traveller  who  falls 
headlong  over  an  obstacle.  For  all  the  agencies  which  work  either  a  people's  weal  or 
woe  are  in  the  hands  of  the  Eternal.  He  is  the  Creator  of  the  smith,  and  so  mediately 
of  the  destroying  weapon  he  forjjes.  So  the  great  Oriental  kings  are  his  tools.  But  no 
weapon  turned  against  Israel  shall  succeed  in  its  aim;  and  every  abusing  tongue  shall 
be  pronounced  guilty  in  the  day  of  judgment.  Such  is  the  s(jiritual  inheritance  of  the 
servants  of  Jehovah,  such  their  justification  at  his  hands.  "  It  is  not  gold  and  the 
triumph  of  battle.  It  is  nnt  the  laurel  won  in  fields  of  blood.  The  inheritance  is  the 
protection  of  God  in  all  times  of  trouble ;  his  friendship  in  all  periods  of  activity ;  com- 
plete victory  in  all  the  contests  with  error  and  false  systems  of  religion ;  and  prevention 
when  foes  rise  up  in  any  form  and  seek  to  destroy  the  Church,  and  to  blot  out  its  exist- 
ence and  its  name."  "  Gud  defend  the  right  I "  has  been  an  ancient  prayer  in  times  of 
anxiety  and  conflict.  He  does  defend  the  right  and  the  righteous  at  all  times,  the 
prophet  declares. — J. 

Ver.  10. — Perennial  kindness.  "  My  kindness  shall  not  depart  from  thee."  Much 
kindnes^s  does.  It  is  fervid,  but  fickle,  and  is  too  often  conditioned  by  mood  and  temper 
and  circumstance.     Moreover,  it  may  depart  through  lack  of  power  and  opportunity. 

I.  'J  HE  Saviour's  kindness  is  true  kindness.  He  knows  what  kindness  is.  We 
too  often  mistake  favour  and  indulgence  for  kindness.  God  is  often  kindest  when  he 
is  most  severe. 

II.  The  Saviour's  kindness  is  manifested  kindness.  It  costs  him  something. 
Much  kindness  evaporates  in  sentiment  and  speech.  It  does  not  impinge  on  the  ease 
and  the  comfort  of  our  friends.  Jesus  Christ  said,  "  Lo,  I  come  to  do  thy  will,  0  Qt)d  1 " 
and,  "  although  he  was  ricli,  yet  for  our  sakes  he  became  poor."  His  kindness  was 
tested :  1.  By  the  treatment  he  received.  2.  By  the  nature  that  suffered.  So  deep  in 
feeling ;  so  infinite  in  its  capacity  for  enduring  sorrow.  3.  By  the  sacrifice  he  offered. 
4.  By  the  permanence  of  his  work,  as  "  Head  over  all  things  to  the  Church,"  Then 
let  the  laint-hearted  rest  on  the  promise,  " It  shall  not  depart." — ^W.  IC  S. 


OH.  LIT.  1-17.]      THE  BOOK  OF  THE  PROPHET  ISAIAH.  ■  316 

Ver,  10. — The  eternal  constancy:  a  meditation  on  change.  "My  kindness  shall  not 
depart  from  thee."  How  much  does  depart  in  this  world  1  There  are  departed  sorrowSj 
departed  joys,  departed  friends ;  and  in  one  sense,  concerning  life  and  joy  and  dttty^ 
the  world  is  full  of  graves.  But  we  have  an  unchanging  Lord,  Jesus  Christ,  "the  same 
yesterday,  and  to-day,  and  forever."  "Jfy  kindness!"  Is  there  not  a  comfort  in  theyery 
emphasis?  For  much  kindness  does  depart.  Fervent,  but  evanescent,  it  has  its  little 
day,  and  then  vanishes  away.  "We  are  such  stuff  as  dreams  are  made  of."  The  nobility 
of  our  nature  fails  before  the  strains  of  littleness  in  character  of  others  and  distance  of 
place  and  time.  The  eternal  constancy  is  beautiful.  Mark  the  connection  of  thought. 
The  mountains  may  depart,  Galilee's  lake  may  embosom  the  surrounding  hills,  but  the 
great  Father's  love  is  immutable  and  eternal.  To  take  to  heart  these  words  would  be 
to  dispel  our  darkest  fears.  A  faith  strong  enough  to  grasp  this  will  light  up  every 
forest,  and  overcome  every  foe.  There  are  strange  mysteries  of  suffering  in  this  world 
Sorrow  has  many  synonyms  in  human  speech  answering  to  the  many  phases  of  humaE 
experience.  There  are  agonies  of  endurance,  breaches  of  trust,  sighiiigs  of  solitude, 
sadnesses  of  disappointment,  wailings  of  bereavement.  To-day  there  are  disciples  terrified 
in  the  storm,  Eachels  mourning  fur  their  departed,  Peters  dropping  scalding  tears  over 
denials  of  the  Lord.  Can  it  be  wondered  at  that  in  such  a  world,  amid  such  human 
trials  and  such  spiritual  experiences,  kindness — the  Divine  kindness — should  be  so 
precious  a  thing?  Let  us  recall  the  multitude  of  God's  mercies;  let  us  remember  his 
hand  in  the  glacier-passes  of  temptation,  and  the  nights  of  tribulation.  The  strings  of 
our  human  harps  must  sweep  forth  the  music  of  love.  There  has  been  no  change  in 
Ohrist. 

i.  The  subfbise.  Think  of  what  we  are  I  Fickle,  irresolute,  ungrateful,  unfaithful. 
Our  God  is  a  God  of  insiglit.  He  searcheth  the  heart.  He  sees  not  only  conduct,  but 
character.  No  disguise  can  cloak  from  him.  And  what  secrets  there  are  in  these 
hearts  of  ours!  Tljere  are  mirrors  there  which  flash  back,  even  to  ourselves,  the 
hidden  things  of  darkness.  Yet  he  loves  us  still!  The  pre\ious  chapter  says,  "All 
we  like  sheep  have  gone  astray."  Yet  it  is  the  stray  lambs  the  Saviour  seeks,  and  the 
poor  prodigal  wanderer  the  Father  loves!  The  strongest  ties  we  know  of  are  in  our 
human  relationships;  they  are  images  of  the  Divine  love.  Only  an  artificial  theology 
has  made  the  rectoral  character  of  God  override  the  paternal.  Think  you  that  on  some 
wild  Christmas,  amid  home's  most  festive  scenes,  with  the  children  and  the  children's 
children  ahout  him,  that  father,  whose  hair  is  whiter  than  the  winter  snow,  can  forget 
the  prodigal  ?  With  the  ruddy  fire-glow  around  him,  and  the  yule  logs  piled  high,  his 
mind  wanders  over  the  bleak  and  barren  moorland  of  the  outside  world;  and  one  faint 
knock  at  the  portal,  one  weary  step,  one  quivering  lip,  brings  more  music  to  his  heart 
than  the  tabret  and  the  dance.  He  knows  all  about  the  squandered  wealth,  the  profligate 
life,  the  reckless  pilgrimage  of  vanity.  But  his  kindness  cannot  depart  from  him,  for 
he  is  a  father  still.  1  claim  for  God  the  very  amplest  application  of  that  analogy. 
"  Now  then  we  are  ambassadors  for  Christ,  ...  we  pray  you  in  Christ's  stead,  be  ye 
reconciled  to  God."  "  In  Christ's  stead ! "  What  words!  Many  evil  things  the  Church 
has  done— Soman,  Anglican,  and  Puritan — would  look  strange  enough  if  Christ's  gentle 
imago  had  been  thought  upon,  and  men  had  inscribed  above  it,  "  We  are  Christ's ! " 
God  gave  such  tension  and  tenderness  to  the  human  heart  to  make  our  fatherhood 
a  parable  of  his  own !  "If  we  knew  all ! "  Thus  even  we  who  love  him,  who  have  been 
-  reconciled  to  him,  say  sometimes  in  our  darker  moods.  Does  God  know  all  ?  ITien 
could  he  be  kind  to  us  still.  We  have  served  other  gods.  We  have  been  faithless 
stewards.  We  have  been  at  heart  callous  and  cold.  Yet  to  us  comes  this  laessage  of 
the  eternal  constancy :  "  My  kindness  shall  not  depart  from  thee." 

II,  The  contrast.  Think  of  what  human  nature  is.  We  make  retrospect  con- 
cerning ourselves.  We  do  not  depreciate  humanity  when  we  say  that  kindness  is  an 
uncertain  thing.  We  do  not  charge  it  upon  others  to  the  exclusion  of  ourselves.  We 
ire  all  unstable  as  water.  We  find  how  difficult  it  is  to  be  unselfish.  And  no  kindness 
can  be  perpetual  without  that.  There  are  occasions  when  kindness  is  lacking  in  us; 
when  a  feeble  witticism  has  wounded  a  friend;  when  a  cruel  sarcasm  has  bruised  a 
brother's  sensibilities;  when  a  personal  enjoyment  has  inflicted  deprivation  on  others. 
Kindness  is  easy  when  its  manifestations  are  costless.  Nay,  it  cannot  be  dignified  with 
the  name;  for  it  ministers  to  our  own  pride  and  satisfaction.     But  we  cannot  conceal 


380  IHlfi  BOOK   OP   THE  PBOPHBT  ISAIAH,      [oh.  liv.  1— 17. 

the  fact  that  courtesy,  eompassion,  and  care  do  fail,  aud,  iu  one  word,  " love"  is  aligent. 
I  am  not  speaking  of  the  false  kindness  of  the  deceiver,  or  the  tender  mercies  of  the 
gay,  or  the  heartless  mannerism  which  feigns  affection.  This  is  devils'  work,  and 
fills  the  sinner's  night  of  death  with  spectres  worse  than  the  genius  of  Dante  ever 
described  or  Doii  ever  designed.  I  am  speaking  of  the  common  fact  of  instability  in 
human  feeling,  inconstancy  in  human  love.  Explainable,  indeed,  sometimes  by  the 
detection  of  selfishness,  superficiality,  or  unworthineas,  as  we  think,  in  others,  but 
manifest,  in  some  measure,  in  iis  all.  Now,  the  Divine  Saviour  is  the  ideal  of  all 
unselfishness.  Be  gave  himself.  He  humbled  himself.  He  became  obedient  unto 
death — even  the  death  of  the  cross — for  us.  While  we  were  yet  enemies,  he  died  for 
us.  And  this  was  no  solitary  embodiment  of  his  nature.  It  was  a  revelation  of  what 
his  eternal  nature  is.  Take,  then,  a  review  of  yourself;  take  a  review  of  society — and 
forget  not  all  the  revelations  you  have  had  of  blessed  contrast  in  God,  whose  kindness 
has  not  departed  from  you. 

III.  The  ebvibw.  Think  of  what  the  past  time  says.  Life  has  been  full  of  mercy 
to  us  all.  Homes  have  been  revisited,  friends  have  been  restored,  love  has  been 
consummated,  new  homes  have  been  set  up,  accident  has  been  averted,  health  has  been 
restored,  deliverance  has  been  vouchsafed,  afiBiction  has  been  sanctified,  and  religious 
faith  has  in  some  cases  been  renewed  and  restored.  Most  wonderful  of  all  is  this.  We 
have  lived  through  seasons  in  which  subtle  temptations  have  had  their  enchanter's 
wand  broken,  and  difficulties  in  oiu:  Christian  faith  have  been  removed.  True,  indeed, 
it  is  that  to  some  these  words  would  mean  nothing — would,  perhaps,  raise  a  smile  of 
condescending  pity  for  those  of  us  who  still  believe  in  a  God  at  all.  Somd  there  are 
who  wonder  at  the  worship  which  rises  above  "  the  stream  of  tendency,"  or  the  laws  of 
evolution,  to  the  Fountain  of  Life  and  Power  which  fills  the  universe  with  life  and  joy ; 
and  to  others  the  words  would  sound  like  the  bitter  irony  of  fate.  Kindness!  when 
the  fig  tree  has  withered,  and  there  is  slender  produce  in  the  vine?  for  some  have  not 
yet  learned  that  Providence  has  higher  ends  than  to  weave  purple  robes  and  to  grow 
costly  fruits.  What  blessedness  there  is  to  most  of  us  in  the  continuous  belief  in  a 
personal  God  and  Father — ^iu  a  hand  that  rules,  a  voice  that  speaks,  and  a  heart  that 
loves  I  Truly  it  sufficeth  us  to  show  us  the  Father ;  for,  try  as  men  may,  they  can 
never  create  an  impersonal  religion.  Greece  raised  her  altars  to  Pity  and  Fame,  and 
the  abstract  virtues ;  but  the  testimony  of  history  was  the  total  neglect  of  them  all. 
The  human  heart  can  worship  a  Divine  heart  only — must  seek  after  a  God,  even 
if  he  be  "  the  Unknown  God."  Certainly,  also,  we  cannot  wor.ship,  adore,  praise,  and 
glorify  any  embodied  idea  of  humanity — the  positivists  cannot  make  a  beautiful  image 
of  that.  No ;  its  shame,  its  vice,  its  corruption,  its  evil,  remain ;  the  statue  may  have 
gold  in  it,  but  it  has  iron  and  clay  as  well.  The  Lord  revealed  in  the  Bible  is  our  God 
and  Father  to-day!  "My  soul  thirsteth  for  God,  the  living  God;"  "Unto  thee, 0 Lord, 
will  I  sing;"  "Great  is  the  Lord, and  of  great  power,and  his  understanding  is  infinite." 
We  retain  our  praj'er,  "Our  Father  which  art  in  heaven."  We  retain  cnr  pathway 
of  approach,  "  Christ,  the  Way,  the  Truth,  and  the  Life."  We  retain  our  altar  of  love, 
the  one  Mediator  between  God  and  man,  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ.  Looking  back,  then, 
and  taking  a  review  of  life  preserved  and  life  sustained,  of  friends  given  or  restored, 
of  love  cemented  and  consecrated,  of  fnith  purified  and  elevated,  must  not  our  seal  be 
set  afresh  to  the  truth  of  the  words,  "My  kindness  shall  not  depart  from  thee"? 

IV.  The  pbospbot.  Think  what  the  futwe  will  bring.  The  coming  days.  These 
are  the  most  constant  theme  of  our  meditation.  We  project  our.ielves  into  life's 
to-morrow.  We  never  live  wholly  for  the  present  time.  We  are  all  artists  in  this  wise, 
colouring  our  picture  by  means  of  our  faith  or  our  experience.  We  are  sometimes 
morbid,  and  doubt  whether  good  times  will  come  to  us  again,  forgetful  of  the  past 
seasons  of  trouble  which  gave  place  in  time  to  the  brighter  morrow.  Alas  1  we  too 
often  say,  "  Hath  God  forgotten  to  be  gracious  ?  hath  he  in  anger  shut  up  his  tender 
mercy?"  Kindness  departed  1  That  is  our  earthly  and  our  spiritual  dread.  But  the 
bow  in  the  cloud  is  God's  silent  prophecy.  And  there  is  a  bow  in  every  cloud,  if  we 
will  but  gaze  upon  the  heaven  of  mercy  above  us.  To-morrow  is  coming,  but  on  its 
wings  mercy  and  love  will  also  come.  God  will  still  show  forth  his  loving-kindness  in 
the  morning.  The  throne  of  God  is  not  to  be  covered  with  the  crape  of  a  departed 
majesty.     We  believe  in  "  the  eternal."    "  Prom  everlasting  to  everlasting  thou  art 


OH.  LIT.  1—17.]       THE  BOOK   OF   THE    PROPHET    ISAIAH.  821 

Ood."  God  is  the  Good  I  His  sceptre  is  no  iron  mace  of  authority,  but  he  is  the 
Father  of  our  spirits,  and  the  God  of  our  salvation.  What  will  to-morrow  tiring? 
The  seed-time  and  the  harvest.  The  summer  sky  and  the  song  of  the  reaper.  Tlie 
release  of  the  ice-bound  fountain  and  the  beauty  and  fragrance  of  a  thousand  fields. 
To-morrow  there  is  to  be  more  and  more  departure  of  ignorance  and  wrong,  of  desolation 
and  darkness.  The  light  is  to  shine  more  and  more  unto  the  perfect  day ;  for  Christ 
must  reign.  Every  season  of  life  will  have  its  kindness.  If  father  and  mother  forsake 
us  in  childhood,  the  Lord  will  take  us  up.  If  widowhood  comes,  Christ  will  be  the 
Husband  of  the  widow.  Frosty,  but  kindly,  as  Shakespeare  says,  will  old  age  be  itself, 
when  the  evening  comes,  and  death  too  will  be  kind  when  it  comes,  taking  down  the 
tabernacle  with  a  quiet  hand,  and  gently  hushing  us  into  the  calm  sleep  of  the  child 
whose  morning  is  heaven.  Let  us  get  rid,  then,  of  the  habit  of  dark  foreboding,  for 
thereby  we  deprive  ourselves  of  the  music  of  to-day.  We  all  sometimes  think  of 
Divine  mercy  as  though  its  meridian  had  passed,  and  as  though  God's  grace  was  setting 
over  the  plains  of  life.  We  have  an  ever-living  Saviour,  an  indwelling  Spirit,  the 
blessing  of  spiritual  souship,  the  foretaste  of  the  sweet  vineyards  of  Canaan,  and  a 
fountain  ever  open  for  sin  and  uncleanness.  Let  us  seek  to  make  God's  kindness  in 
its  constancy  the  image  of  owr  own.  Love  is  the  law  of  heaven ;  the  angels  are  all 
ministering  spirits.  When  poor  Hagar,  with  haggard  eyes  and  dishevelled  hair,  was 
in  the  wilderness,  it  was  an  angel-hand  which  led  her  to  the  well.  When  Gideon  was 
threshing  his  wheat,  his  face  pictures  forth  the  great  sorrow  of  his  people,  and  we  hear 
him  saying,  "  0  my  Lord,  if  the  Lord  be  with  us,  why  then  is  all  this  befallen  us?" 
And  an  angel's  voice  then  reassures  him  with  the  promise,  "  Surely  I  will  he  with  thee." 
When  the  ship  is  driven  helplessly  through  the  storm,  an  angel-voice  says  to  the 
apostle,  "  Fear  not,  Paul ! "  Yes ;  there  is  a  sympathy  and  a  constant  kindness  in 
the  angelic  ministry.  And  we  are  to  be  ministering  spirits  too.  A  part  of  our  nature, 
constituted  as  it  is  to  live  in  others,  would  be  shorn  of  its  blessedness  if  we  could  not 
also  be  ministers  of  kindness.  Onward,  then,  my  brethren,  with  these  words  on  your 
banner.  The  light  which  falls  on  the  letters  of  gold  will  attract  the  eyes  of  others, 
as  you  show  them  what  a  religious  faith  can  do  in  renewing  the  life  of  the  world. 
Faith  in  God  our  Saviour  will  change  the  countenance,  strengthen  even  the  physical 
nerves,  and  make  us  better  companions  and  brighter  friends.  Like  a  talisman,  these 
words  will  keep  you  from  the  dread  which  has  darkened  man's  earthly  life  in  every  age. 
You  will  bear  them  aloft  on  your  banner,  not  as  rejoicing  in  a  God  who  loves  and  cares 
for  you  alone ;  but  you  will  say  to  the  world,  "  Let  our  people  he  your  people,  and  our 
God  your  God."  Yield  your  hearts  to  him.  "  Look  unto  me,  and  be  ye  saved,  all  the 
ends  of  the  earth."  You  will  fear  no  evil,  for  the  Lord  is  with  you !  There  will  be 
manna  in  the  wilderness ;  the  Jordan  itself  will  be  dry ;  the  warder  will  throw  wide 
.the  open  gates  at  your  home-going,  and  the  Saviour  will  give  you  the  welcome  rest. 
These  words  are  those  of  the  faithful  and  true.  "  My  kindness  shall  not  depart  from 
thee."— W.  M.  8. 

Ter.  2. — Enlargement  and  consolidation. '  "  Spare  not,  lengthen  thy  cords,  and 
strengthen  thy  stakes."  Applying  these  words  to  the  Church  of  Christ  in  its  attitude 
of  holy  expectation,  and  its  sacred  duty  under  all  circumstances,  but  particularly  in  the 
time  of  growth,  we  learn  of  it — 

I.  That  it  should  constantly  be  ANTioiPATma  ENLABasMENT.  The  challenge 
comes  from  its  Lord,  "  Spare  not,  lengthen  thy  cords;"  i.«.  take  the  attitude  and  the 
action  of  those  who  are  looking  for  increase,  for  the  incoming  of  those  who  are  outside. 
The  Church  of  Christ  is  well  warranted  in  doing  this ;  for  it  has :  1.  Ample  scope  in 
a  vast  unredeemed  world  beyond  its  borders ;  souls  that  are  capable  of  brotherhood, 
of  sonship,  of  heirship.  2.  All  the  materials  it  wants  for  successful  enterprise,  in 
authority  to  work  and  win,  in  truth  perfectly  fitted  to  the  deepest  wants  of  the  human 
heart,  in  the  potency  of  Christian  love  and  zeal.  3.  Divine  promise  that  its  labour  shall 
not  be  in  vain. 

IL  That  it  shouIiD  continually  be  engaged  in  consolidation.  As  a  mnltituda 

of  armed  men  do  not  make  an  army,  so  a  number  of  people  with  Christian  words  on 

their  lips  and  Christian  ordinances  in  their  practice  do  not  make  a  Christian  Chnrch 

after  Christ's  ideal.    The  accession  of  numbers  is  not  everything ;  it  may  prove  to  he 

ISATAH — n.  T 


822  THE   BOOK  OF  THE   PROPHET   ISAIAH,      [ch.  liv.  1— 17. 

very  little ;  before  now,  in  certain  cases,  it  has  proved  to  be  "  less  than  nothing  and 
vanity."  The  Church  must  "strengthen  its  stakes"  as  well  as  "lengthen  its  cords." 
It  must  not  spare  its  strength  in  providing  for  permanence  and  stability  as  well  as 
increase.  It  must  aim  at,  and  must  pray  and  labour  for :  1.  The  intelligent  acceptance 
of  the  truth  of  Christ  in  its  inte<!;rity.  2.  Spirit uality  in  vvor.-hip.  3.  Consistency  of 
conduct  and  consequent  illustration  of  a  large  part  of  Christ's  will  in  its  daily  life. 
4.  Order  and  discipline  in  its  regular  action. — 0. 

Vers.  6 — 10. — Suparabounding goodness.  The  prevailing  thought  here  is  the  prevalence 
of  God's  goodness  over  his  sevtrity.  For  a  small  moment  he  had  for.salo  n,  but  with 
great  mercies  he  would  comfort  his  people.  Against  the  "little  wrath"  in  whiuh  his 
face  was  hidden  there  was  to  be  set  the  "everlasting  kindness"  with  which  he  would 
redeem  them.  The  largely  preponderant,  completely  outweighing,  superabounding  good- 
ness of  the  Lord  is  manifest  on  every  side.     We  see  it — 

I.  In  the  natural  world.  Tlicre  is  a  great  deal  of  misery  beneath  the  sky.  IIow 
could  it  be  otherwise  when  there  is  so  much  of  cruelty  and  sin  ?  But  if  we  look  long 
at  all  that  hap[iens  as  the  direct  result  of  God's  handiwork,  we  shall  find  that  "  mercy 
triumphs  over  wrath,"  good  over  ill.  There  is  a  large  and  blessed  prepoii..trMnce  of 
light  over  darkness,  of  pleasure  over  pain,  of  joy  over  sorrow,  of  hope  over  despair,  of 
coijfidence  over  distrust,  of  fertility  over  barrenness,  of  plenty  over  poverty,  of  society 
over  solitude,  of  life  over  death.  But  for  the  disturbing  and  destructive  element  of  sin, 
this  would  obviously  be  the  case  in  a  very  much  larger  degree  tlian  it  is  now. 

II.  In  the  Church  of  God.  The  Church  of  God  has  been  represented  at  different 
times  by  different  communities.  At  one  time  by  the  suffering  community  iu  Egypt ; 
at  another,  by  the  Church  in  the  wilderness;  at  another,  by  the  distracted  society  under 
the  judges ;  at  another,  by  the  triumphant  nation  under  David  and  Solomon ;  at  another, 
by  Israel  in  exile ;  at  another,  by  the  returned  and  rejoicing  people  of  God  who  had 
come  home  from  captivity.  It  is  now  represented  by  the  Churchis  ol  Christ  scattered 
over  many  lands,  and  forming  apparently  many  distinct  religious  bodies.  Sonjetimes 
God  has  lifted  upon  his  people  the  light  of  his  countenance,  and  they  have  rejoiced  in 
his  manifested  favour;  at  other  times  he  has  withdrawn  his  face,  and  made  his  people 
to  feel  the  weight  of  his  chastening  hand.  But  upon  the  whole  it  has  been  found,  and 
in  the  end  it  will  be  found,  that  his  manifestations  of  mercy  and  grace  have  triumjihed 
greatly  over  those  of  wrath  and  penalty.  There  were  times  in  the  history  of  the  Jewish 
Church  when  its  light  nearly  went  out  in  the  surrounding  darkness,  but  it  did  not  exiare ; 
by  the  Divine  hand  it  was  guarded  and  fed,  and  has  now  become,  under  other  conditions, 
a  glorious  sun,  giving  light  and  heat  to  all  the  nations.  Mountains  and  hills,  in  the 
shape  of  kingdoms  and  powers,  have  departed  and  been  removed;  but  God's  kindness 
to  his  Church  will  not  depart,  nor  will  his  faithfulness  fail.  With  everlasting  kindness 
will  God  be  merciful  to  the  Church  which  bears  the  name,  and  teaches  the  truth,  and 
extends  the  kingdom,  of  his  Son. 

III.  In  the  oaeeeb  of  his  faithful  servants.  There  is  no  uniform  cour.se  which 
the  life  of  piety  is  found  to  take ;  it  takes  almost  every  variety  of  ways.  Sometimes  it 
lies  much  in  the  sunshine  and  but  little  in  the  shadow;  and  sometimes  it  is  shaded 
nearly  the  whole  way  through.  And  how  many  kinds  of  shadow  fall  on  the  good 
man's  path!  It  is  the  apparent  withdrawal  of  God's  favour  from  his  soul ;  or  it  is  the 
false  charge  which  takes  away  his  fair  fame;  or  it  is  overwhelming  loss  involving  others 
as  well  as  himself  in  struggle  or  even  in  penury ;  or  it  is  early  separation  from  those 
most  dearly  beloved.  There  is  "  the  hiding  of  God's  face ; "  the  hour  comes  when 
nothing  but  the  Master's  words  will  utter  the  feelings  of  the  heart,  "  My  God,  my  God, 
why  hast  thou  forsaken  me?"  But  all  this  is  temporary;  nay,  everythin;'  being 
counted,  it  is  but  momentary.  God  has  in  reserve  infinite  resources  which,  afterwards 
if  not  now,  yonder  if  not  here,  will  mnke  up  a  thousandfold  for  all  that  he  sends  of 
trial  and  suffering.  Let  the  faithful  soul  build  on  the  immovable  rock  of  God's  integrity. 
Mountains  may  melt  and  hdls  raiiy  flee  away,  the  foundations  of  the  solid  earth  may  be 
broken  up,  but  God's  kindness  cannot  depart,  because  his  Word  cannot  fail-  that  ii 
the  one  absolutely  and  eternally  impossible  thing. — 0. 

Ver.  13. — The  prize  of  life,  and  its  pursuit.    "All  thy  children  shall  be  taught 


CH.  LIT.  1—17.]      THE  BOOK  OF  THE  PBOPHBT  ISAIAH.  323 

of  the  Lord;  and  great  shall  be  the  peace  of  thy  children."    We  gather  from  this 
text — 

I.  The  true  prize  of  life.  What  is  that  thing  which  is  most  worth  having,  most 
worth  the  thought  of  our  minds,  the  strenuous  striving  of  our  soul,  the  labour  of  our 
hands?  Nations,  communities,  individual  men,  have  given  different  replies.  One  has 
said  ease,  another  wealth,  another  pleasure,  another  power,  another  glory.  The  inspired 
Hebrew  said  peace.  The  blessing  he  invoked  on  those  he  loved,  and  that  which  he 
lauded  in  speech  and  song,  was  peace.  And  he  was  right.  Peace  is  the  indispensable, 
the  immeasurably  precious  thing.  1.  It  is  a  profound  blessing.  It  goes  down  to  the 
depth  of  our  compound  nature ;  it  is  the  excellent  result  of  complete  Tightness — 
lightness  of  heart  with  God,  Tightness  of  life  with  man.  2.  It  is  a  lasting  thing. 
Other  prizes  may  be  snatched  away  by  untoward  circumstances,  or  their  worth  dims  and 
lessens  with  the  passing  years,  or  even  (with  some  of  them)  with  the  fleeting  days'. 
But  this  abides ;  prosperity  does  not  injure  it,  adversity  does  not  remove  it,  ago  does 
not  diminish  its  excellency.  3,  It  is  the  condition  of  holy  usefulness.  We  can  serve 
our  race  in  higher  and  greater  things  without  the,  other  prizes  of  life,  but  not  without 
this.  Not  until  our  hearts  have  found  rest  in  God's  truth  and  in  himself  can  we 
be  and  say  and  do  that  which  will  guide  the  feet  of  our  fellow-men  into  and  along 
the  paths  of  righteousness  and  wisdom. 

II.  The  one  way  op  winning  it.  The  children  of  2Hon  would  have  great  peace, 
inasmuch  as  they  would  be  "taught  of  the  Lord."  Nothing  else  will  give  to  the  human 
heart  the  peace  which  it  craves.  1.  Comfortable  circumstances  will  not  ensure  it. 
These  circumstances  cannot  be  generally  commanded,  and,  if  they  could,  there  would 
still  be  a  craving  of  the  soul  which  no  comforts  or  successes  of  any  earthly  kind  would 
satisfy.  2.  Philosophy  is  not  equal  to  the  task.  Stoicism  tried  its  hand,  and  with 
some  of  its  disciples  there  was  the  appearance  of  success;  but  it  has  no  power  to 
minister  to  the  necessities  of  the  multitudes  of  mankind,  to  the  ordinary  human  heart, 
to  men  and  women  as  we  meet  and  know  them  every  day.  To  the  common,  ques- 
tioning, thirsting  human  heart  it  is  a  fountain  without  water,  a  name  without  the  power 
behind  it.  3.  A  Divine  Saviour  alone  can  supply  the  need.  He  only  who  brings 
everlasting  truth  to  our  mind,  the  sympathy  and  love  of  an  unfailing  friendship  to  the 
heart,  spiritual  excellence  to  the  soul,  meaning  and  worth  to  human  life,  a  hope  bright 
with  immortal  glory  to  the  closing  hour, — he  only  is  entitled  to  say,  "  Come  unto  me 
...  I  will  give  you  rest."  "My  peace  I  give  unto  you."  &reat  peace — peace  that 
passeth  undeT^tanding,  and  that  outliveth  mortal  life,  have  they  who  learn  of  him  and 
take  his  yoke  upon  them. — 0. 

Ver.  17. — The  heritage  of  faithful  sermce.  From  the  beginning  to  the  end  of  the 
Scriptures  the  service  of  God  is  represented  as  the  only  wise  course  for  men  to  take. 
All  paths  of  disobedience  are  spoken  of  as  ways  of  folly  as  well  as  of  sin.  It  is  godliness 
that  has  the  promise  of  all  things,  here  and  hereafter.  The  heritage  of  the  holy  is  very 
variously  defined,  the  most  remarkable  definition  being  that  given  by  our  Lord  in  reply 
to  Peter  (vide  Mark  x.  28 — ^31).  In  the  text  we  have  it  presented  to  us  as  a  continual 
victory.  No  weapon  formed  against  the  righteous  shall  prosper,  and  every  accusation 
shall  be  silenced.  God  will  justify  them.  The  faithful  service  of  Christ  is  marked  by 
victory  over — 

I.  Success  in  outward  life.  Pew  weapons  are  so  powerful  as  this  in  the  hand 
of  the  enemy.  Many  are  they  who,  in  their  folly,  have  allowed  their  prosperity  to 
destroy  them  (Prov,  i.  32).  The  sense  of  power,  the  enjoyment  of  popularity,  the  com- 
mand of  comforts,  the  continuance  of  success  in  the  chosen  vocation, — these  things  prove 
too  much  for  many  souls.  Under  their  influence  men  swerve  from  the  straight  line  of 
simplicity  of  life,  humility  of  spirit,  purity  of  heart,  integrity  of  character. 

II.  Adverse  oircuustanoes.  These  are  often  found  to  be  victorious  over  men, 
triumphing  over  their  faith  in  God,  their  gratitude,  and  their  submission ;  leading  down 
to  sullenness  and  moroseness  of  spirit;  in  some  cases  conducting  to  unbelief  and 
impiety. 

III.  Privation  of  pbivileoe.  When  it  is  a  man's  fortune  to  be  separated  from  the 
community  and  to  lead  a  life  of  comparative  loneliness,  he  is  cast  much  on  his  own 
rMources.    He^misses  the  encouragement  and  inspiration  which  come  from  social  worship 


32*  THE  BOOK  OF  THE  PROPHET  ISAIAH,      [oh.  try.  1—17. 

and  collective  piety.     Without  the  aid  and  influence  of  these,  he  is  in  danger  of  fainting 
and  falling  in  his  Christian  course. 

IV.  ExPOSDBK  TO  coBEnPT  COMPANIONSHIP.  This  is  often  a  matter  of  necessity  and 
not  of  choice.  The  Ijest  may  have  to  submit  to  it,  and  the  peril  of  spiritual  injury  from 
it  is  very  greatr 

V.  The  force  op  a  surbodndinq  bcbptioism.  A  force  which  either  vigorously 
assaults  the  main  fortress  of  the  faith  or  sedulously  and  stealthily  imdermines  the  wallf: 
—a  great  and  growing  peril. 

It  is  promised  to  the  servants  of  the  Lord  that  they  shall  triumph  over  these  various 
enemies.  "  No  weapon  that  is  formed,"  etc.  But  while  (1)  God's  promise  may  well  cheei 
his  servants,  helping  them  to  pursue  their  troubled  path,  and  to  do  their  difScult  or 
dangerous  work  with  alacrity  and  hope ;  it  is  well  that  (2)  his  conditions  should  be 
remembered.  There  is  no  absolnte,  unconditional  guarantee;  the  careless,  the  dis- 
obedient, the  negligent  servant  will  be,  nay,  he  is,  defeated  by  the  enemy ;  he  yields  and 
falls.  But  let  a  man  be  a  faithful  servant,  studious  of  Christ's  will  and  daily  seeking 
his  Holy  Spirit's  aid,  and  he  will  find  that  his  Divine  Lord  will  "  always  cause  him  to 
triunjph;"  he  will  know  "the  exceeding  greatness  of  his  power"  to  uphold  and  to 
perfect.  Meantime,  to  those  who  are  observers,  (3)  God's  sustaining  grace  will  prove 
the  sign  and  seal  of  his  Divine  favour.  "  This  is  their  righteousness  [justification] 
ofme."— C. 

Ver.  2. — Divine  enlargements.  The  figure  employed  is  taken  from  tent-life,  and  it  is 
used  in  a  similar  way  by  Jeremiah.  "  My  tabernacle  is  spoiled,  and  all  my  cords  are 
broken :  my  children  are  gone  forth  of  me,  and  they  are  not :  there  is  none  to  stretch 
forth  my  tent  any  more,  and  to  set  up  my  curtains  "  (Jer.  x.  20).  "  The  Orientals  have 
two  kinds  of  tents — the  one  larger,  and  the  other  smaller;  but  both  constructed  much  in  the 
same  way.  They  are  sustained  by  poles,  more  or  fewer  in  number,  according  to  the  size  of 
the  tent,  but  the  tallest  is  always  in  the  midst,  while  the  others  suspend  the  covering 
round  the  sides.  This  covering  is  made  of  a  stuff  woven  from  wool  and  camel's  hair ; 
it  hangs  down  like  a  curtain  over  the  side  poles,  and  is  fastened  by  cords  to  wooden 
pegs,  which  are  firmly  driven  into  the  ground.  Other  cords,  fastened  at  one  end  to  the 
top  of  the  poles,  and  at  the  other  to  pegs  or  stakes,  keep  the  tent  steady,  and  secure  it 
against  the  violence  of  storms.  As  the  family  increases,  it  is  proportionally  enlarged, 
and  requires  the  cords  to  be  longer  and  the  stakes  to  be  stronger  in  proportion."  One 
cause  of  depression,  at  the  time  of  the  return,  was  that  so  few  of  the  Israelites  responded 
to  the  Divine  call,  and  it  seemed  hopeless  work  to  attempt  to  revive  the  old  glories  of 
Jerusalem  with  such  a  feeble  company.  The  divinely  comforting  assurances  of  the  text 
are  designed  to  revive  hope  and  renew  confidence.  "  The  little  one  shall  become  a 
thousand,  and  the  small  one  a  strong  nation."  And  the  promise  was  fulfilled.  Those 
that  first  came  out  of  Babylon  were  but  forty-two  thousand  (Ezra  ii.  64),  about  a 
fifteenth  part  of  their  number  when  they  came  out  of  Egypt ;  many  came  dropping  to 
them  afterwards,  but  we  may  suppose  that  to  be  the  greatest  number  that  ever  came  in 
a  body ;  and  yet,  above  five  hundred  years  after,  a  little  before  their  destruction  by  the 
Bomans,  a  calculation  was  made  by  the  number  of  the  Paschal  lambs,  and  the  lowest 
computation  by  that  rule  (allowing  only  ten  to  a  lamb,  whereas  there  might  be  twenty) 
made  the  nation  to  be  nearly  three  millions.  Further  reference  may  be  found  to  the 
enlargement  of  the  Christian  Church  after  Pentecost,  and  especially  after  the  martyrdom 
of  Stephen,  and  the  scattering  of  the  disciples  which  followed  upon  that  sad  event.  The 
general  topic  suggested  for  consideration  is  the  duty  of  cheerfully  following  on,  when 
God  opens  before  us  wider  and  larger  spheres  of  ioQuence  and  usefulness,  and  the 
following  points  may  be  illustrated. 

I.  It  is  wrong  to  fobce  ourselves  into  enlaroehents  before  God  calls. 

IL  It  18  WBONs  to  hold  back  when  God  does  oall. 

III.  Larger  spheres,  and  wider  influbnge,  are  God's  signs  or  aoceftanoi 

An>  AFPKOVAL  of  THE  WOBK  WHICH  WE  HAVE  DONE. 

rV.  Those  who  enter  ok  enlabged  spuebeb  need  to  bk  themselves  enlaboed, 
-B.T. 

7w.  6» — 2%e  htuband-fiffun  fmr  ffod.     "  For  thy  Uaker  is  thine  Husband  "  (comp 


OH.  LIT.  1—17.]     THE  BOOK  OP  THE  PROPHET   ISAIAH.  825 

Hos.  iL  16),  "  And  it  shall  come  to  pass  at  that  day,  saith  the  Lord,  that  thou  shalt 
call  me,  Ishi  [my  Husband],  and  shalt  call  me  no  more,  Baali  [my  Lord] ").  The  figi.r* 
Isaiah  uses  is  that  of  the  Oo&,,  or  next  of  kiu,  and  this  very  suggestire  and  beautiful 
illustration  may  be  taken  from  the  story  of  Ruth  and  Boaz.  Boaz  was  a  "  next  of  kin," 
and  on  him  rested  the  formal  duty  of  recovering  Ruth's  property,  if  the  nearest  kinsman 
failed  to  do  his  duty.  But  all  formal  relations  were  swallowed  up  in  the  tender  love 
that  knit  Boaz  and  Ruth  together  as  husband  and  wife. 

I.  The  claims  of  Qod  expressed  in  this  HUSBAND-FiauBE.  The  points  to  illus- 
trate and  enforce  are  two.  1.  Claims  come  out  of  the  love  which  brings  us  into  such  a 
relationship.  Love-claims  are  altogether  the  most  searching  and  the  most  sacred.  The 
wife  is  bound  with  cords  of  love.  In  view  of  this  relation  we  lose  all  sternness  from  the 
commands  and  requirements  of  Gud ;  love  glorifies  them.  2.  Claims  come  out  of  the 
honour  which  such  a  relationship  brings  us.  We  must  "  walk  worthy  of  the  vocation 
wherewith  we  are  called." 

II.  The  pbovidinqs  of  God  assured  by  the  husband-piqcbe.  The  wife  is  in 
the  care  of  her  husband,  and  because  of  his  care  she  is  free  from  care.  He  provides  for 
the  supply  of  all  need.  Apply  the  figure  to  the  anxieties  of  the  Church  in  exile,  when 
required  to  set  out  on  the  I'ng  journey  to  Palestine,  and  enter  upon  unknown  scenes, 
that  would  surely  be  full  of  toil  and  worry  and  danger.  Infinite  comfort  came  from  the 
assurance  that  they  were  not  aa  lone  and  friendless  women,  in  view  of  the  perplexities 
and  anxieties  of  life.  They  had  one  who  would  shield  them  and  keep  them.  "  Their 
Maker  was  their  Husband."  The  two  figures  for  God,  Father  and  Husband,  still  are  for 
us  full  of  gracious  assuiances.  Helpless  children  have  a  Father;  lonely  women  have  a 
Husband — "the  Lord  of  hosts  is  his  Name." 

m.  The  PEBSUADinas  of  Gob  made  terouoh  the  husband-fioube.  The  relation 
is  a  constant  impulse  to  active  duty.  In  the  text  it  is  a  persuasion  to  energy  in  under- 
taking the  journey,  and  impulse  to  the  work  of  rebuilding  the  ruined  city.  It  was 
persuasion  to  a  biight  and  joyous  acceptance  of  the  Divine  will,  and  a  full  belief  in  the 
largeness  of  the  Divine  restorations.  Eastern  sentiments  concerning  the  protection  and 
honour  of  having  a  husband  put  a  keenness  and  fulness  into  this  figure  which  we  can 
hardly  reach.  What  is  evident  to  us  is  thai  God  will  put  himself  into  any  relation 
which  may  call  out  from  us  perfect  trust  in  him. — R.  T. 

Ver.  5. — Ood-worshippers  outside  Judaism.  "  The  God  of  the  whole  earth  shall  he 
be  called."  To  our  fathers  the  world  seemed  but  small ;  to  us  it  is  great,  and  its  bounds 
are  ever  enlarging.  In  olden  times  the  few  travellers  came  back  with  marvellous  stories 
of  griffins  and  dragons  and  mermaids,  at  which  ignorant  crowds  gaped,  but  at  which 
we  can  afford  to  smile.  Now  almost  every  part  of  the  earth  is  searched  again  and  agidn, 
and  distant  lands  have  become  almost  as  familiar  to  us  as  our  own.  Men  still  chafe, 
indeed,  because  the  vast  northern  seas  will  not  yield  the  last  mysteries  which  they 
conceal,  though  even  the  secret  of  the  North  Pole  seems  to  be  almost  reached.  How 
greatly  our-thoughts  about  God's  world  differ  from  the  thoughts  of  our  fathers!  How 
greatly  the  thoughts  of  our  own  manhood  and  age  diflfer  from  the  thoughts  of  our  youth  I 
We  find  it  difficult  to  realize  to  ourselves  some  of  the  opinions  of  our  forefathers,  and 
to  fit  them  into  the  Word  of  God,  as  we  read  it.  This  especially  refers  to  their  opinions 
about  humanity  as  a  whole,  and  about  the  destiny  of  the  race.  England,  "  encumpassed 
by  the  inviolate  sea,"  is  in  danger  of  being  as  exclusive  as  was  Palestine,  hemmed  in  by 
the  mountains,  the  desert,  and  the  sea;  and  unless  we  watch  ourselves,  and  nsist  the 
evil  tendency,  there  may  grow  up  in  us  a  pride  as  unlovely  as  that  which  marked  the 
privileged  Jew,  and  made  him  brand  aU  other  nations  as  heathen,  who  were  wholly 
excluded  from  Jehovah's  love  and  care.  The  later  Jewish  prophets  plead  earnestly 
against  that  proud  exclusiveness  that  led  the  people  to  think  themselves  the  favoured 
of  the  Lord,  and  so  to  despise  others.  Prophets  taught  the  people  to  look  abroad,  and 
see  that  God  is  working,  both  by  his  mercies  and  by  his  judgments,  in  all  those  natioaa 
around  them  which  they  called  "  heathen."  The  prophets,  in  effect,  speak  thus :  "  It 
is  quite  true  that  you  are  set  in  the  midst  of  the  world  to  be  a  witness  and  a  blessing 
to  surrounding  nations;  but  it  is  equally  true  that  those  nations  are  set  alx>ut  you  to 
be  example  and  impulse  and  warning  to  you.  God  is  dealing  with  them  for  their 
lakes  and  for  yours,  just  as  tiuly  as  he  is  dealing  with  you  for  your  sake  and  forthrirs.* 


9»  THE  BOOK  OP  THE  PROPHET  ISAIAH,     [ch.  htv.  1—17. 

That  diere  might  be  no  ground  whatever  for  the  exclusive  appropriation  of  God  by  tlje 
Jewi,  God  sayg,  "  Blessed  be  Egypt  my  people,  and  Assyria  the  work  of  my  kamU,  atd 
Israel  mine  inheritance."  The  nature  of  God's  relation  to  the  entire  race  18  the  founda- 
tion of  religious  truth.  All  our  religious  ideas  are  toned  by  the  view  we  take  of  this 
relation.  Men  but  feebly  grasp  the  notion  of  one  only  Gi<d,  supreme  in  and  over  all 
tkinge.  They  can  much  more  readily  grasp  the  conception  of  many  gods,  each  one 
supreme  in  his  own  limited  department.  When  God  gives  a  particular  revelation  to 
one  nation,  that  nation  is  tempted  to  say,  "God  is  specially  owr  God.  He  belongs 
to  us,  and  to  nobody  else."  So  St.  Paul's  appeal  needs  to  be  heard  again  and  again, 
"  Is  he  the  God  of  the  Jews  only  ?  Is  he  not  also  of  the  Gentiles  ?  "  No  doubt  we 
shall  all  agree  that  there  is  but  one  Creator,  and  that  he  who  made  all  provides  for  all. 
He  is  interested  in  all  humanity ;  "  his  tender  mercies  are  over  all  his  works."  But 
what  a  singular  distinction  has  grown  up  in  our  minds !  We  have  come  to  think  that 
this  one  God  is  interested  in  the  physical  well-being  of  the  million  heathen,  graciously 
watching  over  life,  and  health,  and  food,  and  pleasures,  and  relationships,  but  not  really 
concerned  for  their  moral  and  spiritual  well-being.  We  do  not  find  ourselves  unutterably 
distressed,  as  we  should  be,  with  the  thought,  which  is  in  many  of  our  minds,  that  the 
million  heathen  brottiers  are  outside  the  pale  of  God's  revelation,  and  eternally  lost.  But 
surely,  if  God  made  men  moral  beings ;  if  there  is,  in  the  wildest  savage,  the  sense  of  right 
and  wrong ; — then  God  bears  saving  relations  to  the  moral  life  of  man  everywhere.  He 
must  see  and  reward  the  man  everywhere  who  offers  him  worship,  as  he  appreheads  hira 
who  strujigles  for  the  good  as  he  knows  it.  He  must  see  and  punish  the  man  everywhere 
who  yields  to  the  evil  which  he  knows  to  be  evil.  So  St.  Paul  thought,  breaking  free 
from  the  exclusive  bondages  of  his  Judaism.  And  so  St.  Paul  teaches  us  to  think.  We 
must  not  venture  to  sweep  all  the  vast  mass  of  humanity,  outside  Christianity,  into  some 
terrible  under-world  of  woe.  There  is  but  one  G<xi  for  them  and  for  us.  Everywhere  he 
is  Light,  and  he  is  Love — Light  and  Love  in  his  response  to  every  poor  heathen  soul  as 
truly  as  to  us  Christians.  No  matter  what  may  be  the  name  by  which  the  heathen 
seeker  may  call  the  great  Spirit — be  it  Tangaroa,  or  Morimo,  or  Tsikuap,  or  Varuna,  or 
Brahma — he  seeks  the  One,  the  Living,  the  Source  of  all.  And  he  may  gain  the  answer- 
ing smile  of  the  one  God's  acceptance.  St.  Paul  is  very  plain  and  very  firm  in  his 
statement :  "  When  the  Gentiles,  which  have  not  the  Law,  do  by  nature  the  things 
contained  in  theLaw,  these,  having  not  the  Law,  area  law  unto  themselves :  which  show 
the  work  of  the  Law  written  in  their  hearts,  their  conscience  also  bearing  witness,  and 
their  thoughts  the  mean  while  accusing  or  else  excusing  one  another."  We  may  wisely 
try  to  break  down  this  tendency  to  limit  the  operations  of  Gk)d's  grace  just  to  ourselves. 
Mission  work  is  breaking  it  down,  by  wakening  our  sympathy  with  seeking  souls.  The 
study  of  comparative  religions  is  breaking  it  down,  by  showing  us,  hidden  deep  in 
heathen  religions,  penitence,  confession,  humility,  love,  faith,  consecration,  prayer,  hope, 
virtue,  and  submission.  Everywhere  we  find  yearning  hearts,  the  sense  of  sin,  the 
prayer  for  pardon,  the  dependence  of  faith,  the  cry  after  God,  who  is  "  God  of  the  whole 
earth."— B.  T. 

Vcr.  9. — Lessons  from  Noah's  times.  In  the  ancient  time  God  was  wroth  with  man- 
kind, when  he  "  looked  upon  the  earth,  and,  behold,  it  was  corrupt;  for  all  flesh  had 
cormpted  his  way  upon  the  earth."  Then  in  Divine  judgment  he  swept  the  earth 
clean  with  a  flood  of  great  waters.  But  in  wrath  he  remembered  mercy :  a  restoring- 
day  came,  and  in  that  day  Gud  was  pleased  to  enter  into  covenant  with  the  race,  and 
make  solemn  pledge  and  promise  that  never  again  should  "  all  flesh  be  cut  off  by  the 
waters  of  a  flood,  nor  should  there  any  more  be  a  flood  to  destroy  the  earth."  Isaiah 
saw  a  parallel  tn  this  in  the  Divine  dealings  with  the  idolatrous  kingdom  of  Israel.  It 
had  become  so  utterly  corrupt  that  ordinary  forms  of  chastisement  would  not  suffice ; 
overwhelming  judgments  were  demanded.  The  Divine  wrath  found  expression  in  the 
destruction  of  the  nation,  and  the  bitterness  of  the  Babylonish  captivity.  But  mercy 
limited  judgment ;  a  restoring-time  came,  and  brought  with  it  new  covenant  assurances 
and  promises :  "  My  loving-kindness  firom  thee  shall  not  remove,  neither  .shall  the 
covenant  of  my  peace  totter,  saith  he  that  hath  compassion  on  thee,  Jehovan."  In 
this  we  are  to  see  exhibited  in  history— earlier  and  later — the  methods  of  Divine  dealing 
which  may  apply  also  to  us. 


OH.  Liv.  1— ir.]     THE  BOOK  OP  THE  PROPHET  ISAIAH.  827 

I.  Omt  SINS  MAT  AROUSE  THE  DiviNE  INDIGNATION.  ScHpture  impresses  on  us  that 
In  God  is  alwa\  s  responsive  feeling  towards  sin.  In  this  we  may  find  foreshadowings 
of  the  fatherly  relations  of  God  toward  us.  He  must  never  be  thought  of  as  merely 
concerned  with  wrong-doing  because  of  its  disturbing  Divine  order,  aa  a  king  or  a 
jud.;e  would  be.  Sin  always  bears  a  personal  relation  to  God.  It  is  disobedience,  it 
is  insult,  it  is  unfaithfulness.  He  /ee/s  it  as  fathers  feel  the  wrong-doing  of  their 
children. 

II.  Divine  wrath  mat  still  find  extreme  judgments.  Such  as  are  represented 
in  the  Flood  or  in  the  Captivity.  Kuch  as  are  suggested  by  the  stern  necessity  fathers 
scimetimes  know ;  they  must  shut  the  home-door  against  hardened  prodigal  sons.  In 
the  spiritual  life  there  are  times  when  God  must  "  cover  himself  with  a  cloud,  that  our 
prayer  should  not  pass  through." 

ill.  Divine  merot  alwats  waits  to  put  limit  on  the  judgment.  That  "  mercy  " 
makes  the  worst  judgments  to  be  but  corrections.  And  that  "  mercy  "  watches  for  the 
moment  when  the  correcting  work  is  done,  and  restorings  can  be  granted. 

IV.  When  God  restores  he  does  it  with  such  abundant  comporting  and  assub- 

ANCB    AS    dispels   ALL   THE   REMEMBRANCE   OF    THE   JUDGMENT-TIME.      Illustrate   from 

the  tender  language  of  the  context.     See  also  the  warmth  of  parental  feeling  when  the 
prodigal  son  came  back  home. — R.  T. 

Ver.  13. — Divine  favour  reaching  to  the  children.  "And  all  thy  children  shall  be 
disciples  of  Jehovah;  and  great  shall  be  the  peace  of  thy  children."  This  is  probably 
the  passage  quoted  by  our  Lord,  as  recorded  in  John  vi.  45,  "  It  is  written  in  the 
prophets.  And  they  shall  be  all  taught  of  God."  The  point  on  which  Isaiah  dwells  is 
that  the  Divine  favour  shall  not  be  limited  to  the  generation  that  was  actually  restored; 
it  would  abide  from  generation  to  generation,  and  the  guarantee  for  this  would  be  found 
in  the  Divine  care  and  training  ol'  the  children  in  preparation  for  their  responsibilities 
and  privileges  when  their  turn  of  manhood  came.  It  is  not  precisely  known  in  what 
ways  the  religious  education  of  the  children  of  the  returned  exiles  was  arranged,  but 
the  system  of  regular  synagogue  instruction  was  developed  soon  after.  It  is  full  of 
suggestion,  for  those  who  work  among  children  now,  that  God  should  find  the  hope 
of  stability  for  the  restored  nation  in  discipUng  its  children.  And  that  work  is,  in  part, 
the  work  of  the  home ;  and,  in  part,  the  work  of  the  Church. 

I.  The  Divine  favour  beaches  the  children  through  good  homes.  Through 
good-charactered  parents  and  wisely  ordered  family  life.  Good  character  has  its 
foundation  in  faith  in  God ;  its  superstructure  is  all  virtue,  including  reverence,  obedi- 
ence, uprightness,  patience,  and  holy  persistency  in  that  which  is  good.  Character  is 
the  supreme  power,  but  it  finds  its  best  expressions  through  the  family  rule.  Parents 
must,  by  due  punishments  and  rewards,  repress  the  evil  and  encourage  the  good.  No 
Divine  lavour  resting  on  our  lives  should  kindle  greater  thankfulness  than  that  shown 
in  providing  for  us  pious  fathers  and  mothers,  and  gracious  home  inSuence. 

II.  The  Divine  favour  reaches  thb  childeen  through  the  Cbubch.  The  con- 
ditions of  modern  civilized  life  put  the  religious  education  of  thousands  of  children 
altogether  into  the  hands  of  Christ's  Church.  Multitudes  of  parents  cannot,  or  will  not, 
train  their  children  in  the  nurture  and  admonition  of  the  Lord.  But  in  all  such  cases 
the  Church  can  do  a  noble  supplemental  work.  We  may  see  the  special  Divine  favour 
resting  on  our  age,  and  the  best  security  for  the  permanence  and  nobility  of  our  nation, 
in  the  wide  spreading  and  vigorous  improvement  of  our  Sunday  schools.  The  "  peace  " 
assured  to  the  children  is  a  term  designed  to  include  all  sorts  of  good.  We  cannot  be 
wrong  in  thinking  that  the  better  tone  of  society  and  family  life  in  our  day  is  the 
direct  result  of  our  increased  concern  for  the  moral  and  religious  culture  of  the  nation's 
ehildren.— B.  T. 

Ver.  14. — The  secret  of  stability.  "  Through  righteousness  shalt  thou  be  established." 
J.  A.  Alexander  paraphrases  thus :  "  When  once  established  by  the  exercise  of  righi- 
eousuess  on  my  part  and  your  own,  you  may  put  far  off  all  dread  of  oppression,  for  you 
have  no  cause  to  fear  it,  and  of  destruction,  for  it  shall  not  come  nigh  you  "  (comp.  A, 
zxxli.  16, 17).  It  is  not  assumed  that  the  restored  Jerusalem  would  have  no  enemies, 
only  that  they  would  have  no  commission  from  God  to  destroy,  aa  the  Assyrians  aoo 


328  THE  BOOK   OF  THE  PROPHET  ISAIAH,     [ch.  liv.  1—17 

fiabyloniaus  had.    There  are  two  sides  of  righteousness  regarded  as  the  ground  of  the 
Ohiirch's,  or  the  Christian's,  stability  and  security. 

I.  Righteousness  ab  the  faithfulness  op  God.  This  is  clearly  in  the  thought 
of  the  prophet,  for  he  has  been  giving  large  promises  from  Ood,  and  naturally  reminds 
of  the  righteousness,  or  faithfulness,  oif  God  as  the  assurance  that  he  will  keep  his  word. 
The  same  ground  of  confidence  is  presented  by  the  apostle.  "  Though  we  believe  not, 
yet  he  abideth  faithful : .  he  cannot  deny  himself."  God's  righteousness  is  our  security, 
because  it  guarantees  that  he  never  promises  (1)  more  than  he  intends  to  perform;  (2) 
more  than  he  can  perform ;  and  (3)  more  than  he  will  perform.  "  Put  not  your  trust 
in  princes,  nor  in  the  sons  of  men,"  for  there  is  no  basis  of  "  righteousness "  in  their 
promises.    Trust  God  utterly,  for  he  is  "righteous." 

II.  Righteousness  as  the  obedience  and  hociness  op  man.  We  might  have  pre- 
served the  covenant-figure,  and  said  the  "faithfulness"  of  man.  Righteous  keeping  of 
covenant  was  the  one  condition  of  stability  for  the  Jewish  nation ;  but  this  was  an 
illustration  of  the  truth  that  good  is,  in  its  nature  as  arranged  by  God,  of  necessity 
permanent.  It  has  no  element  of  weakness  or  decay  in  it.  There  are  no  foes  that  can 
overcome  it.  "  What  can  harm  you,  if  ye  be  followers  of  that  which  is  good  ?  "  Restored 
Jerusalem  must  learn  the  old  lesson,  "  The  reformation  of  manners,  the  restoration  of 
purity,  the  due  administration  of  public  justice,  and  the  prevailing  of  iionesty  and  fair 
dealing  among  men,  are  the  strength  and  stability  of  any  Church  or  state.  The  king- 
dom of  God,  set  up  by  the  gospel  of  Christ,  is  not  meat  and  drink,  but  it  is  righteous- 
ness and  peace,  holiness  and  love."  Of  the  workers  of  righteousness  it  may  always  be 
•aid,  " They  that  do  such  things  shall  never  he  moved" — R.  T. 

Ver.  16. — The  Divine  control  of  evil  forces.  "  I  have  created  the  waster  to  destroy." 
This  is  an  assurance  which  we,  with  our  theological  notions  of  the  sphere  of  Satan,  find 
it  very  difficult  to  realize.  We  cannot  associate  God  directly  with  the  forces  that  work 
evil.  Even  if  we  get  so  far  as  to  say  that  God  permits  evil,  and  overrules  it  for  good, 
we  cannot  see  that  he  actually  sends  the  evil  and  arranges  the  evil,  which  is  as  truly 
his  angel,  his  messenger,  as  any  form  of  good  is.  Perhaps  the  conception  was  less  diffi- 
cult to  a  Jew  than  to  us,  because  he  had  better  notions  of  the  Divine  unitif  than  we 
can  gain.  The  "  waster"  here  is  a  comprehensive  term  for  the  great  conquering  kings 
of  Assyria  and  Babylonia,  at  whose  hands  Israel  had  so  grievously  suffered.  Isaiah 
declares  that  God  raised  them  up;  God  sent  them  forth;  God  gave  them  their 
work.  He  assures  the  new  Jerusalem  that  it  is  quite  safe,  for  God  does  not  intend  to 
send  against  them  any  such  "wasters;"  and  they  may  dismiss  for  ever  from  their 
thoughts  that  any  uther  being  exists  who  can  send  "  wasters  "  forth.  Matthew  Arnold 
says,  "Destroyers  and  destruction  are  God's  work;  they  reach  those  only  whom  he 
means  to  reach,'  and  he  does  not  mean  them  to  reach  Israel." 

I.  God  sends  to  us  all  the  evil  that  comes  to  us.  We  must  never  rest  with 
second  causes,  nor  talk  of  circumstances  as  if  they  were  under  no  wise  control.  We  must 
see  God  in  calamity,  and  enmity,  and  temptation,  and  everything  to  which  we  can 
attach  the  name  evil.  Evil  indeed  is,  oftentimes,  no  more  than  good  which  we  cannot 
understand.  The  supreme  control  of  God  over  all  that  man  calls  evil  is  figured  for  us 
in  Satan,  as  the  angel  of  calamity,  appearing,  to  give  account  of  his  work,  among  the 
sons  of  God  (see  Job  i.,  ii.). 

II.  God  wards  off  all  the  evil  that  might  come  to  ub.  For  there  is  a  sense 
in  which,  as  free-willed  creatures,  we  are  bringing  evil  upon  ourselves;  and  others,  as 
free-willed  creatures,  in  some  limited  sense,  may  contemplate  doing  evil  to  us.  There- 
fore have  we,  in  yer.  17,  the  further  assurance,  "  No  weapon  that  is  formed  against  thee 
shall  prosper ;  and  every  tongue  that  shall  rise  against  thee  for  the  judgment  shalt  thou 
show  to  be  guilty."  It  is  with  God,  and  God  alone,  to  send  into  oui- lives,  or  to  with* 
hold  from  us,  both  the  evU  and  the  good. — &.  T, 


LT.  1— 13.]       THE  BOOK  OF  THE  PBOPHET  ISAIAH. 


329 


EXPOSITION. 


CHAPTER  liV. 


VeM.  1 — 7. — An  Exhobtatiok  to  Spim- 
TDAUTT  AND  Befbntanoe.  The  prophet 
passes  &om  the  ideal  to  the  actual,  from  the 
glorious  future  to  the  unsatisfactory  present. 
The  people  are  not  ripe  for  the  blessings  of 
the  Messianio  kingdom — they  do  not  euffl- 
ciently  value  them.  Hence  a  tender  exhor- 
tation is  addressed  to  them  by  God  himself, 
inviting  them  to  become  more  spiritually 
minded  (vers.  1 — 3),  and  fresh  promises  are 
held  out  to  the  obedient  (vers.  3—5).  The 
disobedient  are  then  somewhat  steinly  ex- 
horted to  turn  from  their  evil  ways  and 
repent  (vers.  6,  7). 

Ver.  1. — Ho,  every  one  that  thirsteth  I 
Though  the  mass  are  gross  and  carnally 
minded,  there  will  ever  be  some  who  have 
higher  aspirations — who  "hunger and  thirst 
after  righteousness"  (Matt.  v.  6),  and  desire 
spiritual  blessings.  These  are  invited,  first 
of  all,  to  oome  and  partake  of  the  good  things 
provided  for  them  in  Messiah's  kingdom. 
Come  ye  to  the  waters  (on  the  spiritual 
symbolism  of  water,  see  the  homiletics  on 
oh.  xliv.  3,  4).  Here  the  "peace"  and 
"righteousness"  of  the  Messianic  kingdom 
(ch.  liv.  13,  14)  are  especially  intended. 
Our  Lord's  oiy  on  the  last  day  of  the  Feast 
of  Tabernacles  (John  vii.  7)  is  clearly  an 
echo  of  this.  Vine  and  milk.  These  are 
not  symbols  of  temporal  blessings,  as  many 
have  thought.  "Wine,  water,  and  milk  are," 
as  Delitzsch  says,  "igurative  representa- 
tions of  spiritual  revival,  re-creiitio*,  and 
nourishment."  Without  money  and  without 
price.  God's  spiritual  gifts  are  freely  given 
to  men;  they  cannot  be  piuobased.  Being 
in  their  own  nature  "more  precious  than 
rubies,"  their  value  transcends  human  means 
of  payment.  They  cannot  even  be  earned 
by  man's  best  works ;  for  man's  btst  works 
ate  comprised  in  his  duty  to  God,  and  liave, 
therefore,  no  purchasing  power.  God  may 
choose  to  reward  them ;  but  if  he  does  it  is 
of  his  free  grace. 

Ver.  2. — Wherefore  do  ye  spend  money  % 
literally,  wherefore  do  ye  weigh  silver  1 — 
silver  being  the  ordinary  currency,  and 
money  transactions,  in  default  of  a  coin  ige, 
being  by  weight  (cf.  Gen.  xxiii.  16 ;  Zeoh. 
xi.  12).  For  that  which  is  not  bread;  i.e. 
"  for  that  which  has  no  real  value — which 
cannot  sustain  you,  which  will  do  you  no 
good."  The  affections  of  the  great  mass  of 
the  Israelites  were  set  on  worldly  things,  on 
enriching  themselves — adding  field  to  field. 


and  Louse  to  bouse  (ch.  ▼.  8).    They  did 

not  care  for  spiritual  blessings,  much  less 
"  hunger  and  thirst "  after  them.  That  which 
satisfieth  not.  Worldly  things  can  never 
satisfy  the  heart,  not  even  the  heart  of  the 
worldly.  "  What  fruit  had  ye  then  in  those 
things,"  says  St.  Paul,  "  whereof  ye  are  now 
ashamed?"  (Bom.  vi.  21).  Hearken  dili- 
gently nnto  me ;  rather,  hearken,  oh,  hearken 
unto  me.  The  phrase  is  one  of  earnest  ex- 
hortation. It  implies  the  strong  disinclina- 
tion of  Israel  to  listen,  and  seeks  to  over- 
come it  (compare  the  opening  words  of  the 
next  verse).  Let  your  soul  delight  itself  in 
fatness  (comp.  Ps.  xxxvi.  8 ;  Ixiii.  5 ;  and 
ch.  XXV.  6).  The  spiritual  blessings  of  the 
Messianic  kingdom  are  richer  dainties  than 
any  that  this  world  has  to  offer.  The  soul 
that  obtains  them  "  delights  "  in  them,  and 
is  satisfied  with  them  (Ps.  xvii.  15). 

Ver.  3. — Come  unto  me  (comp.  ver.  1, 
"  Come  ye  to  the  waters  ").  God  dispenses 
the  waters  (see  ch.  xliv.  3).  I  will  make  an 
everlasting  covenant  with  yon.  That  the 
"  evei  lasting  covenant "  once  made  between 
God  and  man  had  been  broken  by  man,  and 
by  Israel  especially,  is  a  paH  of  the  teaching 
contained  in  the  earlier  portion  of  Isaiah 
(ch.  xxiv.  5).  We  find  the  same  asserted  in 
the  prophecies  of  his  contemporary,  Hosea 
(vi.  7).  It  would  natursiUy  follow  from 
this  that,  unless  God  gave  up  man  alto- 
gether, he  would  enter  into  a  new  covenant 
with  him.  Accordingly,  this  new  covenant 
is  announced,  both  in  Hosea  (ii.  18 — 20)  and 
in  the  later  chapters  of  Isaiah,  repeatedly 
(ch.  xlii.  6 ;  xlix.  8 ;  liv.  10 ;  Iv.  3 ;  Ivi.  4, 
6;  lix.  21;  1x1.' 8).  Having  been  thus  set 
before  the  nation,  it  is  further  enlarged  upon 
by  Jeremiah  (xxxi.  31 — 33;  xxxii.  40;  1.  5) 
and  Ezekiel  (xvi.  60 — 62 ;  xxxiv.  25 ;  xxxvii. 
26 — 28).  Almost  all  commentators  allow 
that  the  Christian  covenant  is  intended — 
that  "new  covenant"  (Heb.  ix.  15)  under 
which  man  obtains  pardon  and  salvation 
through  the  Mediatorship  of  Christ.  Eveu 
the  sure  mercies  of  David.  The  "  sure  mer- 
cies of  David"  are  the  loving  and  merciful 
promises  which  God  made  to  him.  These 
included  the  promise  that  the  Messiah 
should  come  of  his  seed,  and  sit  on  his 
throne,  and  establish  an  everlasting  king- 
dom (Ps.  Ixxxix.  2—5, 19 — 37),  and  triumph 
over  death  and  hell  (Ps.  xvi.  9, 10),  and  giva 
peace  and  happiness  to  Israel  (Pg.  cxxxii. 
15—18).  The  promises  made  to  David, 
rightly  understood,  involve  all  the  essential 
points  of  the  Christian  covenant. 

Ver.  4. — B  ahold,  I  have  given  him  for  a 
witness.  By  ordinary  rules  of  grammar,  the 
pronoun  "him"  should  refer  to  David'  an4 


330 


THE  BOOK  OF  THE  PROPHET  ISAIAH.      [ch.  lv.  1—13. 


80  the  passage  is  understood  by  Gesenius, 
Maurer,  Hitzig,  Ewald,  Knobel,  Delitzsoh, 
and  Mr.  Cheyne.  But,  as  Isaiah  frequently 
Bet8  aside  ordinary  grammatical  rules,  and 
as  the  position  to  the  person  here  spoken  of 
seems  too  high  for  the  historical  David, 
a  large  number  of  commentators,  including 
Vitringa,  Michaelis,  Dathe,  EoseninuUer, 
Umbieit,  and  Dr.  Kay,  consider  tliat  the 
Messiah  is  intended.  It  is  certainly  difficult 
to  see  how  the  histoiical  Dayid  could  be,  at 
this  time  and  in  the  future,  a  "  leader  and 
commander  to  the  peoples  "  who  were  about 
to  flock  into  the  Messianic  kingdom.  A 
witness  ...  a  leader  and  commander.  Christ 
was  all  these.  He  "  came  to  bear  witness  to 
the  truth"  (John  xviii.  37),  and  "before 
Pilate  witnessed  a  good  confession  "  (1  Tim. 
vi.  13).  He  "feeds  and  leads"  his  penple 
(Rev.  vii.  17),  and  is  the  "Commander" 
under  whose  banner  they  serve  (2  Tim.  ii. 
3,  4).  What  he  is  to  his  people,  he  is  also 
to  the  "peoples"  generally;  for  they  have 
been  called  into  his  kingdom.  People  .  .  . 
people;  tsAheT, peoples. 

Yer.  5. — Thou  shalt  call  a  nation  that  then 
knowest  not  (comp.  Fs.  zviiL  43).  The  ob- 
ject of  address  in  this  verse  appears  to  be 
the  Messiah.  He,  at  his  coming,  will  "  call " 
into  his  kingdom  "a  nation,"  or  rather, 
"  people,"  with  whom  he  has  had  no  cove- 
nant hitherto;  and  they  will  readily  and 
gladly  obey  the  call.  Thus  God's  kingdom 
will  be  enlarged,  and  Israel's  glory  will  be 
increased.  Because  of  the  Lord  ...  for  he 
hath  glorified  thee.  The  great  cause  of  the 
attraction  will  be  the  "glory"  which  God 
the  Father  has  bestowed  upon  his  Son,  by 
raising  him  from  the  dead,  and  exalting 
him  to  a  seat  at  his  riglit  hand  in  heaven 
(Acts  ii.  32—35 ;  iii.  13—15). 

Ver.  6. — Seek  ye  the  Lord.  Again  the 
strain  changes.  The  people  are  once  more 
addressed,  but  in  a  tone  of  reproiich.  Israel 
must  "seek  the  Lord"  witliout  delay,  or  the 
opportunity  will  be  past;  God  will  have 
witlidrawn  himself  from  tliem.  He  "  will 
not  alway  be  chiding,  neither  keepeth  he 
his  anger  for  ever  "  (Fs.  ciii.  9). 

Ver.  7. — Let  the  wicked  forsake  his  way ; 
I.e.  his  mode  of  life.  A  general  promise 
of  forgiveness  of  sin  upon  repentance  and 
amendment  of  life  was  first  given  to  Israel 
through  Solomon  (2  Ohron.  vii.  14).  The 
doctrine  is  largely  preached  by  the  pro- 
phets ;  but  is  nowhere  more  distinctly  and 
emphatically  laid  down  than  in  this  place. 
God's  will  is  to  "multiply  pardon,"  if  man 
will  only  turn  to  him. 

Vers.  8—13.  —  A  Fkbsh  Asstoanob  op 
Delitebanoe  fbom  Babylon.  Man  can 
fcaroely  conceive  of  the  deliverance  which 
God  designs ;  but  God's  thoughts  are  not  as 


man's  (vers.  8,  9).  God's  word,  once  pro- 
nounced, is  potent  to  effect  its  purpose  (vers. 
10,  11).  Deliverance  from  Babylon,  having 
been  promised,  will  take  place,  and  will  be 
accompanied  by  all  manner  of  spiritual 
blessings  (vers.  12,  13). 

Vers.  8,  9. — My  thoughts  are  not  your 
thoughts.  Though  man  is  made  in  God's 
image  (Gen.  i.  27),  yet  the  nature  of  God  in 
every  way  infinitely  transcends  tliat  of  man. 
Both  the  thouglits  and  the  acts  of  God 
surjiass  man's  understaml iug.  Men  find  it 
hard  to  pardon  those  who  liave  offended 
thorn ;  God  can  pardon,  and  "  pardon  abun- 
dantly." Men  cannot  conceive  of  coming 
cliange8,when  they  pass  certain  limits.  God 
knows  assuredly  what  changes  are  approach- 
ing, since  they  are  his  doing. 

Ver.  10  — As  the  rain  .  .  .  and  the  snow. 
The  rain  and  the  snow  are  God's  ministers 
(Ps.  cxlviii.  8),  and  go  forth  from  Lim,  just 
as  his  word  does.  They  have  an  appointtd 
work  to  do,  and  do  not  return  to  him,  whose 
ministers  they  are,  until  they  have  done  it. 
It  is  best  to  translate,  vrith  Delitzsoh  and 
Mr.  Cheyne,  "As  tlie  rain  cometh  down, 
and  the  snow  from  heaven,  and  returneth 
not  thither,  except  it  hath  watered  the 
earth,"  etc.  The  writer  is,  apparently,  aware, 
as  the  writer  of  Ecclesiastes  is,  that  the 
water  which  falls  from  heaven  in  the  shape 
of  rain  does  return  thither  again  in  the 
shape  of  vapour  (see  Eccles,  i.  7). 

Ver.  11. — So  shall  my  word  be.  God's 
word  is  creative.  "With  the  utterance  the 
result  is  achieved.  Hence  the  sublime  pas- 
sage, which  even  heathenism  could  admire 
(Longin.. '  De  Sublim.,'  §  9),  "And  God  said. 
Let  there  be  ligVit :  and  there  was  light " 
(Gen.  i.  3).  Hence,  too,  the  more  general 
statement,  "  By  the  Word  of  the  Lord  were 
the  heavens  made ;  and  all  the  host  of  them 
by  the  breath  of  his  mouth"  (Ps.  xxxiii.  6; 
comp.  Ps.  cxlviii.  5).  But  it  shaU  acoom- 
plish ;  rather,  unless  it  has  accomplished. 
There  is  a  mixture  of  two  constructions,  "  It 
sliall  not  return  void,"  and  "It  shall  not 
return  unless  it  has  accomplished,"  etc.  It 
shall  prosper.  Every  word  that  proceedeth 
out  of  the  mouth  of  God  has  a  prosperous 
course.  It  is  endued  witli  life  from  God, 
and  (as  Delitzsoh  says)  "runs  like  a  swift 
messenger  through  nature  and  the  world  of 
man,  there  to  melt  the  ice,  as  it  were,  and 
here  to  heal  and  to  save ;  and  it  does  not 
return  from  its  course  till  it  has  given  effect 
to  the  will  of  the  Sender."  The  special 
"  word "  which  the  prophet  has  here  in 
mind  is  the  promise,  so  frequently  given,  of 
deliverance  firom  Babylon  and  return  in 
peace  and  joy  to  Palestine.  But  he  carries 
his  teaching  beyond  the  immediate  occasion, 
for  the  benefit  of  the  people  of  God  in  all  ages 


OH.  LT.  1—13.]      THE  BOOK  OF  THE  PROPHET  ISAIAH. 


331 


Yer.  12. — Te  shall  go  out  with  joy,  and 
be  led  forth  with  peace  (oomp.  oh.  xxzv.  10; 
xl.  9—11 ;  xliii.  i—S,  19—21,  etc.).  A 
strong  oontrast  is  frequently  drawn  between 
the  exodus  from  Babylon  and  that  from 
Egypt.  On  the  former  occasion  all  was 
hurry,  alarm,  disquiet,  danger.  The  later 
exodus  will  be  accompanied  witL  "  peace  " 
and  "joy"  (see  ch.  11.  9—16,  etc.).  (For 
the  fulfilment,  see  Ezra  i.,  ii.,  and  vii.,  viii.) 
The  moontains  and  the  hills  shall  break  forth 
before  yon  into  singing.  All  nature  shall 
rejoice  at  your  deliverance,  especially  the 
noblest  and  the  grandest  parts  of  nature — 
"the  mountains  and  the  hills."  Isaiah's 
admiration  of  mountains  continually  reveals 
itself  throughout  the  work  (ch.  t.  25 ;  xiii. 
2,  4 ;  xiv.  25 ;  xxii.  5 ;  xxx.  17,  25 ;  xxxiv. 
3;  xl.  4,  9,  12;  xlii.  11,  15,  etc.).  It  is 
quite  in  his  manner  to  speak  of  nature  as 
bursting  forth  into  singing  (ch.  xxxT.  2; 
xliT.  23 ;  xlix.  13).  All  the  trees  of  the  field 
■htdl  olap  their  hands.  The  metaphor  is  not 
found  elsewhere  in  Isaiah,  but  appears  in 
Pa.  xoriii  8. 


Yer.  13.— Instead  of  the  thorn  shall  eome 
up  the  fir  tree.  "  Briars  and  thorns  "  were 
to  overgrow  the  nnfruitful  vineyard,  accord- 
ing to  ch.  V.  6;  and  to  cover  the  land  of 
God's  people,  according  to  ch.  xxxii.  13. 
This  would  be  literally  the  case  to  a  large 
extent,  while  the  land  was  allowed  to  lie 
waste.  The  literal  meaning  is  not,  however, 
the  whole  meaning,  or  even  the  main  mean- 
ing, here.  "  Briars  and  thorns  "  represent  a 
general  state  of  wretchedness  and  sin.  The 
"fir"  and  "myrtle"  represent  a  happy  ex- 
ternal condition  of  life,  in  which  men  "  do 
righteously."  It  shall  be  to  the  Lord  for  a 
name.  This  "regenerated  creation"  will 
show  forth  the  glory  of  God  to  mankind  at 
large,  and  "  get  him  a  name  "  among;  them 
(comp.  ch.  Ixiii.  12 ;  Jer.  xiii.  11).  For  an 
everlasting  sign.  It  will  also  be  to  God 
himself  an  enduring  sign  of  the  covenant  of 
pence  which  he  has  made  with  his  people, 
not  to  hide  his  face  from  them  any  more,  but 
to  have  mercy  on  them  "with  everlasting 
kindness  "  (oh.  liv.  7 — 10). 


HOMILETICS. 

Ver.  2. — ITie  earthJy  ohjeeti  of  desire  do  not  satisfy  ;  the  heavenly  objects  not  only 
satisfy,  tut  delight.  Man  is  so  constituted  as  to  desire  a  great  variety  of  objects,  often 
with  extreme  eagerness,  but  rarely  to  find  in  these  objects,  when  they  are  attained,  the 
satisfaction  for  which  he  looked.  "  Man  never  is,  but  always  to  he,  blest/'  says  one  of 
our  poets;  and  the  fact  is  so  nearly  universal,  that  some  tell  us  it  is  the  pursuit  of  an 
object,  not  its  attainment  that  gives  us  pleasure.  Manifestly,  the  child's  objects  do  not 
satisfy  the  boy,  or  the  boy's  the  man ;  nor  do  the  man's  objects  at  his  entrance  on  tjie 
struggle  of  life  generally  appear  very  desirable  as  he  nears  the  close.  Most  men's 
history  is  a  long  series  of  disappointments.  The  boy  desires  freedom  from  restraint, 
and  to  have  his  time  at  his  own  disposal ;  but  no  sooner  does  he  obtain  his  wish  than 
time  hangs  heayy  on  his  hands,  and  he  does  not  know  what  to  do  with  it.  The  best- 
loved  amusement  does  not  please  for  long — the  pleasures  of  eatiug  and  drinking  pall; 
drunkenness  and  excess  are  found  to  have  attached  to  them  an  overplus  of  painful 
sensations ;  the  praise  of  men,  distinction,  fame,  when  they  have  been  enjoyed  for  a 
short  time,  appear  worthless;  wealth,  comfort,  ease,  equally  fail  to  satisfy.  Men 
labour,  as  a  general  rule, during  the  greater  part  of  their  lives,"  for  that  which  satisfieth 
not."  Only  a  fortunate  few  learn  early  to  set  their  affections  on  objects  of  a  different 
character.  Heavenly  objects  are  satisfying.  He  that  drinks  of  that  water  of  life 
which  Christ  supplies,  thirsts  no  more  (John  iv.  14).  The  heavenly  things  do  not 
pass  away — they  remain.  The  water  that  Christ  gives  us  becomes,  in  us,  "  a  well  of 
water  springing  up  into  everlasting  life"  (John  iv.  14).  God's  favourable  regard,  God's 
peace,  God's  blessing,  are  eternally  objects  of  desire,  and  their  possession  is  happiness. 
He  who  has  them  needs  nothing  more,  desires  nothing  more,  finds  them  sufiScient  for 
him.  Nor  is  his  state  one  of  mere  passive  acquiescence — his  "  soul  is  delighted  with 
fatness  "  (ver.  2).     He  "  enters  into  the  joy  of  his  Lord  "  (Matt.  xxv.  21). 

Ver.  11. — The  vital  force  of  the  WordofOod.  There  is  a  strange  force  in  every  utter- 
ance of  God.  In  the  account  of  creation  given  in  Genesis  we  find,  not  only  light,  but 
all  the  other  portions  of  the  universe  which  it  pleased  God  to  make,  created  by  an 
utterance — a  word  (see  Gen.  i.  6,  9,  11, 14,  20,  24,  26).  God  said,  "  Let  there  be,"  and 
at  once  there  was.  "  He  commanded,  and  they  were  created  "  (Ps.  oxlviii.  5).  So  the 
Sou  of  God,  when  upon  earth,  gave  life  with  a  word  (John  xi.  43,  44),  and  destroyed  it 


332  THE  BOOK  OF  THE   PROPHET   ISAIAH.       [oh.  lv.  1— la 

with  a  word  (Matt.  xxi.  19) ;  with  a  word  cast  out  devils  (Mark  ix.  25,  26),  healed 
diseases  (Matt.  xii.  13),  calmed  the  tempest  (Mark  iv.  39),  caused  his  enemies  to  "fall 
to  the  ground  "  (John  xviii.  6).  Isaiah,  in  the  present  place,  declares  three  things  ol 
God's  Word. 

I.  God's  Word  does  not  return  to  him  void.  His  Word  accomplishes  itself.  It 
is  "  sent  forth,"  whether  upon  earth  or  in  the  heavenly  sphere ;  and  in  either  case 
"  runneth  very  swiftly  "  (Ps.  cxlvii.  15).  In  no  case  does  it  "  return  to  him  void."  It 
has  always  an  object,  an  end ;  and  it  would  contradict  the  omnipotence  of  God  that 
that  end  should  be  in  no  way  advanced  by  a  means  which  God  made  use  of  in  order  to 
advance  it. 

II.  God's  Word  accomplishes  that  which  God  pleases  that  it  should  accom- 
plish. Gtod's  Word  often  does  not  accomplish  all  that  we  might  have  expected  from 
it.  His  offer  of  salvation  freely  to  all  does  not  effect  universal-  salvation.  His  call  of 
individuals  is  disobeyed  by  numbers  of  those  who  hear  it.  Yet  always  his  Word 
accomplishes  something ;  and  that  "  something"  is  what  he  designed  it  to  accomplish. 
He  "  knows  the  end  from  the  beginning,"  and  is  not  disappointed,  even  when  the 
results  are  most  scanty. 

III.  God's  Word,  in  evert  oasb,  prospers  in  respect  of  the  end  whereto  he 
SENDS  it.  Every  work  that  God  takes  in  hand  "  prospers "  more  or  less.  The  end 
aimed  at  is  often  quite  other  from  that  which  we  should  have  imagined ;  and  what 
seems  to  us  failure  is  only  failure  from  our  point  of  view,  not  from  the  Divine  stand- 
point. God  cannot  fail  to  accomplish  any  end  that  he  really  proposes  to  himself. 
Every  word  that  procetds  from  his  mouth  has  an  end,  but  that  end  is  known  only  to 
him ;  and  it  may  often  be  that  he  alone  knows  of  its  accomplishment.  Its  accomplish- 
ment is  always,  with  respect  to  the  intention,  full,  complete,  such  as  satisfies  him. 


HOMILIES  BY  VARIOUS  AUTHORa 

Ver»,  1 — 5. —  The  Messianic  blessings.  I.  The  invitation.  "  Ho !"  A  cry  arousing 
attention  (ch.  i.  4)  or  expressing  pity  (ch.  xvii.  12).  1.  It  is  addressed  to  thirsty  ones. 
The  figure  occurs  in  ch.  xliv.  3  also.  What  more  powerful  figure  can  there  be  (or  desire, 
and  for  the  pain  of  unsatisfied  desire  f  It  is  especially  Oriental.  It  brings  up  the 
image  of  the  hot,  sandy  waste,  and  by  contrast  that  of  the  cool,  bubbling  fountain. 
Hunger  and  thirst  are  the  "eldest  of  the  passions,"  and  it  may  be  added,  in  a  sense, 
the  youngest;  for  age  cannot  still  them,  nor  constant  satisfaction  take  off  their  edge. 
They  are  daily,  they  are  recurrent,  they  are  the  expression  of  life  itself.  Hence  they 
may  well  symbolize  the  ardent  desire  for  salvation  (of.  John  vii.  37 ;  Ps.  xlii.  2 ; 
Ixiii.  1 ;  cxliii.  6).  And  what  can  better  represent  salvation  than  water — the  well  that 
springs  up  into  everlasting  life?  Waters,  floods,  overflowing  streams,  or  copious 
showers,  are  often  used  to  denote  abundant  blessings  from  God,  especially  blessings 
under  the  rule  of  the  Messiah  (oh.  xxxv.  6  ;  xliii.  20  ;  xliv.  3).  2.  It  is  addressed  to 
each  and  all.  The  invitation  is  bounded  only  by  the  thirst — the  felt  need.  Not  the 
rich,  the  noble,  the  great ;  not  the  select  and  the  few ;  btit  those  who  partake  of  a 
common  want,  and  are  capable  of  a  common  satisfaction.  "  It  proves  that  provision 
has  been  made  for  all.  Can  God  invite  to  a  salvation  which  has  not  been  provided  ? 
Can  he  ask  a  n.an  to  partake  of  a  banquet  which  has  no  existence?  Can  he  ask  a  man 
to  drink  of  waters  when  there  are  none  ?  Can  he  tantalize  the  hopes  and  mock  the 
miseries  of  men  by  inviting  them  to  enter  a  heaven  where  they  would  be  unwelcome, 
or  to  dwell  in  mansions  which  have  never  been  provided  ? "  (cf.  Matt.  ix.  28 ;  Mark 
xvi.  15  ;  John  vii.  37  ;  Rev.  xxii.  17).  It  is  addressed  especially  to  the  poor.  "  No 
man  can  excuse  himself  for  not  being  a  Christian  because  he  is  poor;  no  man  who  is 
rich  can  boast  that  he  has  bought  salvation." 

II.  The  blessings  described.  "  Buy."  The  word  is  properly  used  of  grain.  "  Iti 
use  here  shows  that  the  food  referred  to  can  be  called  equally  well '  bread '  or  '  wina 
and  milk,'  i.e.  it  belongs  to  the  supernatural  order  of  things  "  (Cbeyne).  And  the  buying 
is  to  be  understood  spiritually.  The  blessings  are  only  to  be  obtained  for  "  that  which 
is  not  money  and  not  a  price."  It  is  faith,  or  the  hearing  of  the  inner  ear  :Jver.  3), 
which  is  meant.     In  the  wine  we  may  find  a  symbol  of  gladness  (Judg.  ix.  13 ;  2  Sara. 


OH.  LV,  1—13.]       THE  BOOK  OP  THE  PROPHET  ISAIAH.  333 

xiil.  28  ;  Ps.  civ.  15).  The  blessings  of  salvation  cheer  men  amidst  their  sorrows ;  and 
one  of  the  firstfruits  of  the  Spirit  is  joy.  Milk,  again,  is  the  symbol  of  nourishment 
(Deut.  xxxii.  14 ;  Judg.  iv.  1 ;  v.  25 ;  John  vii.  22  ;  1  Cor.  ix.  7).  It  is  joined  with 
"wine"  and  with  "honey"  in  Cant.  iv.  11 ;  v.  1.  These  blessinrjs  areWcA  and  satisfying 
as  compared  with  the  pleasures  of  the  world.  The  latter  may  be  emphatically  described 
as  not-bread — less  satisfying.  Happiness  is  our  being's  aim.  But  men  seek  it  in 
erroneous  ways.  Bread  is  the  support  of  life,  and  stands  as  the  symbol  of  all  that 
conduces  to  support  life  in  the  spiritual  sense.  "In  ambition,  vanity,  and  vice,  men 
are  as  disappointed  as  he  who  should  spend  his  money  and  procure  notliing  that  would 
sustain  life."  Men  toil  for  that  which  defeats  their  aim,  because  it  does  not  sntisfy. 
The  blossom  of  pleasure  "  goes  up  as  dust ; "  the  fruits  are  those  of  the  Dead  Sea, 
"  turning  to  ashes  on  the  lips."  The  deaire  of  the  human  soul  is  as  insatiable  as  the 
grave,  Where  is  the  man  who  has  been  satisfied  with  ambition?  Alexander  wept  on 
the  throne  of  the  world,  and  Charles  V.  came  down  from  the  throne  to  private  life, 
because  he  had  not  found  royalty  to  satisfy  the  soul.  In  one  respect  we  are  all  like 
Alexander — our  happiness  is  disproportioned  to  our  appetites.  Nature  seems  scanty, 
aud,  though  we  have  never  so  much,  we  still  long  for  something  or  other  more.  But 
to  those  who  hearlcen  to  God,  there  is  promised  a  perfect  luxuriation  (ch.  Ixvi.  11) 
in  good  things.  "Fatness"  stands  for  the  richest  food  (Grcn.  xxvii.  28 — 39;  Job 
xxxvi.  16;  Ps.  Ixv.  11),  and  hence  for  the  abundance  of  blessing  flowing  from  the 
favour  of  God  (Ps.  xxxvi.  9 ;  Ixiii.  5).  "  Man  seems  as  boundless  in  his  desires  as  God 
in  his  Being :  and  therefore  nothing  but  God  can  satisfy  him."  All  else  is  "  love  lost" 
— is  part  of  "  the  great  lie  or  cheat  that  overspreads  the  world." 

III.  The  BVEKLASTiNa  COVENANT.  Mention  of  it  is  made  seven  times  in  Isaiah. 
The  idea  of  the  original  covenant,  broken  by  Isr,\el  and  renewed  by  Jehovah,  is  specially 
characteristic  of  Jeremiah  (xxxi.  31 — 33 ;  xxxii.  40 ;  1.  5).  The  loving-kindnesses 
shown  to  David  by  Jehovah  are  meant  (cf.  ch.  Ixiii.  7  ;  Ps.  Ixxxix.  49  ;  cvii.  43 ;  Lam. 
iij.  22).  "  David  is  probably  to  be  understood  in  a  representative  sense;  he  is  radiant 
with  the  reflected  light  and  spirituality  of  the  Me.'-sianio  age."  These  luvin^j-kindnesses 
are  "unfailing"  (Ps.  Ixxxix.  28).  For  Jehovah's  word  cannot  be  broken,  and  the 
reward  of  piety  extends  to  the  latest  posterity  (Exod.  xx.  5,  6).  David  is  termed  a 
"  witness  to  the  people,"  apparently  in  the  san>--  li.u'esentative  sense.  God,  then,  binds 
himself  by  solemn  promises  to  be  their  Gou,  their  Protector,  and  their  Friend.  The 
promise  was  not  to  be  revoked,  was  to  remain  in  force  for  ever;  and  he  would  be  their 
God  to  all  eternity.  Let  them,  then,  hear,  and  their  soul  shall  live.  Religion  is  life 
(John  vi.  33  ;  v.  40 ;  viii.  13 ;  xx.  31 ;  Eom.  v.  17,  18 ;  vi.  4 ;  viii.  G ;  1  John  v.  12 ; 
Rev.  ii.  7 — 10).  Bearing  is  the  means  whereby  the  soul  is  enlivened  (John  vi.  45; 
V.  25 ;  Acts  ii.  37 ;  Matt.  xiii.). — J. 

Vers.  6 — 13. — Exhortations  and  assurance.  I.  Exhoetations.  "  Seek  ye  Jehovah." 
This  is  the  beginning  of  a  religious  life — to  seek  for  God,  to  inquire  for  his  ways  (Deut. 
iv.  29  ;  Job  v.  8  ;  viii.  5  ;  Ps.  ix.  10  ;  xiv.  2  ;  xxvii.  8).  "  Wliile  he  may  be  found  " 
(Pa.  xxxii.  6) — "in  a  time  of  finding."  For  a  bitter  "day"  will  come,  when  woe  to 
his  foes  (ch.  Ixv.  6,  7)!  It  is  hinted  that  a  time  will  come  when  the  offer  will  be 
withdrawn.  "  If  a  man  will  not  do  so  simple  a  thing  as  seek  for  mercy,  as  ask  for 
pardon,  he  ought  to  perish.  The  uiiiverse  will  approve  the  condemnation  of  such  a  man." 
"  Who  knows  what  a  day  may  bring  forth,  and  what  may  be  the  dangers  of  an  hour's 
delay  ?  This  is  most  sure,  that  every  particular  repeated  act  of  sin  sets  us  one  advance 
nearer  to  hell.  Who  can  tell,  wbde  we  go  on  our  audacious  course  of  sin,  but  God  may 
swear  in  his  wrath  against  us,  and  rej,ister  our  names  in  the  black  rolls  of  damnation? 
And  then  our  condition  is  sealed  and  determined  for  ever."  "  Call  upon  him ; "  i.e. 
implore  his  mercy  (Joel  ii.  32;  Rom.  x.  13).  How  easy  the  terms  of  salvation!  how 
just  the  condemnation  ot  the  sinner  who  calls  not  on  God,  first  for  pardon,  then  for  a 
share  in  the  promises  (Jer.  xxix.  12 — 14)  1  God  (according  to  the  manner  of  man's 
thoughts)  seems  to  be  nearer  at  sonje  times  than  at  others  to  men.  Some  special 
influences  are  brought  to  bear ;  some  facilities  of  salvation.  "  He  comes  near  to  us  in 
the  preaching  of  his  Word,  when  it  is  borne  home  with  power  to  the  conscience;  in  his 
providence,  when  he  strikes  down  a  friend,  and  comes  into  the  very  circle  where  we 
move,  or  the  veiy  dwelling  where  we  abide  ;  when  be  lays  his  hand  upon  us  in  sick- 


894  THE   BOOK  OF  THE   PROPHET  ISAIAH.       [09.  lv.  1—18. 

ness.  And  he  is  neair  to  U8  by  day  and  by  night ;  in  a  revival  of  religion,  or  when  a 
pious  friend  pleads  with  us,  God  is  near  to  us  then,  and  is  calling  us  to  his  favour. 
These  are  favourable  times  for  salvation — times  which,  if  unimproved,  return  no  more." 
"  Let  the  ungodly  forsake  his  way,  and  the  man  of  iniquity  his  thoughts."  To  seek 
Jehovah  must  involve  the  renouncing  of  all  other  gods ;  the  calling  upon  him,  the 
cessation  of  prayer  in  heathen  temples;  and,  with  this,  all  the  "thoughts,"  the  habits 
and  feelings,  of  impure  heathen  life.  It  is  to  reoounce  corruption  and  destruction  for 
blessedness  and  peace,  which  are  contained  in  the  thoughts  of  Jehovah  (Ps.  xxxvi. 
6,  6 ;  Jer.  zxix.  11).  "  He  has  plans  for  accomplishing  bis  purposes  which  are  different 
from  ours,  and  he  secures  our  welfare  by  schemes  that  cross  our  own.  He  disappoints 
our  hopes,  foils  our  expectations,  crosses  our  designs,  removes  our  property  or  our 
friends,  and  tbwarts  our  purposes  in  life.  He  leads  us  in  a  path  we  bad  nut  intended, 
and  secures  our  ultimate  happiness  in  modes  which  we  should  not  have  thought  of,  and 
which  are  contrary  to  all  our  designs  and  desires."" 

IL  Assurance  of  fotukb  felicity.  1.  The  certainty.  God's  purposes  fulfil 
themselves.  They  are  as  certain  as  the  law  of  gravitation,  as  the  falling  of  rain  and 
snow.  In  poetic  religious  thought  these  elements  of  nature  are  his  angels  (cf.  Ps. 
cxlviii.  8 ;  cii.  4).  They  fulfil  his  purpose  in  inanimate  nature ;  so  shall  his  Word 
fulfil  his  purpose  in  the  moral  world-^it  shall  not  return  empty,  nor  until  it  has  done 
its  work.  (On  truth  compared  to  rain  or  dew,  see  Deut.  xxxii.  2 ;  Ps.  Ixxii.  6 ;  2  Sam. 
xxiiL  4 ;  ch.  v.  6.)  2.  Its  glory  and  joy.  The  exode  from  Babylon  is  not  only  meant, 
but  the  glorious  condition  of  Israel  after  the  return.  It  is  compared  to  the  transition 
from  tbs  wilderness  (the  misery  of  the  exile),  vfith  its  monotonous  dwarf  shrubs,  to  a 
park  of  beautiful  trees  (ch.  xli.  18, 19),  in  the  midst  of  which  Israel  is  to  walk  "in 
solemn  troops  and  sweet  societies  "  (so  in  ch.  xxxv.  9).  3.  The  sympathy  of  nature. 
(For  similar  views,  see  ch.  xiv.  8 ;  xxxv.  1,  2, 10 ;  xlii.  10,  11 ;  xliv.  23.  So  in 
Virgil,  'EcL,'  v.  62;  and  in  Oriental  poetry  generally.)  When  the  god  Bama  was 
going  to  the  desert,  it  was  said  to  him,  "  The  trees  will  watob  for  you;  they  will  say, 
'  Ho  is  come  I  be  is  come ! '  and  the  white  flowers  will  clap  their  hands.  The  leaves 
as  they  shake  will  say,  '  Come !  come  I '  and  the  thorny  places  will  be  changed  into 
gardens  of  flowers."  A  change  will  be  produced  in  the  moral  condition  of  the  world,  as 
great  as  if  the  useless  thorn  should  be  succeeded  by  beautiful  and  useful  trees.  It  is  of 
the  very  soul  of  poetry  that  it  hints  and  presages  spiritual  events  which  cannot  be 
made  clear  to  the  senses  nor  certain  to  the  understanding.—^. 

Vet.  1.— The  smd's  thirst  satisfied.  "Ho,  every  one  that  tbirstethl"  This  is  a 
Divine  invitation,  and  as  such  shows  us  the  natwe  of  Ood,  which  is  in  itself  a  healing 
and  a  satisfying  nature,  finding  expression  in  the  incarnation  and  redemption  of  our 
Lord  Jesus  Christ. 

I.  The  awaeenino  socl.  "  Thirsteth.*'  When  the  soul  is  quickened  and  feels 
new  life,  then  is  consciousness  of  need — ^need  of  God.  New  thirsts  are  sometimes 
awakened  in  human  nature — thirsts  for  love  and  friendship;  and  in  the  intellectual 
nature,  thirsts  for  knowledge  and  mental  light.  This  is  the  highest  thirst — soul-thirst 
— which  God  by  his  Spirit  alone  can  satisfy. 

II.  The  ebbponsibilitt  of  the  soul.  "  Come  ye."  We  must  seek  for  friendship, 
seek  for  knowledge,  and  so  we  must  be  searchers  after  God.  Finding  Christ,  we  must 
also  follow  him,  and  come  to  the  waters  of  forgiveness,  of  purity,  and  of  immortal 
blessedness. 

III.  The  chabity  op  God.  "God  is  love."  Amazing,  free,  boundless  love.  Haring 
made  provision  for  our  salvation,  God  says,  "  All  things  are  now  ready ;  come."  The 
marriage>banquet  is  open  to  us  all.  The  spread  table  is  God's  own  table,  and  we  an 
to  be  receivers  of  bis  fulness  of  grace,  "  without  money  and  without  price." — ^W.  U.  S. 

Ver.  2. — Foolish  investments.  "  Wherefore  do  ye  spend  money  for  that  which  ii 
not  bread  ?  and  yonr  laoour  for  that  which  satisfieth  not  ?  "  This  is  man's  great  miiery, 
that  he  has  the  "deceived  heart "  which  leads  him  to  false  investments. 

L  SouL-BATisFAonoN.  The  soul  is  made  for  God,  and  there  is  no  bread  that  will 
satisfy  man  but  God  himself.  "  I  am  the  living  Bread,"  says  Christ.  Bread  of  fortune, 
bread  of  gold,  bread  of  aesthetic  beauty,  bread  of  worldly  honour, — these  only  satisfy  the 


OH.  LV.  1—18.]      THE  BOOK  OF  THE  PROPHET  ISAIAH.  836 


ontward  man,  and  leave  "the  hidden  man  of  the  heart"  hungry  and  starven.  Yet 
men  spend  their  money — that  is,  their  time,  strength,  enthusiasai,  and  energy — on  sham 
bread. 

II,  SonL-ATTBNTioN.  "Hearken  diligently  unto  me."  For  God  has  spoken — ^in 
nature,  in  conscience,  by  the  prophets  and  by  his  own  Son,  the  express  Image  of  his 
Person.  1.  Qod,  who  made  the  soul,  knows  all  Us  mysterious  depths  and  needs.  2. 
God,  who  redeemed  the  soul,  knows  that  without  pardon  man  knows  no  peace,  and 
without  life  in  God  he  knows  no  blessedness.  The  "delights"  of  a  godly  man  attest 
the  change  in  his  nature — he  "  joys  in  God,  by  whom  he  has  received  the  atonement." 
— W.  M.  S. 

Ver.  5. — Man's  true  glory.  "  The  Holy  One  of  Israel,  he  hath  glorified  thee."  We 
need  to  fill  the  word  "glory,"  which  often  has  such  false  renderings,  with  its  true  and 
ancient  meaning. 

I.  TuuB  BELIGION  OLOBIFIES  MAN.  He  canuot  be  really  glorified  by  titles  or 
splendours  of  fame,  but  only  by  beauty  and  majesty  of  being.  God  says,  "  I  will 
make  a  man  as  the  gold  ot  Ophir."  Man  is  only  truly  glorified  as  he  fulfils  the  great 
end  of  his  being,  which  is  to  be  in  his  moral  nature  like  God. 

II.  The  Holt  Onk  accomplishes  this.  Christ  took  our  manhood  up  into  God. 
He  redeemed  body,  soul,  and  spirit;  so  that  all  parts  of  our  complex  nature  might  be 
complete  in  all  the  will  of  God.  1.  Christ  glorified  the  body.  He  became  man,  not 
taking  the  nature  of  angels,  but  the  seed  of  Abraham.  Thus  he  shows  us  how  to  live 
a  heavenly  life  in  an  earthly  citizenship.  False  philosophies  of  religions  had,  in  tlie 
East,  put— as  the  Manichaeans  did — disdain  on  the  body.  2.  Christ  glorified  ma/iCs  estate. 
He  Uved  in  humble  estate,  and  showed  that  the  poorest  framework  might  enclose  a 
Divine  picture  of  character.  3.  Christ  glorified  the  soul.  He  lifted  man  as  man  above 
all  grandeur  of  mere  outward  estate  and  honour,  and  propounded  this  great  question, 
"  What  shall  it  profit  a  man,  if  he  gain  the  whole  world,  and  lose  his  own  life  ?  "  That 
life  was  to  be  supreme  in  grandeur  as  a  God-like  life.  "  And  the  glory  which  thou 
gavest  me,"  said  our  Saviour,  "  I  have  given  them." — W.  M.  8. 

Ver.  1. — The  provision  which  cannot  he  purchased.  In  a  country  like  our  own  we 
hardly  know  what  thirst  means.  Pew  Englishmen  have  sufi'ered  from  intense  thirst. 
A  man  must  live  or  travel  in  other  latitudes  to  be  exposed  to  this  evil.  But  judging 
from  the  accounts  of  those  who  have  suffered,  we  conclude  that  it  is  almost,  if  not  abso- 
lutely, the  severest  and  most  intolerable  sensation  to  which  "  flesh  is  heir."  It  may 
very  well  be  taken  as  a  picture  of — 

I.  The  unsatisfied  ceavino  op  the  human  soul.  The  hunger  and  thirst  of  the 
human  heart  must  necessarily  be  more  serious  by  far  than  the  cravings  of  the  body ; 
for  they  are  the  longing,  the  yearning,  the  keen  and  imperious  demand  of  our  higher 
and  truer  self.  Man  thirsts  after  God.  Spite  of  all  the  downward  tendencies,  the 
earthward  inclinations,  the  sensiious'leanings  of  our  human  nature,  it  remains  true  that 
there  is  a  profound,  ineradicable  crying  of  our  soul  after  the  living  God  (see  Ps.  xlii.  1  ; 
Ixiii.  1).  1.  The  intelligence  of  man  thirsts  for  the  ultimate  Cause  of  all  things.  2.  The 
immortal  spirit  which  man  (not  has,  but)  is,  thirsts  for  the  satisfying  joy  which  is  only 
found  in  his  fellowship  and  his  service.  3.  The  guilty  heart  of  man  thirsts  for  a  thorough 
reconciliation  with  him.  Man  knows  that  he  has  sinned,  that  he  is  condemned,  that 
his  guilt  stands  as  au  impassable  barrier  between  him  and  his  God,  and  he  earnestly 
longs  to  be  forgiven  and  restored,  so  that  he  may  again  lift  up  his  face  to  his  Divine 
Father  in  filial  confidence  and  joy.  But  he  asks — How  f  "  How  shall  man  be  just  with 
God?"  (Job  ix.  2),  "Wherewith  shall  we  come  before  the  Lord?"  (Micah  vi.  6,  7). 
Beneath  all  the  louder  cries  that  fill  the  air,  deep  in  the  soul  of  man  is  the  demand — 
What  shall  we  do  that  we  may  live  before  God  and  with  him  ?  There  can  be  no  final 
rest  vn  our  heart  until  this  question  has  been  answered  in  our  experience. 

IL  The  precious  provision  which  is  offered  us.  In  the  truth  which  God  has 
revealed  in  his  Word,  and  more  particularly  in  that  Son  of  God  who  is  himself  the  great 
Revelation  of  the  Father,  we  have  that  which  satisfies  our  spiritual  need.  1.  It  is  that 
which  slakes  our  spiritual  thirst.  "  Come  ye  to  the  waters."  Water  relieves  and  removes 
thirBt  as  nothing  else  will.    The  forgiveness,  the  restoration,  the  reinstatement  which 


836  THE  BOOK  OF  THE  PBOPHBT  ISAIAH.        [ch.lv. 

is  in  JesuB  Christ  perfectly  satisfies  tbe  intense  craving  of  the  soul.  It  brings  a  sur- 
passing, transcendent  peace.  2.  It  is  that  which  nourishes  the  soul  in  all  spiritual, 
strength.  "  Buy  .  .  ,  milk."  3.  It  is  that  which  gladdens  it  with  true  and  abiding 
/oy.     "Buy  wine." 

III.  The  pbicelbssness  op  this  Divine  peovtsion.  The  prophet  may  indeed  say, 
"Buy;"  for  these  provisions  are  worth  all  the  wealth  that  the  most  opulent  can  offer. 
But  he  has  to  add,  "  without  money  and  without  price ; "  for  these  blessings  cannot  be 
earned  or  purchased  by  us.  God  cannot  sell  his  love,  his  mercy,  his  restoration  of 
erring  children.  He  does  not  meet  us  on  the  ground  on  which  a  creditor  meets  his 
debtors.  He  is,  indeed,  a  Divine  Creditor ;  we  owe  him  ten  thousand  talents  of  reverence 
and  gratitude  and  service  we  have  never  paid.  But  he  dops  not  demand  of  us  some 
pence  in  the  pound  before  he  certifies  that  we  are  free.  We  frankly  confess  that  we 
have  nothing  to  pay,  and  ho  "frankly  forgives  us  all"  (Luke  vii.  42).  God  offers  us 
his  redeeming  love,  everlasting  life,  as  the  gift  of  his  grace — a  glorious  gift,  freely  offered 
on  his  part,  and  to  be  gladly  accepted  on  ours.  He  necessarily  imposes  conditions; 
but  these  are  open  to  every  soul,  and  none  need  reject  them ;  they  are  the  turning  away 
of  our  hearts  from  sin,  and  the  acceptance  of  Jesus  Christ  as  our  Divine  Saviour  and 
Lord.— C, 

Vers.  2, 3. —  Wasted  strength.  It  has  often  been  remarked  of  the  criminal  population 
that,  if  they  would  only  give  to  honest  and  honourable  pursuits  the  same  patient  atten- 
tion, the  same  untiring  energy,  the  same  keen  ingenuity,  which  they  now  devote  to 
illegal  schemes,  they  would  soon  rise  to  competence  and  honour.  Perhaps  the  essence 
of  this  great  mistake  may  be  found  in  those  who  are  very  far  removed  from  the  criminal 
class ;  there  are  many  in  all  vocations  and  positions  of  life  who  are  wasting  their 
strength  on  that  which  is  unprofitable,  who  might  be  effecting  great  things  for  others 
or  for  themselves  if  they  would  only  "  labour  for  that  which  satisfies."  This  principle 
will  apply  to— 

I.  The  study  of  the  Bible.  What  immense  pains  were  taken  by  the  scribes  of 
our  Lord's  time  in  mastering  the  minute  points  of  Old  Testament  Scripture!  It  ended 
in  a  barren  and  guilty  formalism  which  called  down  the  severest  condemnations  that 
came  from  the  lips  of  Christ.  If  they  had  only  spent  their  strength  on  gaining  the 
heavenly  wisdom  with  which  those  sacred  pac;es  are  enriched,  they  would  have  been 
much  better  men,  and  would  have  received  the  Messiah  In  a  very  different  spirit.  We, 
too,  may  expend  a  vast  amount  of  unprofitable  labour  on  the  Scriptures,  trying  to  secure 
their  sanction  for  our  fancies  or  foibles,  and  leave  untouched  their  springs  of  truth  and 
power  and  life. 

II.  The  wobk  in  the  Masteb's  vinbtard.  We  shall  certainly  not  include  in 
wasted  strength  or  unsatisfying  labour  the  energy  spent  in  laying  the  foundation, 
although  the  workman  may  not  live  to  see  the  walls  of  the  building  rise ;  this  may  be 
the  most  honourable,  remunerative,  profoundly  satisfying  work  ef  a  man's  life :  this, 
indeed,  was  the  work  of  the  Saviour  of  mankind.  But  we  shall  include :  1.  Libour 
which  is  merely  superficial,  which  the  wind  of  changing  circumstance  soon  "  driveth 
away."  2.  The  deliverance  of  one-sided  truth — a  statement  of  doctrine  which  is  so 
partial  as  to  be  practically  false.  This  must  issue  in  disappointment;  it  is  building  ol 
•'  wood,  hay,  and  stubble,"  which  will  be  burned.  3.  Irreverent  activity,  on  which 
the  blessing  of  God  is  not  sought,  and  on  which,  consequently,  it  does  not  descend. 

HI.  The  pursuit  of  pbesonal  well-bbinq.  1.  AH  men  seek  hap|iiness;  thej 
give  freely  of  their  various  resources  to  obiaiu  it — money,  strength,  ingenuity,  patience 
they  endure  hardship  and  even  suffering  in  order  to  secure  it.  2.  A  very  large  jiropoi' 
tion  of  mankind  is  bitterly  disappointed.  What  promised  to  be  bread  turns  out  to  be 
chaff;  what  looked  like  satisfaction  in  the  distance  proves  to  be  weariness  and  heart- 
ache in  experience.  3.  The  disappointment  is  due  to  one  fundamental  mistake — 
they  adopt  a  false  method.  They  risk  everything  on  some  one  object — wealth,  fame, 
power,  pleasure,  friendship — which  either  eludes  their  grasp  or  proves  unsatisfying  and 
vain.  They  should  become  the  active  servants  of  God,  listening  when  he  speaks, 
accepting  what  he  offers,  going  whither  he  directs.  In  the  earnest,  faithful  service  of -a 
Divine  Saviour  is  happiness  of  the  truest  kind — blessedness,  well-being,  life ;  the  pure, 
lasting  satisfaction  of  the  son], — C, 


oa.tv.  1— 13.]      THE  BOOK  OF  THE  PKOPHET  ISAIAH.  83T 

Ver.  4. — The  leadership  of  Christ.  These  words,  primarily  applicable  to  David,  are 
true  of  that  Son  of  David  whose  course  was  to  be  so  different,  but  whose  work  was  to  be 
so  much  deeper  and  greater  than  that  of  the  King  of  Israel.  David  was  a  man  who 
showed  himself  possessed  of  all  the  essential  qualities  of  a  great  leader  of  men.  He  had 
the  power  of  attaching  them  to  his  own  person  with  a  strong  affection  ;  he  shared  their 
hardships  and  their  perils;  he  impressed  on  them  his  own  principles  and  habits;  he 
lifted  them  up  with  his  own  elevation.  In  these  respects,  but  with  a  depth  and  fulness 
to  which  tlie  iMthly  monarch  can  lay  no  claim  at  all,  Jesus  Christ  is  the  great  "  Leader 
to  the  people"  of  God. 

I.  He  attaches  us  to  himself.  The  devotion  of  his  soldiers  to  Napoleon  Bona- 
parte was  extraordinary ;  but  that  great  commander,  with  all  his  egotism,  acl<nowledg»d 
that  this  was  nothing  compared  with  the  devotion  of  Christian  men  to  the  Person  of 
Jesus  Christ.  The  pity  with  which  he  pitied  us  in  our  low  estate,  the  tender  interest 
with  which  he  has  sought  and  rescued  us,  the  shame  and  the  sorrow  which  he  bore  for 
us,  the  death  he  died  for  us,  thepatient  love  with  which  he  has  been  loving  us, — all 
this  will  well  account  for  the  fact  that,  as  no  king,  or  general,  or  statesman  has  ever  done 
before,  Jesus  Christ  has  shown  himself  the  Leader  of  men  by  attaching  them  to  his 
Person  with  a  passionate  and  unwavering  devotion. 

II.  He  has  shared  oub  hardships  and  oub  suFFEBiNaB.  He  does  not  bid  us  go 
the  way  he  went  not  himself. 

"He  leads  ns  through  no  darker  iooids 
Than  he  went  through  before." 

He  asks  us  to  drink  of  his  cup,  but  it  is  only  to  taste  that  bitter  drauglit  which 
he  himself  drained  even  to  the  dregs.  Whettier  it  be  bodily  pain  or  spiritual  distress; 
whether  it  be  suffering,  or  poverty,  or  loneliness,  or  disappointment,  or  desertion,  or 
shame,  or  death, — Christ  has  himself  endured  darker  and  sadder  trials  than  any  he 
calls  us  to  encounter. 

III.  He  constrains  us  to  live  his  own  life.  He  not  only  demands  of  us  that 
our  minds  shall  be  possessed  with  his  own  principles,  and  that  our  lives  shall  illustrate 
them,  but  he  has  the  power  of  constraining  us  to  think  as  he  thought,  to  feel  as  he  felt, 
to  do  as  he  did,  to  be  what  he  was.  If  this  purpose  of  his  is  not  accomplished  or  is 
not  being  wrought  in  us,  then  are  we  not  his  "disciples  inleed." 

IV.  He  shares  with  ds  his  own  exaltation.  If  we  bear  his  cross,  we  shall  sit 
down  with  him  on  his  throue.  To  us  all  he  says,  "  I  appoint  unto  you  a  kingdom." 
If  we  suffer  with  him,  we  shall  reign  with  him. — 0. 

Ver.  6. — Qod's  especial  nearness.  It  is  one  of  the  familiar  Scripture  truths,  open 
even  to  the  little  child,  that  God  is  always  near  to  us;  and  that  there  is  no  time  we 
can  think  of  when  he  may  not  be  found  by  the  humble,  believing  heart.  But  there  are 
times  when  he  is^  comparatively  near,  and  when,  if  we  are  wise,  we  shall  go  to  him  in 
the  spirit  of  full  self-surrendei',  shall  enter  the  kingdom  of  his  grace,  and  secure  his 
everlasting  favour. 

I.  The  period  of  tooth  ;  when  the  mind  is  open,  the  conscience  tender,  the  soul 
responsive. 

II.  The  DAT  OF  VISITATION ;  when  the  stricken  and  wounded  heart  wants  a  Divine 
Healer,  and  can  find  none  but  in  him  who  binds  up  the  broken  heart  and  heals  its 
wounds. 

III.  The  TIME  OF  SPECIAL  PBiviLEQE;  when  we  listen  to  the  minister,  read  the 
book,  have  fellowship  with  the  friend  whose  true  and  earnest  voice  has  an  unusual 
power  to  penetrate  to  the  secret  places  of  our  soul. 

IV.  The  houb  of  direct  Divine  contact;  when  God  lays  his  hand  upon  us, 
touches  the  springs  of  our  sacred  thought,  reveals  to  us  our  sinfulness  and  our  need, 
awakens  us  to  the  seriousness  of  our  life  and  thenearness  of  eternity,  and  calls  us  to 
return  unto  himself.  Wise  is  it  beyond  all  earthly  wisdom  then  to  hearken  and  obey, 
to  seek  the  Lord  while  he  may  be  found,  to  call  upon  him  while  he  is  near;  foolish  is 
it  beyond  all  other  folly  to  turn  a  deaf  ear  or  to  show  a  disobedient  spirit  then ;  for 
God  may  never  again  come  so  near  to  our  souls — may  never  again  be  so  readily  found 
by  our  human  spirits ;  the  distance  between  us  and  our  Saviour  may  be  continually 

J8AIAH— II.  B 


338  THE  BOOK  OF   THE  PROPHET   ISaIAH.       [oh.  lv.  1~13, 

enlarging,  until  some  great  gulf  of  sin  or  hard-heartedness  separate  ui  from  his  side  and 
from  his  service  evermore. — 0. 

Ver.  7. — Distance — return — welcome.  Pew  more  gracious  words  than  these  can  be 
found  in  Scripture :  they  are  of  those  which  the  world  would  not  willingly  let  die ; 
whole  libraries  could  be  better  spared  from  human  literature  than  this  single  verse. 
We  may  express  the  thoughts  it  offers  to  us  by  four  simple  propositions. 

I.  Sin  means  sepakation — the  separation  of  the  soul  from  its  Creator.  The 
distance  we  can  calculate  in  miles  or  in  degrees  is  nothing  to  that  which  divides  one 
spirit  from  another ;  it  is  nothing  to  that  which  separates  the  erring,  guilty  soul  of  man 
from  the  Holy  Spirit  of  the  living  G-od.  We  may  be  in  the  same  room  with  another 
of  our  race  or  even  of  our  family,  and  yet  feel  further  apart  than  if  many  leagiiSe  of 
ocean  came  between  us.  We  are  always  near  to  him  who  is  everywhere,  and  yet  our 
inj;ratitude,  our  un  worthiness,  our  guilt,  may  compel  us  to  feel  terribly  far  off  from  him. 

II.  Ebpentancb  means  kbtuen — the  abandonment  by  the  sinful  soul  of  its  evil 
way,  and  its  return  to  the  righteous  God  whom  it  has  forsaken.  It  signifies  much  more 
than  a  change  of  creed  and  of  profession ;  or  than  a  passing  emotion  of  sorrow,  hwvever 
violent  the  feeling  may  be ;  or  than  an  alteration  in  outward  habit.  It  signifies :  1.  Tht 
aversion  of  the  heart  from  the  thougl)t  and  love  of  evil.  "  Let  the  unrighteous  man  forsake 
his  [evil]  thoughts."  2.  The  consequent  change  of  the  habit  of  l^e.  "  Let  the  wicked  for- 
sake his  way."  3.  The  return  of  the  soul  to  God.  The  man  who  has  neglected,  forsakes, 
disregarded,  and  disobeyed  God,  coming  back  in  penitent  thought  and  with  the  language 
of  confession  on  his  lips  to  the  Father  from  whom  he  has  wandered. 

m.  The  WAT  BACK  IS  OPEN.  Can  the  sinner  be  forgiven  ?  Is  the  way  clear?  Are 
there  not  insuperable  obstacles  in  the  way — grievous  transgressions  of  Law,  accumulated 
guilt,  darkening  and  deepening  iniquity?  How  can  all  this  be  removed  from  the  path 
of  reconciliation?  The  answer  is  in  the  gospel  statement:  "  Througli  this  Man  is 
preached  unto  you  the  forgiveness  of  sins."  "  He  is  the  Propitiation  for  -  .  .  the  sins 
of  the  whole  world." 

IV.  The  welcome  home  is  sure.  There  is  an  assurance,  here  as  elsewhere,  which 
is  "  doubly  sure."  The  mercy  of  God  is  not  only  enov^h  for  our  necessities,  it  is  far 
more  than  enough.  It  is  not  only  a  lake,  it  is  a  deep  and  wide  sea ;  it  is  not  merely  a 
hill,  it  is  an  overtowering  mountain ;  there  are  not  only  riches,  there  are  exceeding 
riches,  unsearchable  riches  of  grace;  on  the  repentant  and  believing  sinner  God  will 
not  only  have  mercy,  he  will  abundantly  pardon  him ;  the  returning  prodigal  will  not 
merely  be  taken  in  when  he  arrives ;  the  Father  will  nm  to  meet  him,  and  lavish  upon 
him  all  possible  proofs  of  his  parental  love. — C. 

Vers.  8,  9. — The  human  and  the  Divine,  Man  was  made  in  the  image  of  €k)d,  and 
once  bore  his  likeness ;  then  his  spirit  was  like  that  of  the  Spirit  of  God.  Under  tiie 
debasing  influences  of  sin  he  has  become  utterly  unlike  his  Maker,  and,  instead  of  being 
compared  with  him,  he  is  placed  in  sad  and  painful  contrast  with  his  heavenly  Father. 
"My  thouglits  are  not  your  thoughts,"  etc. 

I.  The  spirit  of  the  human.  1.  The  spirit  of  man  is  selfish.  Not  that  he  is 
incapable  of  generosity,  but  the  prevailing  and  penetrating  spirit  which  runs  through 
his  acts  and  his  institutions  is  that  of  sell-love,  self-interest.  What  will  it  profit  me  f 
What  shall  /gain  by  it?  How  will  it  affect  my  interests?  These  are  the  questions 
which  come  up  from  the  depths  of  the  human  heart,  and  are  perpetually  recurring. 
2.  The  spirit  of  man  is  vindictive.  Men  hate  their  enemies ;  they  wish  ill  to  those 
who  have  in  any  way  done  them  an  injury.  Men  are  secretly  if  not  openly  glad  when 
any  harm  happens  to  those  who  have  successfully  opposed  them,  or  to  those  who  have 
outstripped  them  in  the  race,  or  to  those  whose  material  interests  clash  with  theirs, 
or  to  those  who  have  rebuked  and  shamed  them,  or  to  those  whom  they  have  wronged 
and  thus  marie  their  enemies.  Their  thoughts  are  vindictive  and  malignant,  and  their 
ways  answer  to  their  thoughts.  By  pronounced  hostility,  or  by  artful  intrigue,  or  by 
a  criminal  silence  and  inaction,  they  further  the  end  for  which  they  look, — the  discom- 
fiture of  their  fellows. 

IL  Thb  Spibit  of  the  Divine.  1.  The  Spirit  of  (Jod  is  bene/lemt,  God  lives  to 
bless— to  ooBununicate  life,  love,  beauty,  joy,  throughout  his  universe.    That  Son  o( 


EH.  LV.  1—13.]       THE    BOOK   OP   THE   PROPHET    ISAIAH.  339 

man  who  '*  came  not  to  be  ministered  unto,  but  to  minister  "  perfectly  represented  the 
Spirit  of  the  Father,  who  occupies  his  eternity  and  expends  his  onmiscience  in  doing 
good  to  all  his  creation.  2.  The  Spirit  of  God  is  magnanimous.  God  delights  not  to 
give  pain  or  to  send  sorrow. to  those  who  hare  offended  him;  that  is  his  "strange 
work."  He  delights  to  pardon.  He  "  abundantly  pardons."  He  receives  back  and 
reinstates  his  penitent  children  with  abounding  joy.  His  mercy,  his  grace,  is  inex- 
haustible— ^it  is  an  overarching  sky  with  no  horizon-line ;  it  is  a  sea  without  •  bottom 
or  a  shore. 

III.  The  Divine  offbb.  So  great,  so  surpassing,  so  all-sufficient,  is  the  magnanimity 
of  God  that  we  may  cast  ourselves  on  his  mercy  with  the  utmost  confidence.  "  Iniquities 
may  prevail  against  us,"  but  the  pardoning  grace  of  God  will  prevail  against  them. 

IV.  The  human  aspiration.  Jesus  Christ  summons  us  to  rise  from  the  level  of  the 
human  to  the  height  of  the  Divine;  to  breathe  his  spirit  of  forgiveness,  to  live  his  life 
of  love,  to  move  on  the  noble  and  lofty  plane  of  a  sustained  magnanimity,  "  that  we 
may  be  the  children  of  our  Father  who  is  in  heaven ; "  that  we  may  "  be  perfect  as  he 
is  perfect." — 0. 

Vers.  10 — 13. — The  fruitfulness  of  sacred  trvth.  It  may  be  said  that  the  rain  and 
the  snow  do,  in  fact,  return  to  the  heavens  whence  they  came,  drawn  up  by  the  sun  as 
it  shines  on  sea  and  lake,  on  stream  and  river,  everywhere.  But  not  until  they  have 
done  the  work/or  which  they  came,  not  until  they  have  "  accomplished  that  which  God 
pleases,"  until  they  have  prospered  in  the  purpose  for  which  he  sent  them ;  not  until 
they  have  fertilized  the  soil,  and  made  it  bring  forth  its  precious  fruits.  The  vast 
amount  of  rainfall  which  the  earth  receives  during  every  year  renders  incalculable 
service  before  it  returns  to  the  skies.  So  also  does  all  the  outpouring  of  Divine  truth 
on  the  mind  and  heart  of  men.  There  may  he  times  when  the  human  spokesman  may 
question  this — when  he  may  have  grave  misgivings  as  to  its  utility,  when  it  may  seem 
unprofitable  and  vain.  But  we  have  the  strong  assurance  that  God's  Word  "  shall  not 
return  unto  him  void" — that  the  issue  shall  be  one  in  which  all  surrounding  nature 
may  well  take  its  f«rt  with  jubilant  acclaim  (vers.  12, 13).  The  excellency  of  sacred 
truth  will  be  seen  if  we  regard — 

L  OuE  CONDITION  IN  ITS  ABSENCE.  1.  The  Unproductiveness  of  the  human  mind 
when  thus  untaught ;  the  sud  fact  that  men  who  are  capable  of  the  loftiest  conceptions, 
the  most  ennobling  convictions,  the  most  elevating  feelings  and  aspiraiions,  live  and 
die  without  cherishing  any  one  of  these,  in  blank  and  dreary  ignorance.  '2.  The  noxious 
growths  which  flourish :  the  errors,  the  superstitions,  the  dark  and  foul  imaginations 
which  defile  the  mind  in  which  they  spring  up,  and  those  also  on  whom  these  are 
acting. 

II.  The  bbnionant  powek  which  it  exerts.  1.  The  outward  transformations 
it  works — great  and  happy  reformations  in  the  conduct,  the  career,  the  condition  of 
individual  men,  of  families,  and  of  nations.  2.  The  inward  blessedness  it  confers — 
peace,  freedom,  purity,  love,  joy,  hope. 

in.  Its  occasionaIi,  apparent  fruitlessness.  Even  as  the  rain  and  the  snow  often 
fall  on  rock  and  sand  and  sea  without  seeming  to  produce  any  beneficent  result,  so  does 
the  truth  of  God,  as  preached,  or  taught,  or  printed,  often  seem  to  be  unavailing ;  and 
there  is  discouragement,  despondency,  even  despair,  in  the  heart  of  the  Christian  worker. 
But  we  look  at — 

rV.  Its  actual  bffioaot.  1.  There  is  much  of  actual  efficacy  which  we  can  dis- 
covar — of  inddental  result,  bringing  strength  and  sanctity  to  those  whose  benefit  is  not 
sought ;  ol indirect  result ;  oi ultimate  result,  being  "  found  after  many  days."  2.  There 
is  more  which  we  take  on  trust.  God  has  ways  of  using  material  things  which  long 
escaped  our  notice,  and  doubtless  many  ways  which  still  elude  our  observation.  Has 
he  not  ways  of  using  our  spiritual  efforts,  of  turning  them  to  account,  so  that  one  day 
we  shall  find  that  his  own  Word  never  returns  to  him  void — that  it  always  prospers  in 
the  thing  whereto  it  is  sent  ?  "  He  that  goeth  forth  weeping  . .  ,  shall  doubtless  come 
agtto  with  rejoicing,  bringing  his  sheaves  with  him." — 0. 

Ver.  1. — Man's  need  and  Ood's  provision.  This  well-known  and  much-nsed  verse  ii 
'.he  model  of  gospel  invitations.    "  Ho !  "  as  to  persons  at  a  distance ;  beyond  the  pale, 


3iO  THE  BOOK  OF  THE  PBOPHET  ISAIAH.       [oh.  lv.  1—13. 

according  to  Jewish  thought.  "  Wine,"  that  cheers ;  "  water,"  that  refreshes ;  "  milk,'' 
that  nourishes.  "  Buy  without  money  "  impresses  the  worth,  as  well  as  the  freeness, 
of  the  thing  obtained. 

I.  The  okt  of  souls  is  so  vabibd,  they  need  ijIlBoe  am>  oompbehensive  invita- 
tions. So  various,  so  large,  so  intense,  so  immediate,  so  urgent.  1.  Think  of  the  cry 
of  creation  to  God,  rising  day  and  night  for  precise  blessings,  from  the  worlJ  of  vegetable 
and  animal  I'fe.  2.  Then  think  of  the  cry  of  man's  bodily  nature.  How  complex  are 
its  demands  if  it  is  to  be  kept  in  vigour  1  But  souls  are  altogether  more  wonderful, 
more  mysterious,  than  bodies,  and  body-needs  do  but  suggest  and  illustrate  sOMZ-ueeds. 
Wliat  is  the  cry  of  all  souls?  What  is  the  cry  of  some  souls?  It  is  impossible  to 
press  the  cries  of  souls  into  any  one  mould.  There  is  difference  between  men's  cry  and 
women's  cry  ;  between  the  cry  of  the  shallow  and  of  the  thoughtful ;  between  the  cry 
of  the  educated  and  uneducated ;  between  the  cry  of  the  moral  and  the  profligate.  And 
yet  there  is  one  word  in  which  the  deep  want  of  all  men  everywhere  can  be  expressed — 
they  want  Ood,  though  so  many  do  not  know  his  Name,  or  cannot  articulate  it.  If  we 
carefully  distinguish  the  cries  of  men,  we  may  say,  (1)  some  cry  for  light  amid  the  dark 
perplexities  of  our  time ;  (2)  some  for  guidance  amid  difficulties ;  (3)  some  for  earnest- 
ness amid  frivolities ;  (4)  some  for  pardon  under  pressure  of  the  sense  of  sin  ;  (5)  some 
for  truth  amid  the  allurements  of  error ;  and  (6)  some  for  rest  from  the  weariness  of  toil 
and  failure ;  and  (7)  some  for  comfort  under  woes  that  press  heavily.  What  a  cry  that 
must  be  which  enters  into  the  ears  of  the  Lord  of  sabaoth ! 

II.  None  but  Gtod  can  make  invitations  labge  enough,  and  vabied  bnouoh,  to 
MEET  THE  CRIBS.  The  cry  for  happiness  is  too  big  for  the  world  to  meet ;  the  cry  for 
truth  is  beyond  all  the  skill  of  science  to  satisfy.  "The  fountains  of  this  earth  are 
dried,  and  I  am  thirsty  still."  1.  Human  conscience  cries  for  pardon.  In  Christ  is 
proclaimed  "  forgiveness  of  sins."  2.  Human  affection  cries  for  love.  It  may  spend 
its  uttermost  and  best  on  Christ,  and  be  fully  satisfied  with  his  response.  3.  Human 
intellect  cries  for  truth.  Jesus,  by  his  Spirit,  leads  into  all  truth.  4.  Human  will  cries 
for  a  supreme  authority.  And  Christ  is  Lord.  For  every  want  we  can  translate  into  a 
cry,  Christ  is  the  Supply.  For  every  want  we  c»n  feel,  but  cannot  translate  into  a  cry, 
Christ  is  still  the  infinitely  adapted  and  all-satisfying  Supply. — B.  T. 

Yer.  1. — The  thirst  of  the  soul  quenched.  Compare  the  assurances  and  invitations  of 
Christ,  in  John  iv.  13, 14;  vi.  35 ;  vii.  37,  38.  It  is  singular  to  note  that  the  prophet 
chose  a  form  of  speech  very  common  in  the  East.  In  Jerusalem  the  shopkeepers  cry 
to  the  passers-by,  "  Ho,  every  <me  that  hath  money,  let  him  come  and  buy  1 "  "  Ho, 
such  a  one,  come  and  buy  I "  They  indeed  expect  to  get  full  value,  though  they  offer 
for  nothing.    Qod  utends  a  free  and  sovereign  gift 

I.  Thibst.  a  figure  for  unresting  desire,  setting  us  upon  pursuit  and  effort.  Thirst- 
ing differs  from  hungering  in  this — the  hungering  man  will  quietly  lie  down  and  die ; 
the  tlursting  maa  will  spend  himself  in  mad  strivings.  Illustrate  from  desert  scenes. 
So  thirsting  is  the  more  impressive  figure  of  a  man's  condition.  Everybody  is  eagerly 
wanting  something.  Of  this  there  are  both  painful  and  phasing  signs.  Illustrate  bow 
this  thirst  takes  special  religious  forms  at  special  times,  as  in  opening  youth,  seasons 
of  sickness,  scenes  of  revival,  death  of  first  friend,  as  in  cases  of  Luther  and  Korman 
Maoleod.  TWs  restless  soul-thirsting  is  (1)  man's  suffering ;  (2)  man's  glory ;  (3)  man's 
hope.  He  may  satisfy  the  thirsting,  but  it  would  be  a  sign  of  soul-death  simply  to  hse 
it.     The  thirst  of  the  soul  is  ever  for  one  satisfaction — it  is  thirst  for  Ood. 

II.  TniBSTiNe  aoain.  This  is  the  result  of  all  attempts  to  quench  the  thirst  of  the 
soul  by  anything  earth  can  offer.  There  are  lines  upon  which  temporary  supplies  seem 
to  come.  Man  offflts  "  cups  of  cold  water."  1.  Thirst  quenched  for  a  time  in  worldly 
pleasure.  Illustrate  from  the  familiar  picture,  '  The  Pursuit  of  Pleasure.'  There  never 
were  such  strivings  for  sense-gratification  as  there  are  now.  Life  makes  a  loud  noise  to 
drown  the  soul's  cries.  2.  Thirst  quenched  fca-  a  time  in  the  externalities  of  religion. 
Satiated  with  pleasure,  men  sometimes  turn  to  religion.  Illustrate  from  experience  of 
Ignatiiu  Loyola.  Also  see  confidence  in  holy  wells  and  shrines.  There  is  a  fascination 
at  first  in  ceremonial  religion,  but  it  soon  palls.  You  can  soon  empty  these  cups,  and 
then  there  is  nothing  for  your  thirsty  soul  when  you  come  again. 

IIL  Thibstino  nevegmobe.    Christ  does  not  destroy  the  thirsting,  but  sets  us  down 


oh.lv.  1—13,]      THE  BOOK  OF  THE  PROPHET  ISAIAH.  Ml 

close  beside  the  living  spring.  And  all  the  bitterness  is  gone,  if  the  supply  is  close 
beside  us,  and  we  may  drink  wheu  we  please.  Apply  to  the  soul's  love.  The  love  of 
Christ  is  the  satisfying  response.  To  the  soul's  trust.  The  work  of  Christ  is  the 
satisfying  response.  To  the  soul's  ideal.  The  Person  of  Christ  is  the  satisfying 
response.  To  the  soul's  anxiety  about  the  future.  The  promises  of  Christ  are  the 
satisfying  response.  The  soul  that  has  Christ  has  an  upspringing  well  beside  him ;  he 
lives  close  near  to  the  waters  of  life. — B,.  T. 

Ver.  2. — Vain  expenditure  on  things.  Comp.  ch.  xliv.  20,  "  He  feedeth  on  ashes:  a 
deceived  heart  hath  turned  him  aside."  A  very  striking  illustration  of  imsatisfying 
food  is  given  by  the  Rev.  H.  Macmillan.  "A  strange  plant,  called  the  nardoo,  grows 
in  the  deserts  of  Lento,  Australia.  Its  seeds  formed  for  months  together  almost  the 
sole  food  of  the  party  of  explorers  who,  a  few  years  ago,  crossed  the  continent.  When 
analyzed,  the  nardoo  bread  was  ascertained  to  be  destitute  of  certain  nutritious  elements 
indispensable  to  the  support  of  a  European,  though  an  Australian  savage  might,  for  a 
while,  find  it  beneficial  as  an  alterative.  And  thus  it  happened  that  these  poor,  unfor- 
tunate Englishmen  perished  of  starvation,  even  while  feeding  fully  day  by  day  upon 
food  that  served  to  satisfy  their  hunger."  An  old  author,  date  1600,  says, "  It  is  a  thing 
that  the  Emperor  Caligula  is  laughed  at  in  all  stories.  There  was  a  mighty  navy 
provided,  well  manned  and  victualled,  and  every  one  expected  that  the  whole  country  of 
Greece  should  have  been  invaded :  and  so  it  might  have  been ;  but  the  emperor  had 
another  design  in  hand,  and  employed  his  soldiers  to  gather  a  quantity  of  cockle- 
shells and  pebble-stones,  and  so  returned  home  again.  Just  such  another  voyage  doth 
almost  every  man  mak«  here  in  this  world,  were  the  particulars  but  truly  cast  up." 
J.  A.  Alexander  makes  an  important  distinction.  "  Observe,  too,  that  he  does  not  seek 
to  remedy  the  evils  which  arise  from  perverted  and  unsatisfied  desire,  by  the  extinction 
of  the  appetite  itself — of  that  immortal,  inextinguishable  craving,  which  can  only  cease 
by  annihilation  or  by  full  fruition.  This,  indeed,  is  a  distinctive  mark  of  true  religion, 
as  opposed  to  other  systems.  Since  the  evils  under  which  the  human  race  is  groaning 
may  be  clearly  traced  to  the  inordinate  indulgence  of  desires  after  happiness,  under  the 
influence  of  'strong  delusions'  as  to  that  which  can  afford  it,  we  are  not  to  wonder 
that  when  unassisted  reason  undertakes  to  do  away  with  the  effect,  it  should  attempt 
the  extirpation  of  the  cause;  and  you  will  find,  accordingly,  that  every  system  of 
religion  or  philosophy,  distinct  from  Christianity,  either  indulges,  under  some  disguise, 
that  perversion  of  man's  natural  desire  after  happiness  which  makes  him  wretched,  or 
affects  to  cure  it  by  destroying,  the  desire  itself."  "  While  one  voice  cries  to  the 
bewildered  sinner, '  Cease  to  hunger,  cease  to  thirst ; '  and  another  from  an  opposite 
direction  bids  bim  '  Eat  and  drink ;  for  to-morrow  we  die ; '  the  voice  of  God  and  of  the 
gospel  is, '  Wherefore  do  ye  spend  money  for  that  which  is  not  bread  ?  and  your  labour 
for  that  which  satisfieth  not ? '" 

I.  SOBL-HUNGBE  0A»   NEVER  BE   SATISFIED   WITH  THINGS.      It   IS  easy  tO  COUfuse  the 

soul's  hunger  with  the  bodily  cry  for  pleasure,  the  mental  cry  for  knowledge,  the  society 
cry  for  place  and  wealth,  or  the  assthetic  cry  for  the  beautiful.  Men  readily  enough 
mistake  their  own  longings,  their  own  unrest.  There  is  much  that  we  have  not,  and 
we  think  the  craving  is  to  get  what  others  enjoy.  Men  need  to  have  translated  for 
them  their  own  restlessness  and  desire.  Augustine  does  it.  "  Man  was  made  for  God, 
and  can  find  no  rest  till  he  finds  rest  in  him."    The  hymn  does  it— 

«  My  heart  is  pained,  nor  can  it  be 
At  rest  till  it  finds  rest  in  thee." 

Things  can  never  rest  and  satisfy  souls.  Angels  cannot  feed-on  man's  bread.  Things 
can  satisfy  some  things  in  man — his  taste,  his  passions,  his  sentiments — but  not  the  • 
man  himself.  They  who  have  had  the  most  of  the  good  in  things  that  this  world  can 
command  have  complained  most  deeply  of  the  yawning  and  yearning  of  their  unsatis- 
fied souls.  "  If  a  man  ask  a  fish,  will  ye  give  him  a  stone  ?  "  If  a  man  wants  love,  what 
good  is  it  to  give  him  gold,  or  fame,  or  pleasure  ?  The  gains  and  honours  apd  so-called 
«  good  "  of  this  wwld  are  not  only  brief  in  their  duration,  but  unsuited,  in  their  very 
nature,  even  while  they  last,  to  satisfy  the  wants  of  an  immortal  spirit. 

II,  BotJL-HnNOEE  CAN  ONLY  BE  SATISFIED  IN  A  Pebson.    Therefore  Jesus  said, "  I  am 


342  THE  BOOK  OP  THE  PROPHET  ISAIAH.        [oh.  lv.  1— 18L 

the  Bread  of  life:  he  that  cometh  to  me  shall  never  hunger;  and  he  that  believeth  ou 
me  shall  never  thirst."  On  Christ,  as  the  Gift  of  God  to  us,  our  souls  may  "  eat,  and 
live  for  ever."  There  is  in  ver.  4  a  first  allusion  to  King  David,  but  a  further  final 
allusion  to  Jesus.  "  He  that  haih  the  Son  hath  life."  The  points  which  may  be  illus- 
trated and  impressed  are  suggested  in  the  following  paragraph  :  "  The  prophet,  speaking 
in  the  name  of  God,  after  calling  men  to  come  to  him,  to  hear  him  that  their  souls  may 
live,  annexes  to  this  gracious  invitation  the  specific  promises  of  a  suie  salvation — a 
salvation  not  contingent  or  fortuitous,  but  one  provided  by  a  gracious  constitution  on 
the  part  of  God  himself ;  a  salvation  promised  and  confiimed  by  oath  ;  a  covenant  of 
mercy,  eternal  in  its  origin  and  everlasting  in  its  stipulations,  comprehending  in  its 
wonderful  provisions  the  essential  requisite  of  an  atonement,  a  priest  and  sacrifice,  an 
all-sufficient  Saviour;  not  a  Saviour  whose  performance  of  his  o6Sce  should  be  partial, 
or  contingent,  or  uncertain  from  the  change  of  person,  but  the  one,  the  only  Saviour — 
the  same  '  yesterday,  and  to-day,  and  for  ever,'  the  Son  of  God,  the  Son  of  man,  the  Son 
of  David."  Soul-rest  in  the  living  personal  Saviour  finds  expression  in  the  familiar 
verse — 

"I  came  to  Jesus  as  I  was. 
Weary,  and  worn,  and  sad ; 
I  found  in  him  a  Resting-plaoe^ 
And  he  has  made  me  glad." 

B.T. 

Ver.  6. — The  thaefor  seeking  after  Qod.  Compare  "  Now  Is  the  accepted  time,  now 
is  the  day  of  salvation."  "To  proclaim  the  acceptable  yearof  the  Lord."  After  showing 
the  need  for  seeking  after  Gud,  and  the  duty  of  seeking,  dwell  on  the  appropriate  time 
for  the  seeking,  unfolding  and  illustrating  two  points. 

I.  The  time  fob  seeking  is  not  fixed  by  our  convenience.  Yet  men  constantly 
act  as  if  it  were.  They  assume  that  they  can  find  God  when  they  please.  But  such  an 
idea  proves  that  they  neither  know  themselves  nor  God.  1.  They  do  not  know  them- 
selves ;  for  a  man  is  not  at  all  sure  of  feeling  the  desire  when  he  thinks  be  will  and 
arranges  to.  If  a  man  plays  with  his  deeper  emotions,  and  puts  off  responding  to  them 
until  some  unknown  time,  he  has  no  security  that  the  feelings  will  return.  If  a  man 
resists  good  inclinations,  he  will  find  that  he  cannot  get  them  when  he  would.  2.  And 
they  do  not  know  God ;  for  he  can  never  permit  man  to  play  with  his  offers  of  mercy 
and  willingness  to  accept.  Bejected  gifts,  neglected  gifts,  cannot  be  still  pressed  on 
acceptance.  It  is  inconceivable  that  God  can  ever  wait  on  man's  convenience.  We 
must  take  advantage  of  OtoA'a  time  for  seekers,  for  he  can  never  recognize  times  that 
seekers  are  pleased  to  arrange  for  themselves. 

II.  The  time  fob  seekiko  is  fixed  bt  God's  ikyttations.  It  mnst  be ;  for  the 
gift  is  an  absolutely  sovereign  and  free  gift,  and  the  Giver  must  be  allowed  to  find  his 
own  time  and  way.  If  salvation  were  a  matter  of  purchase,  we  might  expect  it  to  be 
dependent  on  our  good  will.  It  is  wholly  a  matter  of  grace,  and  so  aosoiucely  dependent 
on  God's  good  will.  Our  Lord  even  said, "  No  man  cometh  unto  me,  except  the  Father, 
which  hath  sent  me,  draw  him."  The  general  invitations  of  God  stand  in  his  Word ;  the 
precise  and  special  invitations  to  individuals,  in  which  we  find  our  golden  opportunities 
of  salvation,  are,  in  the  text,  called  times  when  "  God  may  be  found,"  or  when  OtoA  is 
propitious  towards  us ;  and  times  when  "  God  is  near,"  or  gives  an  impressive  sense  of 
his  nearness.  Such  times  may  appear  to  us  as  (1)  providences, — circumstances  that 
arouse,  awaken,  humble  us;  or  as  (2)  persuasions, — such  as  come  through  appeals  of 
ministers,  or  the  atmosphere  of  revival-times.  Anything,  everything,  that  brings  to 
us  the  sense  of  God's  nearness  is  an  appropriate  thing  to  set  us  hopefully  seeking  after 
salvation,  eternal  life,  and  heart-rest  in  God. — ^R.  T. 

Ver.  7. — Man's  preparations  for  receiving  Qod'i  pardon.  Two  things  have  to  be 
".learly  recognized,  and  harmoniously  set  together.  1.  Ghxi's  pardon  and  favour  are 
absolutely /ree  and  priceless;  they  are  sovereign  gifts,  based  on  no  condition,  won  bv 
no  payment,  Responsive  to  no  merit  in  us.  He  saves  us  purely  for  his  "  own  Name  s 
sake."  2.  And  yet  there  are  conditions  which  those  who  receive  the  grace  are  reasonably 
r'-quired  to  be  in,  if  they  are  to  be  recipients,  and  make  right  use  of  the  graoe  r^cejred) 


bh.lv.  1—13,]      THE  BOOK  OP  THE  PROPHET  ISAIAH.  343 

These  conditions  are  absolutely  necessary,  and  yet  there  are  in  no  sense  at  all  any  merit, 
or  price,  on  which  the  grace  is  obtained.  The  harmonizing  of  the  two  things  is  not 
difficult.  When  we  bestow  a  gift  we  look  for  a  proper  recipiency  in  those  who  receive. 
It  would  be  to  waste  our  gifts  to  bestow  them  where  there  was  no  preparedness  to  use 
them  rightly.     In  this  verse  the  preparation  ta^es  a  threefold  form. 

I.  There  must  be  the  putting  aw  at  op  all  wbono-doino.  It  would  be  insult 
for  a  child  to  ask  pardon  of  a  father  while  he  kept  on  doing  the  disobedient  thing  that 
grieved  his  father.  Sincerity  of  desire  for  pardon  is  shown  in  separating  ourselves  from 
the  sin.  Sense  of  the  evil  of  the  act  is  indicated  in  resolutely  putting  it  away.  This 
is  the  first  thing  God  looks  for  in  all  who  seek  him.  Kept  sin,  always  and  everywhere, 
keeps  ofi"  the  "  grace." 

II.  There  uust  be  a  CLEANsisa  of  thought  and  heart.  The  love  of  sinning 
must  go,  and  the  act  of  sinning  must  cease.  In  the  view  of  God,  sin  is  not  merely 
some  positive  act  done.  The  Heart-searcher  knows  that  the  act  was  but  the  expression 
of  evil  thought,  biassed  will,  selfish  purpose.  And  so  a  man  is  not  ready  for  forgive- 
ness until  his  thought  is  changed,  and  exactly  that  changed  thought  is  what  we  put 
into  the  word  "  repentance."  Reformation  of  life  and  repentance  of  heart  most  go 
together  to  make  the  proper  recipient  attitude. 

III.  There  must  be  a  fositivk  turning  towabds  God.  The  difference  between 
evangelical  repentance  and  worldly  remorse  is  that  repentance  draws  us  toward  God  in 
hope,  and  remorse  drives  us  from  God  in  despair.  It  is  distinctly  expected  that  man 
will  make  positive  efforts;  and  therefore  we  find  the  plea,  "  Come,  and  let  us  return 
unto  the  Lord."  Bishop  Wordsworth  says, "  In  proclaiming  God's  loving  promises,  and 
the  firee  offers  of  Divine  grace,  the  prophet  does  not  forget  man's  duties  both  in  will  and 
work.".  H.  Ward  Beecher  gives  the  following  illustration :  "  Every  day,  from  my 
window,  I  see  the  gulls  making  circuits  and  beating  against  the  north  wind.  Now  they 
mount  high  above  the  masts  of  the  vessels  in  the  stream,  and  then  suddenly  drop  to 
the  water's  edge,  seeking  to  find  some  eddy  unobstructed  by  the  steady-blowing  blast ; 
till  at  length,  abandoning  their  efforts,  they  turn  and  fly  with  the  wind ;  and  then  how 
like  a  gleam  of  light  do  their  white  wings  flash  down  the  bay,  faster  than  the  eye  can 
follow  I  So,  when  we  cease  to  resist  God's  influences,  and,  turning  towards  him,  our 
thought  and  feelings  are  upborne  by  the  breath  of  the  Spirit,  how  do  they  make  such 
swift  heavenward  flight  as  no  words  can  overtake!"  When  these  three  preparations 
indicate  to  Go>i  a  readiness  to  receive  his  grace,  then  will  that  grace  overflow,  and  he 
will  "  •bundantly  pardon."— R.  T. 

Vers.  8,  9. — Chd  is  like  yet  unlike  man.  We  are  made  in  his  image.  We  are  called 
to  be  "  perfect  as  our  Father  in  heaven  is  perfect."  The  hope  of  the  future  is  that  we 
"  shall  be  like  him."  And  yet  we  must  keep  up  the  conviction  that  we  are  but  faint 
copies  of  him,  and  he  is  altogether  better  than  we,  the  Infinite  that  is  ever  high  above 
us,  at  once  our  inspiration  and  our  despair.  Apply  God's  unlikeness  to  us  especially  in 
the  matter  of  redemption. 

I.  God  can  foroive.    This  man  finds  it  hard  to  do. 

II.  God  can  restore.    This  man  cannot  do. 

III.  God  can  bless,  hoping  fob  nothing  in  betubm.  Man  never  very  certainly 
succeeds  in  doing  anything  save  for  pay  (see  Acts  viii.  20). 

IV.  God  oan  absolutely  keep  his  word  of  promise.  Man  is  ever  swift  to  pro- 
mise, slow  to  perform.  "  The  point  of  the  comparison,  in  ver.  11,  is  that  the  predomi- 
nance of  fertility  in  the  natural  world,  in  spite  of  partial  or  apparent  failures,  is  the 
pledge  of  a  like  triumph,  in  the  long  run,  of  the  purposes  of  God  for  man's  good  over 
resistance.  It  does  not  exclude  the  partial,  or  even  total,  failure  of  many ;  it  asserts 
that  the  saved  are  more  than  the  lost."  The  hettemess  of  God  is  the  ground  of  our 
admiration,  trust,  and  love ;  it  is  the  incitement  of  a  perpetual  imitation.  Perfection, 
for  those  who  know  God,  is  to  be  like  Ood. — R.  T. 

Vers.  10, 11. — Change  and  permanence  in  Qod^t  Word.  Dr.  Cteorge  Dana  Boardman 
sees,  in  these  verses,  an  unconscious  anticipation  of  two  great  doctrines  of  moders 
science — the  doctrine  of  convertibility  of  energies,  or  correlation  of  forces ;  and  the  doctrine 
of  conservation  of  energy,  or  indestructibility  vf  force.    "  We  are  now  tau^^ht  tbat  beat, 


34i 


THE  BOOK  Of  THE  PROMET  ISAIAH,      tea- i-Vi.  1—12. 


light,  electricity,  magnetism,  chemical  affinity,  etc.,  are  modes  of  motion,  and,  as  such, 
mutually  interchangeahle.  And  we  are  also  taught  that  there  is  no  evidence  of  any 
atom  of  matter  having  ever  heen  annihilated.     Disintegration  is  not  annihilation." 

I.  God's  Word  is  capable  of  ekbless  transformations.  God's  truth,  coming 
down  like  rain  or  snow  from  heaven,  does  not  return  to  him  void,  but  is  transfigured 
into  Christian  character.  Truth,  like  force,  undtrgoes  metamorphosis.  For  instance, 
the  motion  of  enterprise  glides  into  the  heat  of  enthusiasm  ;  the  heat  of  enthusiasm  into 
the  light  of  influence ;  the  light  of  influence  into  the  magnetism  of  love,  and  so  on. 
The  history  of  Christianity  itself,  what  is  it  bnt  the  history  of  the  grace  of  God 
metamorphosed  into  various  virtues? 

II.  God's  Word  is  indbstrdotible.  "What  though  rainfalls  on  barren  ledges? 
Not  a  drop  is  lost ;  for  the  rain  trickles  down  into  rills,  the  rills  grow  into  brooks, 
the  brooks  swell  into  rivers,  the  rivers  broaden  into  the  sea,  and  the  sea  forms  the 
international  exchange  of  the  world's  commodities.  What  though  snow  mantles  deso- 
late deserts?  Not  a  flake  is  a  failure ;  for  the  snow  melts,  percolates  the  sands,  feeds 
unseen  spiings,  re-emerges  as  the  bearded  wheat  of  autumn."  We  may  hopefully  engage 
in  the  teaching  and  preaching  of  God's  Word ;  for  not  one  lesson  can  be  really  lost. 

-B.T. 


EXPOSITION. 


CHAPTER  LVL 

Vers.  1 — 8. — ^An  Exhortation  to  observe 
the  Law,  especially  the  Law  of  the 
Sabbath,  combined  with  Promises.  There 
was  much  of  the  I^aw  which  it  was  impos- 
sible to  observe  during  the  Captivity.  Sacri- 
fice had  ceased,  the  temple  was  destroyed, 
almost  all  the  ceremonial  law  must  have 
been  suspended;  even  the  command  to  do 
no  work  on  the  sabbath  day  cannot  have 
been  kept  by  a  nation  of  slaves,  whose  masters 
would  certainly  not  have  permitted  them  to 
be  idle  one  day  in  seven,  Still,  the  spirit 
of  the  ordinance  might  be  kept  by  devoting 
the  day,  so  far  as  was  possible,  to  religious 
observance,  as  to  prayer  and  to  meditation 
upon  holy  things.  This  is  now  enjoined  on 
the  captive  Jews,  with  the  promise  of  a 
blessing — a  blessing  in  which  even  the  most 
despised  part  of  the  nation,  the  proselytes 
and  the  eunuchs,  might  participate. 

Ver.  1. — Keep  ye  judgment,  and  do  justice ; 
rather,  Tteep  ye  Law,  and  observe  righteousnest. 
Tlie  exhortation  is  general, and  has  no  special 
bearing  on  trials  or  law-courts.  It  is  a  call 
on  the  Jews,  in  their  captivity,  to  keep,  so 
far  as  was  possible,  tlie  whole  Law  given  on 
Sinai.  My  salvation  is  near  to  come.  The 
nearer  the  time  of  deliverance  approaches, 
the  more  faithful  and  exact  ought  Israel  to 
\m  in  life  and  conduct.  God's  "  salvation  " 
and  his  "righteousness"  go  hand-in-hand. 
It  is  as  his  righteous  people,  "  a  holy  seed  " 
(ch.  vi.  10),  that  he  is  about  to  vindicate  and 
rescue  them.  If  they  are  no  holier  than 
others,  why  should  he  do  more  for  them  than 
for  those  others  ? 


Ver.  2.— That  doeth  this  .  .  .  that  layeth 
hold  on  it ;  i.«.  that  doeth  according  to  the 
exhortation  in  Ver.  1.  That  keepeth  the 
sabbath.  The  prominent  place  assigned  to 
tills  duty  by  the  evangelical  prophet  is 
remarkable.  We  may  observe,  however,  (1) 
that  the  spirit  of  obedience  is  better  tested 
by  a  positive  than  by  a  moral  ordinance ; 
and  (2)  that  as,  probably,  there  could  be 
little  outward  keeping  of  the  sabbath  by  the 
captives,  it  woidd  have  had  to  be  kept 
inwardly  by  spiritual  exercises,  by  silent 
prayer  and  praise,  together  with  prolonged 
meditation  npon  holy  things.  In  the  ab- 
sence of  all  the  ordinary  aids  to  devotion, 
the  religious  condition  of  the  people  must 
have  depended  very  much  on  their  keeping 
up  the  recollection  of  the  sabbath,  and  hal- 
lowing it  so  far  as  was  possible ;  e.g.  doing 
no  work  for  themselves,  neither  buying  nor 
selling,  making  their  devotions  longer,  and 
keeping  God  in  their  thoughts  throughout 
the  day. 

Ver.  3. — ^The  son  of  the  stranger;  i.e.  the 
foreigner,  who  has  become  a  proselyte. 
During  the  depression  of  the  Captivity  these 
are  not  likely  to  have  been  many.  Still, 
there  were  doubtless  some ;  and  these,  who 
had  embraced  Judaism  under  such  unfavour- 
able circumstances,  were  entitled  to  special 
consideration.  As  Messianic  hopes  prevailed, 
and  the  time  of  restoration  to  Palestine  drew 
near  (ver.  1),  they  might  naturally  be  afraid 
that  they  would  not  be  looked  upon  as 
equals  by  the  native  Israelites,  but  would  be 
made  into  a  lower  grade,  if  not  even  excluded. 
The  Lord  hath  utterly  separated  me ;  rather. 
the  Lord  wiU  utterly  teparate  me.  They  ao 
not  suppose  it  done,  but  think  it  will  be 
done.  The  ennnoh.  Isaiah  had  prophesied 
to  Hezekiah  that  •  certain  nomher  of  his 
seed  should  serv*  •■  •mvoha  in  the  njil 


CH.  LVL  1— 12.]       THE  BOOK  OF  THE  PROPHET  ISAIAH. 


345 


palace  of  the  King  of  Babylon  (2  Einga  xx. 
18).  Daniel,  Hananiah,  Mishael,  and  Aza- 
riah  were  such  persons  (Dan.  i.  3 — 6),  and 
there  may  have  been  others.  By  the  letter 
of  the  Law  (Deut.  xxiil.  1),  they  were  cut 
off  from  the  congregation,  but  practically  it 
would  seem  that  during  the  Captivity  tliey 
were  on  a  par  with  other  Israelites.  These 
persons  feared,  with  more  reason  than  the 
foreign  proselytes,  that,  on  the  return  of 
Israel  to  their  own  land,  a  stricter  practice 
would  be  established  than  bad  prevailed 
during  the  Captivity,  and  the  letter  of  the 
Law  would  be  enforced  against  them.  I  am 
a  dry  tree.  Therefore  useless,  and  entitled 
to  no  consideration  at  all. 

Ver.  4. — The  eunnohs  that  .  .  .  take  hold 
of  my  coTeuant.  The  law  of  Deut.  xziii.  1 
shall  be  abrogated  under  the  new  condition 
of  things,  for  such  as  "  take  hold  of  God's 
covenant." 

Ver.  5. — In  mine  house;  i.e.  "in  my 
Church"  (comp.  1  Tim.  iil.  15).  Within  my 
walls.  Within  the  walls  of  my  "  holy  city  " 
(see  above,  ch.  liv.  11,  12  ;  Ix.  14;  Ixii.  12). 
A  place  and  a  name  ;  or,  a  memorial  and  a 
name;  i.e.  honourable  mention,  like  that  pro- 
mised to  the  woman  who  anointed  Christ 
for  his  burial  (Matt.  xxvi.  13).  Such  men- 
tion is  found  in  Matt.  zix.  12;  Acts  viii. 
27—39. 

Yer.  6. — Also  the  sons  of  the  stranger 
(comp.  ver.  3).  The  proselytes  shall  not  be 
treated  aa  they  fear.  On  the  contrary,  God 
will  treat  them  in  exactly  the  same  way  as 
his  original  people — will  conduct  them  to 
Palestine,  settle  them  in  his  "holy  moun- 
tain," admit  them  to  the  temple  services, 
accept  their  burnt  offerings  and  their  sacri- 
fices. All  this  will  be  a  foretaste  of  their 
position  in  the  Christian  Church,  where  there 
will  be  neither  Jew  nor  Gentile,  neither  cir- 


cumcision nor  uncircumcision,  but  a  com- 
munity where  all  are  brethren  and  all  have 
equal  privileges. 

Ver.  7.— My  house  of  prayer.  In  Solo- 
mon's address  to  God  at  the  dedication  of 
the  temple,  its  character,  as  a  house  of 
prayer,  is  abundantly  laid  down  (1  Kings 
viii.  29 — 53).  And  no  doubt  it  was  used  for 
the  purpose  of  prayer,  as  well  as  for  the 
purpose  of  sacrifice,  fiom  its  first  erection  to 
its  final  destruction.  But  the  purpose  of 
sacrifice  so  far  predominated,  in  fact,  over 
the  other,  that  the  expression,  "  my  liouse  of 
prayer,"  comes  upon  us  in  this  place  to  some 
extent  as  a  surprise.  The  prophet  seems  to 
anticipate  the  time  when  the  temple  should 
be  emphatically  a  Trpoo-euxi),  the  legal  sacri- 
fices having  received  their  fulfilment  (ch. 
liii.  10),  and  being  thenceforth  superfluous 
and  out  of  place.  For  all  people;  rather, 
for  all  the  peoples.  All  the  ends  of  the  earth 
were  to  see  the  salvation  of  God  (Ps.  xcviii. 
3) ;  "  All  nations  were  to  fall  down  before 
him ;  all  people  to  do  him  service "  (Ps. 
Ixxii.  11). 

Ver.  8. — The  Lord  God ;  rather,  the  Lord 
Jehovah — Adonai  Jehovah.  An  unusual 
phrase.  Which  gathereth  together  the  out- 
casts of  Israel ;  i.e.  the  Lord  who  has  pledged 
himself  to  bring  back  Israel  from  captivity, 
and  to  gather  together  Israel's  outcasts  from 
all  regions  (ch.  xi.  11;  xxvii.  12,  13;  xliii. 
5,  6,  etc.).  This  same  Lord  now  promises 
something  further :  "  He  will  gather  others 
also  to  Israel,  besides  his  own  gathered  ones." 
Introduced  with  such  emphasis  and  formality, 
this  was  probably,  when  delivered,  a  new 
revelation.  In  the  present  arrangement  of 
the  prophecies,  liowever,  it  announces  no 
novelty.  The  addition  of  Gentile  members 
to  the  Israelite  community  has  been  declared 
frequently  (see  oh.  xliv.  5 ;  Iv.  5,  etc.). 


Beotion  V.    A  Warnino  to  the  Wicked  (ch.  lvi.  9 — Lvn.). 


Vera.  9—12. — ^Thb  BlindGcides  op  Israel 
BEBDKBD.  A  suddcn  change  of  style  marks 
the  introduction  of  an  entirely  uew  prophecy. 
The  eye  of  the  prophet,  apparently,  goes 
back  from  the  period  of  the  exile,  which  he 
has  been  so  long  contemplating,  to  his  own 
day,  or  at  any  rate  to  the  pre-exile  period, 
and  rests  upon  Israel  in  their  own  land. 
He  sees  them  misled  by  their  teachers  (vers. 
10—12),  given  to  idolatry  (oh.  Ivii.  3—9), 
and  offering  themselves  a  ready  prey  to 
their  enemies  (eh.  lvi.  9).  Many  modern 
critics  regard  the  passage  as  the  composition 
of  an  unknown  prophet  belonging  to  the 
time  of  Manasseh.  But  there  is  no  sufli- 
cient  evidence  of  this.  The  prophecy  has 
many  Isaian  characteristics. 


V«jr.  9. — Beasts  of  the  field  .  .  .  beasts  in 
the  forest ;  i.e.  "  all  wild  beasts  of  whatever 
kind  " — all  the  enemies  of  God's  flock  (see  . 
Jer.  xii.  9 ;  Ezek.  xxxiv.  8).  Come  to  devour. 
Make  haste,  now  is  your  opportunity.  The 
people  have  none  to  protect  tliem,  and  will 
be  an  easy  prey.  Come, set  to  work;  devour. 

Ver.  10. — His  watchmen  are  blind.  Israel's 
"watchmen"  are  his  guides  and  teachers, 
the  prophets  (Jer.  vi.  17 ;  Ezek.  iii.  17 ;  Hab. 
ii.  1,  etc.).  At  the  time  of  which  Isaiah 
speaks,  they  are  "blind"  (ch.  xxix.  18; 
XXXV.  5;  xlii.  7,  16, 18,  19;  xliii.  8.  etc.),  or 
without  knowledge — like  the  "blind  guides" 
of  the  Gospel  (Matt.  xv.  14;  Luke  vi.  39, 
etc.)  They  have  not  the  spiritual  discem- 
meBt  which  would  enable  them  to  lead  th« 
people  aright.  Fuither,  they  are  dumb  dogs 
Instead  of  acting  as  faittful  watch-dogs,  wbn 
give  warning  of  the  approach  of  danger  1  ^ 


346 


THE  BOOK  OF  THE  PBOPHET  ISAIAH.  [ch.  lvi.  1—12, 


their  barking,  they  remain  apathetic,  and 
utter  no  warning  at  all.  It  is  as  if  they 
paBSod  tlrelr  lives  in  sleep. 

Ver.  11.  —  Yea,  they  are  greedy  dogs. 
Another  defect  is  noted.  Not  only  do  they 
fail  in  the  way  of  neglect  of  duty,  but  they 
are  actively  culpable.  Being  worldly  and 
not  spiritually  minded,  they  are  "  greedy  " 
after  gain.  Anciently,  the  taking  of  a  gift, 
or  fee,  from  those  who  came  to  consult  them 
was  regarded  as  no  dishonour  to  the  pro- 
phetic office  (Kumb.  xzii.  7  ;  1  Sam.  ix.  7 ; 
1  Kings  ziv.  3);  but  the  nobler  class  of  pro- 
phets declined  to  make  a  profit  of  tlieir 
spiritual  powers,  and  wonld  receive  no  fee 
(2  Kings  T.  16;  Matt.  x.  8;  Acts  viii.  20). 
In  Ezekiel  and  Micah  the  taking  of  gifts  by 
prophets  is  regarded  as  discreditable  (Ezek. 
ziii.  19 ;  xxii.  25 ;  Micah  iii.  3).  From  his 
quarter ;  rather,  to  the  uttermost  (Kay),  oi 
every  one,  teithout  exception  (Cheyne). 

Yer.  12.— Come  ye,  say  they,  I  will  fetch 


wine.  Here  we  have  mention  of  s  third 
defect.  The  prophets  of  the  time  are  not 
only  negligent  of  their  duty,  and  covetous, 
but  they  are  given  to  excess  in  wine  and  to 
long  revels,  such  as  even  the  heathen  con- 
sidered to  be  disgraceful  (eomp.  ch.  xxviii. 
7,  where  both  priests  and  prophets  are  taxed 
with  habitual  drunkenness).  To-morrow  shall 
be  as  this  day ;  i.e.  the  drinking  shall  con- 
tinue— we  will  have  a  two  days'  bout  of  it. 
And  mnoh  more  abundant ;  rather,  very  ex- 
ceedingly abundant.  Tliere  is  no  comparison 
of  one  day  with  the  other;  but  simply  a 
promise  that  on  both  days  the  drinking 
shall  be  without  stint.  (On  the  drunken- 
ness occasionally  prevalent  in  Oriental  coun- 
tries, see  Herod.,  i.  133;  Xen.,  'Cyrop.,' 
viii.  8,  §  10;  Dur.  Sam.  Pr.,  13;  and  com- 
pare the  remarks  of  Sir  H.  Bawliuson  on 
the  inebriety  of  the  modern  Persians  in  the 
author's  'Herodotus,'  vol.  i.  p.  219,  edition 
of  1862.) 


HOMILETICS. 

Vers.  8 — 7. — Outward  defetti  and  defilements  no  hindrance  to/ull  communion  tn  (As 
Church  of  God.  In  the  infancy  of  humanity,  and  with  a  people  so  carnal  as  the 
Israelites,  it  was  necessary  to  teach  the  great  doctrines  of  purity  and  holiness  by  a 
material  symbolism.  Hence  the  multitude  of  regulations  in  the  Law  concerning 
defects,  blemishes,  sources  of  outward  defilement,  methods  of  removing  defilements, 
clean  and  unclean  meats,  and  the  like.  God  strove  to  train  his  people  ty  these  out- 
ward shows  to  the  recognition  of  the  eternal  distinction  between  inward  purity  and 
impurity,  and  to  a  proper  sense  of  the  fact  that  impurity  is  an  utter  disquali6cation  for 
communion  with  him  and  with  his  Church.  But  these  distinctions  were  nev.er  intended 
to  be  lasting.  Our  Lord  himself  declared  to  his  disciples,  "Not  that  which  goeth 
into  the  mouth  deflleth  a  man ;  but  that  which  cometb  out  of  the  mouth,  this  defileth 
a  man.  .  .  .  Those  things  which  proceed  out  of  the  mouth  come  forth  from  the  heart ; 
and  they  defile  the  man.  For  out  of  the  heart  proceed  evil  thoughts,  murders,  adulteries, 
fornications,  thefts,  false  witness,  blasphemies :  these  are  the  things  which  defile  a  man ; 
but  to  eat  with  unwashen  hands  defileth  not  a  n;an"  (Matt.  xv.  11 — 20).  It  was  long 
before  the  Jews  could  fiiUy  understand  this  doctrine,  or  believe  that  the  Levitical  Law 
on  all  points  of  external  defilement  was  absolutely  done  away  (see  Acts  x.  9 — 35  ;  xi. 
3 — 18;  XV.  5 — 20;  1  Cor.  viii.  4 — 13).  There  was  at  first  a  great  objection  to  receive 
any  Gentiles  into  the  Christian  Church,  and  many  miracles  had  to  be  wrought  to 
.  overcome  it.  There  was,  after  this,  a  line  of  separation  drawn,  and  a  claim  set  up 
by  those  of  the  favoured  nation  to  form  a  higher  grade  than  the  Gentile  Christians, 
with  whom  they  refused  to  eat  (Gal.  ii.  11 — 14).  So  persistent  is  the  spirit  of 
formalism,  that,  notwithstanding  our  Lord's  teaching  and  that  of  his  apostles,  it  was 
centuries  before  the  Church  was  wholly  freed  from  dissension  and  di£Sculty  in  this 
matter  (Burton, '  Church  of  the  First  Three  Centuries,'  vol.  L  pp.  348 — 351). 

Vers.  9 — 12. — When  their  spiritual  guides  go  astray,  the  flack  of  Christ  suffers. 
Spiritual  guides  are  bound  to  watch  for  the  flock,  as  "  they  that  must  give  account" 
(Heb.  xiii.  17).  It  is  ill  for  the  flock  when  they  are  even  negligent  in  their  duties — 
still  worse  when  they  engage  actively  in  evil  courses.  Israel's  guides  at  this  time 
were  open  to  both  charges,  and  are  blamed  on  both  accounts.  Istuah  taxes  them  with 
being — 

I.  Bund  guides,  destitute  of  spiritual  wisdom  and  spiritual  discernment.  "The 
priest's  lips  should  keep  knowledge"  (Mai.  ii.  7).  It  is  the  office  of  priests  and 
ministers  to  guide  ari>,'ht  the  souls  committed  to  their  charge,  and  for  this  purpose 


OH.  Lvt  1— 12/         THE  BOOK  OP  THE  PROPHET  ISAIAH.  34'! 

they  require  a  large  fund  of  "  the  wisiom  which  is  from  ahove,"  a  large  experience 
of  human  li^e  and  of  the  human  heart,  and  a  deep  acquaintance  with  the  written 
Word,  wherein  treasures  of  wisdom  and  knowledge  are  hid  away.  "  Blind  guideB " 
constitute  a  terrible  danger.  "If  the  blind  lead  the  blind,  shall  they  not  both  fall 
into  the  pit?"  (Matt.  xv.  14).  What  havoc  may  not  be  wrought  by  a  "  blind  guide," 
who  undertakes  to  be  the  director  of  thousands  or  even  hundreds  of  souls  1  And  yet 
how  lightly  do  young  men,  after  no  more  than  a  year  or  two  of  exjierience,  seek  to 
obtain  "sole  charges"!  "Sole  charges"  should  he  reserved  for  those  who  have  been 
thoroughly  tried  and  tested,  and  have  shown  themselves  able  ministers  of  the  Word 
and  wise  directors  of  men's  consciences. 

II.  Dumb  doos.  If  we  are  without  knowledge,  it  is  better  to  be  "dumb"  than  to 
speak.  But  to  have  knowledge,  to  be  able  to  direct  and  improve  others,  and,  having 
undertaken  the  ministerial  office,  then  to  draw  back  and  remain  silent,  through  sloth 
and  laziness,  because  we  would  fain  "  lie  down,  and  dream,  and  slumber,"  and  pass 
our  life  without  care,  or  anxiety,  or  trouble, — this  is  a  most  "  dangerous  downfall,"  a 
shirking  of  our  responsibilities,  a  "drawing  back  unto  perdition  of  the  soul"  (Heb.  x. 
39).  There  are  ministers  even  now,  in  this  latter  part  of  the  nineteenth  century,  whose 
object  in  their  ministerial  life  seems  to  be  to  do  as  little  as  possible,  who  preach  little, 
visit  less,  reprove  and  rebuke  vice  least  of  all,  whose  desire  seems  to  be  always  for 
"  a  little  more  sleep,  a  little  more  slumber,  a  little  more  folding  of  the  hands  to  sleep  " 
(Prov.  vi.  10).     Such  persons  will  one  day  experience  a  terrible  awakening! 

III.  Greedy  doos.  Ministers  are  bound  to  be  patterns  to  the  flock.  If  they  preach 
the  doctrines  of  the  gospel — self-sacrifice,  spirituality,  unworldliness — and  are  them- 
■elves  greedy  of  gain,  conspicuous  examples  of  the  worldly  and  covetous  spirit  which 
they  denounce,  what  possible  effect  for  good  can  their  preacliing  have?  Such  men 
do  more  harm  than  infidels.  They  dishonour  their  Master,  bring  scorn  and  contempt 
upon  religion,  do  their  best  to  create  the  impression  that  Christianity  is  a  sham, 
a  make-believe,  a  device  for  bolstering  up  a  rotten  state  of  society  and  repressing 
revolutionary  effort.     "  The  labourer  is  worthy  of  his  hire  "  (Luke  x.  7),  and  they 

•that  preach  the  gospel  are  entitled  to  "  live  of  the  gospel "  (1  Cor.  ix.  14) ;  but  a  hard, 
grasping,  or  even  niggardly  spirit  in  a  Christian  minister  is  a  disgrace  to  his  profession, 
a  scandal  to  the  Church  whereto  he  belongs,  and  a  danger  to  society.  Such  as  "  look 
to  their  own  way,"  and  seek  their  own  gain,  "to  the  uttermost,"  as  did  the  pseudo- 
prophets  of  Isaiah's  day,  are  wholly  unfit  to  bear  the  message  of  him  who,  "  though 
rich,  for  man's  sake  became  poor"  (2  Cor.  viii.  9),  and  chose  "the  poor  of  this  world" 
for  his  ministers  (Jas.  ii.  5). 

IV.  WnfE-BiBBBBS.  Intemperate  habits  are,  if  possible,  more  unbecoming  to  the 
minister  of  Christ  than  even  coretousness.  Covetousness  may  be  secret,  and  escape 
detection ;  intemperance  is  a  public  scandal.  The  man  of  intemperate  habits  can 
scarcely  have  the  faic>3  to  rebuke  any  vice  in  others,  seeing  that  his  own  vice  is  so  open 
and  patent  to  all.  He  is  thus  utterly  disqualified  for  the  ministerial  office,  which  he 
degrades  and  disgraces  so  long  as  he  bears  it.  Fortunately,  at  the  present  day, 
intemperance  is  recognized  as  incompatible  with  the  cure  of  souls;  and  the  intemperate 
minister,  in  modern  Churches,  can  scarcely  remain  a  minister  for  many  months. 


HOMILIES  BY  VARIOUS  AUTHORS. 

Vers.  1—8. — The  true  observance  of  the  sabbath.  Foreign  converts  are  commended 
for  their  observance  of  the  sabbath,  and  promised  an  appropriate  reward,.  The  day 
was  more  strictly  observed  during  the  Babylonian  and  Persian  periods  (Jer.  xvii.  19 — 27 ; 
Ezek.  XX.  11—21 ;  xxii.  8,  26 ;  Neh.  xiii.  15—22  ;  of.  2  Kings  xi.  1—16  with  1  Mace. 
ii.  32 — 38).     Its  estimation  rose  with  the  estimation  of  prayer  (Cheyne). 

L  The  dutt  of  obedirnoe.  The  Law  is  "  the  objective  rule  of  life,  the  Law  of 
JehoTah."  Or,  with  others,  "  equity,  justice.''  And  the  "  practice  of  righteousness  " 
is  eTer  a  necessity  with  him.  The  more  so  as  every  serious  crisis  draws  on.  My 
salvation  is  near — the  kingdom  of  heaven  is  at  hand.  A  crisis  means  a  time  of  siftine 
and  separatum.  "God's  salvation  is  not  indiscriminate,  And  the  grounds  on  which 
he  distinguishes  his  people  from  his  enemies  aru  not  external,  but  internal.     It  is  tha 


348  THE  BOOS   OP  THE  PROPHET  ISAIAH.       [ch.  lvi.  1—12. 

Israel  within  Israel,  the  spiritaal  dnnimdBion,  the  holy  seed,  that  he  acknowledges, 
vindicates,  rescues,  glorifies  "  (Cheyne). 

II.  Sabbath-eeefino  as  an  sxprebsion  of  obedience.  How  significant  the 
sabbath  in  the  iustitiitions  of  Judaism  I  True,  the  seventh  day  belonged  also  to 
Babylonian  religion,  but  we  know  its  beauty  and  its  blessing  through  the  Jews.  It 
was  a  sign  ol  the  great  standing  covenant  between  God  and  the  nation  (Exod.  xxxi, 
13 — 17).  By  this  the  Jews  were  maiked  as  a  nation.  Narrow  notions,  Puritan 
superstitions,  have  gathered  about  the  sabbath;  still,  the  idea  of  it  is  very  beautiful. 
Bwald  brings  it  under  the  idea  of  sacrifice  of  time.  It  is  the  representative  of  the 
duties  of  the  first  table  (Ezek.  xx.  11 — 21).  But  mere  sabbath-keeping  avails  not 
without  the  honest  heart  and  the  upright  life — ^the  man  must  "keep  his  hand  from 
evil." 

III.  Tub  blessings  of  obedience  univeesal.  The  prophet  would  remove  a 
misunderstanding.  The  beatitude  is  universally  applicable  to  those  who  keep  God's 
commandments.  The  foreigner  might  be  anxious  about  his  position  in  the  spiritual 
commonwealth.  For  there  were  exclusive  injunctions  directed  against  him  (Deut. 
xxiii.  4 — 7).  During  the  Captivity  probably  an  exclusive  spirit  was  growing ;  it  may 
be  observed  in  the  restored  exiles  (Neh.  xiiL).  They  are  here  assured  that  they  shall 
be  admitted  to  the  spiritual  commonwealth  on  an  equal  footing  with  the  Jews, 
National  barriers  are  broken  down  before  the  new  expansive  spirit  of  love.  There 
was  also  a  law  against  eunuchs  (Deut.  xxiii.  2).  But  this  disability  is  also  to  be 
removed.  This  class  of  men  may  stand  for  the  outcast  and  degraded  in  generaL 
They  are  to  be  admitted  to  communion,  and  are  to  receive  some  "  trophy  and  monu- 
ment" (1  Sam.  XV.  12;  2  Sam.  xviii.  18)  in  the  temple  itself — provided  they  have 
been  faith lul  to  the  commands  and  covenant  of  Jehovah.  Probably  a  spiritual  and 
everlasting  memorial  is  meant  (cf.  Rev.  iii.  12;  Matt.  xxvi.  13).  Then  the  foreign 
proselytes  who  should  (1)  join  them  to  the  Lord,  (2)  with  intent  to  serve  him,  (3)  and 
who  should  love  the  Name  of  the  Lord,  (4)  who  should  be  his  servants,  (6)  who  should' 
keep  his  sabbaths,  (6)  and  take  hold  of  his  covenant,  were  to  be  admitted  to  all  the 
privileges  of  the  chosen  people.  The  same  terms  of  salvation  were  to  be  applicable 
to  all.  In  1  Kings  viii.  41— -43  Solomon  prays  that  God  should  do  "  according  to  all 
that  the  stranger  calleth  to  thee  for."  In  Ps.  oxxxv.  19,  20  the  proselytes  are  called 
to  bless  Jehovah,  after  the  house  of  Israel,  of  Aaron,  of  Levi. 

lY.  The  blessings  of  the  house  of  pbateb.  All  shall  be  brought  to  God's  holy 
mountain— shall  be  admitted  to  the  one  sacred  fellowship.  They  shall  be  made  joyful 
by  the  levelation  of  the  Shechinah — the  presence  of  the  Eternal  in  his  power  and  mercy. 
Their  offerings  (those  of  the  proselytes)  shall  be  accepted  on  his  altar.  There  should 
be  no  invidious  distinctions.  The  house  should  be  a  "  house  of  prayer  to  all  peoples  " 
(cf.  Matt.  xxi.  13).  Moreover,  other  nations,  not  now  of  Israel^  would  be  united  to 
the  one  spiritual  stock.  The  exiles  in  distant  lands  would  be  gathered;  also  other 
Gentiles  of  whom  the  proselytes  are  the  firstfruits — "  other  sheep  not  of  this  flock  " 
(John  X,  16) — and  they  will  become  fellow-citizens  with  the  saints  and  of  the  household 
of  God  (Eph.  ii.  19).  The  race — "on  a  level  with  respect  to  moral  character,  all 
having  sinned  and  come  short  of  the  glory  of  God — is  on  a  level  with  respect  to  redemp- 
tion ;  the  same  Saviour  died  for  all,  the  same  Spirit  is  ready  to  sanctify  all.  The  wide 
world  may  be  saved,  and  there  is  not  one  of  the  human  race  so  degraded  in  hutnan 
estimation  by  rank,  or  colour,  or  ignorance,  who  may  not  be  admitted  to  the  same 
heaven  with  Abraham  and  the  prophets,  and  whose  prayers  and  praises  may  not  be 
as  acceptable  to  God  as  those  of  the  most  magnificent  moQarch  who  ever  wore  a 
crown." — J. 

Ver.  9 — ch,  Ivii,  2. — The  negUetfuH  shepherdt.  Hera  in  •  series  of  powerful  pictures 
religious  indifferenee  on  the  part  ol  pastors  is  described. 

I.  The  blind  watchman.  Nothing  can  be  more  beautiful  than  the  idea  of  the 
shepherd  as  descriptive  of  the  true  teacher  and  minister  to  souls ;  tenderness,  watch- 
fulness, self-denial,  all  are  his.  So,  on  the  other  hand,  nothing  can  more  hold  up  the 
faithless  pastor  to  scorn  than  the  character  of  the  faithless  shepherd  (John  x.).  As 
the  flock  becomes  a  prey  to  the  wild  beasts  when  there  is  no  shepherd,  or  when  he 
neglects  his  care,  so  Israel,  bereft  of  her  natural  defenders,  lies  at  the  meicy  of  th« 


oil.  LTt  1—12.]       THE  BOOK  OF  THE  PROPHET  ISAIAH.  349 

great  heathen  empire  (cf.  Bzek.  xiii.  4 ;  xxxiv.  8  ;  xxxix.  4 ;  Jer.  xii.  9 ;  Eev.  xix. 
17, 18).  Especially  the  prophets  are  referred  to  (of.  Ezek.  iii.  17 ;  oh.  xxi.  1 1).  These 
"dumb  dogs"  are  opposed  to  the  faithful  shephenl-dogs  (Job  xxx.  1).  "We  must 
suppose  that  the  prophets  referred  to  were  no  better  thun  the  ancient  soothsayers,  who 
gave  oracles  respecting  the  difficulties  of  everyday  life,  but  were  silent  on  the  great 
moral  questions"  (Cheyne).  Immersed,  perhaps,  in  sin  themselves,  they  were  blind  to 
the  national  sins.  "  G-od  requires  knowledge  in  his  ambassadors.  Ignorance  of  the 
truth ;  of  the  nature,  existence,  and  pollution  of  sin ;  of  the  claims  of  God  and  of  the 
way  of  pardon, — ^is  an  effectual  disqualification  for  the  office." 

II.  Thbib  ,  SLUGGISHNESS  AND  GKEBD.  They  are  like  those  who  rave  in  sleep, 
moving  among  idle  phanfcasnis  raiher  than  serious  realities.  The  false  teacher  not  only 
does  not  know  the  truth,  he  falls  into  some  species  of  delusion,  and  leads  his  flock  along 
with  him.  He  "  loves  to  slumber."  "  Alas !  that  this  should  be  too  true  of  multitudes 
wlio  bear  the  sacred  office,  and  are  appninted  to  warn  their  fellow-men  of  danger! 
Some  are  afraid  of  giving  offence;  sume  have  no  deep  sense  of  the  importance  of 
religious  truth ;  some  embrace  false  opinions ;  some  engage  in  worldly  projects,  and  fill 
up  their  time  with  the  cares  and  plans  of  this  life ;  and  some  are  invincibly  indoknt. 
An  inactive  and  unfaithful  ministry  suffers  the  grtat  enemy  to  come  and  bear  away 
the  soul  to  death,  as  an  unfaithful  mastiff  would  suffer  a  thief  to  approach  the  dwelling 
without  warning  the  inmates.  Instinct  prompts  the  faithful  animal  to  act  the  part 
G(A  intends;  but  alas!  there  are  men  whoui  neither  conscience,  reason,  hope,  fear,  nor 
love  will  rouse  to  put  forth  efforts  to  save  a  soul  from  hell !  Their  greed.  They  "  keep 
ap  the  old  custom,  rejected  by  the  higher  prophets  as  an  abuse,  of  taking  fees  "  (sea 
references  in  Cheyne).  Each  and  all  are  bent  upon  private  interest  and  gain,  and  upon 
selfish  enjoyment.  One  of  them  is  represented  as  inviting  another  to  a  carouse  of 
two  days. 

IIL  The  contrasted  fate  of  the  biohteous.  They  "  perish " — prematurely 
cut  off;  a  contradiction  peculiarly  great  from  an  Old  Testament  point  of  view  (Bccles. 
vii.  15).  It  seemed  as  if  this  prematlire  de[)arture  were  an  ill  reward  for  faithful 
service;  but  it  was  dictated  by  mercy.  The  godly  were  delivered  from  sights  of 
horror  which  might  have  vexed  their  souls. 

"  O  Brettinoro  I  wherefore  tarriest  still, 
Since  forth  of  thee  thy  family  hath  gone, 
And  many,  hating  evil,  join'd  their  steps?" 

Moreover,  they  were  spared  from  the  coming  retribution ;  so  Abraham  goes  to  his  fathers 
in  peace,  and  Isaiah  is  not  to  see  all  the  evil  which  Grod  will  bring  upon  the  place. 
"  His  soul  is  pleasing  to  God ;  therefore  he  hastens  with  hitn  out  of  the  evil  life  "  (Wisd. 
iv.  14).  Here  was  a  warning  to  the  wicked;  great  must  be  the  evil  doomed  to  be  so 
punished.  A  few  remaining  righteous  might  have  saved  the  city  (Gen.  xviii.  23 — 32). 
Sorer  punishment  was  therefore  at  hand.  The  departure  of  a  good  man  is  a  public 
calamity.  His  example  and  his  influence  are  among  the  richest  blessings  of  the  world. 
If  men  are  not  deeply  affected  by  the  withdrawal  of  them,  it  is  a  proof  of  guilt  and 
stupidity.  Who  knows,  asked  a  heathen  poet,  if  dying  be  not  life,  and  life  dying  ? 
On  the  hither  side  of  the  grave  the  wicked  remain  steeped  in  sin  and  sloth;  on  the  further 
side  there  is  rest  and  peace.  "Let  them  rave,  thou  art  quiet  in  tliy  grave."  "Who 
does  not  envy  those  who  have  seen  to  an  end  their  manful  endeavour  ?  Who  that  sees 
the  meanness  of  our  public  life,  but  inly  congratulates  the  pure  statesman  or  teacher 
that  he  is  long  wrapped  in  his  shroud,  and  for  ever  safe ;  laid  sweet  in  his  grave,  the 
hope  of  humanity  not  subjugated  in  him?  Who  does  not  sometimes  envy  the  good 
and  brave,  who  are  no  more  to  suffer  from  the  tumults  of  the  natural  world,  and  await 
with  curious  complacency  the  speedy  term  of  his  own  conversation  with  finite  nature? 
Yet  the  love  that  will  be  annihilated  sooner  than  treacherous,  has  already  made  death 
impossible,  and  affirms  itself  no  mortal,  but  nature  of  the  deeps  of  absolute  and 
inextinguishable  being  "  (Emerson). — J. 

Ver.  6. — Service.  "The  sons  of  the  stranger,  that  join  themselves  to  the  Lord,  to 
serve  him,"  etc.  This  word  is  often  degraded  in  human  speech.  "Service"  is  con- 
sidered humiliating,  and  ouly  mastership  is  glorious.     But  "the  Son  of  man  came  uut 


860  THE  BOOK  OF   THE   PROPHET  ISAIAH.      [oh.  lvl  1— 12, 

to  be  ministered  onto,  but  to  miniiter.''    We  are  all  of  us  "  debtors  "  to  othen ;  we  owe 
them  much,  and  we  owe  Christ  all. 

L  Sebvioe  calls  onr  what  is  best  in  hen.  1.  Their  unselfishnesB.  2.  Their 
heroism.    3.  Their  ^ttenc«. 

II.  Sebvioe  ohabaotebizes  the  noblest  and  this  best  or  hen.  1.  Think  of  the 
worWs  great  leaders.    2.  Think  of  the  Church's  suffertrs  and  martyrs. 

III.  Sebvice  is  eubodied  in  many  forms.  There  is  a  service  of  gift ;  a  service  of 
speech ;  a  service  of  submission. 

"  They  also  serve  who  only  stand  and  wait." 

All  God's  universe  is  alive  with  blest  activity.    The  idler  ia  ont  of  harmony  with  the 
entire  creation  of  God. — W.  M.  S. 

Ver.  1. — The  attitude  of  holy  expectation.  God  evidently  requires  of  us  that,  when 
we  are  anticipating  any  special  manifestation  on  his  part,  there  should  be  special  purity 
on  our  part.     We  look  at — 

I.  Our  cokdition.  This  is  one  of  complete  dependence  on  God.  We  need  the 
action  of  the  Divine  power  to  give  efficacy  to  all  our  labour;  nothing  that  we  do,  of 
any  kind  whatever,  is  effectual  without  the  energizing  touch  of  his  hand.  We  need 
also  the  manifestation  of  this  Divine  power  for  deliverance  from  danger  and  trouble. 
Salvation  from  any  evil,  temporal  or  spiritual,  can  come  only  from  CSnd.  "  All  onr 
springs  are  in  him." 

II.  OuB  expectation.  We  hope  for  great  things  of  God.  He  has  taught  ns  to 
hope  from  the  beginning  (Ps.  xxii.  9).  It  is  with  a  true  instinct  that  the  farmer  looks 
up  to  God  for  his  annual  harvest ;  that  the  soldier  trusts  for  victory  in  the  favour  and 
tlie  aid  of  the  God  of  battles;  that  the  sailor  cries  to  Heaven  for  help  when  his  ship  is 
tussing  on  the  waves  in  the  overwhelming  storm ;  that  the  faithful  witness  of  Jesus 
Christ  appeals  to  his  Divine  Lord  when  the  persecutor  is  on  his  track  or  has  him 
in  his  cruel  grasp.  We  hope  in  God,  for  we  know  (1)  the  benignity  of  hit  Spirit,  his 
desire  to  bless  his  children,  and  his  compassion  for  them  in  their  distresses;  (2)  the 
faithfulness  of  his  word,  and  that  be  has  said,  "  Call  upon  me  in  the  day  of  trouble : 
I  will  deliver  thee"  (Ps.  1.15). 

HI.  The  right  attitude  of  expectation.  It  is  that  of  special  purity  or  righteous- 
DL'ss ;  separating  ourselves  from  all  that  is  offensive  in  the  sight  of  God.  To  expect 
any  unusual  manifestation  of  Divine  power  or  grace  when  we  are  holding  any  iniquity 
to  our  heart,  is  only  to  delude  ourselves,  and  to  be  the  heirs  of  disillusion  and  dis- 
appuintnient.  1.  When  God  manifested  himself  at  Sinai  he  required  that  the  people 
should  be  sanctified  in  readiness  for  his  coming  (Exod.  xix.  10).  2.  When  the  Lord 
of  hosts  would  give  victory  to  the  armies  of  Israel  he  required  that  they  sanctified 
themselves,  not  only  by  religious  rite,  but  by  cleansing  themselves  of  their  sin  (Josh, 
iii.  5 ;  V. ;  vii.).  3.  When  the  children  of  Israel  were  delivered  from  the  land  of  captivity 
they  fasted  and  prayed  that  the  hand  of  God  might  be  upon  them  (Ezra  viii.  21 — ^23). 
4.  When  the  kingdom  of  God  was  announced  there  was  a  solemn  summons  to  repent 
(Matt.  iiL  2  ;  iv.  17).  5.  When  we  seek  Divine  mercy  and  eternal  life  in  Jesus  Christ 
we  must  put  away  evil  from  our  heart  and  life;  repentance  never  has  been  and  never 
can  be  dissociated  from  a  living  and  saving  faith  (Acts  xx.  21).  6.  When  we  draw 
near  to  Gud  in  worship  we  must  come  to  him  with  clean  hands  and  a  pure  heart 
(Ps.  XV.  24  ;  Ixvi.  18;  ch.  xxxiii.  15,  16;  Matt.  t.  8;  Heb.  xii.  14;  1  Tim.  ii.  8). 
7.  When  we  look  for  a  manifi'station  of  God's  power  in  the  renewal  of  a  Church,  or  the 
regeneration  of  a  community,  we  must  appear  before  him  in  purity  of  heart  and 
integrity  of  life ;  or  his  "  salvation  *  will  not  "  come,"  his  "  righteousness  "  will  not  "  be 
revealed." — C. 

Vers.  3—8. — 2%«  open  gate.  The  temple  or  house  of  God  (ver.  7)  stands  for  his 
kingdom  of  righteousness ;  and  in  exalted  vision  the  prophet  foresees  the  time  when  it 
shaU  stand  open  to  every  man — to  the  stranger  or  heathen,  and  even  to  those  physically 
debarred.  It  is  to  becalled  "a  house  of  prayer /or  all  people."  It  is  wui  thy  of  note  that 
it  should  be  called  a  house  of  prayer ;  the  truth  is  intimated  that,  in  the  kingdom  of 
God,  sacrifice  performed  by  the  few  on  behalf  of  the  raaiiy  will  yield  to  the  spiritual 


0H.LVI.1— 12.]       THE  BOOK  OP   THE   PROPHET   ISAIAH.  861 


approach  by  all  to  the  Father  of  muIs  ;  that  one  principal  purpose  of  worship  is  that  of 
coming  into  close,  holy,  personal  fellowship  with  the  living  God.  But  the  main  truth 
of  the  passage  is  found  in  the  thought  of — 

L  The  open  gate  into  the  kinqdou  of  God.  When  God's  full  purpose  should  be 
revealed,  there  would  be  a  kingdom  or  Church  which  should  be  open  to  every  child  of 
man,  irrespective  of  his  nationality  or  his  physical  peculiarities ;  the  time  should  come 
when  there  would  be  neither  Greek  nor  Jew,  barbarian  noi-  Scyth  na,  bond  nor  free. 
The  gracious  purpose  of  God  is  fulfilled  only  in  the  gospel  of  his  Son.  There  we  find 
"the  common  salvation,"  broad  as  the  race  of  man.  1.  It  is  adapted  to  all  men 
everywhere,  however  apart  and  afar  they  may  be  from  the  scene  of  its  iDirth.  Judaism, 
Mohammedanism,  Buddhism,  have  local  features ;  they  are  peculiarly  adapted  to  men 
living  in  certain  latitudes  and  longitudes,  with  certain  surroundings  and  national 
habits  and  wants ;  they  have  their  limitations.  But  into  the  gospel  of  Jesus  Christ 
limitation  or  partiality  does  not  enter;  it  is  as  perfectly  suited  to  men  of  one  clime  as 
to  those  of  another;  we  cannot  think  of  men  under  any  earthly  conditions  whatever 
for  whose  elevation  and  happiness  it  is  not  thoroughly  fitted.  2.  It  is  intended  for, 
and  is  powerful  over,  those  fui  hest  removed  from  the  knowledge  and  the  likeness  of 
God.  It  purified  the  corrupt  Oorinthian;  it  softened  the  hard  Roman;  it  sobered  and 
solemnized  the  flippant  Athenian  ;  it  has  civilized  the  most  savage  baibaiian ;  it  has 
rescued  and  transformed  the  most  degraded  citizens  of  our  modern  civilization ;  it  has 
proved  itself  the  power  of  God  to  redeem  and  regenerate  the  very  worst  that  have 
defaced  the  human  image  and  disgraced  the  human  name.  3.  It  is  needed  by  those 
who  are  nearest  the  sources  of  truth ;  for  it  convicts  even  the  best  of  unworihiness  and 
guilt,  and  it  finds  for  them  a  Saviour  and  a  reconciliation. 

II.  The  conditions  or  citizenship.  The  gate  is  open  into  the  blessed  kingdom, 
but  it  is  a  kingdom  of  righteousness  and  peace  and  joy  (Rom.  xiv.  17).  Only  they  can 
be  accounted  citizens  who  fulfil  certain  spiritual  conditions.  These  are  indicated  here. 
They  are :  1.  Drawing  nigh  to  God  through  the  appointed  means — the  sabbath  day,  the 
house  of  prayer,  etc.  2.  Accepting  God's  method  of  reconciliation  ;  i.e.  by  faith  in  his 
Son,  our  Saviour ;  "  taking  hold  of  his  covenant "  (see  Phil.  iii.  7 — 9).  3.  Conforming  the 
life  to  God's  holy  will ;  "  choosing  the  things  that  please  him,"  rather  than  those  wl  jch 
please  ourselves  or  others ;  engaging  in  his  service  (ver.  6). — C. 

Vers.  9 — 12. —  Unfaithful  ministry.  Three  truths  appear  as  we  consider  these  strong 
words. 

I.  That  God  has  placed  the  welfabb  of  the  mant  in  the  ohabqb  of  the  few. 
Practically,  the  moral  and  material  condition  of  the  country  in  the  course  of  the  next 
twenty  years  depends  greatly  on  the  character  of  those  of  its  citizens  who  are  parents. 
The  fathers  and  mothers  in  the  land  are  determining  its  future  to  a  large  extent  by  their 
parental  wisdom  or  folly.  But  we  may  narrow  the  issue  considerably ;  we  may  say  that 
what  the  next  generation  will  be,  in  respect  of  conviction  and  conduct,  depends  on  the 
character  of  the  ministry  it  is  receiving  at  the  hands  of  its  religious  teachers.  If  these 
are  loyal  to  iheir  Lord,  and  do  faithfully  the  work  committed  to  their  care,  the  com- 
munity will  know  the  truth  and  do  the  will  of  God.  And  so  long  as  the  nation  walks 
in  the  light  of  the  Lord  it  will  be  prosperous  and  strong ;  its  worst  enemies  will  not 
prevail  ajiainst  it;  it  will  grow  in  wisdom,  in  honour,  in  power. 

II.  That  men  mat  prove  utterly  unworthy  op  the  high  position  to  which 
thet  abb  called.  It  may  be  said  that  no  one  has  a  ri^ht  to  take  a  step  which  may 
result  in  the  responsibilities  of  parentage,  unless  he  or  she  is  prepared  to  teaoh  and 
train  children  in  the  knowledge  and  fear  of  God.  It  must  certainly  be  said  that  no 
one  has  a  right  to  take  on  himself  the  functions  of  a  Christian  minister  unless  hu  is 
qualified  to  teach  Christ's  truth  and  to  commend  his  gospel  to  the  minds  and  the  hearts 
of  men.  It  is  the  grav*  misfortune  of  the  Church  and  the  world  that  so  many  have 
incurred  responsibility  without  any  such  qualifications.  They  have  failed  either  in 
docfrJTie,  having  been  as  "dumb  dogs,"  not  warning  sinners  of  the  perils  "besetting  them, 
wilfully  and  culpably  silent ;  or  in  understamding,  being  "  hlind  "  and  "  ignorant,"  never 
having  understood  the  truth,  or  having  become  insensible  to  its  excellence  by  reason  of 
their  un&ithfulness ;  or  in  consistency  of  life,  falling  into  the  sin  of  idleness  (ver.  10), 
or  that  of  covetousness  and  consequent  rapaciiy  (ver.  11).  or  that  of  bodily  indulgencu 


i62  THE  BOOK  OP  THE  PROPHET  ISAIAH,      [oh.  lvi.  1— 12. 

(ver.  12).    And  sin  is  never  so  ugly  a  garment  as  when  it  clothes  the  person  of  a  minister 
of  Jesus  Clirist. 

III.  That  an  unwokthy  ministkt  seals  the  fate  op  the  unfortdnatb  country 
ON  WHICH  IT  IS  IMPOSED.  There  is  little  hope  for  a  land  cursed  with  an  unfaithful  and 
an  ungodly  ministry.  Not  only  is  the  truth  of  God  withheld  from  men,  but  it  is  made 
positively  distasteful  and  repugnant  to  the  more  spiritual  by  being  associated  with  such 
professors.  Its  power  is  reduced  to  the  very  lowest  possible  point;  the  people  are 
abandoned  to  error  and  to  folly.  It  will  soon  be  time  for  the  enemy  to  appear  at  the 
gates — for  the  destroying  beast  to  ravage  the  flock  (ver.  9).  1.  Let  all  but  those  whom 
God  has  fitted  for  it  shrink  with  holy  difBdence  from  the  sacred  office.  2.  Let  the 
Church  of  Christ  take  the  greatest  care  whom  it  invites  to  be  "over  it  in  the  Lord." — C. 

Ver.  1, —  Ood's  nearness  a  plea.  "My  salvation  is  near  to  come;"  therefore  "  keep 
ye  judgment,  and  do  justice."  Isaiah  announced  God's  delivering  and  redeemiug  from 
Babylon  as  close  at  hand,  and  used  this  fact  as  a  plea  by  which  to  urge  immediate 
moral  preparation.  "  When  God  is  coming  to  us  in  a  way  of  mercy  we  must  go  forth 
to  meet  him  in  a  way  of  duty."  Illustration  may  be  found  in  Ps.  1.  23 ;  Mai.  iv.  4 — 6. 
.John  the  Baptist  had  a  similar  commission  to  this  of  Isaiah.  He  was  to  call  to  repent- 
ance on  the  ground  of  the  fact  that  the  "kingdom  of  Leaven  was  at  hand."  Further 
illustration  may  be  found  in  the  preparing  of  roads  for  a  coming  Eastern  kiii^,  and  the 
preparations  made  in  our  towns  when  the  sovereign  is  about  to  visit  ihem.  The 
general  subject  suggested  is  the  call  to  be  ready  for  every  display  of  Divine  grace.  Our 
getting  the  blessing  of  any  near  coming  of  God  to  us  depends  on  our  preparedness  for 
the  manifestation.     We  may  note  two  points. 

I.  Prepabations'  fob  God's  coming  are  spiritual.  They  are  right  states  of  mind 
and  feeling.  They  are  cleansings  of  thought  and  heart.  They  are  humiliations  on 
account  of  sin  and  shortcoming.  They  are  the  putting  away  of  doubts,  and  the 
nourishing  of  trust.  They  are  cherishings  of  all  reverent  sentiments.  They  are  earnest 
efforts  to  gain  an  open  and  receptive  mood  of  soul.  Sabbath  worship  and  sacramental 
seasons  are  times  of  special  nearness  of  God,  and  thoy  are  dependent  on  the  spiritual 
moods  wii  h  which  we  approach  them.  Fitting  moods  are  gained  by  times  of  meditation 
and  prayer.  A  point  of  importance  to  impress  is  that  spiritual  preparations  are  quite 
as  necessary  in  view  of  God's  mercies,  benedictions,  and  prosperities,  as  in  view  of  his 
chastisements  and  judgments.  So  easily  we  miss  observing  the  necessity  for  spiritual 
readiness  to  receive  Divine  bestowals  and  blessings.  See  St.  Paul's  teaching  con- 
cerning self-examination  before  partaking  of  the  sacramental  feast  (1  Cor.  xi.  28). 

II.  Spiritual  peepabation  finds  expression  in  altered  conduct.  On  this  the 
prophet  dwells.  Because  God's  salvation  is  near,  men  ought  to  readjust  their  conduct 
and  rearrange  their  relations.  They  should  keep  judgment  and  do  justice;  or  love  the 
right  aud  try  to  do  it,  remembering  always  that  the  "right"  includes  the  "kind." 
Just  as,  if  a  visitor  is  expected  at  a  house,  all  kinds  of  house-preparations  are  made, 
but  the  heart-welcome  is  the  chief  thing,  so  when  God  would  come  to  us,  we  must  fit 
up  the  house  of  conduct  for  him,  but  take  good  heed  that  this  only  ex[)resses  the 
hearty  welcome  of  our  soiJs.  In  conclusion,  show  how  these  two  mutually  help  each 
other.  Soul-culture  aids  in  mastery  of  life  and  conduct.  The  wise  ordering  of  life 
brings  go.>d  opportunity  foi  soul-culture.  Jesus  came  to  save  from  sin;  but  there  was 
little  preparation  for  him.  He  catiie  as  a  babe,  and  there  was  no  room  for  him  in  the 
inn.— R.  T. 

Ver.  2. 2%«  sabbath  a  test  of  obedience.    It  is  singular  to  find  Isaiah  now  making  so 

much  of  the  sabliath  when,  in  the  earlier  part  of  his  prophecy,  he  had,  in  the  name  of 
God,  spoken  of  it  so  scornfully  (see  cli.  i.  13,  "  The  new  moons  and  sabbaths,  the 
calling  of  assemblies,  1  cannot  away  with  ").  Matthew  Arnold  refers  to  this  contrast, 
and  says,  "That  related  to  a  time  when  the  kingdom  of  Judah  yet  stood,  when  the 
service  of  the  temple  was  in  full  course,  the  whole  exterior  part  of  the  Jews'  religion 
splendid  and  prominent.  At  such  a  time  a  prophet  might  naturally  undervalue  the 
whole  of  this  exterior  part  in  comparison  with  the  inward  part.  But  duiing  the  exile 
in  Babylon  all  the  services  aud  sacrifices  of  the  temple  had  ceased,  and  the  one 
testimony  of  faithfulness  to  their  religion  which  the  Jews  among  an  idolatrous  people 


AH.  LTL  1— 12.]     THE  BOOK  OF  THE  PBOPHET  ISAIAH.  853 

conld  give,  was  the  observance  of  their  sabbath ;  their  sabbath  was  the  one  outward 
thing  which  brought  their  religion  to  their  mind.  Hence  its  observance  acquired  quite 
a  special  value."  Inquire  what  signs  of  their  allegiance  to  Jehovah,  and  their 
obedience  to  his  commands,  pious  Jews  in  Babylon  could  give  to  those  around  them. 
None  could  be  so  important  or  so  effective  as  to  show  themselves  a  nation  of  sahhaih- 
keepers,  because  Jehovah,  their  God,  had  commanded  sabljHth-keeping. 

I.  Sabbath-keeping  a  fobi^al  act.  As  such  it  is  of  comparatively  small  import- 
ance. It  bears  good  relation,  indeed,  to  the  physical  healih  and  the  social  order  ot  a 
community,  providing  seasons  of  rest  and  change,  and  reminding  of  the  claims  of  so.il 
as  well  as  body.  But  if  sabbath-keeping  be  the  mere  formal  act,  with  no  deeper 
meaning  in  it,  then  it  may  be  judged  as  a  matter  of  expediency,  and  valued  as  a  wise 
and  excellent  Mosaic  arrangement,  more  or  less  wisely  imitated  by  other  rulers. 
'  II.  Sabbath-keeping  a  mobal  state.  Souls  must  keep  sabbath,  or  it  is  not  really 
kept.  Souls  must  keep  sabbath  (1)  as  an  act  of  obedience  to  God ;  (2)  as  an  expression 
of  love  for  worship ;  (3)  as  a  sign  of  loyalty  and  affection  for  God.  There  is  never  any 
difSculty  about  the  proper  ordering  of  the  day  when  the  soul  is  fall  of  the  sabbath- 
spirit, 

HI.  Sabbath-keeping  the  fobmal  aot  which  exhibits  the  moral  state.  Man 
cannot  test  the  soul-oonditions  of  his  fellow-man  save  by  observing  the  expressions  of 
that  condition  in  his  conduct.  God  can  read  soul-states,  but,  for  purposes  of  revelation 
and  teaching,  he  treats  us  as  we  treat  each  other,  and  asks  for  signs  in  the  life  of  what 
may  be  in  the  soul.  Therefore  he  still  looks  for  careful  and  faithful  sabbath-keep- 
ing.— R.  T. 

Vers.  4 — 6. — Disabled  onet  sharing  Divine  blessings.  Prom  the  points  of  view  of 
the  earlier  Judaism,  eunuchs  and  strangers  were  persons  placed  under  special  disability. 
Neither  could  take  full  share  in  national  or  sanctuary  privileges  (Deut.  xxiii.  1 — 8). 
To  understand  the  feeling  towards  eunuchs  we  must  remember  the  two  prevailing  ideas 
among  the  Jews,  which  made  offspring  seem  so  desirable.  1.  A  man  found  a  sort  of 
quasi-immortality  in  the  feeling  that  he  would  live  over  again  in  his  children.  2.  It 
was  possible  to  any  Jewish  parents  that  they  might  be  progenitors  of  the  promised 
Messiah.  Eunuchs  were  persons  who,  either  by  renson  of  physical  infirmity  or  cruel 
custom,  could  not  have  children  born  to  them.  They  were  despised  because  of  their 
inOrmity.  The  prophet  assures  such  that  the  new  spiritual  kingdom  of  Messiah  would 
have  room  for  them,  and  gather  them,  as  well  as  the  foreigners  and  strangers,  into  its 
embrace,  and  even  put  special  honour  on  them  if  they  were  found  men  of  taith.  "  The 
prophet's  whole  conception  of  the  Gentiles  in  relation  to  the  religion  ot  Israel  is 
unexampled  in  the  Old  Testament  for  its  admirable  width,  ilepth,  and  grandeur."  The 
term  "dry  tree"  is  still  a  phrase  used  in  the  East  of  a  person  of  either  sex  who  has 
no  children.  Roberts,  writing  of  Hindoo  customs,  says,  "  People  without  posterity,  of 
both  sexes,  are  called  dry  trees;  which,  strictly  speaking,  means  they  are  dead,  having 
neither  sap,  nor  leaves,  nor  fruit."  Matthew  Arnold  says, "  It  must  be  remembered 
that,  attached  to  a  great  Eastern  court  like  that  of  Babylon,  were  a  multitude  of 
eunuchs,  some  of  whom  had  perhaps  adopted  the  religion  of  Israel.  It  is  probable, 
also,  that  some  of  the  Jewish  youths  were  taken  for  the  court  service  as  eunuchs,  and 
*heir  countrymen  would  afterwards  have  been  likely  to  abhor  them  I'n  that  account." 
Tliese  considerations  will  enable  us  the  better  to  feel  the  exquisite  tenderness  and 
mercifulness  of  this  passage.  The  general  topic  suggested  is  the  gracious  way  in  which 
the  gospel  kingdom  embraces  all  the  disabled.     This  may  be  illustrated  from — 

I.  Those  dndeb  phtsical  disabilities. 

IL  Those  tjndbb  bacb-disabilities. 

III.  Those  under  social  disabilities. 

IV.  Those  under  mental  disabilities. 

V.  Those  under  disabilities  from  past  evil  liyibo. 

Christ's  salvation  is  for  man  as  man.  In  his  kingdom  there  uo  fonnd  black  and 
white,  bond  and  free.    Its  gate  is  open  to  whosoever  will. — R.  T. 

Ver.  7. — Ood't  house  of  prayer  for  everybody.  "  Mine  bouse  shall  be  called  an  house 
.>f  prayer  for  all  people."    These  words  were  quoted  by  the  Lord  Jesus  when  he  drove 

ISAIAH— n.  2  A 


354  THE  BOOE  OF  THE  PROPHET  ISAIAH,     [oh.  lvi.  1— 12. 

out  tho  shopkeepers  who  defiled  the  temple  (see  Matt.  xxi.  13).  The  prophet  declare! 
that  the  "  prayers  and  praises  (those  spiritual  sacrifices)  of  devout  Gentiles  shall  be  as 
pleasing  to  God  as  those  of  the  pious  Jews,  and  no  difference  shall  be  made  between 
them ;  for,  though  they  are  Gentiles  by  birth,  yet  through  grace  they  shall  be  looked 
upon  as  the  believing  seed  of  faithful  Abraham,  and  the  praying  seed  of  wrestling 
Jacob,  for  in  Christ  Jesus  there  is  neither  Greek  nor  Jew,  circumcision  n^r  uncircum- 
cision."  God's  house,  the  old  temple,  had  been  thought  of  as  a  place  of  sacrifices.  The 
new  temple,  and  above  all  the  spiritual  temple,  the  Christian  temple,  must  be  thought 
of  as  a  place  oi  prayer.    This  contrast  gives  the  following  topics. 

I.  The  old  ibka  of  God's  house  was  a  housk  op  SACBincB.  The  old  worship  was 
one  of  multiplied  and  varied  rites  and  ceremonies.  It  was  a  round  of  bodily  services ; 
it  was  honouring  God  by  the  devotion  to  him  of  the  things  that  men  possessed.  It 
had  its  deeper  spiritual  meanings,  but  the  prominent  things  were  exact  obediences, 
minute  services,  gorgeous  and  impressive  spectacles.  The  "  shadow  of  good  things  to 
come." 

II.  The  new  idea  op  God's  house  is  a  house  op  pbatek.  f  rayer  comprehensively 
indicates  all  forms  of  spiritual  worship,  of  communion  with  the  Divine  Being.  Illustrate 
by  the  essential  differences  between  the  Jewish  temple  and  the  Christian  Church.  Even 
the  .Jewish  worship,  when  a  synagogue  could  not  be  built,  was  held  in  &  jproseiKhi,  or 
place  of  prayer.  It  was  the  work  of  the  prophets  to  lift  men's  minds  away  firom  the 
more  formal  to  the  more  spiritual  associations  of  Gcd's  house.  Explain  the  senses  in 
which  prayer  may  stand  for  the  whole  of  Christian  worship. 

III.  The  old  idea  fitted  God's  house  poe  a  wmited  pew.  Just  those  to  whom 
his  particular  directions  about  ritual  and  sacrifice  had  been  given.  If  God  has  to  be 
served  by  formal  acts,  they  must  be  such  as  he  requires  and  has  duly  explained  to  us. 
So  God's  house  was  of  old  exclusively  for  Jews. 

IV.  The  new  idea  fits  God's  house  fob  eveetbodt.  Because  prayer  is  just  the 
great  human  commonplace.  Man  has  been  satirically,  yet  truthfully,  called  "a  pray- 
ing animal."  Prayer  is  characteristic  of  him.  He  has  uplooking  eyes  and  a  yearning 
heart.  When  men  know  the  unutterable  value  of  prayer,  "  then  shall  the  nations  from 
the  east  and  from  the  west  build  the  last  great  temple  of  all — the  temple  of  an  eternal 
religion — ^whose  foundations  shall  be  wide  as  the  whole  nature  of  man,  and  whose 
dome,  reaching  up  to  heaven,  shall  shelter  and  overshadow  the  world." — B.  T. 

Vers.  10 — 12. —  Wm-ihlesa  shepherds.  "  Dumb  dogs ; "  "  Greedy  dogs ; "  "  Shepherds 
that  caunot  undenstand."  The  prophet's  messages  are  in  the  main  addressed  to  the 
pious  and  believina;  among  the  exiles.  But  he  knows  well  how  many  of  them  were 
living  in  self-indulgence  and  sin,  and  were  not  in  the  least  likely  to  heed  his  words, 
and  prepare  themselves  for  the  coming  deliverance.  The  evils  were  especially  manifest 
in  the  leading  people,  who  ought  to  have  been  leaders  in  goodness  to  the  people. 
Instead  of  this,  they  were  neglecting  their  duty,  and  presenting  a  debasing  example  of 
self-indulgence,  and  even  of  covetousness.  The  term  "  watchmen  "  is  used  for  chief 
mnn,  princes,  priests,  prophets.  These  were  utterly  unable  to  comprehend  or  to  meet  the 
spiritual  wants  of  the  nation  at  this  time,  when  God  was  so  near,  for  carrying  out  his 
redeeming  purpose.  "  The  language  here  employed  strikingly  depicts  the  feelings  of 
the  voluptuous  in  every  age." 

I.  The  helplessness  op  the  lbaoebs  and  tbaohkbs  of  teat  aoe.  Observe  the 
blending  of  figures  suitable  to  the  shepherd  and  to  the  shepherd's  dog.  Such  a  blending 
of  figures  IS  commtin  in  poetry  and  in  Scripture.  InefSciency  and  sinful  neglect  are 
suggested  in  the  terms  (1)  blind ;  (2)  ignorant ;  (3)  dumb;  (4)  loving  to  slumber ;  (5) 
greedy ;  (6)  void  of  understanding ;  (7)  drunken. 

II.  The  seal  secret  op  their  helplessness.  They  thought  of  lelf.  They  did 
not  live  for  their  charge,  but  for  themselves.  "  They  all  look  to  their  own  way,  every 
one  for  his  gain,  from  his  quarter."  And  this  is  the  root  of  evil  in  all  who  are  placea  in 
positions  of  responsibility,  authority,  and  influence — all  who  are  in  any  sense  leaders 
and  teachers.  They  must  serve  others,  not  get  for  self.  Therefore  the  Apostle  Paul 
pleads,  saying,  "  We  preach  not  ourselves,  but  Christ  Jesus  the  Lord,  and  ourselTes 
your  servants  for  Jesus'  sake."  Compare  the  plea  of  the  noble  Samuel,  on  ^ving  up 
his  life-ministry,  "  Whose  ox  have  i.  taken  ?  or  whose  ass  have  I  taken  ?  or  whom  nave 


CH.  Lvii.  1— 21.]      THE   BOOK  OF  THE  PBOPHBT  ISAIAH. 


Kr< 


I  defrauded  ?  whom  have  I  oppressed  ?  or  of  whose  hand  have  I  received  any  bribe  to 
blind  mine  eyes  therewith  ?"  (1  Sam.  xii.  3).  In  this  way  St.  Paul  counsels  the  young 
teacher  Timothy,  "  Be  thou  an  example  of  the  believers,  in  word,  in  conversation,  in 
charity,  in  spirit,  in  faith,  in  purity."  And  a  bishop  is  thus  described,  "  Not  given  to 
wine,  no  striker,  not  greedy  of  filthy  lucre;  but  patient,  not  a  brawler,  not  covetooa" 
(1  Tim.  iv.  12  ;  iii.  S).  St.  Paul  complains  of  the  teachers  of  his  time,  "All  seek  their 
own,  not  the  things  that  are  Jesus  Christ's  "(Phil.  iL  21)ii— B.  T. 


EXPOSITION. 


CHAPTER  LVn. 

Vers.  1,  2. — The  Early  Death  of  Right- 
eous Men  accounted  job.  The  Hebrews 
were  given  to  expect  that  long  life  should, 
as  a  general  rule,  accompany  righteousness 
(Exod.  XX.  12 ;  1  Kings  iii.  14  ;  Ps.  xci.  16 ; 
Prov.  iii.  1, 2,  etc.) ;  and  under  the  Mosaioal 
dispensation  we  must  suppose  that  it  did  so. 
But  there  were  exceptions  to  the  rule. 
Wicked  persecutors,  like  Ahab,  Jezebel,  and 
Athallah,  cut  off  the  righteous  ere  they 
had  seen  half  their  daja.  So  probably  did 
Manasseh  (2  Kings  xxiv.  3,  4).  And  God 
sometimes  removed  the  righteous  from  earth 
by  a  natural  death  before  they  had  grown 
old  (Ecoles.  vii.  15;  viii  14).  At  the  time 
of  which  Isaiah  is  here  speaking  there  had 
been  such  removals ;  and  of  this  he  takes 
note,  partly  to  rebuke  those  who  lightly 
passed'over  the  phenomenon,  partly  to  justify 
God's  ways  to  such  as  were  perplexed  by  it. 

Yer.  1. — The  righteooa  peiisheth.  The 
word  translated  "  pt risheth  "  does  not  imply 
any  violence ;  but  the  context  implies  a  pre- 
mature death.  The  righteous  disappear — 
are.  taken  from  the  earth  before  their  natural 
time.  Yet  no  man  layeth  it  to  heart;  i.e. 
no  one  asks  what  it  means — no  one  is  dis- 
turbed, no  one  grieves.  The  general  feeling 
was  either  one  of  indifference,  or  of  relief  at 
the  departure  of  one  whose  life  was  a  re- 
proach to  his  neighbours.  Ueroiful  men; 
rather,  godly  men,  or  pious  men  (oomp.  Micah 
vii.  2).  Are  taken  away;  literally,  are 
gathered  in.  Compare  the  phrase  so  fre- 
quently used,  "  gathered  to  his  fathers " 
(Gen.  xlix.  29;  Numb,  xxvii.  13;  Judg. 
ii.  10 ;  2  Kings  xxii.  20 ;  2  Chron.  xxxiv. 
28).  From  the  evil ;  or,  out  of  the  way  of  the 
evil — ^in  order  that  he  may  escape  it  (comp. 
2  Kings  xxii.  20,  where  Josiah  is  promised 
that  he  shall  be  gathered  to  his  fathers 
(prematurely),  in  order  that  he  may  escape 
the  sight  of  the  evil  that  was  coming  on 
Jerusalem  soon  after  his  decease. 

Ver.  2  — He  shall  enter  into  peace.  Not 
laarelr  into  "  stillness  "  or  "  silence  "  (Ps. 


ozv.  17),  but  into  "peaoe,"  or,  u  ths 
word  might  be  rendered  (OheyneX  "  »  state 
of  peace."  There  is,  no  doubt,  primarily, 
"  a  contrast  to  the  awful  troubles  which  the 
survivors  will  have  to  encounter"  (Heng- 
stenberg) ;  but  perhaps  this  contrast  ia  not 
all  that  is  meant.  The  "  peace"  is  positive 
rather  than  negative,  or  it  would  scarcely  be 
a  consolation  to  any  one.  They  shall  rest  in 
their  beds ;  or,  upon  their  beds.  This  ex- 
pression seems  to  imply  a  consciousness  of 
rest,  and  so  a  certain  enjoyment  of  it.  Each 
one  walking  in  his  uprightness ;  rather,  who- 
soever hath  walked  uprightly,  or  tn  a  straight 
path  (see  Prov.  iv.  25 — 27).  The  phrase  is  an 
equivalent  for  "  the  righteous  "  of  ver.  1,  and 
reters  to  the  life  on  earth  of  those  who  have 
gone  down  into  silence,  not  to  their  life  after 
they  have  reached  the  silent  shore.  Of  that 
life  the  evangelical  prophet  is  not  commis- 
sioned to  give  us  any  information. 

Vers.  3 — 14. — Iskael  severely  bebdked 
FOB  Idolatry.  Though  Hezekiah  had 
made  a  great  reformation  of  religion  when 
he  ascended  the  throne  (2  Kings  xviii.  4 ; 
2  Chron.  xxix.  3 — 19),  and  had  done  his 
best  to  put  down  idolatry,  yet  it  was  still 
dear  to  large  numbers  among  the  people, 
and  was  easily  revived  by  Manasseh  in  the 
earlier  portion  of  his  reign  (2  Chron.  zxxiii. 
2 — 9).  Isaiah  now  rebukes  various  kinds  of 
idolatrous  practices,  and  shows  the  vanity 
of  them. 

Ver.  3. — Draw  near  hither.  Approach, 
to  hear  the  reprimand  which  ye  so  well 
deserve.  Ye  sons  of  the  soroeress ;  rather, 
of  a  sorceress.  Judah  herself,  the  nation,  is 
the  "  sorceress  "  and  "  adulteress,"  whose  in- 
dividual children  are  summoned  to  draw 
near.  She  is  an  adulteress ;  for  she  has 
transgressed  against  the  mystic  marriage-tie 
which  bound  her  to  Jehovah  (see  ch.  liv.  5, 
and  the  comment  ad  loo.").  She  is  also  a 
"sorceress,"  since  she  has  bewitched  her 
children,  and  given  herself  up  to  magical 
as  well  as  to  idolatrous  practices  (2  Chron. 
xxxiii.  6).  Seed  of  the  adulterer  and  th« 
whore;  rather,  seed  of  an  adulteress,  and 
that  thyself  oommittest  whpredom.    The  oon< 


THE  BOOK  OF  THE  PROPHET  IBAIAH.      [ch.  lvii.  1—21. 


■.jcnital  tendency  has  broken  out  into  act. 
J'i.e  Israel  addressed  is  as  "  adulterous,"  i.e. 
idolatrous,  as  the  Israel  of  former  times. 

Ver.  4. — Against  whom  do  ye  sport  yonr- 
L  elves  1  The  idolatrous  Israelites  here  ad- 
dressed, no  doubt,  made  a  mock  of  the  few 
rij:ht(;ous  who  were  -still  living  among  them, 
and  vexed  their  souls,  as  his  fellow-towns- 
men did  the  soul  of  "just  Lot  "  (2  Pet.  11. 7). 
They  "  made  wide  the  mouth  "  at  them,  and 
"  drew  out  the  tongue  "  in  derision  (oomp. 
Ps.  xxii.  7 ;  xxxv.  21).  The  prophet  asks, 
"Against  whom  do  ye  do  this?  Is  it  not 
rather  against  God,  whose  servants  these 
men  are,  than  against  them?"  Are  ye  not 
children  of  transgression  f  rather,  are  ye  not, 
yourselves,  children  of  apostasy  1  and  there- 
fore more  truly  ohjects  of  scorn  than  theu? 
A  seed  of  falsehood.  Idols  were  viewed  by 
Isaiah  as  "  lies  "  (ch.  xlv.  20 ;  cf.  Eom.  i.  25  ; 
Eev.  xxii.  15).  Idolaters  were  therefore  "  a 
seed  of  falsehood  " — men  who  put  their  trust 
in  a  lie. 

Ver.  5. — ^Inflaming  yourselves  with  idols 
under  ievery  green  tree  (comp.  ch.  1.  29 ; 
Izv.  3 ;  Izvl.  17 ;  and  see  also  2  Kings  xvi. 
4;  xvii.  10;  Jer.  ii.  20;  HI.  6,  etc.).  The 
reference  is,  as  Mr  Cheyne  says,  to  the 
**  orgiastic  cults  In  the  sacred  groves  of 
Palestinian  heathenism."  The  nature  of 
these  cults  is  well  stated  by  Professor  Dol- 
llnger  ('  Jew  and  Gentile,'  vol.  1.  p.  430) : 
"  At  the  spring  festival,  called  by  some  the 
'brand-least,'  by  others  that  of  torcheSj 
which  was  attended  by  streams  of  visitors 
from  every  country,  huge  trees  were  burnt, 
with  the  offerings  suspended  on  them. 
Even  children  were  sacrificed;  they  were 
put  Into  a  leathern  bag,  and  thrown  the 
whole  height  of  the  temple  to  the  bottom, 
with  the  shocking  expression  that  they  were 
calves,  and  not  children.  In  the  fore-court 
stood  two  gigantic  phalli.  To  the  exciting 
din  of  drums,  flutes,  and  Inspired  songs,  the 
Galli  out  themselves  on  the  arms ;  and  the 
effect  of  this  act,  and  of  the  music  accom- 
panying it,  was  so  strong  upon  mere  specta- 
tors, that  all  their  bodily  and  mental  powers 
were  thrown  into  a  tumult  of  excitement; 
and  they  too,  seized  by  the  desire  to  lacerate 
themselves,  deprived  themselves  of  their 
manhood  by  means  of  potsherds  lying  ready 
for  the  purpose."  Slaying  the  children  in 
the  valleys  under  the  clefts  of  the  rocks. 
The  sacrifice  of  their  children  to  Moloch 
was  largely  practised  by  the  Jews  in  the 
later  period  of  the  kingdom  of  Judah.  It 
seems  to  have  been  originally  Introduced  by 
the  superstitious  Ahaz,  the  father  of  Heze- 
kiah,  who  "  made  Ms  son  to  pass  through 
the  fire,  according  to  the  abominations  of 
the  heathen  "  (2  Kings  xvi.  3 ;  2  Ohron. 
zxviiL  3).  Suspended  during  the  reign  of 
Hezekiah,  it  was  renewed  under  Manasseh, 


who  followed  the  example  of  his  grand- 
father in  himself  sacrificing  one  of  his  sons 
(2  Kings  xxi.  6).  Under  the  lust  three 
kings  it  prevailed  to  a  very  wide  extent,  and 
the  propliets  Jeremiah  and  Ezelfiel  are  load 
in  their  denunciations  of  it  (Jer.  vii.  31, 32 ; 
six.  2—6;  xxxii.  35;  Ezek.  xvi.  20;  xx. 
26  ;  xxiii.  37,  etc.).  Arguments  have  been 
brought  forward  to  prove  that  the  child  was 
merely  passed  before  a  fire,  or  between 
two  fires,  and  not  burnt ;  but  the  evidence 
to  the  contrary  is  overwhelming  (see  the 
article  on  "Moloch"  in  Dr.  W.  Smith's 
'  Dictionary  of  the  Bible,'  vol.  11.  pp.  403, 
401).  The  rite  belonged  especially  to  tlie 
worship  of  Chemosh  and  Moloch  by  the 
Moabites  and  Ammonites  (2  Kings  Hi.  27 ; 
Micah  vl.  7),  from  whom  it  was  adopted  by 
the  Israelites  (2  Kings  xvii.  7)  and  Jews. 
Tlie  sacrifice  was  supposed  to  be  expiatory 
(Micah  vi.  7).  In  tile  later  times  of  the 
Jewish  kingdom  the  place  of  sacrifice  was 
the  valley  of  Hinnom,  west  and  north  of 
Jerusalem,  which  is  overhung  by  rugged 
rocks. 

Ver.  6. — Among  the  smooth  stones  of  the 
stream  is  thy  portion.  Smooth  stones, 
rounded  by  water-action,  were  among  the 
objects  worshipped  by  many  Semitic  peoples. 
Such  stones  were  called  $alTu\oi  or  Pairi- 
\ia — Bethels,  or  "  houses  of  God  " — and  re- 
ceived libations  of  oil  and  wine  from  their 
worshippers  (see  Gen.  xxvlii.  1 8 ;  and  comp. 
Herod.,  \ii.  8 ;  Arnob., '  Adv.  Gentes,'  1.  39 ; 
Lucian, 'Pseudomant.,'  p.  30;  Apul.,p.  349; 
eto.).  Stones  ot  this  kind,  the  prophet  says, 
had  now  become  "the  portion"  of  Israel, 
Instead  of  Jehovah  (Ps.  cxix.  57 ;  comp.  Ps. 
xvi  5).  To  such  objects  they  offered  their 
"  meat  offerings  "  and  "  diink  offerings." 
Should  I  receive  comfort  in  these  ?  Can  I, 
Jehovah,  be  comforted,  when  my  people  in- 
dulge in  such  practices  7 

Ver.  7. — Upon  a  lofty  and  high  mountain 
hast  thou  set  thy  bed.  Instead  of  reserving 
thy  marriage-bed  for  me,  Jehovah  (ch.  liv. 
5),  thou  hast  set  it  up  on  those  "  high 
places,"  with  which  the  hill-tops  of  Judsea 
are  everywhere  crowned  (see  1  Kings  xiv. 
23 ;  xvi.  4 ;  2  Ohron.  xxxiii.  17 ;  Ezek.  xv. 
16,  etc.).  Almost  every  hill-top  is  still,  in 
a  sense,  held  sacred  in  Palestine  (Conder,  in 
'  Quarterly  Statement  of  Palest.  Explor. 
Fund,'  1875,  p.  39).  Even  thither  wentest 
thou  up,  etc.  (On  the  persistency  of  the 
Jews  in  maintaining  the  high-place  worship, 
see  1  Kings  xiv.  23;  zv.  14;  xxii.  43; 
2  Kings  xii.  3 ;  ziv.  4 ;  xv.  4 ;  xxi.  3,  etc.) 
The  best  kings  failed  in  their  attempts  to 
put  it  down 

Ver.  8. — Behind  the  doors  also  and  tha 
posts  hast  thoa  set  up  thy  remembranoe.  It 
has  been  usual  to  explain  this  of  a  removal 
from  its  proper  place  into  an  obscure  poii. 


CH.  LYn.  1— 21.]     THE  BOOK  OP  THE  PROPHET  ISAIAH. 


357 


tion  of  the  formuln  wWch  the  Israelites 
were  commanded  in  ths  Law  to  write  on 
their  doorposts  and  on  their  gates  (Deut. 
vL  9  ;  xi.  20).  But,  in  the  first  place,  there 
is  no  evidence  that  anciently  these  passages 
were  understood  literally,  or  that  such  in- 
scriptions were  ever  set  up;  and  secondly, 
as  Mr.  Oheyne  remaiks,  they  would  have 
been  more,  rather  than  less,  conspiououB  in 
a  new  place.  Probably,  therefore,  the 
"  memorial "  {zihltdrdn)  of  this  place  Is 
surae  idolatrnns  symbol  or  emblem  newly 
adopted  by  the  Jews,  and  made  use  of  as  a 
sort  of  tulisman.  Many  commentators  think 
that  it  was  of  a  phallic  character  (see  Ezek. 
xvi.  17).  Discovered  thyself;  rather,  un- 
covered thyself.  Thou  hast  enlarged  thy 
bed;  i.e.  multiplied  thy  idolatries  (comp. 
2  Kings  xvi.  3,  4,  10 ;  xxi.  3—7).  It  is  a 
feature  of  the  idolatry  of  the  time,  that  it 
was  a  mixture  adopted  from  many  quarters. 
It  included  Baal  and  Ashtoreth-worship 
from  Phoenicia,  Moloch-worsliip  from  Moab 
and  Ammon,  worship  of  the  Qutjen  of  Heaven 
from  Syria,  high- place  worship  from  the 
Oauaanites,  and  stone-worship  from  their 
own  remote  Mesopotamian  ancestors.  And 
made  thee  a  covenant  with  them;  i.e.  "a 
bargain  for  wages,"  that  aid  and  protection 
should  be  rendered  in  return  fur  worship 
and  sacrifice.  Where  thou  sawest  it.  The 
original  is  W3ry  obscure,  but  can  scarcely 
have  this  meaning.  It  is  certainly  a  dis- 
tinct clause,  and  may  perhaps  be  best  trans- 
lated, "  thou  sawest  indecency." 

Ver.  9. — And  thou  wentest  to  the  king. 
Delitzsch  and  Mr.  Cheyne  understand  "  the 
King  of  Assyria,"  and  regard  the  verse  as 
bringing  forward  a  new  subject  of  complaint: 
"  Not  only  hast  thou  deserted  me  for  other 
gods,  but  thou  trustest  for  aid,  not  to  me, 
but  to  the  Assyrian  monarch."  But  there  is 
no  indication  of  the  Jews  having  put  any 
trust  in  Assyria  after  the  reij!;n  of  Aliaz,  to 
which  this  chapter,  by  its  position  in  the 
prophecy,  cannot  belong.  Moreover,  the 
King  of  Assyria  is  never  called  simply  "  the 
king."  It  is,  therefore,  better  to  regard 
"the  king"  as  Moloch,  whom  the  Jews  of 
Isaiah's  time  certainly  worshipped  (see  ver. 
5),  and  whose  name  was  a  mere  dialectic 
variety  of  Meleeh,  "  king  "  (see  Dean  Payne 
Smith's  '  Sermons  on  Isaiah,'  sermon  iv. 
p.  119).  Ointment  .  .  .  perfumes.  Either 
bearing  them  as  offerings,  or  herself  per- 
fumed with  them,  as  was  the  practice  of 
lewd  women  (Prov.  rii.  17).  And  didst  send 
thy  messengers  far  off ;  ».  e.  to  distant  Moloch- 
shrines.  And  didst  debase  thyself  even  unto 
hell ;  ».«.  "  didst  take  on  thee  the  yoke  of  a 
mean  and  grovelling  superstition,  which 
debased  tliee  to  the  lowest  point  conceiv- 
able." There  was  nothing  lower  in  reli^on 
than  the  worship  of  Moloch. 


Ver.  10. — Thou  art  wearied  in  the 
greatness  of  thy  way.  Judah  had  travelle  1 
far  from  Grod,  sei  king  aid  from  all  quarters, 
and  might  well  be  "  wearied "  with  her 
quest ;  but  she  would  not  confess  her  weari- 
ness^she  would  not  say.  There  is  no  hope  | 
she  stirred  up  hei  remaining'strength,  and 
persisted  in  her  course,  not  suffering  herself 
to  "  grieve." 

Ver.  11. — Of  whom  hast  thon  been  afraid  ? 
Judah's  abandonment  of  Jehovah  and  devo- 
tion to  new  deities  was  caused  by  fear — the 
fear  of  man,  especially  of  Assyria.  This 
induced  them  to  seek  for  help  in  each  new 
superstition  that  presented  itself,  and  pro- 
duced the  enlarged  syncretism  which  has 
been  noticed  in  the  comment  on  ver.  8.  But 
how  absurd  to  be  driven  by  fear  of  man  into 
offending  God  I  That  thon  hast  lied  (see 
the  last  clause  of  ver.  4,  with  the  comment) 
Have  not  I  held  my  peace,  etc.  ?  i.e.  "  Is  il 
not  because  I  have  for  so  long  a  time  held 
my  peace,  that  thou  fearest  me  not  ?  "  God 
had  for  a  long  time  suffered  them  to  "  go  on 
still  in  their  wickedness  " — ^he  had  not  in- 
terposed with  any  severe  judgment ;  there- 
fore they  had  ceased  to  fear  him,  and  had 
feared  men  instead. 

Ver.  12. — I  will  declare  thy  righteous- 
ness, et«5.  The  Syriac  Version  has  "  my 
righteousness,"  which  gives  a  much  better 
sense,  and  is  adopted  by  Bishop  Lowtb,  Dr. 
Weir,  and  Mr.  Cheyne.  God  will  be  silent 
no  longer.  He  will "  declare,"  or  show  forth, 
"  his  righteousness,"  by  visiting  Judah  with 
some  righteous  punishment.  Then  it  will 
he  seen  of  what  value  are  those  things  in 
which  Judah  has  hitherto  trusted.  Her 
works — whether  her  "  idols "  are  meant 
(Cheyne,  Delitzsch),  or  her  "deeds  of 
iniquity  "  (Kay) — what  will  they  profit  ? 
She  will  "  cry "  out  under  the  rod  of 
chastiseirient — cry  to  her  false  gods  to  save 
her. 

Ver.  13. — When  thou  oriest,  let  thy  com- 
panies deliver  thee.  Then,  when  she  thus 
cries,  let  her  mixture  of  gods  (ver.  8),  if 
they  can,  deliver  her ;  they  will  fail  utterly 
to  do  so.  The  wind — or  rather,  a  breath — 
shall  carry  them  all  away ;  vanity  shall  take 
them.  The  idol  gods  shall  be  shown  to  be 
wholly  futile,  unable  to  save,  incapable  ot 
rendering  any  the  slightest  assistance.  But 
he  that  putteth  his  trust  in  me  shall  possess 
the  land.  If,  however,  at  that  dread  hour, 
there  be  any  among  the  people  who  are  not 
idolaters,  but  "  trust  in  Jehovah,"  the  crisis 
shall  turn  to  their  advantage.  They  shall 
"  possess  the  land,"  t.e.  have  the  promised 
land  for  their  inheritance  (Deut.  iv.  1 ;  v. 
33 ;  Ps.  xxxvii.  11 — 29,  etc.) ;  and  inherit 
Zion,  God's  holy  mouatain  (see  oh.  xL  9 ; 
xxvii.  13 ;  Ivi.  7,  etc.). 

Ver.  14.— And  shaU  say ;  lather,  and  ovf 


858 


THE  BOOK  OP  THE  PROPHET  ISAIAH,     [oh.  Lvn.  1— 21, 


mid.  The  prophet  hears  ft  voice,  saying, 
Cast  ye  tip,  cast  ye  up ;  i.e.  make  .a  highway 
to  the  holy  mountain  by  beaping  up 
material  (ch.  Izii.  10) ;  and,  having  made  it, 
remove  every  obstruction  from  the  path  of 
my  (righteous)  people.  The  voice  is,  pro- 
bably, an  angelic  one. 

Vers.  15 — 21. — A  Fbomibb  of  Salvation 
TO  THE  Humble  and  Pemitent,  with  a 
FtiBTHER  Threat  against  the  'Wicked. 
The  prophet,  in  this  portion  of  his  discourse, 
whereof  "  comfort "  is  the  key-note  (oh. 
xl.  1),  can  never  continue  threatening  long 
without  relapsing  iuto  a  tone  of  tenderness 
and  pity.  He  now  sets  against  his  long 
denunciation  (in  vers.  3 — 12)  an  ample  pro- 
mise (vers.  15 — 19),  and  against  his  brief 
encouragement  (in  vers.  13,  14)  a  short 
menace  (vers.  20,  21). 

Ver.  15. — For.  The  ground  of  the  pro- 
mise of  salvation  in  ver.  15  is  God's  com- 
bined might  and  mercy,  which  art;  now  set 
forth.  The  high  and  lofty  One  (comp.  oh. 
vi.  1,  where  the  same  words  are  translated 
"  high  and  lifted  up  ").  In  God's  loftiness 
are  included  at  once  his  exalted  majesty 
and  his  almighty  power.  He  is  "  high  "  in 
himself,  transcending  thought,  and  "lofty" 
or  "  lifted  up "  in  that  he  is  absolute  Lord 
of  his  creatures,  and  therefore  high  above 
them.  That  inhabiteth  eternity.  So  the 
LXX.,  KaTOiKwy  rhv  aiuya.  But  the  Hebrew 
is  less  abstract,  and  would  perhaps  be  best 
translated  "  that  liveth  eternally."  I  dwell 
in  the  high  and  holy  place.  Solomon's 
"  heaven  of  heavens  "  (1  Kings  viiL  27), 
which,  however,  "  cannot  contain  him ; "  St. 
Paul's  "  light  which  no  man  can  approach 
unto"(l  Tim.  vi.  16);  Zechariah's  "  holy 
habitation  "  (Zech.  ii.  13).  With  him  also 
that  is  of  a  contrite— literally,  crushed — and 
humble  spirit.  "  Though  the  Lord  be  high, 
yet  hath  he  respect  unto  the  lowly  "  (Ps. 
cxxxviii.  6) ;  "  He  humbleth  himself  to 
con^ider  the  things  that  are  in  heaven  and 
eai  th  "  (Ps.  cxiii.  6).  He  is  not  an  Epicurean 
Deity,  too  far  exalted  above  man  to  have  any 
regard  for  him,  or  concern  himself  with 
man's  welfare  (see  Job  xxii.  12,  13).  On 
the  contrary,  he  condescends  to  "  dwell 
with"  man,  only  let  man  have  a  "humble" 
and  "crushed,"  or  "bruised,"  spirit.  To 
revive  the  spirit  of  the  humble,  When  God 
condescends  to  visit  the  contrite  and  humble 
spirit,  the  immediate  effect  is  to  comfort, 
console,  revive.  His  presence  is  a  well  of 
life,  springing  np  within  the  soul  to  ever- 
lasting life  (John  ir.  14). 

Ver.  16. — I  will  not  contend  for  ever. 
God  "  will  not  always  chide,  neither  will  he 
keep  his  anger  for  ever"  (Pa.  oiiL  9).    If 


he  were  "extreme  to  mark  what  is  done 
amiss,"  none  could  abide  it  (Ps.  cxxx.  3). 
He  remits  somewhat,  therefore,  from  the 
claims  of  strict  justice,  and  is  content  to 
take  lower  ground.  Were  it  otherwise, 
man's  spirit  should  fail  before  him.  Man, 
t.e.,  would  be  utterly  unable  to  justify  him- 
self, and  would  faint  and  fade  away  before 
the  Divine  fnry.  The  souls  which  God  has 
made  would,  one  and  all,  perish.  He,  how- 
ever, has  not  made  them  for  this  purpose, 
but  that  they  should  live  (Deut.  xxx.  19; 
Ezek.  xviii.  31)  ;  and  has  therefore  devised 
for  them  a  way  of  salvation  (see  ch.  liii, 
5—10). 

Ver.  17. — ^For  the  iniquity  of  his  covetons- 
ness  was  I  wroth.  Among  the  sins  that 
angered  God  most  against  me  Jews  of  the 
later  kingdom  of  Judah  was  their  covetous- 
ness — that  desire  of  unjust  gain  which  led 
them  continually  to  oppress  their  weaker 
brethren,  to  remove  their  neighbours'  land- 
marks, to  harass  tliem  with  lawsuits,  to 
obtain  from  the  courts  corrupt  judgments 
against  them,  and  so  to  strip  them  of  their 
inheritances  (see  eh.  i  15 — 23;  iii.  5,  14, 
15;  V.8,  23;  Jer.  vi.  13;  Ezek.  xxxiii.  31, 
etc.).  This  was  far  from  being  their  only 
sin ;  but  it  was  their  besetting  sin,  and  it 
led  on  to  a  number  of  others.  It  would 
seem  even  to  have  been  the  principal  cause 
of  those  judicial  murders  with  which  they 
are  so  constantly  taxed  by  the  prophets  (ch. 
i.  15,  21  ;  xxxiii.  15;  liz.  3;  Jer.  ii.  34; 
six.  4;  Ezek.  vii.  23;  xL  6;  Hos.  iv.  2; 
Micah  iii  10;  vii.  2,  etc.).  Isaiah  selects 
the  sin  of  covetousness  here,  as  typical  or 
representative  of  the  entire  class  of  Judah's 
besetting  sins — the  most  striking  indication 
of  that  alienation  of  their  hearts  from  God, 
which  constituted  their  real  guilt,  and  wa« 
the  true  cause  of  their  punishment  And 
smote  him.  The  form  of  the  verb  marks 
repeated  action.  God  gave  Judah  many 
warnings  before  tlie  final  catastrophe.  He 
punished  Judah  by  the  hand  of  Sargon,  by 
that  of  Sennacherib  (2  Kings  xviii.  14 — 16), 
by  that  of  Manasseh  (2  Chron.  xxxiii.  11), 
by  that  of  Pharaoh-Necho  (2  Chron.  xxxv. 
20 — 24),  by  that  of  the  Syrians,  the  Moabites 
and  the  Ammonites  (2  Kings  xxiv.  2), 
and  others,  during  the  hundred  and  forty 
years  which  intervened  between  the  acces- 
sion of  Hezekiah  and  the  completion  of  the 
Captivity.  I  Ud  me  (comp.  oh.  Tiii  17 ; 
liv.  8). 

Ver.  18. — ^I  have  seei(  bis  ways,  and  will 
heal  him.  God  had  seen  the  wanderings  of 
liis  people  in  perverse  ways,  and  his  heart 
had  been  touched  with  pity  thereat.  The 
good  Shepherd  follows  and  recalls  the 
wanderers  of  the  flock.  When  they  have 
suffered  hurt  he  "heals"  them.  He  is 
willing  to  "lead "them  also— to  go  befon 


OH.  Lvn.  1— 21.]     THE  BOOK  OP   THE  PROPHET   ISAIAH. 


369 


Qiem,  aod  show  them  the  way  that  they 
should  walk  in  (oh.  xlix.  10 ;  Kzek.  xxxiv. 
11  — 16),  and  "  restore  comforts  "  to  them, 
eBpecially  to  such  of  them  as  have  begun  to 
•*  mourn    over  their  perversity, 

Ver.  19.-^  create  the  frnit  of  the  lips; 
literally,  creating  the  fruit  of  the  lips.  The 
clause  is  best  attached  to  the  preceding 
verse.  By  his  tender  treatment  of  the 
wanderers,  God  brings  forth  fruit  from  their 
lips  in  the  shape  of  praise  and  thanksgiving. 
Peace,  peace;  or,  perfect  peace,  as  in  ch. 
xxvi.  3.  Judah's  prophets  were  apt  to  say 
to  her,  "  Peace,  peace,"  when  tliere  was  no 
peace  (Jer.  vi.  14 ;  viii.  11 ;  Ezek.  xiii.  10). 
Isaiah  is  now  commissioned  to  give  the  pro- 
mise from  the  mouth  of  God  (comp.  John 
ziT.  27 ;  xz.  21. 26>    Xo  him  that  ia  for  off, 


and  to  him  that  is  near;  i.e.  either  "to  both 
the  Gentiles  and  the  Jews,"  or  "  to  both  th« 
scattered  members  of  the  Jewish  body " 
(ch.  xi.  11;  xliii.  5,  6)  "and  the  collected 
nation  in  Canaan." 

Ver.  20. — The  wicked  are  like  the  troubled 
sea.  A  striking  metaphor,  but  one  which 
occurs  nowhere  else  in  the  Old  Testament, 
and  once  only  in  the  New  (Jude  13).  The 
sea's  restless  action  well  expresses  the  un- 
quiet of  the  wicked ;  and  the  mud  and  mire 
that  it  casts  up  resembles  their  evil  thoughts 
and  evil  deeds.  "  There  is  no  peace  "  for 
snch  persons,  either  bodily  or  spiritnal, 
either  in  this  world  or  the  world  to  come. 

Ver.  21. — Comp.  ch.  zlviii.  22,  where  the 
prophet  ends  another  section  of  this  part  •! 
his  work  with  almoit  the  lame  woida. 


HOMILETIOSL 

Ver.  14. — The  mtntitry  of  angels.  Without  intmdtiif  H  on  the  reader's  attention, 
Isaiah  is  continually  implying  the  interest  which  angels  take  in  all  God's  dealings 
with  his  Church,  and  the  assistance  which  they  render.  Voices  fill  the  heavenly  sphere 
around  him  and  about  him,  which  can  only  be  angelic  utterances,  and  from  time  to 
time  he  records  the  sayings.  Sometimes  he  records  them  openly  as  angelic ;  e.g.  the 
seraph's  words,  when  he  took  the  live  coal  from  the  altar  in  the  court  of  heaven,  and 
therewith  touched  the  prophet's  lips  (ch.  vi.  7).  But  more  often  he  names  no  speaker, 
but  simply  gives  the  words  or  introduces  them  impersonally  with  the  phrase,  "and 
one  said  "  (see  ch.  xxi.  11 ;  xxvi.  2 ;  xl.  6,  etc.).  It  is  sometimes  said  that  the  Jews 
first  learnt  to  believe  in  the  existence  of  angels  from  the  Babylonians.  But  Isaiah's 
writings  furnish  a  proof,  if  proof  were  needed,  that  this  was  not  so.  Isaiah  shows  ua 
angels — 

L  As  MiNisTRANT  TO  GoD  IN  HEAVEN.  Above  the  throne  of  God  in  heaven  were 
seen  by  Isaiali,in  vision,  a  number  of  seraphim,  or  winged  creatures  of  the  angelic  class, 
attendant  upon  the  great  King,  and  ready  at  each  moment  to  do  his  pleasure  (ch.  vi.  2). 
They  "  stood,"  to  show  respect  and  reverence ;  they  had  two  of  their  wings  outspread, 
to  show  readiness  to  fly  at  once  whithersoever  God  should  send  them ;  they  had  two 
others  veiling  their  faces,  to  indicate  a  sense  of  their  unworthiness  to  look  on  the  faca 
of  the  Almighty.  As  they  stood,  they  praised  God,  saying,  "  Holy,  holy,  holy,  is  the 
Lord  of  hosts :  the  whole  earth  is  full  of  his  glory  "  (ch.  vi.  3).  The  scene  drawn  reminds 
us  of  St.  John's  vision  in  Patmos  (Rev.  iv.  1 — 11),  and  also,  to  some  extent,  of  the 
vision  of  Micaiah  the  son  of  Imlah,  in  the  First  Book  of  Kings  (xxii.  19 — 22).  The 
teaching  of  all  these  passages  is  consentient.  God  has  always  attendant  upon  him,  in 
the  courts  of  heaven,  angelic  beings  of  varied  powers  and  capacities,  who  stand  before 
him  in  adoration,  and  at  the  same  time  are  eager  to  go  whithersoever  he  may  send 
them,  and  carry  into  effect  his  purposes. 

II.  As  DOING  BEKVICE  TO  MEN  ON  EARTH.  Angel  s  are  represented  by  Isaiah  as 
interested  in  the  life  of  God's  faithful  ones,  as  watching  God's  dealings  with  them,  and 
occasionally  showing  their  sympathy.  Christians  are  expressly  taught  that  all  angels 
are  "  ministering  spirits,  sent  forth  to  minister  to  them  who  are  heirs  of  salvation " 
(Heb.  L  14).  Isaia.li  seems  to  have  divined  their  functions  in  this  respect.  He  "  sees 
indeed  through  a  glass  darkly,"  and  not  yet "  face  to  face  "  (1  Cor.  xiii.  12) ;  but  stiU  ha 
not  obscurely  intimates  from  time  to  time  their  close  relationship  to  man.  God  places 
them  upon  the  walls  of  the  new  Jerusalem  to  watch  (ch.  Ixii.  6).  They  stand  there, 
and  "  take  no  rest."  They  are  Jehovah's  "  remembrancers,"  not  reminding  him  of 
human  sin  or  human  shortcomings,  but  of  his  promises  to  his  people,  and  of  their  need 
that  he  should  give  them  succour  (see  Mr.  Cheyne  on  ch.  IxiL  6).  It  is,  perhaps,  a 
ory  of  the  ang^  tiuA  rings  out  in  the  "  splendid  apostrophe,"  "  Awake,  awake,  put 


J60  THE  BOOK  OF  THE  PEOPHBT   ISAIAH,    [ch.  lvbl  1—21. 

on  Btrength,  0  arm  of  the  Lord  I  awake,  as  in  the  ancient  days,  in  the  generations  of 
old "  (oh.  IL  9).  Angels  exchange  "  cries  "  when  the  promise  of  Christ's  coming  is 
given  (ch.  zl.  6—8).  Angels  arc  interested  in  a  path  being  made  by  which  the  faithful 
ones  may  reach  God's  holy  city  (ch.  Ivii.  14).  Angels  call  on  their  fellows  to  open  to 
the  saints  the  gates  of  heaven  (ch.  zxvi.  2).  The  dwellers  in  the  empyrean  are  joined 
with  the  believers  on  earth  in  the  bonds  of  charity  and  love,  and  form  with  them  one 
community  in  the  city  of  the  living  God  (ch.  Ixii,  6 ;  comp.  Heb.  xii.  22 — 24). 

Ter.  15. — The  humility  cf  Ood.  An  ancient  Jewish  writer  says,  "  Wherever  the 
Scripture  bears  witness  to  the  Divine  mightiness,  it  brings  out  side  by  side  with  it  the 
Divine  himibleness  "  ('  Megilla,'  31,  o) ;  and  this  is  nowhere  more  strikingly  mani- 
fested than  in  the  present  passage.  God  "  dwells  in  the  high  and  holy  place  " — in  the 
most  exalted  sphere  to  which  human  thought  can  possibly  mount;  and  yet  at  the  same 
time  he  dwells  with  the  human  spirit  that  is  humble  and  crushed.  As  Delitzsch  says, 
"  The  heaven  of  heavens  is  not  too  great  for  him,  and  a  human  heart  is  not  too  small  for 
him,  to  dwell  in."  He  who  sits  upou  the  cherubim,  and  hears  the  seraphim  praise  him 
with  ceaseless  voice,  does  not  scorn  also  to  "  dwell  among  the  sighs  of  a  poor  human 
soul."    Note,  in  connection  with  this  theme — 

I.  That  all  God's  peovidbntial  dealikos  with  the  things  that  he  has 
OBEATBD  AEB  A  coKDEBCENBiON.  It  is  ncccssary  that  he  should  "  humble  himself"  even 
to  "  behold  the  things  which  are  in  heaven  and  earth  "  (Ps.  cxiii.  5).  He  is  infinitely 
above  these  things — their  "  goodness  extendeth  not  to  him"  (Ps.  xvi.  2).  All  contact 
with  them  is  contact  of  the  higher  with  the  lower,  and  involves  necessarily  the  higher 
stooping  from  his  high  estate.  The  distance  between  him  and  the  highest  of  the  angels 
is  an  infinite  distance.  His  condescending  to  accept  the  praises  of  the  angels  is  an 
infinite  condescension. 

II.  That  it  is  a  gkbateb  oondescbdsion  foe  God  to  have  DEALnras  with  men 
TBATSf  with  ANGBL8.  Angels  are  pure,  at  any  rate,  from  the  taint  of  sin.  God  may 
"tax  them  with  folly"  (Job  iv.  12),  but  he  does  not  tax  them  with  sin.  There  is  no 
barrier  of  iniquity  or  impurity  between  God  and  the  lowest  angel.  But  with  man  the 
case  is  different.  Man  is  "  very  far  gone  from  original  righteousness."  He  lias  cor- 
rupted his  way  before  God.  The  best  man  "  has  sinned,  and  come  short  of  God's  glory  " 
(Rom.  iii.  23).  "What  tlien  is  man,  that  God  should  be  mindful  of  liim?  or  the  son  of 
man,  that  he  should  visit  him?"  (Ps.  viii.  4).  It  is  an  extraordinary  condescension 
and  humility  that  God  should  bring  himself  down  to  the  level  of  man,  hold  communion 
with  him,  "  dwell "  with  him,  "  heal "  him.  Yet  he  does  this.  Although  his  throne  is 
in  heaven,  "  yet  bis  eyes  behold,  his  eyelids  try,  the  children  of  men  "  (Ps.  xi.  4).  He 
"  looks  down  from  heaven  upon  them  "  (Ps.  xiv.  2).  "  Prom  the  place  of  his  habitation 
be  beholdeth  all  the  dwellers  on  the  earth  "  (Ps.  zxxiii.  14).  The  gratitude  of  men 
should  correspond  to  the  condescension  of  God. 


HOMILIES  BY  VARIOUS  AUTHORSL 

Vers.  8 — 10.— Pictures  of  idolatry.  The  idolaters  are  summoned  to  hear  the  judg- 
ment upon  them.  They  are  characterized  as  "  sons  of  a  sorceress,  seed  of  an  adulterer." 
The  source  of  all  idolatry  is  unfaithfulness  to  God  regarded  as  the  Husband  of  his 
people  (Ezek.  xvi.  44,  45).  Yet,  in  their  pride,  these  idolaters  make  sport  of  and  scoff 
at  the  true  servants  of  God. 

I.  The  eiteb  op  idolatet.  There  were  enthusiastic  orgies  in  the  sacred  groves  of 
oak  and' in  the  gardens  (ch.  i.  29 ;  Ezek.  vi.  13 ;  Hos.  iv.  13).  There  were  sacrificts  of 
children  to  Moloch.  There  were  fetish-stones,  which  were  anointed  with  oil,  and  these 
continued  to  be  devoted  to  heathen  uses.  And  Israel,  having  by  covenant  a  "  portion," 
or  property,  so  to  speak,  in  God,  has  exchanged  this  for  the  senseless  stones ;  and  to 
these  food-offerings  are  made.  The  pictures  of  Phoenician,  Tsraelitish,  and  Greek  super- 
Btitions  are  in  this  respect  much  the  same.  Jehovah,  in  that  jealousy  whioh  is  tha 
expression  of  a  holy  love,  is  deeply  grieved  by  these  things. 

II.  The  peofliqact  or  idolatry.  On  the  high  hills  shrines  were  erected,  and 
tombs  are  still  seen  upon  them,  overshadowed  by  the  tree  on  which  votive  offerings 


OH.  ,',vii,  1— 21.]    THE  BOOK  OF  THE   PROPHET   ISAIAH.  361 


hang.  Saints  or  prophets  have  replaced  the  old  gods.  Here  idolatrous  symbols  were 
set  up.  And  idolatry  polluting  politics,  the  |  cople  negotiated  and  coquetted  with 
heathen  powers,  and  humbled  themselves  to  the  lowest  servility.  And  yet  these 
negotiations  and  journeys  had  been  in  vaiii.  For  all  tliat,  the  attempts  had  been 
renewed.  "  It  is  a  striking  illustration  of  men  seeking  happiness  away  from  God.  They 
wander  from  object  to  object;  become  weary  in  the  pursuit,  yet  do  not  renounce  it; 
still  cling  to  hope,  though  often  repulsed;  though  the  world  gives  them  no  permanent 
comfort,  though  wealth,  ambition,  and  gaiety,  all  fail  of  imparting  happiness, — ^j'et  they 
do  not  give  up  the  pursuit  in  despair.  The  world  is  still  pursued  with  just  as  little 
success,  with  continually  augmenting  evidence  that  it  cannot  satisfy  the  desires  of  the 
immortal  soul,  with  just  as  much  reluctance  to  seek  permanent  bliss  in  God." 

III.  DiviSB  BBM0K8TBAN0E.  The  tone  is  one  of  gentleness  and  softness.  "Who 
is  there  so  strong  and  so  terrible  as  to  justify  thee  in  thy  infidelity  to  Jehovah  ?  None." 
Yet  there  may  be  some  excuse  for  them  in  his  long  silence.  Passed  over  again  and 
again,  it  might  seem  that  God'had  forgotten  to  be  gracious — that  tliey  wei  e  hidden  from 
him.  But  now  he  will  draw  near  again :  "  The  speech  of  mingled  mercy  and  judgment 
shall  work  more  effectually  on  the  heart "  (of.  ch.  xlvi.  13 ;  Ps.  xxii.  31 ;  xcviii.  2).  Or 
the  words  may  be  taken  ironically — it  depends  on  whether  we  read  "  my  righteousness  " 
or  "thy  righteousness."  In  the  coming  trial,  no  help  but  Jehovah's  will  avail  thee. 
"  Her  medley  of  gods"  will  not  deliver  her — the  Pantheon  of  various  divinations  set  up 
by  her  (cf.  Micah  i.  7).  The  wind  shall  carry  them  off  like  all  dwellings  and  defences 
of  merely  human  structure  (cf.  Matt.  vii.  26,  27). 

IV.  Eternal  assxtbancb.  "  To  take  refuge  in  Jehovah,"  in  the  Eternal,  is  the  only 
safety,  the  only  guarantee  of  stability  and  possession,  amidst  the  tlux  and  change  of 
things.  To  say  that  they  shall  •'  possess  the  land  "  is  to  say,  according  to  the  manner  of 
the  Hebrew,  everything  that  denotes  favour  for  this  life  (ch.  xlix.  8 ;  Ps.  xxxvii.  11, 
29 ;  cf.  Matt.  v.  5 ;  Ps.  Ixix.  35,  36).  And  to  "  inherit  the  holy  mountain  "  is  to  enter 
upon  all  spiritual  privileges  and  joys — "as  great  as  if  they  had  posses-i(in  tif  a  portion 
of  the  mount  on  which  the  temple  was  built,  and  were  permitted  to  dwell  there."  And 
then  mysterious  voices  are  heard,  hinting  that  all  obstacles  shall  be  removed  from  the 
path  of  those  who  trust  in  God.  The  language  is  suitable  to  the  return  fi  om  exile,  as 
if  persons  should  go  before  them,  oryin;;,  "  Cast  up !  "  So  before  a  pacha  the  labourers  go 
and  remove  stones  out  of  the  way,  with  the  cry,  "  Cast  u|  i  the  way ;  remove  the  stones ! " 
(of.  ch.  xxvi.  7;  xxxv.  8;  xL  3,  4;  Ixii.  10).  He  who  places  obstacles  in  the  path  (Jer. 
vi.  21)  is  he  who  gives  command  in  his  own  time  for  their  removal.  War  and  peace, 
welfare  and  hindrances  to  welfare,  are  from  the  same  hand. — J. 

Vers.  16 — 21. — The  character  of  Jehovah.  I.  His  exaltation.  "  High  and  holy :" 
high  because  holy,  exalted  far  above  the  meanness  of  human  thoughts  and  the  impurity 
of  human  ways.  Far  above  creatuies  of  all  species  and  all  ranks,  it  is  needless  further 
to  designate  him.  He  is  the  Inconipaiable  One.  He  dwells  in  eternity  (cf.  ch.  ix.  6). 
His  Name  is  "  the  Holy  One "  (ch.  i.  4 ;  xxx.  11;  xl.  25  ;  xli.  14 ;  xliii.  3,  8 ;  xlvii.  4) ; 
his  place  the  high  and  holy  place,  or  temple  (oh.  vi.  1). 

II.  His  condescension.  "Wherever  the  Scripture  bears  witness  to  the  Divine 
mightiness,  it  brings  out  side  by  side  with  it  the  Divine  humbleness  (Deut.  x.  17,  18; 
ch.  Ivii.  15;  Ps.  Ixviii.  4,  5)."  It  is  nut  an  Epicurean  view  of  God  (Acts  xvii.  18),  nor 
the  Gnostic  view  that  God  had  left  the  world  to  the  nianagejnent  of  inferior  beings,  by 
himself  created.  Though  illimitable  and  unapproachable,  he  delights  to  make  his  abode 
with  men.  "  He  cannot  direct  the  affairs  of  his  people  from  without.  He  desires  to  he 
enthroned  in  their  hearts."  He  is  with  them  that  are  of  a  contrite,  or  cnished,  spirit — 
souls  bowed  down  with  a  sense  of  sin  and  unworthiness  (Ps.  xxxiv.  18 ;  cxxxviii.  6),  to 
make  alive  their  spirit,  to  impart  strength  and  comfort,  even  as  genial  rains  and  dews 
fall  upon  the  drooping  plant.  Such  a  lowly  state  of  mind  can  only  have  beeu  produced 
by  afiBiction  (ch.  Ixi.  1;  IxT.  14;  Ixvi.  2;  Ps.  xxxiv.  18;  cxivii.  2,  3). 

III.  His  faithfulness  and  love.  He  will  not  be  angry  with  his  fieople  for  ever 
(Ps.  ciii.  9).  The  soul  could  not  hold  out  in  a  prolonged  contention  with  its  Maker. 
Its  power  must  fail;  it  must  sink  into  destruction.  "  If  we  are  God's  cbild'en,  we  are 
safe.  We  may  suffer  much  and  long.  We  may  suffer  so  much,  it  may  teem  scare* 
posaible  we  should  endure  more.    But  he  knows  how  much  we  cau  bear,  and  will  lighten 


S62  THE  BOOK  OF  THE  PROPHET  ISAIAH,    [oh.  ltu.  1— 21. 

the  burden  and  remove  the  load  "  (Ps.  Ixxviii.  38,  39).  Why  has  he  smitten  them  at 
all?  It  is  because  of  their  sin.  Unjust  gain  is  put  for  sin  in  general  (cf.  Jer.  vi.  13 ;  v.  1 ; 
Ezek.  xxxiii.  31 ;  Ps.  cxix.  36),  even,  as  in  other  places,  the  shedding  of  blood.  He 
has  seen  their  ways,  both  of  sin  and  aberration,  of  suffering  and  amendment. 
Having  hidden  himself,  he  will  now  interpose  to  heal  their  wounds,  and  to  guide  them 
by  a  clearer  path  (oh.  Iviii.  11).  (For  sin  as  disease,  and  pardon  as  healing,  cf.  Jer. 
xxxiii.  6 ;  2  Chron.  vii.  14 ;  Ps.  xli.  i ;  Jer.  iii.  22 ;  xvii.  4 ;  Hos.  xiv.  4.)  And  as  the 
result  of  all  this,  he  creates  the  "  fruit  of  the  lips  "  (cf.  Hos.  xiv.  2),  i.e.  praise  and 
thanksgiving ;  of  which  the  subject  would  be  peace  (of.  Eph.  ii.  14 — 17)  to  the  near 
and  remote,  Jew  and  Gentile,  or  with  reference  to  the  noly  city ;  no  degree  of  remote- 
ness was  to  disqualify  true  Israelites  from  the  enjoyment  of  the  promise. 

IV.  The  comtbast.  The  impure  and  the  unpardoned  alone  shall  know  no  peace. 
Those  who  are  in  a  state  of  alienation  from  Jehovah  shall  be,  on  the  contrary,  like  the 
restless,  ever-shifting  sea  (Jude  13 ;  cf.  Ovid,  '  Tristia,'  i.  10.  33).  They  have  no 
fixed  happiuL'ss,  no  .substantial  peace ;  a  rage  of  passion  ever  ferments  within  them  ;  past 
guilt  casts  up  its  mire  in  memory ;  fears  of  the  future  torment.  How  different  bom 
the  scene  where  "  the  good  man  meets  his  fate,  quite  in  the  verge  of  heaven  "  I 

So  fades  a  summer  cloud  away ; 

So  sinks  the  gale  when  storms  aie  tfett 
So  gently  shuts  the  eye  of  day ; 

So  dies  a  wave  along  the  snoiei 

«r. 

Ver.  10. —  The  weariness  of  life.  "  Thou  art  wearied."  What  do  we  mean  by 
"  weariness  "  ?  Look  at  the  word.  It  means  "  to  wear ; "  not  to  wear  out,  but  to  wear 
away,  to  exhaust  the  nervous  sensibilities,  the  tissues  uf  brain  and  heart.  So  we  use 
the  wurd  in  relation  to  mind.  We  become  worn  and  weary.  St.  Paul  felt  this.  It  is 
not  lassitude  which  comes  from  indifference,  but  the  exhaustion  felt  by  the  earnest  and 
the  faithful  soul.  Let  us  thank  Grod  fur  restorative  power.  In  nature  how  blessed 
this  is !  The  weary  traveller,  unable  to  drag  his  tired  limbs  one  step  further  through 
the  leaden  air  and  under  the  copper'  sky  of  the  East,  laves  his  limbs  in  the  limpid 
stream,  and  lies  down  to  rest.  When  the  sun  fills  the  east  with  rosy  light  he  is  up  and 
off'  again — the  birds  sing,  the  air  is  full  of  vitality;  freshened  and  cheered,  he  ia  young 
once  more!  So  with  grace.  God  has  provided  refreshment  for  us  all.  We  need 
not  despair  of  reaching  the  goal.  "  Ihey  shall  return,  and  come  to  Zion  with  songs 
and  everlasting  joy  upon  their  head."  We  have  the  ever-open  fountain  of  a  Saviour's 
precious  blood,  tu  which  we  can  come  for  cleansing  and  renewal;  the  Holy  Ghost 
to  quicken  and  inspire ;  and  the  Word  of  God,  which  is  spirit  and  lif»^ 

«  Come,  let  us  anew  our  journey  pursue." 

I.  Wearinesb  comes  with  tbmpobaby  disappointment  and  defeat.  I  ny 
"temporary,"  because  Goii  himself  has  promised  to  perfect  that  which  concerneth  us. 
The  top-stone  shall  be  put  on  the  temple  of  character  with  shoutings  of  "  Grace,  grace 
unto  it."  The  way  of  perfection  is  just  the  way  which  wearies  us.  The  building  for 
immortality  cannot  be  completed  in  a  day.  Moreover,  the  stones  are  living  stones. 
We  are  disappointed  that  the  building  does  not  progress  quickly  and  easily.  And 
we  are  human  as  well  as  Divine.  We  have  citizenship  and  home  to  deal  with.  We 
are  related  to  friends  and  to  children.  Think  of  Bebekah  !  She  said,  "  I  am  weary 
of  my  life  because  of  the  daughters  of  Heth.  If  Jacob  take  a  wife  of  the  daughters 
of  Heth — such  as  these?  "  The  motherly  anxiety  was  at  work.  She  knew  how  slight 
her  power  was  in  such  a  sphere  as  that  of  her  boy's  love ;  and  she  knew  what  life-issues 
depended  on  that.  As  we  get  older  we  feel  "  limitations"  of  power.  We  can  counsel 
and  pray,  but  we  cannot  command.  The  mind  looks  with  sorrow  on  the  feeble  sceptre 
of  the  will !  We  stand  outside  events,  and  all  we  can  do  is  so  little.  Disappointment 
is  a  school  wherein  we  learn  humility  and  trust  in  God.  Disappointment  is  a  cloud, 
and  we  wait  till  the  heavens  are  clear  and  the  all-revealing  light  comes  again.  But 
we  are  defeated,  too,  in  ourselves ;  in  others.  "  Depart  &om  me,"  Peter  said ;  "  for 
I  am  a  sinful  man,  0  Lord." 

<*  Oppressed  with  sin  and  woe 
A  burdened  heart  I  bear." 


CH.  Lvii.  1—21.]     THE  BOOK  OP  THE  PEOPHET  ISAIAH.  363 

But  first  defeat  has  made  many  a  true  general,  has  quickened  many  inventors,  like 
Watt,  Stephenson,  and  Brunei,  and  the  vanquished  one  has  become  the  victor  iu  after- 
hours.  Still,  weariness  comes— to  student,  explorer,  scientist,  and  missionary,  to 
philanthropist  saddened  with  ingratitude,  and  to  disciple  following  the  Lord.  But  this 
is  not  the  weariness  of  sin ;  that  not  only  exhausts,  but  destroys. 

IL  Weabiness  coues  with  sblf-discovbbt.  We  become  more  revealed  to  our- 
selves. The  volcano  teUs  what  is  in  the  earth.  The  lightning  reveals  the  latent 
electricity  in  the  air.  Passions  and  lusts  reveal  terrible  possibilities  in  good  men. 
David  said,  "  I  am  weary  vrith  my  groaning ;  all  the  night  make  I  my  bed  to  swim ; " 
and  again,  "  I  am  weary  of  my  crying ;  my  throat  is  dried  :  mine  eyes  fail  while  I  wait 
for  my  God."  Conflict  with  sin  in  all  its  forms  is  weary,  weary  work.  1.  The  roots 
are  so  hidden.  Like  some  garden  weeds,  they  have  roots  that  never  seem  uprooted, 
long  white  threads  that  interlace  the  earth  and  strangle  other  plants.  2.  The  battle  is 
so  varied.  Like  Stanley's  passage  of  the  falls,  enemies  on  both  banks  and  on  the 
island  mid-stream — cannibals  who  cry,  "  Meat,  meat  1 "  Scripture  speaks  of  enemies 
who  devour  our  souls.  "  Their  sleep  is  taken  away,  unless  they  cause  some  to  fall." 
3.  The  avengements  are  so  real.  There  is  no  escaping  the  voice !  "  Thou  art  the 
man  1 "  And  the  soul  canoot  pretend  not  to  hear.  It  turns  pale.  Scepticism  says, 
"  It  is  not  a  real  voice  1 "  How  does  scepticism  know  ?  The  indiKtion  is  so  wide  and 
comprehensive.  All  men  feel  it  after  sin.  Take  Divine  advice.  "  Be  not  deceived ; 
God  is  not  mocked :  for  whatsoever  a  man  soweth,  that  shall  he  also  reap."  Weariness, 
you  say,  then,  is  to  be  expected.  Yes;  think  of  the  cry  of  St.  Paul.  "  Who  shall  deliver 
me  fi:om  the  body  of  this  death  ?  "  The  answer  is,  "  Christ — Christ  alone."  "  We  are 
more  than  conquerors  through  him  that  loved  us."  More  than  conquerors  1  Yes, 
because  we  do  not  leave  a  desolate  province.  The  gospel  is  a  creator  as  well  as  a 
conqueror.     "  The  desert  shall  rejoice  and  blossom  as  the  rose." 

III.  Weabiness  combs  with  unbelief.  It  was  so  in  the  old  world,  and  so  it 
will  be  in  the  new.  The  Greeks  had  an  underlying  sadness  in  their  outwardly  beautiful 
life,  as  Luthardt  so  well  shows  in  his  volume  on  the  Christian  evidences.  It  is  faith 
which  gives  life  and  zest.  Thomas  Carlyle  says  in  his  essay  on  Diderot,  "  All  epochs, 
wherein  unbelief,  under  whatever  form  soever,  maintains  its  sorry  victory,  should  they 
ever  for  a  moment  glitter  with  a  sham  splendour,  vanish  from  the  eyes  of  posterity ; 
because  no  one  chooses  to  burden  himself  with  study  of  the  unfruitful."  So  he 
shows  us  how  French  philosophism  vanished  into  non-entity.  Yes,  that  is  it;  there 
is  non-entity,  no-being  in  unbelief.  What  a  glorious  creed  is  the  Christian  creed 
— meeting  all  deepest  necessities  of,  sin,  and  want,  and  sorrow,  and  immortal  instinct, 
by  its  doctrines  of  Divine  atonement,  fatherhood,  sympathetic  brotherhood,  and  eternal 
life  1  Who  can  be  weary  when  he  believes  in  One  who  is  himself  the  revelation  of 
the  Father  ?  Bringing  life  and  immortality  to  light,  Christ  has  made  this  toorld  more 
beautiful.  There  is  a  deeper  life  even  in  human  love.  As  Esther  Lyon  says,  in 
'  Felix  Holt,'  "  One  likes  a  beyond  everywhere."  Men  must  be  weary  who  have  lost 
faith.  1.  Bound  of  same  duties  without  a  goal.  2.  Growth  a  mockery  merging  into 
weakness.  3.  Health  into  pain.  Vision  into  dimness.  Thought  into  blank !  If  this 
age  becomes  an  unbelieving  age,  its  joy-bells  will  all  be  mufiSed,  its  fruit  will  all 
wither.     It  is  faith  that  foresees,  foretastes,  and  forestores. 

IV.  Weariness  COMES  FBOM  SOLITDDB.  The  regimentis  thinning,  thinning,  in  which 
you  started.  You  have  seen  many  aims  of  the  soldiers  "dip  below  the  downs"  into 
the  valley.  You  are  beginning  in  a  human  sense  to  feel  solitary.  Yes ;  it  is  not  enough 
to  give  help  even  to  the  poor ;  you  must  visit  the  fatherless  and  widows  in  their  afflic- 
tions. Show  them  a  face.  An  old  woman  was  once  speaking  to  me  of  a  young  visitor 
who  was  timid  and  shy,  and  could  not  pray  with  her  I  "  What  did  she  do  then  ?  " 
I  said..  "  Oh,  she  looked  at  me,  and  it  did  me  good ! "  Yes ;  the  face  is  a  revelation. 
The  Master  was  weary  iu  solitude  :  '*  What !  could  ye  not  watch  with  me  one  hour  ?  " 
So  was  St.  Paul :  "  At  Athens  alone."    We  cannot  take  the  poet's  recipe — 

"  Bury  our  dead  joys. 
And  live  above  them  with  a  loving  world." 

No;  it  ia  ignoble  to  forget  them.  But  the  Christian  is  never  alone.  The  Savioui 
Is  nei^r,    "  I  will  not  leave  you  comfortless :  I  will  come  to  you."    God  grant  tbiii 


364  THE  BOOK  OF  THE  PROPHET  ISAIAH,    [oh.  lvu.  1— 21. 

all  our  solitude  may  be  lightened  by  his  presence,  all  our  weariness  refreshed  by  hit 
love.  Into  green  pastures  he  will  lead  us,  by  still  waters  he  will  talk  to  us.  And 
all  the  weary  and  heavy-laden  may  find  rest  in  him. — ^W.  M.  S. 

Vers.  1,  2. — Three  pictwres  of  the  human.  Our  attention  is  called  to^ 
L  A  PICTTJBE  OF  HUMAN  GOODNESS.  A  good  man  is  represented  as  "the  righteoug," 
as  "the  mercilul,"  as  one  who  "  walketh  in  uprightDess."  These  characterizations 
include :  1.  The  fear  of  Otod — reverence  for  bis  Name,  the  worship  of  his  Divine  Spirit, 
the  recognition  of  his  righteous  claims,  a  supreme  regard  for  his  holy  will.  2.  The  love 
of  man — ^a  practical  acknuwledgnient  of  his  claims  on  our  sympatljy  and  our  succour, 
a  hearty  and  practical  desire  to  promote  his  well-being.  3.  The  regulation  of  daily 
life,  in  all  stations  and  spheres,  by  the  laws  of  truth,  purity,  honesty,  sobriety.  A 
righteous,  merciful,  and  upright  man  is  one  who  will  be  making  an  honest  and  earnest 
endeavour  to  realize  all  this  in  his  character  and  his  career.  Nothing  less  will  satisfy 
his  aspiration. 

II.  A  FiOTDBB  OF  HUMAN  TBOUOHTLEssNEss.  "The  righteous  perlshcth,  and  no 
man  layeth  it  to  heart."  When  a  commnnity — nation  or  Church — has  not  been  living 
and  walking  in  the  light  of  the  Lord,  it  becomes  dull  of  apprehension,  spiritually  blind, 
incapable  of  estimating  the  true  character  of  events.  1.  It  fails  to  appreciate  the 
worth  of  one  good  man's  life.  What  an  incalculable  lilessing  a  single  true,  pure,  and 
holy  life  may  be,  and  indeed  must  be  I  and  what  a  fountain  of  good  is  dried  up  when 
one  who  leads  such  a  life  is  taken  away  1  It  is  a  bad  time,  indicative  of  evil  and  prophetic 
of  decline  and  death,  when  human  worth  is  disregarded.  2.  It  fails  to  feel  the  injury 
and  wrong  done  by  arbitrary  violence ;  it  ought  to  resent  it  with  keenest  indisjnalion,  and 
to  take  vigorous  steps  to  arrest  and  remove  it.  3.  It  fails  to  recognize  a  valuable  mitiga- 
tion :  "  None  considering  that  the  righteous  is  taken  away  from  the  evil  to  come."  It 
is  natural  enough  for  men  to  wish  to  go  on  into  the  future,  that  they  may  see  what  is 
coming,  and  that  they  may  help  to  s-hape  the  event;  but  the  wise  and  thoughtful  will 
consider  that  there  may  be  a  future  impending  from  which  they  would  earnestly  pray 
God  to  save  them.  It  was  not  a  threat,  but  a  promise,  sent  to  Josiah,  "  I  will  gather 
thee  to  thy  fathers  .  .  .  neither  shall  thine  eyes  see  all  the  evil  which  I  will  bring 
upon  this  place "  (2  Kings  xxii.  20).  Many  are  they  who  have  outlived  the  period 
of  prosperity  and  peace,  to  whom  an  earlier  death  would  have  been  a  happier  lot.  We 
cannot  be  sure  that  a  sudden  and  even  (what  we  call)  a  premature  death  may  not 
be  a  most  merciful  removal  from  intolerable  pain,  or  from  overwhelming  temptation, 
or  from  grievous  burdens  and  sorrows.  We  sing,  "  Our  times  are  in  thy  hand,"  and 
we  do  well  to  continue,  "  0  God,  we  wish  them  there." 

III.  A  PICTURE  OF  HUMAN  REPOSE.  "  He  shall  enter  into  peace :  they  shall  rest 
in  their  beds."  From  the  tumult  and  the  strain,  from  the  battle  and  the  burden  of 
life,  even  the  rest  of  the  grave  is  welcome.  But  how  much  more  welcome  to  the  weary 
spirit  is  that  rest  which  Jesus  Christ  has  revealed,  and  which  remaineth  for  the  people 
of  God !— rest  in  the  home,  in  the  likeness,  in  the  glory,  in  the  untiring  service  of  the 
ascended  Saviour. — C. 

Ver.  10. —  Weariness  in  tinfid  error.  Whether  the  guilty  error  of  Israel  consisted 
in  its  departure  into  idolatry,  or  in  its  having  recourse  to  the  arm  of  flesh  instead  of  to 
the  power  of  its  Divine  Redeemer,  we  reach  the  same  conclusion,  viz. — 

I.  That  sin  goes  to  tedious  lengths  in  its  wandering  from  God.  It  is  "  wearied 
in  the  greatness  uf  its  way."  Whatever  may  be  the  particular  course  which  iniquity 
may  take — whether  it  moves  in  the  direction  of  disbelief,  or  of  covetousness,  or  oi 
any  one  of  the  vices,  or  of  worldliness — it  goes  far  enough  to  find  that  the  path  of  sinful 
error  is  a  long  and  tedious  roaJ,  that  it  is  one  in  which  the  soul  finds  no  lasting  satis- 
faction, that  there  continually  recurs  a  sense  of  want  and  spiritual  craving,  a  hungering 
of  the  heart  for  that  which  is  not  supplied.  Their  name  is  legion  who  find  their  own 
jhosen  course  of  sin  a  weary  round,  an  unsatisfying  pursuit. 

IL  That,  bpite  of  its  own  weariness,  it  persists  in  its  unhallowed  path. 
It  is  weary  enough,  yet  it  "  says  not,  There  is  no  ho|ie."  It  finds  just  enough  to  main- 
tain some  kind  of  existence — "the  life  of  thine  hand" — to  go  on  without  being 
iltogether  changed  and  restored.     Are  there  not  multitudes  of  men  who  are  draggiua 


CH.I.VII.1-21.J    THE  BOOK  OF  THE  PEOPHBT  ISAIAH.  368 

on  a  weary  life,  profoundly  dissatisfied  with  what  they  are  in  themselrm  and  what 
they  are  accomplishing,  and  yet  allowing  themselves  to  continue  in  their  griilty  course  ? 
The  path  of  sin  is  a  very  pitiable  one  ;  it  is  no  wonder — 

ILL  That  it  calls  down  a  strong  Divine  ebproach.  (Ver.  11.)  God  reproaches 
his  erring  children :  1.  That  they  have  given  themselves  up  to  that  which  is  utterly 
unworthy  of  their  devotion  :  "  Whom  hast  thou  feared  ?  "  2.  That  they  have  neglected 
the  strong  claims  he  has  on  their  worship  and  service — ^he  who  has  laid  them  under 
such  deep  obligations  and  has  held  out  to  them  such  glorious  prospects ;  "  Hast  not 
remembered  me."     Nor  must  it  be  forgotten — 

IV.  That  God's  bilenoe,  as  well  as  his  speech,  is  an  argument  foe  bbtuen. 
"  Have  not  1  held  my  peace  .  .  .  and  thou  fearest  me  not  ?  "  1.  Go.l's  silence  is  strangely 
and  grievously  misinterpreted  (Ps.  1.  21).  2.  Instead  of  making  it  an  encouragement 
to  sin,  it  ought  to  be  employed  as  an  opportunity  for  repentance.  It  is  a  Divine  pause, 
in  order  that,  while  it  lasts,  the  guilty  may  reconsider  and  return.  3.  God's  silence 
is  temporary ;  it  is  imposed  on  himself  by  a  strong  and  merciful  restraint.  But  it 
cannot  be  very  long  continued ;  the  interests  of  righteousness  demand  that  it  shall  be 
broken.    Let  not  the  impenitent  presume — 

"  For  tho'  mercy  be  kind  ud  its  patience  endure^ 
To  the  path  of  repentance  it  seeks  to  allure, 
And  they  who  are  deaf  to  its  voice  may  be  sure 

That  God  will  not  always  be  silent. 
Oh,  Time  brings  the  hour — we  shall  soon  all  be  ther»— 
When  the  Judge  on  his  judgment-tbrone  shall  appeal^ 
And  his  sentence  of  mercy  or  wrath  shall  declare, 
And  then  will  no  longer  be  Bilent" 

a 

Vers.  12, 13. — The  fate  of  foUy  and  the  reward  of  wisdom.  The  Divine  One  whom 
Israel  has  so  grievously  wronged  (vers.  4 — 9)  intimates  (ver.  12)  that  he  will  make 
known  to  his  people  the  results  of  their  apostasy  from  him ;  he  will  tell  them  "  how 
unprofitable  are  their  works,"  how  suicidal  is  their  policy  ;  he  will  tell  them  also  how 
great  is  the  reward  of  the  wise — of  those  who  abide  in  his  service. 

L  The  bitter  fate  of  the  ungodly.  .  Departing  from  God,  they  have  no  resort 
but  that  which  they  find  in  their  own  poor  divinities,  in  those  "  heaps  of  idols  "  whose 
power  is  blown  away  with  the  first  breath  of  adversity ;  they  may  cry  to  these  wretched 
images,  but  they  will  meet  with  no  response.  This  will  prove  the  portion  of  the  ungodly 
in  every  age  :  the  powers  to  which,  in  God's  absence,  they  have  recourse  will  fail  them 
utterly  in  their  time  of  need ;  they  may  be  numerous,  they  may  be  "  companies,"  they 
may  be  highly  esteemed,  but  they  will  certainly  fail  when  the  hour  of  trial  arrives. 
Worldly  wealth,  a  great  reputation,  troops  of  friends,  high  social  position,  varied  attain- 
ments, strength  of  bodily  constitution, — any  one  or  all  of  these,  or  other  resources 
besides  these,  may  be  possessed,  but  they  will  ignominiously  fail  in  the  hour  of  supreme 
necessity ;  they  will  not,  for  they  cannot,  deliver  a  human  soul  in  its  deepest  troubles, 
in  its  darkest  hours ;  they  will  be  as  impotent  as  "  the  chaff  which  the  wind  drivetb 
•way."  "Vain  things  lor  safety"  are  they  all.  The  soul  of  man  has  wants  which 
strike  deeper  and  which  rise  higher  than  any  of  them  can  reach, 

II.  The  blessed  heritage  of  the  godly.  "  He  that  putteth  his  trust  in  me  shall 
possess  the  land."  To  him  may  come,  will  come,  hours  of  darkness,  of  loss,  of  trial ; 
but  he  has  a  stay  and  a  resource  in  God  his  Father,  in  Jesus  Christ  his  unfailing  Friend, 
which  will  make  him  blessed  at  every  point  of  his  pilgrimage,  in  every  stage  of  his 
career.  For  him  will  be:  1.  The  rest  of  heart  which  comes  with  a  consciousness  of 
spiritual  integrity.  2.  Growth  in  all  that  is  good  and  wise.  3.  The  happiness  of 
heart  which  is  found  in  the  worship  of  God :  "  He  shall  inherit  my  holy  mountain." 
4.  The  joy  of  sacred  service,  of  rendering  succour,  of  imparting  strength  to  the  weak 
and  comfort  to  the  sad,  of  rescuing  and  reinstating  the  fallen  and  despairing.  6.  Tho 
hope  of  the  heavenly  inheritance. — C. 

Vers.  16,  16. — 2%e  greatness  of  Qod  and  the  hope  of  the  humUe.     The  pro^^t 

presents  us   with  a  most  noble  contrast  as  he  draws  for  us  the  surpassing  greatneM 


366  THE  BOOK  OP  THE  PROPHET  ISAIAH,     [oh.  lvu.  1— 2L 

of  the  infinite  Ood,  and  then  pictures  him  to  us  as  resident  in  a  humble  human 
soul— 

L  The  bxceedino  obbatness  of  God.  And  this  whether  we  have  regard  to  (1) 
the  duration  of  his  existence, — the  fact  that  he  "inhabits  eternity,"  that  he  is  "from 
everlasting  to  everlasting;"  or  to  (2)  his  position  in  the  universe, — he  is  the  "high  and 
lofty  One,"  King  of  kings,  Lord  of  lords,  immeasurably  removed  in  his  majesty  and 
authority  above  the  highest  aud  mightiest  of  his  creatures ;  or  to  (3)  his  character, — 
"  his  Name  is  Holy."  This  name  of  holiness  is  indicative  of  all  moral  excellence,  and 
reminds  us  that  God  is  he  in  whom  all  goodness  of  every  kind  whatsoever  has  its  resi- 
dence and  its  source.  So  surpassingly  great,  in  all  respects,  is  he  whom  we  worship, 
with  whom  we  have  everything  to  do. 

II.  The  hope  of  the  humble  in  keoabd  to  him.  We  naturally  ask— What  hope  is 
there  that  finite  and  guilty  men  can  ever  he  brought  into  a  close  relationship  with 
this  infinite  and  holy  God  ?  what  chance  is  there  of  anything  like  happy  fellowship  with 
him?  Our  text  provides  the  answer.  1.  The  conclusion  to  which  our  philosophy  and 
our  experience  point  us — this  is  to  a  hopeless  separation  from  him.  Our  human  thought 
(see  ch.  Iv.  8)  would  lead,  has  continually  led,  to  the  conclusion  that  God  would  dwell 
apart  from  man  in  some  remote,  select  region  of  illimitable  space,  not  concerning  him- 
self with  creatures  so  small  and  insignificant  as  we  are.  Our  expeiience  of  guilt  would 
lead  us  to  the  conclusion  that  we  are  hopelessly  barred  from  his  presence,  and  that 
those  who  have  grieved  and  wronged  him,  as  we  have  done,  must  be  content  to  be 
banished  for  ever  from  his  royal  presence.  But  against  this  reasoning  and  this  instinc- 
tive dread  we  have  to  place :  2.  The  fact  which  Divine  revelation  establishes ;  "  with 
him  also  [does  Goil  dwell]  who  is  of  a  contrite  and  humble  spirit."  It  is  a  well-estab- 
lished/a'*, built  on  sure  premises,  on  words  which  are  stronger  than  the  hills  and  the 
skies  (Matt.  xxiv.  35),  that  God  abides  witli  all  penitent  souls,  manifesting  himself  to 
them  as  their  Father  and  their  Friend,  inviting  their  trust,  their  love,  their  joy  in  him- 
self and  in  his  near  presence  (see  text ;  ch.  Ixvi.  2 ;  Ps.  xxxiv.  18 ;  li.  17  ;  cxxxviii.  6 ; 
Matt.  V.  3;  xviii.  4  ;  1  Pet.  v.  5).  3.  The  explanation  of  this  fact  lies  in  two  Divine 
attributes:  (1)  His  mercy.  The  merciful  Father  desires  to  restore  and  "  to  revive"  the 
heart  that  has  been  crushed  umier  a  weight  of  sin.  He  wounds,  but;  it  is  in  order  that  he 
may  heal.  He  desires  to  see,  and  he  promotes  both  by  word  and  action,  the'contrition 
of  spirit  wl)ich  appropriately  follows  a  sinful  deed  or  a  guilty  course;  then  the  gracious 
and  pitiful  Lord  extends  his  Divine  mercy,  and  he  heals  the  broken  heart,  restoring 
10  it  "  the  joy  (if  his  salvatiim,"  the  bles  edness  of  "the  man  whose  transgression  is  for- 
given, who~e  sin  is  covered."  (2)  His  considerateness.  "  I  will  not  contend  forever  .  .  . 
for  the  spirit  should  fail  before  me,"  etc.  We  have  to  do  with  a  considerate  Father,  who 
"  knows  our  frame,  and  who  remembers  that  we  are  dust;"  with  a  considerate  Savioui, 
who  remembers  thnt  the  spirit  is  willing  though  the  flesh  be  weak;  with  One  who  has 
a  gracious  I'orbearanoe  in  his  chiding,  lest  too  severe  a  sentence  should  crush  the  spirit 
he  only  means  to  bend  and  bless.  We  can  hardly  take  too  humble  a  view  of  ourselves, 
of  the  heinousness  of  our  guilt  and  of  the  imperfection  of  our  service ;  but  our  hope  is 
this — we  have  to  deal  with  a  merciful  and  considerate  Lord,  and  his  friendliness  toward 
us  may  be  measured  by  the  lowliness  of  the  view  we  are  taking  of  ourselves.  Well  may 
the  proud  of  heart  be  afraid,  for  the  heaviest  penalties  impend  above  their  head ;  but 
let  the  humble-hearted  be  full  of  hope,  for  God  is  with  them,  and  he  will  dwell  in  them, 
making  their  hearts  his  home. — C. 

Vers.  17 — 21. — The  course  of  the  snul.  These  words  of  Isaiah  indicate  the  course 
which  the  human  spirit  often  takes  in  its  downward  and  upward  path.     We  have — 

I.  The  essence  op  iniquity — this  is  selfishness.  "  The  iniquity  of  his  selfishnesSj" 
as  it  n;ay  be  rendered.  Whether  it  takes  the  specific  form  of  rapacity,  of  unholy  ambi- 
tion, of  self-indulgence  or  of  any  other  special  sin,  you  may  trace  iniquity  home  to  the 
evil  spirit  of  selfishness — the  withholding  from  God,  for  st'lf,  of  that  which  is  due  to 
him.  Those  who  are  transgiessing  none  of  the  ten  commandments  in  the  letter,  but  are 
yet  living  to  themselves,  are  living  in  iniquity. 

II.  DiviNB  displeasure  and  rebuke.  "  I  was  wroth  and  smote  him :  I  hid  me." 
Our  wilful  departure  from  God  and  refusal  of  our  hearts  and  lives  excite  his  profound 
displeasure,  his  sacred   grief — call  forth  his  pareiital  wrath  and  displeasure.     In  a 


OH.  Lvii.  1— 21.]    THE  BOOK  OF  THE  PROPHET  ISAIAH.  867 

very  solemn  sense  "  God  is  angry  with  the  wicked ; "  they  abide  under  hia  "  wrath." 
He  is  compelled  to  withhold  from  them  the  light  of  his  countenance;  he  rebukes 
them ;  he  sends  the  penalty  which  is  due  to  sin,  and  which  is  appropriate  to  the  par- 
ticular sin  which  is  being  committed.  He  hides  his  face;  he  withdraws  his  blessing;  be 
causes  pain,  disappointment,  sorrow,  to  visit  the  doer,  to  a£3ict  the  heart. 

III.  Human  eesentment  and  inoeeasbd  rebelliousness  op  spirit.  "  He  went  on 
frowardly  in  the  way  of  his  heart."  That  which  is  intended  to  draw  near,  sometimes 
drives  away.  Godly  sorrow  works  repentance ;  but  sorrow,  taken  ill  and  treated  wrongly, 
works  death.     If  the  heat  does  not  melt,  it  hardens. 

IV.  The  victory  of  Divinb  love.  Still,  in  spite  of  a  growing  waywardness,  the 
pity  of  God  pursues  the  wandering  sonl.  And  though  deceived  and  led  astray,  man 
travels  far  and  wanders  long,  God  "sees  his  ways;  he  stretches  forth  the  hand  of 
power  and  grace,  and  he  "  heals  him ; "  he  leads  him  home  and  comforts  him  with  the 
priceless  blessings  which  are  under  the  Father's  roof.  These  blessings  are :  1.  Recon- 
ciliation :  the  being  spiritually  healed,  being  restored  to  God  after  the  saddest  of  all 
separations — spiritual  distance  from  God.  2.  Peace  :  peace  offered  and  granted  to 
those  who  were  more  distant  and  also  to  those  less  far  removed  from  truth  and  righteous- 
ness and  purity — the  peace  of  conscious  acceptance.  3.  Praise :  "  the  fruit  of  the  lips," 
joyful  ascription  unto  him  that  redeemed  and  restored ;  the  daily  song  of  gratitude  that 
wells  up  from  a  heart  filled  with  gratitude  and  love. 

V.  A  POWERFUL  INCENTIVE  TO  RETURN.  Perhaps  it  may  be  taken  as  one  "  fruit  of 
the  lips"  that  the  healed  and  restored  soul  now  speaks  for  God  to  men;  now  becomes 
his  spokesman ;  now  teaches  transgressors  his  way  (Ps.  li.  12, 13).  And  one  convincing 
and  impressive  truth  which  a  home-brought  wanderer  can  enforce  better  than  an 
nnfallen  angel  is  the  hardness  of  the  transgressor's  road,  the  weariness  of  the  way  to 
him  who  is  leaving  God  for  the  far  country,  the  restlessness  of  a  heart  that  is  separated 
from  its  Divine  Source  and  Friend;  the  truth  that  the  mirth  of  unhallowed  enjoyment 
is  very  shallow  and  short-lived,  that  fast  on  the  heels  of  guilty  pleasure  come  pursuing 
pain  of  body  and  misery  of  soul ;  the  fact  that  there  is  no  peace  to  the  wicked,  no 
ksting  joy  to  any  one  who  has  abandoned  the  fountain  of  living  waters  for  the  broken 
cisterns  of  earth  and  time.  The  plaintive  cry  which  comes  from  the  aching  hearts  and 
troubled  lives  of  guilt  is  answered  by  one  voice  alone — by  that  of  him  who  stands 
before  all  generations  of  men,  and  says,  in  the  accents  of  sweet  and  sovereign  pity, 
"  Come  unto  me,  all  ye  that  labour  and  are  heavy  laden,  and  I  will  give  you  rest." — C. 

I 
Ver.  1. — Mercy  and  wrath  in  the  death  of  the  righteous.  Possibly  the  good  king 
Josiah  is  here  prophetically  referred  to.  His  untimely  death  seems  a  strange  dispensa- 
tion of  Providence  even  to  us  now.  Josiah's  case  may  be  taken  as  illustrating  the  general 
truth  which  is  thus  stated  by  Bishop  Wordsworth  :  "  Gfood  and  merciful  men,  who  are 
taken  away  in  the  midst  of  their  efforts  to  do  good  in  their  generation,  and  whose 
endeavours  appear  to  be  disowned  by  God,  and  to  be  blighted  and  withered  by  him,  may 
perhaps  seem  to  men  to  be  cut  off  by  a  violent  stroke  of  Divine  indignation,  and  may 
be  mourned  by  some  as  having  died  an  untimely  death ;  but  the  truth  is — which  these 
Scriptures  reveal — they  are  gently  gathered  by  God  in  love,  and  are  in  peace."  The 
terms  used  have  precise  significations.  The  "righteous"  means  "those  who  walk 
straight,  and  stand  upright."  An  honoured  pastor  lay  upon  his  dying  bed,  and  a 
member  of  his  congregation  stood  beside  it,  whose  business  ways  were  known  to  be 
somewhat  shifty.  Beckoning  him  to  bend  down  close  to  him,  the  pastor  solemnly  said 
these  few,  but  searching,  words,  "William,  gro.s*ra«grA</ "  "Mercifal  men"  are  men 
of  kindness ;  gracious  men,  who,  having  themselves  felt  the  loving-kindness  of  God, 
deal  kindly  with  their  fellow-men. 

L  MeROT  is   shown  in   sparing  the   righteous   from  t/OMINO  CALAMITIES.       We 

have  often  to  notice  how  graciously  the  death  of  our  friends  is  timed.  At  first  we  wonder 
why  they  were  taken  Just  then,  but  the  lapse  of  a  few  months  satisfies  us  that  they  were 
taken  "from  the  evil  to  come."  The  widow  is  removed  before  her  little  estate  is 
wrecked  by  some  inefficient  or  unfaithful  trustee.  The  honourable  business  man  is 
gathered  in  before  some  wrong-door  brings  disgrace  on  his  firm  which  would  have  broken 
his  heart.  Miithuselah  died  the  year  before  the  Flood ;  Augustine  a  little  before  the 
sacking  of  Hippo.    Pareus  just  before  the  taking  of  Heidelberg ;  Luther  a  little  before 


368  THE  BOOK  OP  THE  PROPHET  ISAIAH,    [oh.  lvh.  1— 2L 

the  wan  broke  out  in  Qermany.  We  have  known  beloved  ones  who  all  their  life  long 
prayed  that  they  might  not  be  spared  to  become  troublesome  to  anybody,  and  mercy 
called  them  away  almost  suddenly,  ere  bodily  powers  began  to  decay.  Most  graciously 
the  time,  the  place,  the  manner,  of  our  exit  from  earth  are  divinely  arranged  j  and  in  this 
matter  too  we  may  perfectly  trust. 

II.  Wrath  is  bhown  in  removing  the  babbibbs  to  oncomino  judgments.  Thig 
is  one  point  which  the  prophet  would  enforce.  The  death  of  good  men  should  be 
regarded  as  a  sign  that  calamity  is  at  hand.  Bighteousness  can  hold  baok  judgment, 
as  is  seen  in  Abraham's  pleading  for  Sodom.  Prayers  and  intercessions  can  hold  back 
judgment.  Then  the  removal  of  the  righteous  men  and  the  intercessors  removes 
barriers  and  lets  free  the  flood. — R.  T. 

Ver.  i. — Insult  of  good  men  is  insult  of  God,  "  The  righteous  dies,  and  is  at  rest ; 
but  ye,  what  will  ye  make  at  last  of  your  derision  of  the  righteous,  and  of  the  follies 
and  idolatries  wherein  ye  trust?  Nothing."  Matthew  Henry  says,  "  Mocking  the 
messengers  of  the  Lord  was  Jerusalem's  measure-filling  sin ;  for  what  was  done  to  them 
QoA  took  as  done  to  himself.  When  they  were  reproved  for  their  sins,  and  threatened 
with  the  judgments  of  God,  they  ridiculed  the  Word  of  God  with  the  rudest  and 
most  indecent  gestures  and  expressions  of  disdain.  They  sported  themselves  and  made 
themselves  merry  with  that  which  should  have  made  them  serious,  and  under 
which  they  should  have  humbled  themselves.  They  made  wry  mouths  at  the 
prophets,  and  drew  out  the  tongue,  contrary  to  all  the  laws  of  good  breeding;  nor 
did  they  treat  God's  servants  with  the  common  civility  with  which  they  would  have 
treated  a  gentleman's  servant  that  had  been  sent  to  them  on  an  errand."  Illustrations 
may  be  found  in  the  treatment  of  Isaiah  (see  ch.  xxviii.  7 — 15);  of  Jeremiah ;  and, 
above  all,  by  the  insults  Offered  to  the  Lord  Jesus  by  the  men  of  Jerusalem.  The 
"wide  mouth"  and  the  "drawn-out  tongue,"  are  the  natural  symbcis  of  derision  (see 
Fa,  XXXV.  21).  We  may  note  some  of  the  conditions  imder  which  the  messengers  of 
Gfod  are  likely  to  be  insulted  and  misunderstood. 

L  When  they  do  not  come  in  the  regulab  and  recognized  obdeb.  Qoi  has 
his  order  of  ministrants  in  every  a^e,  and  his  ordinary  messages  to  men  maybe  expected 
to  come  through  them :  patriarchs  in  one  age,  priests  in  another,  prej'ihets  in  yet 
another,  clergy  in  still  another.  And  all  due  honour  should  be  put  on  the  Divine 
Older  for  the  particular  time.  But  God  has  always  held  the  right  of  sending  messengers 
outside  the  order,  as  he  sends  comets  into  our  solar  system,  and  there  is  as  real  a  law 
for  the  sending  of  seemingly  erratic  messengers  as  of  the  seemingly  erratic  comets. 
But  there  is  always  the  disposition  in  those  who  belong  to  the  order,  and  the  attaches 
of  the  order,  to  reject  the  outside  man.  Compare  our  Lord's  disciples  saying  to  the 
Master, "  We  found  one  teaching  in  tliy  Name,  and  we  forbade  him,  because  he  followeth 
not  with  us."  The  questions  concerning  any  apparent  messenger  from  God,  which  we 
ought  to  ask,  are  these — Will  his  work  bear  the  test  of  God's  revealed  Word  ?  And 
does  God  seal  his  work  with  his  Divine  benediction?  To  reject  any  man's  work  which 
can  stand  this  dual  test  is  to  insult  God,  whose  messenger  he  certainly  is. 

n.  When  there  are  odditibs  in  the  man  himself  or  in  the  manner  of  deliveb- 
nto  ms  MESSAGE.  Just  as  we  have  established  the  notinn  that  there  must  be  an 
"order"  through  whom  Divine  me-sages  alone  can  come,  so  we  have  convinced  our- 
selves that  there  are  particular  styles  and  methods  in  which  alone  Divine  messages  do 
come.  So  if  a  message  is  not  to  pattern,  we  think  we  are  right  in  rejecting  it.  The 
personal  peculiarities  of  a  messenger  may  touch  the  humorous  faculty,  and  so  close 
men's  minds  and  hearts  against  the  reception  of  the  message.  But  this  is  to  insult  the 
messenger,  and  in  him  the  God  who  chose  him  and  sent  him  with  the  message.  We 
have  not  to  ask  what  a  man  is ;  but  we  have  to  ask — Is  he  of  God  ?  If  he  is,  we  must 
hear  him. 

ni.  When  the  messenoeb  makes  severe  demands.  Illustrate  from  Jonah  at 
Kineveh.  No  doubt  there  were  many  who  scorned  him  on  this  ground.  Also  see  the 
demand  of  Savonarola  which  led  to  the  great  burning  in  the  market-place  '^f  S'lorence. 
Many  of  the  wilder  spirits  of  Florence  did  jeer  at  him.  Men  in  every  n^b  have  pre- 
ferred the  prophets  who  prophesied  smooth  and  soft  things;  and  they  have  always 
been  disposed  to  reject  the  prophets  who  had  to  do  the  nobler  and  morv  '.«cessary  work 


OH.  Lvn.  1— 21.]    THE  BOOK  OP  THE   PROPHET  iSAlAH.  369 

of  prophesying  rough  things  and  hard  things.  Exactly  what  our  over-civilized  genera- 
tion needs  is  some  prophet  of  God,  who  will  tell  us  strongly,  plainly,  sternly,  what  God 
would  have  us  do.  But  of  this  we  may  be  quite  sure,  even  in  this  enlightened  nine- 
teenth century,  such  a  prophet  and  teacher  would  have  a  hard  time  of  it. 

IV.  When  the  message  gobs  against  the  fashion  op  the  age.  For  there  are 
fashions  in  thinking  and  religion,  as  well  as  in  manners  and  dress.  And  none  of  us 
like  to  be  out  of  the  thinking  or  reli<;ious  lashion.  But  fashions  may  become  slavery 
to  us,  and  degrade  us  as  slavery  always  does.  Let  a  man  of  God  come  and  show  us 
the  evils  into  which  fashions — mental  and  religious — have  brought  us,  and  we  hate  the 
man,  we  cry  out  against  him,  we  are  all  alarm,  because  we  have  deluded  ourselves  with 
the  notion  that  fashion  is  synonymous  with  truth.  Urge  that  we  are  bound  to  test 
every  public  witness,  and  decide  for  ourselves  whether  he  is  of  God.  If  he  is,  then  to 
neglect  his  message  is  to  sin  against  God,  and  to  insult  him  is  to  insult  God.-^B.  T. 

Ver.  6. — The  worship  of  stones.  "In  the  smooth  stones  of  the  valley  is  thy 
portion  .  .  .  even  to  them  hast  thou  poured  out  drink  offerings."  A  good  deal  of 
information  is  at  command  on  this  subject.  Illustrative  matter  will  be  found  in  Kitto'a 
'  Daily  Bible  Illustrations,'  vol.  '  Isaiah,'  p.  209.  Matthew  Arnold  sums  up  the 
matter  in  the  following  note :  "  The  worship  of  stones  is  a  very  early  form  of  idolatry,- 
and  originated,  probably,  in  the  veneration  paid  to  meteoric  stones — stones  which,  as 
the  people  said,  '  fell  down  from  heaven.'  But  the  worship  extended  to  other  stones 
also.  Traces  of  this  worship  occur  in  Genesis,  in  Jacob's  consecration  of  the  stones 
in  his  passage  by  Bethel  (Gen.  xxviii.  18).  The  Greeks,  too,  had  this  stone-worship. 
'In  the  earlier  times,'  says  the  Greek  traveller  Pausanias,  'all  the  Greeks  worshipped, 
in  place  of  images  of  the  gods,  undressed  stones.'  We  find  the  name  Bsetylia  given  to 
these  stones,  and  it  has  even  been  conjectured  that  this  name  comes  from  Bethel." 
Smooth  stones  (named  salagrams),  chiefly  from  the  river  Ganrfaki,  are  treated  as  sacred 
objects  by  the  Vaishnavas  all  over  North  India.  Dr.  Turner  writes,  "  I  have  several 
'  smooth  stones  of  the  stream  '  from  the  New  Hebrides,  which  were  used  as  idols,  aud 
have  heard  of  precisely  similar  stones  being  used  in  other  parts  of  the  Pacific."  At 
Inniskea,  off  the  coast  of  Mayo,  a  stone,  carefullj'  kept  wrapped  up  in  flannel,  used  to 
be  brought  out  at  certain  periods  to  be  adored ;  and  when  a  storm  arises,  this  god  is 
supplicated  to  send  a  wreck  on  their  coast!  It  is  narrated  that  there  is  a  stone  set  up 
to  the  south  of  St.  Columba's  Church,  in  the  island  of  Briska,  about  eight  feet 
high  and  two  feet  broari.  It  is  called  by  the  natives  the  hnwing-stone ;  for  when  the 
inhabitants  had  the  first  sight  of  the  church,  they  set  up  this  stone,  and  then  bowed, 
and  said  the  Lord's  Prayer.     'J'hree  points  may  be  illustrated. 

I.  God  is  offended  when  things  are  put  in  place  of  him.  This  is  the  coarser 
form  of  idolatry.  Mateiial  things  are  superstitiously  invested  with  powers,  and  become 
actual  idols. 

II.  God  is  offended  when  things  abe  used  to  repbesent  him.  This  is  the  refined 
form  of  idolatry  which  some  thinking  and  educated  persons  approve.  The  thing — stone 
or  figure — becomes  for  them  a  material  representation  of  the  invisible  God.  This  is 
offensive  because  of  the  limitations  it  puts  on  men's  conceptions  of  the  Divine  Being. 

III.  God  is  offended  when  things  abe  made  the  medium  fob  getting  to  hih. 
This  is  one  phase  of  modern  idolatry.  It  is  an  offence  because  the  essence  of  the  last, 
the  Christian,  revelation  is  that  each  individual  soul  can  have  direct  and  immediate 
access  to  God.     There  is  no  place  for  idol-mediators. — B.  T. 

Ver.  10. — The  weariness  of  sinful  ways.  Cheyne  thinks  the  first  reference  of  thia 
verse  is  to  the  ceaseless  quest  of  the  nation,  in  this  its  troublous  time,  for  help  and 
protection,  including,  of  course,  embassies  to  foreign  kings,  and  also  every  other  specimen 
of  untheocratio  policy.  "Nothing  could  convince  these  idolatrous  Jews  of  the  folly 
of  their  misplaced  trust  and  vain  confidence."  Barnes  gives  the  following  suggestive 
note  on  the  general  application  of  the  passage:  "This  is  a  striking  illustration  of  the 
conduct  of  men  in  seeking  happiness  away  from  God.  They  wander  from  object  to 
object;  they  become  weary  in  the  pursuit,  yet  they  do  not  abandon  it;  they  still  cling 
to  hope  though  often  repulsed,  and  though  the  world  gives  them  no  permanent  com- 
fort, though  wealth,  ambition,  gaiety,  and  vice  all  fikil  in  imparting  the  hftppiness 
I8AIAH — ^n.  2  ■ 


370  THE   BOOK    OF   THE    PROPHET   ISAIAH,     [ch.  Lvn.  1—21. 


which  they  sought,  yet  they  do  not  give  it  up  in  despair.  They  still  feel  that  it  is  to 
be  found  in  some  other  way  than  by  the  disagreeable  necessity  of  returning  to  God, 
and  they  wander  from  object  to  object,  and  from  land  to  land,  and  become  exhausted  in 
the  pursuit,  and  still  are  not  ready  to  say,  '  There  is  no  hope;  we  give  it  up  in  despair, 
and  we  will  now  seek  happiness  in  God.'"  Matthew  Henry  keenly,  ijf  somewhat 
quaintly,  says,  "  Prosperity  in  sin  is  a  great  bar  to  conversion  from  sin."  Henderson 
puts  in  a  good  sentence  the  immediate  and  local  association  of  the  verse :  "  The  idolatrous 
Jews  wearied  themselves  with  their  unhallowed  practices ;  but  finding  that  they  had 
not  entirely  exhausted  their  strength,  they  would  not  give  up  their  pursuits  as  hopeless, 
but  rather  emboldened  themselves  in  wickedness." 

I.  It  IS  A  FACT — sniFuii  WATS  DO  WEARY  US.  Illustrate  the  pursuit  of  pleasure  by 
means  of  self-indulgence.  Or  the  "quest  of  the  chief  good"  on  purely  human  lines 
(illustrate  this  from  the  Book  of  Ecclesiastes).  Or  the  mastery  of  evil  by  effort  of  self- 
will.  Or  the  effort  to  get  eternal  life  by  our  own  doings  and  strivings.  In  every  case 
we  are  soon  left  wearied  out  and  sick  at  heart. 

II.  This  fact  men  abb  slow  to  eecoqnize.  They  will  not  say, "There  is  no  hope." 
By  all  kinds  of  delusions  men  persuade  themselves  to  try  once  again.  The  last  tmng 
men  will  give  up  is  hope  in  themselves  and  their  own  self-schemes. 

■  III.  Man's  chance  oomes  only  when  he  is  humble  enough  to  BEOoamzE  this 
FACT.  He  must  be  willing  to  say,  "  Myself  I  cannot  save."  Then,  turning  to  God,  he 
will  say,  "  Thou  canst  save,  and  thou  alone." — B.  T. 

Ver.  11. — Wrong  thoughts  of  God  keep  men  from  repentamee.  Gk)d  pleads,  saying, 
"  Who  filled  thee  with  dread,  or  of  whom  wast  thou  afraid,  when  thou  provedst  false, 
and  didst  not  remember  me  ? "  Some  mental  creation  of  God,  or  some  false  teaching 
concerning  God,  occupied  the  thought  and  the  heart,  and  kept  the  man  of  Israel  from 
feeling  all  those  persuasions  to  repentance  which  come  from  the  full  and  the  worthy 
knowledge  of  him.  Compare  the  expressions,  "Not  knowing  that  the  goodness  of  God 
leadeth  thee  to  repentance ; "  "  This  is  life  eternal,  to  know  thee,  the  only  true  God, 
and  Jesus  Christ  whom  thou  hast  sent."  Some  think  that  the  allusion  is  to  the  help- 
less idols  in  whose  aid  the  people  vainly  trusted.  Matthew  Arnold  paraphrases  thus : 
"How  could  thy  calamities,  and  the  fear  of  thy  Babylonian  tyrant,  make  thee  so 
superstitious  and  forgetful  ?  "  Illustrating  the  earlier  method  of  interpreting  the  verse, 
it  may  be  shown  how  wrong  and  imperfect  thoughts  of  God  are  still  the  great  hin- 
drances in  men's  way.     These  wrong  thoughts  come  either  as — 

I.  Ceeations  of  men's  own  fears.  God  too  often  is  not  to  men  what  he  really  is, 
but  what  he  seems  to  be  when  seen  through  their  fears  and  conscience  of  sin.  So 
a  revelation  was  needed  which  could  assure  men  of  God's  pitying  mercy  and  for^ving 
love.  When  men,  conscious  of  transgression  and  fearing  judgment,  try  to  paint  God, 
we  cannot  wonder  that  their  picture  should  be  untrue  and  unworthy.  The  thing 
of  which  it  is  so  difficult  to  persuade  sinners  is  that  there  is  forgiveness  with  God,  and 
that  he  delighteth  in  mercy. 

II.  Misconceptions  of  theological  teachings.  There  is  always  the  danger  to  be 
guarded  against  that  the  exigencies  of  a  system  make  us  fashion  a  suitable  God,  rather 
chan  try  to  recognize  in  all  simplicity  the  God  who  has  been  revealed.  Therefore,  in 
our  day,  so  m;iny  resist  the  teachings  that  are  known  as  Calvinistic.  The  hard,  legal 
Deity  of  that  system  is  felt  to  represent  most  imperfectly  and  unworthily  the  Father  of 
Jesus,  and  Saviour  of  the  world.  But  we  must  understand  that  the  false  representations 
are  more  often  found  in  the  statements  of  those  who  attempt  to  expound  a  system  than 
in  the  system  itself. 

III.  As  ONE-SIDED  VISIONS  OF  TRUTH  WHICH  NBBDB  TO  BE  BEEN  AS  A  WHOLE.      This 

mistalie  is  often  pointed  out  in  connection  with  the  two  attributes  of  "mercy"  and 
"justice."  The  modern  tendency  to  dwell  on  the  milder  features  of  the  Divine  natinre, 
and  to  exclude  the  sterner  ones,  is  perilously  keeping  men  from  that  repsntonos  which 
is  the  only  open  highway  to  the  eternal  life. — ^B.  T. 

Yer.  15. — The  new  test  of  religion.  "I  dwell  .  .  .  also  in  him  that  Is  contrito,  and 
of  a  lowly  spirit."  The  earlier  test  of  religion  had  been  formal,  and  precise  obedience 
to  all  the  claims  and  conditions  of  the  Jehovah-covenant ;  the  exact  keeping  of  eveiy 


OH.  Lvu.  1— 21.]    THE  BOOK  OF  THE  PROPHET  ISAIAH.  371 


ritual,  social,  and  national  requirement.  St.  Paul  states  the  old  test  thus:  "The  man 
that  doeth  them  shall  live  in  them."  It  was  the  work  of  the  prophets  to  introduce  the 
new  moral  test,  and  prepare  the  way  for  the  higher  spiritual  test  of  Christianity.  The 
later  prophets  even  venture  to  be  severe  on  mere  ritual  obedience,  as  if,  in  the  sight  of 
God,  it  had  become  quite  worthless.  They  intimate  that  God  searches  hearts,  looks 
for  right  motives,  asks  not  for  what  a  man  has,  save  as  the  man  can,  through  his  gifts, 
gim  himself  to  God.  The  "  broken  and  contrite  heart "  are  especially  presented  because 
this  stands  in  most  severe  contrast  with  the  self-satisfaction  and  self-will  of  unre- 
generate  man.  If  a  man  is  humble,  sensible  of  sin  and  sorrow  for  sin,  God  knows  he 
is  such  a  man  as  can  be  made  a  monument  of  Divine  grace.  (Another  treatment  of 
this  theme  will  be  found  under  oh.  Ixvi.  2.)  It  has  been  said,  "  God  has  three  sorts 
of  dwellings :  first,  in  the  highest ;  second,  in  the  sanctuary ;  third,  in  humble  hearts. 
The  first  dwelling  is  the  universalis  prsesentia,  the  universal  presence,  by  which  he 
fills  all  (Jer.  xxiii.  24);  but  there  he  is  too  high  and  incomprehensible  for  us.  The 
second  is  gratiosa,  the  gracious  presence,  by  which  he  lets  himself  be  found  in  the  Word 
and  sacraments,  and  also  comes  finally  to  us,  and  makes  his  dwelling  in  our  hearts." 
And  the  test  is  whether  our  hearts  are  such  as  he  can  make  his  dwelling  in.  The 
three  tests  are — 

L  Does  a  mah  strictly  obey  and  keep  all  bitdal  and  social  injunctions? 
That  test  may  suffice  for  children,  and  child-ages  of  the  world ;  for  we  must  begin 
moral  education  by  requiring  obedience  to  formal  commands. 

II.  Is   A   MAN  IN  A  EIGHT  STATE  OF  MIND   AND  HEART  ?      Suoh  a  State  must  include 

reverence  before  a  God  so  great;  thankfulness  to  a  God  so  kind;  humbleness  through  a 
sense  of  shortcoming  before  a  God  who  makes  such  claims;  and  p  nitence  through 
eonviction  of  sin  against  a  God  so  holy. 

III.  Does  a  man  accept  God's  gift  of  pabdon  and  life  in  his  Son  Christ  Jksus  ? 
"He  that  believeth  on  the  Son  hath  life:  he  that  belieiethnot  on  the  Son  of  Gud  hath 
not  life."  We  cannot  be  tested  only  by  the  two  first  tests;  the  third  searches,  and 
perhaps  condemns  us. — R.  X 

Vers.  20,  21. — The  unrest  of  the  wicked.  "But  the  wicked  are  like  the  sea  that  is 
tossed  up,  for  it  cannot  rest,  and  its  waters  toss  up  mire  and  rand"  (Oheyne).  Comp. 
Jude  13  for  the  figure.  It  is  curious  to  note  the  marked  contrast  between  our  ideas 
and  sentiments  concerning  the  sea,  and  those  of  ancient  times  and  Eastern  lands.  To 
us  it  is  the  beautiful  shining  sea,  and  many  of  us  feel  that  we  must  see  it  at  least  once 
•  year.  To  us  it  is  the  most  soothing  and  calming  of  Nature's  influences,  and  we 
sympathize  with  Bonar  as  he  sings— 

"Bnmmer  ocean,  how  Til  miss  thee^ 

Miss  the  thunder  of  thy  roEur, 
Hiss  the  music  of  thy  ripple. 

Miss  thy  sorrow-soothing  shore. 
Bummer  ocean,  how  I'll  miss  thee, 

When  '  the  sea  shall  be  no  more '  I " 

But  to  Eastern  people  generally  in  ancient  times,  and  to  Israelites  In  particular,  the  sea 
was  a  great  dread.  It  was  the  separator,  the  engulpher  of  life,  the  restless  storm- 
darkened,  storm-tossed,  wailing  sea ;  suggestive  only  of  foulness,  unrest,  and  peril.  So  it 
was  a  type  of  the  wicked  man  in  ways,  and  with  applications,  which  we  find  it  most 
difficult  to  realize.  But  the  unresting  character  of  the  sea  does  impress  us.  There  is 
no  peace  to  the  heaving,  swirling,  wind-driven,  tide-drawn  sea. 

I.  These  is  no  peace  to  the  wicked  because,  in  his  way,  he  can  never  get  it. 
His  way  is  breaking  up  the  Divine  order :  rest  can  never  come  that  way.  His  way 
is  striving  with  everything  that  makes  fair  promises,  apart  from  God :  rest  can  never- 
come  that  way.  His  way  is  to  seek  for  rest  in  things  that  he  can  possess,  not  in  the 
character  which  he  can  be  :  rest  can  never  come  that  wiiy.  God's  world  was  made  for 
good  men,  and  it  will  yield  its  best  treasures  to,  and  satisfy,  nobody  "but  the  good. 

II.  ThEEB    18   NO   PE'ACE   TO    THE   WICKED    BECAUSE,   ON    HIS    CONDITIONS,    GoD    WILL 

BEVEB  GIVE  IT.  And  peace  for  man  is  the  gift  of  God.  &.>,  speaking  for  God,  Jesus 
said,  "  Peace  I  leave  with  you,  my  peace  I  give  unto  you."     The  wicked  want  to  buy 


372 


THE   BOOK   OF   THE   PROPHET   ISAIAH,     [oh.  lvih.  1—14. 


it.  Gt>d  does  not  sell  it.  The  wicked  would  consume  it  on  their  lusts  if  they  obtained 
it.  God  will  never  allow  his  gifts  to  be  abused.  The  wicked  are  not  prepared  to  call 
that  peace  which  God  calls  peace ;  so  he  will  wait  until  they  come  to  a  right  mind. 
Show,  in  contrast,  that  we  have  "  peace  with  God  through  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ " — 
a  heart-peace  that  works  itself  out  into  all  sacred  restings  of  life  and  relationship. — ^R.  T. 


Sbotion  YI.    Practical  Instrttotions  and  WABNiNas,  followed  bt  a  Confession 

AND  A  PbOUIBE  (oH.   LVm.,    LIS.). 

EXPOSITION. 


CHAPTBB  LVin. 

Vers.  1 — 12. — Formalism  rebukbd  and 
Instructions  given  with  Eespeot  to  Fast- 
IKO.  As  in  the  last  section,  so  here,  the 
prophet's  eye  seems  to  rest  upon  his  con- 
temporaries rather  than  upon  the  exiles; 
and  to  note  the  vices  of  the  time,  which 
have  a  general  resemblance  to  those  re- 
buked in  eh.  i.  The  whole  Law  seems  to  be 
in  force,  and  the  people  to  make  a  show  of 
keeping  it,  and  to  complain  that  they  are 
■ot  properly  rewarded  for  their  reJigious- 
Bess.  God  tears  the  mask  from  their  face, 
and  shows  the  difference  between  true  re- 
ligion and  the  pretence  of  it. 

Ver.  1. — Cry  aloud ;  literally,  ery  from  the 
throat;  "k  plein  gosier,"  as  Cw-vih  says. 
The  command  is  addressed  to  the  prophet 
by  Jehovah,  who  will  have  him  warn  the 
people  in  such  sort  as  to  compel  their  atten- 
tion. Lift  np  thy  Toioe  like  a  trumpet 
(comp.  Hos.  viii.  1 ;  Joel  ii^  1).  The 
trumpet  gives  a  note  of  alarm.  Show  my 
people  their  transgression ;  i.e.  "  show  tb^a 
how  they  are  especially  offending  me  at 
this  time  "  (see  Micah  ill.  8) 

Ver.  2. — They  seek  me  daily,  and  delight 
to  know  my  ways  (compare  the  picture  drawn 
tn  oh.  i.  11 — 15).  We  have  there  exactly 
the  same  representation  of  a  people  honour- 
ing God  with  their  lips,  but  wliose  hearts 
are  far  from  him — zealous  in  all  the  outward 
forms  of  religion^  even  making  "many 
prayers"  (ch.  i.  15),  but  yet  altogether  an 
oifence  to  God.  They  are  not  conscious 
hypocrites — quite  the  reverse ;  they  are  bent 
on  "doing  rigjjteousuess,"  on  not  forsaking 
God's  ordinance,  on  continually  "  approach- 
ing" him;  but  they  are  wholly  without  a 
proper  sense  of  what  religion  is — they  make 
it  a  matter  of  outward  observance,  and  do 
not  understand  that  it  consists  in  the 
devotion  of  the  heart.  That  did  righteous- 
ness, and  forsook  not ;  rather,  that  hath  done 
righteousness,  and  hath  not  forsaken.  The 
righteousness  is,  of  course,  forensic  legal 
righteousness — the  offering  of  the  appointed 


Bacriflces,  the  abstaining  from  andean 
meats,  the  avoidance  of  external  defilement, 
the  payment  of  vows,  the  observance  of  the 
one  appointed  fast,  and  the  like.  They  ask 
of  me  the  ordinances  of  justice.  Either 
''they  claim  at  God's  hands  righteous 
judgments  on  their  enemies"  (Delitzsch); 
or  "  they  demand  of  God  a  fidelity  to  his 
covenant  engagements  correspondent  to 
their  own  (assumed)  fidelity  to  theirs." 
They  take  delight  in  approaching  to  God. 
So  the  LXX.,  the  Vulgate,  Calvin,  Vitringa, 
and  Kay.  Others  prefer  to  render,  "thLy 
desire  the  approach  of  God"  (Knobel, 
Delitzsch,  Cheyne) ;  ».e.  they  desire  that  he 
will  come  to  help  them  against  their  foes. 

Ver.  3. — Wherefore  have  we  fasted,  say 
they,  and  thou  seest  not?  The  fasting 
spoken  of  is  probably  that  ot  the  great  Day 
of  Atonement,  the  only  fasting  commanded 
in  the  Law  (Lev.  xvi.  29,  31).  Other  fasts 
were  fmm  time  to  time  appointed  by  civil 
or  eoulesiastical  authority  (1  Kings  xxi.  9. 
12;  2  Ohrou.  xx.  3;  Joel  i.  14;  ii.  12,  15); 
but  they  were  rare,  and  do  not  seem  to  be 
here  intended.  Still,  the  lesson  is  general, 
and  would  apply  to  all  occasions  of  fasting. 
The  Jews  of  the  time  expected,  it  would 
seem,  some  special  definite  result,  in  the 
way  of  victory  or  relief,  to  follow  from  their 
observance  of  the  Atonement  fast.  As  it 
did  not  follow,  they  regarded  themselves  as 
ill  used,  and  accordingly  made  complaint. 
Their  feeling^s  approa<;hed  to  those  of  the 
Vedic  wor.-hippers,  who  regarded  their  re- 
ligious observatices  as  "not  merely  pleasing 
tt*  god  who  was  the  object  of  them,  but  as 
laying  him  under  a  bin  ling  obligation,  and 
almost  compelling  him  to  grant  the  requests 
of  the  worshipper"  ('Religions  of  the 
Ancient  World,'  pp.  143,  144).  Afflicted 
our  soul.  These  are  the  exact  words  of 
Lev.  xvi.  29,  31,  by  which  the  fast  of  the 
great  Day  of  Atonement  was  instituted. 
And  thou  takest  no  knowledge ;  rather,  no 
notice.  In  the  day  of  your  fast  ye  find 
pleasure.  Delitzsch  and  Mr.  Cheyne  render 
"  ye  carry  on  business,"  which  accords  better 
with  the  clause  which  follows.  The  great 
Day  of  Atonement  was,  like  the  sabbath, 
a  day  on  which  no  work  was  to  be  done 


OH.  tvin.  1— 14,]    THE  BOOK  OP  THE  PEOPHET  ISAIAH. 


373 


(Lev.  xvi  29).  The  Jews,  while  priding 
themselTes  on  theii  obBervance  of  the  day, 
did  not  really  observe  it  in  this  particular. 
And  exaot  all  your  lalionrs;  i.e.  "require  of 
your  servants  and  subordinates  all  the 
serTices  that  they  have  to  render  on  other 
days."  Days  of  religious  observance,  even 
under  the  Law,  were  always  intended  to  be 
days  of  kindly  forbearance  towards  the  poor, 
of  the  remission  of  burdens,  ot  even  of  the 
actual  giving  of  relief. 

Yer.  4. — ^Ye  fast  for  strife  and  debate. 
Delitzsch  explains, "  When  fasting,  th^  are 
doubly  irritable  and  ill  tempered;  and  this 
leads  to  quarrelling  and  strife,  even  to 
striking  with  angry  fists."  This  is  quite  a 
possible  explanation.  Or  there  may  have 
been  two  parties,  one  for,  the  other  against, 
fasting;  and  those  who  practised  fasting 
may  have  done  it,  as  some  preached  Christ, 
"of  envy  and  strife"  (Phil,  i  15) — ^to  pro- 
voke the  opposite  side.  Ye  shall  not  fast  as 
ye  do  this  day,  to  make  your  voice  to  be 
heard  on  high;  «'.«.  "ye  must  not  fast  as  ye 
do  at  present,  if  ye  would  have  your  voices 
heard  in  heaven."  God  will  not  hear  the 
prayer  of  which  such  a  fast  is  the  accom- 
paniment. 

Ver.  5. — ^Is  it  snob  a  fast  that  I  have 
ohosen,  etc  7  Do  you  suppose  that  such  can 
be  the  fast  commanded  by  me  in  the  Law — 
a  fast  which  is  expressly  called  "  a  day  for 
a  man  to  afflict  his  soul"?  Is  afflicting 
one's  soul  simply  bowing  down  one's  head 
as  a  bulrush,  and  making  one's  couch  on 
sackcloth  and  ashes?  Surely  it  is  much 
more  than  this.  (On  the  employment  of 
"sackcloth  and  ashes"  in  fasting,  see  Esth. 
iv.  3;  Dan.  ix.  3;  Jonah  iii.  6.) 

Yer.  6.— Is  not  this  the  fast  that  I  have 
chosen?  This  passage,  as  Dr.  Kay  observes, 
"stands  like  a  homily  for  the  Day  of 
Atonement."  Bnch  homilies  are  found  in 
the  uninspired  Jewish  writings  ('  Taanith,' 
ii  1;  'Nedarim  babli,'  p.  10,  a,  etc.),  and 
are  conceived  very  much  in  the  same  spirit. 
The  Jews  <»11  the  true  fast  "  the  fasting  of 
the  heart"  To  loose  the  bands  of  wicked- 
ness. To  set  &ee  those  whom  wicked  persons 
have  wrongfully  imprisoned  or  entangled. 
To  undo  &e  heavy  burdens;  literally,  to 
untie  the  tJumgs  ^  the  yoke.  The  liberation 
of  a  man's  slaves,  or  of  Jews  captive  among 
the  heathen  (Neh.  v.  8%  is  probably  in- 
tended. To  let  the  oppressed  (literally,  the 
hmieei)  go  free.  Bemission  of  debts  and 
restoratfen  of  pledges  (Neh.  x.  31;  Kzek. 
zviiL  7)  ase,  perhaps,  the  acts  pointed  at 

Yer.  T.— Is  it  not  to  deal  thy  bread  to  the 
hungry?  In  the  early  Christian  Church 
i^msgiTiag  waa  aonneoted  with  fasting  hy 
2aM(DreHerk'Pate.Apost,'p.493).  It  was 
«Im  aoeept«d  at  *  Mccal  auom  that  "  fast- 
tog  tmitmm  ««•  flte  wings  of  j^yvt," 


Cast  out;  or,  homeleis  {hniyavs,  LXX.). 
That  thou  hide  not  thyself  from  thine  own 
flesh.  Their  "  flesh  "  were  not  merely  their 
near  kindred,  but  their  countiymen  generally 
(see  Neh.  v.  5). 

Yer.  8.— Then.  When  thou  hast  taken  this 
advice  to  heart,  and  adopted  it,  and  made  it 
the  rule  of  thy  conduct.  Upon  such  a 
change  in  thee,  all  good  things  shall  follow. 
Thou  shalt  have  no  more  to  complain  of 
unanswered  prayers  or  covenant  promises 
left  in  abeyance  (see  the  comment  on  vers. 
2  and  3).  ShaU  thy  light  break  forth;  ije. 
thy  glorious  time  shall  begin  (eomp.  oh.  Ix. 
1).  Thine  health — ^rather,  thine  healing ;  the 
"healing  of  thy  bruise,"  or  thy  recovery 
from  the  low  estate  to  which  thy  sins  have 
brought  thee  down — shall  spring  forth 
speedily ;  t'.e.  shall  soon  manifest  itself;  and 
the  result  will  be  twofold:  (1)  thy  own 
righteousness  will  go  before  thee — ^will  be, 
as  it  were,  thy  vanguard ;  and  (2)  The  glory 
of  the  Lord;  i.e.  the  glory  which  he  will 
confer  upon  thee,  will  follow  th&e  up,  and 
be,  as  it  were,  thy  rearguard  (comp.  ch. 
Iii.  12). 

Yer.  9. — ^If  thou  take  away  from  the 
midst  of  thee  the  yoke  (comp.  ver.  6),  The 
putting  forth  of  Uie  finger.  The  pointing  of 
the  finger  at  any  one  in  scorn.  And  speak- 
ing vanity;  rather,  speaking  evU,  or  plotting 
evil,  against  others. 

Ver.  10. — ^If  thou  draw  out  thy  soul  to  the 
hungty;  t.e.  not  merely  giving  him  bread, 
but  giving  him  sympathy  and  compassion 
with  it.  Then  sh^  thy  light  rise  in 
obscurity  (comp.  Ps.  oxii  4,  "Unto  the 
godly  there  riseth  up  light  in  the  dark- 
ness ; "  and  see  above,  ver.  8). 

Yer.  11. — The  Lord  shall  guide  thee  con- 
tinually ;  t'.e.  "  direct  thee  in  all  thy  paths — 
teach  thee  the  way  that  thou  shouldst  walk 
in."  In  drought.  In  time  of  spiritual  de- 
pression and  weariness.  Hake  fat  thy 
bones ;  t.e.  sustain  thy  strength.  Thou  shalt 
be  like  a  watered  garden  (comp.  Jer.  xxxi. 
12). 

Yer.  12.— They  that  shall  be  of  thee  shaU 
build  the  old  waste  places.  Thy  descend- 
ants shall  restore  all  that  has  fallen  into 
decay  in  Israel,  whether  it  be  cities  or 
customs.  They  shall  restore  "  breaches  "  of 
every  kind,  and  bring  back  the  old  paths 
for  thee  to  walk  in.  The  restoration  of  the 
mined  cities  of  Judah  may  be  glanced  at, 
but  is  far  from  exhausting  the  writer's 
meaning  (eomp.  eh.  Ixi.  4). 

Yezs.  13, 14. — A  Stbioc  Obsertasob  or 
THE  Sabbath  enjoined.  While  the  fasting 
•f  the  day  oaly  required  to  be  spiritualized, 
the  sabbath  observance  needed  both 
sjuritnaliziDg  and  increased  stricbiees. 
From  2  Chnm.  xxxvi  M  w  learn  that  th« 


374 


THE    BOOK  OP  THE  PROPHET  ISAIAH,    [oh.  i.vin.  1—14. 


sabbatical  years  had  been  little  obserred 
during  the  later  Jewish  kingdom;  and  it 
would  seem  from  the  present  passage  (oomp. 
Jer.  xvii.  21 — 23)  that  even  the  observance 
of  tlie  sabbath  itself  liad  been  neglected. 
Not  timt  the  neglect  was  total.  The  sacri- 
fices proper  to  the  sabbath  were  duly 
offered — the  "solemn  assembly''  was  duly 
called  and  attended  (ch.  i.  13);  but  during 
the  rest  of  the  day  business  flowed  In  its 
usual  course — ^the  complete  sanctifioation  of 
the  entire  day  was  set  aside.  We  find  a 
similar  laxity  prevalent  after  the  retnm 
from  the  Captivity  (Neh.  i.  31 ;  xiii.  15, 16). 
Ver.  13.— If  thou  turn  away  thy  foot  from 
the  sabtath  ;  t.e.  treat  it  with  reverence,  as  if 
it  were  "  holy  ground  "  (Exod.  iii.  5;  Prov.  iv. 
27).  Prom  doing  thy  pleasure ;  rather, /rom 
doing  thy  bv,siness — the  same  expression  as  in 
ver.  3.  It  is  by  "  business, "  not  by  pleasure, 
that  the  sabbiith  was  polluted  both  in  the 
time  of  Jeremiah  (xvii.  21— 23)  and  of  Nehe- 
miah  (x.  31,  etc.).  And  call  the  sabbath  a 
delight.  This  is  the  spiritualization  of  the 
sal  ibath — "  to  call "  and  feel  it  "  a  delight," 
a  real  satisfaction  to  the  soul,  not  a  weari- 
ness (Amos  viii.  5),  as  it  was  to  many.  And 
Shalt  honour  him ;  rather,  and  shall  honour 
it;  i.e.  the  sabiiath,  wliieh  is  made  masculine 
here,  as  in  ch  Ivi.  2  The  sabbath  was  to  be' 
honoured  by  men  uot  pnrsning  their  own 
ordinary  ways,  or  engaging  in  their  regular 
business,  or  even  carrying  on  their  ordinary 
everyday  talk.  Literally,  the  command  is, 
not  to  "spet^  worda;"  but  no  Jews  were 


ever  inch  strict  Sabbatarians  as  to  understand 
this  as  prohibiting  all  speech  on  the  sabbath. 
gome  have  held  that  sabbatical  talk  should 
be  scanty,  limited,  restrained  as  much  as 
possible;  but  even  for  this  there  is  no 
warrant.  It  is  the  quality,  rather  than  the 
quantity,  of  the  words  uttered  that  is  of  leal 
importance. 

Yer.  14.— Then  shalt  thon  delight  thyself 
in  the  Lord.  Then  shall  communion  with 
Jehovah  become  a  real  pleasure  to  thee. 
The  acts  of  worship  shall  not  be  done  merely 
from  a  sense  of  duty,  because  commanded, 
but  because  they  are  congenial  to  the  soul 
of  the  worshipper.  A  right  use  of  the 
sabbath  will  help  to  form  in  men  habits  of 
devotion,  which  will  make  religion  a  jojr 
and  a  delight  to  them.  I  wiU  cause  thee  to 
ride  npon  the  high  places  of  the  earth;  t.«. 
"I  will  give  thee  a  prominent  position  in 
the  earth,  and  cause  thee  to  occnpy  its  high 
places,  and  bear  rule  over  many  nations." 
Something  more  than  a  "taking  triumphal 
possession  of  Palestine  "  is  evidently  pointed 
at  (see  Deut.  zzxiL  13).  And  feed  thee 
with  the  heritage  of  Jacob  thy  fother.  The 
world  itself  was  the  "heritage  of  Jacob," 
since  in  him  and  his  seed  "  all  the  families 
of  the  earth  were  to  be  blessed"  (Gen. 
xxviii.  14).  Israel,  having  laid  aside  its 
formalism,  and  turned  to  God  sincerely, 
keeping  fast  and  sabbath  as  God  would 
have  them  kept,  not  in  the  letter,  but  in  the 
spirit,  would  enter  upon  the  promised  heri- 
tage, and  occupy  the  position  originally 
assigned  to  it.  Israel's  rejection  of  the 
gospel  made  the  mixed  Christian  Ohnioh 
the  inheritress  of  tiie  old  piomiaei. 


HOMILETIOS. 

Vers.  3 — 7. — Rightful  and  vnrongfidfastimg  need  to  he  eartfkdty  dMinguhhed.  Among 
wrong  kinds  of  fasting  may  be  noticed  the  tbllowing. 

I.  FuBELT  FOBMAL  FASTiNQ  IS  WBONa.  The  fasting  that  consists  in  mere  abstinence 
from  food,  without  any  accompaniment  of  prayer  or  meditation  or  almsgiving,  has 
in  it  nothing  religious,  and  is  an  indifferent  act,  unless  it  be  viewed  as  in  some  sort  a 
pious  exerci-se.  Viewed  in  this  light,  it  is  a  delusion  and  a  snare — an  encouragement 
to  men  to  make  all  their  religion  formal,  and  to  trust  in  mechanical  acts  as  having 
a  power  to  justify  and  to  save.  That  which  was  indifferent  in  itself  becomes  wrong 
through  the  ill  results  to  which  it  leads. 

II.  Fasting  fob  ostentation'b  bake  is  still  mobb  wbono.  In  the  time  of  our 
Lord's  ministry  there  were  persons  among  the  Jews  who,  when  they  fasted,  purposely 
made  themselves  "  of  a  sad  countenance,  that  they  might  appear  unto  men  to  fast " 
(Matt.  vL  16).  Their  sole  object  was  to  attract  attention,  and  obtain  a  reputation  for 
asceticism  in  religion  beyond  their  contemporaries.  They  looked  to  making  a  gain  out 
of  godliness,  and  were  so  far  successful  that  our  Lord  says,  "  They  had  their  reward." 
Men  accounted  them  holier  than  others,  and  respected  them  accordingly,  whereas  theii 
ustentatious  fasting  deserved  no  respect. 

III.  Fasting  fob  stbife  and  debate  is  also  wbong.  Wherever  the  practice  stirs 
up  "strife  and  debate,"  it  is  for  men  to  ask  themselves  whether  such  "strife  and 
debate  "  are  their  iaceatives  for  maintaining  it  or  no.    If  they  fast  for  other,  sufficimtii 


OH.  Lvin.  1— 14.]    THE   BOOK  OF   THE   PROPHET  ISAIAH.  376 

reasons,  it  may  well  be  that  there  is  no  call  upon  them  to  relinquish  the  practice, 
beoan^B  it  calls  forth  opjiosition — even  violent  and  bitter  opposition.  Christ  declared 
that  he  "  came  not  to  bring  peace  on  earth,  but  a  sword  "  (Matt.  x.  34).  Whatever 
is  good  is  sure  to  be  evil  spolien  of.  But,  on  the  other  hand,  opposition  may  be 
courted,  may  be  the  real  end  and  aim  of  those  who  head  the  movement.  The  Jews  in 
Isaiah's  time  "fasted  lor  strife  and  debate;"  it  is  not  impossible  that  Christiana  may 
do  80  now.  But  if  they  do,  this  is  certainly  not  such  a  fast  as  is  acceptable  to  the 
Almighty,  or  such  as  will  cause  the  voices  of  those  who  keep  it  to  be  heard  on  high. 

Rightful  fasting — such  fastiiiK  as  both  the  Old  and  the  New  Testaments  allow  and 
require — has  also  certain  tolerably  distinct  characteristics. 

I.  Rightful  fastino  must  be  unostentatious.  "  Thou,  when  thou  fastest,"  says 
our  blessed  Lord,  "  anoint  thy  head,  and  wash  thy  face,  that  thou  appear  not  unto 
men  to  fast."  There  must  be  no  desire  to  obtain  the  praise  of  men  by  the  observance  ; 
there  must  be  no  parade  of  it ;  so  far  as  possible,  it  must  be  done  "  in  secret."  Then, 
and  then  only,  will  the  "Father,  which  seeth  in  secret,  reward  it  openly"  (Matt.  vi. 
17,  18). 

II.  Rightful  fastino  must  be  not  mebely  outward,  but  also  inwakd.  "  Is  not 
this  the  fast  that  I  have  chosen  V  to  loose  the  bands  of  wickedness,"  etc.  ?  Unless 
fasiing  be  with  a  spiritual  object  and  accompanied  by  distinctly  spiritual  acts,  it  is 
absolutely  vain  and  idle.  Its  natural  spiritual  concomitants  are  (1)  repentance  (1 
Kings  xxi.  27;  Neh.  ix.  1,  2;  Joel  ii.  12,  13;  Jonah  ii.  5 — 10,  etc.);  (2)  prayer 
(Dan.  ix.  3  ;  Joel  ii.  17);  (3)  almsgiving,  and  other  acts  of  charity  and  mercy  towards 
our  fellow-men  (ch.  Iviii.  5 — 7).  To  neglect  such  acts,  and  to  regard  the  mere  opus 
operatum  of  fasting  as  haviug  any  spiritual  efficacy,  is  a  most  dangerous  delusion,  and 
one  akin  to  the  heresy  of  Montanus. 

Ver.  13. — Rightful  and  wrongful  keeping  of  the  sabbath  need  to  he  distinguished. 
I.  The  more  worldly  among  the  Jews  were  inclined  to  a  mere  perfunctory  keeping  of 
tie  sabbath.  They  shut  up  men's  religious  duties  on  the  day  within  the  corners  of  the 
Levitical  enactments ;  and  considered  that,  if  the  legal  sacrifices  were  offered,  and  the 
"  holy  convocation  "  held  and  duly  attended,  the  rest  of  the  day  might  be  employed 
exactly  as  they  pleased.  They  pursued  their  secular  occupations  on  the  sabbath  day 
with  all  freedom — bought  and  sold,  carried  their  corn,  trod  the  wine-press,  conveyed 
commodities  from  place  to  place,  and  engaged  in  every  form  of  trafBc  and  merchamlise 
(Nell.  xiii.  15,  16).  This  was  the  lowest  theory  of  sabbath-observance  propounded  by 
any,  and  it  received  direct  and  severe  condemnation  from  Jeremiah  (xvii.  21 — 23) 
and  Nehemiah  (xiii.  15,  16). 

IT.  A  second  form  of  observance  added  to  the  Levitical  enactments  with  respect  to 
sacrifices  and  the  "holy  convocation,"  an  abstinence  during  the  rest  of  the  day  from  work 
of  every  sort — an  abstinence  which  was  sometimes  puslied  to  excess,  as  when  it  was 
interpreted  to  forbid  self-defence  in  war  (1  Maco.ii.  34 — 38).  These  religionists  were 
content  to  remain  in  a  negation,  and,  so  long  as  they  preserved  the  sabbatical  rest 
unimpaired,  were  fully  satisfied  in  their  consciences.  Something  of  the  same  spirit,  it 
is  to  be  feared,  still  pervades  certain  parts  of  Christendom.  Mere  abstinence  from  work 
— a  negative  "  folding  of  the  hands" — appears  to  be  thought  acceptable  to  God;  and 
the  sabbdth  is  given  a  morose  aspect  by  the  disallowance  of  occupations  which  are 
innocent,  which  conduce  to  cheerfulness,  and  which  are  in  no  way  at  variance  with 
piety. 

III.  The  third  and  only  rightful  form  of  observance,  here  touched  by  Isaiah,  and 
more  fully  taught  by  our  Lord  (Matt.  xii.  3 — 13),  consists,  in  the  first  place,  in 
"  making  the  sabbath  a  delight."  It  should  be  made  a  delight,  both  to  ourselves  and 
to  others.  God's  people  should  look  forward  to  their  sabbaths  as  times  of  refreshment 
and  of  "joy  in  the  Lord" — oases  in  the  wilderness  of  life,  glimpses  and  foretastes  ol 
heaven.  Music  should  lend  its  charm  to  them,  intensifying  and  elevating  devotion  ; 
the  aid  of  other  arts  should  be  sailed  in  ;  churches  should  be  aglow  with  floral  beauty; 
preaching  should  be  warm  and  heart-stirring ;  and  the  highest  a«t  of  Christian  worship 
should  be  viewed  as  the  crowning  perfection  of  the  feast-day.  In  the  next  place,  our 
Lord's  example  should  be  followed,  and  his  words  remembered,  "  It  is  lawful  io  do  good 
ou  the  sabbath  day."   Acts  of  mercy  and  loving-kindness  to  our  fellow-men  are  |)ointe4 


376  THE  BOOK  OF  THE  PROPHET  ISAIAH,    [ch.  lVui.  1— 14. 

out  by  him  as  ooi  best  employment  on  the  sabbath ;  it  is  the  special  day  on  which  t« 
visit  the  sick,  to  clothe  the  naked,  to  give  our  bread  to  the  hungry,  to  relieve  th« 
0]  pressed,  to  carry  the  glad  tidings  of  the  gospel  to  the  poor  and  ignorant.  It  is  also 
a  day  part  of  which  may  well  be  devoted  to  the  strengthening  of  family  affection  by 
oral  or  written  communications  with  relations  iiom  whom  the  business  of  life 
commonly  separates  us,  and  also  for  kindly  talk  with  our  neighbours  and  friends. 
Without  in  any  way  secularizing  the  sabbath,  we  may  give  it  a  cheerful,  kindly, 
friendly  aspect,  and  cause  it  to  be  regarded  in  our  families,  not  as  a  "  dull  time,"  with 
difficulty  to  be  "got  through,"  but,  as  it  was  intended  to  be,  the  crown  of  the  week — 
the  special  "  day  which  the  Lord  hath  made,"  to  the  end  that  we  should  "  rejcdce  and 
be  glad  in  it "  (Fs.  cxviii  24). 


HOMILIES  BY  VARIOUS  AUTHOBa 

Vers.  1 — 12. — ZVu«  and  spu/rioua  fasting.  Loudly,  with  all  the  strength  of  throat 
and  as  with  tnimpet-voice,  the  prophet  is  to  cry  and  denounce  the  rebellion  and  the 
sins  of  the  people. 

I.  Thbib  foemality  ahd  hypoceisy.  They  consult  Jehovah  daily;  they  apply  to  the 
prophet  or  the  oracle ;  they  offer  prayer.  They  profess  to  desire  to  know  God's  ways, 
his  commands,  and  his  dealings  with  his  people.  Just  as  if  they  were  a  holy  people, 
and  were  not  really  far  in  heart  from  God,  they  demand  of  him  "judgments  of  righteous- 
ness ; "  ^.e.  manifestations  of  his  pleasure  as  the  God  of  the  covenant,  his  approach  as  the 
God  of  justice.  They  adhered  to  the  forms  of  religion,  but  the  heart  was  not  in  them. 
Relying  on  those  forms,  they  were  surprised  the  Divine  favour  was  not  vouchsafed  to 
them.  "A  hypocrite  has  no  true  and  real  delight  in  the  service  of  God  or  in  his  truth ; 
but,  at  the  same  time,  there  may  be  a  great  deal  of  professed  interest  in  the  ways  of 
God.  A  great  deal  of  busy  and  bustling  solicitude  about  the  order  of  religious  services, 
the  external  organization  of  the  Church,  the  ranks  of  a  clergy,  the  claims  of  a  liturgy. 
There  may  be  a  great  deal  of  pleasure  in  theological  discussion,  in  the  metaphysics  of 
theology,  in  the  defence  of  what  is  deemed  orthodoxy.  There  may  be  much  pleasure 
in  the  music  of  devotion,  in  the  pleasant  voice  of  a  preacher,  in  the  triumphs  of  party, 
the  advancement  of  our  sect.  But  true  religion  is  delight  in  religion  itself — ^in  the 
service  of  God  as  such,  and  because  it  is  holy.  It  is  pleasure,  not  even  in  the  triumph 
of  Christianity  as  a  mere  party  measure,  but  in  God  as  he  is,  his  holy  service  and  truth  " 
(Barnes). 

n.  Sfubioub  FABTDta.  Formal  fasting  appears  to  have  increased  fi-om  the  time  of 
the  Captivity.  Another  phrase  for  it  was  "humbling  the  soul"  (Lev.  xvi.  29,  31  j 
xxiii.  27,  32 ;  Numb.  zxix.  7 ;  xix.  13).  In  connection  with  this  outward  observance, 
they  keenly  pursue  business  ends,  exacting  the  full  tale  of  tasks.  "  Like  Shylock,  they 
demand  the  pound  of  flesh,  at  the  same  time  that  they  may  be  most  precise,  punctual, 
and  bigoted  in  the  discharge  of  the  duties  of  religion.  If  we  desire  to  keep  a  fast 
acceptable  to  God,  it  should  be  such  as  shall  make  us  kind,  mild,  benignant;  such  as 
shall  take  effect  in  the  unbinding  heavy  burdens  from  the  poor,  and  relaxing  the  rigid- 
ness  of  the  claims  we  have  on  others."  Moreover,  the  fasting  is  connected  with  strife 
and  contention ;  and  so  their  prayers  cannot  rise  to  the  seat  of  Jehovah  (ch.  Ivii.  15). 
"Thou  hast  covered  thyself  with  clouds,  so  that  prayer  may  not  pass  through"  (Lam. 
iiL44). 

"Their  words  fly  up,  their  thoughts  remain  below; 
Words  without  thoughts  never  to  heaven  go." 

The  inclination  of  the  head,  the  sackcloth  and  the  ashes, — these  make  not  the  fast  in  the 
eyes  of  Jehovah.  "  It  is  not  a  mournful  expression,  a  solemn  dress,  or  a  thin  table  that 
God  so  much  regards.  It  is  the  heart,  and  not  the  stomach,  that  he  would  have  empty; 
and,  therefore,  if  a  man  carries  a  luxurious  soul  in  a  pining  body,  or  the  aspiring  miud 
of  a  Lucifer  on  the  hanging  head  of  a  bulrush,  he  fasts  only  to  upbraid  his  Maker,  and 
to  disgrace  his  religion,  and  to  heighten  his  final  reckoning,  till  he  becomes  ten  timet 
more  the  son  of  perdition  than  those  who  own  their  inward  lore  of  sin  by  the  open 
tindissemblcd  enmities  of  a  suitable  behaviour.    Let  a  man  not  count  himself  to  hayc 


•H.  Lvni.  1— 14.]    THE  BOOK  OF  THE  PROPHET  ISAIAH.  877 

faeted  to  any  purpose ,  if  by  it  he  has  not  got  ground  of  his  corruption,  in  some  measure 
supplanted  his  sin,  tud  estranged  his  affections  from  the  beloved  embraces  of  sinful 
objects  "  (South). 

III.  The  tbus  fasitng.  There  was  elaborate  and  merciful  legislation  for  the  pro- 
tection of  Hebrew  slavos  (Exod.  xxi.  2 ;  Deut.  xv.  12  ;  Lev,  xxv.  39) ;  yet  it  appears 
to  have  become  a  dead  letter,  which  called  for  severest  oastigation  (Jer.  xxxiv.  8,  etc.). 
"  To  loose  the  bands  of  wickedness,"  to  release  those  borne  down  by  exactions  contrary 
to  the  Law,  to  "  untie  the  thongs  of  the  yoke  "  (to  free  those  detained  beyond  the  legal 
time),  to  raise  up  the  "crushed  (in  the  spirit  of  him  who  cherishes  the  crushed  reed, 
ch.  xlii.  3 ;  Cheyne),  this  was  the  chosen  fast  of  Jehovah.  It  was  "  to  break  bread 
to  the  hungry,  and  to  bring  miserable  outcasts  to  their  home  "  (cf.  Ezek.  xviii.  7,  16). 
It  was  "  to  clothe  the  naked,  and  not  to  hide  one's-self  from  one's  own  flesh."  It  is 
known  that  from  time  to  time,  both  in  the  Jewish  and  the  Christian  Churches,  alms- 
giving has  been  exalted  into  a  religion  and  a  morality,  instead  of  remaining  the 
expression  and  fruit  of  a  pure  heart.  None  the  less  it  may  be  true  that  at  certain 
times  the  duty  may  stand  in  the  forefront  of  piety,  and  the  neglect  of  it  leave  the 
reproach  of  "worse  than  the  infidel"  on  the  conscience.  Righteousness  is  not  cciin- 
cident  with  almsgiving  ;  but  almsgiving,  like  any  other  external  act,  may  be  perverted 
into  a  formalism  (as  we  see  from  Matt.  vi.  1 — 4).  Charity  must  begin  at  home.  The 
outcasts  (Joel  iii.  2 — 8 ;  Neh,  v.  8),  and  those  of  the  same  flesh  (Neh.  v.  5),  are  especially 
those  of  one's  own  house  and  country.  "  The  condition  of  a  truly  religious  fast  is  that 
it  be  attended  with  almS  and  works  of  charity.  Amongst  our  other  emptinesses,  the 
evacuation  of  the  purse  is  proper  to  this  solemnity,  and  he  that  inflicts  a  thorough 
penance  upon  this,  stops  the  fountain  of  luxury  and  the  opportunities  of  extravagance. 
Charity  is  the  grand  seasoning  of  every  Christian  duty ;  it  gives  it  a  gloss  in  the  sight 
of  Gtod,  and  a  value  in  the  sight  of  man ;  and  he  fasts  properly  whose  fast  is  the  poor 
man's  feast,  whose  abstinence  is  another's  abundance.  God  here  roundly  tells  his 
people  what  is  truly  a  fast  and  what  is  no  fast  in  his  esteem — not  to  abstain  from  bread, 
but  to  deal  it  to  the  hungry ;  "  this  is  properly  to  fast.  Not  to  wrap  ourselves  in  sack- 
cloth, but  to  cover  and  clothe  our  naked  brother ;  this  is  to  be  humbled.  Alms  have 
80  much  the  pre-eminence  over  prayer,  that  one  is  a  begging  of  God,  the  other  a  lending 
to  him"  (South). 

IV.  Pbomibes  to  the  obedient.  "Thy  light  shall  break  forth  as  the  morning" 
(cf.  Job  xi.  17).  Like  the  spreading  welcome  light  of  "  rosy-fingered  dawn,"  prosperity 
will  come  to  gladden  their  hearts.  "  Thy  new  flesh  shall  quickly  shoot  forth."  Old 
wounds  shall  be  healed,  and  the  vital  forces,  which  have  been  checked,  shall  resume  their 
activity.  "  Thy  righteousness  shall  go  before  thee."  Personal  rectitude  (ch.  i.  27 ; 
xxxiii.  5,  6)  shall  be  as  a  leader,  conducting  them  in  the.  paths  of  prosperity  and  peace ; 
and  in  the  rear  of  the  host  shall  be  Jehovah's  glory  (ch.  Iii.  12).  Here,  then,  is  Joy, 
vigour,  confidence,  all  connected  with  rightness ;  this  rightness  found,  where  alone  it 
can  be  found,  in  mind  and  heart  conformed  to  the  Divine  will.  Prayer  will  be  heard 
and  answered  (contrast  vers.  2,  4).  A  God  distant  and  exiled  will  give  place  to  one  so 
near  that  a  cry  will  bring  his  presence  and  his  help.  As  the  last  note  of  despair  is, 
"  Where  is  our  God?  "  the  highest  point  of  faith  is  reached  by  those  who  hear  him  say, 
"  Here  I  am  1 "  But  God  would  ever  be  near,  were  it  not  for  the  "  thick  cloud  "  of  sin 
between  the  heart  and  him.  Only  let  the  oppression  and  the  contumely  and  the 
defilement  of  the  tongue,  reflected  in  the  defilement  of  the  mind,  cease,  and  the  better 
springs  of  the  inner  life  will  rise.  When  they  rise,  there  will  be  blessing  around  one, 
and  other  lives  will  be  gladdened;  and,  when  this  shall  be,  then  "thy  thick  darkness 
shall  be  as  noon ;"  life  shall  be  a  progress  under  Divine  direction ;  there  shall  be  re&esh- 
ment,  comfort,  exhilaration,  and  restoration  of  the  ruins  of  the  past. — J. 

Yen.  13, 14. — The  claims  of  the  sabbath.  I.  The  holinesb  of  the  sabbath.  "  The 
prophet  regards  the  fast-days  as  forms  without  authority  and  significance.  All  the  more 
strict  is  his  view  of  the  claims  of  the  sabbath  "  (Cheyne).  It  is  emphatically  a  con- 
secrated day,  and  the  foot  is  to  be  turned  aside  from  it  as  if  it  were  holy  ground,  like 
that  where  Moses  put  the  shoes  from  his  feet  (Exod.  iii.  5).  The  foot,  as  instrnment  of 
travel,  is  to  be  "  removed  from  evil "  (Prov.  iv.  27),  and  its  "  path  is  to  be  pondered  " 
(Prov.  iv.  29).    Selfish,  merely  human  business,  is  not  to  be  done  on  that  day,  which 


378  THE  BOOK  OF  THE  PROPHET  ISAIAH,    [oh.  lvih.  1—14 

may  be  viewed  as  a  part  of  that  great  duty  of  sacrifice  which  runs  through  the  Law^ 
The  day  was  to  be  peculiarly  Jehovah's  own.  A  particuhir  temperance  and  modesty  of 
the  tongue  was  suitable  to  its  observance.  Falsehood  (H.is.  x.  4;  Job  xv.  13)  would 
especially  desecrate  it.  Scripture  is  especially  strong  on  the  siynificance  of  words.  For 
they  express  the  soul,  and  reflect  in  their  expression  influences  of  good  or  evil  on  the  soul 
again.  There  should  be  reserve  and  economy  of  speech  (a  lesson  liisreg  uded  too  much 
in  modem  times),  for  an  element  of  sin  is  certain  to  find  its  way  into  excessive  loquacity 
(Prov.  X.  19 ;  Eccles.  v.  3).  A  "  tonguey  man  "  almost  means  the  same  as  a  malicious 
talker  (Ps.  cxl.  11).  The  regulation  of  the  tongue  may,  therefore,  in  ^reat  part,  be 
taken  as  the  measure  of  spiritual  self-control  and  sobriety,  as  the  expression  of  the 
living  sacrifice  of  the  heart. 

n.  The  BLESsnio  attached — bpiritual  delight.  Joy  in  Jehovah,  the  Eternal, 
is  manifested  to  men  in  grace,  in  proportion  as  they  approach  him  in  obedience.  "  You 
shall  no  longer  be  left  to  barren  ordinances  and  to  unanswered  prayers.  No  one  has 
ever  properly  observed  the  sabbath  who  did  not  find  as  a  consequence  that  he  had 
increased  pleasure  in  the  existence,  character,  and  service  of  Jehovah  "  (cf.  Job  xxii. 
21 — 26;  Ps.  xxxvii,  4,  for  the  illustraiion  of  the  princijile  involved).  Triumphant 
possession  of  the  land  of  promise.  (For  the  phrase,  see  Deut.  xxxii.  13  ;  cf.  Hab.  iii. 
19 ;  Ps.  xviii.  33 ;  Amos  iv.  13.  For  the  idea,  see  ch.  Ixv.  9 ;  Ezel?.  xxxiv.  13,  14 ; 
xxxvi.  1 — 12.)  The  hills  and  fortresses  of  Palestine,  so  greatly  beloved  by  the  patriot- 
hearts  of  the  prophets,  shall  be  recovered  by  the  people,  once  following  the  righteous 
moral  lead  of  Jehovah. — J. 

Ver,  2. — Delight  in  CM.  "  Yet  they  seek  me  daily,  and  delight  to  know  my  ways." 
Religion  is  little  if  it  is  not  delight  in  God.  This  is  its  true  touchstone.  It  is  what 
we  love  that  constitutes  an  abiding  test.  If  we  do  not  feel  at  heart  tiie  blessedness 
of  religion,  we  may  discover  that  we  are  only  seeking  it  for  selfish  safety,  or  for  the 
world's  approval  of  a  respectable  name. 

I.  The  daily  orison.  We  seek  that  which  we  desire ;  and  how  ingenious  is  love  in 
finding  words  of  conimimioation  and  opportunities  of  intercourse  of  heart  with  heart! 
A  look  may  carry  with  it  prosperity  and  hope.  Prayer  is  not  in  words,  nor,  lot  us 
remember,  is  it  in  thougJds ;  it  is  what  we  desire  that  we  really  pray  for.  Our  wishes 
are  our  supplications.  What  your  heart  is  eager  after  is  the  devotion  that  God  sees. 
"  Search  me,  0  God,  and  know  my  heart ;  try  me,  and  know  my  thoughts."  "  They 
seek  me  daily."  Comtnunion  with  God  is  not  a  cry  in  danger,  or  a  beseechment  in 
hours  of  special  anxiety  and  necessity ;  it  is  an  Enoch-like  life — a  "  walk  with  God." 

II.  The  dbliohtfdl  knowledob.  "  Delight  to  know  my  ways."  1.  That  they  may 
follow  Qod.  2.  That  they  may  see  Qod  in  everything.  3.  That  they  may  please  God. 
4.  That  they  nay  he  prepared  to  live  in  him  and  with  him  for  ever. — W.  M.  S. 

Ver.  2. — Practical  godliness.  "  As  a  nation  that  did  righteousness."  No  word 
occurs  ofteaer  in  the  Bible  than  this  word  "  righteousness."  It  is  the  granite  founda- 
tions of  Gud's  government.  "  Shall  not  the  Judj,e  of  all  the  earth  do  right  ?  "  And  it  is 
this  which  is  the  salt  of  a  nation.  "  Righteousness  exalteth  a  nation."  There  may  be 
much  sentimentality  in  human  beings  without  the  cardinal  virtues;  but,  wanting  these, 
all  else  is  meretricious  and  hollow. 

I.  The  oloby  of  Israel.  They  were  not  a  large  nation,  nor  were  they  in  the  strict 
sense  a  military  people.  But  they  had  this  high  vantage-ground  of  influence — the 
God-given  laws  of  Sinai,  and  the  prophets  of  the  Lord  of  hosts  to  counsel  and  reprove 
them.  But  their  glory  was  not  simply  that  they  had  the  Law,  or  knew  the  Law,  but 
that  they  did  righteousness.  And  this  was  their  true  guerdon.  Whilst  they  so  lived 
they  were  safe,  honoured,  and  happy.  Their  (all  was  from  within.  The  armies  of 
Bon)e  only  overthrew  them  because  the  nation's  heart  was  corrupt.  The  rotten  fruit 
drops — the  storm  only  expedites  its  fall. 

II.  The  oloby  of  any  nation.  This,  and  this  alone,  is  glory.  Not  vast  fleets 
and  imposing  armies,  not  a  full  exchequer  and  extensive  colonies,  but  righteousness. 
1.  Equity  in  jurisprudence.  2.  Honour  in  trade.  3.  Justice  to  all  and  for  all. 
A.  I'urity  in  morah,  or  a  right  government  of  the  passions.  5.  Fairness  to  ail  otim 
uatiout.—W.  M.  S. 


OH.  Lvnt  1— 14.]    THE  BOOK  OP  THE  PEOPHET  ISAIAH.  379 

Ver.  6. — A  religiout  fast.  "Is  not  this  the  fast  that  I  have  chosen?"  Which? 
The  contrast  is  seen  in  the  inclusire  words  from  the  fourth  to  the  ninth  verses. 
God  does  not  delight  in  outwardness.  The  mere  mannerism  of  religion,  or  the  head 
bowed  as  a  bulrush,  with  sackcloth  and  ashes  beneath,  is  hateful  to  the  Most  High. 

I.  Fabtino  is  to  be  BEALiiT  BELioious.  It  is  to  "  loose  the  bands  of  wickedness " 
— to  free  one's  own  soul  from  the  last  shackles  of  lust  and  selfishness,  and  to  aid  in 
liberating  the  souls  of  others.  Religious  effort  is  to  deal  directly  with  character,  and 
not  with  the  countenance ;  with  the  habits  of  evil,  and  not  the  ritual  of  ceremonies. 

II.  Fastino  IB  TO  BE  DEEPLY  HUMAN.  It  is  to  carc  for  OUT  brethren  in  the  world. 
1.  Many  are  heavily  burdened.  Care  writes  its  lines  on  the  anxious  brow,  and  often 
the  heart  is  grey  while  the  hair  is  yet  black.  2.  Many  are  oppressed.  Justice  is  the 
subject  of  bribery,  and  wealth  lords  it  over  poverty ;  moreover,  slavery  existed  then,  and 
has  done  till  recent  years,  and  the  war  against  slavery  has  come  from  religiuus  men. 
3.  Many  are  wider  varied  yokes.  Yokes  of  intemperance  and  pernicious  habit — of 
selfishness  in  its  worst  forms  of  cruelty  to  others.  4.  Many  are  helplessly  poor.  Not 
through  crime,  or  faults  of  their  own,  such  as  indolence  and  inebriety,  but  through 
sudden  calamities  and  severe  illnesses.  We  must  feed  the  hungry  and  cover  the  naked. 
5.  Many  are  neglected  hy  their  own.  The  workhouse  has  received  to  its  dull  shelter 
those  connected  with  the  well-to-do  and  the  well-born ;  or  "  relatives  "  have  never  been 
inquired  after,  sympathized  with,  or  succoured.  "  And  that  thou  hide  not  thyself  from 
thine  own  flesh." 

These  words  in  Isaiah  teach  us  that  the  ancient  Law  was  not  simply  legal  and  cere- 
monial, and  outwardly  sacrificial,  but  social,  moral,  and  religious  in  the  highest  degree. 
Such  Law  Christ  came  not  to  destroy,  but  to  fulfil. — W.  M.  S. 

Ver.  8. — The  hreak  of  day,  "Then  shall  thy  light  break  forth  as  the  morning." 
The  hindrances  to  progress  in  God's  Church  are  not  in  Divine  limitations,  but  in 
human  perversions. 

I.  The  lioht  ib  thebb.  We  hide  it  under  the  bushel  of  our  formalism  and  world- 
liness.  Divine  revelation  gives  it — yea,  keeps  it  alive ;  and  if  we  remove  the  obstacles 
to  its  glory,  it  will  burst  forth.  Many  blame  religion  for  the  faults  and  formalities  of 
nominally  religious  men. 

II.  The  revelation  of  this  lioht  is  a  MOBinNa.  Mornings  have  often  come  alike 
in  Jewish  and  Christian  history.  Isaiah  awakened  the  Hebrew  nation  to  a  new  life. 
Mediaevalism  with  its  dark  superstitions,  the  inquisition  with  its  abhorrent  cruelties, 
did  not  destroy  Christianity.  What  has  been  well  called  the  "  morning  of  the  Refor- 
mation "  came.  Look  back  now  to  Savonarola,  and  you  will  see  what  one  man  can  do  to 
herald  a  better  day  in  darkest  times.  Then  I  Not  by  an  accident  in  history,  nor  by  an 
arbitrary  decree  of  God ;  but  by  obedience  to  his  Word  and  by  the  baptism  of  his 
Spirit.  And  beautiful  as  are  all  mornings,  when  the  sun  touches  the  clouds  with  gold, 
and  fills  the  earth  with  splendour,  and  makes  dancing  sunshine  on  the  sapphire  sea, 
none  ue  so  beautiful  as  the  mornings  of  new  moral  life  for  the  world. — W.  M.  S. 

Ver.  13. — The  sahbath  idetU.  "Call  the  sabbath  a  delight."  It  cannot  be  a  holy  day 
unless  it  is  a  happy  day.  For  only  souls  that  joy  in  God  are  really  devoiit.  Unless 
religious  exercises  have  a  charm  for  the  soul,  they  are  only  routine ;  they  are  not  religious. 

I.  A  seeming  contb  a  diction.  "  Turn  away  thy  foot . . .  from  doing  thy  pleasure." 
And  again,  "  Not  doing  thin"  own  ways,  nor  finding  thine  own  pleasure."  But  there 
is  no  real  contradiction.  Many  things  are  rightly  enough  pleasant  to  us  in  daily 
occupation  and  association ;  but  things  right  in  themselves  may  be  wrong  if  indulged 
in  under  improper  conditions ;  and  the  sabbath  is  to  be  holy  unto  the  Lord — and  in  the 
Christian  dispensation  it  is  called  "  the  Lord's  day."  This  is  to  dominate  everything. 
Those  who  seek  worldly  pleasure  upon  this  day  hinder  others  from  fellowship  with 
God,  and  keep  from  that  constancy  of  vision  on  heavenly  things  by  which  alone  they 
can  be  indelibly  impressed  on  the  mind  and  the  heart. 

II.  A  60LEMN  obligation.  It  is  a  day  that  should  be  made  pleasant,  not  merry 
nor  mirthful,  but  full  of  all  the  highest  and  best  enjoyments.  Praise  is  pleasant — it 
awakens  a  remembrance  of  mercy.  Fellowship  is  pleasant — it  nerves  the  fainting 
soldier's  heart  to  look  at  his  companions  in  arms,  and  it  cheers  the  weary  to  hear  of 


880  THE  BOOK  OP  THE  PROPHET  ISAIAH,    [oh.  LTm.  1— 14. 

"  the  rest  that  remaioeth."  Christian  parents  should  take  heed  to  this.  Dulness  and 
moroseness  are  not  reli^on.  Literature  is  none  the  less  Christian  that  is  well  illus- 
trated, and  written  with  all  the  charm  of  an  attractive  style ;  and  the  church  of  God  i8 
none  the  less  the  house  of  the  Lord  and  the  gate  of  heaven,  that  the  service  is  in  itself 
cheerful  and  bright.  There  is  no  memory  more  potent  for  good  than  the  remembrance  of 
the  happy  sabbaths  <^  our  childhood.  And  service  for  others  helps  our  joy ;  to  call  tk« 
sabbath  a  delight,  we  must  be,  if  possible,  givers  as  well  as  receivers — like  Nehemiah, 
"  cup-bearer  of  the  King,"  handing  the  living  water  to  others. — W.  M.  S. 

Vers.  1 — 12. — Beligion  :  its  temblance,  its  tttbstance,  its  reward.  I.  Thb  bbublakok 
OF  BELioioN.  It  argues  nothing  whatever  against  religion  that  there  is  a  great  deal  of 
hypocrisy  in  the  world ;  indeed,  the  absence  would  be  a  more  formidable  argument  than 
the  presence  of  it.  For  men  imitate  that  which  is  most  worthy  of  esteem,  and  if 
nobody  pretended  to  be  religious  it  would  be  fair  to  conclude  that  religion  itself  was  of 
very  small  account.  Imitation  implies  the  respect,  and  indicates  the  value,  which  is 
attached  to  anything  which  is  copied.  It  speaks  well,  therefore,  for  religion  that  mea 
more  often  affect  to  be  religious  than  they  pretend  to  any  other  excellency.  There 
may  be :  1.  Acts  of  devotion.  "  Seeking  God  daily  " — "  Approaching  him  "  in  the  attitude 
and  engagement  of  "  prayer,"  whether  in  the  secret  chamber,  the  family  circle,  or  in  the 
house  of  God.  2.  Consultation  of  his  Word.  "  Asking  of  God  the  ordinances  of  justice  " 
— ^the  regular  and  systematic  reading  of  Scripture.  3.  Special  acts  of  piety.  Like  that 
of  fasting,  which  was  not  enjoined  by  Mosaic  Law  (except  on  one  day  in  the  year) ;  or 
observing  certain  particular  days  as  days  of  humiliation  and  devotion,  or  ostentatious 
deeds  of  beneficence.  Concerning  these  outward  shows  of  piety,  it  has  to  be  observed ; 
(1)  That,  begun  in  insincerity,  they  may  become  positively  pleasurable  to  those  who 
practise  them.  There  are  many  who  always  go  through  religious  rites  vrith  labour  and 
weariness  of  spirit ;  but  there  are  others  who  find  enjoyment  in  the  ceremonies  and 
services  in  which  they  engage.  They  may  be  sud  to  delight  in  them  (ver.  2),  Love 
of  the  artistic,  fondness  for  distinction,  or  other  earthly  considerations,  may  account  for 
this ;  but  it  is  also  an  undeniable  fact  that  many  who  do  not  please  God  with  their 
observances  do  greatly  please  themselves.  (2)  That  it  is  the  solemn  and  urgent 
duty  of  the  minister  of  Christ  to  show  the  utter  insufiSciency  of  these  things.  He  is 
to  "  cry  aloud,  and  spare  not,  to  lift  up  his  voice  like  a  trumpet,"  to  show  those  who 
pass  for  God's  people  that,  if  they  have  nothing  better  to  bring  to  the  heart-searching 
God  than  hollow  phrases,  formal  services,  outward  actions  which  are  not  animated  by 
inward  feeling,  they  are  living  in  transgression  and  in  sin  (ver,  1).  He  is  to  insist 
upon  it  with  utmost  earnestness,  that  only  they  can  worsliip  God  acceptably  who 
worship  him  "  in  spirit  and  in  truth ; "  and  that  if  the  semblance  of  piety  be  divorced 
from  a  holy  and  useful  life  (ver.  4),  it  weighs  nothing  whatever  in  the  balances  of 
heaven  (ver,  6).  Those  who  have  the  form  of  piety  without  the  substance  may  con- 
sider themselves  to  be  of  the  number  of  the  faithful  (ver.  3) ;  but  they  are  miserably 
mistaken.  Gk>d  decisively  and  peremptorily  rejects  such  empty  formalities  (ver.  6) ; 
nay,  they  are  positively  offensive  in  his  sight  (ch.  i.  13 — 15). 

II.  The  substance  of  belioion.  The  teaching  of  the  text  is  that  real  piety  is  to 
be  found  in  such  fear  of  God  as  will  manifest  itself  in  doing  his  holy  will  in  all  the 
relations  of  human  life ;  such  reverence  for  the  Supreme  as  will  constrain  men  to  do 
irhat  is  right  and  good  in  all  their  dealings  with  their  equals  and  their  inferioni ;  such 
[Hety  as  bears  the  fruits  of :  1.  P&iceablm,ess :  the  exact  opposite  of  strife  aad  smiting 
(ver.  4).  2.  Justice :  loosing  the  bands  of  wickedness,  letting  the  oppressed  go  free,  etc. 
(ver.  6).  8.  Kindness ;  feeding  the  hungry,  clothing  the  naked,  etc.  (ver.  7) ;  practical 
recognition  of  the  claims  of  the  suffering  humanity  which  we  can  ^ty  and  can  succour 
(ver.  10).  This  is  "  the  fast,"  this  is  the  piety,  which  Gh>d  has  chosen — that  lore  (rf 
God  which  shews  itself  in  the  love  of  our  aeighbour  (Lev,  x.  26,  37 ;  Bom.  xiL  20, 21 ; 
Ja8.i.  27;  ii.  14— 26). 

III.  Thi  rkwabd  of  belioion.  '  It  is  quite  true,  prt^Mindly  trae,  ttat  real  religion 
is  its  own  reward.  Well  dees  the  active  servant  of  Jesus  Ohrbt  bag  ta  be  caatiMwA  ia 
hii  holy  woric,  (ayiag— 

"  Aad  I  will  ask  far  bo  remnrd, 
Bxoapi  t»  serve  thee  ttX^." 


OH.  Lviu.  1—14.]    THE  BOOK  OF  THE   PROPHET  ISAIAH.  881 

But  God  offers  to  US,  and  even  presses  on  our  acceptance,  his  ample  and  generous  rewards 
for  our  genuine  and  faithful  service.  These  are,  under  Christ :  1.  Spiritud  illumination 
(ver.  8) ;  being  made  to  be  the  children  of  light  and  of  the  day,  walking  in  the  light 
of  Divine  truth,  receiving  the  commuDicatiuns  of  the  enlightening  Spirit.  2.  Sotmd- 
ness  of  soul,  wholeness  of  heart  and  character — "  health  "  within  (ver.  8).  3.  Divine 
guidance  and  protection.  (Vers.  8, 11.)  4.  Communion  with  the  living  and  present 
SaTiour  (ver.  9).  6.  Fruitfulness ;  ourselves  being  as  a  "  watered  garden"  for  beauty 
•ad  productiveness  (ver.  11) ;  and  our  work  resulting  in  moral  utd  spiritual  restoration 
(rer.  12>-a 

Vers.  18,  14. — 2%e  day  of  soared  rest.  The  institution  of  the  weekly  sabbath  is 
certainly  one  of  the  "water-marks"  of  revelation.  It  is  not  possible  to  conceive  of 
anything  more  wise  and  beneficent  than  this  provision  for  our  bodily  and  spiritual 
well-being.  Who  can  calculate  the  material  or  the  moral  benefit  which  it  has  conferred 
on  the  human  race?  Who  can  estimate  the  blessing  it  will  have  proved  to  humanity 
when  time  has  run  its  course  ?  Whether  we  regard  it  in  the  lower  or  in  the  higher 
aspect  of  the  question,  its  value  is  simply  inestimable.     We  may  look  at — 

L  The  ground  of  its  observance.  *  The  Jews  had  special  reasons  for  honouring 
the  day.  Its  observance  was  part  of  their  statute  law  (Exod.  xx.  8 — 11).  But  all 
mankind  have  reason  enough  for  giving  it  a  conspicuous  place  in  their  custom  and  their 
commandment.  1.  It  has  its  commencement  at  the  very  dawn  of  human  history  (Q«n. 
iL  2,  3).  2.  It  was  inculcated  in  the  most  solemn  form,  and  enforced  by  the  weightiest 
sanctions  on  the  Hebrew  people ;  and  although  it  is  not,  on  that  account,  binding  on  us 
as  a  Divine  enactment,  yet  the  fact  that  it  was  made  of  so  much  consequence  in  the 
judgment  of  the  Divine  Legislator,  and  had  so  large  a  part  in  the  training  of  the 
healthiest  and  purest  people  the  world  has  ever  known,  is  a  very  strong  argument  in 
favour  of  its  perpetuity :  we  may  surely  elect  to  continue  that  which  we  are  not  formally 
boimd  to  adopt.  We  find  a  powerful  reason  for  so  doing  in  the  text  and  in  similar 
passages,  where  we  have  the  signifinant  fact  that :  3.  It  finds  a  prominent  place  in  pro- 
phetic utterance.  Inasmuch  as  the  prophets  were  the  strong  and  even  vehement 
opponents  of  ceremonialism,  and  (as  in  the  previous  verses  of  this  chapter)  made  every- 
thing of  the  moral  and  the  spiritual,  their  testimony  concerning  the  sabbath  day  has 
peculiar  value.  It  points  to  a  Divine  intention  that  it  should  not  pass  away  with  the 
focal,  the  rudimentary,  the  temporary,  but  hold  its  ground  with  the  abiding  and  the 
permanent.  4.  It  was  stated  by  our  Lord  to  have  been  "  made  for  man  "  (Mark  iL  27). 
6.  In  the  new  form  of  the  "  Lord's  day,"  commeaiorating  the  crowning  work  not  ofcreation 
but  of  redemption,  it  was  honoured  by  the  apostles  of  our  Lord.  We  may,  therefore, 
conelude,  in  the  exercise  of  our  reason,  that  it  is  the  will  of  Christ  that  we  should  observe 
one  day  in  seven  as  a  day  of  sacred  rest. 

II.  The  true  spirit  or  obedience.  1.  The  spirit  of  self-^-enunciation.  The  Hebrew 
saint  was  to  "  turn  away  his  toot  from  the  sabbath,  from  doing  his  pleasure  on  God's 
holy  day ; "  t.e.  he  was  to  lay  aside  his  customary  labours,  and  to  refrain  from  ordinary 
amusements  on  a  day  on  which  God  asked  for  contemplation  and  worship.  As  Christians, 
we  come  to  the  conclusion  that  it  is  the  will  of  our  Saviour  that  we  should  give  to 
him  our  homage,  our  docility,  our  sacred  zeal ;  we  thereTore  gladly  forego  the  common 
engagements  and  enjoyments  of  our  life,  "not  doing  our  own  ways,"  in  order  that  we 
may  do  his  will  and  gain  his  good  pleasure.  2.  The  spiiit  of  devotion.  The  corollary  of  the 
cheerful  renouncement  of  our  own  business  is  the  adoption  of  God's  worship  and  service 
as  the  appropriate  engagement  of  the  day.  Quitting  our  home  and  shunning  the  mart 
and  the  place  of  amusement,  whither  should  we  go  but  to  the  house  of  the  Lord,  to  the 
field  of  sacred  usefulness  ?  And  how  can  we  better  spend  our  time  or  occupy  our  powers 
than  in  the  manly,  the  lofty,  the  elevating  engagements  of  devotion  and  sacred  service  ? 
Then^o  we  reach  our  highest  mark,  and  most  nearly  attain  the  true  standard  of  our 
manhood,  the  richest  heritage  of  our  race.  Then  do  we  "delight  ourselves  in  the 
Lord;"  then  is  God  what  he  was  to  Abraham,  and  what  he  will  be  to  us  all  when 
we  receive  the  fulness  of  our  inheritance — our  "exceeding  great  Reward."  3.  The 
spirit  of  sacred, foy.  We  shall  "  call  the  sabbath  a  delight,"  shall  find  it  so,  and  shall  do 
our  best  to  make  it  so — ^to  the  children,  to  the  employed,  to  the  lonely  and  the  confined, 
who  can  be  visited  and  cheered  in  the  quiet  home,  in  the  sick-chamber. 


382  THE   BOOK   OF  THE  PKOPHET  ISAIAH,    [os.  i-vm.  1—14. 


IIL  Its  laboe  bewabd.  1.  In  immediate  spiritual  enjoyment;  In  the  gladness 
of  heart  with  which  the  worship  of  God  is  anticipated  (Ps.  cxxii.  1);  in  the  joy  of  holy 
fellowship  and  sacred  song ;  in  the  happiness  of  domestic  piety.  2.  In  the  continuous 
spiritual  hlessedness  to  which  it  leads;  for  a  true  use  of  Christian  privileges  ends  in  the 
reconciliation  of  the  soul  to  Grod,and  in  the  possession  of  his  abiding  favour,  in  the  life- 
long friendship  of  Jesus  Christ ;  there  is  daily,  continual  "  delight  in  the  Lord."  8.  In 
the  realization  of  the  liindest  prmnises  of  God.  To  Israel  was  offered  the  excellency  of 
"  riding  on  the  high  places  of  the  earth,"  and  being  "  fed  with  the  heritage  of  Jacob." 
To  us,  if  we  truly  seek  God's  face  until  we  find  his  favour,  is  offered  (1)  the  guidance 
of  an  unerring  finger  and  the  protection  of  an  almighty  arm  along  all  the  path  of  life, 
whether  along  higher  or  lower  levels ;  (2)  the  exercise  of  a  benign  and  gracious  influence 
on  human  hearts — an  influence  which  will  live  when  we  are  gone ;  (3)  eotrance  into 
the  heavenly  kingdom. — 0. 

Ver.  2. — The  offence  of  merely  external  religiousnein,  "And  [yet]  me  they 
consult  daily,  and  to  know  my  ways  they  desire :  as  a  nation  that  hath  done  righteous- 
ness, and  hath  not  forsaken  the  Law  of  God,  they  ask  of  me  judgments  of  righteous- 
ness "  (Cheyne).  "  The  words  point  to  the  incongruous  union,  possible  in  the  reign 
of  Manasseh,  but  hardly  possible  after  the  exile,  of  the  formal  recognition  of  Jehovah 
with  an  apostate  life.  Every  phrase  rings  in  the  tone  of  an  incisive  irony, 
describing  each  element  of  a  true  devotion  which  the  people  did  not  possess" 
(Dean  Plumptre).  External  worship  is  insufficient,  a  change  of  heart  is  needed ;  God 
asks  what  we  hive,  and  what  we  can  do,  only  because  through  these  things  hearts  can 
find  expression. 

I.  Ceremonies  and  symbols  abe  good.  Within  due  limits.  We  cannot  conceive 
the  sort  of  religion  that  may  suit  angels  or  pure  spirits.  Perhaps  it  has  no  ritual. 
But  our  religion  must  be  that  of  spirits  working  through  human  bodies,  and  therefore 
it  must  have  form.  For  man  God  instituted  or  recognized  sacrifices.  For  some 
men  he  appointed  Judaism.  Heart-feeling  may  be  strengthened  by  expression,  but 
capacity  of  feeling  may  be  exhausted  by  expression.  There  is  a  measure  of  truth 
in  the  saying  that,  for  many  persons,  religious  truth  needs  to  be  set  in  the  picture- 
teaching  of  ceremonial.  They  are  not  wise  who  refuse  to  see  value  in  organization  and 
ordinances. 

II.  Obkdiencb  and  hbart-sbbvicb  abb  better.  Because  the  thing  expressed 
must  be  better  than  the  expression.  Ceremony  can  have  no  moral  value  apart  from  the 
heart  and  the  will  (see  Ps.  xL  6—8 ;  li.  16,  17 ;  Prov.  xv.  8 ;  ch.  i.  11, 12—16 ;  Ixvi.  3 ; 
Jer.  vii.  '^2,  23 ;  Eos.  vi  6 ;  Amos  v.  21—24 ;  Micah  vl.  6—8).  We  should  not  bo 
able  to  conceive  of  Gid  as  a  moral  Being,  if  we  were  not  sure  that  he  puts  obedience 
fimt;  a  father  does  ;  a  king  even  does. 

III.  Tkdb  hearts  endeavour  wisely  to  blend  both.  They  find  out  the  practical 
value  of  well-ordered  and  well-kept  religious  habits.  Three  things  occupy  serious 
attention.  1.  How  to  get  good  religious  habits  formed.  2.  How  to  keep  the  forms 
instinct  with  life.  3.  How  to  keep  the  forms  within  wise  limitations.  Every  man 
finds  out  that  the  "  seen"  is  constantly  endeavouring  so  to  satisfy  him  that  he  shall 
cease  to  care  for  the  "unseen." 

IV.  If  we  cannot  have  both,  wb  mitst  saorifioe  the  fobm,  not  the  spirit. 
There  are  times  when  it  seems  as  if  one  must  be  sacrificed.  The  tone  of  an  age  may 
give  extraordinary  force  to  ceremonial ;  e.g.  an  age  of  decayed  religion,  such  as  the  time 
of  Christ ;  an  {esthetic  age  such  as  ours  is.  Now  it  has  become  our  duty  to  limit  cere- 
monial to  the  efficient  expression  of  spiritual  life  and  feeling. — B.  T. 

Vers.  3,  4. — Selfishness  spoiling  religioua  habits.  "  Behold,  in  the  day  of  your  fast 
ye  find  pleasure."  That  is,  you  make  your  religion  a  mode  of  pleasing  yourselves.  You 
really  enjoy  your  fastings.  Two  points  may  be  illustrated  and  enforced.  As  introduc- 
tery,  it  may  be  shown  that  externalism  is  the  special  temptation  of  a  people  who  have 
been  cured  of  idolatry.  Pharisaic  formalism  is  the  evil  that  threatens  a  nation  th&c 
rebounds  from  the  notion  of  many  gods  to  the  idea  of  one,  spiritual  God.  "Helf" 
becomes,  in  a  subtle  way,  the  idol  of  men's  worship. 

I,  gaLr-niSA«itf»  w  an  end  gained  in  bet.ioiotts  duties.    'Hiose  who  give  them- 


OH.  Lvm.  1— 14.]    THE  BOOK  OF  THE  PROPHET  ISAIAH.  8U3 

selves  heartily  to  the  religious  life  do  come  positively  to  enjoy  it.  It  is  the  Divine 
reward  of  their  devotion  that  they  find  personal  pleasure  in  their  pious  works  and  ways. 
What  strikes  us  as  a  most  marked  contrast  between  the  older  and  the  new  religious  Ufe 
is  this— our  fathers  found  their  pleasure  in  their  religion,  while  we  find  our  pleasure  in 
anything  and  everything  but  our  religion.  The  irksomeness  of  religious  services  and 
religious  works  is  the  sure  sign  that  we  have  little  or  no  pleasure  in  these  things.  God 
does  not  give  us  this  reward  because  our  hearts  and  energies  are  nut  in  such  things.  A 
kind  of  force  and  fear  holds  us  to  a  round  of  engagement ;  relics  of  old  association  and 
of  an  old  sense  of  duty,  keep  us  to  formal  acts  of  worship ;  but  when  the  heart  is  gone 
out  of  religious  service  joy  goes  too.  The  lost  sense  of  pleasure  is  not  the  worst  thing 
in  our  spiritual  condition,  but  it  may  be  one  of  the  signs  of  the  worst.  Self-pleasure  is 
God's  reward — is  one  of  the  proper  ends  of  the  pious  life. 

II.   SELF-FIiEASCNa  MUST   NOT   BE  THE   END  SOUaHT  IN   RELIGHOTJS   DUTIES.      We  need 

not  dwell  on  the  case  of  the  hypocrite,  who  purpusely  seeks  ends  of  his  own  in  making 
his  show  of  piety.  It  is  more  searching  to  deal  with  the  case  of  the  self-deceived,  who 
mistakes  the  idea  of  religion,  and  thinks  himself  to  be  serving  God  when  he  is  only 
gratifying  himself;  and  with  the  case  of  those  who  act  from  divided  motives,  and  are 
always  in  danger  of  making  self-pleasing  the  ruling  one.  God  is  to  be  honoured, 
obeyed,  and  served  for  his  own  sake  alone,  no  matter  what  a  man  may  get  or  lose  by 
his  service.  It  is  the  sternest  reproach  of  some  professed  followers  of  God,  that  "  they 
feared  Jehovah,  but  served  their  own  gods  ;  "  it  would  adapt  the  expression  to  modem 
mistakes  if  we  read  it,  "  They  feared  the  Lord,  but  lived  for  ends  of  self-pleasini^."  It 
may  be  shown  that  the  teachings  concerning  the  heaven  Yrhich.  is  to  be  obtained  through 
•  religious  life  are  too  often  presented  as  an  encouragemeut  to  self-pleasing.  Illustrate 
by  the  calamity  that  befell  Pliable,  in  '  Pilgrim's  Progress,'  who  was  going  on  pilgrimage 
for  the  sake  of  what  he  himself  would  get  by  it. — R.  T. 

Vers.  6,  7. — Ood^s  idea  of  fasting.  It  should  be  noticed,  as  giving  special  point  to 
this  reference  to  fasting,  that,  besides  the  regular  fasts  of  the  Jewish  religion,  there 
were,  during  the  Captivity  in  Babylon,  si)eoial  fasts  appointed  as  days  of  repentance 
and  prayer  for  Israel.  God  complains  that  these  fasts  did  not  say  to  him  exactly  what 
those  who  fasted  intended  them  to  say,  because  he  looked  at  the  whole  conduct  of  the 
men  to  see  if  it  was  in  harmony  with  the  fasting.  The  important  principle  is  here 
illustrated  that,  if  a  man  be  right  with  God,  he  will  be  right  also  with  his  fellow-men. 
If  a  man  does  not  forgive  his  brother  his  trespasses,  he  cannot  be  in  such  a  state  of 
mind  as  makes  it  any  use  to  him  for  God  to  forgive  his  trespasses.  If  a  man  is  harsh, 
exacting,  violent,  in  his  dealings  with  his  fellow-creatures,  God  will  take  no  notice  of 
his  sad  countenance,  fasting,  and  fine  pretences  of  penitence.  God  is  never  deceived  by 
the  excellent  appearance  of  our  Sunday  ways.  He  judges  us  by  the  records  of  all  the 
week. 

I.  God's  idea  of  fasting  is  not  a  fine  outwakd  show  of  humiliation. 
(Ver.  5.)  Bowed  head.  Starved  body.  Sackcloth  dress.  Ashes  for  a  seat.  That 
UKiks  fine,  and  men  may  be  deceived  by  it,  but  not  God.  Compare  our  Lord's  teaching 
in  the  sermon  on  the  mount,  "  Be  not,  as  the  hypocrites,  of  a  sad  countenance :  for 
they  disfigure  their  faces,  that  they  may  appear  unto  men  to  fast."  "  The  pro[)het  finds 
fault  with  the  fasting  of  the  Jews  in  two  respects.  1.  Because  they  did  not  combine 
fasting  with  works  of  righteousness.  2.  Because  they  held  the  bodily  exercise  to  be 
the  chief  thing."  Outward  appearances  may  speak  for  us  to  God,  only  we  must  take 
care  that  they  have  something  sincere  and  true  and  worthy  to  say  to  him,  Irom  oor 
hearts.  "  Rend  your  hearts,  and  not  your  garments ; "  "  The  Lord  sea.cheth  the 
heart." 

IL  God's  idea  of  fasting  is  sblf-resteaint  in  order  to  oai>  higher  effi- 
OIENCT  FOB  BBBVICE.  And  such  fasting  needs  to  make  no  show.  The  man  who  fasts 
in  this  sense  may  "  anoint  his  head,  wash  his  face,"  and  look  cheerful.  The  be<it  signs 
of  fasting  are  the  good  works  which  we  can  accomplish,  which  we  gain  power,  through 
our  self-restraints;  to  accomplish — loosing  bands,  freeing  the  oppressed,  feeding  the 
hungry,  clothing  the  naked,  blessing  all.  Fasting,  in  the  sense  of  a  rehisal  of  all  food, 
belongs  to  ceremonial  religion  and  had  its  origin  in  Eastern  lands.  Fasting  in  its 
most  spiritual  form,  as  personal  self-restraint,  wiU-mastery  over  habits  and  preferences, 


Sa*  THE   BOOK  OF  THE  PROPHET  ISAIAH,    [oh.  Lvm.  1— 14. 

mugt  ever  be  binding  upon  all  Christiana.    As  explained  by  an  apostle,  it  is  "  knowing 
how  to  possess  the  vessel  of  the  body  in  sanctification  and  honour."— B.  T. 

Ver.  9. — Oonditiont  o/aniwer  to  prayer.  Were  these  men,  whose  lives  were  spent 
for  self,  but  who  made  a  show  of  seeming  to  want  God,  proper  persons  to  receive 
answers  to  their  prayers?  Let  the  Apostle  James  answer,  "Ye  ask,  and  receive  not, 
because  ye  ask  amiss,  that  ye  may  consume  it  upon  your  lusts  "  (Jas.  iv.  3).  OtoA 
wants  signs  of  right  character  in  those  whose  petitions  he  grants;  for  such  character  it 
the  only  guarantee  that  what  he  gives  is  rightly  accepted  and  rightly  used.  Here 
with  special  reference  to  the  particular  sins  of  the  age,  we  have  these  conditions  laid 
down.  1.  Ceasing  from  stem  and  cruel  dealings  with  those  who  serve  us.  "  Take 
away  the  yoke "  (see  ver.  6).  2.  Taunts  of  those  who  are  recognized  as  the  faithful 
servants  of  O-od,  but  do  not  make  just  the  same  expression  of  their  piety  that  we  do. 
"  Putting  forth  the  finger;"  a  gesture  of  derision.  "  Indicative  of  mockery  and  inso- 
lence towards  the  pious  and  persisting  part  of  the  nation"  (Matthew  Arnold).  3. 
Boasting.  A  spirit  of  self-satisfaction,  which  is  quite  inconsistent  with  any  approach  to 
God  with  expressions  of  need  and  fervent  desires.  "  Speaking  vanity."  While  these 
evils  must  be  put  away,  it  is  made  a  fiirther  condition  of  answer  to  prayer,  that  he  who 
prays  shall  be  positively  set  upon  doing  good,  caring  for  the  hungry  and  the  afSicted. 
As  the  immediate  reference  is  to  the  prayers  offered  on  the  national  fast-days,  this 
homily  may  be  made  to  bear  specially  upon  national  days  of  humiliation,  Ijenten  times, 
etc.  Such  times  are  useful,  and  are  necessary.  They  are  called  for  by  the  Divine 
judgments.  But  the  special  danger  of  them  is  insincerity.  The  special  condition  of 
their  acceptance  with  Ood  is  national  turning  from  sin  to  righteousness  and  charity. 
Therefore,  at  such  seasons,  the  work  of  God's  ministers  is  to  produce  due  convictions  of 
national  sins.  Our  Lord  taught  conditions  of  prayer  for  his  individual  disciples,  in  his 
sermon  on  the  mount.  "  For  if  ye  forgive  men  their  trespasses,  your  heavenly  Father 
will  also  forgive  you." — ^B.  T. 

Ver.  IL — Guided,  provided,  and  refreshed.  "  Guide  thee ; "  "  Satisfy  thy  soul  In 
drought ; "  "  Make  fat  thy  bones ; "  "  Make  thee  like  a  watered  garden."  These  figures 
are  all  plain  and  simple,  but  the  last  of  them  gains  point  by  some  knowledge  of  Eastern 
sentiments.  Van  Leunep  tells  us  that,  in  the  East,  "  almost  every  house  has  more  or 
less  of  a  garden  adjoining.  There  is  neither  system  nor  regular  laying  out.  Trees  are 
scattered  about  with  little  or  no  plan,  and  patches  for  vegetables  are  laid  out  as  most 
convenient,  onions  and  cabbages  being  the  universal  favourites.  But  the  ornament 
most  prized  in  a  garden,  one  which  all  seek  to  possess  if  they  can  possibly  afford  it,  is 
the  marble  tank — square,  oblong,  or  octagonal — with  a  spout  in  the  centre,  always  out 
of  order.  They  would  not  fpve  up  that  spout  in  the  centre  for  a  good  deal,  although  it 
does  not  play  once  in  a  generation;  but  they  sit  there  and  think  how  fine  it  would  be 
to  see  it  work,  and  it  is  almost  the  same  as  if  they  did  see  it.  These  tanks  are  often 
very  tastefully  cut  and  ornamented.  The  ground  around  them  is  always  well  smoothed, 
and  fine  grass  is  sown  in  it,  and  kept  fresh  by  frequent  sprinkling."  The  immediate 
reference  of  the  text  is  to  the  restoration  of  the  exiles.  Tneir  journey  they  well  might 
fear.  Weariness,  drought,  peril,  they  could  but  expect.  So  the  Divine  assurances 
some  meeting  the  three  points  of  their  special  need.  Their  need  is  ours  in  the  journey 
of  life,  our  journey  home  to  the  new  Jerusalem. 

I.  God  PBOjasES  help  fob  all  thk  movements  of  life.  "  Guide  thee  continu- 
ally." We  are  very  familiar  with  joumeyings.  We  are  always  going  to  and  fro.  By 
land  we  are  constantly  within  the  flange  of  a  wheel  of  destruction.    By  sea  only  a 

Elank  or  a  plate  of  iron  keeps  us  from  foundering.    Yet  how  securely  we  go  1    Is  it 
uman  science  or  skill  that  we  trust  ?    Nay,  God  guideth.    To  every  man  the  life-path 
is  unknown.    We  have  never  gone  the  way  heretofore.    No  matter.    God  guideth. 

II.  God  fbomises  sufplt  fob  the  nboebsities  of  life.  "Satisfy"  thee.  Com- 
pare "  Verily  thou  shalt  be  fed."  Forty  years  in  the  wilderness  Israel  was  fed.  For 
months  Elijah  was  fed.  Through  the  long  march  the  exiles  were  fed.  Manna  did  not 
more  truly  come  fiom  God  than  does  onr  daily  supply.  None  of  his  people  are  Ufi 
duolate. 

III.  God  FBOMun  bblisf  iob  thx  wxAsmwBS  or  urm.    Bnch  as  oomet  to 


OH.  Lix.  1— 21.]      THE   BOOK  OF  THE   PROPHET   ISAIAH. 


385 


drooping  flowers  in  the  garden  when  the  Boft  iftins  fall.  Such  as  comeB  to  parched 
travellers  when  in  the  desert  they  And  the  living,  sparkling  spriug.  Who  of  us  cannot 
recall  sweet  memories  of  Diyiue  refreshings,  winds  of  God,  waters  of  life  ? — B.  T. 

Ver.  13. — The  universal  sahhafh-law.  "Not  doing  thine  own  ways,  nor  finding 
thine  own  pleasure,  nor  speaking  thine  own  words."  The  peculiarity  of  the  day,  the 
essential  thing  about  the  day,  is  that  it  is  Qod^s  day,  not  ours.  We  only  keep  it  aright 
when  we  keep  it  for  Ood.  We  misuse  it  when  we  fill  it  with  any  ends  of  our  own. 
The  one  sabbath-work  is  a  special  effort  to  honour  and  obey  God,  and  we  shall  surely 
find  that  the  one-day  efibrt  helps  us  in  establishing  and  confirming  the  everyday 
~  habit.  Do  only  God's  pleasure  on  the  sabbaths,  and  it  will  be  easy  to  put  God's  will 
and  pleasure  ^rst  every  day.  Importance  attached  to  keeping  the  sabbath  in  Babylon, 
because  it  was  the  most  prominent  thing  in  which  the  people  publicly  witnessed  to 
their  separation  from  idolatry,  and  allegiance  to  Jehovah.  Faithful  observance  of  it 
was  the  test  by  which  the  faithful  ones  were  known.  Equal  importance  attaches  to 
the  keeping  of  the  sabbath  in  our  day.  It  is,  as  much  as  ever  it  was,  the  searching  test 
that  reveals  all  the  humble  and  faithful  followers  of  God.  Still  a  Christian  is  known 
by  the  Sunday  test,  "  Does  he  seek  his  own  pleasure  on  God's  day  ?  "  Henderson  well 
jays,  "The  observance  of  the  sabbath  has,  in  all  ages,  been  found  essential  to  the 
maintenance  and  prosperity  of  spiritual  religion."  Blackstone  says,  "  A  corruption  of 
morals  usually  follows  a  profanation  of  the  sabbath."  It  should  be  carefully  noticed 
that  this  prophet,  who  is  so  stern  against  forms  and  ceremonies  in  religion,  is  thus 
severe  in  demanding  loyalty  to  the  day  which  is  not  ours,  but  OocPs.  So  familiar  a 
subject  needs  no  more  than  an  outline  of  thought;  illustrative  material  will  readily  be 
suggested. 

I.  We  must  keep  the  day.  As  a  sepatate  day.  Showing  its  distinctness  from 
other  days  in  the  change  made  in  our  life-habits  and  associations.  Some  illustrations 
may  be  taken  from  our  keeping  wedding-days  or  birthdays.  At  such  times  our  minds 
are  full  of  some  particular  persons — the  days  are  kept  in  their  honour.  So  we  should 
separate  Sundays  for  God. 

II.  We  should  enjoy  the  day.  Here  is  a  paradox.  We  are  not  to  do  our  own 
pleasure  on  the  day,  but  we  are  to  find  our  pleasure  in  the  day.  Sunday  should  be  the 
brightest  day  of  the  week. 

UL  Ws  OUGHT  TO  HONOUR  GoD  Aix  THE  DAY.  What  precisely,  in  an  age,  a 
town,  a  comn^unity,  a  family,  or  a  life,  the  best  honouring  of  God  is,  the  preacher  must 
think  out  and  present  in  his  own  way.— K.  T. 


EXPOSITION. 


OHAPTBB  LIX. 

Yen.  1 — 8.7-A  Genbral  Rebuke  or 
Israel  fob  its  Manifold  Sins.  The  com- 
mand given  to  the  prophet  in  oh.  Iviii.  1 
to  "show  God's  people  their  transgression, 
and  the  house  of  Jacob  their  sins" — partly 
executed  in  ch.  IviiL  4—7  and  13— is  now 
further  carried  out  by  a  scathing  denuncia- 
tion of  various  forms  of  wickedness,  more  or 
less  prevalent  in  Israel,  the  effect  of  which 
has  been  to  separate  between  Israel  and 
God,  to  "  shorten  God's  hand  "  and  "  make 
his  ears  heavy."  The  passage  has  many 
«iialogies  with  ch.  i.  2 — 23. 

Ver.  1.— The  Lord's  hand  is  not  shortened; 
i.e,  God  is  not  less  able  to  help  than  of  old ; 
hJa  "hand"  has  lost  none  of  its  power. 

ISAIAH — ^11. 


That  he  does  not  help  is  owing  to  the 
iniquities  of  his  people,  which  have  sepa- 
rated between  him  and  them  (ver.  2).  It 
is  the  same  faot  which  has  made  his  ear 
heavy.  He  cannot  hear  prayers  that  are 
not  sincere — not  from  tlie  heart. 

Ver.  2. — Have  separated;  literally,  have 
i«e»  separating.  The  force  of  the  form  used 
is  continuous,  and  implies  that  Israel  had 
now  for  a  long  time  been  heaping  up  a 
barrier  between  itself  and  Jehovah.  Your 
sins  have  hid  his  face ;  literally,  your  tint 
have  caused  his  fane  to  he  liidden  from  you, 
Le.  "  have  made  him  avert  it." 

Ver.  8. — Your  hands  are  defiled  with 
blood  (comp.  ch.  i.  15,  21).  (On  the  "  inno- 
cent blood  "  shed  by  the  Jews  of  the  later 
Judssan  kingdom,  see  2  Kings  zxL  6,  16; 
xxiv.  4;  XXV.  25;  2  Chron.  xxiv.  21 ;  xxviii. 
3;  xsxiii.  6;  xsxvi.  16,  etc.)  It  consisted 
in  (1)  sacrifices  of  children  to  Moloch ;  (2) 
2  a 


386 


THE  BOOK   OF  THE  PEOPHET  ISAIAH,      [oh.  lix.  1—21 


periecntion  of  prophets;  and  (3)  judicial 
murders,  either  actual  (like  that  of  Naboth, 
in  Israel)  or  virtual,  i.e.  such  perTorsion  of 
justice  as  produced  general  poverty  and 
misery,  and  tended  to  shorten  men's  lives 
(see  the  comment  on  ch.  i.  1.5).  Yonr  lips 
have  spoken  lies  (comp.  ch.  xxxii.  7).  The 
vicked  opprLSSors  "  devised  wicked  devices 
to  destroy  the  poor  with  lying  words." 

Ver.  4. — None  calleth  for  justice ;  iitther, 
none  preferreth  his  suit  in  justice  (so  Lowth, 
Gesenius,  Ewald,  Knobel,  and  Mr.  Chtyne). 
"  No  one,"  that  is,  "  who  engaged  in  a  suit, 
limited  himself  to  just  pleas  and  honest 
courses  in  his  prosecution  of  it."  Nor  any 
pleadeth  for  truth ;  rather,  none  pleadeth  in 
truthfulness.  They  trust  in  vanity ;  literally, 
in  dtaos ;  i.e.  "  in  a  mass  of  false  and  vain 
statements."  The  whole  basis  of  the  deal- 
ings between  man  and  man  was  unsound, 
corrupt,  chaotic.  Where  truth  and  plain 
dealing  are  set  aside,  all  shortly  becomes 
ruin  and  confusion.  They  conceive  mischief 
etc.  (comp.  Ps.  vii.  14). 

Ver.  .*). — They  hatch  oockatriee'  eggs.  (On 
the  cockatrice,  see  the  comment  upon  ch. 
xi.  8.)  The  meaning  here  is  that  the  people 
gave  themselves  to  brooding  on  and  hat<'hing 
purposes  whioli  were  as  pernicious  and  de- 
structive as  the  eggs  of  venomous  serpents. 
And  weave  the  spider's  weh;  t.e.  "their 
purposes  were  as  flimsy  and  unsubstantial 
as  the  web  of  the  spider."  He  that  eateth, 
etc.  If  a  man  partake  of  their  plans,  he 
becomes  morally  as  bad  as  they,  and  is 
smitten  with  spiritual  death.  If  an  attempt 
be  made  to  "  crush  "  and  destroy  their  plans, 
the  only  result  is  the  premature  birth  of  a 
viper. 

Ver.  6. — Their  webs  shall  not  become  gar- 
ments. The  unsubstantial  fabrics  wMch 
they  weave  shall  not  serve  them  in  any 
way  as  garments,  or  be  of  any  real  value 
or  utility.  Their  devices  shall  not  take 
objective  shape  in  such  sort  as  to  afford 
them  "  cover  "  or  protection.  Their  vorks 
are  works  of  iniquity;  rather,  teorks  of 
nothingness,  worlis  that  make  a  mere  pre- 
tence of  being  works  at  all,  and  are  in 
reality  mere  shams,  impotent  and  delusive. 
And  the  act  of  violence  is  in  their  hands; 
rather,  and  it  it  an  act  of  violence  that  it  in 
their  iMnds.  Violence  creates  nothing.  At 
the  best,  it  destroys. 

Ver.  7.— Their  feet  run  to  evil  It  is, 
however,  only  too  true  that  they  have  a 
power  to  work  eviL  They  cannot  construct, 
their  devices  fall  through,  their  "spinning" 
is  to  no  purpose ;  but  they  can,  in  a  rough  and 
blind  way,  do  enormous  mischief.  "Their 
feet  run  to  evil " — rush  to  it  at  full  speed — 
brook  no  delay,  but  hurry  on  into  act. 
It  is  an  easy  thing  to  shed  innocent  blood; 
aad  those  who  are  consoioiu  of  constructive 


impotence  are  very  apt  to  geek  compensa- 
tion by  doing  destructive  work,  which  at 
least  shows  that  they  have  a  power  of  some 
kind.  Hence  "Eeigns  of  Terror"  when 
revolutions  are  at  the  last  gasp.  The  strong 
expressions  with  respect  to  shedding  inno- 
cent blood,  used  here  and  in  2  Kings  xxi.  16 
and  xxiv.  4,  seem  to  imply  something  like 
a  massacre  of  the  more  godly  Israelites  by 
the  ungodly  in  Manasseh's  time.  Wasting 
and  destruction  (compare  tlie  "  de.-truction 
and  misery  "  of  Bom.  iii.  16,  which  is  a  quo- 
tation of  the  present  passage). 

Ver.  8. — The  way  of  peace  they  know  not. 
They  have  no  desire  for  "  peace,"  and  neither 
"seek"  it  nor  "ensue"  it  (1  Pet.  iii.  11). 
Peace  can  only  be  obtained  through  right- 
eouaness  (ch.  xxxii.  17).  There  is  no  judg- 
ment in  their  goings ;  rather,  no  justice — no 
recognition  of  other  men's  rights,  no  endea- 
vour to  observe  right  in  their  own  acts  and 
proceedings  (comp.  ver.  4 ;  and  see  also  ch. 
L  17,  21,  23;  iii.  14,  15,  etc.).  They  have 
made  them  crooked  paths  (comp.  Prov.  ii.  15; 
X.  9 ;  xxviii.  6).  The  way  that  lendeth  to  life 
is  straight.  They  have  wandered  from  it,  and 
made  for  themselves"crooked"  p:iths,  which 
can  only  lead  to  destruction.  In  such  path* 
there  neither  ia  nor  can  be  "  peace." 

Vers.  9 — 15. — ^Ibbagl  humbly  coiii<'E881II 
ITS  SiKs  TO  Goi).  Isaiah,  anxious  to  bring 
the  people  to  confession  and  amendment, 
makes  humble  confession  in  their  name, 
joining  himself  with  them,  as  if  he  had 
been  a  participator  in  their  iniquities. 

Ver.  9. — Therefore — i.e.  on  account  of  these 
sins — is  judgment  far  from  ns;  i.e.  "does 
God  refrain  from  judging  our  enemies." 
Neither  doth  justice — i.e.  the  righting  of  the 
wrongs  which  we  suffer  at  the  hands  of  the 
heathen— overtake  ns.  We  are  left  by  God 
unavenged,  and  onr  enemies  are  left  on* 
punished  on  account  of  our  many  trans- 
gressions. We  wait  for  light.  We  look  foi 
a  bright  dawn  to  succeed  the  niglit  of  oui 
trouble ;  but  we  wait  in  vain — ^the  obsouiity 
continues. 

Ver.  10. — ^We  grope  for  the  wall;  rather, 
we  grope  along  the  wall  (comp.  Deut.  xxviii 
29;  and  for  the  "blindness  that  had  hap- 
pened unto  Israel,"  see  above,  ch.  xxix.  10, 
18;  xxxv.  5;  ilii.  16,  etc.).  We  stumble 
at  noonday.  It  was  not  that  light  was  really 
wanting,  but  they  had  no  eyes  to  behold  ii 
We  are  in  desolate  places ;  rather,  tn  dark 
placet  (Vrtgate,  Bodiger,  Kay,  Knobel). 
The  word  occurs  only  in  this  place,  and  is 
of  doubtful  signification. 

Ver.  11. — ^We  roar  all  like  bears ;  rather, 
we  growl.  The  verb  is  used  commonly  of 
the  "roaming"  of  the  sea  (oh.  xvii.  12;  li. 
IS;  Jer.  vi  23;  xxxi.  45;  i  12;  U.  65); 


OH.  Lix.  i— 21.]     THE  BOOK  OF  THE  PROPHET  ISAIAH. 


887 


bnt  i*  applied  also  to  the  noise  marie  by  a 
dog  (Pb.  lix.  6, 14).  Here  it  represents  the 
deep  murmur  of  discontent,  which  alternates 
■with  the  mournful  tones  of  Israel's  despon- 
dency— ^the  latter  being  compared  to  the 
melaTiohoIy  cooing  of  the  dove  (see  ch. 
xxxviii.  14).  We  look  for  judgment,  but 
there  is  none,  etc.  The  same  complaint  as 
in  ver.  9,  clause  1. 

Ver.  12.— Our  transgressions  are  multi- 
plied before  thee;  i.^.  they  are  very  nume- 
rous; and  they  come  "before  God,"  so  as 
to  attract  his  attention  and  call  for  his 
animadversion  Our  sins  testify  against  us ; 
i.e.  " rise  up  against  us  as  witnesses,  whose 
evidence  we  cannot  disprove,  and  I'ave  not 
even  the  face  to  dispute."  Our  transgres- 
sions are  with  us — i.e.  "constantly  haunt 
us" — and  as  for  our  iniquities,  we  know 
them;  i.e.  we  are  aware  of  tliein,  we  ac- 
knowledge them,  we  have  them  continually 
in  oiur  memories.  It  is  one  of  the  most 
certain  phenomena  of  consciousness  that 
grievous  sins,  deadly  sins,  haunt  the  mind, 
and  cannot  in  this  life  be  wiped  out  from 
the  memory. 

Ver.  13. — ^An  enumeration  of  special  sins. 
First,  sins  of  the  heart.  Transgressing  and 
lying  against  the  Lord ;  or  rather,  treaton 
and  unfaithfulness  to  Jehovah  (Cheyne); 
followed  by  departing  away  from  Ood,  or 
the  secret  act  of  apostasy.  Next,  sins  of 
the  tongue:  Speaking  oppression  and  revolt; 
or, oppression  and  lorong — Ihe  "wrong," pro- 
bably, of  false  accusation  (comp.  Deut.  xix. 
16);  and,  lastly,  conceiving  and  uttering 
.  .  .  words  of  falsehood  generally. 

Ver.  14. — Judgment  is  turned  away  baok- 
ward.  In  conclusion,  the  crying  sin  of  per- 
version of  justice  is  admitted  with  much 
amplification.  (I)  Bight  judgment  is  ex- 
actly inverted — the  innocent  are  condemned, 
the  guilty  acquitted.  (2)  Justice  standeth 
afar  off — too  far  off  to  be  able  to  hear  those 
who  make  appeal  to  it.  (3)  Truth  iB  fallen 
in  the  street ;  t.e.  false  witness  prevails  over 
true  in  the  courts  of  justice.  (4)  Equity 
cannot  enter — is  not  admitted  inside  the 
courts,  but  waits  without. 

Ver.  15.— Yea,  truth  faileth.  Truth  itself 
is  altogether  gone,  is  missing,  not  forth- 
coming. "Terras  Astrsea  reliquit."  This 
is  the  worst  of  all.  For  truth  is  the  basis 
of  the  social  fabric,  the  groundwork  of  all 
morality.  Once  let  there  be  no  regard  for 
truth  in  a  state,  no  discredit  attacldng  to 
lying,  and  all  virtue  is  undermined,  all 
soundness  is  vanished — nothing  remains  bnt 
"  wounds,  and  bruises,  and  putrifying  sores  " 
(oh.  L  6).  He  thai  departeth  from  evil 
maketh  himself  a  prey.  Evil-doers  prosper. 
The  man  who  "eschews  evil,'  and  declines 
to  employ  (as  otheis  do)  the  weapons  of 
fjrand  and  ▼iolence,  simply  gives  himself 


over  as  a  prey  to  those  who  are  less  scrupu- 
Ions  than  himself. 

Vers.  15 — 21. — ^A  Pbomise  or  Deliveb- 
ANOE  TO  Oppressed  Isbael.  The  godly  ia 
Israel  were  suffering  a  double  oppression : 

(1)  at  the  hand  of  their  imgodly  bretljren ; 

(2)  at  the  hand  of  the  heathen.  The  pro- 
phet promises  a  deliverance  from  both.  The 
deliverance  will  be  followed  by  the  estab- 
lishment of  Messiah's  kingdom,  whioh  will 
continue  for  ever. 

Ver.  15. — And  the  Lord  saw  it.  The  di- 
vision of  tho  verses  here  requires  alteration. 
The  openinu;  clause  of  ver.  15  belongs 
to  what  precedes ;  the  second  clause  to 
what  follows.  "The  Lord  saw"  tijat  con- 
dition of  things  in  Israel  which  is  described 
in  vers.  3—15 ;  and  it  displeased  him ;  lite- 
rally, it  was  evil  in  his  eyes,  especially  in 
that  there  was  no  judgment.  Justice  was 
not  done  between  man  and  man;  no  one 
thought  of  pronouncing  just  judgments. 
The  circumstances  were  such  as  to  invite  a 
Divine  interposition. 

Ver.  16. — He  saw  that  there  was  no  man, 
and  wondered  that  there  was  no  intercessor; 
i.e.  God  looked  for  some  champion  of  the 
oppressed  to  arise;  it  was  to  be  expected 
under  the  circumstances.  But,  alas !  "  there 
was  no  man."  None  stood  up  to  resist  the 
unrighteous  and  protect  the  innocent;  much 
less  did  any  stand  up  to  deliver  Isiael  from 
its  heathen  adversaiies.  When  it  is  said 
that  God  "  wondered  "  at  no  champion  ap- 
pearing, we  must  understand  the  expression 
as  an  anthropomorphism.  Therefore  his 
arm  brought  salvation  unto  him.  As  there 
was  no  liuman  cliampion,  it  became  neces- 
sary that  God  should  arise  in  his  own  Per- 
son, and  show  himself.  "  His  arm "  and 
"his  rigliteousness"  were  enough  ;  nohuman 
aid  was  needed,  or  could  have  added  any- 
thing to  the  resistless  strength  of  his  might 
(comp.  ch.  Ixiii,  5). 

Ver.  17. — He  put  on  righteousness  as  a 
breastplate.  The  Isaian  anthropomorphism 
is  far  less  gross  than  the  Homeric,  'fhe 
gods  in  Homer  put  on  actual  armour,  and 
take  sword  and  shield.  Jehovah  arms  him- 
self for  the  battle  in  a  way  tIjat  is  manifestly 
metaphoric.  He  puts  on  a  *'  Divine  panoply  " 
— righteousness  as  his  breastplate,  salvation 
as  his  helmet,  vengeance  for  garments,  and 
zeal,  or  jealousy,  for  a  cloak.  He  takes  no 
offensive  weapons — "  the  out-breathing  of 
his  Spirit  (ver.  19)  is  enough "  (Kay). 

Ver.  18. — According  to  their  deeds;  rather, 
according  to  their  deserts  (comp.  Ps,  xxviii. 
4,  ad  fin.).  He  will  repay.  The  ordinary 
futuie  here,  and  in  the  remainder  of  the 
prophecy,  replaces  the  "  perfect  of  proplioti« 
certitude,"  which  has   been  employed  ii 


S88 


THE  BOOK  OP  THE  PROPHET  ISAIAH,      [ch.  ux.  1— 21 


rers.  16,  17.  Fury  to  his  adTeTsaiies,  re- 
compense to  his  enemies.  God's  "  advei- 
earies  "  are  those  of  bis  own  household — his 
people,  the  ungodly  Israelites;  bis  "ene- 
mies" are  the  heathen  that  oppress  his 
people  (comp.  oh.  i,  24,  which  is  very 
similar).  To  the  islands ;  i.e.  the  maritime 
kinds,  which,  under  Assyria,  and  afterwards 
nnder  Babylon,  took  part  in  the  oppression 
of  his  people. 

Ver.  19. — So  shall  they  fear;  rather,  and 
Oiey  ehall  fear.  The  result  of  the  trium- 
phant exhibition  of  God's  might  will  be  a 
conversion  of  the  Gentiles,  who  will  flock 
in  both  from  the  west — the  quarter  of  "  the 
islands" — and  from  the  east,  to  do  rever- 
ence to  the  name  and  to  the  glory  of  the 
Lord.  When  the  enemy  shall  come  in 
(rather,  come  on)  like  a  flood;  literally,  like 
the  river;  i.e.  the  Euphrates  (comp.  ch. 
Tui.  7,  "The  Lord  bringeth  up  upon  them 
the  waters  of  tlie  river,  strong  and  many, 
even  the  King  of  Assyria  and  all  his  glory," 
etc.).  When  this  shcdl  be  the  case,  then  the 
Spirit  of  the  lord — ^hypostasized  or  nearly 
so— shall  lift  np  a  standard  against  him 
(oomp.  ch.  X.  18 ;  Zech.  ix.  16),  and  easily 
vanquish  him.  The  metaphor  of  "  lifting 
a  standard  "  for  making  an  armed  resistance 
is  common  in  Isaiah  (r.  26;  ziii  2;  xviii. 
S :  zxzi.  9,  etc.). 

Ver.  20. — And  the  Sedeemer  shall  oome  to 
Zion;  lather,  and  Otert  thaU  oomt  •  Bo- 


deemer  for  Zion,  and  for  those  mho  ttim,  etc 
When  the  "  adversaries  "  and  tho  "  enemies" 
shall  have  been  punished,  repentant  Israel 
shall  be  saved  by  the  coming  of  Messiah. 
As  usual,  the  prophet  does  not  note,  or  per- 
haps see,  intervals  of  time,  but  blends  events 
of  various  poriods  into  one  glorious  vision 
of  triumphant  deliverance,  redemption,  and 
prolonged  spiritual  life  in  the  Bedtemer's 
kingdom. 

Yer.  21. — As  for  me;  literally,  and  I. 
The  prophet  begins  with  one  construction, 
and  then  checks  himself,  and  introduces 
another.  This  is  my  covenant  (comp.  Jer. 
xxxi.  31 — 31 ;  and  see  the  comment  on  ch. 
Iv.  3).  The  new  covenant  involved  the 
giving  of  God's  Spirit  to  his  people  (Joel  ii 
28);  and  this  Spirit,  it  is  here  promised, 
shall  not  depart  from  God's  people  while 
time  endures.  The  Spirit  wUl  be  accom- 
panied with  certain  "words"  which  will  be 
put  into  the  Church's  mouth;  and  these 
words  will  remain  unchanged  and  pass  on 
from  mouth  to  mouth,  age  after  age,  for 
ever.  The  "  words  "  intended  are  probably 
those  of  the  entire  Bible — "all  God's  revela- 
tions" (Cheyne) — which  the  Church  will 
maintain  as  inspired  truth  through  all  ages. 
Upon  thee;  t.e.  upon  Israel.  The  change 
of  number  and  person  ("with  them  .  .  . 
upon  thee  ")  is  not  unusual  in  Isaiah  (i.  29 ; 
zzxui.  2;  xlix.  6;  Ixii.  11, 12,  eta,). 


HOMILBTIC& 

Ven.  2 — 8. — The  wiscMt/aetoriness  of  linful  wmrtes.  "VJhei  fruit  had  ye  then  In 
those  things  whereof  ye  now  are  ashamed?"  asks  the  apostle  of  those  whom  he  had 
converted  from  a  life  of  sin  to  a  life  of  righteousness  (Bom.  vi.  21).  What  good  did  the 
life  of  sin  seem  to  do  you  ?  Of  course,  if  the  lite  of  sin  had  no  pleasures  at  all  to  offer, 
it  would  have  no  attractiveness,  and  would  not  be  led  by  any.  But  what,  after  all,  are 
the  attractions,  compared  with  the  counterbalancing  disadvantages? 

L  Thk  fleasubes  of  sin  ABE  SLiaHT,  EVEN  WHILE!  THEY  LAST.  Ko  doubt  there 
is  a  gratification  in  the  satisfaction  of  every  desire,  in  the  venting  of  every  passion,  in 
the  full  indulgence  of  every  lust  and  appetite.  There  is  a  pleasure  also  in  the  mere 
indulgence  of  self-will,  the  setting  aside  of  every  restraint,  and  the  determination  to  be 
free  and  do  exactly  what  we  choose.  But  put  all  these  things  together;  and  to  what 
do  they  amount  ?  What  is  their  value  ?  Is  the  game  worth  the  candle  ?  Are  not  the 
pleasures  themselves  always  mixed  with  pains,  which  detract  from  them?  Du  they 
not  generally  involve  as  their  consequences  worse  pains,  to  that  mere  selfishness  should 
make  us  decide  to  decline  the  pleasures?  Does  not  conscience  offer  a  continual  protest 
against  the  lile  of  sin?  and  is  not  that  protest  painful— often  severely  painful ?  Again, 
are  not  those  who  lead  a  life  of  sin,  even  while  they  lead  it,  always  more  or  less  ashamed 
of  it  ?  And  is  not  that  shame  a  very  bitter  feeling  ?  Is  not  the  disapproval  of  the  life 
by  friends  and  relatives,  especially  the  nearest,  who  should  be  the  dearest,  a  very  sub- 
stantial set-off  against  any  balance  of  pleasure  that  might  otherwise  remain  ?  Do  the 
wicked  ever  "  know  peace  "  ?  Can  they  ever  calmly  review  their  lives,  and  derive  from 
the  review  any  feeling  of  satisfaction  ?  Can  they  even  boast  in  all  their  life  of  a  moment's 
perfect  restftdness,  content,  calm,  quiet,  sense  of  ease? 

II.  The  pleasubes  of  bin  abe  flebtino  ;  thbt  die  out  as  time  goes  on.    Tb» 


•H.  Lix.  1— 21.]      THE  BOCK  OF   THE   PROPHET   ISAIAH.  889 

great  pleasure-seekers  have  always  acknowledged  that  the  end  of  all  indulgence  is 
satiety.  The  cry  of  the  sensualist  is  for  "  a  new  pleasure; "  but  the  cry  is  vain.  New 
pleasures  are  not  forthcoming.  Sensualists  tread  the  same  weary  round  over  and  over 
again,  with  less  of  satisfaction  each  time  it  is  traversed,  and  with  a  growing  feeling  that 
they  are  slaves,  compelled  to  grind  perpetually  on  the  same  futile  treadmill.  Almost 
every  passion  dies  out  after  a  time.  If  any  one  remaioB,  it  is  avarice,  which  reduces  its 
victim  to  the  most  miserable  condition  possible. 

III.  The  plgasukbs  of  bik  separate  from  Gh>D.  If  God  is,  as  even  the  heathen 
acknowledcred,  the  supreme  good;  and  if  man's  highest  good  is,  as  some  of  them  also 
allowed,  communion  with  him, — then  anything  whatsoever  that  separates  from  him  is 
weighted  with  a  disadvantage  which  must  necessarily  overbalance  all  possible  good  that 
it  can  possess.  Were  the  pleasures  of  sin  ten  thousand  times  greater  than  they  are, 
and  were  they  absolutely  permanent,  instead  of  being,  as  they  are,  fleeting  and  evanescent, 
the  single  fact,  here  mentioned  by  Isaiah  (ver.  2),  that  they  erect  a  barrier  between 
man  and  God,  should  render  them  utterly  unsatisfactory  to  a  reasonable  being.  To  be 
cut  ofif  from  God  is  to  be  cut  off  from  the  source  of  all  joy  and  peace  and  happiness ; 
it  is  to  be  shut  out  from  light,  to  lose  contact  with  the  Life  which  sustains  all  other  life, 
and  to  be  left  to  our  own  miserable  selves  for  the  remainder  of  our  existence.  Nothing 
could  possibly  be  a  compensation  to  man  for  such  losses. 

Vers.  14, 15. — ZVu^A  the  foundation  of  morality.  Surprise  is  sometimes  expressed  at 
there  being  no  distinct  prohibition  of  all  lying  in  the  ten  commandments.  "False 
witness  "  alone  is  forbidden.  But  the  reason  may  be  that  truth  is  assumed  as  too 
fundamentally  necessary  for  any  one  to  suppose  that  it  could  possibly  be  dispensed 
with.  Similarly,  piety  is  assumed  as  a  duty  in  the  commandments,  where  men  are  not 
bidden  to  worship  God,  but  warned  against  worshipping  more  than  one  God,  and  against 
worshipping  him  in  an  improper  way.  Truth  throughout  Scripture  appears  as  a  quality 
assumed  to  be  possessed  by  men,  rather  than  as  a  virtue  which  they  are  to  be  exhorted 
to  "  put  on."    It  lies,  in  fact,  at  the  root  of  all  real  goodoesa. 

L  Truth  lies  at  the  boot  of  justice.  The  administration  of  justice  consists 
primarily  in  a  series  of  efforts  to  find  out  the  truth.  There  is  always  a  question  before 
the  court,  and  the  first  question  is  one  of  fact,  "  Has  the  thing  charged  been  done  or 
no?"  What  is  the  truth  of  the  matter?  When  this  has  been  decided,  if  decided  on 
the  affirmative  side,  then  a  second  question  arises,  "  What  is  the  degree  of  the  guilt  ?  " 
It  is  essential  for  the  judge  to  have  the  most  earnest  desire  to  discover  the  truth,  and 
the  highest  power  of  eliciting  the  truth.  Nor  is  this  all.  To  every  one  concerned  in  a 
cause — whether  prosecutor,  defendant,  witness,  counsel,  or  attorney — the  sole  object 
ought  to  be  the  discovery  of  the  truth.  The  importance  of  veracity  in  the  witnesses  is 
universally  admitted;  but  veracity  is  really  incumbent  on  all  concerned.  A  prisoner 
who  knows  himself  guilty  would  do  best  to  confess  his  guilt.  It  is  no  real  benefit  to 
him  to  be  acquitted  unless  he  is  innoceiit.  Truth  ought  to  govern  all  the  utterances  of 
counsel,  who  are  not  entitled  to  make  any  suggestions  but  such  as  they  think  may  be 
true.  Chicanery,  quibbles,  special  pleading,  are  unworthy  of  those  who  take  part  in  the 
administration  of  justice  and  exercise  what  is  really  a  sacred  function.  The  first  requisite 
of  all  those  who  bear  part  in  the  solemn  work  of  "doing  justice"  is  that  they  should 
be  "  men  of  truth"  (Exod.  xviii.  21). 

II.  Truth  lies  at  the  boot  of  kindness.  The  desire  to  be  kind  is  independent 
of  truth ;  but  the  molUeut  that  the  desire  has  to  pass  into  action,  considerations  of  truth 
come  in.  Am  I  prompted  to  praise  a  person  ?  But  if  I  pi  aise  him  when  he  is  deserving 
of  blame,  I  am  doing  him  the  greatest  unkindness.  If  I  even  overpraise  him  when  he 
deserves  praise,  I  am  doing  him  an  unkindness  to  a  certain  extent — an  unkindness  and 
a  wrong.  I  am  helping  him  to  content  himself  vrith  a  low  standard  of  goodness.  Again, 
suppose  that  I  am  prompted  to  relieve  a  person  who  appears  to  me  poor  and  distressed. 
To  decide  aright  whether  I  ought  to  relieve  him  at  all,  and,  if  so,  to  what  extent,  I 
require  a  true  knowledge  of  his  circumstances.  I  do  him  an  injury  if  I  allow  him  to 
impose  upon  me.  I  do  him  au  injury  if  I  repress  efforts  that  he  would  otherwise  have 
made  to  help  himself.  In  all  the  kindly  acts  that  we  seek  to  do  to  others  there  b 
always  room  for,  and  generally  much  need  of,  careful  consideiatimi  of  fiacts,  disooreiy 
of  the  exactly  true  state  of  the  case,  before  we  allow  AuneWw  to  follow  our  impulses. 


890  THE  BOOK  OF  THE  PROPHET  ISAIAH,     [ch.  lix  1— a 

Otherwise  we  may  make  great  blunders,  and,  while  striving  to  be  kind,  be  guilty  of  many 
an  unkindness. 

HI.  Tbuth  lies  at  thb  boot  of  piett.  Piety  is  a  feeling  of  love  and  reverence 
towards  some  being,  or  beings,  whom  we  feel  to  be  superior  to  ourselves,  and  believe  to 
afford  us  help  and  protection.  It  is  impossible  to  say  that  many  of  the  heathen,  many 
even  of  the  grossest  idolaters,  were  not,  in  a  certain  sense,  pious.  But  for  piety  to  attain 
its  full  proportions,  and  to  be  the  virtue  that  it  was  intended  to  be,  it  needs  to  rest  upon 
a  basis  of  truth.  We  need  to  have  true  conceptions  of  the  nature  of  that  which  is  the 
object  of  our  love  and  reverence.  Until  we  conceive  of  that  "  eternal  something  outside 
us  that  makes  for  righteousness"  as  One,  as  a  Person,  as  the  Creator  of  all  things,  as 
omnipotent,  as  omniscient,  as  beneficent,  and  as  perfectly  good,  we  cannot  have  the 
feelings  towards  him  that  we  ought  to  have,  or  worship  him  acceptably.  True  piety 
is  the  worship  of  the  true  God.  The  votaries  of  false  religions  possess  only  a  semblance 
of  piety — a  dwarff^d  and  cramped,  sometimes  a  distorted,  imitation  of  it. 

Vers.  20,  21, —  The  Church  indefectibU.  The  Church  of  Gbd,  being  a  body  of  men 
and  women,  each  one  of  whom  is  weak,  fallible,  and  liable  to  fall  from  the  truth,  ay, 
even  to  apostasy,  must,  by  the  nature  of  things,  be  of  iUdf  and  in  itself  defectible.  A 
weakness  which  attaches  to  all  the  individuals  of  a  body  must  attach  to  the  body 
which  those  individuals  make  up.  The  Church,  therefore,  is  not,  per  le,  indefectible. 
If  indefectible  in  fact,  it  can  only  be  so  by  the  will  of  God,  and  can  only  be  by  us 
known  to  be  so  if  God  bad  declared  to  us  his  will.    But  this  has  been  done — 

I.  God  oeclabbo  by  the  fbai^mists  and  the  pbofhets  that  he  would  bkt  or 
ON  eabth  an  imperishable  kingdom,  oitt,  ob  coumdnitv  of  men.  a  promise  to 
this  effect  was  first  given  to  David.  God  said  to  him,  by  the  mouth  of  Xathan,  "I  will 
set  up  thy  seed  after  thee,  which  shall  proceed  out  of  thy  bowels,  and  I  will  establish 
his  kingdom.  He  shall  build  an  house  for  my  Name,  and  I  will  establish  the  throne  of 
his  kingdom /or  ever  "  (2  Sam.  vii.  12, 13);  and  again,  "  Thine  house  and  thy  kingdom 
shall  be  established /or  ever  before  thee :  thy  throne  shall  be  established /or  ever  "  (2  Sam. 
vii.  16).  Hence  David  himself  spake  of  "  the  city  of  the  Lord  of  hosts,  which  God 
would  establish /or  ever"  (Ps.  xlviii.8).  And  Ethan  the  Ezrahite  spoke  of  the  promise 
as  a  "  covenant  to  which  God  had  "  sworn : "  "  His  seed  shall  endure /or  ever,  and  his 
throne  as  the  sun  before  me.  It  shall  be  established  for  ever  as  the  moon,  and  as  a 
faithful  witness  in  heaven  "  (Ps.  Ixxxix.  34 — 37).  Isaiah's  declarations  as  to  a  coming 
kingdom  are  to  the  same  effect.  "  Unto  us  a  Child  is  born,  unto  us  a  Son  is  given : 
and  the  government  shall  be  upon  his  shoulder.  ...  of  the  increase  of  his  government 
and  peace  there  shall  he  no  end,  upon  the  throne  of  David,  and  upon  his  kingdom,  to 
order  it,  and  to  establish  it  with  judgment  and  with  justice  from  henceforth  even  for 
ever"  (ch.  ix.  6, 7).  And  the  declaration  of  the  present  chapter :  "  My  Spirit  that  is  upon 
thee,  and  my  w  ords  that  I  have  put  in  thy  mouth,  shall  not  depart  out  of  thy  mouth, 
nor  out  of  the  mouth  of  thy  seed,  nor  out  of  the  mouth  of  thy  seed's  seed  .  .  .  from 
henceforth  and  for  ever." 

II.  God  attached  these  pbomises,  thbouoh  the  declabations  of  his  Son,  to  thb  , 

PAETICULAB   COMMUNITT  WHICH   HE  CALLED   HIS  ChUBCH.      "  ThoU  8rt  Peter,"  Said  Our 

blessed  Lord,  "  and  upon  this  rock  I  will  build  my  Church ;  and  the  gates  of  hell  shdU 
not  prevail  against  it "  (Matt.  xvL  18) ;  "  Go, . . .  teach  all  nations,"  our  Lord  said  again, 
"  and,  lo,  1  am  with  you  alway,  even  unto  the  end  of  the  world  '  (Matt,  xxviii.  19,  20). 
The  apostles  are  confident,  therefore,  that  the  Church  will  always  continue.  St.  Paul, 
in  his  directions  concerning  the  Eucharist,  declares  that,  through  their  partaking  of,  it. 
Christians  "  do  show  the  Lord's  death  tiU  he  come  "  (1  Cor.  xL  26).  And  he  speaks  of 
the  members  of  the  Church  who  are  living  at  the  last  day  as  "  caught  up  in  the  clouds, 
to  meet  the  Lord  in  the  air "  (1  Thess.  iv.  17).  St.  John  traces  the  fortunes  of  the 
Church  from  his  own  time  to  the  consummation  of  all  things,  and  finds  a  remnant  of 
faithful  ones  upon  the  earth  to  the  last,  who  give  testimony  for  Jesus  (Bev.  ii. — xxi.). 
Christians  are  therefore  justified  in  believing  that  the  Church  of  Christ  is  practically,  il 
not  ideally,  indefectible — that  in  point  of  fact,  it  will  never  fail,  but  will  continue  to  the 
end  oi  the  world  Christ's  great  witness  upon  earth,  testifying  to  his  Godhead,  to  hii 
ndeeming  love,  and  to  the  sufficiency  of  his  one  sacrifice. 


OH.  Lix.  1—21.]      THE  BOOK  OP  THE  PROPHET  ISAIAH.  391 


HOMILIES  BY  VARIOUS  AUTHOE& 

Vera.  1 — 15. — 2%e  separation  of  the  soul  from  God.  Why  in  the  hour  of  need  it 
there  no  deliverance?  Why  are  prayers  for  aid  unanswered?  A  theory  might  obtain, 
or  an  objection  misht  be  raised,  that  Divine  power  was  not  sufScient,  that  the  Divine 
sensibility  was  dulled.  And  yet  this  cannot  be.  The  simplest  knowledge  of  what  God 
is  must  contradict  an  assumption  so  foolish.  There  must  be  another  explanation ;  and 
that,  the  conscience  says,  is  to  be  found  on  the  human  side  of  the  relation. 

I.  The  channel  of  Divine  communication  closed.  Only  to  tlfe  upright  doei 
Jehovah  show  himself  upright,  only  pure  to  the  pure.  There  is  a  state  of  the  soul  in 
which  men  see  God,  because  his  face  is  therein  reflected  ;  but  those  addressed  have  long 
been  "  belying  their  professions  by  their  acts,  and  thus  precluding  an  answer  to  their 
prayers"  (ch.  Iviii,  2 — i).  The  face  is  "the  self-manifesting  side  of  the  Divine 
nature  "  (cf.  ch,  Ixiii.  9 ;  i.  12 ;  xL  10).  Where  that  is  not  given,  there  must  be  dark- 
ness  in  the  mind,  and  bitterness  in  the  heart. 

II.  SiNFDL  OBSTACLES  TO  BE  REMOVED.  The  defilement  of  the  hands.  With  the 
guilt  of  blood.  But  probably  this  stands,  by  a  strong  figure,  for  sin  in  general.  The  lips 
are  lying,  and  the  tongue  depraved.  Here  the  organs  of  the  body,  ministers  of  the 
mind,  express  and  set  forth  the  state  of  the  latter.  There  is  a  certain  correspondence 
between  cleanliness  of  the  person  and  truthfulness  and  honesty  of  the  soul.  And  it  is 
just  this  which  is  wanting.  Society  is  resting  on  a  foundation  of  chaos.  Men  weave 
their  schemes,  vain  and  brittle  as  spiders'  webs,  or  hatch  policies  pernicious  as  the  eggs 
of  basilisks.  They  tread  with  swiftness  the  paths  of  mischief;  their  thoughts  are  full 
of  hate  and  destruction.  They  ignore  the  way  of  peace  and  the  track  of  justice,  and 
follow  crooked  paths  of  their  own  (Prov.  x.  9 ;  xxviii.  18 ;  iL  15).  It  is  a  picture  of 
extreme  social  demoralization. 

III.  Penitence  and  confession  of  sins.  The  prophet  speaks  in  the  name  of  the 
people.  And  here  all  the  true  elements  of  repentance  and  confession  may  be  found. 
1.  The  connection  of  sin  with  Divine  disfavour.  'I'he  first  thing  is  to  see  that  the  curse 
does  not  "causeless  come;"  the  next  to  fix  upon  the  true  cause.  It  is  not  because  of 
want  of  will  or  want  of  power  in  God  (ver.  12).  They  were  entitled  to  expect  his  help^ 
according  to  the  covenant,  but  not  apart  from  conditions  on  their  side  to  be  fulfilled. 
If,  then,  the  judicial  interference  of  Jehovah  on  their  behalf  was  not  witnessed,  the  cause 
must  lie  in  the  breach  of  those  conditions — in  "  our  sins."  2.  Human  darkness  and 
bewilderment  without  God.  "  Jehovah  shall  be  thy  Light  and  thy  Salvation."  That  light 
withdrawn, — what  can  there  be  groping  and  stumbling  in  the  thick  darkness?  (Deut. 
xxviii.  29).  How  extreme  the  contrast  of  the  "  way  which  Jehovah  knows,"  of  the 
"  path  of  the  just,  shining  to  the  perfect  day ; "  and  the  "  knowing  not  whither  he 
goeth,"  the  "staggering  as  at  noonday,"  the  groping  and  stumbling  of  the  man  God- 
abandoned  and  left  to  himself.  3.  Human  sorrow  arid  despair  loitliout  Ood.  Compared 
to  the  growling  or  moaning  of  beast  or  bird.  Men  long  to  have  their  own  will  and 
way,  and  find  that  to  be  "  lords  of  themselves  "  is  a  "  heritage  of  woe."  Sooner  or  later 
they  niust  find  that  their  passionate  autonomy  means  "rebellion"  before  God  and  in 
their  own  consciousness.  And  peace  cannot  be  where  they  know  that  they  are  thus 
"  kicking  against  the  goads."  The  passage  strongly  shows  how  a  violated  conscience 
must  be  a  tormenting  conscience.  God  will  not  let  us  sin  and  forget.  "  As  for  our 
iniquities,  we  know  them."  4.  Human  shame  and  self-contempt  without  Ood,  It  is 
contempt  that  "  pierces  through  the  shell  of  the  tortoise ; "  above  all,  one's  own  con- 
tempt. The  worst  is  when  we  look  into  the  mirror  held  up,  not  by  hand  of  enemy  or 
critic,  but  by  our  own,  and  see  the  lineaments  of  the  traitor,  the  expression  of  the 
infidel  at  heart,  the  base  attitude  of  the  deserter  and  backslider  from  the  Holy  One, 
the  downcast  mien  of  the  convicted  liar.  There  has  been  no  truth,  no  rectitude,  no 
justice.  These,  as  fair  spirits,  have  been  banislied  from  a  polluted  earth.  And  if  one 
would  live  an  innocent  life,  he  is  but  game  for  any  rude  spoiler.  In  all  this  there  is 
the  deepest  sense  of  he  evil  of  sin,  and  of  the  need  of  humiliation.  It  is  felt  that  humilia- 
tion cannot  remove  the  evil,  unless  it  first  remove  the  sin.  Misery  is  the  natural  effect 
of  iniquity ;  and  he  that  seeks  to  rid  himself  of  the  one  before  he  is  freed  from  the 
other  would  hinder  the  stream  before  he  has  stopped  the  fiMintun.     "'Bend  your 


892  THE  BOOK  OF  THE  PROPHET  ISAIAH,      [oh.  ldk.  1— 21 

hearts,  and  not  yonr  garments.'  If  the  heart  be  not  torn  off  from  sin,  to  rend  only  the 
garment  farther  provokes  God,  and  makes  the  breach  wider.  There  is  do  reli^ous 
duty  attains  its  end,  but  when  it  weakens  our  sin."  True  fasting  draws  down,  as  here 
Men,  the  pity  and  invites  the  help  of  the  Almighty.r— J. 

Vers.  15 — ^21. — Jehovah  a»  Champion  of  the  people,  L  Hb  n  thb  iotxrestkd 
Spbotatob  op  huuan  affairs.  He  "  conraders  in  his  dwelling-place  "  (ch.  xviii.  4). 
He  "  causes  his  ear  to  hear  " — to  judge  the  fatherless  and  oppressed,  that  the  man  of  the 
earth  may  no  more  oppress  (Ps.  x.  18).  He  is  not  like  the  gods  of  the  Epicureans, 
"  sitting  Apart,  eareless  of  mankind."  He  is  a  God  who  can  feel  pleasure  in  goodness 
and  the  good,  displeasure  in  the  prevalence  of  wrong  and  injustice.  To  doubt  it  is  to 
doubt  of  the  existeoce  of  God  himself. 

IL  He  takes  upon  himself  the  cause  or  the  ofpressed.  He  saw  that  there  was 
"  no  man,"  no  champion,  and  was  "  stupeSed,"  or  in  "  consternation  "  (cf.  Jer.  xiv.  9), 
that  none  was  at  hand  to  interpose  in  l»ttle  on  behalf  of  his  own.  He  therefore  armed 
himself  with  sword  and  bow,  with  coat  of  mail  and  helmet,  and  the  garments  of  zeal 
and  vengeance.  A  great  world-struggle  is  coming  on,  in  which  he  will  inflict  retribu- 
tion upon  his  foes. 

III.  The  revebekoe  of. the  nations  tob  him.  The  Gentiles  who  are  spared 
are  imagined  as  hastening  from  their  distant  abodes  in  tremulous  anxiety  to  meet 
Jehovah.  His  Name  (cf.  Dent,  xxviii.  68 ;  Micah  vi.  9 ;  Neh.  L  11 ;  Ps.  Ixxxvi.  11 ; 
cii.  16)  shall  be  universally  feared.  His  advance  will  be  like  that  of  a  rushing  stream, 
driven  by  the  might  of  the  wind,  and  so  as  a  Ooel  he  will  come  to  Zion,  and  to  all  the 
obedient — those  that  have  "  turned  from  rebellion."  The  effect  of  his  coming  will  be 
the  turning  of  men  from  their  sins,  and  only  to  such  regenerate  ones  will  he  come. 

IV.  His  covenant.  He  makes  solemn  promises  to  men  conditional  on  their  com- 
pliance with  his  terms.  To  the  repentant  his  Spirit  will  be  imparted,  as  a  continuous 
gift.  His  words,  or  revelations,  shall  be  in  their  moutb,  therefore  in  their  minds  and 
hearts,  for  ever — flowing  on,  a  holy  stream  of  tradition,  from  generation  to  generation 
(cf.  Deut.  vii.  9 ;  iv.  37 ;  v.  29 ;  Ps.  Ixxxix.  24—36 ;  Jer.  xxxii.  39,  40).  The  majority 
of  religious  people  are  descendants  of  those  who  were  the  friends  of  God.  A  large 
proportion  of  American  piety  has  descended  from  the  Pilgrim  Fathers.  Barnes  says 
"I  am  acquainted  with  the  descendant*  of  John  Rogers,  the  first  martyr  in  Queen 
Mary's  reign,  of  the  tenth  and  eleventh  generations.  With  a  single  exception,  the  eldest 
sou  in  the  family  has  been  a  clergyman — some  of  them  eminently  distinguished  for 
learning  and  pety." — J. 

Ver.  1. — The  Divine  db&ity.  "Behold,  the  Lord's  hand  is  not  shortened,  that  it 
cannot  save."  We  note  here  something  that  awakens  surprise.  Behold!"  Let  Israel 
know  where  her  help  lies.     There  has  been  wrong  looking,  viz.  to  sel£ 

I.  Gk)D  STILL  WORKS  If!  THE  WORLD.  It  is  "his  hand."  He  "  formed  "  ns,  and  he 
"  redeems  "  us. 

II.  We  mat  make  mistakes  oonoebnino  human  histobt.  His  "hand  is  not 
shortened."  It  can  always  reach  to  every  length,  and  raise  from  every  depth.  The 
future  must  be,  therefore,  in  ourselves. 

III.  Salvation  is  alwats  possible  on  eabth.  1.  In  M forme  tftim.  2.  In  tUl 
degrees  of  sin.  3.  In  all  depths  of  distress  and  despair,  human  as  w^  as  spiritual. — 
W.  M.  8. 

Ver.  2^^Alienation  from  Ood.  "  Tour  iniquities  haTe  separated  between  you 
and  your  Gkid."  Here  is  the  secret.  We  can  resist  God's  arm.  Until  the  "  iniquities  " 
be  confessed,  deplored,  and  forsaken,  there  can  be  no  salvation.  God  is  ready  to  for^Te ; 
but  are  we  ready  to  be  forgiven?  God  has  provided  a  Saviour;  but  it  may  be  true  of 
ns, "  Te  will  not  come  to  me,  that  ye  might  have  life."  Man  is  not  a  heart  only  ; 
he  is  a  will.  And  here  lies  our  condemnation,  not  that  we  are  not  sometimes  aahamed 
and  even  sorry,  but  that  we  will  not  repent,  return,  and  believe. 

L  The  tebm  given  to  sin.  "Iniquities;"  that  is, "inequities."  Bead  the  fourth 
verse,  "  None  calleth  for  justice  j "  and  the  sixth  verse,  "  The  act  of  violence  is  in  their 
hands."    Unless  we  are  willing  to  forgive  and  luve  and  do  justice  to  our  brother,  it  ii 


DH.  Lix.  1— 21.]     THE  BOOK  OF  THE  PROPHET  ISAIAH.  398 


idle  to  talk  aVmt  turning  to  God,  Bnch  religion  i8  a  sentiment,  not  a  salvation.  Then 
there  are  "  inequities  "  in  relation  to  God.  We  have  been :  1 .  Unjust  to  his  government. 
2.  We  have  twled  him  of  ounelvea.  8.  We  have  aided  t?te  forces  <^  rebellion.  4.  We 
have,  in  one  vmrd,  done  iniquity. 

'  XL  Trb  distance  obbatxd  bt  sns.  The  separation  is  moral.  He  is  near  to  ns — 
dose,  indeed,  to  us  as  the  air  we  breathe.  But  we  are  at  opposite  poles  of  the  moral 
universs.  1.  Separated  in  nature.  We  are  not  renewed  in  his  image.  2.  Separated 
in  purpose.  Our  will  is  set  i^inst  his  will.  All  separations  are  painful.  We  see 
them  In  the  family  and  in  the  nation.  Wars  and  fends  abound  on  every  side.  So 
we  are  alienated  from  the  life  of  God.  Christ,  and  he  alone,  can  break  down  the  middle 
wall  of  partition,  and  through  faith  in  him  we  may  be  reconciled  by  one  Spirit  unto 
the  Father,— W.  M.  & 

Ver.  lS.—Balvat{on — not  in  man.  "And  he  saw  that  there  was  no  man,  and 
wondered  that  there  was  no  intercessor."  It  seemed  a  dark  hour  for  the  world. 
Evidently  a  dead  nation  cannot  arise  of  itself,  any  more  than  a  dead  man.  It  is  a  time 
of  wonderment.  Great  men  often  arise  for  great  occasions;  but  there  is  no  man,  that  is, 
no  mere  man,  equal  to  this  occasion.     But— 

L  "Gh)D  IS  HIS  OWN  Intbepeeteb."     He  makes  plain  his  own  mysteries  alike  in 

Srovidence  and  in  redemption.  There  is  silence  everywhere,  that  he  himself  may  be 
eard.  There  is  no  other  hand,  that  his  own  may  be  made  bare  before  the  nations. 
n.  God  is  the  world's  only  Savioue  and  Intebcessob.  In  the  Person  of  his  Son, 
he  fulfils  all  the  evangelic  strains  of  Isaiah.  "  God  was  in  Otirist  reconciling  the  world 
unto  himself,"  1.  It  is  still  wonderful.  "  Lo  I  I  come  to  do  thy  will,  0  God ! "  "  Behold 
the  Lamb  of  Godl"  Angels  cannot  see  into  the  depths  of  such  a  mystery  as  this.  2, 
It  M  true  as  wonderftd.  "  His  arm  brought  salvation."  Look  and  see.  Christianity 
can  be  tested  as  a  history  as  well  as  a  prophecy.  When  we  see  that  dark  degraded 
Roman  world,  with  its  lust  and  licence,  its  cmelties  and  pageantries,  its  very  worship 
turned  to  aids  to  vice,  and  then  read,  "  Such  were  some  of  you :  but  ye  are  washed, 
but  ye  are  sanctified,  but  ye  are  justified,"  we  excUim,  "  What  hath  God  wrought  i  " — 
W.M.a 

Ver.  19.— The  sziceessfui  standard.  "  When  the  enemy  shall  come  In  like  a  flood. 
the  Spirit  of  the  Lord  shall  lift  up  a  standard  against  him."  The  standard  is  highly 
prized  in  war.  On  it  are  engraven  the  names  of  special  victories  and  the  fields  of  old 
renowned.  It  is  the  last  disgrace  to  lose  the  standard,  and  in  many  a  foray  and  fierce 
campaign  men  have  fallen  in  heaps  around  the  standard-bearer.     Think — 

I.  Op  the  viotobibs  engraven  on  the  standard  of  the  Lobd.  Of  truth  over 
error ;  righteousness  over  injustice ;  purity  over  lust ;  God  over  mammon. 

II.  Of  the  special  seasons  in  which  iniquitt  combs  in  like  a  flood.  Times 
such  as  those  of  the  profligate  Stuarts,  when  the  sabbath  was  desecrated  and  debasing 
plays  were  acted.  Times  when  the  pride  of  priestcraft  and  power  drove  out  the  faithful 
from  the  land.  Times  when  the  Bible  itself  was  put  under  a  ban,  and  the  flood-gates 
of  evil  were  left  open.  Nothin;;  then  withstood,  and  nothing  will  ever  withstand,  the 
tides  of  sin,  but  the  Word  of  God.  Utility,  expediency,  propriety, — these  are  but  thin 
"  withes"  that  the  giant  snaps;  these  are  but  gossamer  gates  through  which  the  torrent 
roars.  Nothing  is  strong  but  the  Spirit  of  the  Lord  working  in  us  and  with  ua  — 
W.  M.  & 

Vers.  1,  2. — The  true  and  the  false  account  of  Divine  inactivlly.  Hew  comes  it  to 
pass  that  the  people  of  the  Lord  are  in  such  distress  ?  How  do  we  account  for  the  fact 
that  the  cause  of  Christ  makes  such  slow  progress  or  even  shows  symptoms  of  decline 
and  failure  ?  Where  is  the  Lord  God  of  Israel  ?  Is  the  Spirit  of  Gkxi  present  in  the 
midst  of  the  Churches? 

I.  The  appabentlt  inexhaustible  fobcbs  at  our  command.  For  our  resources 
we  have :  1.  The  fulness  of  Divine  pity.  The  ear  of  God  is  open  to  the  cry  of  destitution, 
of  pain,  of  sorrow,  of  spiritual  yearning.  His  heart  of  tenderness  is  touched  by  the 
miseries  and  necessities  of  his  cliildren.  2.  The  almightiness  of  Divine  power.  The  "right 
hand  of  the  Lord  "  is  on  all  the  springs  and  forces  of  the  universe ;  he  can  compel  all 


394  THE  BOOK  OF  THE   PROPHET  ISAIAH,      [oh.  mx.  1— 2\ 


thingi  to  serve  him,  to  minister  to  his  people  and  to  eatablish  his  kingdom.  3,  The 
perfectness  of  Divine  wisdom.  Who  shail  measure  "the  depth  of  the  wisdom  and 
knowledge  of  God  "  ? 

II.  The  poverty  of  BPiBrrnAii  results.  In  how  many  instances  hare  we  occasion 
to  be  profomidly  discontented  with  the  condition  of  things,  spiritually  considered !  It 
is  so  in  regard  to  :  1.  Individual  character.  Considering  the  resources  at  commard,  men 
do  not  make  the  progress  in  spiritual  growth,  in  moral  attainment,  or  in  excellency  of 
behaviour,  which  might  be  expected  of  them ;  they  remnin  where  they  were,  or  move 
backward  and  forward,  making  no  substantial  progress  toward  "  the  mark  [goal]  which 
is  set  before  them."  2.  Christian  Churches.  Taking  into  account  the  number  of  privi- 
leges which  are  theirs,  and  the  variety  of  opportunities  which  are  within  reach,  there  is  a 
very  considerable  proportion  of  Churches  compelled  to  acknowledge  retrogression  rather 
than  advancement,  defeat  rather  than  success.  3.  Missionary  operations.  After  all 
that  has  been  done  through  the  centuries,  by  all  societies  of  Christian  men,  how  much 
land  "  remains  to  be  possessed  " ! 

III.  The  false  and  the  true  account  of  the  matteb.  It  is'not  Divine  negli- 
gence that  explains  our  position.  It  is  not  that  God's  hand  is  shortened  or  tliat  his  ear 
is  heavy ;  it  is  not  that  his  power  is  diminished  or  that  his  pity  has  failed  in  the  very 
smallest  degree.  He  abideth  faithful  and  omuipotent.  We  are  not  straitened  in  him, 
but  in  ourselves.  It  is  sin  that  has  come  between  our  praying  lip  and  his  hearing  ear 
between  our  pressing  need  and  his  opened  hand.  1.  Be/usal  of  his  righteousness  makes 
our  prayer  ineffectual,  his  interposition  impossible.  If  we  "  regard  iniquity  in  our  heart, 
he  will  not  hear  us ; "  i.e.  if  we  decline  to  enter  his  service,  if  we  "  will  not  have  him 
to  reign  "  over  us,  if  we  stubbornly  and  haughtily  reject  the  salvation  which  he  offers 
us  in  Jesus  Christ  (Rom.  x.  3),  we  take  an  attitude  in  which  we  have  no  right  to  expect 
any  answer  to  our  petitions.  Ttie  first  thing,  the  only  right  and  acceptable  thing,  for 
one  that  has  not  yet  returned  to  God  in  self-surrender,  is  to  "arise  and  go  to  the 
Father  "  in  penitent  submission ;  then  he  may  call,  and  the  Lord  will  answer.  2.  Special 
sins  may  prove  a  stumbling-block ;  8ome  are  specified  in  the  following  verses — cruel 
violence,  falsehood,  litigiousness.  We  are  expressly  told  in  the  later  revelation  that 
some  particular  sins  are  absolutely  inconsistent  with  personal  piety,  and  therefore  with 
the  efficacy  of  prayer — impurity  (Eph.  v.  5);  strife  (Gal.  v.  20);  drunkenness;  lying 
(Rev.  xxi.  8).  3.  2%e  absence  of  essentiaX  Christian  graces  will  account  for  the  non  • 
intervention  of  God  on  behalf  of  a  Christian  Church :  of  unity  (Ps.  cxxxiii.  3) ;  ot 
faith  (Heb.  xi.  6 ;  Matt.  xiii.  58) ;  of  zeal  (Rev.  ii.  4 ;  iii.  15,  16) ;  of  fidelity  to  the 
truth  (Rev.  ii,  14).  The  true  account  of  our  failure  is  not  in  Divine  indifference,  but 
in  human  shortcoming.—^. 

Ver.  6. —  Webs  that  will  not  make  garments.  It  is  the  virtue  of  a  garment  that  ii 
covers.  The  ideas  of  covering  and  of  atoning  were  very  closely  allied  in  Hebrew  thought. 
The  prophet  intimates  that  there  were  webs  of  their  own  spinning  which  would  never 
hide  their  sin  from  the  sight  of  God.     Such  are  there  now.     We  look  at —   . 

I.  The  soul's  supreme  necessity.  The  presence  of  sin  is  the  sternest  of  all  fects ; 
the  mark  which  it  has  made  on  our  manhood  is  by  far  the  deepest  and  darkest  of 
any;  all  others  are  mere  touches,  mere  scratches  in  comparison.  This  is  true  of  the 
indivi.iual  as  well  as  of  the  community.  T\e  thing  that  we  have  done,  more  serious 
and  of  greater  consequence  than  any  other,  is  that  we  have  sinned  against  the  Lord  and 
come  beneath  his  condemnation.  What  we  most  urgently  want  is  a  covering  for  our 
soul.  Our  naked  and  guilty  soul  imperatively  and  sorely  needs  that  under  which  it  may 
ap{lear  before  God  without  shame  and  shrinking,  and  take  its  place,  in  this  world  or  in 
any  other,  among  the  pure,  the  holy,  the  righteous.  The  question  is — What  is  that 
garment  which  will  cover  the  sinful  human  sonl? 

II.  The  nisuFFioiBNar  of  the  provision  which  some  men  ark  making.  Many  are 
providing  for  themselves  that  which  is  utterly  inadequate ;  they  are  spinning  webs- 
poor,  thin,  gossamer  productions — which  "  will  not  become  garments  "  available  for  this 
purpose.  There  is:  1.  The  web  of  Christian  profession.  Some  find  comfort  and  com- 
placency of  soul  in  the  fact  that  they  are  acknowledged  members  of  a  Church,  ancient, 
or  catholic,  or  established,  or  scriptural.  Desirable,  in  many  ways,  as  is  an  avowal  of 
attachment  to  Christ,  it  is  not  a  thing  in  which  to  put  any  trust ;  a  man  may  be  r 


CM.  ux.  1—21.]      THE   BOOK   OF  THE   PROPHET  ISAIAH.  39fi 

member  of  the  most  acriptural  Church,  and  yet  be  destitute  of  that  which  is  vital  and 
essential.  "  He  is  not  a  Jew  who  is  one  outwardly,"  etc.  Christian  proression  is  a  poor 
thing  for  a  soul  to  hide  in ;  it  is  no  true  refuge  for  the  human  heart ;  it  is  a  "  web  that 
will  not  make  a  garment."  2.  'J'he  web  of  ceremony  and  ordinance.  Many  have  an 
undefined  but  strong  confidence  in  having  passed  through  Christian  ceremonies  (Baptism 
•nd  the  Lord's  Supper),  or  in  having  been  constant  in  attendance  on  Divine  worship,  or 
in  haTing  taken  on  their  lips  apostolic  and  evangelical  language  ;  but  to  trust  in  these 
things  as  garments  of  salvation  is  to  put  "  confidence  in  the  flesh  "  (Phil.  iiL  1):  they 
may  exist  without  any  faith  or  love  prompting  and  vitalizing  them.  3.  The  web  of 
correct  behaviour — abstinence  from  impurity,  inebriety,  untruthfulness,  trickery,  pro- 
fanity. This  is  altogether  and  in  every  way  desirable,  and  it  may  be  eminently  praise- 
worthy firom  a  hnman  standpoint ;  but  it  will  not  atone  for  the  supreme  omission — 
the  failure  to  respond  to  a  heavenly  Father's  love,  to  subject  the  will  to  the  will  of  the 
Creator,  to  dedicate  the  life  to  the  service  of  God.  It,  too,  is  a  web  that  will  not  make 
a  garment  with  which  to  cover  a  sinful  soul. 

III.  Thb  onk  qabment  that  suffices.  What  did  Christ  mean  by  that  "  wedding 
garment "  without  which  the  guest  might  not  sit  down  to  the  marriage-feast  (Matt. 
xxii.  11)?  May  it  not  have  been  the  abounding  mercy  ofGod  unto  eternal  life,  received 
through  faith  in  a  Divine  Saviour  (Rom.  v.  1;  viii.  1 ;  Phil.  iii.  7 — 9)?  Men  will  be 
just  with  God,  their  sins  will  be  covered  and  hidden  for  evermore,  when,  in  the  spirit  of 
penitence  and  faith,  they  accept  the  Saviour  of  mankind  as  the  Lord  in  whom  they  hide 
and  to  whom  they  yield  themselves  in  glad  surrender.— 0. 

Vers.  9,10.— The  goal  of  guilt.  A  course  of  conduct  or  a  principle  of  action  is  rightly 
judged  by  the  issue  to  which  it  tends.  All  is  well  that  ends  well,  and  a'l  is  ill  that  ends 
ill.  If  we  look  far  enough  and  deep  enough  in  our  estimate  pf  consequences,  we  shall 
always  find  that  the  goal  of  guilt  is  wretchedness  and  ruin.     It  ends  in — 

L  A  SENSE  OF  WBONO.  The  nation  feels  that  "judgment  and  justice"  are  lacking  and 
the  enemy  is  triumphant ;  the  individual  feels  that  he  is  injured,  that  his  rights  are 
withheld  from  him,  and  he  goes  on  his  way  dispirited  and  complaining. 

II.  Deep  disappointment.  "  We  wait  for  light,  and  behold  obscurity,"  etc.  Men  who 
seek  not  their  refuge  and  their  portion  in  God  and  in  his  service  are  always  subject  to 
a  profound  dissatisfaction.  Life  does  not  yield  the  good  they  crave.  1'hey  look  for 
■access,  and  behold  failure ;  for  joy,  and  behold  weariness,  hearache,  ennui ;  for  sweet 
communion,  and  behold  isolation  and  loneliness ;  for  laughter,  and  behold  disgust. 

III.  Agora vated  blindness.  "We  grope  . . .  like  the  blind  ...  we  stumble  at  noon- 
day," etc.  It  is  one  of  the  saddest  consequences  of  sin  that  the  power  of  spiritual  per- 
eqition  continually  lessens ;  the  **  eyesight "  of  the  soul  becomes  weaker  and  weaker. 
Great  truths  are  less  clearly  apprehended.  Confusion  takes  the  place  of  distinctness, 
until  at  length  good  is  mistaken  for  evil,  and  evil  for  good  :  "  the  light  that  is  in  us 
becomes  darkness ; "  the  very  organ  of  spiritual  understanding  misleads  us.  And  the 
aggravating  circumstance  is  that  this  failure  of  the  soul's  sight  takes  place  "at  noon- 
day," when  others  are  walking  and  rejoicing  in  the  light  of  the  Lord. 

IV.  Deathfulness.  "  In  desolate  places  [or  perhaps  rather,  '  in  luxuriant  fields,'j 
we  are  as  the  dead."  The  thought  of  Christ  and  of  his  apostles  is  that  to  live  in  sel- 
fishness, in  ungodly  pleasure,  is  death  in  life.  To  exist  apart  from  God ;  to  be  severed 
from  him  in  thought  and  feeling,  in  speech  and  act ;  to  be  utterly  regardless  of  his  wiV 
and  then  defiantly  antagonistic  to  bis  cause ; — this  is  death  indeed,  and  it  is  consum- 
mated in  the  death  which  is  eternal. — 0. 

Vers.  15—17. — Human  hopelessness  and  Divine  redemption.  This  vivid  picture  of 
the  nation's  demoralization,  and  of  its  incapacity  to  produce  a  citizen  who  could  regene- 
rate and  reform,  may  appropriately  suggest — 

L  The  hopeless  condition  of  the  human  race  under  the  long  tyranny  of  sis. 
Man  had  fallen  so  far  that  there  was  not  the  smallest  prospect  of  redemption  from  any- 
thing he  could  originate.  The  all-seeing  eye  of  Qud  rested  on  "  no  man,  no  intercessor." 
Reformer  there  might  be,  but  Redeemer  there  was  none.  No  human  arm  could  uplift 
a  sin-slain  and  fallen  race  from  its  degradation  and  ruin.     Hence  came — 

IL  Thk  redeeming  power  of  Almighty  Uod.    "It  displeased  the  Lord;"  the 


S96  THE   BOOK  OP   THE   PROPHET  ISAIAH,      [oh.  ux.  1— 2t 

iniquity  of  the  world  pained,  grieved,  distressed,  Iiis  pure  and  pitiful  heart.  And  his 
compassion  found  fitting  utterance  in  redemption.  "His  arm  brought  salyation." 
The  redemption  of  the  world  by  Jesus  Christ  was  indeed  a  work  wrought;  it  was 
•  putting  forth  of  Divine  power ;  it  was  the  mighty  act  of  God's  righteous  "  arm." 
The  work  of  the  strong  brute  is  to  carry  great  weights,  of  the  human  giant  to  deal 
mighty  blows,  of  the  trained  intellect  to  solve  subtle  problems  or  make  intricate  calcu- 
lations; but  the  work  of  the  holy  and  merciful  Spirit  of  God  is  by  self-sacrifice  to 
redeem  and  to  restore.  Here  is  the  exercise  of  the  truest,  noblest,  most  beneficent 
power.     In  comparison  with  this  all  other  power  is  weakness  itself. 

III.  The  qualifications  of  the  Divine  Rbdeemee.  1.  A  sense  ot  perfect  recti- 
tude, "  His  righteousness,  it  sustained  him."  It  was  much,  it  was  everything  to  the 
aspersed  and  incriminated  Saviour  to  know  that  he  was  absolutely  right  in  the  sight  of 
the  holy  Father.  2.  Compassion.  "The  helmet  of  salvation."  3.  Holy  indignation. 
"He  put  on  the  garments  of  vengeance."  Hatred  of  sin  is  quite  as  indispensable  to  a 
Saviouraspity  for  its  victim  (wicte  Matt,  xxiii.).  4.  Consecration.  "  Clad  with  zeal  as  a 
cloak ; "  with  that  utter  and  entire  devotedness  which  led  him  to  drink  quite  up  that 
bitter  cup  which  the  Father  placed  in  his  hands. — 0. 

Ver.  21, — The  hope  of  the  race.  Wherein  shall  we  i5nd  the  true  hope  of  the  human 
race?  It  would  be  but  a  sorry  prospect  if  man  had  nothing  better  to  build  upon  than 
the  results  of  physical  science,  or  political  economy,  or  mental  and  moral  philosophy. 
These  are  helpful  handmaids,  but  they  have  shown  themselves  inefficient  regenerators 
of  mankind.     We  build  our  hope  ultimately  on — 

I.  The  F0LFILMENT  OF  THE  DlviNB  PKOMisE.  Qod  has  "  covenanted  "  or  promised 
to  do  great  things  for  us.  Our  hope  is  in  him  :  it  was  in  his  Divine  pity,  unpledged, 
unexpressed.  It  is  in  his  promise  to  befriend,  to  illumine,  to  renew.  The  world  went 
utterly  wrong,  and  in  the  greatness  of  his  compassion  he  interposed  with  a  marvellous 
redemption.  The  Church  became  utterly  corrupt,  and  in  the  fulness  of  his  faithfulness 
he  did  not  desert  it,  but  cleansed  and  raised  it. 

II.  The  FLANTme  of  Divine  tkuth.  We  may  have  a  good  hope  for  mankind  if 
"  Oodft  words  are  in  the  mouth "  of  men.  Not  enactments  on  the  statute-book,  nor 
institutions  in  society,  nor  the  sword  in  the  magistrate's  hand,  but  Ood's  truth  in  the 
mind,  is  the  source  of  strength,  the  criterion  of  advancement,  and  the  condition  of 
aecurity.  When  God's  thoughts  are  precious  (Ps.  cxxxix.  17),  and  God's  words  are 
loved,  the  people  are  in  the  way  of  wisdom  and  of  life. 

in.  The  0UTP0URIN8  of  his  Spihit.  "  My  Spirit  is  upon  thee."  The  indwelling, 
illuminating,  transforming  Spirit  will  make  all  holy  truth  effectual  and  mighty. 

IV.  The  transmission  of  godliness  feom  generation  to  generation.  "Nor 
out  of  the  mouth  of  thy  seed,"  etc.  The  "  promise  is  to  us  and  to  our  children."  Par 
more  than  to  evangelistic  efforts  or  missionary  labours  do  we  look  to  the  upgrowing  in 
godly  homes  of  a  devout  and  holy  generation.  The  future  of  the  world  is  in  the  hands 
of  Christian  fathers  and  mothers  I  Let  them  be  what  they  should  be,  and  their  sons 
and  daughters  will  strengthen  the  cause  of  God  and  fulfil  the  hope  of  mankind. — 0. 

Ver.  1. — Misameeptions  of  thefiivine  delay.  This  is  a  plea  with  the  murmurers, 
who  doubtingly  asked — Whi  re  are  the  signs  of  the  fulfilment  of  these  great  Divine 
promises  ?  ITiings  looked  black  and  hopeless  right  up  to  the  time  of  Cyrus.  The  Lord 
appeared  to  be  delaying  his  coming,  and  it  was  easy  for  unbelievers  to  say  that  God 
delayed  because  "  his  hand  was  too  short  to  deliver,  and  his  ear  too  heary  to  hear." 
Keble  renders  the  text  thus — 

"Wake,  arm  Divine!  awake^ 
Eye  of  the  only  Wise  I 
Now  for  thy  glory's  sake. 
Saviour  and  God,  arise, 
And  iaay  thine  ear,  that  sealed  seemly 
In  pity  mark  our  mournful  themes  i 

"  Thus  in  her  lonely  hour 
Thy  Chui«h  is  fain  to  «rj. 


OH.  UT.  1—21.]      THE  BOOK  OP  THE  PROPHET  ISAIAH.  397 

Ab  if  thy  love  and  power 
Were  vaniflh'd  from  her  gky; 
Tet  Ood  ia  there,  and  at  his  side 
He  triumphs  who  for  sinners  died." 

It  may  snffice  to  answer  the  murmurers  who  remind  us  of  the  Divine  delayings,  and 
would  have  us  misunderstand  them,  and  join  thim  in  doublings  of  the  Divine  power 
or  the  Divine  good  will,  that  there  are  high  and  gracious  ends  served  by  this  particular 
metliod  of  Divine  dealing.     These  things  at  least  we  can  see — 

I.  It  INOBEA8E8  O0B  DEPENDENCE  ON  GoD.  It  teaches  US  that  we  have  not  just  to 
"ask  and  have,"  but  "ask  and  have"  in  accordance  with  God's  will,  in  dependence  on 
Goil's  wisdom,  and  in  agreement  with  Gud's  time  and  wny.  We  should  never  learn 
that,  if  we  were  not  sometimes  made  to  wait.  We  teach  our  children  to  trust  js  by 
making  them  wait  until  we  think  best. 

XL  It  enhances  the  value  of  the  expected  blessing.  What  we  wait  long 
for  becomes  increasingly  valuable  in  our  eyes.  What  is  obtained  easily  aud  at  once 
is  sure  to  be  under-estimated.  The  value  of  a  gift  very  constantly  depends  on  the 
ntoral  preparation  of  those  who  receive  it ;  and  delay  is  a  cultivator  of  moral  pre- 
paration. 

m.  It  pboducbs  a  more  earnest  watchfolness  and  more  believing  pkatebful- 
IIB88  FOB  the  DESIRED  BLESSING.  It  does,  if  we  regard  the  delay  aright.  It  does  not,  if 
we  persist  in  misconceiving  the  purpose  of  tlie  delay.  Then  delay  will  weary  us,  and 
wo  shall  leave  off  to  watch  and  be  sober.  Delay  may  be  borne  wisely  and  cheerfully 
when  we  recognize  it  as  only  the  hush,  the  stillness,  tlie  brealhlessness  that  ushers  in 
the  glorious  showers  of  Divine  awakening  and  Divine  comforting.— E.  T. 

Ver.  2. — 8in-elouds  between  us  and  Ood,  In  a  former  homily  it  has  been  shown 
how,  in  judgment,  and  in  order  to  awaken  us  to  a  sense  of  our  sin,  God  may  pass  a 
cloud  across  between  us  and  him,  hiding  from  us  his  smiling  face,  and  leaving  us  iu  tlie 
dark  and  the  ciiill.  Now  we  see  how,  in  our  heedlessness  and  wilfulness,  we  may  put 
clouds, even  little  clouds,  into  our  own  sky,  and  hide  his  lace.  Tlie  reference  of  the  text 
is  to  the  doubting  ones,  the  unfaithful  ones,  in  Babylon  who  let  their  own  sinfulness 
spoil  their  vision,  and  either  hide  God  from  them  ur  distort  their  view  of  him.  The 
prophet  reminds  them  that  they  had  put  the  clouds,  and  in  reminding  them  thus  he 
calls  on  them  to  put  the  clouds  away.     These  are  our  two  divisions. 

I,  Men  put  the  sin-clouds  between  them  and  CiOD.  1.  They  may  be  very  small 
douda,  yet  suffict  to  hide.  Often  a  cloud  no  digger  than  a  band  will  keep  the  light 
and  warmth  from  us.  Illustration :  David  Rittenhouse,  of  Pennsylvania,  was  a  great 
astronomer.  He  was  skilful  in  measuring  the  size  of  planets,  and  determining  the 
position  of  the  stars.  But  he  found  that,  such  was  the  distance  of  the  stars,  a  silk 
thread  stretched  across  the  glass  of  his  telescope  would  entirely  cover  a  star;  and, 
moreover,  that  a  silk  fibre,  however  small,  placed  upon  the  same  glass,  would  cover  so 
much  of  the  heavens  that  the  star,  if  a  small  one  and  near  the  pole,  would  remain 
obscured  behind  that  silk  fibre  several  seconds.  So  small  faults,  secret  sins,  little 
doubtings,  can  become  effective  fibres,  dark  clouds,  obsciiritig  veils,  that  hide  the 
"  face."  "  Little  foxes  spoil  the  grapes."  The  psalmist  puts  a  passion  of  holy  feeling  into 
his  ■pcvfv  '  Cleanse  thou  me  from  secret  faults."  2.  They  may  be  very  big  clouds, 
and  meau  long  hiding  and  deep  misery  for  us  under  the  darkness,  and  in  the  chill. 
Illustrate  from  David's  open  and  shameless  iniquity.  It  was  right  that  "  his  bones 
should  wax  old  through  his  roaring  all  the  day  long,"  while  the  black  storm-clouds  of 
passion,  and  its  consequeuces,  hid  away  bis  God.  We  cannut  negligently  sin,  and  hope 
to  keep  the  smile;  if  we  openly  and  wilfully  sin  we  shall  not  even  care  to  keep  the  smile, 
but  we  shall  gladly  put  our  clouds  across,  and  hide  the  '•  face." 

II.  Men  must  put  awat  the  sin-clouds  that  abb  between  them  anb  God.  And 
there  is  only  one  way  of  doing  this,  Men  must  put  away  the  sins  that  make  the  clouds. 
God  will  not  burst  through  such  clouds.  He  will  not  dirjpel  such  clouds,  until  men  turn 
from  their  iniquities,  their  hig  or  little  sins ;  but  then  he  will  breath*  on  the  cloud,  as 
the  hot  Eastern  sun  breathes  on  the  cluudi"  of  morning,  and  they  shall  fade  away  from 
the  sky,  and  we  shall  see  the  face,  and  live  in  that  heaven  which  is  the  "  shining  of  the 
face  upon  us." — B.  T. 


893  THE  BOOK  OP  THE  PROPHET  ISAIAH,      [oh.  ux.  1—21 

Ver.  7. — Sin  in  thoughts.    "  Their  thoughts  are  thoughts  of  iniquity." 

I.  Tbb  importanoe  of  a  man's  THOiTOHTS.  A  maa  is  as  his  thoughts.  This  is  the 
fact  and  troth  on  which  we  may  dwelL  Any  one  who  would  truly  judge  his  fellow-man 
must  know  his  secrets  and  judge  his  thoughts.  Therefore  man's  judgment  of  bis  fellow- 
man  is  always  imperfect  and  uncertain.  God  alone  can  judge  perfectly,  hecause  he  is 
the  "  Discemer  of  the  thoughts  and  intents  of  the  heart."  There  is  an  impression  resting 
on  the  minds  of  many  religious  persons  that  they  have  no  control  over  the  suggestions 
that  are  made  to  their  minds,  and  no  responsibility  for  the  contents  of  their  thoughts, 
only  for  the  cherishing  of  the  thought  and  dwelling  upon  it,  and  letting  it  take  shape  in 
action;  or,  as  the  Apostle  James  puts  it,  only  when  "lust  is  allowed  to  conceive,  and 
bring  forth  sin."  This,  however,  is  true  only  within  very  narrow  limits,  and  it  is  alto- 
gether healthier  for  us  to  accept  a  large  measure  of  responsibility,  even  for  the  contents 
of  our  minds ;  for  only  then  shall  we  be  likely  to  wafoh  over  what  goes  in  as  over  what 
goes  out.  The  importance  that  attaches  to  our  thoughts  may  be  seen:  1.  In  our 
observation  of  men.  We  misjudge  because  we  cannot  read  thoughts.  2.  In  the  experir 
ences  of  friendship.  We  trust  our  friend  more  than  outsiders  can  do,  hecause,  in 
some  measure,  we  do  know  his  thoughts.  3.  In  view  of  the  heart-searching  claims 
of  God,  who  desires  "  truth  in  the  inward  parts."  Sin  does  not  consist  in  mere  act ;  it 
really  lies  at  the  back  of  the  action — in  the  thought,  the  intention,  and  the  motive  that 
inspire  it.  4.  In  consideration  of  the  work  of  Divine  redemption ;  which  is  really  a 
heart-regeneration,  a  purifying  of  the  very  springs  of  thought  and  feeling.  It  seeks 
out  the  fountains  and  cleanses  them. 

II.  The  control  a  han  may  hate  over  his  thouohts.  1.  He  has  control  over 
the  materials  of  thought.  Thought  is  really  the  comparison,  selection,  and  association 
of  the  actual  contents  of  our  minds,  under  the  guidance  of  our  wills.  All  that  has 
impressed  us  during  our  lives,  by  the  eye,  the  ear,  or  the  feeling,  has  passed  into  our 
mental  treasury.  Then  we  may  take  some  care  as  to  what  goes  in.  We  need  not  go 
into  scenes  or  read  hooks  which  will  leave  behind  bad  impressions.  2.  We  have  con- 
trol over  the  processes  of  thought.  We  can  deliberately  choose  to  think  about  evil 
things ;  we  can  start  such  thoughts,  we  can  dwell  on  them,  we  can  follow  them  on  their 
foul  way,  we  can  collect  from  our  associations  things  that  match  them.  And,  in  a  similar 
way,  we  can  dwell  upon  and  encourage  the  good.  If  our  will  is  a  renewed  and  sanctified 
will,  then  we  shall  £nd  it  may  gain  presidency  over  our  thoughts,  so  that  we  may  choose 
and  follow  only  that  which  is  good. — B.  T. 

Vers.  15, 16. — SalvatUm  hy  Ood  through  man.  This  text  contains,  in  part,  the  con- 
fession of  social  iniquity.  "  Truth  faileth ;  and  he  that  departeth  from  evil  is  accounted 
mad.  There  is  no  judgment " — that  is,  no  social  righteousness,  no  sense  of  the  "  right " 
manifestly  ruling  in  the  common  relations  of  life.  God  looked  down  upon  this  degene- 
rate and  hopeless  condition.  He  knew  how  far  the  evil  spread,  until  the  whole  people 
was  corrupted,  and  there  was  no  man  able  to  plead  against  the  prevailing  evU;  no 
days-man.  to  stend  up  for  righteousness  and  truth ;  no  iutrrcessor  to  check  the  on-coming 
judgments,  and  plead  for  their  withdrawal — none  such  as  Moses,  or  as  Aaron,  or  as 
Phinehas.  As  no  human  intercessor  could  be  found  among  the  exiles,  God  himself 
wrought  salvation;  "his  arm  brought  salvation  unto  him."  The  point  suggested  is 
this:  Social  and  moral  evils,  being  but  inadequately  dealt  with  by  man, demand  Divine 
intervention ;  but  the  Divine  operations  for  redemption  from  evil  are  committed  to  men, 
as  agents,  to  apply  and  carry  out. 

I.  Man  cannot  save  man.  In  every  age  the  experiment  has  been  tried.  In  every 
form  of  Ihe  trial  it  has  proved  a  failure.  There  have  been  a  great  variety  of  religions 
in  the  world ;  they  were  all  just  this — man  trying  to  save  man.  Great  teachers  and 
reformers  have  appeared — they  were  men  trying  to  save  man.  There  have  been  philo- 
sophical, and  moral,  and  educational,  and  scientific,  and  ceremonial,  and  artistic  systems, 
but  no  one  of  them  was  ever  anything  more  than  this — man  trying  to  save  man.  The 
issue  of  nineteenth-century  humanity  schemes  will  exactly  repeat  the  old  story ;  it  has 
been  proved,  over  and  over  again,  until  we  wonder  that  any  one  should  be  foolish  enough 
to  try  a  C'esb  experiment,  that  man  cannot  save  man. 

n.  God  AiiONE  CAN  savb  man.  This  is  stating  the  truth  again,  with  an  important 
addition.    It  is  entirely  a  question  between  man  saving  himself,  and  God  saving  him. 


OH.  ux.  1—21.]     THE  BOOK  OP  THE  PROPHET  ISAIAH.  899 

There  it  no  third  party  to  the  question.  And  God  can  save  man.  He  has  always  been 
finding  ont  man's  extremity,  and  making  it  his  gracious  opportunity;  ever  saving 
tribes,  saving  cities,  saving  societies,  saving  families,  saving  individuals.  God,  th« 
Bedeemer,  is  the  name  for  God  that  is  blazoned  on  the  history  of  every  age  and  clime. 
"  God  can  save  man  "  is  the  great  truth  written  in  the  large  record  of  the  whole  human 
race.  Spared  for  four  thousand  years  that  he  might  try  to  save  himself,  mau  learned 
at  last  to  put  away  the  schemes  in  which  he  had  trusted,  and  then,  when  the  fulness 
of  the  times  had  come,  God  sent  forth  his  Son,  and  called  his  name  Jesus  Immanuel, 
because  he  was  to  be  in  the  world,  "  God  himself  saving  men  from  their  sins." 

III.  God  only  saves  uan  by  man.  One  of  the  most  difficult  truths  for  which  to 
get  men's  acceptance  is  the  truth  that  man's  salvation  is  a  moral  miracle,  for  the 
accomplishment  of  which  man  is  made  the  ageut.  God's  salvation  for  moral  beings  is 
not  a  display  of  august  force,  as  is  his  correction  of  disorder  in  his  world  of  created 
things;  it  is  the  exertion  of  moral  power  upon  them  through  moral  influences  and 
moral  agents.  The  great  deliverance  of  Israel  from  the  Egyptian  bondage  was  mani- 
festly God's  redemption,  altogether  God's ;  and  yet  even  in  that  case  God  only  saved 
man  by  man.  He  found  an  instrument  and  agent  by  whom  to  carry  out  his  purposes. 
The  man  Moses  is  prominent  throughout  the  whole  scene,  and  yet  he  never  stands 
before  God ;  he  is  only  the  agent.  Illustrate  further  by  the  salvation  from  Babylon.  In 
that  case  too  a  man  was  found.  Cyrus  was  the  Divine  agent.  The  law  is  working  in 
all  the  society  around  us.  God  is  in  the  midst  of  men,  saving  still.  But  he  is  only 
saving  men  through  human  agencies.  Social  and  moral  evils  cannot  be  mastered  by 
merely  human  forces,  since  man  cannot,  of  himself,  reach  those  deeper  religious  evils 
that  lie  at  the  root  of  the  social  ones.  God  is  saving  men.  This  is  the  glory  of  our  pre- 
sent-day life,  with  all  its  seeming  failures  and  oppressive  burdens  and  amazing  self-wilL 
He  is  saving  men,  and  we  are  to  be  his  witnesses,  co-workers  together  with  him.  As  we 
preach  Christ  to  men,  we  have  no  power  to  save  men ;  but  as  we  lift  Christ  up  in  sight 
of  men,  we  become  God's  agents,  and  through  our  words  of  faith  and  persuasion  God 
moves  and  sways  careless  hearts,  and  wins  sinners  unto  himself.  This  is  our  honour, 
our  trust,  our  sacred  burden.  God  would  save  this  country,  but  he  will  only  save  it 
by  us — by  the  Christian  people  in  it.  We  must  prophesy  and  preach  to  these  dry 
bones,  and  then  only  will  the  breath  of  Heaven  give  them  life.  We  must  spend  the 
strength  of  our  manhood  in  giving,  preaching,  visiting,  pleading,  and  then  only  will 
the  ends  of  the  land  see  the  salvation  of  the  Lord. — B.  T. 

Ver.  19. — The  standard  of  the  Spirit.  Cheyne's  translation  is,  "For  he  shall  come 
like  a  rushing  stream,  which  the  breath  of  Jehovah  driveth."  The  prophet  regards  the 
impending  deliverance  of  the  Jews  as  an  act  in  the  great  drama  of  the  world-judgment. 
Henderson  translates,  "The  breath  of  Jehovah  shall  raise  a  standard  against  him;" 
and  he  treats  the  passage  as  prophetic  of  the  resistance  offered  to  the  evil  schemes  of 
the  enemies  of  the  gospel.  Probably  the  historical  figure  in  the  mind  of  the  prophet, 
which  gave  the  form  to  his  expression,  was  the  check  given  to  Sennacherib,  in  his 
schemes  against  Jerusalem,  by  the  plague-breath  of  Jehovah,  which  destroyed  his  host. 
Cheyne's  translation  is  supported  by  the  Revised  Version,  and  the  person  referred  to 
appears  to  be  Cyrus,  the  deliverer,  regarded  as  urged  to  his  work  by  Jehovah.  These 
two  historical  references  suggest  different  ways  of  applying  the  figure. 

L  The  figubb  of  Jehovah's  breath.  The  same  Hebrew  word  means  "breath," 
"wind,"  "spirit."  Distinguish  between  the  anthropomorphic  figures  of  the  Lord's 
hand  or  arm,  and  the  anthropopathic  figures  of  the  Lord's  "anger"  or  "repentance." 
Distinguish  between  the  "  arm  "  or  "  hand,"  which  indicates  God's  active  working  in  the 
sphere  of  things,  and  his  "  breath,"  as  his  secret  working  on  the  springs  of  life  and 
motive.  Sometime  God  works  openly,  and  all  can  see  his  doings.  But  even  more 
frequently  he  silently  works  at  the  heart  of  things,  and  only  men  of  faith  can  trace 
his  doings, 

n.  The  Fioints  of  the  bbeath  as  a  besibtakoe.  Take  the  allusion  to  Senna- 
cherib as  illustration.  Show  how  in  life  we  constantly  meet  with  difSculties  that  seem 
insoluble,  and  enemies  that  cannot  be  overcome.  And  yet  presently  the  difficulties  go 
out  of  the  way,  and  the  enemies  can  proceed  no  further.  There  are  no  evident  reasons 
for  these  things,  in  any  circumstances  that  we  can  observe.  All  that  we  can  say  is,  **  Ths 


400 


THE  BOOK  OF  THE   PROPHET  ISAIAH.       [oh.  lx.  1—22. 


Spirit  of  the  Lord  has  lifted  up  a  standard  against  them."  Further  illustrate  from  the 
way  in  which  the  plans  of  the  Apostle  Paul  and  his  companions  were  hlocked.  "  They 
assayed  to  go  into  Bithynia,  but  the  Spirit  suffered  them  not^  We  seldom  feel  as  we 
ought  how  graciously  God  helps  us  by  shutting  doors  which  we  fain  would  enter. 

III.  The  fiodre  of  the  breath  as  an  impulse.  Take  the  allusion  to  Cyrus; 
and  further  iUustrate  from  the  impulse  given  to  Philip  to  go  and  join  the  eunuch  of 
Queen  Candace.  Open  souls  are  ready  and  willing  to  he  moved  by  the  indwelling 
breath  or  spirit.  Such  open  souls  surely  prove  what  it  is  to  be  led  into  all  truth, 
strengthened  for  all  duty,  and  sanctified  through  all  fellowships. — ^B.  T. 

Ver.  21. — The  gospel-covenant.  The  recipient  of  this  covenant  is  the  spiritual  Israel. 
The  old  Jewish  covenant  is  to  provide  figures  that  may  help  us  to  understand  the 
spiritual  covenant  which  we  make  with  God  and  God  makes  with  us,  through  Jesus 
Christ,  the  covenant-Negotiator.  Here  God's  side  of  covenant-pledge  is  that  he  will 
always  be  the  inner  life  and  inspiration  of  his  people.  And  it  is  assumed  that  hia 
people's  covenant-pledge  is  that  they  hold  themselves  as  fully  consecrated  unto  him, 
and  in  all  holy  and  earnest  activities  seek  to  serve  him. 

L  ThI:  kew  covenant  on  God's  side.  Compare  the  pledge  in  the  older  Jewish 
covenant — preservation  of  bodily  life,  with  all  that  this  might  demand  of  providing, 
guiding,  and  preserving — everything  needed  for  the  life  that  now  is.  In  the  new 
covenant  the  pledge  is  of  preservation  of  that  Divine  life,  spiritual  life,  which  in  us  has 
Deen  divinely  quickened,  with  all  that  this  higher  life  may  demand  of  sustenance, 
guidance,  protection,  and  inspiration.  God  will  be  sure  to  supply  all  the  needs  of  our 
soul-life,  and  put  his  Spirit  in  us  and  keep  his  Spirit  with  us,  to  be  the  life  of  onr  life, 
our  security,  our  guarantee,  our  sanctification.  Cramer  says,  "  Does  the  Spirit  of  God 
remain  ?  then  also  does  his  Word ;  does  the  Word  remain  ?  then  preachers  also  remain ; 
do  preachers  remain  ?  then  also  hearers  do ;  do  hearers  remain?  then  also  remain  believers ; 
and  therefore  the  Christian  Church  remains  also."  Too  seldom  do  we  take  the  comfort- 
ing and  strengthening  assurance  that  our  God  is  actually  under  pledge  to  us  to  carry 
on  to  its  completion  the  work  of  grace  in  us  which  he  has  begun.  "  Though  we  believe 
not,  yet  he  abideth  faithful :  he  cannot  deny  himself."  Mattlie w  Henry  says,  "  In  the 
Redeemer  there  was  a  new  covenant  made  with  us,  a  covenant  of  promises ;  and  this  is 
the  great  and  comprehensive  promise  of  that  covenant,  that  God  will  give  and  continue 
hil  Word  and  Spirit  to  his  Church  and  people  throughout  all  generations.'^  Dean 
Plumptre  says,  "  The  new  covenant  is  to  involve  the  gift  of  the  Spirit,  that  writes  the 
law  of  God  inwardly  in  the  heart,  as  distinct  from  the  Law,  which  is  thought  of  as 
outside  the  conscience,  doing  its  work  as  an  accuser  and  a  judge." 

IL  The  hew  covenant  on  man's  side.  Find  what  is  the  spiritual  counterpart  of 
the  old  Jewish  covenant-conditions  on  man's  side.  Then  he  pledged  loyalty  to  Jehovah, 
strict  and  prompt  obedience  to  the  will  of  Jehovah.  The  answering  spiritual  pledge 
may  be  found  in  Bom.  xii.  1,  "  I  beseech  you  therefore,  brethren,  by  cbe  mercies  of 
God,  that  ye  present  your  bodies  a  living  sacrifice,  holy,  acceptable  to  God,  which  is 
your  reasonable  service." — B.  T. 


SionoM  Vn.    Thb  Globieb  of  the  Rebtobed  Jebubausu  ^oh.  lz.). 
EXPOSITION. 


OHAPTEB  liX. 
V«T*.  1 — 22. — A  Bono  of  Triumph  upon 
GiiOBiriED  ZiON.  This  is  rather  a  detached 
poem  than  an  integral  portion  of  a  book. 
It  is  complete  in  itself,  and  but  slightly 
connected,  either  with  what  precedes  or 
witii  what  follows.  Delitzsoh  and  Mr. 
Cheyne  regard  it  as  a  "countertwrt"  to  the 


magnificent  ode  in  ch.  zIvlL,  which  desoribes 
the  fall  and  ruin  of  Babylon.  It  is  composed 
of  five  stanzas,  of  nearly  equal  length :  (1) 
vers.  1—4;  (2)  vers.  5—9;  (8)  vers.  10— 14; 
(4)  vers.  15—18;  and  (5)  vers.  19—22. 

Vers.  1 — 4. — The  first  stanta.  Zion'i 
brightness  and  numbere. 

Ver.  1.— Arise,  shine.  The  gnbjeot  of 
the  address  does  not  distinotlT  appear  until 


OH.  LX.  1—22.]       THE  BOOK  OF  THE  PROPHET  ISAIAH. 


401 


ver.  14,  where  it  is  found  to  be  "  the  city  of 
the  Lord,  the  Zion  of  the  Holy  One  of 
Israel."  Zion  has  long  been  prostrate  in 
the  dust  from  the  prophet's  standpoint,  and 
covered  with  thick  darkness.  Now  she  is 
bidden  to  "arise"  and  "shine  forth  as  the 
day."  For  thy  light  is  come.  Zion  cannot 
shine  with  her  own  light,  for  she  has  no 
light,  of  her  own,  having  preferred  to  "walk 
in  darkness"  (ch.  lix.  9).  But  she  may 
reflect  the  radiance  which  streams  from  the 
Penon  of  Jehovah,  whose  glory  is  risen  upon 
her.  "In  thy  light  shall  we  see  light" 
(Ps.  xxxvi.  9). 

Vei.  2. — For,  behold,  the  darkness  shall 
cover  the  earth.  As  in  Egypt  a  "thick 
darkness"  covered  the  whole  land  at  the 
word  of  Moses  (Exod.  x.  22),  while  still 
"the  children  of  Israel  had  light  in  their 
dwellings,"  so  now  the  world  and  "  the 
nations  of  the  wurld  luy  in  a  deep  ob- 
scurity, into  which  scarcely  a  ray  of  liglit 
penetrated,  while  on  Israel  tliere  dawned  a 
glory  which  streamed  from  the  tliroce  of 
God,  and  at  once  transfigured  her,  and  gave 
her  the  appearance  of  an  angel  of  the  Most 
High.  In  the  radiance  of  this  light  she 
was  to  stand  up  and  show  herself,  and  then 
great  results  would  follow. 

Ver.  3. — The  Gentiles  shall  come  to  thy 
light.  Plunged  in  darkness  themselves 
(ver.  2),  the  Gentiles  shall  be  astonished 
and  attracted  by  Israel's  radiance,  and  shall 
draw  near  to  it  and  seek  to  partake  of  it. 
Among  them  shall  come  even  their  "  kings," 
drawn  by  the  brightness  of  the  glory  (cump. 
oh.  xlix.  23). 

Ver.  4. — lift  up  thine  eyes  (see  ch.  xlix. 
18).  Thy  sons  .  .  .  thy  daughters.  Not  so 
much  Jews  of  the  dispersion,  ns  Gentiles, 
who  vrill  become  thy  adopted  "sons"  and 
"  daughters."  Shall  be  nursed  at  thy  side ; 
rather,  shall  be  carried  on  thy  side.  Oriental 
mothers  often  carry  a  small  child  on  their 
hip,  with  the  arm  round  it  to  prevent  its 
falling  off. 

Vers.  5 — 9. — The  second  stanza.  Zion's 
wealth. 

Ver.  5. — ^Thiue  heart  shall  fear;  rather, 
shall  throb;  "beat  with  excitement."  Be- 
cause the  abundance  of  the  sea  shall  be  con- 
verted unto  thee ;  i.e.  the  iiiaritliiie commerce, 
which  has  hitherto  enriched  other  nations, 
shall  be  turned  thy  way  and  be  at  thy  dis- 
posal. The  forces  of  the  Gentiles;  ralher, 
tAe  riches  of  the  Gentiles — as  in  ch.  viii.  4 ; 
X.  14 ;  XXX.  6;  Ixi.  6.  Details  of  the  riches 
follow  in  vers.  6 — 9. 

Ver.  6. — The  multitude  of  camels ;  rather, 
a  multitude — a  continual  stream  of  caravans 
(KJay).  These  would  be  composed  of  mer- 
obanta  &om  Midian  and  Ephah,  and  would 
bring  goods  ftom  Sheba.  The  Midianite 
eatkvans  of  camels  are  mentioned  as  earljr 

ISAIAH— II, 


M  the  time  of  Jacob,  when  they  carried 
"spicery  and  balm  and  myrrh"  from  the 
land  of  Gilead  into  Egypt  (Gen.  xxxvii.  25, 
28,  36).  Ephah  is  a  sub-tribe  of  MiJian 
(Gon.  XXV.  4).  These  nomads  would  visit 
ti]e  distant  Sheba,  in  Happy  Arabia,  for 
purposes  of  trade,  and  would  procure  there 
gold  and  incense,  which  they  would  convey 
to  Palestine.  The  "Sheba"  intended  is 
doubtless  that  whose  queen  visited  Solomon, 
and  brought  with  her  gold  in  abundance, 
and  "of  spices  very  great  store,  and  precious 
stones"  (1  Kings  x.  10).  The  Egyptians 
appear  to  have  called  the  kingdom  of  the 
Shebaim  (Sabseans)  "Punt,"  and  io  have 
traded  with  it  from  a  very  early  time, 
especially  for. frankincense  ('Becordii  of  the 
Past,'  vol.  X.  pp.  14 — 19;  Eawlinson,  'His- 
tory of  Ancient  Egypt,'  vol.  ii  pp.  132 — 134, 
221 — 224)  The  dromedaries;  rather,  the 
young  camels,  or  the  camel  colls.  All  they 
from  Sheba  shall  come ;  rather,  they  (i.e.  the 
camels  of  Midian  and  Ephah)  shall  come 
all  together  from  Sheba. 

Ver.  7. — Kedar  ,  .  .  Nebaioth.  Arab  tribes, 
like  the  Midianites  and  Sabseans.  (With 
respect  to  Kedar,  see  the  comment  on  ch. 
xxi.  15.)  "Nebaioth"  stands  for  the  tribe 
called  by  the  Greeks  and  Eomans  the 
"  Nabatseans,"  and  by  the  Assyrians  the 
"  Nabiiiti,"  who  were  one  of  the  most  power- 
ful in  the  peninsula.  About  B.O.  645  Na- 
than, their  king,  warred  with  Asshur-bani-pal 
(Smith's  'Hist,  of  Asshur-bani-pal,'  pp.  256 — 
29H).  During  the  Maocabee  period  we  find 
the  Nabateeans  in  alliance  with  the  Jews, 
and  p;iving  them  some  valuable  assistance 
(1  Mace.  V.  25 ;  ix.  35).  Tlie  locality  of  the 
Nalatseans  was  northern  Arabia,  or  tlie  tract 
lying  between  the  Elanitic  Gulf  and  the 
Lower  Euphrates.  The  wen  1th  of  the  Naba- 
tseans and  the  Kedarenes  was  in  their  flocks 
and  herds ;  and  tliis  wealth,  it  is  prophesied, 
they  will  place  at  the  disposal  of  IsraeL 
Mine  altar  .  .  .  the  house  of  my  glory.  The 
renovated  Zion  contains  a  glorious  temple, 
and  the  temple  has  in  it  an  altar,  to  wMch 
the  sheep  and  rams  are  brought — not,  how- 
ever, to  be  offered  in  sactiflce,  but  to  be 
presented  to  God  and  become  a  part  of  the 
wealth  of  the  Church. 

Ver.  8.— Who  are  these,  etc.?  The  pro- 
phet beholds  the  waters  of  the  Mediterranean 
Sea  covered  with  numerous  ships,  whose 
sails  remind  him  of  white  clouds  movine 
across  the  blue  expanse  of  heaven,  and 
again  of  doves  wending  their  way  home- 
wards to  their  accustomed  dove-cotes.  The 
"  windows  "  of  the  dove-cotes  are  the  openings 
through  which  the  birds  pass  into  the  towen 
where  they  breed. 

Ver.  9. — Surely  the  isle*  shall  wait  for 
me.  The  "isles,"  or  maritime  countries  at 
the  West,  haye  long  waited  for  •  Bedeemer 
2  D 


402 


THE  BOOK  OF  THE  PROPHET  ISAIAH.       [oh.  lx.  1—22. 


(ch.  xli.  1 ;  xlii.  4 ;  xlix.  1 ;  li.  5,  etc.). 
They  shall  send  their  eons,  and  their  gifts, 
in  ships,  which  will  come  from  far,  and 
cover  the  Mediterranean  (see  the  preceding 
verae).  The  ships  of  Tarshish.  Either  ships 
belonging  to  the  people  of  Tartessus,  in 
Spain,  who  had  a  widely  extended  commerce 
in  ancient  times  (Herod.,  1.  163;  iv.  152; 
1  Kings  X.  22 ;  Ezuk.  xxvil.  12 ;  Jonah  i.  3 ; 
etc.),  or  ships  of  a  peculiar  class,  such  as 
were  considered  suitable  for  the  long  and 
dangerous  voyage  to  the  distant  Western 
port  (see  the  comment  on  ch.  ii.  16).  To 
bring  thy  sons  from  far  (see  the  comment  on 
ver.  4).  tJnto  the  Name  of  the  Lord;  i.e. 
"to  the  place  where  the  Lord  has  set  hia 
Name  "  (comp.  oh,  xviii.  7). 

Vers.  10 — H.—  The  Mrd  stanza.  Zion'i 
reconstruction. 

Ver.  10. — ^The  sons  of  strangers  shall  bTiild 
np  thy  walls.  Cyrus  aided  in  the  supply  of 
timber  for  the  construction  of  the  second 
temple  (Ezra  ui.  7).  Artaxerxes  Longima- 
nus  sanctioned  the  rebuilding  of  the  wall  of 
Jerusalem  (Neh.  i.  3 ;  ii.  5 — 8).  The  passage 
has,  however,  a  meaning  beyond  the  literal 
one.  "  Strangers  "  of  all  kinds,  Greeks,  and 
Bomans,  and  Syrians,  and  Africans,  and 
Gauls,  and  Spaniards,  and  others,  assisted 
in  building  and  enlarging  the  walls  of  the 
Church  as  it  spread  over  the  world,  set  np 
its  bulwarks  in  the  Creeds,  and  fenced  it 
round  about  with  various  decrees  and  canons. 
Their  kings  shall  minister  unto  thee  (see 
the  comment  on  ver.  3).  Among  ministiant 
kings  may  be  mentioned  Cyrus,  Darius  the 
son  of  Hystaspes,  Artaxerxes  Longimanus, 
Alexander  the  Great,  Oonstantine,  Theodo- 
sius,  Charlemagne,  St.  Louis,  etc.  I  had 
meroy  on  thee.  A  preterit  of  prophetio 
certitude.  Mr.  Cheyne  translates,  "I  wiU 
have  compassion  upon  thee." 

Ver.  11. — Thy  gates  shall  be  open  oon- 
tinually.  That  all  who  seek  salvation  may 
have  free  access  at  all  times.  There  ia  no 
fear  of  enemies  entering,  since  war  has 
ceased  (ch.  U.  4 ;  xi.  9,  etc).  The  forces  of 
the  Gentiles ;  rather,  the  wealth  of  the  Oen- 
Hies,  as  in  ver.  5.  That  their  kings  may  be 
brought;  i.e.  forced  to  come  by  their  sub- 
jects, who  know  that  their  own  prosperity 
IS  involved  in  complete  submission  to  the 
Church  established  m  Zion,  and  therefore 
compel  their  kings  to  come  and  render  their 
homage  in  person. 

Ver.  12.— The  nation  .  .  .  that  will  not 
serve  thee  shall  perish.  God's  curse  shall 
be  upon  them ;  they  shall  wither  and  decay 
for  lack  of  the  Divine  favour  and  of  the 
graces  which  God  dispenses  to  mankind 
tlKough  his  Church  (oomp.  Zeoh.  xiv.  17 — 
19). 

Ver.  13. — The  glory  of  Lebanon  ihall  eome 
{tomf.  ch.  XXXV.  2;  xli,  19).    Qoniidered 


M  Imagery,  the  representation  is  that  th« 
barren  hills  which  stand  about  Jerusalem 
shall,  in  the  new  state  of  things,  be  decked 
with  tall  and  beautiful  forest  trees,  all  the 
sylvan  scenery  of  Lebanon  being  transported 
to  Southern  Palestine,  bo  as  to  enoompais 
the  city  of  God  with  a  garden  as  delightfol 
as  that  of  Eden.  The  spiritual  meaning  is 
that  graces  of  all  kinds  shall  abound  in  and 
around  the  holy  city,  and  shall  make  it 
beautiful  and  glorious.  The  flr  tree*  the 
pine  tree,  and  tike  box  together  (comp.  cb 
xli.  19,  where  the  same  wordi  occnr  m  the 
same  order ;  and,  for  the  trees  intended,  see 
the  comment  on  that  passage).  To  beautify 
the  place  of  my  aanvtaaxy.  Not  with 
'■avenues  of  cedars  and  plane  trees  leading 
np  to  it"  (Delitzsch),  wUoh  was  a  style  of 
ornamentation  quite  unknown  to  the  He- 
brews; but  with  groves,  and  thickets,  and 
sylvan  glades,  and  wooded  slopes  all  around 
it,  as  round  the  Syrian  temples  in  the 
Lebanon.  The  place  of  my  feet.  The  Jew- 
ish temple,  as  the  specitd  place  of  God's 
presence  upon  earth,  was  frequently  termed 
"God's  footstool"  (1  Chron.  xxriiL  2;  Ps. 
xcix.  5;  cxzxii.  7;  Lam.  iL  1)l  He  that 
towers  above  the  heavens  had  there  set  bis 
foot.  The  metaphor  is  transferred  to  the 
renovated  Zion. 

Ver.  14. — The  sons  (i.e.  descendants)  also 
of  them  that  afflicted  thee ;  i.e.  of  the  various 
nations  that  at  different  times  oppressed  and 
afSicted  Israel — as  Egyptians,  Oanaanites, 
Philistines,  Assyrians,  Babylonians,  Edom- 
ites,  Moabites,  Ammonites,  eto.  Shall 
come  bending  unto  thee.  Bowing  themselves 
down  to  the  new  Israel — the  Israel  of  Gk>d— 
as  the  eleven  sheaves  bowed  themselves 
down  to  Joseph's  sheaf  (Qen.  xxxviL  7), 
At  the  soles  Of  thy  feet  (oomp.  ch.  xlix.  28). 
Shall  call  thee,  The  dty  of  the  Lord. 
Hitherto  her  enemies  had  bestowed  on 
Jerusalem  disparaging  names,  as  "For* 
saken,"  or  "Desolate"  (ch.  Ixii.  4).  New 
they  will  substitute  for  such  names  titlss  of 
honour,  such  as  "Oi^  of  Jehovah,"  "Zioo 
of  Israel's  Holy  One.' 

Vers.  15— 18.— 3%«/ourtft  iUuum.  Zion's 
prosperity. 

Ver.  IS. — Then  hast  been  forsaken  and 
hated  (oomp.  ch.  liv.  7;  Ixii.  4).  Zion  has 
been  a  wife  repudiated  for  her  adulteries, 
"  forsaken"  by  her  husband,  and  the  object 
of  his  just  "hato."  So  that  no  man  went 
through  thee.  The  mixed  metaphor  is 
awkward,  but  readily  intelligible.  Zion  is 
at  once  a  city  and  a  wife.  As  a  wife,  sh« 
is  "  hated  and  forsaken,"  as  a  eity,  no  man 
goes  through  her.  An  eternal  exoelleniv 
(comp.  ch.  Ux.  21,  and  see  the  Homiletiet 
on  the  passage). 

Ver.  16.— Thou  shalt  also  ioek  the  milk  sf 
the  Otntilsi  (comp.  Drat  xxxiiL  19).    A*  « 


OH.  LX.  1—22.]       THE  BOOK  OF  THE  PROPHET  ISAIAH. 


408 


child  at  the  mother's  breast,  thou  shalt 
obtain  kindly  nourlBhiiient  through  the 
means  of  the  Gentiles,  who  acknowledge 
thee  for  their  superior,  and  place  all  their 
means  at  thy  disposal  {supra,  yers.  5 — 11). 
Among  these,  the  most  liberal,  and  the  most 
prompt  to  render  aid,  will  be  their  kings 
(see  the  comment  on  ver.  10).  Thou  shalt 
know  that  I  the  Lord  am  thy  Saviour.  This 
clause  is  repeated  from  eh.  xlix.  26.  It  is 
a  phrase  containing  in  i^  a  mysterious  depth 
of  promise. 

Ver.  17.— For  brass  I  wiU  bring  gold; 
rather, /or  copper.  "Brass"  was  an  alloy 
little  known  to  the  Oriental  nations.  The 
general  idea  is  that  the  glorious  age  of 
Solomon  would  return  (1  Kings  x.  21,  27), 
and  Zion  be  as  resplendent  and  as  wealthy 
as  in  his  time.  The  material  splendour  is, 
no  doubt,  throughout  the  whole  description, 
typical  in  the  main  of  spiritual  glories  and 
excellences.  I  will  also  make  thy  officers 
peace,  and  thine  exactors  righteousness. 
"Peace"  and  "righteousness"  are  here 
personified ;  and  the  declaration  is  that  they 
shall  bear  rule  in  the  community  whereof  the 
prophet  is  speaking  (comp.  ch.  xxxii.  16, 17). 

Ver.  18. — Violence  shall  no  more  be  heard 
in  thy  land  (comp.  ch.  ii.  4 ;  xi.  6 — 9 ;  xxxv. 
9).  The  entire  cessation  of  war  and  violence 
is  one  of  the  most  characteristic  features  of 
the  "  last  times,"  when  swords  shall  be  beaten 
into  ploughshares,  and  spears  into  pruning- 
hooks.  "The  Prince  of  Peace"  shall  ulti- 
mately e.stablish  peace.  It  is  uot  surprising 
that  men  of  earnest  religious  fueling  should 
have  thought,  at  various  times,  that  they 
saw  the  actual  commencement  of  the  reign 
of  peace  upon  earth,  so  distinctly  promised, 
so  earnestly  longed  for,  so  necessary  for  the 
happiness  of  mankind.  But  to  a  calm  and 
dispassionate  observer  the  nineteenth  cen- 
tury seems  scarcely  more  advanced  upon  the 
road  which  leads  to  this  desirable  end  than 
the  first.  Thou  shalt  call  thy  walls  Salva- 
tion, and  thy  gates  Praise.  The  true  wall  of 
the  city  will  be  the  "salvation"  of  which 
God  assures  it,  and  the  true  gates  will  be 
the  "  praise,"  or  renown,  which  it  has  among 
the  nations  of  the  earth  (comp.  oh.  xxvi.  1). 

Vers.  19— 22.— The  fifth  etanta.  Zion's 
crowning  glories. 

Ver.  19. — ^Ihe  sun  shall  he  no  more  thy 
light  by  day.  Here  Isaiah  anticipates  one 
of  the  most  sublime  thoughts  in  the  Bevela- 
tion  of  St.  John  the  Divine,  viz.  that  the 
heavenly  Jerusalem,  illuminated  perpetually 
by  the  radiance  of  the  Divine  Presence,  shall 
need  neither  light  of  the  sun  by  day,  nor  of 
the  moon  by  night,  but  shall  be  sufBciently 
illumined  by  the  direct  and  primary  Lght 
which  streams  down  upon  it  from  God  him- 
self. Whether  the  sun  and  moon  will  con- 
tinue to  exist  or  not  is  beyond  the  prophet's 


ken— he  makes  no  announcement  on  the 
subject ;  sufScient  for  him  that  the  redeemed 
bask  perpetually  in  a  Divine  radiance  shed 
upon  them  by  the  "Father  of  lights"  (see 
Bev.  xxi.  23;  xxii.  5).  The  germ  of  the 
idea  appears  in  the  earlier  prophecies  (ch. 
xxir.  23).  For  brightness;  rather, /or  tKu- 
mination.  The  Lord  shall  be  unto  thee  an 
everlasting  light.  God  is  "the  Father  of 
lights"  (Jas.  i.  17) — "the  true  Light,  which 
lighteth  every  man  that  cometb  into  the 
world  "  (John  i.  9).  All  other  light  is  but 
his  shadow  and  his  reflex — his  creature 
(Gen.  i.  3) — ^therefore  perishable,  not  to  be 
reckoned  on  for  continuance  (Ps.  cii.  26; 
Heb.  i.  11).  But' God  abides;  therefore  his 
light  will  abide.  He  is  "  the  same  yesterday, 
and  to-day,  and  for  ever  "  (Heb.  xiii.  8).  And 
thy  Ood  thy  glory  (comp.  Zech.  ii.  5).  God 
will  not  only  be  the  Light  of  the  Cliureh, 
but  her  "  Glory  "  and  boast.  As  the  Shechi- 
nah  was  the  glory  of  the  first,  so  "the 
eternal  unchangeable  light  of  Jehovali,  with 
its  peaceful  gentleness  and  perfect  purity " 
(Delitzscli),  will  be  the  glory  of  the  final 
temple. 

Ver.  20.— Thy  sun  ...  thy  moon.  That 
which  is  to  thee  instead  of  sun  and  moon — 
Jehovah's  brightness.  The  days  of  thy 
mourning  shall  be  ended.  Till  the  new  Jeru- 
salem descends  from  heaven  (Kev.  xxi.  2), 
and  Christ  reigns  personally  over  his  people 
(Bev.  xxii.  5),  the  Church  is  always,  more 
or  less,  in  a  state  of  mourning.  The  Bride- 
groom is  away  (Matt.  ix.  15);  his  light 
shines  upon  his  Church  only  by  snatches; 
his  Church  feels  itself  unworthy  of  him — 
cold,  unloving,  stained  with  sin.  Fasting, 
weeping,  and  mourning  befit  such  a  state  of 
things.  But  in  the  tinal  condition  of  the 
redeemed  their  mourning  shall  be  ended, 
"  sorrow  and  sighing  shall  have  fled  away  " 
(oh.  XXXV.  10);  God  shall  have  "wiped 
away  all  tears  from  their  eyes"  (Bev.  xxi. 
4);  "There  shall  be  no  more  death"  (Rev. 
xxi.  4);  "no  more  curse"  (Eev.  xxii.  3); 
"  neither  sorrow,  nor  crying ;  neither  shall 
there  be  any  more  pain:  for  the  former 
things  are  passed  away  "  (Eev.  xxi.  4).  The 
days  of  mourning  shall  be  ended. 

Ver.  21. — Thy  people  also  shall  be  all 
righteous.  Here  the  prophet  touches  the 
root  of  the  matter.  Fain  and  sorrow  aie 
the  fruit  of  sin.  Once  let  sin  disappear,  and 
sorrow  goes  with  it  It  is  the  Ibundation  of 
all  the  glory  and  all  the  happiness  of  the 
redeemed  in  their  Lord's  final  kmgdom,that 
they  are  cleansed  from  all  defilement  of  sin, 
and  "are  as  the  angels"  (Mark  xii.  25). 
They  shall  inherit  the  land;  rather,  the 
earth  -  -the  "  new  heavens  and  new  earth  "  of 
ch.  Ixv.  17:  Ixvi.  22.  The  branch  of  mj 
planting;  rather,  a  mrout  of  my  planting i 
Le.  a  sprout  which  I  nave  punted. 


404  THE  BOOK  OF  THE  PROPHET  ISAIAH.         [oh.  lx.  1—22 

Yer.  22 — A  little  one;  t.«.  the  "little  I  time ;  rather,  tn tfo  ttme,  when  the  time  fixed 

flock "  of  our  Lord's  own  time  on  earth  in  Ood'e  counsels  for  the  final  establislunent 

(Lnke  xii.  32),  will  become  a  strong  nation —  of  Ohrisf  s  kingdom  uiirei. 
•  conntlesa  multitude  (BeT.  vii.  9).    In  Us  I 


H0MILETIC8. 

Vers.  1 — 22. — ZTle  eharacteristies  of  the  final  Ohureh  «f  the  Redeemer.     Iiaiah'i 

teaching  on  this  subject  divides  itself  under  three  heads. 

I.  The  Church  shall  bb  basiant  with  a  lioht  dekivkd  fkom  heb  Lord.  The 
radiance  spoken  of  (vers.  1 — 3)  is  a  radiance  of  moral  and  spiritual  goodness.  The 
absolute  moral  perfection  of  the  Son  of  man  can,  of  course,  be  but  faintly  and  feebly 
imitated  by  his  followers.  Still,  they  are  bound  to  imitate  him;  for  he  "left  tliem  aii 
example,  that  they  should  follow  his  steps "  (1  Pet.  ii.  21).  And  they  are  helped  in 
their  imitation  by  their  Lord  himself,  who  infuses  into  them  of  his  own  righteousness, 
and  gives  them  "grace  for  grace"  (John  L 16).  And  the  result  is  that  ultin.ately  tliey, 
even  in  this  life,  more  or  less  bear  his  image  and  are  made  like  to  him.  "We  all," 
says  St.  Paul,  "  with  open  face  beholding  as  in  a  glass  the  glory  of  the  Lord,  are 
changed  into  the  same  image  from  glory  to  glory,  even  as  by  the  Spirit  of  the  Lord  " 
(2  Cor.  iii.  18).  And  the  resemblance  will  be  greater  hereafter.  For  in  their  final 
state  they  will  be  cleansed  from  all  stain  of  sin. 

II.  The  Church  shall  be  a  great  nation,  a  vast  coumcnity,  which  shall 
FILL  the  new  earth  AND  NEW  HEAVENS.  The  "little  ODC "  was  to  " beconie  a 
thousjvnd,"  and  the  "  small  one  a  strong  nation "  (ver.  22).  The  Gentiles  from  every 
quarter  were  to  flock  in  (vers.  3,  4, 14),  and  haste  to  the  brightness  of  Zion's  rising. 
Distinctions  of  race  were  to  be  abolished,  and  Zion's  gates  were  to  stand  open  always, 
to  receive  all  comers  (ver.  11).  The  result  was  to  be  a  vast  influx ;  and  iu  the  ultimaie 
kingdom  of  the  Eedeemer  would  be  contained  people  from  every  nation  under  heaven. 
Besides  the  mystical  hvmdred  and  forty-four  thousand,  representative  of  the  twelve 
tribes  of  Israel,  St.  John  saw  in  the  apocalyptic  vision  "a  great  multitude,  which  no 
man  could  number,  of  all  nations,  and  kindreds,  and  peoples,  and  tongues,  which  stood 
before  the  throne,  and  before  the  Lamb  "  in  the  heavenly  kingdom,  "  clothed  with  white 
robes,  and  palms  in  their  hands  "  (Rev.  vii.  9). 

III.  The  Church  shall  cease  to  have  enemies  ob  suffer  violence,  and  shall 
ENJOT  everlasting  PEACE.  When  the  pit  has  closed  on  the  ungodly,  and  Satan  hag 
been  bound  and  shut  up,  and  her  sins  have  not  only  been  forgiven,  but  purged  away 
(oh.  i.  25),  then  the  Chiurch  will  find  herself  kept  in  perfect  peace,  with  no  trouble 
either  from  within  or  from  without,  with  no  enemy  to  vex  her,  with  no  faults  to  mourn 
(ver.  20),  with  no  temptations  against  which  to  struggle.  Rest  and  peace  are  msuL 
objects  of  human  desire ;  only  the  peace,  to  be  satisfactory,  must  be  a  prolonged  quiet 
energy,  instinct  with  consciousness  and  life.  Such  an  energy  is  the  reverential  and 
loving  adoration  which  the  blesseid  souls  render  coutinnally  to  their  present  Gk>d,  as 
they  cast  their  crowns  before  his  throne,  and  cry,  "  Salvation  to  our  God  which 
•itteth  upon  the  throne,  and  unto  the  Lamb"  (Rev.  vii.  10).  The  Divine  presence 
will  be  a  perpetually  present  joy,  contenting  those  who  live  in  it,  and  cauaiug  them  to 
feel  an  eternal  peaceful  delight. 


HOMILIES  BY  VARIOUS  AUTHORS. 

Vers.  1 — ^14. — The  rebuilding  of  the  temple.  I.  The  DAWN  OP  THK  HEW  DAT.  Zion, 
lying  like  a  prostrate  woman  on  the  ground,  is  bidden  to  arise,  because  the  glory  of  her 
God  has  dawned  upon  her.  And  this  in  contrast  to  the  thick  darkness  enwrapping  the 
earth  in  general,  'i'his  darkness  means  alienation  from  Gbd.  As  the  Israelites  had 
light  in  their  dwellings  when  thick  darkness  was  on  the  land  of  Egypt,  so  again  now. 
Israel  is  the  "central  and  mediatorial  people."  Here  a  community  of  OroA;  yonder 
a  world  exiltd  from  God.  The  contrast  continues,  and  ever  must  continue.  "  We  are  o( 
God ;  the  whole  world  lieth  in  the  evil  one."    The  glory  of  the  pure  Church  is  nothing 


OH.  tx.  1—22.]      THE  BOOK  OP  THE  PROPHET  ISAIAH.  405 

but  a  reflection  from  the  Eternal.  He  is  a  Sun  to  enlighten  the  understanding,  open  the 
eyes  of  the  mind,  thrill  the  heart  with  love.  When  through  the  faithlessness  of  the 
Church  that  splendour  fades  from  her,  there  are  no  conTersions,  there  is  little  interest 
in  religion.  When  it  reappears,  nations  aet  forth  to  that  light,  kings  to  the  brilliance 
of  that  dawn. 

II.  The  BETasH  rnOK  exile  and  ihflttx  of  wealth.  Here  the  prophet  exults  in 
the  contemplation  of  Arabian  wealth  flowing  into  the  holy  city.  Their  gifts  are  viewed 
as  religious,  as  sacrificial, — consecrated  to  God.  "  The  wealth  of  the  heathen  world 
shall  be  consecrated  to  the  service  of  the  Church.  In  part  this  has  been  the  case.  No 
small  part  of  the  great  Wealth  of  the  Bomitn  empire  flowed  into  the  Christian  Church. 
The  time  will  come  when  the  wealth  of  India  and  China,  and  of  Africa,  and  of  the 
entire  world,  shall  be  devoted  to  the  service  of  God." 

III.  Tee  new  Jebusaleu.  The  walls  shall  be  raised  by  the  willing  hands  of 
strangers,  probably  the  converted  heathen,  whose  kings  shall  become  servants  of  Zion ; 
an  endless  stream  of  caravans  shall  flow  through  the  open  gates.  And  "eager  to 
minister  to  Israel,  the  far-off  nations  force  their  reluctant  chie&  to  join  them."  For 
the  very  existence  of  ihese  nations  must  depend  on  their  organic  connection  with  Israel. 
The  Prophet  Zechariah  si^ificantly  declares  that  the  nations  who  rel'use  to  come  up 
to  Jerusalem  to  worship  shall  not  enjoy  the  blessing  of  rain  (xiv.  17, 18),  which  means 
they  must  perish,  and  their  land  become  desolate.  Whatever  is  said  of  the  territory 
is  said  of  the  nation.  To  Zion,  thus  effulgent  in  her  revived  glory,  shall  be  attracted 
also  the  beauty  of  natural  products — the  splendour  of  the  trees  of  Lebanon,  that  the 
courts  of  the  temple  and  the  whole  city  may  be  decorated  in  honour  of  Jehovah.  The 
oppressors,  once  so  hated  and  feared,  will  come  in  the  attitude  of  crouching  suppliants, 
and  they  will  call  the  city,  "  City  of  Jehovah,  Zion  of  the  Holy  One  of  Israel."  This 
magnificent  picture  may  be  construed :  1.  As  a  picture  of  the  ideal  Church  in  relation 
to  mankind.  True,  in  this  imperfect  state,  the  prophecy  can  be  but  imperfectly  realized. 
The  glorious  Church,  without  spot  or  blemish,  remains  the  dream  of  lofty  prophets  and 
apostles.  But  without  such  dreams  religious  life  must  become  despondent  and  dreary, 
flat  and  sad.  While  we  listen  to  such  oracles,  translate  them  into  song  and  set  them 
to  music,  we  pmrify  and  uplift  our  hearts.  Sursum  cordal  We  rise  a  little  nearer  to 
heaven,  or  bring  heaven  a  little  nearer  to  earth.  2.  As  a  picture  of  heaven.  There 
stands  the  heavenly  temple;  thither  a  vast  multitude  has  congregated;  and  there 
a  vast  fund  of  spiritual  riches  has  accumulated.  Prophecy  and  religious  poetry  in 
general  are  but  ulusory  enchantments  unless  they  point  to  «  reality  in  diat  state 
unseen.— J. 

Yen.  16 — 22. — The  favour  of  Jehovah  to  his  people.  Zion  is  again  imagined  as  the 
bride  of  Jehovah.  No  more  is  she  to  be  "  hated,"  i.e.  neglected  (Gen.  xxix.  31 ;  Deut. 
xxi.  16),  like  one  less  beloved.  No  more  are  her  streets  to  be  deserted  of  passengers. 
She  is  to  be  made  an  "  everlasting  pride,  the  delight  of  successive  generations."  The 
kings  of  the  earth  are  to  be  tender  over  her,  and  she  Is  to  he  enriched  by  the  resources 
of  the  nations. 

L  Jehovah  the  Savioub  and  the  Buleb.  (Repeated  from  oh.  xlix.  26.)  Happy 
the  people  whose  God  is  Jehovah,  the  "Hero  of  Jacob"!  Every  image  of . <e?ry)orai 
richea  and  prosperity,  such  as  the  gold  of  Solomon's  palace,  or  the  silver  common  as 
stones,  and  the  cedars  as  sycamores  (1  Rings  x.  21,  27),  may  but  &intly  shadow  forth 
the  splendour  of  the  city  under  the  true  and  eternal  King.  Better  still,  the  politics  will 
be  those  of  peace.  By  a  figure  of  speech,  peace  itself  and  righteousness  are  said  to 
govern  the  city.  And  so  spiritual  shall  be  the  sources  of  its  strength,  "  it  shall  need  no 
walls  nor  gates ;  for  Jehovah  shall  he  a  constant  source  of  salvation,  and  of  a  renown 
which  shaU  keep  all  foes  at  a  distance"  (ch.  xxvi.  1;  xxxiii.  21).  Nothing  less  than 
righteousness  prevailing  in  every  department  of  Church  and  state  can  satisfy  that  ideal 
which  has  been  revealed  to  us,  and  which  our  souls  thirst  to  see  realized.  Violence  is 
to  cease.  "The  pure  gospel  of  the  Redeemer  has  never  originated  a  single  war  of 
invasion,  nor  produced  a  scene  of  bloodshed  or  prompted  to  strife.  Let  us  look  forward 
to  a  time  when  the  mad  passions  of  kings  and  nations  will  be  subdued,  and  war*  only 
be  known  among  the  sad  and  disgraceful  records  of  the  past." 

U,  Thb  itkbkai  bflenooub  of  the  o|tt  or  God.    Jehovah  himsil^  and  m 


406  THE  BOOK  OF  THE  PROPHET  ISAIAH.       [oh.  tx.  1— 2a 

nukterial  luminaries,  shall  enlighten  it  (cb.  xxz.  26 ;  cf.  Bev.  xxL  23;  xsii.  6).  All  the 

wonders  of  the  natural  world  must  pale  and  turn  lustreless  berore  the  effulgence  of  moral 
beauty.  The  glory  of  the  Church  is  its  great  Head — his  Kame,  attributes,  laws,  and 
protecting  care.  Not  bo  much  wealth,  talent,  numbers,  influence,  but  the  character 
of  her  sovereign  Lord,  is  her  boast.  The  Church  shall  enjoy  a  perpetucU  existence, 
living  through  all  changes  and  surviving  all  revolutions.  Discipline  and  sorrow  shall 
one  day  have  done  their  work,  and  the  people  shall  "  all  be  righteous."  They  will 
possess  the  land,  will  inherit  all  that  God  has  done  for  its  welfare,  will  enter  into 
all  his  plans  and  purposes,  enjoy  the  fruit  of  his  agelong  spiritual  husbandry.  And 
fi  om  this  state  of  things  fresh  lustre  will  ever  be  reflected  upon  his  holy  Name.  There 
would  be  immense  increase  by  accessions  from  the  Qentile  world.  Nor  will  there 
be  unnecessary  delay.    The  lesson  is  to  wait,  pray,  and  toil  until  the  day  dawn — till, 

"  Crowned  with  light,  imperial  Salem  rise. 
Exalt  her  towering  head,  and  lift  her  eyes  I" 

"  He  that  shall  come  will  come,  and  will  not  tarry "  (Heb.  x.  37).  TheM  inspired 
visions  have  deep  relation  to  the  truth ;  if  they  he  not  translated  into  bot  in  our  time^ 
we  may  be  translated  to  the  sphere  where  they  are  realities. — J. 

Ver.  1. — The  blessed  davm.  "Arise,  shine;  for  thy  light  is  come,  And  the  glory 
of  the  Lord  is  risen  upon  thee."  The  original  reads,  "  Be  enlightened ;  for  thy  light 
Cometh."  For  it  does  not  follow  that  all  are  enlightened  to  whom  the  light  comes. 
There  must  be  a  receptive  and  a  reflecting  power  in  us. 

I.  Opfobtunities  ABE  NOT  ENOUGH.  These  come  to  nations  and  to  men ;  but  we 
must  Rfise,  and  shake  ourselves  from  slumber  and  indifference.  Israel  is  to  live  as  a 
witi.ess  for  God.  We  are  not  to  be  as  the  vortex  swallowing  up  all  heavenly  privileges ; 
but  a  fountain,  to  send  them  abroad.  A  lighthouse  is  not  for  our  own  vessels,  but  for 
the  merchandise  of  the  world.  The  light  shines  there  in  Israel  that  the  Gentiles  may 
come  to  the  brightness  of  its  rising.  Light  is  come.  What  an  advent  I  How  value- 
less  is  all  else  in  creation  without  light  I  1.  Tfie  light  of  a  new  morning  of  national  life. 
2.  The  light  of  an  evangelical  prophet,  like  Isaiah,  who  sees  not  only  Jsrad't  rum,  but 
Israel's  remedy  too. 

II.  Human  ehdeayoubb  abb  not  enough.  Isaiah  does  not  say,  "i  have  come." 
He  does  cot  point  to  the  medium,  but  to  the  light  itself.  "  The  glory  of  the  Lord." 
This  is  seen  to  be  such:  1.  By  its  tinique  character.  There  is  no  light  like  the 
light  of  inspiration.  2.  By  its  glorious  influence.  It  brings  safe  guidance,  Kuw 
prosperity,  and  spiritual  peace. — ^W.  M.  S. 

Ver.  15. — A  promise  to  Israel.  "  I  will  make  thee  an  eternal  excellency,  •  Joy 
of  many  generations."  God's  estimate  of  honour  is  the  only  real  and  permanent  one. 
Nations  have  sought  other  excellences.  The  Egyptians  excelled  in  architecture;  the 
Greeks  in  art  and  beauty ;  the  Romans  in  government  and  military  prowess.  The  Jew 
was  to  excel  in  righteousness  and  religion. 

I.  Goi>'s  ideal  18  IMMOBTAL.  "  An  eternal  excellency."  1.  MUitary  empire  passes 
from  kingdom  to  kingdom.  2.  Taste  changes  alike  in  art  and  architecture.  But  the 
moral  law  is  eternal. 

II.  The  contrast  is  couplbtk.  The  "forsaken"  shall  have  arise  among  them  One 
who  shall  fulfil  the  words  of  the  sixteenth  verse,  "Thou  shalt  know  that  I  the  Lord 
am  thy  Saviour  and  thy  Redeemer,  the  Mighty  One  of  Jacob."  The  "  hated  "  shall 
find  and  feel  the  tender  love  of  God ;  for  (ver.  10)  ''In  my  favour  have  [  bad  mercy 
on  thee."  Scorn  and  contumely,  what  are  they  when  the  heart  glows  with  the  love  of 
God,  and  the  character  wins  his  everlasting  favour  ? — ^W.  M.  S. 

Ver.  20. — Eternal  day.  "Thy  sun  shall  no  mon  go  down,"  etc.  We  are  told  in 
the  preceding  verse  who  this  sun  is.  It  is  God.  As  the  Light  of  the  soul,  he  shall  live 
for  ever.  We  speak  of  sun  and  moon,  not  only  as  they  exist  in  nature,  but  figuratively, 
as  symbolic  of  joy  and  gladness  to  the  human  heart.  Many  things  are  in  this  sense 
Ugbts  to  us  here,  but  their  glory  is  often  dimmed,  often  edipsed  in  darkless;  but  here- 
after "the  Lord  shall  be  unto  thee  an  everlasting  Light,  and  th^  God  thy  Gloiy."  Night 


OH.  ML  1—22.]      THE  BOOK  OF  THE  PROPHET  ISAIAH.  4OT 

in  Indispensable  to  nature  here.  Its  dews  and  darkness  answer  numberless  purposes 
of  goud  in  the  wide  creation.  And  must  we  not  say  that  the  gloom  and  mystery  of  life 
have  all  a  meaning,  a  Divine  intent  ?  and  that  the  spirit  of  the  probationer  for  eternity  is 
perfected  in  it?  To  have  all  sunshine  in  a  world  so  stained  with  sin  would  argue  that 
God  thinks  lightly  of  evil.  It  is  not  so.  This  life  of  ours  has  much  of  gloom ;  hut 
all  its  darkness,  directly  or  indirectly,  springs  from  sin.  The  eclipse  is  caused  by  the 
selfishness  of  man  coming  between  God  and  the  soul.  Will  God  always  cause  ua 
to  endure  so  much  of  darkness?  No.  But  we  must  wait  his  tiTnt.  We  must  wait 
his  place.  We  may  put  off  our  black  dress  and  dress  in  bridal  robes  when,  as  our 
text  says,  "  the  days  of  our  mourning  shall  be  ended."  Light  is  beautiful,  "  Surely 
light  is  sweet."  Think  how  many  golden  harvest-fields  the  all-ripening  sun  has  looked 
down  upon ;  how  many  scenes  of  blest  content  its  rays  have  rested  on.  Many  of  our 
frames  of  mind  are  materially  affected  by  the  merry  sunshine.  The  sun  not  only  ripens 
the  corn,  it  gladdens  the  heart.  But  there  is  a  sunshine  of  the  soul  not  at  all  connected 
with  this.  There  are  joys  which  nothing  outward  can  bestow  or  remove.  Yes ;  there 
are  many  miserable  hearts  on  the  brightest  days.  The  sunshine  cannot  replace  the  smile 
of  a  vanished  face.  Likewise  there  are  many  glad  hearts  on  the  gloomiest  days.  Nothing 
can  steal  from  them  the  blessedness  of  being  loved  and  doing  good.  I  would  remark, 
however,  that — 

I.  The  snKSHiiiE  of  lifk  is  uncertain.  Do  dark  days  come  suddeTily  on  mariners 
in  distant  seas,  in  other  zones  ?  So  imperceptibly  comes  sorrow  to  human  hearts. 
We  liavo  no  control  over  the  landscape  and  the  heart.  Its  fairssV  scenes  may  be 
darkened  in  an  hour  1  Imagine  a  belated  traveller  seeing  the  sun  go  down.  This  is  so  I 
What  sad  intelligence  may  come!  What  unbidden  conjecture  may  arise  I  What 
surmise  I  What  thought  may  come  forth  from  the  chambers  of  memory  1  What 
spoken  words — what  sad  scenes  may  quench  the  light  of  joy  and  gladness  in  the  human 
countenance!  Yes;  you  have  marked  this;  perhaps  your  own  words  may  have 
produced  it.  How  many  can  bear  evid^nce  of  this !  They  will  be  ready  to  echo  my 
words  when  I  say,  "  Let  us  be  very  thankful  for  so  much  bright  sunshine  as  we  have,  for 
the  joys  which  are  the  rewards  and  accompaniments  of  Christian  life."  Yes;  "  they  will 
bring  hither  the  timbrel,  the  pleasant  harp,  with  the  psaltery ; "  they  will  be  glad, 
but  they  will  rejoice  with  trembling,  for  they  "  know  not  what  a  day,"  etc. 

II.  The  sunshine  of  life  is  much  dependent  on  the  state  op  ouk  souls.  We 
may  be  surrounded  by  the  sweetest  natural  and  the  holiest  moral  associations,  and 
yet  sometimes  be  very  sad.  It  may  be  at  home,  or  even  in  the  sanctuary  of  God. 
A  little  pebble  placed  near  the  eye  will  intercept  the  light  of  the  sun ;  and  a  little 
object  may  keep  away  from  us  the  smile  of  God  and  the  sweet  sanction  of  our  own 
conscience.  We  feel  discontented  with  ourselves,  that,  having  a  cross  so  near  to 
go  to,  we  should  yet  bear  the  burden  of  so  many  sins ;  that,  having  a  Friend  so  near, 
we  should  let  him  share  so  few  of  our  sorrows.  But  the  cause  of  this  is  the  explanation 
ol  our  sadness :  we  so  often  love  the  sins  we  cherish ;  we  so  often  forsake  the  Friend 
we  should  make  our  own.  As  it  is  with  a  sermon,  so  it  is  with  all  the  aspects  of  life,  so 
much  hangs  on  the  state  of  our  own  soul.  But  look  up  higher.  The  souls  that  listened 
where  you  do,  trod  the  same  earth,  wept  the  same  tears  as  you  do, — -they  are  sad  nevermore, 
for  the  state  of  their  souls  is  purer  than  the  purest  lake  which  reflects  the  overhanging 
hills  ;  so  pure  that  they  consciously  and  clearlj'  bear  the  image  of  him  who  knew  no  sin. 

III.  The  sunshine  of  heaven  will  Be  soft  as  well  as  BRianT.  It  is  likened  to 
the  moon  as  well  as  to  the  sun.  Hiaven  is  not  only  pictured  to  us  by  the  symbols  of 
the  waving  palms,  and  the  majestic  multitude,  and  the  thrilling  anthem,  and  the  rever- 
berating choir,  and  the  glad  hosannahl  No;  there  will  be  soft  moonlight  as  well 
as  sunlight.  Much  and  most  of  our  happiness  here  is  not  of  the  outwardly  buoyant 
and  ecstatic  character.  It  is  calm  and  peaceful  joy  which  you  crave  no  vivid  image  for. 
This  one  suits  it  though — the  moonlight.  Yes ;  how  many  voyagers  has  it  lent  its  soft 
light  to  guide  amongst  the  breakers  1  How  many  travellers,  imperilled  by  the  way,  has 
it  kept  in  safety  from  the  precipice  and  the  watercourse !  How  many  will  sing  of  the 
beauty  as  well  as  the  safety  it  gives !  Never  did  the  sleeping  city  stand  out  in  such 
calm  and  stately  grandeur.  Never  did  the  overhanging  worlds  glow  with  a  serener 
or  a  steadier  beauty.  We  caiinot  always  bear  the  gaze  of  the  sun ;  but  ask  the  Indiar. 
sais^ionar^Ti  and  be  will  tell  you  the  sweet  loveliness  of  the  moon.    It  is  a  type,  then, 


408  THE  BOOK  OP  THE  PROPHET  ISAIAH.       [oh.  lx.  1—22 

«s  I  think,  of  a  calmer  joy ;  the  blessedness  of  a  being  who,  no  longer  vexed  with 
anger,  hate,  or  jealousy,  no  more  burdened  with  priiie,  or  prejudice,  or  selfishness^  sees 
and  enjoys  God  in  all  around  and  all  within  him.  Who — what  shall  disturb  this 
joy  ?    "  Neither  shall  thy  moon  withdraw  itself." 

IV.  The  SDNSHiMi  of  heaven  will  be  common  to  all  CHBISTIAN8.  Some  of  us 
here  to-day  may  be  for  a  time  walking  in  darknes-i,  whilst  some  are  rejoicing  in  the  light. 
There  sits  the  sad  widower,  and  there  the  joyful  husband ;  there  the  pensive  widow, 
there  tlie  glad  wife;  there  the  fatherless  orphan,  there  the  fond  child.  Yea,  and 
deeper  are  the  differences.  There  is  one  who,  by  the  grace  of  God,-  has  just  conquered 
some  besetting  sin;  beside  him,  one  who  still  indulges  it.  There,  one  whose  commerce 
with  the  court  of  heaven  is  small ;  and  there,  one  who,  like  Enoch,  walks  with  God. 
There,  one  who  pitches  his  tabernacle  with  the  open  door  towards  the  cross ;  there,  one 
wl'O  has  his  tent  open  towards  the  world.  Here  are  different  phases  of  human 
experience,  different  states  of  physical  health,  and  different  degrees  of  the  spiritual  life. 
Consequently  the  sunshine  of  one  is  not  the  sunshine  of  all.  In  heaven  it  will  he  common. 
I  do  not  say  all  will  have  the  same  degree  of  blessedness.  I  believe  they  will  not.  But 
all  will  he  at  rest.  There  will  be  no  such  difference  as  between  sorrow  and  joy.  All 
will  he  happy  up  to  the  measure  of  their  being ;  all  will  participate  in  a  joy  of  which 
the  snblimest  foretastings  on  earth  are  but  the  faintest  shadows.  Mark,  then,  the 
language.  "  Thy  sun  shall  no  more  go  down."  It  belongs  to  thee.  We  are  not  of 
the  night,  as  we  are  in  the  night. 

V.  The  sunshine  of  heaven  shall  never  best  on  orates.  "The  days  of  thy 
mourning  shall  be  ended."  I  have  often  thought  on  the  brightest  days  of  the  many 
new  tombs  which  the  sun's  light  falls  on.  But  a  few  days  since,  closed  eyes  rejoiced  in 
the  light  as  well  as  mine.  Ah!  and  there  are  eyes  looking  on  the  world  which  looked 
on  it  with  them ;  scenes  of  sea  and  land,  hill  and  vale,  forest  and  flood,  which  photo- 
giaphed  themselves  on  both  hearts  alike.  One  is  now  a  clod  of  the  valley.  Much 
of  the  description  of  heaven,  to  inspirit  our  hearts,  rests  in  what  there  is  not  there.  And 
there  are  no  more  graves.  There  is  no  new  tomb  for  Joseph  in  the  garden  of  the  better 
country.  We  shall  hear  no  lamentation  for  the  dead  there — "  Rachel  weeping  for  her 
children,  because  they  are  not."  We  shall  never,  as  did  the  disciples,  stand  with  Jesus 
at  the  grave  there.  No  voice  will  ever  say,  "  Young  man,  I  say  unto  thee.  Arise  I " 
"  Lazarus,  come  forth  1 "  No ;  there  are  no  graves,  neither  in  the  sea  nor  in  the 
rock ;  for  "  the  days  of  thy  mourning  shall  be  ended." — W.  M.  S. 

Ver.  20. — Departed  grief.  "  The  days  of  thy  mourning  shall  be  ended."  What 
a  glorious  perspective  there  is  in  these  words  1  In  the  fairest  skies  we  are  accustomed 
to  expect  some  clouds  to  start  up  from  the  bed  of  the  sea,  or  to  come  suddenly  across 
the  blue  firmament  heralded  by  some  fleecy  outrider.  Nor  do  we  expect  perpetuity 
of  joy  in  human  life.  Life  is  ever  the  subject  of  risk  and  danger.  We  never  part 
without  uncertainty  as  to  meeting  again ;  we  never  know  but  our  day  of  glory  may 
set  in  tears.  There  comes,  too,  in  time,  to  us  all  that  "  last  glance  of  love  which  becomes 
the  sharpest  pang  of  sorrow." 

I.  Night.  On  earth  our  experience  is  often  that  of  mourning.  We  are  sorrowful. 
1.  Over  the  ravages  of  sin  in  ourselves  and  in  the  world.  2.  Over  the  contrast  between 
our  ideals  and  our  imperfections.  3.  Over  the  influences  of  mutability  and  morttUity, 
4.   Over  th".  weakness  of  our  faith  and  the  coldness  of  our  love  to  Christ. 

II.  MoKNXNQ.  "Ended."  Some  things  end /or  a  time  only.  We  are  liable  to  them 
again.  Pear  returns.  Disaffection  of  friends,  awhile  ago  removed,  recommences  once 
more.  Pain  eased  gives  place  to  after-anguish.  Friend  after  friend  departs.  After 
one  victory  over  temptation  comes  another  and  a  fiercer  conflict.  "  Mourning  ended." 
Why  ?  God  is  our  everlasting  "  Light ; "  for :  1.  We  are  all  righteous.  (Ver.  21.)  The 
new  nature  is  perfected  in  those  who  have  the  new  name ;  there  is  no  sorrow  where  there 
is  no  sin.  2.  We  are  all  at  home.  "  They  shall  inherit  the  land  for  ever."  At  last 
the  craving  for  rest  is  satisfied.  At  last  what  we  have  so  long  sought  h&re  we  shall 
find  there.  All  here  mocks  us  with  a  sense  of  change,  disruption,  and  death.  2%ere 
"  thy  sun  shall  no  more  go  down." — W.  M.  S. 

Ver.  82. — Multiplication.    "A  little  one  shall  b?«ome  a  thousand,"  etc     Thii 


OH.  LX.  1—22.]     THE  BOOK  OP  THE  PROPHET  ISAIAH.  40» 


is  a  Divine  rebulce  of  our  estimates.  We  look  at  outward  magnitudes;  God  looks  at 
that  which  has  inward  extension  in  itself. 

L  This  is  trub  histobioallt.  Israel  found  it  so.  The  Pilgrim  Fathers  found  it 
■o.  And  many  Churches  have  found  it  so,  where  there  has  been  loving  co-operation  and 
personal  consecration.  Look  how  the  despised  mission  work  in  India  grew  to  a  mighty 
foicp,  despite  the  satirical  review  of  Jefferies.  Look  how  the  native  schools,  with  their 
slender  heginniiigs,  have  grown  to  millions  of  disciples. 

n.  This  is  true  conditionally.  God  must  be  with  us  I  "I  the  Lord  will 
hasten  it."  "It  is  to  be  in  his  time."  There  is  no  promise  to  the  "  little  one,"  whatever 
skill,  energy,  or  endeavour  there  may  be — anly  God  is  with  them.  When  we  are 
on  the  side  of  truth,  we  are  on  the  side  of  conquest.  When  we  are  waiting  in  dis- 
appointed moods,  God  is  hastening  on  the  sure  foundation,  which  he  is  laying.  When 
we  are  fascinated  with  the  meretricious  glory  of  the  world,  we  see  it  laid  low  and 
Christ's  kingdom  established  on  its  ruins. — W,  M.  S. 

Vers.  1 — 22. — The  Church  triumphant.  With  other  eyes  than  ours  the  Jews  must 
have  read  these  glowing  words.  They  saw  in  them  a  fascinating  picture  of  a  triumphant 
people ;  they  saw  the  Jerusalem  of  their  knowledge  and  of  their  love  made  strong  and 
glorious  in  some  coming  time.  Their  patriotic  hopes  were  kindled  and  must  have 
been  raised  to  a  white  heat  of  intensity  as  they  dwelt  on  the  gladdening,  transporting 
promise.  In  the  midst  of  surrounding  darkness  covering  the  whole  earth  (ver.  2), 
Zion  shines  forth  with  a  light  which  proceeds  from  notliing  less  than  the  Divine 
Presence  itself  (vers.  1,  2).  Attracted  by  its  radiant  beams,  her  exiled  sons  and 
daughters  return  from  the  strange  lands  whither  they  have  gone  into  captivity,  while 
from  every  quarter  the  wealth  of  Gentile  nations  flows  to  her  feet.  She  trembles  for 
very  joy,  her  heart  expands  with  the  fulness  of  its  emotion,  as  she  welcomes  her 
children  to  her  heart,  as  she  receives  these  treasures  into  her  gates  (vers.  4 — 6).  The 
produce  of  other  lands  is  laid  on  the  altar  of  Jehovah,  and  brightens  the  lustre  of  that 
glorious  house  (ver.  7).  Precious  tribute  is  brought  from  distant  coasts  (ver.  9),  and 
they  who  once  contemptuously  humiliated  her,  now  build  up  the  walls  of  her  strength 
and  find  their  safety  in  her  service  (vers.  10 — 12, 14).  In  place  of  saddest  desolation  and 
signs  of  Divine  departure  shall  be  proofs  of  national  supremacy  and  the  recovered 
favour  of  the  Lord  (vers.  15, 16).  The  excellences  of  earlier  days  will  be  eclipsed  by  the 
future  splendour ;  the  rude  arm  of  force  shall  give  place  to  the  gentle  hand  of  righteous- 
ness; the  salvation  of  Jehovah  shall  surround  the  city;  and  songs  of  praise  shall  be 
on  the  lips  of  the  citizens  (vers.  17, 18).  The  light  of  noon  in  all  its  radiance  is  but 
a  picture  of  the  glory  which  will  rest  upon  her  in  the  abiding  presence  of  Jehovah ; 
and  joy,  rectitude,  and  enlargement  will  be  her  blessed  portion  (vera.  20 — 22).  There  may 
be  intervening  days  before  this  is  realized;  but  when  the  hour  is  reached  for  it  to  come, 
the  Lord  will  hasten  its  arrival.  But  "God  fulfils  himself  in  many  ways ;  "  'he  redeems 
bis  promises  to  us  otherwise  than  we  hope  and  even  confidently  expect.  Jeru- 
salem has  never  attained,  and  is  not  likely  to  realize,  the  prosperity  and  power  here 
depicted ;  in  some  other  way  than  that  of  national  glory  must  we  look  for  the  fulfil- 
ment of  this  brilliant  vision.  We  shall  find  it  in  the  triumph  of  the  Church  of 
Christ,  of  the  "Israel  of  God,"  which  the  Divine  Redeemer  has  lived  and  died  to 
establish.  The  features  of  this  "  golden  age,"  as  thus  realized,  are  indicated  in  the  text ; 
they  are — 

L  The  exaltation  or  the  Divinb.  Its  glory  will  be  manifestly  the  "  glory  of 
the  Lord "  (vers.  1,  2).  And  everything  is  to  work  for  the  exaltation  of  Christ 
(vers.  20,  21).  Whatever  does  not  aim  at  this  or  make  for  this  is  alien,  intrusive, 
harmful. 

II.  The  possession  of  vital  pbincifles.  (Ver.  12.)  All  that  opposes  itself  to  those 
truths  and  principles  of  which  the  Church  of  Christ  is  the  exponent  and  depository 
will  fail  and  perish. 

III.  Peefect  accessibility.  (Ver.  11.)  Its  gates  are  never  to  be  shut.  The  Church 
which  is  exclusive,  the  Christian  society  which  is  repelling,  the  minister  or  messenger 
of  Christ  who  is  forbidding,  the  message  which  does  not  welcome  the  wandering,  bear* 
on  the  face  of  it  a  decisive  condemnation. 

IV.  Tbiumph  oveb  its  bitterest  enemies.    (Vers.  10,  14, 15.)    Those  who  smot* 


410  THE  BOOK  OF  THE  PROPHET  ISAIAH.        [oh.  lx.  1—22. 

and  scorned  shall  acknowledge  its  heavenly  origin,  and  their  lips  shall  utter  the 
redeeming  truth ;  their  own  hands  shall  build  the  walls  of  Zion. 

V.  The  iNCOMiNa  of  the  remotest.  (Vers.  6,  8,  9.)  1.  Those  most  distant  in 
space.  They  shall  seek  entrance  who  come  from  furthest  latitudes,  whose  language, 
laws,  customs,  are  most  strange.  2.  Those  most  distant  in  spirit — they  who  have  been 
farthest  from  God.,  dwelling  in  the  thickest  and  grossest  darkness  with  which  the  land 
has  been  covered  (ver.  2). 

VI.  Latins  all  thinos  under  tribute.  Not  only  the  glory  of  nature  (ver.  13), 
but  al^o  the  greatness  of  mankind  (ver.  16) ;  fairest  and  finest  fruits  of  the  field,  and 
the  proudest  products  of  society,  shall  minister  to  its  strength  and  promote  its  cause. 

VII.  Special  contribdtions  to  the  kingdom  and  glokt  op  Christ.  (Ver.  7.) 
As  the  flocks  and  herds  of  Kedar  and  Nabathea  would  add  something,  by  their  novelty 
and  peculiarity,  to  the  glories  of  the  temple ;  so  will  the  especial  characteristics  of 
Christian  converts,  of  the  Englishman,  of  the  Italian,  of  tiie  Indian,  of  the  Chinaman, 
etc.,  contribute  to  the  glories  of  the  Church  :  so  will  "the  imagination  of  the  East, 
the  passion  of  the  South,  the  vigoiu-  of  the  Noith,  and  the  ep'<irpriae  of  the  West," 
bring  their  own  tribute  to  the  glory  of  Christ. 

VIII.  The  prevalence  op  peace.    (Vers.  17, 18.) 

IX.  The  reion  of  righteousness.    (Vers.  17,  21.) 

X.  Ever-enlarging  prosperity.    (Vers.  17,  22.) 

The  special  lessons  to  be  learnt  from  this  description  of  the  Church  triumphant  are  : 
1.  That  in  all  matters  pertaining  to  the  kingdom  of  God,  it  is  his  glory  that  should 
be  sedulonsly  kept  in  view.  2.  That  the  Church  of  Christ  must  expect  to  prove  an 
attractive  power  in  the  midst  of  encompassing  evil.  3.  That  it  must  address  itself 
to  the  restoration  and  acquisition  of  ihose  that  seem  least  likely  to  be  gained.  4.  That 
each  community  should  consider  what  is  the  particular  contribution  it  can  bring 
to  adorn  the  doctrine  and  strengthen  the  cause  of  its  Master.  5.  That  the  Church 
should  be  incssantly  active  in  its  holy  mission.  6.  That  it  should  take  care  that 
moral  and  spiritual  excellency  marks  it  course  as  welt  as  numarical  growth  and  the 
brilliancy  of  its  conquests.  7.  That  it  must  maintain  the  attitude  of  devout  expectancy 
and  holy  gratitude,  remembering  that  all  its  strength  and  hope  are  in  "  the  Lord,  its 
Saviour  and  its  Eedeemer." — C. 

Ver.  1. — The  call  to  shine  if  we  have  light ;  or,  the  duty  of  doing  as  well  as  knowing 
Our  first  response  to  God  is  the  reception  of  his  light ;  but  the  second  is  the  giving 
forth  of  that  li^ht.  We  read  this  truth  and  duty  in  its  Christian  phases,  and  urge  it  by 
the  use  of  Christian  persuasions.  Our  Lord  made  very  much  of  the  connection  between 
knowing  and  doing,  profession  and  practice.  His  disciples  must  be  salt,  that  savours 
sometliing  or  somebody ;  light,  that  shines  forth  on  somebody.  See  the  parables  of  the 
ten  talents,  -the  husbandmen,  the  sower  and  the  seed,  and  the  barren  fig-tree.  God  always 
looks  for  fitting  signs  and  expressions  wherever  there  is  life.  See  the  direct  teachings  of 
Christ.    "  He  that  heareth  these  sayings  of  mine,  and  doeth  them ; "  "  He  that  doeth  the 

will the  s!«ne  is  my  brother ;"'  "Tea,  blessed  are  they  that  hear  the  Word,  and  do 

it."  This  union  of  dwng  with  professing  is  necessary :  1.  To  satisfy  us  of  the  reality  of  our 
own  piety.  Illustrate  frcm  the  seed — if  there  is  life  in  it,  that  life  will  shovv  itself  to 
the  light.  Men  expect  to  see  religion  influencing  conduct.  We  expect  this  in  others. 
Others  expect  it  in  us.  They  look  for  our  shining  if  we  profess  to  have  received  God's 
light.  No  excellence  of  creed  can  excuse  unsubdued  tempers,  unrestrained  habits, 
indifference  to  the  welfare  of  others,  and  silence  concerning  what  we  have  tasted  and 
handled  and  felt  of  the  Word  of  life.  We  must  test  ourselves  if  we  would  be  assured 
of  our  own  vitality.  No  breath,  no  life.  No  shining,  no  light.  2.  To  prove  the  truth 
of  Christianity.  It  makes  great  pretensions.  How  shall  it  support  and  prove  them  ? 
Only  by  living  examples.  Experiment  tests  everything,  and  constantly  fresh  eiperi- 
ment»  are  needed.  After  all  argument  and  evidence  are  exhausted,  we  otight  to  be 
able  to  say,  "See  what  Christianity  has  done:  the  demon-possessed,  the  blind,  the 
lame,  the  drunken,  the  strong-tempered,  the  selfish,  are  changed,  and  now  they  shine." 
Then,  if  we  would  offer  to  the  men  around  us  the  best  plea  for  Cliristianity,  we  must 
just  shine.  "Arise, shine;  for  thy  light  is  come."  3.  To  extend  the  work  of  the  Light- 
brinser.  the  Redeemer.     Christian  livln£  is  the  supreme  persuasion.     Men  may  resist 


OH.LX  1—22.]      THE  BOOK  OP  THE  PROPHET  ISAIAH.  411 

eloquence,  reasoning,  force,— they  cannot  resist  (he  power  of  godliness ;  it  is  like  the 
influence  of  leaven;  it  is  like  the  testimony  of  the  dawning  day,  which  men  must 
heed.  Jerusalem  of  old — Jerusalem  spiritualized  as  the  modem  CFiurch — may  well  be 
bidden  to  "  put  on  the  beautiful  garments  "  of  godly  living,  and  "  arise  and  shine." 
— B.T. 

Ver.  7. — Chd's  presence  the  glory  of  Ood^s  house.  "  I  will  glorify  the  house  of  my 
glory"  (comp.  Hag.  ii.  7 — 8;  Mai.  lii.  1).  Rendered  literally,  the  sentence  would 
read,  "  My  house  of  beauty  will  I  beautify."  Foreshadowinss  of  this  spiritual  truth 
are  found  in  God's  presence  making  the  charm  of  the  Bden-home ;  God's  presence 
abiding  as  a  glory  between  the  cherubim  in  the  holy  of  holies ;  and  God's  pri  sence 
coming  in  the  symbol  of  the  descending  cloud  on  Solomon's  temple.  It  was  the  great 
glory  of  Herod's  restored  temple,  that  the  Qod-Maa  walked  and  worshipped  and  taugtit 
within  its  courts.  It  is  the  exceuding  great  glory  of  the  Church,  the  spiritual  temple, 
that  God  the  Spirit  comes  to  it,  dwells  in  it,  is  the  inspiration  of  it,  and  glorifies  it. 
There  is  no  glury  in  a  shrine  without  the  Deity.  The  sunshine,  streaming  through  the 
windows  of  the  old  cathedral,  fills  the  whole  place  witn  wondrous  and  solemnizing  lights 
and  shades ;  and  the  sunshine  of  the  Divine  presence  fills  the  heai  t,  and  the  sanctuary 
with  the  only  true  glory  and  beauty  and  joy.  "  The  Church  is  the  house  of  God's 
glory,  where  he  manifests  his  glory  to  his  people,  and  receive*  that  homage  by 
which  they  do  honour  to  him." 

I.  We  "ought  to  globify  God's  housb.  One  idea  of  the  text  is  that  the  restored 
temple  at  Jerusalem  would  be  honoured  by  abundant  supplies  of  sacrifices.  That  old 
way  of  worshipping  has  given  place  to  spiritual  forms,  such  as  prayer  and  praise  and 
instruction ;  then  we  should  give  the  best  possible  attention  to  these,  that  in  so  doing 
we  may  honour  God's  house.  The  best  song,  the  best  gifts,  the  best  architecture,  all , 
should  be  devoted  to  the  glorifying  of  God's  house.  And  the  best,  most  re>;ular,  most 
reverent,  attendance  at  public  worship  may  be  our  way  of  honouring  God.  "  What 
shall  I  render  unto  the  Lord  for  all  his  benefits  toward  me  ?  I  will  take  the  cup  of 
salvation,  and  call  upon  the  Name  of  the  Lord."  That  is  the  way  to  glorify  God  for 
his  goodness. 

II.  God  alonb  oak  truly  oLonirY  God's  housb.  If  he  is  not  present,  accepting  the 
worship,  inspiring  the  worship,  and  sanctifying  the  worship,  then  't  is  all  vain  show, 
empty  form,  deluding  ceremony.  Wri te  up  "/cAaSorf,"  for  the  "glorj  '.s  departed."  God's 
presence  is  known  in  the  enduement  of  his  ministers  with  righteousness,  and  in  the 
making  of  his  chosen  people  joyful. — B.  T. 

Ver.  11. — Open  gospelrgates.  "Thy  gates  also  shall  be  open  continually;  they 
shall  not  be  shut  day  nor  night."  Compare  the  picture  of  the  new  Jerusalem,  in  Bev. 
xxi.  25,  "  And  the  gates  thereof  shall  in  no  wise  be  shut  by  day  (for  there  shall  be  no 
night  there) :  and  they  shall  bring  the  glory  and  the  honour  of  the  nations  into  it." 
The  figure  is  taken  from  a  country  in  which  the  cities  were  defended  by  walls  and 
gates,  and  these  gates  were  closed  at  night.  Closed  gates  represented  the  old  limitation 
and  exclusiveness  uf  Judaism.  Open  gates  suggest  the  fulness  and  freeness  of  the 
gospel  provision  and  the  gospel  offer.  "  Here  the  open  gates  have  their  special  reason 
assigned — to  admit  the  ever  in-streaming  world,  with  its  offerings  and  homage."  "  The 
words  of  the  text  imply  a  state  of  peace,  in  which  there  would  be  no  danger  of  attack ; 
and  the  constant  stream  of  pilgrims,  with  their  offerings,  entering  by  night  as  well  as 
by  day." 

L  Open  gates  arb  a  proclamation  op  peaoe.  The  Church  does  not  want  to  hurt 
anybody,  so  it  feels  no  fear  of  anybody  wanting  to  hurt  it.  Illustrate  from  the  open 
country  of  America ;  it  can  keep  its  gates  open,  because  it  does  not  want  to  injure  or 
take  advantage  of  any  other  nation,  and  so  it  is  unable  to  conceive  of  other  nations 
wanting  to  injure  it.  George  Macdonald  has,  in  '  Thomas  Wingfold,  Curate,'  a  very 
curious,  but  very  striking,  conception  of  a  heaven  of  sweetest  peace,  where  there  is  no 
money  to  create  greed,  and  where  everybody  wants  to  serve  his  neighbour,  and  nobody 
wants  to  injure  his  neighbour.  That  place  can  keep  its  gate  open  ;  and  so  can  Chriat'a 
Church.  Even  in  some  parts  of  our  country,  people'i  doors  are  never  locked.  It  to  ■ 
delightful  sign  of  peacef'iil  living. 


41i  THE  BOOK  OF  THE  PROPHET  ISAIAH.      [oh.  lt,  1—22. 


II.  Opbn  jVates  aeb  an  invitation  to  enter.  IlluBtrate  by  the  silent,  yet  powerful, 
call  of  the  o^u  church  doois  on  the  sabbath  day.  We  hear  them  singing  to  us  and 
■ayiog — 

"  Come  in,  come  in. 
Eternal  glory  thou  may's!  win  I* 

The  gospel's  "whosoever  will "  is  Divine  persuasion.    It  givea  ns  confidence;  we  all  ma 
come  under  that  "  whosoever." 

III.  Open  gates  abe  an  assubancb  of  welcome  and  pbovibion.  There  is  some- 
thiog  inside  the  temple,  ioside  the  city,  which  thus  boldly  dares  to  open  its  doors. 
There  must  be  a  "  fenst  of  fat  things, ...  of  wines  on  the  lees  well  refined."  Illustrate 
from  our  Lord's  parable  of  the  gospel-feast.  He  would  not  open  thus  wide  his  doors 
if  the  oxen  were  not  killed  and  the  fatlings  ready.  Unfold  what  precious  and  ail- 
satisfying  things  for  souls  the  Lord  Jesus  has  provided,  and  plead  that,  whether  it  be 
morning-time  of  life,  noontime,  evening,  or  night,  the  gates  are  open,  and  we  may  enter 
now.— E.  T, 

Ver.  12. — ITie  condition  of  national  prosperity.  "  Every  nation  shall  fell  nnless  it 
serves  the  Lord,  the  righteous  God,  the  God  of  Israel,  through  whom  alone  is  salvation. 
The  figure  of  serving  Israel  means  serving  the  God  of  Israel "  (Matthew  Arnold). 
Foerster  remarks  that  "  the  Roman  pontiffs  abuse  this  oracle  of  the  prophet  to  establish 
their  tyranny  over  monarchs.  In  particular,  it  is  recorded  of  Pius  IV.,  that  at  the  time 
of  his  election  he  caused  a  coin  to  be  struck,  on  one  side  of  which  vas  his  own  image, 
adorned  with  a  triple  crown,  and  un  the  other  these  words  of  the  prophet  were  inscribed." 
Barnes  gives  suggestions  for  the  historical  illustration  of  the  passage :  "  The  idea  of  the 
verse  is  that  no  nation  can  flourish  and  long  continue  that  does  not  obey  the  Law  of 
Ood,  or  where  the  true  religion  does  not  prevail,  and  the  worship  of  the  true  God  is  not 
maintained.  History  is  full  of  affecting  illustrations  of  this.  The  ancient  republics 
and  kingdoms  fell  because  they  had  not  the  true  religion.  The  kingdoms  of  Babylon, 
Assyria,  Macedonia,  and  Egypt;  the  Roman  empire,  and  all  the  ancient  monarchies 
and  republics,  soon  fell  to  ruin  because  they  had  nut  the  salutary  restraints  of  the  true 
religion,  and  because  they  lacked  the  protection  of  the  trae  God.  France  cast  off  the 
government  of  God  in  the  first  Revolution,  and  was  drenched  in  blood.  It  is  a  maxim 
•f  universal  truth  that  the  nation  which  does  not  admit  the  influence  of  the  laws  and 
Ae  government  of  God  must  be  destroyed.  No  empire  is  strong  enough  to  wage 
successful  war  with  the  great  Jehovah ;  and,  sooner  or  later,  notwithstanding  all  that 
human  policy  can  do,  corruption,  sensuality,  luxury,  pride,  and  fa'-f  preading  vice  will 
•xpose  a  nation  to  the  displeasure  of  God,  and  bring  down  the  heavy  arm  of  his 
vengeance."  The  precise  form  in  which  this  subject  is  dealt  with  must  depend  on 
the  standpoint  of  the  preacher.  It  is  better,  therefore,  only  to  give  the  lines  in  which 
thoughts,  arguments,  and  persuasions  may  run.  The  conditions  of  national  prosperity 
are — 

I.  Belief  in  God.  Atheism  never  has  built  up,  and  never  can  build  up,  a  stable 
nation.  An  atheistic  nation  is  like  a  wall  of  loose  stones.  There  is  nothing  to  hind  it 
into  a  unity  uf  strength. 

II.  Aokkowledqment  of  God.  From  different  points  of  view  the  absolute  necessity 
for  some  public  and  authorized  testimony  of  the  national  faith  may  be  urged. 

III.  Obedience  to  God.  By  the  recognition  of  his  Law  as  the  absolute  standard  of 
aational  righteousness,  the  final  court  of  appeal. 

IV.  Reeebence  to  God.  In  all  times  of  national  perplexity  or  peril.  "  Righteous- 
ness exalteth  a  nation,"  but  righteousness  is  this — trjiug  to  hnvw  God's  will,  and  trying 
to  do  it.— E.  T. 

Ver.  13.—  Olorifying  the  second  temple.  There  are  no  records  of  such  ovei  whelming 
manifestatidns  of  the  Divine  glory  at  the  dedication  of  the  second  temple  as  were 
granted  wlien  Solomon  consecrated  the  first.  And  yet  its  glory  was  to  be  higher  than 
any  readied  in  the  experiences  of  Solomon's  temple.  There  was  to  be  a  spiritual 
presence  of  God,  which  was  to  be  realized  by  the  help  of  the  human  presence  of  Christ. 

I.  Evidences  of  the  rirLFiLMBNT  of  this  peom'.sb.  Or  signs  of  the  spiritual 
presence  and  spiritual  nower  of  Gkid  in  his  Church.     1.  Quickening  of  religious  lifej 


0H.IJL1— 22.]      THE  BOOK  OF  THE  PROPHET  ISAIAH.  41S 

or  conTersions.  2.  Renewals  of  religions  life ;  or  sanctification.  3.  Enlargement  of 
religious  feelings.  This,  however,  may  be  spurious,  or  it  may  be  sound.  4.  Recou- 
secration  to  religious  work. 

n.  Thb  conditions  on  which  the  fulpilments  of  this  pbomibb  depend.  Our 
moral  attitudes.  We  must  be  set  for  the  blessing.  The  Church  that  would  have  the 
spiritual  presence  of  God  must  be  (1)  maintaining  the  Christian  spirit ;  (2)  living 
the  Christian  life ;  (3)  upholding  the  Christian  worship ;  (4)  working  the  Christian 
work.  Then  there  is  much  preparing  and  fitting  work  for  us  to  do,  if  God  is  to  "make 
the  place  of  his  feet  glorious  "  where  we  unite  in  his  worship, — ^R.  T. 

Ver.  16.— «  The  Mighty  One  of  Jacol."  "  And  thou  shalt  know  that  I  the  Lord 
am  thy  Saviour,  and  thy  Redeemer,  the  Mighty  One  of  Jacob."  It  is  singular  and 
significant  that  Jehovah  should  here  be  so  closely  identified  with  Jacob,  and  not,  as 
usual,  with  the  three  great  patriarchs.  We  are  to  get  our  ideas  of  him  as  a  Saviour 
and  Redeemer  precisely  from  what  he  was  to  Jacob,  and  what  he  did  for  Jacob.  Now, 
the  striking  thing  in  the  life  of  Jacob  is  that  he  had  much  more  trouble  with  himsel) 
than  with  his  circumstances.  The  cursory  view  might  make  much  of  the  changeable- 
ness  and  the  hardships  of  Jacob's  checkered  life ;  but  he  easily  mastered  his  circum- 
stances. The  deeper  view  sees  throughout  the  career  a  constant  struggle  with  the  had 
self,  which  never  gets  more  than  a  partial  victory,  until  life  draws  near  to  its  close,  and 
*;hen  the  hero  of  a  thousand  fights  with  the  bad  self  is  enabled  to  speak  of  "  the  angel 
that  redeemed  me  from  all  evil."  That  angel  the  prophet  suggestively  calls  the  "  Mighty 
One  of  Jacob."  This,  then,  is  our  point.  The  glory  of  God  our  Redeemer  is  that  he 
can  redeem  us  from  our  lad  selves.  Show  what  is  meant  by  and  included  in  the  "  bad 
self." 

-  I.  The  struggle  with  the  bad  self  is  a  secebt  struggle.  We  do  not  talk  about 
it.  We  do  not  put  forth  any  signs  of  it.  Men  think  our  earthly  troubles  are  our  great 
troubles,  but  the  truth  is  that  no  cry  goes  forth  from  us  with  such  intensity  of  passion 
as  the  cry  which  no  fellow-creature  hears,  "  0  wretched  man  that  I  am  1  who  shall 
deliver  me  from  the  body  of  this  death  ?  "  Nobody  knows  how  hard  we  are  trying  to 
put  away  the  "  old  man  with  his  corruptions." 

IL  The  struggle  with  the  bad  self  is  a  hopeless  struggle.  It  is  if  we  carry  it 
on  in  our  own  strength.  "  Who  can  say,  I  have  made  my  heart  clean,  I  am  pure  from 
my  sin  ?  "  What  Jacoh-Iike  man  or  woman  ever  yet  sang  a  victory-song  over  his  own 
giant  self,  and  praised  the  weapons  and  the  skill  that  gained  the  triumph  ?  Jacobs 
that  try  to  get  quit  of  the  bad  self  in  their  own  strength  end  in  the  dust,  under  giant 
Selfs  loot. 

III.  The  struggle  with  the  bad  self  is  just  the  struggle  in  which  we  mat 
hate,  and  should  rejoice  to  have,  a  Divine  Helper,  He,  the  "  Mighty  One  of 
Jacob,"  has  access  to  souls,  and  influence  on  souls.  He  "  strengtheneth  us  with  strength 
in  the  soul."  He  will  not  cease  his  gracious  working  until  his  people  are  "  all  glorious 
within."  Of  this  we  may  be  sure,  in  this  we  may  have  supreme  consolation — over  the 
secret  inner  strife  of  our  souls,  the  Lord,  the  Saviour,  the  Redeemer,  graciously  presides. 
— R.  T. 

Ver.  19. — Our  everlasting  Light,  Contrasts  are  suggested  with  brief  days  that 
darken  into  night,  and  cloudy  days  that  hide  the  sunshining.  It  passes  our  compre- 
hension, indeed,  but  it  kindles_  bur  imagination,  to  conceive  of  a  day  that  knows  no 
ending,  and  a  suhrising  that  never  reaches  its  meridian.  Yet  we  often  feel  as  if  we 
wanted  life  to  be  all  sunshine ;  it  shall  be  when  we  are  altogether  good.  While  we  afe 
encompassed  with  infirmities,  and  must  be  under  discipline,  God  cannot  be  to  us  an 
"  everlasting  Light;"  there  must  be  clouds  coming  betwixt,  which  our  fearing,  trembling 
souls  fashion  into  his  forms.  In  the  white  heavens,  white  sotils  need  no  sun  and  no 
moon  to  shine  upon  them,  for  the  glory  of  God  doth  lighten  them.  But  this  is  ideal 
glory,  and  the  question  for  us  is — How  near  can  we  get  to  it  now  ? 

I,  Fob  us  God  mat  be  the  Light  or  the  material  world.  To  let  ourselves  be  b« 
engrossed  with  business  affairs  that  there  is  no  room  for  God  in  thought,  or  heart,  or  life, 
is  to  lose  the  everlasting  light — to  be  unable  to  see  God  in  common  everyday  things. 
It  is  hardly  conceivable  that  any  man  could  wish  to  have  this  fair  earth  with  its  vales 


414 


THE  BOOK  OP  THE  PEOPHET  ISAIAH,     [oh.  lxi.  1— 11. 


and  hills,  without  the  gilding  beautifying  sunshine.  0  poor  earth,  dull  and  dead,  like 
sunless  winter  in  Arctic  climes !  And  yet  thousands  are  willing  to  have  this  earth  of 
material  relationships  without  the  sunshine  of  God.  Exactly  what  men  want,  but  do 
not  know  that  they  want,  is  God  their  everlasting  Light.  Common  life,  with  him,  is 
lived  in  the  sunshine. 

II.  Foe  us  God  mat  be  the  Light  op  the  intellectual  woeld.  In  our  day  he  is 
only  allowed  to  shine  intermittently  in  this  world,  and  there  are  many  who  would  blot 
him  out  of  this  sky  if  they  could.  Others,  who  would  not  go  so  far  as  that,  would  gladly 
make  a  thick,  foggy  atmosphere  of  their  own  wisdom,  through  which  he  can  only  shine 
dimly.  We  shall  never  get  the  full  glory  of  the  treasures  of  the  intellectual  world  until 
we  let  the  revealing  rays  of  the  "  everlasting  light "  fall  everywhere  upon  them. 

III.  Fob  us  God  mat  be  the  Light  op  the  spiritual  world.  Indeed,  there  is  no 
light  at  all  in  the  spiritual  world  if  he  does  not  shine.  And  the  one  thing  above  all 
others  which  they  crave  after  who  dwell  in  that  spiritual  world  is  the  full,  constant, 
unshaded,  glowing,  life-renewing  power  of  the  everlasting  Light. — B.  T. 

Ver.  21. — The  heaven  of  universal  righteousnesi.  "Thy  people  also  shall  bo  all 
righteous."  "There  are  no  people  on  earth  that  are  all  righteous;  there  is  a  mixture 
of  some  bad  in  the  best  societies  on  this  side  of  heaven ;  but  there  are  no  mixtures 
there.  They  shall  be  '  all  righteous,'  that  is,  they  shall  be  entirely  righteous ;  as  there 
shall  be  none  corrupt  among  them,  so  there  shall  be  no  corruption  among  them ;  the 
spirit  of  just  men  shall  there  be  made  perfect "  (Matthew  Henry).  Universal  righteous- 
ness includes  the  following  things. 

I.  That  evbet  man  has  won  his  own  will  whollt  fob  God. 

II.  That  evbet  man  has  won  his  own  life  and  conduot  fob  God. 
ni.  That  eveet  man  has  won  his  own  relationships  foe  God. 

IV.  That  eveet  man  has  won  all  his  own  sueeoundings  foe  God. 

No  picture  of  a  material  heaven  can  be  so  inspiring  to  us  as  this  sublime  picture  of  a 
moral  state,  in  which  everybody  tries  to  do  the  right,  and  finds  triumphant  grace  ^ven 
to  him  for  the  doing. — R.  T. 


Seotion  Vin.     Soliloqut  of  the  Seevant  of  the  Loed,  who  peomibes  Globt 

AND  I^SPEBITT  TO  JeEUSALEM   (OH,   LXI.,  LXn.). 

EXPOSITION. 


CHAPTER  LXL 
VeiB.  1 — 3. — The  Mission  op  the  See- 
vant OP  THE  Lobd.  The  words  of  our  Lord 
In  Luke  iv.  21,  "  This  day  is  this  Scripture 
fulfilled  in  your  ears,"  preclude  the  appli- 
cation of  this  passage  to  any  other  than  the 
Lord  himself.  It  is  simply  astonishing  that 
some  Christian  commentators  (Ewald,  Hit- 
zig,  Knobel)  have  not  seen  the  force  of  this 
argument,  but,  with  the  Jews,  imagine  the 
prophet  to  be  speaking  of  his  own  ministry. 
It  is  contrary  to  the  entire  spirit  of  Isaiah's 
writings  so  to  glorify  himself,  and  specially 
nnsuitable  that, after  having  brought  forwarf 
with  Buch  emphasis  the  Person  of  "  the  Ser- 
vant" (ch.  xlii.  1—8;  xlix.  1—12;  1.  4—9; 
lii.  13 — 15;  liii.  1 — 12),  he  should  proceed 
(o  take  his  place,  and  to  "  ascribe  to  himself 
those  very  same  official  attributes  which  he 
has  already  set  forth  as  oharaoteristic  features 


in  his  portrait  of  the  predicted  One"  (De- 
litzsch).  Hence  most  recent  commentators., 
whatever  their  school  of  thought,  have  ac- 
quiesced in  the  patristic  interpretation,  which 
regarded  the  Servant  of  Jehovah  as  here 
speaking  of  himself. 

Ver.  1. — The  Spirit  of  the  lord  God  is  upon 
me ;  literally,  Ae  Spirit  of  the  Lord  Jehovah 
(Adonai  Jehovah)  is  upon  me.  The  Septua- 
gint,  the  Vulgate,  and  one  manuscript  omit 
adonai.  In  the  original  announcement  of 
"  the  Servant "  it  was  stated  that  God  had 
"put  his  Spirit  upon  him"  (oh.  xlii.  1). 
The  sanctification  of  our  Lord's  human  nature 
by  the  Holy  Spirit  is  very  explicitly  taught 
in  the  Gospels  (Matt  i.  20;  iii.  16;  iv.  1, 
etc.;  Mark  i.  10,  12;  Luke  1.  35;  ii.  40; 
iii.  22 ;  iv.  1, 14, 18—21,  etc. ;  John  i.  32, 33 ; 
iii.  84,  etc.).  The  Lord  hath  anointed  me. 
The  "  anointing"  of  Jesus  was  that  sanctifi- 
cation of  his  human  nature  by  the  Holy 
Spirit,  wliich  commenced  in  the  womb  of  the 
blessed  Virgin  (Lnke  1.35),  which  continued 


OT.LXi.  1— IL]     THE  BOOK  OP  THE   PEOPHET  ISAIAH. 


415 


as  he  grew  to  manhood  (Luke  ii.  40,  52), 
which  was  openly  manifested  at  his  baptism, 
and  never  ceased  till  he  took  his  body  and 
soul  with  him  into  heaven.  Of  this  spiritual 
anointing,  all  material  unction,  whether 
undertheLaw(LeT.  viii.  10 — 12,30;  1  Sam. 
X.  1;  xvi.  13;  1  Kings  i.  39;  six.  15, 16, 
etc.)  or  under  the  gospel  (Mark  vi.  13; 
Jas.  v.  14),  was  symbolical  or  typical.  To 
preach  good  tidings  (comp.  oh.  xl.  9 ;  xli.  27 ; 
lii.  7 ;  and  Nah.  i.  15).  Unto  the  meek  (see 
Matt.  V.  5;  xi.  29;  and  comp.  ch.  xi.  4; 
xxix.  19).  To  bind  np  the  broken-hearted 
(comp.  Pb.  cxlvii.  3,  where  this  is  declared 
to  be  the  ofBce  of  Jehovah  himself).  "  Bind- 
ing up  "  is  an  ordinary  expression  in  Isaiah's 
writings  for  "  healing  "  (see  oh.  i.  6 ;  iii.  7 ; 
XXX.  26).  To  proclaim  liberty  to  the  oap- 
tives.  This  was  one  of  the  special  ofSces  of 
"  the  Servant "  (see  oh.  xlii.  7).  The  "  cap- 
tivity" intended  is  doubtless  that  of  sin. 
And  the  opening  of  the  prison  to  tliem  that 
are  bound,  St.  Luke,  following  the  Septua- 
gint,  has,  "and  recovering  of  sight  to  the 
blind,"  It  is  thought  by  some  that  the 
original  Hebrew  text  has  been  corrupted. 
Others  regard  the  Septuagint  rendering  as 
a  paraphrabe, 

Yer.  2, — To  proclaim  the  acceptable  year 
of  the  Lord.  An  "acceptable  year,"  or 
"year  of  acceptance,"  is  a  space  of  time 
during  which  God  would  be  pleased  to  ac- 
cept such  as  repented  and  turned  to  him. 
It  is,  of  course,  not  intended  to  limit  the 
space  to  a  "  year."  The  space  is  rather  the 
term  of  our  sojourn  here  below.  The  day  of 
vengeance.  The  "day"  of  Tengeance  is 
contrasted  with  the  "  year  "  of  acceptance, 
to  indicate  God's  long-suffering  and  patience 
towards  sinners  (comp.  oh.  xxxiv.  8 ;  and  see 
also  Exod.  XX.  5,  6).  To  comfort  all  that 
mourn;  i.e.  all  who  "sorrow  after  a  godly 
sort "  (2  C!or.  vii.  11) — all  who  mourn  their 
transgressions  and  shortcomings,  their  "  sins, 
negligences,  and  ignorances,"  with  a  hearty 
desire  to  be  rid  of  them,  and  to  serve  God 
truly  in  the  future. 

Ver.  3L — ^To  appoint  ...  to  give.  The 
latter  expression  is  a  correction  of  the  former, 
which  was  not  wide  enough.  Messiah  is  sent 
to  give  to  the  godly  mourners  (1)  beauty 
for  ashes ;  or  "  a  crown  for  ashes,"  t,e.  a  crown 
of  glory  in  lieu  of  tlie  ashes  of  repentance 
which  it  was  customary  to  sprinkle  upon  tlie 
head ;  (2)  the  oil  of  joy  for  mourning ;  or 
the  anointing  of  the  Spirit  in  lieu  of  that 
plenteousness  of  tears  which  naturally  be- 
longed to  mourners ;  and  (3)  the  garment  of 
praise  for  the  spirit  of  heavinesB,  or  a  glad 
heart  inclined  to  praise  God,  in  lieu  of  a 
heavy  one  inclined  to  despair.  Christian 
experience  witnesses  to  the  abundant  accom- 
plishment of  all  these  purposes.  That  they 
nlfht  be   called  trees  of  righteousness; 


literally,  oak>  of  righteousness,  or  strong  and 
enduring  plants  in  the  gar<1en  of  God, 
planted  by  him,  in  order  that  through  them 
he  might  be  glorified.  Nothing  gives  so 
much  glory  to  God  as  the  proved  righteous- 
ness of  his  saints.  The  planting  of  the  Lord ; 
i.e. '-  which  he  has  planted  "  and  caused  to 
grow,  and  rendered  righteous.  The  right- 
eousness, though  it  is  their  own,  an  indwell- 
ing quality,  has  nevertheless  oomo  from  him 
(comp.  oh,  Ix,  21), 

Vers,  4 — 9, — God's  Pobpose  op  Dealino 
OBAOiousLY  WITH  IsBAEL.  Having  pro- 
claimed the  objects  of  his  own  mission,  "  the 
Servant "  proceeds  to  declare  God's  gracious 
purposes  towards  Israel.  Taking  the  Cap- 
tivity period  for  his  standpoint,  he  promises, 
first,  the  restoration  of  the  cities  of  Jndah 
(ver.  4),  and  then  a  flourishing  time  in  which 
Jews  and  Gentiles  shall  dwell  together  in  one 
community  peacefully  and  gloriously,  Israel 
having  a  certain  pre-eminence  (vers.  5—9). 

Ver,  4, — They  shall  build  the  old  wastes. 
(On  the  "  waste  "  condition,  not  of  Jerusalem 
only,  but  of  the  cities  of  Judah  generally, 
see  oh.  xliv.  26;  xlix.  8,  19;  Ixiv.  10,  11, 
etc.)  The  first  step  in  the  recovery  of  Israel 
from  tho  misery  of  the  Captivity  would  be  a 
return  to  Palestine,  and  a  generi  restoration 
of  the  ruined  towns.  It  was  a  ram  of  "  many 
generations,"  having  commenced,  probably, 
with  the  invasion  of  Pharaoh-Neoho  in  B.a 
608,  and  being  contpued  till  the  edict  of 
Cyrus  (b.o.  538). 

Ver.  5. — Strangers  shall  stand  and  feed 
your  flocks  (comp.  oh.  xiv.  1,  2;  xlv.  14;  Ix, 
10).  The  Gentiles  who  join  themselves  with 
the  Jews,  and  form  with  tliem  one  com- 
munity, are  constantly  represented  in  the 
writings  of  Isaiah  as  occnpying  a  subor- 
dinate position.  In  the  New  Testament, 
Jew  and  GeutUe  are  put  upon  a  par.  Is  the 
explanation  that  Isaiah  assumes  that  the 
Jews  generally  will  accept  the  gospel,  and 
therefore,  to  some  extent,  retain  their  privi- 
leges in  the  new  community,  whereas,  in 
fact,  they  rejected  the  gospel,  and  so  lost 
their  natural  position  (see  Eom.  xi.  7 — 
20)  ?  Or  does  Isaiah  look  onward  to  a  latei 
date  ?  And  is  there  to  be  a  restoration  of 
"  Israel  according  to  the  flesh  "  upon  their 
conversion,  and  a  reinstatement  of  them  in 
a  position  of  privilege  ?  Such  a  condition  of 
things  seems  glanced  at  in  Bom.  xi.  23—29, 
and  in  Rev.  vii.  4 — 9;  xiv.  1.  The  sons  of 
the  alien  shall  be  yonr  ploughmen  and'yonr 
vinedressers.  Not  so  much  compelled,  like 
the  Gibeouites  (Josh.  ix.  21 — 27),  to  perform 
menial  ofBces,  as  undertaking  them  volun- 
tarily out  of  good  will. 

Ver.  6. — But  ye  shall  be  named  the  Friesti 
of  the  Lord,    By  the  covenant  made  at  Sinai 


416 


THE  BOOK  OP  THE  PEOPHET  ISAIAH,      [oh.  lxi.  1— 11 


iBrael  was  to  be  "  a  kingdom  of  priests,  and  I 
an  holy  nation  "  (Bxod.  xix.  6).  Had  they 
risen  to  the  height  of  their  calling  when  our 
Lord  and  bis  disciples  oifered  them  salvation 
before  offering  it  to  the  Gentiles,  they  might 
have  "been  in  the  midst  of  the  heatlien 
who  had  entered  into  the  congregation  of 
Jehovah  and  become  the  people  of  God, 
what  the  Aaronites  formerly  were  in  the 
midst  of  Israel  itself"  (Delitzsch).  Will 
they  ever  now  obtain  this  position?  Ye 
shall  eat  the  riches  of  the  Gentiles  (comp. 
ch.  Ix.  6—9  and  16).  The  Gentiles,  when 
they  came  in,  would  freely  offer  to  the  Church 
of  their  substance. 

Ver.  7. — For  your  shame  ye  shall  have 
double.  Instead  of  the  shame  and  confusion 
of  face  which  were  the  portion  of  Israel 
during  the  Captivitv  (see  ch.  li.  7, 23 ;  liv.  4 ; 
Dan.  ix.  7,  8,  etc.),  they  should  after  their 
restoration  to  Palestine  "  have  double  "  their 
former  glory,  and  double  their  former  terri- 
tory. An  increase  of  territory  had  been 
already  prophesied  (ch,  xlii.  18 — 21) — an 
increaie  which,  however,  was  not  so  mitch 
an  extension  ot'the  bounds  of  Palestine  as  a 
spread  of  the  Church  over  the  whole  earth 
(comp.  Zi  ch.  ix.  12).  For  confusion ;  rather, 
at  for  disgrace.  So  far  from  feeling  dis- 
graced, they  will  rejoice,  or  exult,  in  their 
portion ;  i.e.  in  the  teiritory  assigned  them. 
It  wUl  be  ample;  and  their  life  in  it  will  be 
one  of  everlasting  joy.  The  speaker  passes 
on  in  liis  thougW;  to  the  time  of  the  "  new 
heavins  aid  ths  new  eatrth,"  which  he  re- 
gards as  continiious  with  tlaat  of  Lsraers 
retnm. 

Ver.  8. — For  I  the  lord  Icve  judgment. 
Either  "  the  Servant "  here  identifies  himself 
with  Jehovah,  or  he  cites  a  declaration  of 
Jehovah  which  he  has  authority  to  an- 
nounce, Jehovah  will  restore  the  Israelites 
to  their  land  because  he  "loves  judgment" 
(equivalent  to  "justice")  and  hates  injustice. 
The  Babylonian  conquest,  though  a  judgment 
sent  by  him,  is,  so  far  as  the  Babylonians  are 
concerned,  a  wrong  and  a  "  robbery."  I  hate 
robbery  for  burnt  offering;  rather,  I  hate 
robbery  wifli,  wickedness  (comp.  Job  v.  16; 
Ps.  Iviii.  3i  Ixiv.  7;  xcii.  16).  The  trans- 
plantation of  nations  was  a  gross  abuse  of 
the  rights  of  conquest.  I  wUl  direct  their 
work  in  truth ;  rather,  I  will  give  them  their 
recompeme  faifhfvUy.  As  they  have  been 
wronged,  they  shall  be  righted ;  they  shall 
be  foithfully  and  exactly  oompenaatiBd  Cor 


what  they  have  suffered.  Nay,  more— ovei 
and  above  this,  God  will  give  them  the 
blessing  of  an  "  everlasting  covenant "  (comp, 
ch.  Iv.  3). 

Yer.  9. — Their  seed  shall  he  known;  or, 
$hall  be  illustriouB  (Lowth),  renowned 
(Cheyne).  A  halo  of  renown  still,  in  the 
eyes  of  many,  attaches  to  Jewish  descent. 
Among  the  people ;  rather,  among  the  peoples 
The  seed  which  the  Lord  hath  blessed; 
rather,  a  seed.  The  blessing  has  passed  in 
the  main  to  "the  Israel  of  God"  (Gal. 
vi.  16). 

Vers.  10,  11. — Jebusalbm  aocefts  tbi 
Promises,  and  glories  in  Jehovah.  So  the 
Targum  and  Bosenmiiller.  Others  think 
that  "  the  Servant "  is  still  speaking,  or  that 
Isaiah  speaks  in  the  name  of  the  people.  To 
us  the  exposition  of  the  Targum  appears  the 
most  satisfactory.  It  is  in  the  manner  of 
Isaiah  suddenly  to  introduce  a  new  speaker. 

Ver.  10.— X  will  greatly  rejoice  in  the  lord 
(comp,  Hab.  iii.  18).  The  promises  made 
were  such  as  naturally  to  call  forth  on  the 
part  of  Israel  the  most  heartfelt  joy  and  re- 
joicing— including,  as  they  did,  restoration, 
rule  over  the  Gentiles,  a  universal  priesthood, 
a  wide  territory,  "  everlasting  joy,"  a  high 
renown,  and  an  "  everlasting  covenant."  He 
hath  clothed  me  with  the  garments  of  sal- 
vation (comp.  ch.  lix.  17  and  Ixi.  3).  The 
metaphor  occurs  also  in  the  Psalms  (Ixxi.  6; 
cix.  18).  God  clothes  Israel  with  "  right- 
eousness "  derived  &om  himself  (ch.  liv.  17, 
ad  fin  %  and  then  with  its  natural  conse- 
quence— "  salvation."  The  result  is  to  make 
Israel  as  a  bridegroom  who  deoketh  himself 
vrith  a  priestly  crown,  and  as  a  bride  who 
adorneth  herself  with  her  jewels.  That 
bridegrooms  ordinarily  wore  crowns  appear* 
from  the  Mishna. 

Ver.  11. — As  the  garden;  rather,  at  a 
garden.  The  Hebrew  is  without  the  article. 
Bighteousness  and  praise.  The  essential 
result  of  righteousness  is  "  salvation "  (see 
ver.  20) ;  its  accidental  result  is  "  praise  "  or 
"renown."  Men  cannot  but  recognize  the 
benefits  which  flow  to  themselves  from  good- 
ness in  others;  and  a  perfectly  righteous 
nation  would  attract  to  itself  universal 
praise  (oomp.  Zeph.  iii.  20,  "I  will  make 
you  a  name  and  a  praise  among  all  people 
of  the  earth,  when  I  turn  back  your  captivity 
before  yoiu  eyes,  laith  the  Lord  ">. 


HOMILBTICa 

Vera  1 — 3. — Thepurposes  of  Messiah's  mission.  We  are  not  to  suppose  tliat  the  propbet 
unfolds  to  us  in  the  present  passage  the  whole  purpose  of  God  in  sending  his  Son  into 
the  world.    Such  logical  exactness  is  alien  to  the  spirit  of  prophecy,  and  especially 


OH.  LSI.  1—11.]     THE  BOOK  OP  THE  PROPHET  ISAIAH.  417 

unsuited  to  the  rhetorical  tone  which  everywhere  characterizes  Isaiah.  Still,  as  the 
subject  is  one  of  transcendent  interest,  and  as  our  Lord  himself  cites  the  passage  as 
descriptive  of  his  mission,  it  may  be  useful  to  note  how  many,  and  what  purposes,  it 
sets  before  us  as  included  in  the  counsels  of  the  Father,  aud  intended  to  be  realized  by 
Christ's  coming.     They  seem  to  be  some  nine  or  ten. 

I.  The  pbeachinq  op  good  tidings.  Christ  "  came  not  into  the  world  to  condemn 
the  world,  but  that  the  world  through  him  might  be  saved  "  (John  iii.  17).  The  angels 
who  announced  his  birth  intimated  that  it  was  a  subject  for  joy  and  rejoicing — "  Glory 
to  God  in  the  highest,  and  on  earth  peace,  good  will  toward  men"  (Lulie  ii.  14).  His 
forerunner  declared  it  to  be  the  object  of  his  coming,  "  that  all  flesh  should  see  the 
salvation  of  Grod  "  (Luke  iii.  6).  He  himself  came  with  "  gracious  words  "  (Luke  iv.  22), 
and  called  men  into  his  kingdom.  Hence  from  a  very  early  date  his  message  to  man 
was  known  as  the  gospel,  i.e.  "  the  good  tidings."  What  could  be  better  tidings  than 
the  announcement  of  free  pardon  on  repentance,  of  salvation,  of  atonement,  of  deliverance 
from  sin,  of  a  Comforter  to  support,  and  sustain,  and  cleanse  the  heart,  and  give  men 
peace  and  joy  in  believing  ?  Man,  lost  without  him,  was  by  him  sought  and  saved,  and 
brought  out  of  darkness  and  misery  into  light  and  happiness. 

I I.  The  healing  of  the  bkoken-heabtbI).  By  "  the  broken-hearted "  seem  to  be 
meant,  not  so  much  those  whom  misfortune  and  calamity  have  afflicted  and  reduced  to 
despondency,  as  those  who  are  deeply  grieved  on  account  of  their  sins.  Among  the 
objects  of  Christ's  coming  was  the  healing,  or  restoring  to  health,  of  such  persons.  He 
"  iiealed  the  broken  in  heart,  and  bound  up  their  wounds  "  (Ps.  cxlvii.  3).  He  made 
atonement  for  their  sins,  and  thus  secured  them  forgiveness ;  he  assured  them  of  God's 
mercy  and  readiness  to  pardon ;  he  bade  them  "  come  to  him,"  and  promised  to  "  give 
them  rest "  (Matt.  xi.  28).  Through  his  actions  and  bis  teaching  all  the  contrite  in  all 
ages  have  their  wounds  bound  up ;  are  strengthened,  sustained,  and  comforted ;  obtain, 
even  in  this  life,  a  "  peace  that  passeth  all  understanding." 

in.  The  giving  op  liberty  to  the  captives.  "  The  captives "  are  the  servants 
of  sin — the  unfortunates  whom  Satan  has  made  his  prisoners,  and  compels  to  labour  in 
his  service.  ■  Christ  came  to  "  proclaim  "  to  them  "  liberty,"  to  make  them  an  offer  of 
release.  "  Christ  Jesus,"  St.  Paul  tells  us,  "  came  into  the  world  to  save  sinners " 
(1  Tim.  L  15).  He  himself  declared,  "  I  came  not  to  call  the  righteous,  but  sinners  to 
repentance  "  (Matt.  ix.  13).  It  is  one  of  his  greatest  glories  that  he  delivers  men  "  from 
the  bondage  of  corruption  into  the  glorious  liberty  of  the  children  of  God  "  (Rom.  viii.  21). 
He  offers  to  do  this  for  all;  but  unless  his  offer  is  accepted  he  can  do  nothing.  Men 
must  not  only  be  sinners,  but  must  pass  into  the  class  of  repentant  sinners,  before  he 
can  aid  them.  Then,  however,  his  aid  is  effectual.  All  the  bonds  of  sin  may  be  struck 
off;  the  service  of  Satan  maybe  renounced  and  quitted;  and  the  captives  have  only 
thenceforth  to  "stand  fast  In  the  liberty  wherewith  Christ  has  made  them  free" 
(Gal.  V.  1). 

IV.  The  giving  of  bight  to  the  blind.  (See  Luke  iv.  18.)  Our  Lord,  when  on 
earth,  gave  recovery  of  sight,  in  the  most  literal  sense,  to  several  persons  who  were 
literally  blind  (Matt.  ix.  30 ;  Mark  viii.  23 ;  x.  52 ;  Luke  vii.  21 ;  John  ix.  7).  But 
this  is  scarcely  the  "  giving  of  sight "  which  was  one  of  the  main  purposes  of  his  coming. 
He  came  to  open  the  eyes  of  men's  understandings,  to  give  them  spiritual  inteUigence 
and  spiritual  insight,  to  enable  them  to  discern  between  right  and  wrong,  between  good 
and  eviL  Men  at  the  time  were  so  far  gone  fi-om  original  righteousness,  that  they  were 
to  a  large  extent  blind  to  moral  distinctions — "  put  bitter  for  sweet,  and  sweet  for  bitter, 
darkness  for  light,  and  light  for  darkness  "  (oh.  v.  20),  were  "  vain  in  their  imaginations," 
and  had  "  their  foolish  hearts  darkened  "  (Rom.  i.  21).  Christ  dispelled  this  spiritual 
darkness.  He  taught  a  pure  and  broad  morality,  which  re-established  moral  distinctions 
in  the  general  conscience,  and  at  the  same  time,  through  his  Spirit,  he  gave  to  each 
individual  Christian  an  inward  light,  which  man  did  not  possess  before,  by  which  he 
might  direct  his  paths. 

V.  The  rBOCLAiMiNG  of  a  time  of  acceptance.  Christ  proclaimed  a  "time  of 
acceptance  "  in  various  ways.  To  the  Jews  generally  the  three  years  of  his  ministry 
formed  "  the  acceptable  time,"  during  which,  if  they  had  received  him  (John  1. 11), 
they  would  have  maintained  their  position  as  a  nation,  and  have  held  pre-eminence  m 
the  Church  of  Christ.    To  individuals  who  heard  him  the  "  time  of  acceptance  "  was 

ISAIAH — n.  2  M 


418  THE  BOOK  OF  THE  PROPHET  ISAIAH,     [oh.  lxi.  1—11. 


that  iDetween  such  hearing  and  a  hardening  of  the  heart  consequent  on  the  rejection  of 
his  gracious  message.  To  mankind  at  large  the  "  time  of  acceptance  "  is  the  time  of 
their  sojourn  here  below,  during  which  it  is  always  possible  for  them  to  repent  and  turn 
to  him,  unless  perchance  they  have  been  guilty  of  the  "sin  against  the  Holy  Grhost." 
Such  sin  is  probably  still  possible ;  but  it  may  be  hoped  that  few  have  committed  it, 
and  that  the  apostle's  declaration,  which  he  made  to  all  his  converts  (2  Cor.  vi.  2),  may 
still  be  repeated  to  professing  Christians  generally,  "  Behold,  now  is  the  accepted  time ; 
behold,  now  is  the  day  of  salvation." 

VI.  The  pkoclaiminq  of  a  day  of  vengeance.  It  was  among  the  purposes  of 
our  Lord's  coming  that  he  should  "  proclaim  a  day  of  vengeance."  1.  To  the  nation  of 
the  Jews,  which  by  rejecting  him  caused  its  own  rejection  from  the  position  assigned  it 
under  the  first  covenant,  and  was  delivered  up  for  puniabmfnt  to  the  Romans.  This 
he  did  by  a  number  of  remarkable  prophecies  (e.g.  the  following:  Matt.  xxi.  40 — i3; 
xxiv.  4 — 28 ;  Luke  xiii.  34,  35 ;  xxi.  20 — 22),  which  announced  that  Jerusalem  was 
to  be  destroyed,  and  that  there  was  to  be  "  great  wrath  upon  the  people  "  (Luke  xxi.  23). 
2.  To  the  enemies  of  God  universally.  The  general  day  of  vengeance  upon  God's 
enemies  is  that  "  last  day,"  which  our  Lord  announced  so  often,  when  he  "  will  come 
again  with  glory  to  judge  both  the  quick  and  the  dead"  (see  Matt.  vii.  22,  23;  xxiv. 
29 — 31 ;  XXV,  31—46 ;  xxvi.  64,  etc.).  Then  all  his  enemies  will  be  "  put  under  his 
feet."  Then  will  be  fulfilled  the  apocalyptic  vision,  "  I  saw  the  dead,  small  and  great, 
stand  before  God ;  and  the  books  were  opened :  and  another  hook  was  opened,  which  is 
the  book  of  life :  and  the  dead  were  judged  out  of  those  things  which  were  written  in 
the  books,  according  to  their  works.  And  the  sea  gave  up  the  dead  that  were  in  it; 
and  death  and  hell  delivered  up  the  dead  that  were  in  them :  and  they  were  judged 
every  man  according  to  their  works.  And  death  and  hell  were  cast  into  the  lake  of  fire. 
This  is  the  second  death.  And  whosoever  was  not  found  written  in  the  book  of  life  was 
cast  into  the  lake  of  fire  "  (Rev.  xx.  1.2 — 15). 

VII.  The  C0MF0ETIK8  OF  M0URNBB8.  It  was  indicative  of  the  tenderness  of  Jesus, 
that  in  his  life  on  earth  he  had  ever  such  great  compassion  for  mourners.  In  his 
sermon  on  the  mount  he  assigned  to  them  the  second  Beatitude,  "Blessed  are  they 
that  mourn :  for  they  shall  be  comforted  "  (Matt.  v.  4).  Thrice  only  in  his  ministry 
does  he  seem  to  have  come  across  actual  death,  and  then  each  time  fie  had  such  pity 
on  those  who  mourned  their  dead,  that  he  worked  miracles  on  their  behalf,  and  comforted 
them  by  raising  their  lost  ones  to  life  again  (Mark  v.  22 — 42 ;  Luke  vii.  12 — 15 ;  John 
xi.  32—44).  After  his  resurrection,  he  hastened  to  comfort  the  women  who  mourned 
him,  by  special  appearances  to  them  (Matt,  xxviii.  9 ;  Mark  xvi.  9).  These,  however, 
were  but  samples  of  his  power  and  of  his  good  will.  Through  the  long  ages  that  have 
elapsed  since  he  founded  his  Church,  mourners  have  ever  found  in  him  a  true  and  potent 
Comforter.  Through  him  it  is  that  Christians  "  sorrow  not  as  they  that  have  no  hope  " 
(1  Thess.  iv.  13);  through  him  that  they  have  resignation,  and  are  able  to  say,  "The 
Lord  gave,  and  the  Lord  hath  taken  away :  blessed  be  the  Name  of  the  Lord ; "  through 
him  that  they  look  to  receive  their  dead  again  raised  to  life  (Heb.  xi.  35),  and  to  be 
joined  with  them  in  a  land  where  there  is  no  parting. 

VIII.  The  crowning  of  the  saints  in  bliss.  "  Henceforth,"  said  St.  Paul,  as  he 
approached  the  end  of  his  life,  "  there  is  laid  up  for  me  a  crown  of  righteousness,  which 
the  Lord,  the  righteous  Judge,  shall  give  me  at  that  day ;  and  not  to  me  only,  but  unto 
all  them  that  love  his  appearing  "  (2  Tim.  iv.  8).  We  shall  receive,  says  St.  James, 
"the  crown  of  life"  (Jas.  L  12).  "When  the  chief  Shepherd  shall  appear,"  says  St. 
Peter  "  ye  shall  receive  a  crown  of  glory  that  fadeth  not  away  "  (1  Pet.  v,  4).  Such 
crowns  were  seen  by  the  beloved  disciple  as  worn  by  the  elders  in  the  heavenly  region 
^Rev  iv  4)  and  were  promised  to  all  who  should  remain  "  faithful  unto  death  "  (Rev. 
li  10)  by  him  that  is  "  Faithful  and  True  "  (Rev.  xix.  11).  A  part  of  the  intention  of 
Christ's  mission  was  to  purify  to  himself  a  people  to  whom  such  crowns  might  without 
unfitness  be  awarded  in  his  heavenly  kingdom.  The  term  "crown  is,  no  doubt,  a 
metaphor  ■  but  it  signifies  some  definite  and  positive  degree  of  glory,  having  a  substantial 
value,  and  forming  a  proper  object  of  the  Christian's  desire 

rx  The  anointing  them  with  the  on.  op  jot.  Christ  himself  was  to  be  "anointed 
with  the  oil  of  gladness  above  his  fellows"  (Ps.  xly.  7).  His  mission  on  earth  was,  in 
put  to  extend  fiie  blessing  of  this  anointing  to  his  disciples.    Ihe  "oil  of  gladness," 


OH.  LXJ.  1— 11.]     THE  BOOK  OP  THE  PKOFHET  ISAIAH.  *19 

whatever  else  it  may  mean,  cannot  but  primarily  symbolize  the  gift  of  the  Holy  Spirit, 
which  is  called  by  St.  John  an  "  unction  from  the  Holy  One  "  (1  John  ii.  20),  and  which 
was,  in  fact,  the  unction  wherewith  Christ  himself  was  anointed  (see  the  comment  on 
ver.  1).  To  give  the  Holy  Spirit  to  Christians  was  a  very  main  object  of  his  coming. 
The  Spirit  was  essential  to  the  sanctiScation  of  Christians;  and  he  must  "send  the 
Spirit,"  and  he  could  not  send  him  until  he  himself  was  first  "  glorified  "  (John  vii.  39 ; 
xvi.  7).  St.  Luke  tells  us  how  soon  after  his  ascension  the  Spirit  was  given  (Acts  ii. 
4 — 33);  and  our  Lord  promised  that,  after  he  once  came,  he  would  abide  with  the 
Church  "  for  ever "  (John  xiv.  16).  Of  all  the  immediate  consequences  of  our  Lord's 
CQission  the  gift  of  the  Spirit  was  perhaps  the  most  precious,  embracing  as  it  did 
regeneration,  sanotifioation,  comfort,  strength,  gladness. 

X.  The  causing  them  to  be  called,  and  thebbfobk  to  be,  riqhteotjs.  All  the 
other  objects  had  this  final  end  in  view.  The  good  tidings  were  preached,  and  the  broken- 
hearted healed,  and  the  captives  set  free,  and  the  dull  of  sight  given  moral  discernment, 
and  the  acceptable  time  proclaimed,  and  the  day  of  vengeance  threatened,  and  the 
mourners  comforted,  and  the  crowns  of  glory  promised,  and  the  Holy  Spirit  given,  in 
order  that  "  oaks  of  righteousness  "  might  be  planted  in  the  garden  of  the  Lord — that 
men  might  burst  the  bonds  of  sin,  and  become  righteous,  "perfecting  holiness  in  the 
fear  of  God  "  (2  Cor.  vii.  1).  Christ  "  gave  himself  for  us,"  says  St.  Paul,  "that  he 
might  redeem  us  from  all  iniquity,  and  purify  to  himself  a  peculiar  people,  zealous  of  good 
works  "  (Titus  ii.  14).  This  was  the  principal  object  of  our  Lord's  coming — to  "  save  men 
from  their  sins."  Other  objects  were  rather  means  to  ends.  This  was  the  great  end. 
Christianity  is  a  success  just  so  far  forth  as  it  weans  man  from  sin,  and  creates  and 
maintains  in  the  world  a  "company  of  faitliful  men,"  who  deserve  to  "be  called  oaks  of 
righteousness,"  who  persistently  and  determinately  "  esciiew  evil  and  do  good,"  who  lead 
holy  lives,  who  "  shine. like  lights  in  the  world,"  "adorning  the  doctrine  of  God  their 
Saviour  in  all  things  "  (Titus  ii.  10). 

Vers.  10, 11. — Sejoidng  in  the  lord.  "  Eejoice  in  the  Lord  alway,"  says  the  apostle : 
"  and  again  I  say,  Eejoice "  (Phil.  iv.  4).  It  reflects  shame  on  Christians  that  their 
religion  should  appear,  so  much  as  it  does,  to  those  without  as  a  religion  of  gloom  and 
melancholy.  In  Scripture  true  religion  wears  a  wholly  different  aspect.  Faithful  Israel 
rejoices  constantly  in  the  Lord,  is  perpetually  joyful  in  its  God.  The  Book  of  Psalms 
is  one  almost  continuous  jubilation.  The  worship  of  David,  of  Solomon,  of  Hezekiah, 
of  the  Old  Testament  saints  generally,  is  a  glad  worship  (2  Sam.  vi.  12 ;  1  Chron.  xxix. 
9—22 ;  2  Chron.  v.  2—13;  xxix.  20—36;  xxx.  21—26,  etc.).  In  the  Gospels  we  find 
Christ's  coming  on  earth  the  immediate  occasion  of  canticles  of  praise  (Luke  i.  46 — 55, 
68 — 79;  ii.  14,  29 — 32).  The  apostolic  practice  is  delivered  to  us  in  the  foUuwing 
words :  "  They,  continuing  daily  with  one  accord  in  the  temple,  and  breaking  bread 
from  house  to  house,  did  eat  their  meat  with  gladness  and  singleness  of  heart,  praising 
God,  and  having  favour  with  all  the  people  "  (Acts  ii.  46,  47).  And  such  gladness  and 
rejoicing  will  certainly  appear  to  be  reasonable,  if  we  consider — 

L  The  CAUSES  that  Christians  have  fob  such  rbjoicino.  1.  In  the  past.  The 
whole  scheme  of  redemption  is  a  thing  to  be  joyful  and  thankful  for,  including  as  it  does 
atonement,  forgiveness,  reconciliation,  renewal  of  the  Divine  image  in  man,  revelation 
of  saving  truth,  assisting  grace,  etc.  The  bringing  them  within  the  scheme,  so  as  to 
make  its  blessings  theirs,  is  a  ground  for  special  thankfulness  and  joy,  since  the  privilege 
has  been  granted  to  them  without  being  deserved  by  any  merit  of  their  own,  and  has 
not  been  taken  from  them  despite  their  subsequent  demerits.  The  granting  of  a  written 
revelation,  and  the  preservation  of  that  precious  deposit  in  purity,  is  another  special 
ground  for  rejoicing;  as  also  is  the  institution  and  continuation  of  the  Church  to  the 
present  day  as  an  organized  corporate  body.  2.  In  the  present.  Christians  have  abun- 
dant ground  for  rejoicing  in  God's  goodness  to  them  individually — in  his  providential 
care  of  them,  in  the  patience  and  long-suffering  which  he  has  shown  towards  their 
shortcomings,  in  their  enjoyment  of  Christian  privileges,  and  in  the  many  other  tem- 
poral and  spiritual  blessings  vouchsafed  to  them.  3.  In  the  future.  They  have  an 
imperishable  hope,  a  confident  expectation  of  eternal  life  through  the  merits  of  Christ, 
an  assurance  of  an  inheritance  that  is  "  incorruptible,  and  undefiled,  and  that  f»deth  not 
away,  reserved  in  heaven  for  them  "  (1  Pet.  i.  4). 


420  THE  BOOK  OF  THE  PEOPHET  ISAIAH,      [ch.  txi.  1—11. 

XL  The  results  that  natobaIiLT  flow  feom  such  bejoicino.  1.  Such  rejoicing 
is  good  for  Christians  themselves.  It  makes  them  realize  their  blessings  and  their 
pririleges,  and  take  as  it  were  a  firmer  hold  on  them.  It  helps  them  to  make  light  of 
the  small  trials  and  hindrances  that  more  or  less  beset  every  one,  and  that,  if  dv?elt  upon 
exclusively,  may  be  magnified  until  they  assume  very  undue  proportions.  It  actually 
increases  the  feeling  of  joy,  and  so  the  feeling  of  happiness,  for  every  active  principle 
within  us  is  strengthened  by  being  exercised.  2.  Such  rejoicing  has  a  beneficial  effect 
on  others.  It  attracts  them  to  Christianity  in  the  same  degree  that  a  gloomy  presenta- 
tion of  the  Christian  religion  repels  them.  It  wakes  responsive  echoes  in  their  hearts. 
It  stirs  up  latent  and  undefined  longings  in  their  souls.  It  leads  sometimes  to  inquiry 
and  conversion.  3.  Such  rejoicing  is,  further,  for  the  glory  of  Grod.  God  wills  that  his 
saints  should  praise  him  and  rejoice  in  him.  Such  rejoicing  sets  forth  his  power  and 
his  goodness.  It  is  a  proclamation  to  angels  and  to  men  that  "  the  Lord  is  good,  and 
that  his  mercy  endureth  for  ever  "  (Ps.  cxxxvi.  1).  It  is  borne  through  the  empyrean, 
•nd  enters  into  the  courts  of  heaven,  and  wakes  angelic  sympathies  and  intensifiea 
angelic  devotions.    It  is  an  offering  of  a  sweet  savour  tu  God. 


HOMILIES  BY  VARIOUS  AUTHORS. 

Vers.  1 — ^9. — Message  of  grace  to  Zion.  L  The  anointino  of  the  Mesbeitobb. 
Under  the  Law,  the  priests  were  anointed  (Exod.  xxix.  7 ;  Lev.  vii.  36),  and  also  the 
kings  (1  Sam.  ix.  16 ;  x.  1 ;  xvi.  13).  It  was  the  sign  of  appointment  to  a  high  office 
or  commission  from  God.  Hence,  by  a  figure,  it  is  applied  to  the  appointment  of  Elisha 
to  the  prophetic  office  (1  Kings  xix.  16),  and  to  the  designation  of  Cyrus  as  the  instru- 
ment of  the  piirpose  of  Jehovah.  Similarly,  in  1  John  ii.  20,  the  use  is  figurative.  The 
idea  is  that  of  consecrated  dedication  (cf.  Ps,  xlv.  7 ;  Heb.  i.  9). 

II.  The  puhpose  op  the  anointino.  1.  That  he  may  evangelize,  or  preach  the 
gospel.  To  whom  ?  To  those  who  need  good  tidings — the  afflicted,  the  distressed  and 
needy,  the  poor  (Luke  iv.  18),  or  those  borne  down  by  long  captivity  or  other  calamity 
(of.  Matt.  xi.  5).  2.  To  hind  up  the  hrohen-hearted.  In  temporal  or  spiritual  reference, 
"  He  healeth  the  broken  in  heart,  and  bindeth  up  their  wounds  "  (Ps.  cxlvii.  3).  And  this 
by  the  proclamation  of  liberty.  The  sonnd  of  the  words  would  remind  of  the  great 
"year  of  jubilee"  (Lev.  xxv.  10;  cf.  Ezek.  xlvi.  17 ;  Jer.  xxxiv.  8).  If  nothing  is  said 
in  the  law  of  jubilee  about  the  release  of  prisoners  or  the  remission  of  debts,  all  the 
associations  of  the  time  led  to  its  being  spoken  of  as  a  symbol  of  manumission,  emanci- 
pation, and  so  of  universal  joy.  3.  To  proclaim  a  time  of  grace  and  of  retribution.  A 
"  year  "  of  mercy,  a  "  day  "  only  of  vengeance.  Punishment  descends  to  the  third  and 
fourth  generation,  but  mercy  to  the  thousandth  (Exod.  xx.  5,  6 ;  cf.  Deut.  vii.  9).  But 
the  coming  or  deliverance  must  ever  mean  also  the  coming  in  destruction  (cf.  Matt.  xxv. 
31^-46 ;  2  Thess.  i.  7 — 10).  4.  To  comfort  mourners.  Especially  those  of  Zion.  But 
an  application  of  evangelical  promises  must  be  equally  large  with  human  need,  human 
receptivity,  human  willingness,  human  power  to  receive,  «.«.  faith.  Upon  such  the 
"  coronet "  is  to  be  placed  instead  oi  ashes ;  the  associations  of  the  wedding  (ver.  10) 
are  to  replace  those  of  the  funeral  (2  Satn.  xiii.  19),  the  nuptial  song  the  former  lamenta- 
tion. Instead  of  the  "  failing  spirit,"  described  under  the  image  of  a  wick  burning  out, 
or  of  dimness,  or  faintness  (ch.  xlii.  3 ;  1  Sam.  iii.  2 ;  Lev.  xiii.  39),  there  will  be  the 
"  mantle  of  renown."  In  the  Orient,  especially,  the  apparel  expresses  the  mood  of  the 
mind.  See  an  illustration  in  Jud.  x.  3,  4 :  she  "  put  on  her  garments  of  gladness, 
wherewith  she  was  clad  during  the  life  of  Manasses  her  husband."  6.  To  produce  a 
vigorous  and  beautiful  life.  Men  shall  call  them  "  oaks  of  righteousness,  the  plantation 
of  Jehovah  for  showing  himself  glorious "  (cf.  on  the  simile,  Ps.  xcii.  12 — 14,  "  The 
righteous  shall  flourish  like  the  palm  tree,"  etc. ;  i.  3 ;  Jer.  xviL  8).  A  mystic 
^ntation  under  the  care  of  the  Divine  Gardener  (cf.  Matt.  xv.  13).  The  exiles  will 
return,  will  "  build  up  the  ruins  of  antiquity,  and  raise  up  the  desolations  of  the  fore- 
fathers, and  renew  the  ruined  cities.  As  ruins  suggest  all  the  pathos  of  the  decay  ol 
femilies  and  nations,  so  does  the  act  of  rebuilding  remind  of  that  ever-recreative  energy 
which  lies  in  the  religious  heart  of  mankind,  and  which  breaks  forth  afresh  after  every 
epoch  «t  calamity.    Strangen  are  to  feed  their  flocks,  aliens  are  to  be  their  ploughmen 


0H,uxl— U.]     THE  BOOK  OF  THE  PROPHET  ISAIAH.  42i 

and  vinedressera,  and  all  classes  are  to  partake  in  the  Messianic  blessings.  The  people 
of  Israel  themselves  will  be  called  the  "priests  of  Jehovah."  For  the  priests,  as  a  class 
only,  represented  the  idea  of  Israel,  as  a  nation  consecrated  to  the  service  of  the 
Eternal,  destined  to  perform  a  holy  ministry  to  the  rest  of  mankind.  Men  will  take 
hold  of  the  skirts  of  the  Jew  (Zeoh.  viii.  23).  There  will  be  compensation,  double 
compensation,  in  the  possession  of  the  laud  in  increased  fertility  and  with  enlarged 
boundaries. 

III.  The  CONFIRMATION  OF  Jehovah.  1.  The  principle  of  justice  and  compensation. 
He  "  hates  things  torn  away  unjustly,"  and  will  compensate  his  people  for  their  past 
sufferings.  How  grand  and  all-consoling  that  truth  of  compensation!  "All  things  are 
moral.  That  soul  which  within  us  is  a  sentiment,  outside  of  us  is  a  law.  We  feel 
its  inspiration ;  yonder  in  history  we  can  see  its  fatal  strength."  "  It  is  in  the  world, 
and  the  world  was  made  by  it.  Justice  is  not  postponed.  A  perfect  equity  adjusts 
its  balance  in  all  parts  of  life.  The  dice  of  God  are  always  loaded.  Every  secret  is 
told,  every  crime  is  punished,  every  virtue  rewarded,  every  wrong  redressed,  in  silence 
and  certainty.  What  we  call  retribution  is  the  universal  necessity  by  which  the  whole 
appears  wherever  a  part  appears"  (Emerson).  2.  The  everlasting  covenant.  (Oh.  Iv.  3.) 
Fart  of  the  condition  of  that  covenant  is  the  securing  of  an  illustrious  position  for  Israel 
among  the  nations ;  to  be  "  known "  is  to  be  honoured,  as  in  Ps.  Ixvii.  2  ;  Ixxvi.  1 ; 
Ixxix.  10.  The  time  shall  come  in  a  larger  sense,  when  the  friends  of  the  lowly  and 
despised  Nazarene  shall  be  regarded  as  the  favoured  of  the  Lord ;  instead  of  being 
persecuted  and  despised,  the  whole  earth  shall  regard  them  with  confidence  and  esteem. 
Providence  throws  a  veil  of  obscurity  over  its  deepest  designs,  and  the  seed  of  glorious 
futures  lies  slumbering  in  the  rough  husk  until  the  appointed  time  for  its  germination 
and  growth. — J. 

Vers.  10, 11. — Spiritual  joy  in  the  Eternal.  We  may  regard  the  city  as  the  speaker, 
and  the  city  may  typify  the  Church. 

I.  Heb  OLOTHiNa.  As  garments  are  for  protection  and  ornament,  so  it  may  stand  as 
a  figure  of  a  community  arrayed  in  the  strength  and  righteousness  of  Jehovah.  And 
so  the  Church  still  sings — 

"  Jesus,  thy  robe  of  righteousness 
My  beauty  is,  my  glorious  dress." 

There  iskn  allusion  to  the  dress  of  the  bridegroom  and  of  the  priest ;  for  at  one  time  the 
bridegroom  wore  a  crown,  and  the  priest  wore  a  mitre,  with  the  plate  or  crown  of  gold 
in  front  of  it  (Exod.  xxix.  6).  Such  portions  of  the  dress  mark  out  the  wearer  in  his 
sacred  character  and  in  his  solemn  functions.  They  are  not  for  mere  ornament.  The 
Church,  the  saints  in  general,  are  designated  as  a  "  royal  priesthood,"  to  ofier  praise 
and  prayer  continually. 

IL  Nature's  parable  of  bpieitual  joy.  (Cf.  cb.  xlii.  9 ;  xliii.  19 ;  xlv.  8 ;  Iv.  10, 
11 ;  Iviii.  11.)  The  joy  with  which  we  see  the  earth  becoming  all  "one  emerald"  with 
the  new  verdure  of  spring ;  the  burgeoning  of  the  trees,  the  disclosure  of  the  rudi- 
ments of  future  leaves  and  flowers,  is  in  a  sense  prophetic  of  some  analogous  process  in 
the  spiritual  world.  Eor  self-fulfilling  is  the  power  of  the  Divine  Word.  And  even  when 
the  aspect  of  Church  and  state  is  most  dark  and  depressing,  life  is  stirring,  seeds  of 
better  development  are  germinating,  and  events  are  being  set  in  motion  which  shall 
stir  men  up  to  praise  Israel  and  the  God  of  IsraeL — J. 

Ver.  1.— 3%e  coming  Saviowr.  "The  Spirit  of  the  Lord  God  is  upon  me,"  etc. 
These  words  are  specially  memorable  as  being  those  which  the  Saviour  read  in  the 
synagogue  at  Nazareth.  We  have  had  it  described  to  us  "  with  its  pillared  portico  of 
Grecian  architecture,  with  its  seats  on  one  side  for  the  men ;  on  the  other,  behind 
a  lattice,  are  seated  the  women,  shrouded  in  their  long  veils."  When  the  lesson  from 
the  Pentateuch  was  over,  Jesus  ascended  the  steps  of  the  desk,  and  the  chazzan,  or 
clerk,  "  drew  aside  the  silk  curtain  of  the  painted  ark,  which  contained  the  sacred 
manuscripts,"  and  from  the  roll  of  the  Propliet  Isaiah,  either  read  tlje  lesson  for  the 
day,  or  chose  the  portion  himselL    We  can  scarcely  read  these  words  here  without 


422  THE  BOOK  OF  THE  PROPHET  ISAIAH,     [oh.  lxl  1— H 

thinking  of  him  there,  the  whole  congregation  standing  up  to  listen  to  him.     Th« 
words  contain — 

I.  The  Messianic  orandbub  op  Christ.  Anointed  of  the  Father.  No  mere  prophet 
or  teacher,  but  ths  Holy  One  of  Israel.  This  prophecy,  written  some  seven  hundred 
years  before,  and  thus  attested  by  the  Saviour  as  written  concerning  himself,  gives 
Divine  testimony  to  the  ancient  inspiration. 

II.  The  Messianic  work  of  Christ.  1.  It  wan  a  prociamation.  "  Good  tidings." 
Think  of  the  iron  power  of  Rome ;  the  selfishness  of  the  rich ;  the  pride  of  the 
patrician ;  the  helplessness  of  the  slave ;  the  hopelessness  of  the  philosopher.  Christ 
came  to  the  tnee/c,  not  the  mighty.  2.  It  was  a  consolation.  "  To  bind  up  the  broken- 
hearted." To  heal  by  the  touch  of  his  sympathy,  and  to  save  by  the  power  of  his 
cross.  3.  It  was  a  deliverance.  "  To  proclaim  liberty  to  the  captives,"  etc.  Sin  had 
woven  its  silken  cords  into  iron  bands.  Men  were  slaves  of  lust  and  habit.  The  prison 
was  opened;. and  the  fetters  which  they  could  not  shake  off  Christ  struck  from  their 
aouls.— W.  M.  S. 

Ver.  3. — Comfort  and  cheer.  "  To  appoint  unto  them  that  mourn  in  Zion,"  etc. 
There  is  a  triple  exchange  spoken  of  in  these  words,  which  ought  to  quicken  thought. 

I.  Character.  "  Beauty  for  ashes."  The  penitent  is  uplifted  from  the  dust. 
Instead  of  standing  before  God  in  sad  confession,  with  all  the  stains  of  sin  upon  his 
heart  and  the  liturgy  of  woe  upon  his  lips,  he  has  new  life.  The  beauty  of  the  Lord 
is  given  to  him — there  is  transformation. 

II.  Emotion.  "The  oil  of  joy  for  mourning."  No  longer  looking  at  the  dark  side 
of  personal  history  and  personal  prospect.  The  very  countenance  is  anointed  with 
fresh  oil — a  type  of  what  has  taken  place  within  the  man.  Because  you  cannot  force 
joy,  nor  can  you  pretend  It.  Nature  sets  herself  against  all  forgeries.  Such  joy  as  a 
godly  man  experiences  can  only  come  from  the  good  treasvu'e  of  his  heart. 

III.  Expression.  "  The  garment  of  praise  for  the  spirit  of  heaviness."  The  outwaid 
life  is  all  so  different.  As  God  is  said  to  clothe  himself  with  light  as  with  a  garment, 
so  the  Easterns  understood  the  garment  of  light  to  be  the  expression  of  the  man  himself, 
even  as  we  now  look  to  the  habiliments  of  the  mourner  as  testifying  to  his  griet  The 
spirit  of  heaviness  is  distressing.  It  is  not  a  thankful  spirit,  nor  a  hoptful  spirit,  nor 
an  inspiring  spirit.  But  the  garment  of  praise  is  like  the  melody  of  the  temple  choir; 
like  the  music  of  the  river;  like  the  "lark  that  sings  at  heaveu's  gate."  "Awake, 
psaltery  and  harp ;  I  myself  will  awake  right  early." — W.  M.  S. 

Ver.  4. — Bestoration.  "  ITiey  shall  build  the  old  wastes."  All  waste  is  wicked.  It 
is  so  in  war.  Even  taken  at  its  lowest  estimate,  think  of  the  ruin  of  glorious  temples, 
and  exquisite  sculptures,  and  works  of  art, — all  ground  to  dust,  as  Mr.  Euskin  says,  by 
mere  human  rage.  Florence,  and  many  of  the  Southern  cities,  have  been  the  war-fields  of 
Europe.  What  waste  I  There  genius  toiled;  there  multitudes,  in  sweat  of  brow,  built 
the  aqueduct  and  decorated  the  capitol ;  and  there,  from  time  to  time,  the  rude  hand  of 
the  despoiler  has  come.  History  has  made  record  of  victories  and  glorified  conquerors, 
and  some  minstrel  has  caught  the  infection  and  sung  the  lay  of  the  wasters.  What 
a  satire  on  man!  Why  smile  at  the  child  who  builds  houses  for  the  sea  to  smite 
down?  Man  builds,  and  then  with  the  waves  of  maddened  war-lust  dashes  to  pieces 
his  own  best  works.  So  it  is.  The  history  of  Europe  has  been,  in  this  sense,  a  history 
of  waste,  and  instead  of  the  glorious  works  of  Phidias  to  gaze  upon,  we  have  broken 
arms,  fractured  columns.  In  devastated  districts  we  dig  for  relics.  This  is  only  the 
material  side  of  the  waste  of  war,  I  say  all  waste  is  wicked.  And  I  have  to  speak  of 
human  hearts  and  lives.  Much  more  precious  these  than  sculptured  column  or  lofty 
fane.  Yes  ;  do  not  let  us  forget  that  the  words  of  Christ  refer  to  life  present  as  well  as 
life  to  come.  "  What  shall  it  profit  a  man,  if  he  gain  the  whole  world  and  lose  his  own 
life?" 

I.  AlIi  lives  were  designed  to  have  a  Divine  ideal  in  them.  We  cannot 
understand  the  "why"  of  creation  at  all  apart  from  that.  "Lo,  this  only  have 
I  found,  that  God  hath  made  man  upright ;  but  they  have  sought  out  many  inven- 
tions "  (Eccles.  vii.  29).  They  have,  in  fact,  invented  many  ideals  for  themselves,  and 
have  wasted  in  these  inventions  the  fine  God-created  faculties  of  their  souls.    If  th« 


OH.  lau.  1— 11.]     THE  BOOK  OP  THE  PROPHET  ISAIAH.  423 

end  is  missed  all  is  missed.  If  the  column  does  not  stand  erect  and  nphold  the 
building,  it  is  nothing  to  me  that  you  decorate  it  when  on  the  ground.  That  is  not 
its  place,  its  use ;  it  is  a  pillar  or  nothin";.  So  man  was  made  in  this  highest  end  to 
glorify  God ;  and  his  life  is  blighted— if  it  is  rich  in  cultivation,  elevated  in  taste, 
artistic  in  style,  comprehensive  in  erudition,  useful  in  applied  mechanics — if  he  does 
not  glorify  God.  Our  Saviour  said,  "  My  meat  and  my  drink  is  to  do  the  will  of  him 
that  sent  me,  and  to  finish  his  work."  1.  Lives  are  blighted,  if  certain  seasons  <^  spring 
and  seed-time,  which  cannot  return,  pass  idly  hy.  Men  may  be  saved ;  for  the  precious 
blood  of  Christ  can  cleanse  from  all  sin,  even  in  old  age.  But  they  cannot  bear  the 
fruit  of  a  spiritual  manhood,  or  of  a  Christian  childhood.  2.  Lives  are  blighted,  if  not 
filled  with  the  power  of  immortality.  However  noble  and  glorious  they  may  appear, 
their  fruits  wither ;  there  is  no  deep  soil ;  the  roots  do  not  strike  into  the  eternal  life. 
3.  Lives  are  blighted,  if  not  influential  as  good  soil  to  he  used  for  harvests.  Man  does 
not  live  for  the  mere  enjoyment  and  admiration  of  spiritual  beauty  in  hours  of  medita- 
tion. There  must  be  fruit  in  the  tree  for  others  to  gather.  It  is  disappointing  in  the 
autumn  to  lift  the  leaves  and  find  no  rich  bloom  of  purple  fruit.  "Abide  in  me." 
"  So,"  says  Christ,  "  shall  ye  bear  much  fruit." 

IL  All  ■wastino  of  life  is  traceable.  What  to?  Well,  you  can  trace  the  blight 
to  something  in  the  atmosphere,  something  at  the  root,  or  some  confinement  from  the 
free  breath  of  heaven.  So  you  can  trace  human  waste  and  moral  waste.  1.  Sometime* 
it  comes  from  absence  of  faith.  There  has  been  energy  or  heroic  determination  to 
conquer  evil,  to  pursue  the  good,  but  this  has  been  mere  doing,  not  being ;  men  need 
faith  to  win  Christ ;  to  have  him  in  them,  the  Hope  of  glory.  "  If  a  man  abide  not  in 
me,  be  is  cast  forth  as  a  branch,  and  is  withered."  2.  Sometimes  it  comes  from  absence 
of  love.  It  is  love  that  makes  the  other  graces  grow  and  bring  forth  fruit.  Love  is 
warmth  and  life  when  inspired  by  Christ.  Let  me  say  also  that  I  wanted  to  speak  of 
lives  in  a  human  sense  blighted,  and  there  are  some  such.  Why  ?  Because  love  is 
absent ;  they  are  treated  coldly,  contemptuously,  cruelly  ;  the  fire  of  love,  at  first 
damped,  has  now  died  out  in  their  hearts;  they  know,  they  feel  it  is.  Mated  to 
coarseness  and  rudeness,  with  the  first  thin  superficial  refinement  and  tenderness  all 
worn  away,  they  find  life  worse  than  a  blank — it  is  a  bitter,  bitter  bondage  to  the 
selfishness  and  tyranny  of  others.  Poor  heart  I  God  help  thee  wherever  thou  art. 
Love  can  bear  much  and  hope  on.  But  when  love's  aslies  are  white,  life  is  blighted 
indeed.  3.  Sometimes  it  comes/rom  indifference.  Let  it  alone.  That  is  enough.  Leave 
religion  to  take  care  of  itself.     Then,  like  the  best  garden,  it  soon  becomes  desolate. 

III.  Wasted  lives  are  eepabablb  only  by  kbdemption.  In  the  body  there  is 
a  kind  of  self-healing  after  sickness.  Not  so  with  the  soul ;  that  requires  a  Divine 
Physician.  1.  Christ  does  more  than  forgive.  He  renews  and  restores.  Perhaps  you 
desire  now  that  God  should  restore  unto  you  the  joy  of  salvation.  You  are  sad  about 
your  own  fruitlessness.  So  little  peace  and  joy  in  the  Holy  Qhost.  Then,  just  as 
spring — sweet  spring — comes  in  time,  and  the  tender  herb  appears,  and  Nature  puts 
on  her  new  garment  of  beauty,  rejoicing  to  have  her  inoense-cup  filled  again  by  the 
hand  of  the  Most  High,  so  you  desire  that  new  graces  should  spring  forth.  Christ 
can  make  you  abound  with  life  through  the  abundant  grace  which  he  is  waiting  to 
bestow.  2.  Christ  does  more  than  teach.  He  will  live  in  you.  The  fruit  is  not  yours, 
but  Christ's.  He  is  the  Vine,  we  are  the  branches.  A  closer  union  with  him  is  wliat 
we  need.  If  we  seek  to  be  grafted  into  the  true  Vine,  then,  and  then  only,  shall  we 
bring  forth  fruit  in  our  season.  Christ  is  sometimes  called  the  great  Teacher.  So  he 
is !  All  his  teaching  is  that  of  the  infinite  mind.  "  In  him  are  hid  all  the  treasures  of 
wisdom  and  knowledge."  What,  then,  is  his /5rsi  teaching ?  Believe  on  met  Then 
we  become  one  with  him,  and  our  character  has  life  in  it.  3.  Christ  does  more  even 
than  commence  this  life.  He  completes  it.  He  carries  it  on  to  perfection.  So  that  we, 
sinful  and  weak  as  we  are,  are  made  perfect  in  every  good  work.  Waste,  then,  ia 
not  to  be  mourned  over  only ;  it  is  to  be  restored.  The  satirist  speaks  scornfully  of  evil 
when  seen  and  lived  out.  The  optimist  says  all  is  the  best  possible  in  the  best  o< 
worlds,  could  we  but  understand  all.  The  Christian  says,  "  No ;  evil  is  here,  and  evil 
is  not  of  God."  And  then  by  the  aid  of  the  Holy  Ghost  he  Seeks  to  have  the  old  man 
crucified  with  Christ,  and  to  Uve  unto  God.  May  renewal  come  to  as  all  I  May  blight 
and  waste  give  place  to  life  and  fruit  I^W,  M.  S. 


424  THE  BOOK  OP  THE  PEOPHBT  ISAIAH,     [oh.  lxi.  1—11 

Ver.  10. — Fulness  of  Joy.  "  I  will  greatly  rejoice  In  the  Lord,  my  soul  shall  be 
Joyful  in  my  God."  This  does  not  certainly  seem  like  the  case  with  the  anchorite  and 
the  ascetic  and  the  hermit.  A  religion  that  fails  in  the  direction  of  felicity  would  seem 
to  lose  claim,  at  all  events,  ta  he  considered  a  true  ideal  of  the  gospel.  Medievalism 
rejoiced  in  pictures  of  the  saints,  who  could  not  fairly  be  Baii  to  have  an  aureole  of 
gladness  aViout  their  heads. 

I.  Therb  are  orbat  reasons  for  ebjoicing.  1.  God  has  forgiven  and  forgotten 
our  sin.  He  has  blotted  it  out  of  his  book  of  remembrance.  "  He  hath  clothed  me 
with  the  garments  of  salvation."  2.  God  has  made  us  one  with  himself.  The  highest 
pleasures  are  those  of  fellowship  with  mind.  To  know  the  author  is  more  than  to  read 
the  book ;  to  know  the  heart  of  a  beautiful  nature  is  to  discover  a  greater  world  than 
Columbus  did.  What,  then,  is  it  to  walk  as  Enoch  did  with  God,  and  to  know  him 
whom  to  know  is  life  eternal!  Here  we  have  introduced  the  relation  of  bride  and 
bridegroom — so  condescending  is  the  love  of  Christ. 

II.  The  HE  ARE  great  depths  op  hejoicinq.  "My  soul."  Joy  may  be  superficial. 
It  is  idle  to  deny  the  fact  that  there  are  pleasures  which  have  their  root  in  the  passions, 
or  in  the  imagination,  or  in  the  accumulative  faculty.  But  all  these  joys  have  their 
reactions,  their  limitations,  their  exhaustions.  But  spiritual  joy  is  connected  with  the 
soul,  and  as  such  it  is  (1)  ever  capable  of  increase ;  (2)  never  liable  to  exhaustion ;  (3) 
and  immortal  in  its  sphere  of  development.  At  God's  right  hand  there  are  pleasures 
for  evermore. — W.  M.  8. 

Vers.  1,  2. — The  henejicent  mission.  These  words  are  undeniably  Messianic ;  that  is 
their  secondary,  if  not  their  primary,  import.  Of  the  mission  of  Christ  they  remind 
us — ■ 

I.  That  Jesus  Christ  was  sent  of  God.  Our  Lord  not  only  stated  but  insisted 
that  he  came  forth  from  God.  He  constantly  took  up  the  position  here  asserted,  "  the 
Lord  hath  anointed  me  "  (John  iv.  34 ;  v.  19,  30 ;  viii.  28 ;  ix.  4 ;  xii.  49). 

II.  That  he  was  filled  with  the  Spirit  of  God.  "The  Spirit  of  the  Lord  God" 
was  upon  him,  and  dwelt  in  him  as  in  no  other  child  of  man.  God  gave  not  the  Spirit 
"  by  measure  "  unto  him  (John  ill.  34 ;  xiv.  10,  etc.). 

III.  That  he  was  charged  with  a  mission  of  Divine  beneficence.  "  Anointed 
"to  preach  good  tidings."  Well  might  the  human  world  have  expected  that  a  special 
messenger  from  heaven  would  come  with  ill  tidings  on  his  lips ;  would  come  to  announce 
wrath,  penalty,  destruction ;  would  pass  through  town  and  village  with  such  a  "  burden" 
as  that  of  Jonah  to  the  thousands  of  Nineveh  (Jonah  iii.  4).  But  the  coming  of 
Christ  was  the  advent  of  >grace ;  he  came  to  promise  peace,  to  publish  salvation. 
The  thoughts  and  ways  of  the  Supreme  are  not  as  ours;  they  are  immeasurably 
magnanimous. 

IV.  That  the  beneficence  of  Christ  was  bfiritual  and  raoFotiND.  He  came  to 
effect  something  more  and  better  than  the  overthrow  of  a  tyrannical  government  and  the 
establishment  of  an  earthly  kingdom,  than  the  removal  of  abounding  poverty  and  the 
supply  of  material  prosperity,  than  the  introduction  of  any  visible  and  transient  good. 
Became:  1.  To  confer  spiritual  freedom  on  those  vihovf  eve  in  \MiiAa.ge,  "To  proclaim 
Uber  ty  to  the  captives ; "  to  open  the  prison-doors  and  emancipate  human  souls  from  the 
thraldom  of  sin,  of  vice,  of  error,  of  folly,  and  to  lead  them  into  the  glorious  liberty  of 
the  children  of  God — the  liberty  of  truth  and  righteousness.  2.  To  convey  comfort  to 
the  sorrowful,  "  To  bind  up  the  broken-hearted ; "  to  comfort  all  that  mourn.  He  came 
to  furnish  us  with  those  facts  and  principles  which  can  light  up  the  dark  shadows  of 
deepest  affliction  with  rays  of  peace  and  hope.    (See  next  homily.) 

V.  That  even  the  light  of  Divine  beneficence  casts  a  shadow  of  condemna- 
tion. The  day  of  deliverance  to  the  righteous  is  a  "day  of  vengeance"  or  retribution 
to  the  guilty.  The  brightest  light  of  truth  must  fling  the  darkest  shadow  of  respon- 
sibility and  condemnation.  The  corner-stone  of  salvation  to  the  penitent  and  believing 
must  prove  a  stumbling-block  to  the  impenitent  and  the  imbelievmg. — G. 

Ver.  3. — Christ  our  Cornforter.  We  think  of  onr  Lord  as  of  our  Divine  Friend ;  and 
there  is  no  way  in  which  any  one  can  show  himself  so  true  a  friend  as  in  Um  time  of 
trouble.    Well  says  the  old  adage,  ".  A  friend  in  need  is  a  friend  indeed." 


OH.  LXL  1— 11,]     THE  BOOK  OF  THE  PROPHET  ISAIAH.  426 

I.  OcB  traoBNT  MEED  OF  HIS  DiviNH!  8C0C0UB.  "Them  that  mourn  in  Zion."  In 
virtue  of  his  relation  to  us  as  our  Saviour,  Jesus  Christ  delivers  us  from  the  power  and 
bondage  of  sin,  and  so  from  the  remorse  which  attends  its  presence  and  constitutes  a 
priocip^  part  of  its  penalty.  But  there  are  other  things  from  which  he  does  not  profess 
to  save  his  people  in  this  world ;  these  are  suffering  and  sorrow.  His  very  best 
disciples  may  inherit  a  bodily  constitution  which  has  in  it  the  seeds  of  feebleness  and 
pain,  and  which  may  develop  these  evils  in  their  acutest  foi-m ;  or  they  may  be  the 
victims  of  some  terrible  accident  or  of  human  cruelty ;  or  they  may  be  called  on  to  pass 
through  trying  straits,  or  to  bear  bitter  disappointment,  or  to  endure  grievous  losses 
and  long-continued  loneliness.  There  is  no  mark  on  the  lintel  of  their  doors  to  tell 
the  angel  of  sorrow  to  pass  by.  He  enters  every  home ;  he  has  a  message  for  every 
heart,  and  the  children  of  the  kingdom  hear  his  voice,  and  feel  the  touch  of  his  hand, 
even  as  do  the  citizens  of  the  worldly  kingdom. 

II.  The  suffioiekot  of  oub  Savioue's  buccoub.  Christ  saves  us  in  sufiering  and 
sorrow,  though  he  does  not  here  deliver  us  from  it.  Such  is  the  transforming  power  of 
his  mighty  touch,  that  he  converts  it  into  another  thing;  under  his  hand  it  changes  its 
aspect  and  is  something  else;  the  disfiguring  ashea  become  a  diadem  of  beauty;  instead 
of  the  signs  of  mourning  there  is  seen  the  anointing  with  the  oil  of  joy  ;  divested  of  the 
spirit  of  heaviness,  the  soul  is  clothed  in  the  blessed  garment  of  praise.  The  power  of 
the  wonderful  Worker  (ch.  ix.  6)  has  transfigured  everything — has  turned  the  curse 
into  a  blessing.  And  how  ?  1.  By  a  sense  of  his  gracious  presence.  The  sorrowing 
spirit  rejoices  to  feel  that  its  Lord  is  near — is  nearer  than  closest  relative,  than  dearest 
friend.  2.  By  a  consciousness  of  his  tender  pity.  The  known  and  felt  compassion,  the 
assured  sympathy  of  the  Lord  of  love,  fills  the  heart  with  peace.  3.  By  the  direct, 
sustaining  influences  of  his  Holy  Spirit.  4.  By  the  assurance  tliat  he  is  seeking  our 
highest  good ;  that  things  are  not  happening  by  accident  or  mistake ;  that  the  gracious 
and  wise  Lord  of  all  hearts  and  lives  is  working  out  an  issue,  dark  and  afar  off,  perhaps, 
but  kind  and  good,  righteous  and  beneficent ;  that  he  is  planting  and  nourishing  "  trees 
of  righteousness,"  and  that  these  can  only  be  grown  with  drenching  rains  and  searching 
winds  as  well  as  with  sweet  sunshine  and  balmy  airs.  6.  By  the  promise  ca 
unshadowed  blessedness  a  little  further  on. — C. 

Vers.  6 — 9. — Privilege,  reputation,  hope.    We  have  here— 

I.  An  open  privilege  to  be  eagerly  employed.  "  Te  shall  be  named  the  Priests  of 
the  Lord."  Under  the  Law  the  priesthood  was  limited  to  one  family  of  one  tribe ;  the 
rest  of  the  nation  had  rights  and  duties  outside  and  inferior.  TLere  stand,  indeed,  the 
ancient  words,  "  Te  shall  be  unto  me  a  kingdom  of  priests,"  but  this  promise  finds  no 
complete  fulfilment  in  the  history  of  Israel.  It  is  realized  only  in  the  kingdom  of 
Christ.  Under  him  the  whole  community  is  a  "  holy  priesthood,"  a  "  royal  priesthood." 
Christ  "  has  made  us  (all)  kings  and  priests  unto  God."  It  is  open  to  every  one  of  us 
to  draw  nigh  unto  God  in  closest  spiritual  communion;  to  intercede  with  him  iu 
earnest,  believing  prayer;  to  present  unto  him  "spiritual  sacrifices"  of  obedience,  of 
resignation,  of  consecration.  The  way  is  open  now  into  the  holiest  of  all,  and  they 
please  God  most  who  approach  him  most  frequently,  and  offer  to  him  most  continually 
the  sacrifice  which  comes  from  clean  hands  and  a  pure  and  loving  heart. 

II.  An  enviable  eeputation  to  be  greatly  coveted.  "Men  sliall  call  you  the 
Ministers  [servants]  of  our  God."  What  is  it  that  we  would  have  men  say  about  us? 
By  what  do  we  most  desire  to  be  distinguished  and  remembered  ?  By  our  bodily  strength 
or  muscular  skill?  By  our  intellectual  powers?  By  oar  possessions?  These  things 
"profit  a  little;"  they  "have  their  reward"  in  momentary  satisfaction,  in  pleasure 
that  lives  awhile  and  dies.  But  they  are  not  significant  of  the  best  and  worthiest,  of 
that  which  endures  amid  the  wreck  and  passage  of  the  things  which  perish.  The  one 
reputation  worth  possessing  is  that  of  being  a  true  "  servant  of  God."  It  is  worth  whUe 
doing  much  and  endeavouring  much,  if  need  be,  that  the  thing  which  our  contemporaries 
shall  associate  with  our  name,  and  by  which  those  who  survive  us  shall  distingubh  iu 
from  others,  is  our  faithful  and  devoted  service  of  the  Divine  Master.  So  let  us  live 
that  the  first  thought  which  will  arise  in  men's  minds  concerning  us  is  that  we  are 
servants  of  our  God. 

IIL  As  nrvALUABLE  HOPE  iff  be  devoutly  cherished.    "All  that  see  then™  [their 


428  THE  BOOK   OP   THE   PROPHET  ISAIAH,      [oh.  i,xi.  1— IL 

offspring]  shall  acknowledge  them,  that  they  are  the  seed  which  the  Lord  hath  hlessed." 
What  are  our  deepest  solicitudes  concerning  our  children?  That  they  will  rise,  will 
be  enriched,  will  he  honoured  of  men  ?  These  might  prove  curses  rather  than  hlessings. 
The  wise  parent  will  hope,  will  live  and  strive,  will  pray  that  his  children  may  he  such 
in  spirit,  in  character,  in  behaviour,  that  all  who  see  them  will  feel  about  them  that 
the  blessing  of  God  is  in  their  heart  and  upon  their  head. — 0. 

Vers.  10,  11. — Wise  exultation.  I.  Oob  oapaoity  of  EXULTATioif.  Our  human 
spirit  is  capable  of  great  emotion.  Our  feeling  may  sink  to  great  depths  of  sorrow,  or 
may  rise  to  great  heights  of  joy.  We  have  no  language  which  will  express  the  degrees 
of  spiritual  distress  and  agony  which  are  possible  to  the  stricken  and  despairing,  or 
which  will  measure  the  degrees  of  joy  and  ecstasy  possible  to  the  blessed  and  the 
victorious. 

II.  OuB  TEMPTATION  in  this  matter.  The  warning  of  the  prophet  of  the  Lord 
(Jer.  ix.  24)  proves  that  in  other  lands  and  other  times  than  ours  the  wise  (learned) 
man  has  been  tempted  to  glory  in  his  wisdom,  the  rich  man  in  his  wealth,  the  mighty 
man  in  his  power  and  prowess.  But  such  glorification  is  our  weakness  and  our  folly ; 
it  is  not  built  on  truth ;  it  conducts  to  complacency ;  it  ends  in  disappointment,  if  not 
in  shame. 

III.  OuE  WISDOM.  This  is  to  rejoice  in  God,  to  "  glory  in  this,  that  we  understand 
and  know  him,"  and  are  ranked  among  his  people.  We  cannot  go  too  far  in  our 
delight  in  him.  1.  His  character  provides  a  source  of  spiritual  satisfaction  absolutely 
inexhaustible.  We  say  everything  in  one  word  as  to  his  sufficiency  when  we  say  that 
he  is  "our  Ood."  2.  He  has  done  greatest  things  for  us.  He  has  (1)  wrought  for  us 
the  greatest  of  all  deliverances — salvation ;  and  (2)  bestowed  on  us  the  greatest  of  all 
hXessings—H^ighteousness,  inward  and  spiritual  rectitude.  3.  He  stands  pledged  to 
accomplish  that  in  which  we  shall  greatly  triumph  (ver.  11).  As  the  well-cultivated 
garden  has  in  it  living  forces  which  will  show  themselves  in  fairest  flowers  and  richest 
fruits,  so  has  the  Lord  our  God  in  himself  all  the  wisdom,  grace,  and  power  which 
will  be  manifest  in  righteousness  and  praise,  springing  forth  in  the  sight  of  all  the 
nations. — 0. 

Ver.  1. — Messiah's  mission  to  the  trovhled.  Those  more  especially  addressed  by 
Messiah  are  called  the  "  meek,"  the  "  broken-hearted,"  the  "captives,"  and  the  "  bound.' 
It  at  once  comes  to  mind  that  precisely  such  persons  were  addressed  in  the  sermon  on 
the  mount ;  and  it  may  be  remarked,  as  distinguishiiig  Christ  from  all  ordinary  human 
teachers,  who  have  their  own  personal  gain  and  success  to  consider,  that  he  never 
sought  out  the  great,  the  rich,  or  the  learned,  but  gave  his  best  to  the  heart-sore,  the 
body-smitten,  and  the  life-humbled.  Our  Lord  makes  a  very  striking  reference  to  this 
passage  in  his  sermon  at  Nazareth  (Luke  iv.  18).  Before  entering  on  the  proper  sub- 
ject of  this  homily,  it  may  be  well  to  note  that  the  only  credentials  which  our  Lord 
cared  to  present  were  the  manifest  signs  and  proofs  that  the.  Spirit  of  God  was  upon 
him.  And  what  better  credentials  would  any  true-hearted  man  wish  to  offer? 
Material  figures  of  moral  conditions  may  be  found  in  the  depressed,  afflicted,  almost 
despairing  state  of  the  captives  in  Babylon. 

I.  Messiah's  mission  to  the  meek.  This  term  is  used  in  several  senses  in  Scripture. 
Sometimes  it  stands  for  the  humhle,  who  think  lowly  things  concerning  themselves. 
Sometimes  it  stands  for  the  disinterested,  who  are  willing  to  give  up  their  own  things 
for  the  sake  of  others.  Here  it  stands  for  crushed  and  hopeless  ones,  who  have  lost  all 
spirit,  and  think  there  is  no  lioht,  no  cheer,  in  this  life  for  them.  The  battle  with  sin 
sometimes  leaves  men  hard,  and  then  it  is  of  little  use  to  bring  "  good  tidings."  But 
sometimes  it  makes  men  meek,  soft,  impressible,  and  to  them  Messiah  comes  with 
"  good  tidings ; "  for  them  is  bom  a  Saviour. 

n.  Messiah's  mission  to  the  bkokbn- hearted.  This  term  best  expresses  the  state 
of  conviction  and  penitence.  It  is  the  sign  of  that  supreme  grief  which  a  man  knows 
when  he  sees  himself  as  he  is,  and  as  God  regards  him.  To  such  a  man  Messiah  comes 
with  the  message  of  a  free  and  full  forgiveness,  which  is  a  binding  up,  a  healing ;  the 
joy  of  acceptance  and  welcome  of  love. 

HI.  Messiah's  mission  to  the  captives.    Those  between  whose  circimstances  *nd 


OH.  Lxi,  I— 11.]     THE  BOOK  OP  THE  PROPHET  ISAIAH.  427 

whose  souls  there  is  constant  conflict.  Sin  gets  power  to  enslave  through  the  hody. 
"Whoso  committeth  sin  is  the  slave  of  sin."  Messiah  comes  to  energize  souls  for 
victory  over  enslaving  bodies  and  enslaving  circumstances.  Giving  life  to  souls,  he 
gives  liberty.     "  Where  the  Spirit  of  the  Lord  is,  there  is  liberty." 

IV.  Messiah's  mission  to  the  bound.  The  moral  suggestion  is  of  those  who  arc 
mastered  by  old  evil  habits,  easily  besetting  sins.  These  become  the  distress  of  souls 
that  have  been  forgiven  and  accepted.  And  Messiah  comes  to  give  "  more  grace,"  so 
that  they  may  "  resist  unto  blood,  striving  against  sin."  So  Messiah  meets  all  our 
gravest  human  troubles.    He  is  Burden-bearer  and  Burden-lifter. — R.  T. 

Ver.  2, — The  year  of  acceptance  and  the  day  of  vengeance.  Very  striking  is  the 
frequency  with  which  this,  and  other  prophets,  set  together  the  two  sides  of  Messiah's 
work.  Deliverance  of  those  who  trust  him  goes  together  with  judgment  on  those  who 
reject  him.  In  a  most  impressive  way  the  Old  Testament  canon  closes  with  this  dual 
aspect  of  Divine  dealings,  "  For,  behold,  the  day  comi-th,  that  shall  burn  as  an  oven ; 
and  all  the  proud,  yea,  and  all  that  do  wickedly,  shall  be  stubble.  .  .  .  But  untn  you 
that  fear  my  Name  shall  the  Sun  of  Eighteousness^arise  with  healing  in  his  wings" 
(Mai.  iv.  1,  2).  And  the  New  Testament  opens  with  the  prophetic  exclamatioa  of 
Simeon,  as  he  held  the  infant  Saviour  in  his  arms,  "  This  Child  is  set  for  the  fall  and 
rising  again  of  many  in  Israel."  Some  make  a  distinction  between  the  long  year  of 
acceptance  and  the  short  day  of  vengeance.  No  doubt  the  first  reference  of  the  text 
is  to  the  Divine  indignation  against  those  faithless  or  selfish  Jews  who  would  not 
respond  to  the  Lord's  call  to  return  to  their  ancient  land.  So  it  may  stand  for  the 
Divine  indignation  against  those  who  are  "  condemned  already,  because  they  have  not 
believed  in  the  Name  of  the  only  begotten  Son  of  God."  This  subject  is  so  frequently 
and  variously  treated,  that  we  here  confine  ourselves  to  two  points. 

I.  Acceptance  follows  foeqivenbss.  Messiah  proclaims  acceptance  because  he 
brings  forgiveness.  It  is  of  the  utmost  importance  that  there  should  he  no  uncertain 
sound  as  to  the  necessity  for  "  forgiveness."  Vague  sentiments  prevail  concerning  the 
Divine  acceptance ;  and  there  is  a  notion  that  all  we  can  need  is  a  sort  of  educating 
into  goodness.  Man,  every  man,  needs  to  yie  forgiven.  No  man  can  be  accepted  until 
he  is  forgiven.  This  may  lead  to  a  full  consideration  of  that  work  of  Messiah  which 
bears  on  the  ensuring  of  forgiveness.  It  is  a  mediatorial  work,  which  has  relations  of 
propitiation  towards  God  and  relations  of  conviction  towards  man.  The  acceptance- 
time  is  proclaimed  to  guilty  rebels  who  lay  down  their  arms  and  ask  for  mercy. 

II.  Rejection  follows  the  hardness  that  will  not  seek  forgiveness.  That  is 
the  "  day  of  vengeance  of  our  God."  If  put  into  a  word,  that  word  may  be  this — they 
are  left  to  their  fate.  If  put  into  a  figure,  it  may  be  this — they  are  outside  the  lighted 
halls,  in  the  "outer  darkness."  If  fashioned  in  human  images,  the  offended  king  must 
put  to  death  those  who  rebelliously  refuse  to  touch  his  offered  golden  sceptre.  There 
is  a  mystery  of  profound  and  awful  meaning  in  the  expression,  "the  wrath  of  the 
Lamb."— E.  T. 

Ver.  3. — Ood  glorified  in  the  joyous  and  the  beautiful.  "  A  garland  for  ashes,  the 
oil  of  joy  for  mourning,  the  garment  of  praise  for  the  spirit  of  heaviness  .  .  .  that  he 
might  he  glorified."  The  figures  used  are  drawn  from  Eastern  customs  and  sentiments. 
The  afflicted  clothe  themselves  in  sackcloth,  sit  in  ashes,  and  throw  dust  on  their 
heads.  In  gladness  and  feast-time  men  crown  themselves  with  garlands  or  wreaths. 
In  sickness  men  do  not  use  oil  at  toilet ;  when  restored  to  health  they  resume  the  oil 
which  "  makes  the  face  to  shine."  Festal  days  call  forth  bright-coloured  garments ; 
troublous  seasons  find  men  crouched  on  the  ground  heedless  of  the  robes  that  cover 
them.  But  God  is  not  honoured  with  ashes ;  he  wants  garlands.  Nor  is  he  honoured 
with  neglected  toilets;  he  wants  the  oil  of  joy.  He  asks  for  songs  by  the  way  from  all 
who  are  journeying  to  Zion.  His  call  ever  is,  "  Lift  up  your  heads,  for  your  redemp- 
tion draweth  nigh.' 

I.  God's  Messiah  finds  men  sad.  And  they  had  abundant  reason  for  being  sad. 
Illustrate  from  the  state  of  the  Jewish  nation  when  deliverance  from  captivity  came ; 
also  from  the  state  of  the  world  when  Jesus  the  Saviour  came.  ''Darkness  covered  the 
sarth,  and  gross  darkness  the  people."     Di'.  Kane  and  his  shipwrecked  crew  might  well 


428  THE  BOOK  OF  THE  PROPHET  ISAIAH,      [oh.  lxi.  1— 11, 

be  sad  when,  in  the  polar  regions,  they  never  saw  the  sun  for  one  hundred  and  forty 
lung  and  weary  days.  Those  out  of  Christ  have  good  reason  to  be  sad.  It  is  even  a 
hopeful  sign  that  they  are.  Philosophers  and  scientific  teachers  who  do  nat  "  like  to 
retain  God  in  their  thoughts"  are  always  sad — affectingly,  impressively  sad.  The 
saddest  book  ever  written  is  John  Stuart  Mill's  autobiography. 

II.  God's  Messiah  makes  men  glad.  Jesus  Christ  cannot  do  with  people  who,  in 
moral  senses,  stay  in  the  ashes,  neglect  their  toilet,  and  keep  up  miserable  groans.  He 
wants  to  get  a  song  into  men's  souls — even  praise  unto  a  redeeming  God — which  shall 
compel  them  to  put  garlands  and  festal  garments  on,  and  make  their  faces  shine.  We 
cannot  keep  Jesus  and  sadness  both  with  us,  any  more  than  the  world  can  keep  both 
sunshine  and  mists.  This  homily  should  be  used  for  pleading  against  a  long-faced, 
dreary  religion,  and  in  behalf  of  the  smiles  and  song  that  should  characterize  all  who 
know  the  grace  in  Christ  Jesus  unto  life  eternal. 

"I  came  to  Jesus  as  I  was. 
Weary,  and  worn,  and  sad ; 
I  found  in  him  a  Besting-plaoe^ 
And  he  h<u  made  me  glad." 

B.T. 

Ver.  6. — The  world's  priests  and  preachers.  "  Men  shall  call  you  the  Ministers  of 
our  God."  Dean  Plumptre  says  of  this  verse,  "  This  had  been  the  original  ideal  of  the 
nation's  life  (Exod.  xix.  6),  forfeited  for  a  time  through  the  sins  of  the  people  (Ezod. 
xxviii.  1),  to  be  fulfilled  at  last  in  the  citizens  of  the  New  Jerusalem  "  (comp.  1  Pet. 
ii.  9).  Matthew  Arnold  says,  "The  Jews,  a  nation  of  God's  servants  appointed  to 
initiate  the  rest  of  the  world  into  his  service,  are  to  give  tbemselves  to  this  sacred  and 
priestly  labour,  while  the  rest  of  the  world  do  their  secular  labour  for  them."  Matthew 
Henry  says,  "All  believers  are  made  to  our  God  kings  and  priests;  and  they  ought  to 
conduct  themselves  as  such  in  their  devotions,  and  in  their  whole  conversation,  with 
'holiness  to  the  Lord'  written  upon  their  foreheads,  that  men  may  call  them  the 
'  priests  of  the  Lord.' "  We  learn  from  this  passage  what  are  the  views  we  may  rightly 
take  of  our  "  priests  and  preachers." 

'  I.  They  belong  to  oub  God.  Importance  attaches  to  the  personal  appropriation 
indicated  in  the  expression  "  our  God."  Only  those  who  are  themselves  in  right  relations 
with  God  will  ever  put  ministers  into  their  right  place,  or  keep  them  in  their  right 
place,  A  man  who  does  not  know  God /or  himself  will  want  his  minister  to  become 
a  priest,  and  do  too  much  for  him.  The  man  who,  in  covenant  relations,  can  say 
"  my  God,"  will  thankfully  accept,  and  wisely  use,  all  that  God's  servants  can  do  for 
him. 

II.  They  ministbk  fob  oub  God.  And  they  can  do  nothing  but  minister.  They 
are,  like  their  Lord  and  Master  Jesus  Christ,  among  us  "  as  he  that  serveth."  "  We 
preach  Christ  Jesus  the  Lord ;  and  ourselves  your  servants  for  Jesus'  sake."  Ministers 
bring  to  us  messages  from  God,  but  we  must  never  let  them  stand  before  God.  There 
is  peril  for  our  souls  whenever  officiating  priest  or  popular  preacher  takes  all  our 
attention,  and  keeps  us  from  direct  dealing  with  God.  We  must  never  let  even 
apostles  have  "  dominion  over  our  faith ; "  they  are  only  "  helpers  of  our  joy."  Very 
possibly  some  of  our  souls  are  hindered  from  attaining  the  best  in  Christian  life,  because 
our  outlook  is  stopped  by  the  figure  of  a  man,  and  we  cannot  see  God. 

HI.  They  serve  us  in  the  Name  of  oub  God.  Emphasis  is  put  on  the  word  "us." 
It  is  peculiar  to  ail  faithful  and  wise  ministers  that  they  have  a  "passion  for  souls," 
the  "  enthusiasm  of  humanity ; "  and  are  ever  seeking  to  gain  adaptation  to  us.  Some 
men  are  more  interested  in  truth  than  in  persons ;  but  the  real  priests  and  preachers  ' 
and  pastors  of  our  God  follow  after  the  great  apostle  and  say,  "  We  seek  not  yours, 
but  you."—K  T. 

Ver.  9. — Blessed  children.  "  All  that  see  them  shall  acknowledge  them,  that  they 
are  the  seed  which  the  Lord  hath  blessed."  "  Let  the  children  of  gndly  parents  live 
in  such  a  manner  that  they  may  be  known  to  be  such,  that  all  who  observe  them  may 
see  in  them  the  fruits  of  a  good  education,  and  an  answer  to  the  prayers  that  were  put 
up  for  them."    "  Easterns  value  highly  the  retention  of  blessings  through  succeeding 


OH.  Lxi.  1—11.]     THE  BOOK  OF  THE  PROPHET  ISAIAH.  42» 

generationi."  Abraham,  as  the  first  father  of  the  race,  may  he  taken  as  the  type  of 
all  fathers  and  mothers.    Then  the  course  of  thought  may  be  this — 

L  The  pions  paternal  chabaotbe.  As  seen  in  Abraham,  it  includes :  1.  Reverence. 
A  due  sense  of  the  "  unseen  "  is  the  secret  of  the  sense  of  duty  which  lies  at  the  basis 
of  all  real  authority.  2.  Uprightness.  Which  gives  a  "certain  firmness,  almost  stern- 
ness, which  ensures  a  blended  fear  and  confidence.  3.  Obedience.  A  man's  own 
response  to  his  sonship  with  God  is  the  secret  of  his  power  to  command  the  obedience 
of  his  children. 

IL   ThK  8E0URI1T  PATEBNAI.  CHABAOTBR  AFFORDS  THAT  FAMILIES  WILL  BE   BtJLED. 

There  is  a  strange  idea  entertained,  that  there  is  no  strong  rule  in  fatherhood.  But 
every  home  must  have  its  laws.  The  mightiest  men  of  earth  are  not  the  giants  with 
the  big  fists.  The  Davids  of  intellectual,  moral,  and  emotional  force  are  grander  than 
all  Sauls  who  stand  heads  above  their  fellows.  The  highest  power  of  influence  attends 
on  character.  Put  a  man  of  good  character  anywhere,  and  he  proves  to  be  a  king;  he 
rules.  There  is  a  natural  authority  belonging  to  parentage.  This  is  not  enough.  It 
can  be  kept  into  the  manhood  of  the  children  only  as  parents  gain  the  higher  power  of 
moral  character. 

III.  The  eesult  op  good  bulino  is  that  the  chtldren  tubn  out  well.  How 
we  dream  over  the  future  of  our  children  1  We  may  leave  it  all  with  God,  if  we  are 
culturing  ouiselves  into  Christ-likeness,  and  watchfully  anxious  that  this  our  Christ- 
likeness  should  shine  well  on  them.  But  what  do  we  mean  by  "our  children  turning 
out  well"V  Does  that  mean  "proving  talented,"  "marrying  prudently,"  "winning 
business  successes  "  ?  Or  do  we  mean  "  keeping  well  in  the  ways  of  the  Lord,"  what- 
ever may  be  their  circumstances,  and  whatever  may  be  their, relations? 

IV.  Through  good  parents  and  good  families  God's  purposes  in  the  world 
are  accomplished.  Compare  Dr.  Horace  BushneU's  very  striking  expression,  "  The 
out-populating  of  the  Christian  stock."  As  are  the  families  so  will  be  the  nation.  We 
trust  in  virtuous  homes,  well-ruled  families,  godly  fathers,  and  pious  mothers.  Blessed 
indeed  are  those  children  who  grow  up  constrained  to  goodness  by  the  example, 
influence,  and  authority  of  godly  parental — R.  T. 

Ver.  10. — Joy  in  the  Divine  adomings,  Eichard  Weaver  gives  an  effective  and 
pleasing  illustration.  "A  lady  once  took  me  into  her  garden,  and  I  found  there  beds 
filled  with  all  kinds  of  beautiful  flowers;  but  at  the  end  of  the  garden  1  came  to  the 
edge  of  a  steep  precipice,  and  as  I  stood  looking  down  at  the  great  black  rock  beneath, 
I  thought  what  a  dreadful  place  that  would  be  to  fall  down.  '  Come  with  me,'  said  the 
lady, '  and  1  will  show  you  something  beautiful.'  She  led  me  round  to  the  foot  of  the 
rock  and  desired  me  to  look  up,  and  when  I  did  I  could  see  no  rock,  it  was  completely 
covered  with  beautiful  white  roses.  Oh,  thought  I,  that  is  just  a  picture  of  a  poor 
sinner ;  he  is  a  black,  unsightly  thing  like  that  rock,  but  the  '  Rose  of  Sharon '  comes 
and  covers  him ;  and  when  God  looks,  he  cannot  see  the  sinner,  for  between  is  Christ, 
and  he  covers  him  with  the  spotless  robe  of  his  own  righteousness." 

L  Christ's  gift  op  adornments.  Urge  that  a  sinner,  even  a  saved  sinner,  cannot 
be  called  beautiful,  and  cannot  be  fit  for  a  place  at  the  feast.  Fetch  the  poor  beggar 
in  from  the  street,  give  him  free  invitation,  and  let  him  respond  to  it  with  all  his  heart ; 
and  still  he  will  want  something  before  he  can  sit  down  with  the  guests.  It  is  some- 
thing he  cannot  win,  something  he  cannot  buy,  something  of  the  king's  own,  which 
the  king  himself  must  give.  It  is  a  royal  robe  from  the  king's  treasure.  It  is  robe 
and  ornaments  and  jewels,  as  the  bridegroom's  gift.  So  in  the  New  Testament  we  are 
bidden  to  "  put  on  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ,"  and  the  graces  of  Christian  character  are 
treated  as  a  Divine  investiture.  They  who  have  such  adornings  will  be  sure  to  try 
and  be  worthy  of  them,  and  so  graces  given  and  graces  sought  for  will  graciously  blend. 

IL  Christ's  jot  in  those  whom  he  has  adorned.  Figured  in  the  joy  of  a  bride- 
groom over  the  bride  when  beautiful  with  garments  and  jewels  which  he  has  hjmself 
provided,  and  everyone  of  which  is  an  expression  of  personal  affection.  The  joy  of 
every  faithful  pastor  is  found  in  those  whom  he  has  led  to  rest  in  God.  "  Ye  are  our 
glory  and  our  joy."  The  joy  of  Jesus,  the  Saviour  and  Bridegroom,  is  found  in  the 
multitude  whom  uo  man  can  number,  arrayed  in  white  garments,  his  gift,  because  they 
are  white-souled  at  last,  through  his  grace. — B.  T. 


130 


THE   BOOK   OF  THE  PROPHET  ISAIAH,    [oh.  lxil  1— 12. 


EXPOSITION. 


CHAPTER  LXIL 


Vere.   1 — 12.— Fcbthbb   Gbacious  Pro- 

MISEB  MADE  TO  ISRAEL  BT  "  THE  SbETANT." 

Some  regard  the  speaker  in  this  chapter  as 
Jehovah ;  some  as  the  prophet,  or  the  pro- 
phetical order;  some  as  "the  Servant." 
The  last  supposition  appears  to  as  the 
simplest  and  the  hest.  The  close  connec- 
tion with  the  preceding  chapter  is  evident. 
If  that  then  be,  in  the  main,  "  a  soliloquy 
of  the  Servant,"  tliis  should  be  a  continua- 
tion of  the  soliloquy.  Israel  is  promised 
"  righteousness,"  "  glory,"  "  a  new  name,"  a 
guard  of  angels,  »  time  of  peace  and  pros- 
perity, deliverance  from  Babylon,  and  tri- 
umphant establishment  in  Zion  under  God's 
protection. 

Ver.  1. — For  Zion's  sake  will  I  not  hold 
my  peace.  In  the  past  God  has  kept  silence 
(oh,  xlii.  14 ;  Ivii.  11).  "  The  Servant "  has 
not  caused  his  voice  to  be  heard.  Babylon 
has  been  allowed  to  continue  her  oppression 
unchecked.  But  now  there  will  be  a  change. 
God  will  lift  up  liis  voice,  and  the  nations 
will  hear ;  and  the  "  salvation "  of  Israel 
will  be  effected  speedily.  7or  Jerusalem's 
sake.  "  Zion  "  and  "  Jerusalem "  are  used 
througliout  as  synonyms  (ch.  ii.  3;  iv.  3,  4; 
xzxi.  4,  5,  and  9 ;  xxxiii.  20 ;  xl.  9 ;  xli.  27 ; 
lii.  1;  Ixiv.  10,  etc.),  like  "Israel"  and 
Jacob."  Strictly  speaking,  "  Zion  "  is  the 
mountain,  "  Jerusalem  "  the  city  built  upon 
it.  TTntil  the  righteousness  thereof  go  forth 
(comp.  ch.  liv.  17 ;  Ixi.  10,  II).  As  bright- 
ness; or,  a»  tlie  davm  (comp.  ch.  Ix.  3; 
Prov.  iv.  18;  Dan.  vi.  19).  Salvation  . . . 
as  a  lamp  that  bumeth ;  rather,  a>  a 
torch  that  Uazeth  (comp.  Judg.  xv.  4; 
Nah.  ii.  14 ;  Zech.  xii.  6).  Israel's  "  salva- 
tion "  would  be  made  manifest ;  primarily 
by  her  triumphant  return  from  Babylon, 
and  more  completely  by  her  position  in  the 
final  kingdom  of  the  Bedeemer. 

Ver.  2. — The  Oentiles  shall  see,  eto.  A 
continuation  of  the  account  of  Israel's  final 
glory,  as  given  in  ch.  Ixi.  6 — 9.  What  the 
Gentiles  are  especially  to  see  and  admire 
is  Israel's  righteousness.  This  may  point 
to  those  acknowledgments  of  the  purity  and 
excellence  of  the  early  Church  which  were 
made  by  the  heathen  (Flin., '  Epist,,'  x.  97), 
and  which  culminated  in  the  saying,  "  See 
how  these  Christians  love  one  another  I" 
The  aoeptio  Gibbon  acknowledges,  among 
the  causes  of  the  success  of  Christianity, 
"  the  virtues  of  the  early  Christians."  All 
kinp  (oomp.  oh.  xlix.  7,  23;  Ix.  8;  Fa. 


Ixxii.  11).  Thon  shalt  be  oalled  by  a  new  name 
(comp.  vers.  4  and  12;  and  see  also  ch. 
Ixv.  15).  It  is  not  altogether  clear  what  the 
"  new  name  "  is,  since  in  the  remainder  of 
the  present  chapter  more  than  one  name  is 
Bugsested.  Rosenmiiller  supposes  "  Hephzi- 
bah  "  to  be  meant.  Ur.  Kay  suggests  "  the 
holy  people,"  and  notes  that  the  title  of 
"  holy  ones,"  or  "  saints,''  is  given  by  St. 
Paul  to  all  Christians  (Aotsxxvi.  10;  Bom. 
i.  7;  xvi.  15;  1  Cor.  12,  etc.).  Mr.  Cheyne 
thinks  that  it  is  some  unknown  title  of 
honour,  akin  to  that  mentioned  by  Jere- 
miah—"  Jehovah  our  Righteousness"  (Jer. 
xxxiii.  16).  "New  names''  will  be  given 
to  individual  saints  in  the  heavenly  king- 
dom (Rev.  ii.  17 ;  iii.  12). 

Ver.  3. — Thou  shalt  also  be  a  orown  of 
glory,  eto.  God  will  exhibit  Israel  to  an 
admiring  world,  as  a  man  might  exhibit  a 
"  crown  "  or  "  diadem  "  which  he  held  in 
his  hand.  They  will  look  on  with  admira- 
tion and  reverence — "for  they  shall  per- 
ceive that  it  is  his  work  "  (Ps.  Ixiv.  9). 

Ver.  4. — Thon  shalt  no  more  be  termed 
Forsaken.  Judali  had  believed  herself  "  for- 
saken "  of  God  (ch.  xlix.  14),  and  had  actu- 
ually  been,  in  a  certain  sense,  forsaken  "  for 
a  small  moment "  (oh.  liv.  7).  Her  enemies, 
it  would  seem,  had  gone  so  far  as  to  give  her 
the  name  in  derision.  Neither  shall  Vkj  land 
...  be  termed  Desolate.  Judssa  had  not  only 
been  desolated  by  the  Babylonian  invaders 
under  Nebuchadnezzar,  but  had  remained 
"  de.solate "  during  the  whole  period  of  the 
Captivity  (ch.  sxxii.  13,  14 ;  xlix.  19,  etc.). 
It  had  come  to  be  spoken  of  as  Sh'mdrnah, 
"  a  desolation  "  (see  Jer.  xxxiv.  22 ;  xliv. 
2,  6;  Ezek.  xxxiii.  29;  xxxvi.  34),  Now 
all  should  be  altered.  As  Ezekiel  prophe- 
sied, "  The  land  that  was  desolate  is  become 
like  the  garden  of  Eden ;  and  the  waste  and 
desolate  and  ruined  cities  are  become  fenced 
and  are  inhabited"  (xxxvi.  35).  Thon 
shalt  be  oalled  Hephzi-bah ;  I'.e. "  my  delight 
is  in  her."  Uephzi-bah  was  the  name  of 
Hezekiah's  queen,  Manasseh's  mother  (2 
Kings  xxi.  1).  And  thy  land  Beulah.  Ben- 
lah,  or  rather  Bg'ulah,  means  "married" 
(oomp.  oh.  liv.  1).  Judeea  would  be  "  mar- 
ried "  to  her  sons,  or  her  people,  when  they 
quitted  Babylon  and  once  more  took  posses- 
sion of  her.  The  Hebrew  verb  for  "to 
marry  "  (as  a  man  marries)  means  literally 
"  to  be  lord  over." 

Ver.  5. — As  the  bridegroom  rejoioeth  ovet 
the  bride.  There  is%  double  employment 
of  the  analogy  with  marriage  here.  The 
land,  Judeea,  personified  as  a  female,  ii 
married  to  her  sons,  or  her  people,  regarded 
(in  this  connection)  aa  a  i^ale.    The  people, 


CH.  Lxii.  1— 12.]    THE  BOOK  OF  THE  PEOPHET  ISAIAH. 


431 


regarded  as  a  female  ("  the  virgin  daughter 
of  Zion,"  oh.  xxxvii.  22)  is  also  married  to 
JehoTah,  and  recognizes  him  as  her  Bride- 
groom (eomp.  ch.  liv.  5).  As  Bridegroom, 
God  calls  his  bride  "Hephzi-bah" — "my 
delight  is  in  her." 

Yer.  6. — I  have  set  watchmen  upon  thy 
walls,  "  The  Servant "  has  appointed 
watchers  upon  the  walls  of  Zion^ither 
"prophets"  (Delitzach),  or  "priests  and 
prophets"  (Kay),  or,  more  probably,  "an- 
gelic beings  "  (Cheyne),  who  keep  perpetual 
watch  and  ward  (comp.  ch.  lii.  8).  Neither 
day  nor  night  do  they  hold  their  peace,  or 
keep  silence,  but  ever  intercede  with  God 
for  his  people,  like  the  "  angel  of  Jehovah" 
in  Zech.  i.  12,  reminding  him  of  his  cove- 
nant with  them,  and  his  promises  to  them, 
and  exhorting  him  to  "  awake,  awake  "  for 
his  own  honour's  sake  (ch.  li.  9 — 11).  It  is 
generally  allowed  that  the  "watchers"  in 
Dan.  iv.  13, 17,  23  are  angels ;  and  the  same 
interpretation  best  suits  the  "watchmen" 
of  the  present  passage.  Ye  that  make  men- 
tion of  the  Lord ;  rather,  as  in  the  margin, 
ye  that  are  the  Lord's  remembrancers ;  i.e. 
"ye  whose  business  it  is  to  call  to  God's 
remembrance  the  needs  and  claims  of  his 
people,  and  the  obligations  of  his  covenant 
promises." 

Ver.  7. — Give  him  no  rest.  Compare  the 
teaching  of  our  Lord  with  respect  to  the 
efficacy  of  importunity  (Luke  xi.  5 — 8 ;  xviii. 
1-8). 

Ver.  8. — The  Lord  hath  sworn.  In  answer 
in  the  representations  of  the  "  remem- 
brancers," God  solemnly  binds  himself  by  an 
oath  to  come  to  the  relief  of  the  people,  to 
restore  them  to  their  own  land,  and  to  give 
them  the  enjoyment  of  its  fruits  in  peace. 
By  his  right  hand,  God  commonly  swears 
"by  himself"  (Gen.  xxii.  16;  ch.  xlv.  23; 
Jer.  xUx.  13;  h.  14;  Amos  vi  5),  or  "by 
his  holiness  "  (Ps.  Ixxxix.  35 ;  Amos  iv.  2). 
Once  he  swears  "  bf  his  great  Name  "  (Jer, 
xllv.  26),  and  once  "by  the  excellency  of 
Jacob  "  (Amos  viii.  7).  There  is  no  other 
place  in  Scripture  where  he  swears  "  by  his 
right  hand  and  arm" — emblems  of  his 
power  to  act.  Thy  com  .  .  .  thy  wine; 
i.e.  the  fruits  of  thy  land.  Hitherto,  even 
when  Israel  was  in  possession  of  Palestine, 
its  fruits  were  constantly  destroyed,  or 
oarried  off,  by  the  laids  of  hostile  neigh- 


bours.   Henceforth  this  plundering  should 
cease. 

Yer,  9. — Shall  drink  it  in  the  oonrts  of  my 
holiness.  This  is  not  to  be  understood  lite- 
rally, at  any  rate,  of  the  whole  produce  of  the 
land.  What  is  meant  is,  that  the  produce 
will  be  consecrated  by  such  festal  means  as 
the  Law  enjoined  (Deut,  xiv.  22 — 27),  and 
that  then  the  remainder  will  be  consumed 
with  due  thanks  and  acknowledgments. 

Ver.  10. — Go  through,  go  through  the 
gates.  The  speaker  returns  to  the  period  of 
the  exile,  and  exhorts  the  people  to  pass  forth 
from  Babylon,  and  speed  on  their  way  home- 
wards (comp.  ch.  xlviii.  20 ;  Ui.  11).  Soma 
of  them  are  to  clear  away  obstacles,  others 
are  to  bring  materials  and  construct  a  high- 
way along  which  the  stream  of  emigrants 
may  march  (comp.  ch.  Ivii.  14),  while  a  third 
body  removes  such  stones  as  might  cause 
stumbling,  and  a  fourth  lifts  np  a  standard 
to  direct  the  march. 

Yer.  11. — Meanwhile  Jehovah,  by  his 
angels  or  his  prophets,  causes  it  to  be  made 
known  to  the  ends  of  the  earth  that  the 
redemption  of  Israel  draws  nigh,  and  that 
Zion's  "  salvation  "  approaches.  His  reward 
is  with  him,  etc.  The  words  are  repeated 
from  ch.  xl.  10.  Here  they  are  certainly 
said  of  Israel.  They  go  forth  from  Babylon, 
having  their  reward  with  them — i.e.  liberty, 
honour,  riches  to  some  extent  (Ezra  i.  i — 11), 
and  their  work,  or  rather  their  reeompenee — 
the  possession  of  Palestine— before  them. 

Yer.  12. — They  shall  call  them;  or, 
men  shall  call  them,  equivalent  to  "they 
shall  be  called."  The  holy  people.  The 
Persians  in  some  degree  recognized  this 
character  in  the  Israelites  (Ezra  i.  2,  3 ;  vi. 
8—12 ;  vii.  12—26).  So  did  Alexander, 
according  to  Josephus.  The  Romans,  on 
the  contrary,  regarded  them  as  the  votaries 
of  a  degrading  superstition.  Since  the 
Roman  conquest,  they  have  been  almost 
universally  despised.  Perhaps  the  prophecy 
may  be  considered  to  still  await  its  complete 
fulfilment.  Thou  shalt  be  called.  "  Thou  " 
refers  to  Zion  or  Jerusalem.  She  should 
be  called  Sought  out — •',«.  a  special  ob- 
ject of  God's  care— and  A  city  not  for- 
saken— the  very  opposite  of  her  former 
name  (ver,  4),  which  was  "  Forsaken,"  All 
the  conditions  of  her  former  existence  would 
be  altered,  nay,  reversed,  in  the  futun. 


EOMILETICS. 

Vers.  2,  4, 12. — The  teaching  of  Scripture  with  respect  to  names.  ITames  ai«  net 
spoken  of  in  the  Scriptures  as  unimportant,  but  as  of  a  very  high  importance. 

L  A  SPECIAL  VALUE  18  BET  ON  THE  NAMES  OF  GoD.  The  names  of  God  are  Bigni- 
ficant,  and  set  forth  his  nature.  "El"  is  "the  Great;"  "Shaddai,"  "the  Strong;" 
"  Jehovah,"  "  the  Alone-existent."    God  selected  this  last  name  as  that  by  which  he 


482  THE  BOOK  OP  THE  PROPHET  ISAIAH,    [oh.  lxii.  1— 12. 

would  be  especially  known  to  the  Jews  (Exod.  iii.  14),  and  it  became  a  sort  of  propel 
name  with  them  and  their  neighbours.  It  was  this  name  which  was  not  to  be  taken  in 
vain  (Exod.  xx.  7).  It  came  to  be  regarded  as  so  holy  that  the  Jews  would  not  venture 
to  pronounce  it,  but  substituted  the  word  "  Adonai,"  or  "  Lord,"  whenever  they  read 
the  Scriptures  aloud.  God  himself,  is,  in  fact,  in  all  his  names ;  and  nearly  the  same 
reverence  is  due  to  them  which  is  due  to  hitn.  Christians  are  baptized  into  the  Namt 
of  the  Father,  the  Son,  and  the  Holy  Ghost  (Matt,  xxviii.  19).  The  Name  of  the  God 
of  Jacob  defends  them  (Ps.  xxv.  1).  The  Father  keeps  them  through  his  Name  (John 
xvii.  11).  They  give  thanks  to  his  Name  (Heb.  xiii.  15),  fear  and  glorify  his  Navne 
(Rev.  XV.  4),  confess  and  sing  praise  unto  it  (Rom.  xv.  9).  Christ's  Name,  through  faith 
in  his  Name,  makes  them  strong,  yea,  gives  them  perfect  soundness  in  the  presence  of 
all  (Acts  iii.  16). 

II.  A  CERTAIN  VALUE  IS  SET  ON  men's  NAMES.  God  assigns  men  names  (oh.  vii.  14 ; 
viii.  3 ;  Hos.  i.  4,  6,  9 ;  Matt.  i.  21 ;  Luke  i.  13,  etc.) ;  alters  or  modifies  their  names 
(Gen.  xvii.  5,  15 ;  xxxii.  28 ;  2  Sam.  xii,  25,  etc.) ;  explains  the  mystical  meaning  of 
their  names  (Matt.  xvi.  18) ;  gives  them  wholly  new  names  (Rev.  iii.  12).  The  sacred 
writers  also  sometimes  alter  men's  names  in  contempt,  or  as  a  punishment.  Thus 
Esh-Baal,  "  man  of  Baal,"  becomes  Ish-Bosheth,  "  man  of  shame ; "  Merib-Baal  becomes 
Mephi-Bosheth,  and  the  like.  The  true  name  of  Hezekiah's  father  seems  to  have  been 
Jehoahaz,  "possession  of  Jehovah"  (G.  Smith,  'Bponym  Canon,'  p.  124);  but  the 
sacred  writers,  offended  with  him  on  account  of  his  idolatries,  would  only  call  him 
Ahaz,  "  possession."  Conquering  kings  sometimes  required  names  of  subject  kings  to 
be  changed,  apparently  as  a  mark  of  submission  and  subserviency.  Thus  the  name  of 
Eliakim  was  turned  to  Jehoiakim  by  Pharaoh-Necho  (2  Kings  xxiii.34),  and  the  name 
of  Mattaniah  to  Zedekiah  by  .Nebuchadnezzar  (2  Kings  xxiv.  17).  Altogether,  human 
names  are  recognized  as  having  an  importance  which  profane  writers  are  rarely  found 
to  attach  to  them. 

III.  A  CERTAIN  VALUE  18  SET  ALSO  ON  THE  NAMES  OF  PLACES.  Importance  is  attached 
to  the  significance  of  place-names,  and  a  meaning  is  found  for  them  not  always  in 
accordance  with  their  real  etymologies.  Babel  (Babylon)  was  no  doubt  intended  by 
the  Babylonians  to  mean  "  the  gate  of  God ; "  but  the  sacred  writers  saw  in  the  name 
a  derivation  from  halal,  "  to  confound  "  (Gen.  xi.  9).  When  places  ceased  to  correspond 
to  their  names,  the  sacred  writers  freely  altered  the  names,  to  suit  the  circumstances. 
Thus  the  Bethel  of  the  patriarchs  becomes  the  Beth-aven  of  Hosea  (iv.  16 ;  y.  8 ;  x.  6), 
Jeroboam's  idolatries  having  turned  "  the  house  of  God  "  into  "  the  house  of  nothing- 
ness." In  the  present  chapter  Jerusalem  is  supposed  to  have  become  "  Azubah "  on 
her  destruction  by  the  Babylonians,  and  to  be  about  to  be  called  "  Hephzi-bah  "  on  her 
restoration  by  the  returned  exiles.  Another  name  given  to  her  by  Isaiah  is  "Ariel" 
(ch.  xxix.  1).  Each  name  expresses  some  phase  in  her  history  or  feature  of  her 
character. 


HOMILIES  BY  VARIOUS  AUTHORS. 

Vers.  1 — 9. — Promises  of  future  glory.  Let  us  assume  that  Jehovah  Is  the  Speaker, 
and  that  he  utters  this  oracle  in  a  time  of  darkness  and  despondency.  What  is 
expressed  is  the  intense  passion,  if  we  may  so  say,  of  God  for  the  realization  of  his  ideas 
in  the  world.  The  prophet  fears  not  to  use  the  boldest  anthropomorphic  imagery  in 
setting  forth  this  view  of  God. 

I.  The  IRREPRESSIBLE  DESIRES  AND  PURPOSES  OF  THE  Eternal.  He  will  Dot  be  silent 
nor  will  he  rest.  In  dark  times  it  seems  that  God  is  refraining  himself,  putting  a 
restraint  upon  his  lips,  holding  his  peace,  etc.  Four  times  in  the  latter  portion  ol 
Isaiah  that  thought  occurs  (ch.  xlii.  14 ;  Ivii.  11 ;  Ixiv.  12 ;  Ixv.  6).  When  impiety 
and  oppression  are  rampant,  the  wicked  exclaim,  "How  doth  God  know?"  and  the 
righteous,  "  Why  is  he  silent  ?  "  And  yet  there  should  be  fears  and  scruples  on  both 
sides.  Silence  and  reserve  need  not  mean  indifference.  Nor  would  the  voice  of  the 
Eternal  be  so  impressive  were  it  not  for  the  long  spaces  of  silence  that  lie  between. 
Sooner  or  later  be  will  uprouse  himself,  and  his  mighty  voice  will  go  forth,  and  ther* 
wiU  be  a  turn  in  affairs. 


OH.  LXii.  1—12.]    THE  BOOK  OP  THE   PROPHET  ISAIAH.  433 

n.  The  ideal  on  which  he  has  set  his  eeabt.  It  is  the  glory  of  the  ideal 
Jerusalem,  the  spiritual  city  of  God,  or  his  Church.  1.  Hie  glory  of  righteousness  and 
salvation.  The  two  terms  seem  here  nearly  to  denote  the  same  thing.  Negatively, 
freedom  from  all  external  calamity  and  from  all  internal  impurity  ;  positively,  atttun- 
ment  of  all  prosperity  and  all  moral  rectitude.  This  is  to  be  an  all-pervading  brUliance^ 
or  a  torch  carried  far  from  hand  to  band.  2.  ITie  beauty  of  holiness.  "Grown  of 
adorning  in  Jehovah's  hand,"  or  "  diadem  of  royalty,"  shall  she  be.  All  the  associations 
of  forsakenness,  desolation,  and  widowhood  shall  pass  away,  and  be  replaced  by  those 
of  nuptial  beauty  and  joy.  Her  name  shall  be  exchanged  for  a  new  one,  i.e.  her 
afBioted  for  a  glorious  condition. 

ill.  The  angelio  uinistbt.  Angelic  watchers  are  on  the  walls  of  the  city, 
incessantly  engaged  in  intercession.  The  idea  of  them  is  that  of  mediatorial  beings. 
Here  they  intercede  with  Jehovah  that  he  will  raise  the  city  (or  Church)  to  her  proper 
renown  among  the  nations  of  the  earth.  And  an  answer  to  the  prayer  seems  indicated, 
when  Jehovah  swears  that  the  harvest  and  the  vintage  shall  no  more  be  pillaged  by 
her  foes, — J. 

Vers.  10 — 12. — The  homeward  call.  "  The  prophet  returns  to  the  exiles  in  Babylon, 
and  urges  them  not  to  delay  their  homeward  march."  It  is  the  same  call  which 
resounded  in  the  two  former  divisions  of  the  prophecy  (ch.  zlviii.  20 ;  lii.  11). 

I.  The  way  cleared.  The  gates  of  Babylon  are  to  be  thrown  open.  Invisible 
servants  of  Jehovah  are  to  prepare  the  way  (oh.  xl.  3 ;  Ivii.  14).  A  great  highway  (as 
in  ch.  xi.  16)  is  seen  stretching  homeward,  from  which  the  party  of  pioneers  is  removing 
obstructions;  and  on  high  there  floats  a  banner  over  the  escort  of  Gentile  people 
(ch.  xliv.  22;  xi.  10,  12). 

U.  The  pboolamation.  The  news  of  the  approaching  salvation  of  Israel  is  to  be 
published  to  the  ends  of  the  earth.  Meanwhile  Zion,  by  means  of  angelic  or  prophetic 
ministry,  is  to  be  informed  of  her  coming  deliverance.  He  who  is  Betributor  and 
Compensator  is  at  hand. 

III.  The  realization  of  Zion's  dbstint.  The  people  are  to  be  known  once  more  by 
that  great  appellation  given  them  in  the  Law  (Exod.  xix.  6),  the  holy  people,  partaking 
of  the  nature  of  the  holy  God— by  him  redeemed,  by  him  sanctified — a  title  which 
passed  over  into  Christian  use.  In  contrast  to  her  former  isolation  and  neglectedness 
(jer.  XXX.  17),  the  city  will  be  "  sought  out,"  the  object  of  the  nations'  love  and  care. 
In  Christians  as  the  elect,  the  beloved  of  God,  in  the  Church  as  the  "  city  set  on  a  hill," 
or  as  a  glorious  and  spotless  bride,  may  be  found  the  Christian  fulfilment  of  these 
prophecies.— J. 

Ver,  4. — Fellowship  with  God.  "  Thou  shalt  no  more  be  termed  Forsaken."  Mis- 
taken we  may  be — our  judgment  is  so  weak,  our  hearts  so  worldly — but  not  forsaken. 
It  is  a  beautiful  word,  and  it  is  enough.  God  will  not  condescend  to  explain  all  hia 
ways  to  men ;  but  he  is  a  Father,  and  the  Father  will  never  forsake  his  child.  Isaiah 
is  called  the  evangelical  prophet,  and  he  is  so;  he  heralds  the  kingdom  of  Christ, 
describes  the  nature  of  the  kingdom,  under  a  King  who  shall  reign  in  righteousness, 
and  gives  us  the  pathetic  picture  of  his  sorrows.  In  one  word,  as  a  prophet  of  the 
Redeemer,  he  describes  the  theophany,  the  appearance  or  manifestation  of  God  himself; 
the  great  coming  age  of  Immanuel,  "  God  with  us."  Wars  are  prophesied  of,  even 
after  the  advent  of  Christ — tribulations  and  shaking  of  nations.  Much  has  to  be  over- 
turned ;  but  amid  all  there  is  the  pathway  of  the  true  King.  Jesus  comes,  and  comes 
to  reign.  Much  is  transient  here.  It  is  declared  so  to  be.  Man  is  said  to  be  a  pilgrim, 
and  yet  utters  a  cry  of  wonder  that  he  cannot  make  earth  a  home.  Riches  are  said 
to  have  wings,  and  then  man  is  surprised  that  they  flee  away.  Life  is  said  to  be  like 
the  grass,  and  then  man  is  staggered  that  it  is  cut  down.  Friends  turn  false  or  fickle, 
and  then  man  is  surprised  that  evil  hearts  act  in  evil  ways.  Nature  has  her  seasons, 
and  then  man  marvels  at  the  analogue  of  life  which  has  its  night  as  well  as  its  day. 
On  the  one  hand  man  scoffs  at  and  scorns  the  Bible,  and  on  the  other  refuses  to  see 
how  full  of  realism  and  truth  all  its  moral  revelations  are.  It  is  equally  true  on  its 
restful  side.  It  tells  us  that  amidst  all  we  have  a  Father  in  heaven,  whose  will  is  wise 
and  just,  whose  heart  is  kind  and  true  and  good.  It  assures  us  in  that  coming  of 
I8AUB — ^n.  2  9 


434  THE  BOOK  OP  THE  PROPHET   ISAIAH,    [oh.  Lxn.  1— li 

Christ,  to  which  all  the  ages  looked  forward,  that  God  "  remembers  us  in  our  low  estate, 
for  his  mercy  endureth  tor  ever,"  and  that,  though  often  mistaken,  we  shall  never  be 
twmed  Forsaken. 

I.  This  is  a  Divine  reply.  A  reply  to  what  ?  Why,  to  Zion's  utterance  in  ch. 
xlix.  14,  "  The  Lord  hath  forsaken  me."  Not,  mark  you,  that  there  have  been  no 
Divine  footprints  in  the  past,  no  Divine  provision  and  protection  in  Zion's  yesterday ; 
but  now  he  hath  forsaken  us.  Study  life,  especially  what  is  called  religious  life,  and 
you  will  find  that  this  is  always  the  foolish  cry  of  the  Church.  It  wUl  live  in  the  past. 
It  will  not  believe  that  there  are  prophets  and  righteous  men  to-day.  It  will  decorate 
the  sepulchres  of  the  fathers.  It  did  so  in  Isaiah's  time ;  it  does  so  now.  It  glorifies 
the  days  of  Wickliffe  and  Luther,  of  Whitefield  and  Wesley,  forgetful  that  God  is  the 
living  God,  and  his  voice  is  heard,  his  hand  outstretched,  his  purpose  working  now.  I 
know  nothing  in  which  the  human  mind  is  so  fatally  biased  as  in  this  backward, 
looking  and  longing,  whilst  he  is  still  nigh  us  in  our  breath  and  in  our  heart.  For- 
saken ?  No,  there  are  prophets  of  truth  still ;  heralds  of  mercy  still ;  national  seers 
still,  who  search  the  very  heart  of  nations.  Wherever  the  Spirit  of  Christ  is,  there  he 
is.  There  are  wars,  vices,  wrongs,  still ;  but  their  time  is  not  so  easy  as  it  was — not  so 
easy,  indeed,  as  in  some  past  ages  which  we  gl  irify.  The  Spirit  of  Christ  is  becoming 
more  and  more  the  test  ol  good  and  evil,  of  wisdom  and  unwisdom,  of  the  real  and  the 
false,  of  the  righteous  and  unrighteous.  There  is  a  light  shining  to-day  that  no 
breakers  can  put  out,  no  wild  storms  of  passion  extinguish.  "  The  Light  that  lighteth 
every  man  that  cometh  into  the  world  "  is  here.  Christ's  arm  is  not  shortened ;  more 
worn  and  weary  spirits  lean  on  it  than  ever.  Christ's  mercy  is  not  exhausted ;  his 
forgiveness  is  still  the  good  cheer  of  millions  of  hearts.  His  revelations  of  immortality 
have  not  faded  through  the  lapse  of  years.  He  alone  has  given  to  the  world  its  all- 
covering  sky.  We  feel  that  whilst  we  still  believe  in  him  and  cleave  to  him,  the 
prophetic  words  are  real  and  true,  "  Thou  shalt  no  more  be  termed  Forsaken." 

II.  A  Divine  harmony.  The  words  do  not  stand  alone.  They  are  not  merely 
a  beautiful  text,  or  an  isolated  flower,  or  a  separate  jewel.  We  have  to  take  the  moral 
strain  of  a  book  to  see  into  the  mind  and  meaning  of  the  plan.  We  do  not  interpret 
Mendelssohn  or  Mozart  by  separate  passages,  neither  should  we  so  treat  Isaiah.  He 
is  evidently  the  prophet  of  a  golden  age,  no  matter  whether  there  are  ten  hands 
visilile  in  the  work  or  one.  We  test  truth  by  its  voice,  not  by  its  mere  speaker.  All 
prophets  were  not  to  b«  listened  to  and  obeyed  simply  because  they  were,  prophets. 
"  I  have  seen  also  in  the  prophets  of  Jerusalem  an  horrible-  thing :  they  commit  adultery, 
and  walk  in  lies :  they  strengthen  also  the  hands  of  evil-doers.  .  .  .  Thus  saith  the 
Lord  of  hosts.  Hearken  not  unto  the  words  of  the  prophets  that  prophesy  unto  you : 
they  make  you  vain  ;  they  speak  a  vision  of  their  own  heart,  and  not  out  of  the  mouth 
of  the  Lord  "  (Jer.  xxiii.  14, 16) ;  and  again,  "  Let  not  your  prophets  deceive  you " 
(Jer.  xxix.  8) ;  and  again,  "  Mine  hand  shall  be  upon  the  prophets  that  see  vanity, 
and  that  divine  lies"  (Bzek.  xiii.  9);  "Thus  saith  the  Lord  God:  Woe  unto  the 
foolish  prophets.  .  .  .  O  Israel,  thy  prophets  are  like  foxes  "  (Ezek.  xiii.  3,  4).  Yes ; 
there  was  a  moral  test  then;  an  instinct  which  revealed  the  true  prophet,  as  it 
reveals  the  true  Saviour,  Our  Lord  rested  all  on  this :  "  If  ye  were  of  the  truth,  ye 
would  hear  my  voice ; "  "  My  sheep  hear  my  voice."  A  remarkable  instance  of  this 
moral  test  is  given  us  in  Ezek.  xiii.  22.  The  people  were  to  set  their  faces  against  the 
prophets.  Why  ?  "  Because  with  lies  ye  have  made  the  heart  of  the  righteous  sad, 
whom  I  have  not  made  sad ;  and  strengthened  the  hands  of  the  wicked,  that  he  should 
not  return  from  his  wicked  way,  by  promising  him  life,"  That  which  was  against 
righteousness  and  assisted  evil  was  not  to  be  believed.  Why  will  men  be  so  afraid 
of  this  test  ?  Why  do  they  seek  to  rest  authority  on  the  authors  and  writers  of  books, 
and  not  rest  it,  as  God  does,  and  ever  did,  and  only  could,  on  the  truth  itself?  It  was 
Isaiah's  way,  it  was  our  Lord's  way,  it  was  St.  Paul's  way.  "  Commending  ourselves  to 
every  man's  conscience  in  the  sight  of  God."  I  thus  come  to  my  word  "  harmony."  It 
\»  harmonious  with  all  within  us.  Isaiah  is  a  prophet  of  righteousness,  of  Divine 
forbearance,  of  Divine  forgiveness,  of  Divine  pity,  of  Divine  ministry,  of  Divine  sacrifice. 
If  asked — Is  this  a  God  to  be  trusted,  worshipped,  loved?  the  whole  inward  being 
•xolaims,  "  Amen,  and  amen." 

IIL  A  DiTiKE  consolation.    It  is  really  part  of  the  "comfort  y"  strain,  as  that 


OH.  Lxn.  1-.-12.]    THE  BOOK  OP  THE  PROPHET  ISAIAH.  486 

reaches  to  the  depths  of  our  being.  Not  forsaken.  The  same  Isaiah  is  here.  We  feel 
sin.  Israel  felt  it.  We  cannot  by  any  philosophy  of  heredity  escape  from  the  conscions- 
ness  of  personal  guilt.  Alone  the  flame  burns.  At  night  the  thorn  pierces  through  the 
pillow.  Are  we  left  to  bear  the  great  sorrow  unpitied  and  unaided  ?  Out  of  Zion  the 
Deliverer  shall  come.  "  Comfort  ye,  comfort  ye  my  people,  saith  your  God."  We  feel 
social  evils ;  we  are  hurt  by  unrighteousness,  galled  and  wounded  by  selfishness. 
Amid  all,  fierce  wars  seem  again  and  again  to  stir  the  mad  passions  of  humanity. 
What  thought  can  light  our  gloom,  can  give  strength  to  our  hopes?  Only  this — "A 
King  shall  reign  in  righteousness."  If  there  be  no  hope  for  the  supremacy  of  the 
Christ,  all  is  lost,  for  beside  him  there  is  no  Saviour.  But  are  there  not  signs  that 
a  better  spirit  is  abroad  ?  I  think  so.  Men  are  sighing  for  a  Prince  of  peace,  iind  with 
the  sigh  there  is  a  sob  too,  "  0  Lord,  how  long  ?  "  We  feel  our  own  solitude.  We 
seem  to  be  forsaken.  Change  comes.  Fortune  is  turned  to  misfortune,  health  to 
sickness.  But  there  are  restful  hours  in  all  Christian  hearts.  Say  what  men  will  of 
the  mysteries,  let  them  ponder  the  facts ;  there  is  a  touch  of  Christ,  there  is  a  tender 
sense  of  an  encircling  arm,  there  is  a  consciousness  of  the  good  Shepherd's  care  and 
love.  We  want  to  bring  home  the  music  of  this  promise  to  weary  hearts.  If  we  want 
to  exercise  more  influence  than  philosophers  and  moralists,  we  must  have  a  better 
message.  When  Ulysses  passed  by  the  island  of  the  syrens,  the  classic  story  tells  us 
that,  to  save  himself  from  their  snares,  he  bound  himself  with  mighty  thongs  to  the 
masts,  and  secured  his  sailors'  safety  by  filling  their  ears  with  wax,  that  they  might 
not  be  bewitched.  But  when  the  sweet  singer,  when  Orpheus,  voyaged  by  the  same 
syren  island,  he  hound  "himself  to  no  mast.  He  started  a  sweeter,  nobler  music  than 
the  syrens  could  ever  reach,  and  so  sailed  by  in  triumph.  If  we  are  to  win  men  and 
keep  men — men  who  have  been  charmed  with  the  syren  voices  of  the  world  all  the 
week — our  melody  must  be  one  that  comes  down  from  heaven ;  the  music  of  forgiveness 
and  mercy,  of  grace  and  help,  of  God's  love,  and  God's  care,  and  God's  everlasting 
throne.  We  are  in  him  that  is  true,  in  him  of  whom  all  prophecy  is  full,  who  was  the 
Spirit  of  it  all.  In  life  with  all  its  mysteries,  and  in  death  with  all  its  leave-takings. 
We  shall  never  be  termed  "  Forsaken." — W.  M.  S. 

Vers.  1 — 7. — From  night  to  noon.  The  passage  rather  implies  than  states  a  very 
sad  condition  in  which  Israel  is  found,  and  it  suggests  to  us,  as  a  starting-point — 

I.  DaEK    DATS   THROUGH   WHICH    A    CHRISTIAN    ChUECH    MAT   PASS.      The   evils  and 

miseries  which  may  then  be  endured  may  include,  as  with  Israel  at  the  time  of  this 
prophecy :  1.  Eeduced  numbers,  causing  weakness  and  humiliation,  perhaps  approaching 
extinction.  2.  Submission  to  some  kind  of  bondage ;  either  to  the  tyranny  of  some 
spiritual  delusion,  or  to  the  despotism  of  some  other  master  than  the  Lord  of  love  and 
righteousness.  3.  The  actual  withdrawal  of  Christ ;  a  condition  in  which  it  is  rightly 
called  "  the  Forsaken,"  for  "  he  does  not  many  mighty  works  because  of  unbelief."  He 
does  not  dwell  there,  but  passes  by ;  he  does  not  manifest  his  presence  and  his  power  in 
regenerating,  or  renewing,  or  sustaitring  grace.  4.  The  appearance  of  utter  forgetfulness 
on  the  part  of  its  Divine  Head.  There  is  such  an  absence  of  all  fruitfulness,  all  usefulness, 
all  moral  and  spiritual  beauty,  that  its  most  appropriate  name  is  "  The  Desolate  One." 

II.  The  rnxT  or  its  ministers  and  its  best  friends  in  these  dark  days  (vers.  1 — 6). 
1.  Pleading  with  God  for  his  people.  For  Zion's  sake  not  holding  peace,  for  Jerusalem's 
sake  not  resting,  but  continually  and  earnestly  interceding  with  God  that  he  will  pity, 
will  interpose,  will  restore.  2.  Pleading  with  his  people  in  God's  name.  The  function 
of  the  prophet  wa<  to  spealc/or  God,  and  especially  when  his  truth  was  forgotten  and 
his  will  neglected.  The  duty  and  privilege  of  the  minister  of  Christ  is  to  declare  with 
all  fearlessness  and  fidelity,  and  with  all  needful  reiteration,  the  truth  which  has  been 
forgotten,  the  commandment  which  is  being  disregarded.  This  duty  is  shared  by  any 
others,  particularly  by  any  other  officers,  to  whom  the  Spirit  of  God  may  reveal  his 
wUl. 

HI.  The  ruTUBB  which  it  is  in  the  power  and  in  the  heart  or  God  to  confer. 

1.  Deliverance  from  these  distressing  evils.  There  shall  be  "  salvation  "  (ver.  1).  The 
bonds  shall  be  broken,  the  delusions  dispelled,  the  assumption  of  power  removed,  the 
"evil  thing  in  the  midst"  which  prevented  the  indwelling  of  Christ  shall  be  cast  out. 

2.  Manifestation  of  the  Master's  favour.    Its  "  righteousness  "  in  his  sight  shall  "  go 


436  THE  BOOK  OP  THE  PROPHET  ISAIAH,    [oh.  lxil  1— la 

forth  as  brightness  ; "  there  shall  he  such  tokens  of  Divine  favour  that  all  who  dwell 
around  and  observe  shall  "see  its  righteousness"  asserted  and  behold  its  "glory" 
(ver.  2).  3.  The  possession  of  its  Lord's  regard.  Its  new  name,  "  Hephzi-bah,"  shall 
indicate  that  its  Lord  delights  in  it,  looks  upon  it  with  a  glad  approval,  holds  it  in  his 
right  hand  (Rev.  ii.  1)  as  a  man  holds  a  crown  or  diadem,  as  something  of  rare  value, 
of  great  price  in  his  esteem  (ver.  3).  4.  The  outpouring  of  its  Lord's  afifection.  Its  new 
name  is  also  to  be  "  Beulah ; "  for  it  is  to  be  dear  to  his  heart  as  is  the  bride  to  the 
bridegroom,  the  object  of  his  fervent  love.  We  may  be  so  conscious  of  our  short- 
comings and  of  our  departures  from  God's  will  that  we  may  fail  to  realize  the  fulness  of 
our  privilege.  But  it  is  our  sacred  duty  to  be  dissatisfied  with  ourselves,  as  portions 
of  the  Church  of  Christ,  until  we  are  such  as  be  can  regard  with  Divine  love  and 
affection,  such  as  he  can  prize  as  very  precious  crowns  or  diadems.  If  this  seems 
impossible  as  things  are,  it  behoves  us  to  humble  ourselves  before  him,  to  plead  with 
him  in  penitent  prayer,  to  rededicate  ourselves  to  his  service,  until  the  hour  comes 
when  not  only  will  the  darkness  have  given  way  to  dawn,  but  the  dawn  to  noontide 
brightness. — 0. 

Yers.  8,  9. — The  value  of  security,  etc.  The  principal  lesson  here  is  the  inestimable 
advantage  of  national  independence  and  consequent  individual  security.  But  other 
lessons  also  stand  out  from  the  passage,  viz. — 

I.  The  reality  or  national  responsibility.  It  is  very  clearly  implied  that  Israel 
had  suffered  grievously  in  the  past  as  a  nation,  because  of  God's  wrath.  She  had 
sinned  and  had  been  condemned,  and  she  had  paid  the  penalty  of  suffering  from  a  cruel 
and  rapacious  invasion ;  so  that  her  citizens  ate  not  of  the  corn  they  bad  sown,  and 
drank  not  of  the  wine  they  had  planted.  God  makes  nations  as  well  as  individuals  to 
pay  due  penalty  for  their  transgressions.    Hence  we  have — 

IT.  The  individual  obligation  which  this  fact  entails.  It  is  impossible  for  any 
man  to  sever  himself  from  the  community  of  which  he  is  a  member;  he  is  not  at 
liberty  to  leave  the  national  course,  to  be  decided  by  other  men,  while  he  gives  himself 
up  to  more  congenial  labours.  No  man  can  divest  himself  of  his  responsibilities  as  a 
citizen  of  his  country ;  every  man  is  bound  to  exert  his  influence  on  behalf  of  liberty, 
righteousness,  peace,  virtue,  godliness. 

III.  The  value  of  security.  If  it  be  uncertain  whether  men  will  reap  what  they 
sow,  if  it  is  probable  that  strangers  will  partake  of  the  fruit  of  men's  toil,  there  will  be 
a  constantly  and  powerfully  disturbing  force  at  work.  But  security  will  promote: 
1.  Order  and  good  government.  2.  Industry — occupation,  enterprise,  the  useful  arts. 
3.  Benevolence — the  origination  and  growth  of  philanthropic  institutions.  4.  Piety— 
the  erection  of  sacred  structures  and  the  establishment  of  religious  organizations. 

1.  Let  the  prosperity  which  is  the  fruit  of  security  be  consecrated  by  gratitude  and 
benevolence.  "  Eat  and  praise  the  Lord,"  bring  the  wine  "  into  the  courts  of  his  holiness." 
Beware  of  a  selfish  and  complacent  spirit  (see  Deut.  vi.  12),  and  cultivate  carefully  and 
devoutly  a  spirit  of  gratitude  toward  God  and  kindness  toward  man.  2.  Appreciate 
at  its  full  worth  and  give  God  thanks  for  the  national  security  which  is  enjoyed.  It  is 
not  one  of  the  smaller  mercies  we  have  received  at  his  hand  that  we  have  no  fear  of 
being  displaced  by  any  "  stranger,"  that  we  are  so  secure  of  the  fruits  of  our  toil  This 
sense  of  safety  and  stability  has  contributed  largely  to  the  resources  at  our  command, 
and  is  adding  incalculably  to  the  best  movements  and  measures  of  our  time.  3.  Rejoice 
in  and  bless  God  for  the  fact  that  even  though  we  may  not  reap  all  that  we  sow  here, 
there  is  a  future  in  which  the  workman  shall  be  amply  and  gloriously  rewarded 
(Ps.  cxxvi.  6  i  1  Cor.  xv.  68).— 0. 

Vers.  10—12. — Oo^s  summone  to  the  enslaved.  Taking  the  language  of  the  tenth 
verse  as  an  energetic  address  to  the  captive  people  of  God  to  "  go  through  "  the  gates 
of  Babylon,  and  make  their  way  with  all  diligence  to  Zton,  the  home  of  freedom  and 
sacred  joy,  we  have — 

I,  A  Divine  summons  to  the  enslaved.  To  the  individual  $oul,  that  has  been 
brought  into  some  spiritual  bondage,  jierhaps  under  the  tyranny  of  some  enslaving 
habit;  to  the  Christian  Church,  which  has  allowed  itself  to  become  subject  to  some 
outside  power  other  than  that  of  its  Divine  Lord ;  to  the  betrayed  and  vubjeatei  nafion, 


OH.  LXii.  1— 12.]    THE  BOOK  OP  THE  PEOPHET  ISAIAH.  437 

which  has  enjoyed  and  is  capable  of  an  independent  government, — comes  the  summons 
from  above ;  "  Call  forth  all  thy  powers,  leave  no  means  untried,  prepare  the  way,  make 
a  supreme  and  sacrificial  effort  to  break  the  bonds,  to  walk  in  the  way,  to  reach  the 
goal  of  a  true  and  lasting  liberty." 

II.  The  reward  of  obedience.  "  Hts  reward  is  with  him,"  etc.  The  first  recom- 
pense is  found  iu :  1.  A  blessed  sense  of  deliverance  frum  bondage.  The  man,  or  th« 
Church,  rejoices  greatly  that  he  is  one  of  the  "  redeemed  of  the  Lord."  The  fact  that 
God  has  struck  off  his  shackles  and  made  him  breathe  the  sweet  air  of  freedom,  the 
consciousness  that  iniquity  "  has  no  dominion  over  him,"  is  the  greatest  and  happiest 
of  all  facts  to  him.  Life  holds  no  heritage  which  is  equal  to  the  "  salvation  "  which 
has  come  to  his  heart,  to  his  life.  2.  A  restored  reputation.  He  did  belong  to  the 
unholy,  the  guilty,  perhaps  to  the  vicious  or  to  the  violent ;  now  he  is  one  of  "  tlie 
holy  people"  whom  all  men  honour.  This  conducts  to:  3.  Commauiun  and  friendship 
with  the  best  and  worthiest ;  with  the  Highest  himself,  and  with  the  wise  and  good 
among  men ;  he  is  among  those  who  are  "  sought  out,"  "  not  forsaken."  Other  rewards 
accompany  obedience,  not  here  stated  or  hiuted.  We  may  suggest:  4.  Capncity  for 
usefulness  to  others,  occupying  a  position  in  which  he  (or  it,  the  Church)  may  lead 
other  enslaved  ones  into  spiritual  freedom  (Ps.  li.  12,  13;  John  xxi.  15;  Acts  xxvi.  18; 
Jas.  V.  19,  20).    5.  A  good  hope  of  an  inheritance  where  perfect  freedom  dwells. — C. 

Ver.  1. — Godly  desires  for  the  Church.  The  Jews  were  remarkably  attached  to 
localities.  They  cherished  the  national  associations  with  such  places  as  Bethel,  the  Red 
Sea,  the  Jordan,  etc. ;  but  they  loved  most  intensely  Jerusalem  and  Mount  Zion.  To 
the  better  Jews  localities  were  only  shrines  of  spiiitual  truths.  Bethel  meant  "God 
near;"  the  Bed  Sea  meant  "God  redeeming;"  Jordan  meant  "God  faithful  to  hie 
word."  Those  Jews  saw  the  spiritual  through  the  local ;  we  are  expected  to  see  the 
spiritual  without  the  help  of  the  local. 

I.  The  fervent  desires  of  a  godlt  sonii.  To  see  Zion — the  type  of  Christ's 
Church — delivered  and  established  in  righteousness.  1.  Delivered  from  (1)  its  weak- 
nesses, in  motive,  aim,  and  work ;  (2)  its  hindrances,  in  body,  business,  and  relation- 
ships; (3)  its  prejudices,  both  individual  and  sectarian.  The  Church  in  the  world  is 
like  a  lamp  burning  dimly  in  impure  air.  2.  Established  in  righteousness.  (1)  The 
internal  character  of  a  Church  is  the  subject  of  greater  anxiety  than  its  outward  con- 
dition. The  King's  daughter  must  be  "  all  glorious  within."  (2)  The  internal  character 
of  a  church  is  only  preserved  as  it  has  a  capacity  for  growing.  The  figure  in  the  text 
is  of  a  "  brightness,"  not  a  mere  flash,  but  briglitness  brightening,  or  going  forth. 

II.  The  variety  of  motives  that  increase  the  desires.  1.  Our  consecration 
vow.  We  gave  ourselves  first  to  Clirist,  and  then  to  his  Church.  2.  The  emotions 
of  the  Christian  life.  These  inspire  us  to  "  pray  for  the  peace  of  Jerusalem."  3.  Love 
to  Christ.    This,  John  tells  us,  is  sure  to  find  expression  in  love  for  the  brethren. 

III.  The  one  supreme  motive  prominent  in  the  text.  The  real  welfare  of  the 
Church  itself.  "For  Zion's  sake."  We  ought  to  feel  the  utmost  anxiety  that  (1)  the 
joy  of  the  Church  should  be  increased;  (2)  the  beauty  and  Christ-likeness  of  the 
Church  should  be  perfected;  (3)  the  efficiency  and  power  of  the  Church  should  be 
enlarged.  Its  righteousness — which  is  its  true  strength — should  shine  more  and  more 
unto  the  perfect  day. 

IV.  The  man  who  has  good  desires  will  not  withhold  his  personal  efforts. 
"  I  will  not  hold  my  peace,"  etc.  The  real  greatness  of  prayer  is  only  known  to  th« 
man  who  works,  and  the  greatness  of  work  only  to  him  who  prays. — B.  T. 

Ver.  2. — The  Lord^s  new  name  for  his  people.  "  And  men  shall  call  thee  by  •  new 
name,  which  the  mouth  of  Jehovah  shall  appoint"  (compare,  for  the  promise  of  a 
new  name,  Bev.  ii.  17 ;  iii.  12).  Abram,  brought  into  covenant  with  God,  receives 
•  new  name — Abraham.  Jacob  finds  his  triumph  seal  his  acceptance  with  God,  and 
he  is  henceforth  known  by  a  new  name^IsraeL  What  the  name  is  to  be  Gtod  only 
knows,  but  it  will  recognize  the  fact  that  the  people  had  been  faithful,  and  were 
rewarded  for  their  faithfulness.  A  singular  sentiment  prevailed  among  the  Jews  in 
connection  with  this  new  naming.  The  possession  of  a  new  name  came  to  be  regarded 
among  the  pious  as  a  demonsti  atiou  that  ail  sins  committed  under  the  old  name  wera 


438  THK  BOOK  OP  THE  PROPHET  ISAIAH,    [oh.  Lxn.  1— Ift 

forgiven,  and  all  decrees  annulled  which  were  issued  against  the  sinner  while  possessed 
of  his  former  appellation.  Accordingly,  at  the  approach  of  death,  the  Jews  were  wont 
to  change  the  name  of  the  dying  person,  and  the  reason  of  this  custom  will  be  perceived 
from  the  following  prayer  offered  for  the  dying,  to  whom  the  new  name  has  been  given : 
"  0  Ood,  take  pity  on  A  (his  former  name),  and  restore  him  to  health,  and  let  him 
henceforth  be  called  B  (the  new  name);  and  let  him  be  glad  in  his  new  name,  and  let 
it  be  confirmed  to  him.  Be  pleased,  we  entreat  thee,,  0  God,  that  this  change  of  name 
may  abolish  all  the  hard  and  evil  decrees  against  him,  and  destroy  the  broad  sentence. 
If  death  be  decreed  upon  A  (the  former  name),  it  is  not  decreed  upon  B  (the  new 
name).  If  an  evil  decree  was  made  against  A,  lo !  this  hour  ho  is  another  man,  a  new 
creature,  and  like  a  child  born  to  a  good  life  and  length  of  days." 

I.  The  new  name  indicates  the  end  of  the  old  life.  Illustrate:  1.  By  the 
new  name  given  in  marriage,  which  closes  up  the  old  life  in  the  father's  home.  2.  By 
the  npw  name  given  to  those  restored  to  Jerusalem,  which  intimated  the  close  of  the 
time  of  captivity  in  Babylon.  3.  By  the  new  name  "  Christian,"  which  liiarks  the  end 
of  the  old  heathen  life,  or  pagan  life.  4.  By  the  new  heavenly  name  (as  in  Rev.  iL  17), 
which  tells  that  the  earth-conflict  has  ended  in  the  victory  of  holiness.  Apply  to  the 
Divine  recognition  of  our  final  triumph  over  the  old  Adam,  which  is  "corrupt  according 
to  the  deceitful  lusts." 

II.  The  new  name  beminds  men  of  the  gbaoe  of  which  thbt  abb  monuments. 
It  is  very  positively  stated  that  Grod  gives  the  name,  to  remind  men  of  what  he  has 
done  for  them.  The  name  "  redeemed  "  keeps  in  mind  the  "  Redeemer."  The  name 
"  Christian  "  sets  "  Christ "  ever  before  us.  It  is  not  our  name  for  ourselves ;  it  is  Ood^s 
name  for  us,  and  so  a  constant  reminder  of  what  Almighty  grace  has  done,  and  can  do. 

III.  The  new  name  indicates  the  spirit  op  the  new  life.  The  name  "holy 
city  "  calls  attention  to  the  fact  that  the  people  should  be  aU  holy,  as  those  who  are 
fully  consecrated  unto  God. — B.  T. 

Ver.  4. — The  Bunyan  figure  of  the  BeuJah-land.  Hephzi-bah  was  the  wife  of 
Hezekiah,  and  mother  of  Manasseh.  Very  uncertain  tradition  says  she  was  a  daughter 
of  the  Prophet  Isaiah.  The  name  means,  "  My  delight  is  in  her,"  and  Dr.  C.  Q«ikie 
says,  "  Her  name,  whether  given  at  her  marriage  or  earlier,  wakes  a  thought  of  old- 
world  tenderness  and  poetry.  Was  it  a  fond  reminiscence  of  one  he  had  loved  and 
respected,  when  Isaiah  tells  us  that  Jehovah  will  make  Zion,  after  her  long  desolation, 
once  more  his  Hephzi-bah  ?  "  The  word  "  Beulah  "  means  "  married,"  and  the  figure 
rests  upon  the  Eastern  notion  of  the  desolate  condition  of  a  maiden  or  a  widow,  and 
the  happy  satisfied  state  of  the  married  woman,  who  has  husband  and  home.  A 
"married"  land  is  one  watched  over,  tended,  cared  for,  and  loved.  Bunyan  uses  the 
name  to  represent  the  "  waiting  time  "  of  old  age,  or  of  frailty,  in  which  Grod's  people 
tarry  awhile  ere  they  pass  over  the  river.  If  somewhat  fanciful,  his  picture  is  both 
beautiful  and  suggestive.  "  Now  I  saw  in  my  dream,  that  by  this  time  the  pilgrims  were 
got  over  the  Enchanted  Ground,  and  entering  into  the  country  of  Beulah ;  .  .  .  whose 
air  was  very  sweet  and  pleasant ;  the  way  lying  directly  through  it,  they  solaced  them- 
selves there  for  a  season.  Tea,  here  they  heard  continually  the  singing  of  birds,  and 
saw  every  day  the  flowers  appear  in  the  earth,  and  heard  the  voice  of  the  turtle  in  the 
land.  In  this  country  the  sun  shineth  night  and  day :  wherefore  this  was  beyond 
the  Valley  of  the  Shadow  of  Death,  and  also  out  of  the  reach  of  Giant  Despair ;  neither 
could  they  from  this  place  so  much  as  see  Doubting  Castle.  Here  they  were  within 
light  of  the  city  they  were  going  to :  also  here  met  them  some  of  the  inhabitants 
thereof;  for  in  this  land  the  shining  ones  commonly  walked,  because  it  was  upon  the 
borders  of  heaven.  In  this  land  also  the  contract  between  the  Bride  and  the  Bride- 
groom was  renewed ;  yea,  here  '  as  the  bridegroom  rejoiceth  over  the  bride,  so  doth 
thy  God  rejoice  over  thee.'  Here  they  had  no  want  of  com  and  wine ;  for  in  this 
place  they  met  with  abundance  of  what  they  had  sought  for  in  all  their  pilgrimages." 
This  passage  is  taken  from  the  first  part  of  the  '  Pilgrim's  Progress,'  but  a  similar 
passage  at  the  close  of  the  second  part  should  be  examined.  The  following  diviuoni 
m^  serve  as  guides  in  the  spiritualizing  of  this  Beulah-figure. 

L  Beulah-IiANB  hepbesents  timbs  of  peace  aftee  conflict  with  on.     Suck 
times  come  in  various  parts  of  our  life,  and  are  times  of  refreshing. 


ott-LXn.  1^-12.]    THE  BOOK  OF  THE  PROPHET  ISAIAH.  489 

n.  BeULAH-LAND  REPEE8BNT8  TIMES  OF  COMFORT  AND  REST  AFTER  DiVINE  CHAS- 
TISEMENTS. God  is  very  tender  over  the  healing  ot  his  smitten  ones,  and  gives  seasons 
when  the  very  heavens  drop  balm. 

HI.    BeULAH-LAND   REPRESENTS   TIMES  OF    WAITINa   WHEN    EARTH's  TOIL   IS   ENDED. 

The  beautiful  time  of  holy  old  age,  full  of  sweet  memories  and  patient  trust. — B.  T. 

Vers.  6,  7. —  The  work  of  the  praying  men  amongst  us.  "Upon  thy  walls,  0 
Jerusalem,  I  have  set  watchers ;  all  day  and  all  night  they  are  never  silent :  ye  that 
are  Jehovah's  remembrancers,  take  ye  no  rest,  and  give  no  rest  to  him,  until  he  establish 
and  until  he  make  Jerusalem  a  renown  in  the  earth "  (Oheyne).  If  the  watchers 
are  men,  the  idea  is  that  during  all  the  years  of  Israel's  captivity,  her  watchmen, 
remembrancers,  or  praying  men,  are  to  keep  at  their  work  without  ceasing,  as  it  were, 
every  day  reminding  God  of  his  people  and  of  his  promise.  The  figure  of  the  verse 
is  taken  from  t*e  temple-service,  in  which  there  was  appointed  a  constant  watch  day 
and  night  by  the  Levites.  Ther  watches  in  the  East,  even  to  this  day,  are  performed 
by  a  loud  cry  from  time  to  time  by  the  watchmen,  both  to  mark  the  time  and  to 
siiow  that  they  are  constantly  attentive  to  their  duty.  Possibly  the  first  reference  of 
the  figure  is  to  angel-guards  appointed  by  Jehovah ;  but  we  may  reasonably  use  the 
figure  for  the  earth-messengers  of  Jehovah,  the  pious  praying  souls  who  are  his  inter- 
cessors among  his  people.    As  intercessors,  these  men — 

I.  Keep  God  reminded  of  his  people.  It  is  a  small  objection,  indicating  very 
superficial  thinking,  that  "  God  cannot  need  to  be  reminded  of  anything."  The  answer 
is  easy.  If  God  is  pleased  graciously  to  reveal  himself  in  certain  relations,  he  graciously 
condescends  to  accept  all  the  conditions  involved  in  those  relations.  Children  tell 
their  parents  what  the  parents  know,  and  both  children  and  parents  are  blessed  in  the 
telling.  The  prayers  preserved  for  us  in  the  Bible  are  full  of  things  which.  God  must 
fenow.  It  might  be  a  thought  full  of  help  and  cheer  to  us  all  that  while,  busied  with 
our  earth-cares,  we  may  be  forgetting  God,  our  pious  brothers  and  sisters,  our  praying 
men  and  women,  Zion's  watchmen,  are  keeping  God  reminded  of  us.  The  bells  that 
sound  for  morning  prayers  throughout  our  land  are  a  voice  that  God  hears  as  truly 
as  man.    Praying  men  keep  Zion's  walls  ever  before  her  King. 

n.  Keep  God's  people  ever  reminded  op  their  God.  Of  this  there  is 
abundant  necessity.  Both  prosperity  and  adversity  tend  to  make  us  forgetful  of  our 
God.  Even  the  steady  ongoing,  that  has  no  ups  and  downs,  makes  the  thought  of 
God  fade  in  our  minds.  So  we  need  the  witness  of  our  watchers,  our  praying  men, 
and  their  muezzin,  or  call  to  prayer.  Especially  bring  out  that  we  need  to  be  kept  in 
mind  of  the  Lord's  provisions  and  promises — ihe  assurance  of  our  full  and  final  redemp- 
tion. They  who  pray  amongst  us,  "Thy  kingdom  come,"  keep  us  constantly  reminded 
that  there  is  a  necesssLry  preparation  for  all  who  are  to  share  in  the  kingdom. — B.  T. 

Ver.  10.^ — Tlte  mission  of  those  who  remove  hindrances.  The  point  of  interest  here 
is  that,  so  far  as  Jehovah  was  concerned,  all  things  were  arranged  for  the  return 
of  the  exiles,  and  the  restoration  of  the  long-depressed  nation.  But  some  men  were 
hindering  the  return  by  their  hesitancies  and  douhtings  and  selfishnesses.  Therefore 
Jehovah  pleads  with  all  who  trust  his  Word,  urging  them  to  clear  the  way  of  the 
people,  and  get  these  hindrances  moved  out  of  their  path.  There  are  always  hinderers 
to  every  good  work,  and  there  is  always  the  Lord's  call  to  us  not  to  let  these  hinderers 
do  their  evil  work.  They  take  the  heart  out  of  all  good  schemes,  and  often  do  much 
worse  mischief  than  the  active  opponents,  because  they  are  a  foe  within  the  city,  and 
have  deceptive  ways  which  are  seldom  fully  recognized. 

I.  The  work  of  the  hindbrbr.  There  is  a  good  work  done  by  the  conservative- 
minded  among  us,  which  must  not  be  confounded  with  the  work  of  the  hinderer.  It 
is  good  to  have  a  drag  put  on  the  wheels  of  impulsiveness.  It  is  well  to  be  compelled 
patiently  to  consider  schemes  which  have  been  thoughtlessly  and  enthusiastically 
taken  up.  But  the  hinderer  is  not  the  man  of  prudence  and  caution,  but  the  man 
of  selfishness  and  doubt.  Some  men  cannot  see  good  in  anything,  even  though  to 
other  men  the  thing  may  be  rich  in  promise.  Others  delight  in  prophesying  failure, 
and  plucking  the  spirit  out  of  enterprise.  Others  see  that  proposed  schemes  will  make 
heavy  demands  on  self-denial,  and  as  they  are  not  prepared  for  this,  they  put  stones 


440  THE  BOOK  OP  THE  PEOPHET  ISAIAH,    [ch.  lxu.  1— 12 

in  the  way.  Ko  good  thing  was  ever  started  that  did  not  rouse  the  hinderers.  And 
DO  good  thing  was  ever  carried  through  that  did  not  overbear  and  carry  away,  or 
brush  aside,  tbe  hinderers. 

n.  The  wobk  of  those  who  bemove  hindbances.  They  are  either  energetic 
men,  who  will  not  be  repressed,  or  else  men  of  faith  in  God,  who  make  their  loyalty 
master  diflSculties.  Men  of  firmness  and  persistency  are  needed  in  every  sphere  of 
Christian  enterprise ;  and  it  is  all  the  better  if  they  have  some  pleasantness  and  even 
humour,  and  can  remove  hindrances  without  offending  hinderers.  Men  of  faith  are 
always  needed,  who,  clearly  seeing  what  God  would  have  done,  go  steadily  on  towards 
its  accomplishment,  refusing  to  turn  aside  either  to  the  right  baud  or  to  the  left.  If 
we  cannot,  or  will  not,  help  toward  the  on-coming  of  Christ's  kingdom,  at  least  we 
can  get  out  of  the  way  of  those  who  wiU  work. — B.  T. 

Ver.  XI.— The  nearness  of  the  Lord's  coming  used  as  a  persuasion.  The  immediate 
reference  here  is  to  the  Lord's  manifestation  in  the  providences  that  led  to  the  return 
of  the  exiles  to  Jerusalem.  The  Church  has  in  every  age  bad  some  great  hope  held 
out  before  it,  and  that  hope  could  always  be  conceived  of  as  a  coming  or  manifestation 
of  the  Lord.  Three  "  comings  "  are  commonly  recognized.  Our  Lord's  coming  in  the 
flesh,  as  the  Babe  of  Bethlehem,  and  the  "  Man  Christ  Jesus."  Our  Lord's  coming 
in  the  Spirit,  in  the  power  of  the  Holy  Ghost.  Our  Lord's  coming  in  some  manifesla- 
tion  of  himself  for  the  judgment  of  sinners  and  the  glorifying  of  bis  saints.  This 
is  tbe  special  persuasion  to  holiness,  activity,  and  spiritual  preparedness  which  now 
rests  on  Christ's  Church. 

L  This  belief  in  the  second  couiNa  has  alwats  been  held  bt  the  Church  ; 
and  the  fact  that  some  sections  have  held  distorted  and  extravagant  views  of  it  must 
not  be  allowed  to  deprive  us  all  of  the  inspiration  that  comes  Irom  so  sober,  yet  so 
great  and  so  glorious  a  hope.  The  belief  was  plainly  held  by  the  apostolic  Church, 
and  used  by  the  early  teachers  as  a  persuasion  to  watchfulness,  quietness  of  trust,  and 
godly  living.  Bulwer  Lytton  is  true  to  life  when  he  describes  Olynthus  and  a  party 
of  Christians  singing  amid  the  awful  desolations  of  Pompeii,  within  hearing  of  the 
multitude  that  was  rushing  hither  and  thither  for  precious  life — sin^ng  with  the  calm 
assurance  that  their  Lord  was  now  very  near — 

"  Woe  to  the  proud  ones  who  defy  him. 
Woe  to  the  wicked  who  deny  him. 
Woe  to  the  wicked,  woe  J" 

II.  Thb  doctrine  of  the  second  coming  has  always  had  its  place  in  thb 
Chuboh's  creed,  to.  the  Apostles'  Creed :  "  From  thence  he  shall  come  again  to 
judge'both  tbe  quick  and  the  dead."  In  the  Creed  of  St.  Athanasius:  "  From  whence 
he  sliall  come  to  judge  the  quick  and  the  dead,  at  whose  coming  all  men  shall  rise 
again  with  their  bodies,  and  shall  give  account  for  their  own  works." 

III.  The  doctbine  of  the  second  coming  is  taught  in  oub  hymns.  The  real 
faith  and  hope  of  the  Church  may  be  better  shown  by  its  favourite  hymns  even  than 
by  its  formal  creed.  In  every  collection  of  hymns  for  Christian  use  some  portion  is 
devoted  to  the  Lord's  second  advent,  and  not  a  few  of  these  hymns  have  become  very 
sacred  and  dear  to  Christian  hearts.     A  few  may  be  recalled  to  mind— 

"  Lo,  he  comes  with  clouds  descending." 

"When  thou,  my  righteous  Judge,  shalt  come." 

"  Great  God,  what  do  I  see  and  hear?" 

"  The  Lord  shall  come,  the  earth  shall  quake/* 

Or  that  magnificent  song  of  the  ancient  Church — 

"  Day  of  Wrath  I  that  awful  day, 
Bhiill  the  bannered  cross  display. 
Earth  in  ashes  melt  away." 

rV.  Dbvottt  SO0LS  UBE  this  hope  in  ubginq  the  claims  of  Chbist  on  Chbibtuii 
BI8CIPLK3.     For  instance,  J.  A.  James  says,  "  We  are  to  be  waiting  for  the  Son  of  God 


OH.  Lxm.  1—10.]    THE  BOOK  OP  THE  f aOPHET  ISATAff. 


441 


from  heaven,  and  to  be  looking  for  his  coming  as  our  blessed  hope,  above  all  other 
hopes.  This  waiting  for  Christ  was  in  an  eminent  degree  characteristic  of  the  primitive 
Christians;  it  is  frequently  mentioned  by  the  apostles,  and  seems  to  have  been  a 
prevailing  feeling  of  the  Churches.  All  earnest  Christians  now  have  the  same  spirit. 
The  bride,  the  Lamb's  wife,  is,  and  must  be,  supposed  to  be  ever  looking  for  the  return 
of  the  heavenly  Bridegroom.  The  want  of  this  habitual  looking  for  the  return  of  Christ 
indicates  a  low  state  of  piety,  a  prevalence  of  worldly-mindedness  among  professing 
Christians."  There  is  often  much  foolish  talk  about  the  "  lost  hope  of  the  Church ;  " 
and  it  is  strongly  asserted  that  the  Church  generally  is  no  longer  looking  for  the 
coming  of  Christ.  Nothing  could  be  further  from  the  truth.  All  that  is  true  in 
connection  with  such  statements  is,  that  the  great  majority  of  Christian  people  fail  to 
see  that  Scripture  teaches  the  Lord's  coming  in  any  prescribed  mode  and  time  and 
form.  The  Church  has  been  content  with  the  inspiration  and  persuasion  of  the  great 
fact  and  the  large  hope.  The  universal  Church  keeps  her  eyes  fixed  on  the  east, 
watching  for  the  first  signs  of  the  dawning  of  the  day  of  God;  but  the  Church  also 
accepts  her  Lord's  declaration,  that  it  is  not  for  her  "  to  know  the  times  and  the 
seasons."— E.  T. 


SxonoK  IX.    Thk  JtrDGMiiNT  OF  God  on  iDUMiSA  (cH.  Lxni.  1 — 6). 
EXPOSITION. 


CHAPTER  LXIIL 

Yen.  1 — 6. — A  Jvdomeht  on  Idumxa. 
Isaiah  had  already,  in  the  first  portion  of  his 
prophecy,  announced  "  a  great  slaughter  in 
the  land  of  Idumsea  "  as  resolved  on  in  the 
counsels  of  God  (oh.  xxxiv.  5 — 10).  He  now 
recurs  to  the  subject,  and  represents  Jehovah 
as  a  warrior  with  blood-stained  garments, 
fresh  from  the  field  of  battle  in  Edom,  where 
he  has  trodden  down  his  foes  and  taken  a 
fierce  vengeance  on  them.  The  Idumieans 
probably  represent  the  world-power;  and 
the  "day  of  vengeance"  may  be  one  still 
future,  in  which  the  enemies  of  God  will  feel 
the  weight  of  his  hand. 

The  description  stands  by  itself,  neither 
connected  with  what  goes  before  nor  with 
what  follows.  It  has  the  appearance  of  a 
separate  poem,  which  accident  has  placed 
in  its  present  position.  In  form  it  is  "a 
lyrioo-dramatio  dialogue  between  the  pro- 
phet as  a  bystander  and  a  victorious  warrior 
(t.e.  Jehovah)  returning  from  battle  in 
Idumtea  "  (Oheyne). 

Ver.  1. — Who  is  this  1  The  prophet  opens 
the  dialogue  with  an  inquiry,  "Who  is  it 
that  presents  himself  before  him  suddenly 
in  a  strange  guise  ?  "  He  comes  from  Edom, 
bom  Bozrah— a  principal  Edomite  city  (see 
the  comment  on  ch.  xxxiv.  6) — with  dyed 
garments;  or,  rather,  with  blood-red  gar- 
nente — garments  incarnadined  with  gore. 
"Who  is  this,"  again  he  asks,  "that  is 
glorious  (or,  tplendid)  in  his  apparel " — the 


blood-stained  vesture  of  the  conqueror  was 
a  gloiy  to  him  (Nah.  ii.  8;  Eev.  xix.  13) 
— "  as  he  travels  "  (or,  "  bends  forward  ")  in 
the  greatness  of  his  strength — exhibiting 
in  his  movements  a  miglity  indomitable 
strength  ?  Who  is  it  ?  The  reply  is  imme- 
diate— I  that  speak  in  righteousness,  mighty 
to  save ;  i.  e.  I,  whose  every  word  is  "  holy, 
just,  and  true,"  who  alone  am  able  to  "  save 
to  the  utteimost  all  that  come  to  me  "  (Heb. 
vii.  25).  The  answer  unmistakably  indicates 
that  the  figure  which  has  appeared  to  the 
prophet  is  that  of  Jehovah. 

Ver.  2. — Wherefore  art  thou  red  in  thine 
apparel?  The  prophet  resumes  his  ques- 
tioning. What  means  the  redness  of  thine 
apparel?  Whence  the  stains?  Are  they 
wine-stains  consequent  on  treading  the  wine- 
press ?  Among  the  Hebrews,  as  among  the 
Egyptians  (Wilkinson,  'Ancient  Egyptians,' 
vol.  i.  p.  46),  the  juice  of  the  grape  was 
trodden  out  by  the  feet  of  men,  who  often 
splashed  some  upon  their  garments  (Gen. 
xlix.  11). 

Ver.  3. — I  have  trodden  the  wine-press. 
The  warrior  replies.  He  accepts  the  sugges- 
tion of  the  prophet ;  but  raetaiihorioally,  not 
literally.  He  has  indeed  been  "  treading  a 
wine-press,"  but  it  is  the  wine-press  of  his 
fury,  in  which  he  has  trampled  down  his 
enemies;  and  the  stains  upon  his  raiment 
are,  consequently,  not  wine-stains,  but  stains 
of  blood  (comp.  Joel  iii.  13 ;  Lam.  i.  15; 
Bev.  xiv.  19, 20 ;  xix.  15).  Alone.  In  mine 
own  might,  with  none  to  aid  me.  The 
literal  wine-press  was  always  trodden  by  a 
band  of  men.  Of  the  people ;  rather,  of  th« 
peoples ;  i.e.  of  the  neighbouring  nations 
none  took  part  with  God  against  the  special 
enemies  of  his  people,  tlie  Idumnans.    All 


442 


THE   BOOK  OF   THE  PROPHET  ISAIAH,    [oh.  Lxm.  1— 19. 


more  or  less  sympatbized  with  bis  adver- 
laiies,  and  therefore  participated  in  their 
punishment  (see  ver.  6).  For  I  will  tread 
them  .  .  .  trample  them ;  rather,  so  I  trode 
them  .  .  .  trampled  them  (Lowth,  Bosen- 
muller,  Delitzsch,  Gheyne,  by  an  alteration 
of  the  vowel-points).  The  whole  is  a  pro- 
phecy of  the  future ;  but  the  dramatic  form 
of  the  nariatiTs  requires  that  the  verbs 
should  be  in  the  past.  As  "the  peoples" 
would  not  help  God,  but  took  the  side  of  his 
enemies,  they  too  were  placed  in  the  wine- 
press, and  crushed  under  his  feet.  Their 
blood;  literally,  their  juice.  Lowth  and  Kay 
translate,  "life-blood;"  Delitzsoh,  "life- 
sap  ; "  Mr.  Cheyne,  excellently,  "  life- 
stream."  Shall  be  spiinkled  .  .  ,  will  stain; 
rather,  was  sprinkled  .  .  ,  etained. 

Ver.  4. — ^For  the  day  of  vengeance  is  vb. 
my  heart.  Tran8late,/or  o  day  of  vengeance 
mat  in  my  heart  (comp.  ch.  xxxiv.  8 ;  Ixi.  2). 
"A  day "  is  time  enough  for  God  to  take 
vengeance,  to  kill,  and  to  destroy.  He 
hastens  over  work  that  is  necessary,  but 
uncongenial.  Bat  he  lengthens  out  the 
time  of  release  and  redemption  for  his  loved 
ones.  The  "  day  of  vengeance  "  ushers  in 
the  "  year  of  redemption."  Is  come ;  rather, 
wax  come.  The  Divine  speaker  goes  back 
to  the  time  preceding  the  actual  punishment 
of  the  nations. 


Ver.  5. — ^And  I  looked,  and  there  was  non« 
to  help  (comp.  ch.  v.  2,  "  He  looked  that  it 
should  bring  forth  grapeSj  and  it  brought 
forth  wild  grapes;"  also  oh.  xli.  28,  "I 
beheld,  and  there  was  no  man").  By 
an  anthropomorphism  God  is  represented 
as  looking  for  and  expecting  what  might 
reasonably  have  been  expected,  and  even 
as  surprised  when  he  does  not  find  it  (comp. 
ch.  lix.  16).  Out  of  all  the  many  nations  it 
was  reasonable  to  suppose  that  some  would 
have  chosen  the  better  part  and  have  been 
on  the  Lord's  side.  But  the  fact  was  other- 
wise (comp.  ver.  3).  Mine  own  arm  brought 
salvation  unto  me ;  or,  mine  own  arm  helped 
me  (comp.  ch.  lix.  16).  Nothing  more  is 
needed.  If  God  arises,  his  enemies  at  once 
"  are  scattered  "  (Ps.  Ixviii.  1).  "  His  own 
right  hand,  and  his  holy  arm,  get  him  the 
victory  "  (Ps.  xcviii.  1). 

Yer.  6. — I  will  tread  down  .  .  .  make 
drunk  .  i  .  bring  down;  rather,  I  trode 
down  .  .  .  made  drunk  .  .  .  broi^ht  down. 
See  the  comment  on  ver.  3.  The  destruction 
was  to  be  utter,  overwhelming,  absolnte-^- 
one  from  which  there  could  be  no  recovery 
(comp.  Bev.  xix.  11 — 21,  where  the  simile 
of  the  wine-press,  and  the  "  vestur*  dipped 
in  blood,"  seem  introduced  with  a  special 
reference  to  this  pasBage)^ 


Section  X.    An  Address  of  the  Exiles   to  God,  iNOLtroiNo  THAWKscuvnro, 
Confession  of  Sin,  and  Supplication  (ch.  Lxin.  7 — ^lxiv.). 


Vers.  7  — 14.  —  God  praised  fob  his 
Meboibs.  The  address  opens  with  pure  and 
aimple  thanksgiving  of  the  most  general 
kind,  God  being  praised  for  his  loving- 
kindness,  compassion,  and  sympathy  with 
his  people  (vers.  7 — 9).  An  historical  survey 
is  then  commenced,  and  Israel's  shortcom- 
ings contrasted  with  God's  mercies,  but  with 
a  predominantly  thankful  and  even  jubilant 
tone  (vers.  10 — 14). 

Ver.  7. — I  will  mention;  or,  celebrate. 
The  loving-kindnesses  ;  or,  mercies  (see  oh. 
Iv.  3 ;  and  comp.  Ps.  Ixxxix.  1). 

Ver.  8.— He  said.  Surely  they  are  my 
people.  Israel  was  first  recognized  as  "a 
people  "  in  Egypt,  when  the  cruel  Pharaoh, 
probably  Sethos  I.,  said,  "  The  people  of  the 
children  of  Israel  are  more  and  mightier 
than  we  "  (Exod.  i.  9).  Soon  afterwards  God 
aeknowledged  them  as  «  his  people  "  (Bxod. 
iii.  7).  The  exiles  probably  go  back  in  their 
thoughts  to  this  time.  Children  that  will 
not  lie ;  or,  deal  falsely,  as  the  same  word  is 
translated  in  Ps.  xliv.  17.  The  meaning  is, 
that  surely  they  will  be  faithful  to  God, 
and  not  fall  away  &om  him  into  idolatry  or 
trreligion. 


Ver.  9. — In  all  their  affljctioa  he  was 
afflicted.  The  "  afHiotion  "  of  Israel  began 
in  Egypt  (Gen.  xv.  13),  probably  not  long 
after  the  death  of  Joseph.  It  became  an 
intense  oppression,  when  the  king  "arose 
who  knew  not  Joseph  "  (Exod.  i.  8).  God's 
sympathy  with  Israel's  sufferings  at  this 
time  is  strongly  marked  in  the  narrative  of 
Exodus  (ch.  ii.  23, 24 ;  iii.  7, 17).  An  alter- 
native reading  of  the  Hebrew  text  gives  the 
sense,' "  In  all  their  afHiotion  he  was  not 
an  adversary ; "  i.e.  he  did  not  afflict 
them  for  their  hurt,  but  for  their  benefit. 
But  the  reading  followed  by  our  translators, 
and  most  moderns,  is  to  be  preferred.  The 
angel  of  his  presence  saved  them.  "The 
angel  of  his  presence  "  occurs  nowhere  but 
in  this  place.  It  is  probably  equivalent  to 
"  the  angel  of  God"  (Exod.  xiv.  19 ;  Judg. 
XV.  6;  Acts  xxvii.  23),  oi'  "the  angel  Qf  the 
Lord  "  (Gen.  xvi.  7 ;  Numb.  xxii.  23 ;  Judg. 
xiii.  3,  etc.),  and  designates  either  the  Semud 
Person  of  the  Trinity,  or  the  highest  of  the 
angelic  company,  who  seems  to  be  the  arch- 
angel Michael  (see  Pusey's  '  Daniel,'  pp. 
525,  526).  (For  the  angelic  interposition! 
which  "saved"  Israel,  see  Bxod.  xiv.  19; 
Judg.  vi.  11—23;  xiii.  3—21 ;  2  Kings  xix. 
35,  etc.)    In  his  love  asd  in  hii  pitf  ^ 


OH.  Lxra.  1— 19.]    THE  BOOK  OF  THE  PROPHET  ISAIAH. 


443 


redeemed  them.  The  "  redemption  "  of  this 
passage  is  probably  that  from  the  bondage 
of  Egypt  (Exod.  Ti.  6 ;  xt.  13 ;  Deut.  vii.  8, 
etB.),  which  belonged  to  "  the  days  of  old  " — 
not  the  spiritual  redamption  from  the  i)ond- 
age  of  sin,  which  was  reserved  for  the  time 
of  the  Messiah.  Having  "  redeemed  "  them, 
i.e.  delivered  them  out  of  the  hand  of  the 
Egyptians,  and  thereby,as  it  were,  purchased 
them  to  be  his  own,  he  bare  them — "  carried 
them  on  eagles'  wings  "  (Exod.  xix.  4),  and 
brought  them  safely  through  the  wildernes* 
to  Palestine  (comp.  Deut.  xxxiL  10 — 12). 

Ver.  10.— But  they  rebelled.  The  rebel- 
lions of  Israel  against  God  commenced  in 
the  wilderness.  Tliey  rebelled  at  Sinai,  when 
they  set  up  the  golden  calf;  at  Meribah 
(Numb.  XX.  24) ;  at  Shittim,  when  they  con- 
sorted with  the  daughters  of  Moab  (Numb. 
XXV.  6).  Under  the  Judges,  their  conduct 
was  one  long  rebellion  (Judg.  ii.  11 ;  iii.  7, 
12 ;  iv.  1 ;  vi.  1 ;  viii.  33 ;  x.  6 ;  xiii.  1). 
They  rebelled  in  Samuel's  time  by  aslcing  for 
a  king  (1  Sam.  viii.  5,  19,  20).  The  ten 
tribes  rebelled  under  Jeroboam,  and  set  up 
the  idolatry  of  the  calves  at  Dun  and  Bethel. 
Worse  idolatries  followed,  and  in  two  cen- 
turies and  a  half  had  reached  such  a  height, 
that  God  was  provoked  to  "remove  Israel 
out  of  his  sight "  (2  Kings  xvii.  23).  Judah 
remained,  but  "  rebelled  "  under  Manasseh, 
Jehoiakim,  Jehoiaohin,  and  Zedekiah, 
"transgressing  very  much  after  all  the 
abominations  of  the  heathen,  and  polluting 
the  very  house  of  the  Lord  at  Jerusalem  " 
(2  Chron.  xxxvi.  14).  These  rebellions 
against  God  vexed  his  Holy  Spirit — "pro- 
voked him,"  "grieved  him,"  "moved  the 
Holy  One  in  Israel "  (Ps.  bcxviii.  40,  41 ; 
ovL  43).  Therefore  he  was  turned  to  be 
their  enemy  (comp.  Jer.  xxx.  14 ;  Lam.  ii. 
4,  5).  Judah  had  "  filled  up  the  measure  of 
her  iniquities,"  had  gone  on  "until  tliere 
was  no  remedy  "  (2  Oliron.  xxxvi.  16).  God's 
indignation  was  therefore  poured  out  upon 
her  without  let  or  stint.  "  He  out  off  in  his 
fierce  anger  all  the  horn  of  Israel :  he  drew 
back  his  right  hand  from  before  the  enemy ; 
he  burned  against  Jacob  like  a  liaming  fire, 
which  devoureth  round  about.  He  bent  his 
bow  like  an  enemy  ;  he  stood  with  his  right 
hand  an  an  adversary,  and  slew  all  that  were 
pleasant  in  the  tabernacle  of  the  daughter 
of  Zion ;  he  poured  out  his  fury  like  fire. 
The  Lord  was  as  an  enemy  "  (Lam.  ii.  3 — 5). 
He  fought  against  them ;  rather,  he  himself 
fought  against  them.  God  himself,  though 
they  were  "  hia  people,"  yet  fought  against 
them  and  for  the  Chaldseans  in  that  final 
struggle.  He  "  gave  the  city  into  the  hand 
of  the  King  of  Babylon  "  (Jer.  xxxiv.  2). 

Ver.  11. — Then  he  remembered  the  days 
of  old.  It  is  questioned  who  remembered, 
CK>d  or  his  people.  Gesenius,  Hitzig,  Ewald, 


NUgelbaoh,  Delitzsoh,  Enobel,  and  Mr. 
Oheyne  are  in  favour  of  the  people ;  Bishop 
Lowth  and  Dr.  Kay  of  God.  The  reflec- 
tions which  follow  (vers.  11 — 13)  seem 
certainly  most  appropriate  to  the  people,  or 
to  the  prophet  speaking  in  their  name. 
Where  is  he  that  brought  them  up  out  of 
the  sea  ?  »'.«.  "  the  Bed  Sea  "  (comp.  oh.  Ii. 
10).  What  has  become  of  the  protecting 
God  who  then  delivered  them?  With  the 
shepherd  of  his  flock ;  or,  shepherds,  accord- 
ing to  another  reading.  The  "shepherd" 
might  bo  either  Moses,  or  "the  angel  of  his 
face"  (ver.  9).  The  "  shepherds  "—if  that 
reading  be  preferred — must  be  Moses,  Aaron, 
and  perhaps  Miriam  (Micah  vi.  4).  Where 
he  that  put  his  Holy  Spirit  within  himt 
The  "  him "  of  this  passage  undoubtedly 
refers  to"the  people"  (KoseiimiiUer,Knobel, 
Delitzsch,  Kay,  Clieyne).  God  gave  to  the 
people  in  the  wilderness  "his  good  Spirit 
to  instruct  them  "  (Neh.  ix.  20),  and  guide 
them  (Hag.  ii.  4,  5),  and  govern  theot 
(Numb.  xi.  17). 

Ver.  12. — That  led  them  by  the  right  hand 
of  Koses  with  his  glorious  arm ;  rather,  thai 
caused  his  glorious  arm  to  attend  at  Mosef 
right  hand  —  ready  (as  Dr.  Weir  says)  to 
grasp  him  if  he  should  stumble.  Dividing 
the  water  before  them;  literally,  cleaving 
the  waters  before  their  face  (comp.  Exod.  xiv. 
21).  To  make  himself  an  everlasting  name 
(see  Exod.  xv.  11—16).  It  was  one  of  the 
main  purposes  of  the  entire  series  of  miracles 
wrought  in  Egypt,  "  that  God's  Name  might 
be  declared  throughout  all  the  earth  "  (Exod. 
ix.16). 

Ver.  14. — Aa  a  beast  goeth  down  into  the 
valley.  Bishop  Lowth's  version  seems  the 
best, "  As  the  herd  descendeth  to  the  valley." 
Israel's  passage  through  the  Sinaitic  penin- 
sula into  Canaan  is  compared  to  tlie  move- 
ment of  a  herd  of  cattle  from  its  summer 
pastures  in  the  mountains  to  the  valley  at 
their  base,  where  for  a  time  it  rests.  So 
God  gave  his  people,  after  their  many  trials, 
"rest"  in  Canaan  (Heb.  iii.  11— IS).  So 
didst  thou  lead  thy  people.  "  So  "  refers,  not 
to  the  last  simile  only,  but  to  the  entire 
description  contained  in  vers.  11 — 14.  To 
make  thyself  a  glorious  name  (comp.  ver, 
12,  and  see  also  Ezek.  xxzvL  21 — 23;  Mid. 
i.  11). 

Vers.  15 — 19. — A  Pbateb  fob  Delitkb. 

ANC!B     F80M     SiN     AND    SUFFKEINO.        From 

thanksgiving  and  confession,  the  people 
betake  themselves  to  prayer,  and  beseeeh 
God  to  look  down  from  heaven  once  more, 
to  have  compassion  on  them,  to  acknowledge 
them,  and  to  save  them  alike  from  themselves 
(ver.  17)  and  from  their  adversaries  (ven. 
18,   19).    "It  is  difBcoU   to  overrate  tin 


444 


THa   BOOK  OF  THE   PEOPHBT  ISAIAH,    [oh.  txm.  1— 19. 


spiritual  beauty  of  the  prayer  contained  in 
this  paseage.  We  may  admit  tliat  the  most 
prominent  motive  urged  by  the  speaker  has 
a  nationalistic  air;  but  behind  this,  and 
strengthening  it,  is  a  sense  of  the  infinite- 
ness  of  the  Divine  mercy,  and  of  the  strong 
vitality  of  the  union  between  Jehovah  and 
his  people  "  (Cheyne). 

V«r.  15. — Look  down  from  heaven  (comp. 
Dent.  xxvi.  15;  Ps.  Ixxx.  14;'  2  Kings  viii. 
30).  " The  Lord's  seat "  was  "in  heaven." 
While  the  temple  lay  in  ruins,  the  Jews 
would  naturally  address  their  prayers  to  God 
in  his  heavenly  abode.  From  the  habitation 
of  thy  holiness.  Mr.  Cheyne  translates,  from 
the  height  u[  thy  holiness,"  taking  the  mean- 
ing of  the  rare  word  x'bul  from  the  Assyrian. 
"  Height "  certainly  suits  well  most  of  the 
other  places  where  the  word  z'bul  occurs 
(1  Kings  viii.  13 ;  2  Ohron.  vi.  2 ;  Ps.  xlix. 
14;  Hab.  iii  11).  Where  is  thy  zealT  i.e. 
What  has  become  of  it  ?  Has  it  ceased  alto- 
gether, or  is  it  only  in  abeyance  for  a  time  7 
Will  not  God  "  stir  it  up  "  once  more  (ch, 
xliL  13)  ?  And  thy  strength ;  rather,  and  thy 
great  CKti  (oomp.  Ps.  cvi.  2 ;  ozlv.  4 ;  cl.  2). 
The  sounding  of  thy  bowels ;  i.e.  their  thrill- 
ing or  vibration — an  indication  of  sympathy 
(see  oh.  zvi.  11).  Jeremiah  has  a  similar 
expression  (Jer.  zxxi.  20).  Are  they  re- 
strained ?  ratlier,  they  are  restrained.  They 
no  longer  show  themselves.  There  was  no 
room  for  questioning  the  fact. 

Ver.  16. — Doubtless  thou  art  our  Father; 
rather,  for  tJtou  art  our  Father.  This  is  tlie 
ground  of  their  appeal  to  God.  As  their 
Father,  he  must  love  them,  and  must  be 
ready  to  listen  to  them.  Abraham  and 
Iiaao,  their  earthly  fathers,  were  of  no 
service,  lent  them  no  aid,  seemed  to  have 
ceased  to  feel  any  interest  in  them.  It 
cannot  be  justly  argued  from  this  that  the 
Jews  looked  to  Abraham  and  Isaac  as  actual 
"  patron  saints,"  or  directed  towards  them 
their  religious  regards.  Had  this  been  so, 
there  would  have  been  abundant  evidence 
of.  it.  Ihon,  0  Lord,  art  our  father  (comp. 
ch.  Ixiv.  8 ;  and  see  also  Deut.  xxxii.  6,  and 
Jer.  Iii.  4).  Though  the  relationship  was 
revealed  under  the  old  covenant,  it  was 
practically  realized  only  upon  the  rarest 
occasions.  Our  Bedeemer ;  thj  name,  etc ; 
rather,  our  Bedeemer  ha$  been  thy  name  from 
of  old.  "  Bedeemer  "  first  appears  as  a  name 
of  God  in  Job  (ch.  xix.  25)  and  in  the 
Psalms  (Ps.  xix.  14;  Ixxviii.  35).    It  is  ftn 


epilheton  uiitatum  only  in  the  later  portion 
of  Isaiah.    There  it  occurs  tliirteen  times. 

Ver.  17. — ^Why  hast  thon  made  ns  to  ert 
from  thy  ways  ?  Confession  is  here  mingled 
with  a  kind  of  reproach.  They  have  erred 
and  strayed  from  God's  ways,  they  allow ; 
but  why  has  he  permitted  it?  Why  has  he, 
the  shepherd  of  his  flock  (di.  xl.  11;  xlix. 
10),  not  restrained  his  wandering  sheep,  and 
kept  them  in  his  "  ways  "  or  "  paths  "  ?  The 
reproach  borders  on  irreverence,  but  is  kept 
within  the  limits  of  piety  by  the  affection 
and  trust  that  underlie  it.  They  are  like 
wayward  children  reproaching  a  tender 
mother,  not  quite  believing  in  the  justice  of 
their  reproaches,  but  with  a  very  confident 
faith  in  her  love  and  in  her  power  to  aid. 
They  entertain  no  doubt  but  that  God  will 
"return"  to  them,  and  acknowledge  them 
as  his  sheep,  and  resume  their  guidance 
and  direction.  And  hardened  our  heart 
(comp.  Exod.  iv.  21;  vii.  3;  ix.  12;  x.  I), 
"  When  men  have  scornfully  and  obstinately 
rejected  the  grace  of  God,  God  withdraws  it 
from  them  judicially,  gives  them  up  to  their 
wanderings,  and  makes  their  hearts  inca- 
pable of  faith  "  (Delitzsch).  If  the  process 
has  not  gone  very  far,  God  may  relent,  and 
"  return,"  and  soften  the  proud  heart,  and 
renew  in  it  -'  his  fear."  This  is  what  Israel 
now  eutreats  him  to  do.  For  thy  serrants' 
sake.  There  was  always  "  a  remnant "  in 
the  worst  times,  which  had  not  "  bowed  the 
knee  to  Baal."  This  viae  God's  true  "  in- 
heritance," which  he  might  be  expected  to 
protect  and  aid. 

Ver.  18.— The  people  of  thy  holiness;  or, 
thy  holy  people  (comp.  ch.  IxiL  9 ;  Ixiii.  15 ; 
Ixiv.  1 1).  Some  critics  read  har,  "mountain," 
instead  of  'am,  "people,"  and  translate, 
"  But  for  a  little  while  have  they  "  ($.e.  thy 
servants)  "  had  possession  of  thy  holy  moun- 
tain." The  general  meaning  is  the  same  in 
either  case.  "  Israel,  God's  people,  has  held 
Palestine  but  for  a  little  while" — a  few 
centuries — and  now  the  heathen  have  been 
allowed  to  make  themselves  masters  of  it, 
(comp.  Ezra  x.  8). 

Ver.  19,— We  are  thine.  There  is  no 
"  thine  "  in  the  original,  and  so  important 
a  word  cannot  possibly  be  supplied  from 
without  Translate,  We  are  as  those  over 
whom  thou  hast  not  ruled  from  of  old,  as 
(^88  upon  whom  thy  Name  has  not  been 
called ;  i.e.  we  have  lost  all  our  privileges 
— we  have  become  in  God's  sight  no  better 
than  the  heathen — he  has  forgotten  that  w* 
were  ever  his  people. 


H0MILETI08. 

T«8. 1 — 6. — The  Idrnnman*  a  type  of  Ood^s  enemiei.    There  was  a  time  wlien  Kiau 
•ought  to  ilay  hla  brother  Jasob  (Gen.  xxviL  41) ;  and  the  same  spirit  of  violence  and 


OH.  LXiii.  1— 19,]    THE   BOOK   OF   THE    PROPHET   ISAIAH.  445 

hatred  possessed  the  Edoraite  nation  duriiig  its  entire  career.  Edum  strove  to  debar 
Israel  from  entrance  into  the  Holj'  Land  by  refusing  to  give  them  a  passage  through  her 
borders  (Numb.  xx.  14 — ^21).  She  was  always  ready  to  join  Israel's  enemies,  and  sought 
perpetually  to  take  Israel  at  a  disadvantage  (2  Kings  xvi.  6;  2  Chron.  xx.  10,  22 ; 
xxviiL  17 ;  Ezek.  xxv.  12 ;  xxxv.  5 ;  Amos  i.  11 ;  Obad.  10,  etc.).  When  the  Baby- 
lonian conquest  came  she  rejoiced,  and  made  a  mock  of  Israel's  distress  (Ps.  oxxxvii.  7), 
She  was  still  hostile  in  the  time  of  the  Maccabees,  and  supported  the  Syrian  monarchs 
in  their  endeavours  to  crush  Jewish  independence  (1  Maco.  v.  3 ;  vi.  31 ;  2  Mace.  v.  15). 
Herod  the  Great,  who  sought  to  put  our  Lord  to  death  in  his  infancy,  was  an  Idumsean ; 
and  so,  on  the  father's  side,  was  Herod  Antipas,  who  mocked  him  and  set  him  at  nought. 
The  Idumasans  are  well  selected  to  represent  Grod's  enemies  generally — 

L  On  account  of  teeib  peidb.  Pride  was  the  sin  by  which  Satan  and  his  evil 
angels  lost  heaven ;  and  no  sin  is  more  hateful  to  God  or  more  characteristic  of  his 
enemies.  Of  the  Idum»ans  it  is  said,  "  The  pride  of  thine  heart  hath  deceived  thee, 
thou  that  dwellest  in  the  clefts  of  the  rocks  .  .  .  that  saith  in  his  heart.  Who  shall 
bring  me  down  to  the  ground  ?  "  (Obat'..  3)  ;  and  again, "  Thy  terribleness  hath  deceived 
thee,  and  the  pride  of  thy  heart "  (Jer.  xlix.  16).  "  Pride  was  the  root  of  Edom's  sin," 
says  a  recent  commentator  on  Obadiah — pride  of  an  unnatural  kind,  since  God  haid 
assigned  to  Edom  a  low  estate.  Now  "  a  low  estate,  acquiesced  in  by  the  grace  of  God, 
is  the  parent  of  lowliness ;  when  rebelled  against,  it  generates  a  greater  intensity  of  pride 
than  greatness,  because  that  pride  is  against  nature  itself  and  God's  appointment.  The 
pride  pf  human  greatness,  sinful  as  it  is,  is  allied  to  a  natural  nobility  of  character. .  .  . 
The  conceit  of  littlenass  has  the  hideousness  of  those  monstrous  combinations,  the  more 
hideous  because  unnatural,  not  a  corruption  only,  but  a  distortion  of  nature"  (Fusey, 
'Minor  Prophets,'  j^.  234,  235). 

IL  0»  ACCOUNT  OF  TiiBiB  UNNATUBAL  HATBED.  All  hatred  of  One  race  towards 
another  is  hated  by  God,  but  the  hatred  of  a  kindred  race  is  especially  displeasing  to 
iiim.  It  was  one  of  the  special  reproaches  against  Ephraim  that  he  vexed  a  brother, 
Jttdah.  Now,  Esau  and  Israel  were  not  only  brothers,  but  twin  brothers.  They  ought 
to  have  been  drawn  closely  together  by  this  relationship,  and  to  have  supported  each 
ether  against  the  alien  races  of  the  neighbourhood.  But  the  tie  of  blood  was  not  felt. 
Edom  had  "a  perpetual  hatred  of  Israel"  (Ezek.  xxxv.  5).  They  would  gladly  have 
conquered  their  brethren,  and  held  them  in  subjection  (Ezek.  xxxv.  10) ;  but  as  this  could 
not  be,  they  rejoiced  in  their  brethren's  destruction  (Obad.  12)  and  gazed  delightedly  on 
their  sufferings  (Obad.  13).  "Unrelenting,  deadly  hatred  against  the  whole  people  of 
Israel,  and  a  longing  for  their  extermination,  were  inveterate  characteristics  of  Esau  " 
(Pusey, '  Minor  Prophets,'  p.  241). 

III.  On    ACCOUNT    OF    THE    ENVT   IN    WHICH    THETR    HATE   WAS    ROOTED.        Ezcklel, 

declaring  God's  intention  to  punish  Edom,  says,  "  As  I  live,  sailh  the  Lord  God,  I  will 
even  do  according  to  thine  anger,  ami  according  to  thy  envy  which  thou  hast  used  out 
of  thy  hatred  against  them  "  (xxxv.  11).  The  ground  of  all  Edom's  hatred  of  Israel 
was  that  jealousy  and  envy  roused  by  the  Divine  preference  which  put  the  younger  before 
the  elder,  and  gave  to  Israel  superior,  to  Esau  inferior,  blessings.  Edom  had  much  for 
which  to  be  thankful — a  good  pasture  country,  a  secure  capital,  commercial  advantages, 
wisdom  of  a  certain  kind  (Jer.  xlix.  7) ;  but  these  things  did  not  satisfy  her.  They 
were  all  rendered  vain,  and  of  no  account,  by  the  fact  that  Israel  enjoyed  more  numerous 
and  greater  blessings.  She  could  not  forgive  this  superiority ;  and  hence  her  hatred 
and  rancour.  Hence  the  joy  with  'rhich  she  witnessed  the  walls  breached,  and  Jeru- 
salem taken  by  the  Babylonians ;  hence  the  loud  ciies  to  which  she  gave  utterance, 
of  "  Down  with  it,  down  with  it.  [or,  '  raze  it,  raze  it '],  even  to  the  ground "  (Ps, 
oxxxvii.  7). 

IV.  On   account  of   the   violence   and   cruel   outrages   to   which   THE   HATRED 

LKD.  Edom  "shed  the  blood  of  the  children  of  Israel  by  the  force  of  the  sword  in  the 
time  of  their  calamity  *  (Ezek.  xxxv.  5).  When  the  Babylonians  were  besiegiiig  Jeru- 
salem, they  "  stood  in  the  crossway,  to  cut  off  those  that  did  escape  "  (Obad.  14),  shutting 
them  up  with  the  enemy,  driving  them  back  on  their  pursuers.  Not  Cyrily  did  they 
rejoice  in  Judah's  destruction,  and  speak  proudly  in  the  day  of  her  distrt-is  (Obad.  12),  buL 
they  flew  upon  the  spoil,  entering  into  the  gates  with  the  conquerors  and  laying  hands 
upon  the  substance  of  the  conquered  (Obad.  13).   Such  fugitives  as  escaped  and  settled 


446  THE  BOOK  OP  THE  PBOPHET   ISAIAH,    [oh.  uuii.  1— 19. 

among  them  they  slew  (Joel  iii.  19).  Such  captives  as  they  could  induce  the  Philistines 
or  the  Phoenicians  to  sell  to  them  they  also  put  to  death  (Amos  i.  6, 9, 11).  It  was  their 
earnest  desire  that  Israel  should  be  no  more  a,  nation,  and  they  therefore  made  every 
effort  to  exterminate  it.  Next  to  ezterminatim,  they  desired  complete  subjugation. 
Hence  the  support  which  they  lent  to  the  Syrians  against  the  heroic  Maccabee  princes. 
Idumasa's  fate  should  be  a  warning  to  the  enemies  of  God.  Her  reward  returned  npoo 
her  own  head.  As  she  had  done,  so  was  it  done  to  her  (Obad.  15).  By  the  time  of 
Malachi,  Edom's  mountains  and  heritage  had  been  "  laid  waste  for  the  jackals  of  the 
wilderness  "  (MaU  L  3).  She  was  "  impoverished ; "  her  cities  were  thrown  down ;  she 
strove  to  rebuild  them,  but  was  unable  (Mai.  i.  4).  A  century  later  her  territory,  or  great 
part  of  it,  was  occupied  by  the  Nabath«ans,  who  made  Petra  their  capital  (Diod.  Sic, 
xix.  94—98).  After  suffering  Tarious  defeats  at  the  hands  of  the  earlier  Maccabee 
princes,  the  Edomites  were  finally  conquered,  and  incorporated  into  the  Jewish  nation 
by  J'ohn  Hyrcanus.  The  last  that  we  hear  of  them  is  in  the  Boman  war,  when  a  body 
of  twenty  thousand,  admitted  into  Jerusalem  by  John  of  Giscala,  filled  the  city  with 
bloodshed,  and  ending  by  pillagiug  it.  Thenceforth  they  disappear  from  history.  The 
greater  part  perished  in  the  terrible  siege  conducted  by  Titus.  The  remainder,  con- 
founded with  the  Jews,  were  sold  into  slavery.  Idumsea  became  "a  geographical 
expression." 

Ver.  9. — Ood  afflicted  in  the  afflictions  of  Ms  people.  It  is  questioned  by  some  whether 
God  can  really  feel  pain.  Doubtless,  the  inner  essence  of  the  Divine  nature  is  so  far 
removed  from  us,  and  so  inscrutable  by  us,  that  answers  must  be  given  with  extreme 
hesitation  to  any  questions  which  touch  that  inner  essence.  And  in  using  words  of 
God,  which  derive  their  whole  meaning  from  our  consciousness  of  feelings  which  we 
experience  in  ourselves,  we  must  beware  of  supposing  that  the  terms  which  we  employ 
•re  used  univocally  of  God  and  of  men.  They  are,  at  best,  used  analogously.  Still, 
as  Delitzsch  says,  "the  question  whether  God  can  feel  pain  seems  to  be  answered  by  the 
Scriptures  in  the  affirmative,"  Pity,  and  compassion,  and  indignation,  and  anger  are 
ascribed  to  God  in  Scripture,  and  all  of  them  are  pains.  God's  "  soul "  is  said  to  have 
been  "grieved  for  the  misery  of  Israel "  (Judg.  i.  16).  There  is  nothing  derogatory  to 
the  Divine  greatness  in  the  mere  fact  of  Qoi  feeling  pain ;  and  certainly  the  fact  is  of 
a  nature  to  raise  our  conception  of  the  Divine  goodness.  Oroi  seems  to  be  afflicted  in 
the  afflictions  of  his  people— 

L  Wbbn  thet  suffeb  at  the  hands  or  wioebd  hen.  It  was  the  cruel  oppres- 
sion of  the  Israelites  in  Egypt  which  first  called  forth  the  compassion  and  sympathy  of 
God  for  his  people,  and  caused  him  to  draw  near  to  them,  and  to  enter  iuto  a  closer 
relationship.  "The  children  of  Israel  sighed  by  reason  of  the  bondage,  and  they  cried, 
and  their  cry  came  up  unto  God  by  reason  of  the  bondage ;  and  God  heard  their  groan- 
ing "  (Exod.  ii.  23,  24).  "  And  the  Lord  said,  I  have  surely  seen  the  affliction  of  my 
people  .  .  .  and  have  heard  their  cry  by  reason  of  their  taskmasters ;  for  I  know  their 
sorrows "  (Exod.  iii.  7).  It  was,  again,  the  "  sore  distress  "  which  Israel  suffered  at  the 
hands  of  the  children  of  Ammon  that  caused  "  the  Lord's  soul  to  be  grieved"  in  the 
days  of  the  Judges,  and  induced  him  to  raise  up  Jephthah  as  a  deliverer  (Judg.  x.  9, 16; 
xi.  1).  The  oppression  of  Babylon  wrought  similarly,  and  by  stirring  God's  indignation 
and  compassion  induced  him  to  save  his  people  and  execute  judgment  upon  Babylon 
by  means  of  Cyrus  (ch.  xlii.  22 — 25,  etc.). 

II.  When  thet  suffeb  at  the  hands  of  God  hiuself.  Ck>d  "  has  no  pleasure 
in  the  death  of  him  that  dietb."  When  he  is  forced  to  punish,  it  is  with  reluctance 
and  regret  that  he  punishes.  Witness  his  long  pleadings  with  his  people  before  he 
consents  to  let  judgment  go  forth  against  them,  his  long  forbearance,  his  long  endurance 
of  their  perversity.  "  AU  the  chief  of  the  priests,  and  the  people,  transgressed  very 
much  after  all  the  abominations  of  the  heathen ;  and  polluted  the  house  of  the  Lord 
which  he  had  hallowed  at  Jerusalem.  And  the  Lord  God  of  their  fathers  sent  to  them 
by  his  messengers,  rising  up  betimes,  and  sending ;  because  he  had  compassion  on  his 
people,  and  on  his  dwelling-place ;  but  they  mucked  the  messengers  of  Otod,  and  despised 
his  words,  and  misused  his  prophets,  until  the  wrath  of  the  Lord  arose  against  his 
people,  until  there  was  no  remedy  "  (2  Chron.  xxivi.  14 — 16).  As  the  "  fathers  of  our 
flesh,  which  correct  us  "  (Heb,  xii.  9),  grieve  to  do  so,  suffering  often  more  than  those 


OH.  ixm.  1—19.]    THE  BOOK  OP  THE  PROPHET  ISAIAH.  447 

they  chasten  suffer,  so  the  heaveDly  Father  is  himself  afSicted  as  he  a£9ict8;   hU 
"  heart  is  turned  within  him,  his  repentings  are  kindled  together  "  (Hos.  xL  8). 

Vers.  15 — 19. — The  right  of  God's  people  to  address  him  with  complaint  and  expostu- 
lation. No  doubt  the  ordinary  attitude  of  God's  people  towards  their  Maker  and  Ruler 
should  be  one  of  the  most  profound  resignation  and  submission  to  his  will.  "  Shall  not 
the  Judge  of  all  the  earth  do  right  ?  "  (Gen.  xviii.  25).  Yet  on  occasions  it  is  allowed 
them  to  "  speak  with  him  as  a  man  speaketh  with  his  friend  "  (Bxod.  xxxiii.  11),  to 
plead,  expostulate,  complain ;  even,  in  a  certain  sense,  to  reproach.  Job  pleaded  with 
God  at  great  length,  and  God  was  not  angered,'  but  "  accepted"  him  (Job  xlii.  9),  and 
testified  in  his  favour  that  he  had  "  spoken  right "  (Job  xlii.  8).  In  the  Psalms  David 
pleads,  complains,  expostulates.  "  Why  standest  thou  afar  off,  0  Lord  ?  Why  hidest 
thou  thyself  in  times  of  trouble?"  (Ps.  x.  1).  "How  long  wilt  thou  forget  me, 
O  Lord  'i  For  ever?  How  long  wilt  thou  hide  thy  face  from  me?  How  long  shall 
mine  enemy  be  exalted  over  me  ? "  (Ps.  xiii.  1,  2).  "  Lord,  how  long  wilt  thou 
look  on  ?  rescue  my  soul  from  their  destructions.  .  .  .  Let  not  them  that  are  mine 
enemies  wrongfully  rejoice  over  me.  .  .  .  For  they  speak  not  peace :  but  they  devise 
deceitful  matters.  .  .  .  This  thou  hast  seen,  O  Lord :  keep  not  silence :  0  Lord,  be 
not  far  from  me.  Stir  up  thyself,  and  awake  to  my  judgment,  even  imto  my  cause, 
my  God  and  my  Lord  "  (Ps.  xxxv.  17 — 23).  "  Our  heart  is  not  turned  back,  neither 
have  our  steps  declined  from  thy  way ;  though  thou  hast  sore  broken  us  in  the 
place  of  dragons,  and  covered  us  with  the  shadow  of  death.  If  we  have  forgotten  the 
name  of  God,  or  stretched  out  our  hands  to  a  strange  god ;  shall  not  God  search  this 
out?  for  he  knoweth  the  secrets  of  the  heart.  Yea,  for  thy  sake  are  we  killed  all  the 
day  long ;  we  are  counted  as  sheep  for  the  slaughter.  Awake,  why  sleepest  thou, 
0  Lord  ?  arise,  cast  us  not  off  for  ever.  Wherefore  hidest  thou  thy  face,  and  forgettest 
our  affliction  and  our  oppression?  .  .  .  Arise  for  our  help,  and  redeem  us  for  thy 
mercies'  sake  "  (Ps.  xliv.  18 — 26).  Such  expostulations  as  these  do  not  anger  God,  but, 
on  the  contrary,  are  pleasing  and  acceptable.  They  show  earnestness,  confidence,  faith, 
a  .trust  in  his  goodness,  a  conviction  that  he  will  surely  show  himself  on  the  side  of 
truth  and  righteousness.  They  are  within  the  limits  of  the  "  liberty  wherewith  Christ 
has  made  us  free"  (Gal.  v.  1).  Caution, however,  must  be  used,  lest  liberty  degenerate 
into  licence — lest  complaint  and  expostulation  pass  into  "  murmuring."  After  all,  God 
best  knows  what  is  best  for  us,  and  will  assuredly  do  what  is  best  for  us.  We  are  safe 
in  his  hands.  In  his  own  good  time  he  will  give  us  all  that  we  need.  Let  us  not  be 
impatient,  or  imagine  ourselves  wiser  than  he.  If  he  delays  to  give  us  that  which  we 
desire,  we  may  be  sure  that  there  is  a  reason  for  the  delay.  In  quietness  and  confidence 
should  be  our  strength. 


HOMILIES  BY  VARIOUS  AUTHORS. 

Vers.  7 — 9. — An  outburst  of  thanksgiving.  A  deep  heart-effusion,  in  which  all  that 
the  religious  imagination,  inspired  by  love,  can  suggest,  is  projected  upon  the  picture  of 
Jehovah,  the  redeeming  God  of  Israel. 

I.  His  LOVlNO-KDfDNBSS.  (Of.  ch.  Iv.  3 ;  and  the  Hebrew  word  in  ch.  Ixiii.  7 ; 
Ps.  Ixxxix.  28 — 49 ;  cvii.  43 ;  Lam.  iii.  22.)  The  word  (lori)  suggests  a  world  of  love. 
When  used  of  men  it  implies  pity,  benignity,  especially  in  circumstances  of  misfor- 
tune, as  Gen.  xxi.  23 ;  1  Sam.  x.  2 ;  Job  vi.  14.  How  fine  is  the  saying  in  2  Sam. 
ix,  3,  "  I  will  act  kindly  toward  him  like  unto  God  " !  So  that  all  human  expressions 
of  kindness  may  be  and  should  be  conceived  as  flowing  from  the  one  eterual  Fountain. 
Sometimes,  by  a  figure,  God  himself  is  called  Favour,  Mercy  (Ps.  cxliv.  2 ;  Jonah  ii.  9). 

IL  His  GEBAT  DEEDS.  "  Renown,"  Or  "deedsof  renowu."  The  divorce  of  feeling  from 
deed,  of  sentiment  from  action,  that  we  so  often  see  in  feeble  humanity,  we  do  not  find 
in  God.  With  him,  heart  and  head  are  one.  His  deeds  are  daily,  world-extended, 
historical,  eternal.  Every  commotion  of  the  nations,  every  war,  every  revolution,  m'lst 
be  traced  to  the  influence  of  his  Spirit  in  the  last  resort. 

III.  His  gbnebous  bestowals.  There  is  an  exuberant  outflow  of  thought,  feeling, 
and  language  here.    Jehovah  is  lo  be  celebrated  "  according  to  that  which  is  due  foi 


«48  THE  BOOK  OP  THE  PROPHET  ISAIAH,    [ch.  Lxm.  1— 1ft 

all  that  he  hath  hestowed,  according  to  his  compassion  and  his  abundant  loving-kind- 
nesses." Were  it  not  that  the  impression  of  pain  is  keener  and  deeper  with  us  than 
that  of  pleasure,  it  would  be  seen  that  at  every  moment  life  teems  with  mercies,  gifts 
from  the  Giver  of  all  good. 

IV.  His  peovidekce  in  history.  They  were  hig  people  In  virtue  of  the  primeval 
covenant.  They  were  his  sons  by  adoption.  The  great  salvation  out  of  Israel  was 
prototypical  of  all  acts  in  which  Jehovah  "  became  unto  them  a  Saviour.  Distinct  and 
strong  is  the  representation  of  the  sympathy  of  God  with  their  suffering ;  distressed  in 
all  their  distresses."  His  love  and  his  clemency  are  again  mentioned.  He  was  ever,  in 
that  long  and  strange  history  of  rebellion,  "  overcoming  evil  with  good  " — a  pardoning 
God.  His  care  w^s  that  of  a  mother's  heart — carrying  the  people,  as  it  were,  from  their 
birth,  promising  to  carry  them  even  to  hoar  hairs.  "  I  liave  made,  and  I  will  bear ;  I  will 
carry,  and  I  will  deliver  you  "  (ch.  xlvi.  iii.  4).  Yet  it  is  part  of  such  providential 
dealing  to  chastise.  There  were  especially  times  when  the  people  did  evil  in  the  sight 
of  Jehovah  (Judg.  ii.  11 ;  iii.  7).  Secretly  a  Holy  Spirit,  or  Spirit  of  holiness,  was 
striving  with  them,  and  they  were  constantly  resisting  it.  The  great  covenant  with 
God  was  founded  on  this  principle  of  holiness ;  this  was  the  distinctive  characteristic 
of  the  people  as  of  tlieir  God.  By  their  untruth  to  the  covenant,  they  changed  him  as 
it  were  from  a  friend  to  an  enemy.  Thwarted  love  turns  to  jealousy  (Bxod,  xxxiv.  14), 
and  the  gracious  face  of  the  Father  becomes  that  of  the  wrathful  Judge. — J. 

Vers.  10 — 14. — The  remembrance  of  the  past.  I.  The  memory  op  God.  If  God  is 
thought  of,  as  he  must  be  thought  of,  after  the  analogy  of  human  experiences,  he  must 
be  thought  of  as  remembering,  calling  the  past  to  mind,  and  as  undergoing  changes  of 
mind  in  consequence.  These  are.  ways  of  representing  first  to  thought,  then  in  language, 
an  infinite  love,  which  must  be  capable  of  all  the  scale  and  gamut  of  feeling — auger, 
wrath,  jealousy,  and  the  revulsion  almost  to  the  tenderness  of  tears.  So  in  the  wilder- 
ness, he,  being  full  of  compassion,  forgave  the  iniquity  of  the  rebels  in  the  wilderness, 
turning  his  anger  away,  because  he  remembered  that  they  were  flesh,  or  but  as  the 
passing  wind ;  he  called  to  mind  his  covenant ;  he  repented  according  to  the  multitude  of 
his  mercies  (Lev.  xxvi.  45 ;  Ps.  Ixxviii.  39 ;  ovi.  45).  In  the  history  of  Israel  there 
was  nothing  more  memorable  than  the  coming  up  out  of  Egypt,  and  the  leadership  of 
Moses  and  Aaron. 

II.  The  history  of  Israel  explained  prom  the  government  op  Gtod.  The 
outward  wonders,  the  deeds  of  might,  were  but  the  manifestation  of  an  inward  waking 
ofhis  Spirit  in  the  breast  of  the  people.  ASpiritof  instruction, ofprovidential  guidance 
and  sagacious  government " — "  Thy  good  Spirit  to  instruct  them  "  (Neh.  ix.  20).  A 
holy  light  seemed  in  the  retrospect  to  rest  upon  that  period.  It  was  said  that  the 
people  "  served  the  Lord  all  the  days  of  Joshua,  aoci  all  the  days  of  the  elders  that  over- 
lived Joshua,"  for  "they  had  known  all  the  works  of  the  Lord,  that  he  had  done  for 
IsraeL"  The  next  generation  knew  not  the  works  of  the  Lord,  nor  the  works  he  had 
done  for  Israel  (Josh.  xxiv.  31 ;  Judg.  ii.  6 — 10).  The  Spirit  of  Jehovah  appears  to 
mean  much  the  same  as  the  face  of  Jehovah  above  (cf.  Exod.  xxxiii.  14 ;  Hag.  ii.  4,  5 ; 
cf.  Numb.  xi.  10 — 30).  The  term  "  holiness  "  reminds  of  the  covenant,  and  the  covenant 
of  the  obligations  of  fidelity  on  the  part  of  the  people,  in  response  to  the  oath-keeping 
of  God.  Another  image,  almost  carrying  the  same  meaning,  is  that  of  the  "  arm  of 
Jehovah's  splendour  "  (ch.  xl.  10 ;  xlv.  1),  ready  to  support  Moses,  to  hold  him  up 
from  falling  (ch.  xli.  10-— 13).  Then  the  sublime  picture  of  the  crossing  of  the  Red  Sea 
rises  up  in  imagination  (Exod.  xiv.  21;  cf.  Ps.  cvi.  9 ;  Ixxvii.  16),  and  the  wide  and 
dreary  steppe.  Finally,  as  a  herd  goes  down  from  the  mountain-side  into  the  pasture- 
land  of  the  plain,  so,  under  the  same  guidance,  the  people  came  to  their  rest — a  beloved 
word  (Exod.  xxxiii.  14 ;  Deut.  iii.  20 ;  xii.  9 ;  Josh.  i.  13  ;  xxii.  4  ;  Ps.  xcv.  11 ;  Jer.  x'xxi. 
2 ;  Heb.  iv.  1,  9).  The  spiritual  sum  and  substance  of  all  is,  "  Thus  thou  didst  guide 
thy  people  to  make  unto  thyself  a  monument  of  glory."  By  his  work  he  became  for 
ever  known  among  the  heathen.  It  was  a  work  not  to  be  executed  by  any  false  god, 
nor  by  any  human  arm.  "  Egypt  was  at  this  time  the  centre  of  all  science,  art,  and 
culture;  and  what  occurred  there  would  be  known  in  other  lands.  God  desijjned  to 
make  a  signal  demonstration  of  his  existence  and  power,  that  should  be  known  in  all 
lands  and  should  never  be  forgotten."    God's  glory  is  the  grand  end  of  all  he  does,  and 


OH.  Tim.  1—19.]    THE  BOOK  OF  THE  PROPHET  ISAIAH.  449 

consequently  ought  to  be  likewise  of  all  that  we  either  do  or  suffer.  And  whatever, 
therefore,  befalls  any  man  makes  for  God's  glory  and  for  his  own  good,  if  he  be  a  child 
of  God.  We  should  learn,  then,  to  estimate  things  by  their  use  and  tendency.  Poison 
may  enter  into  the  composition  of  an  antidote;  and  things  essentially  good  may,  under 
certain  circumstances,  become  pernicious.  Prosperity  may  harden  and  adversity  may 
humble  us ;  the  one  may  prepare  us  for  judgment,  the  other  for  mercy. — J. 

Vers.  15 — 19. — The  Church's  prayer.    One  of  extreme  "  spiritual  beauty  "  (Gheyne). 

I.  The  majesty  of  God.  He  is  contemplated  as  in  heaven,  upon  "  a  height  of  holi- 
ness and  splendour ; "  and  here,  as  in  Ps.  Ixxz.  14,  is  besought  to  "  look  down  and 
behold  "  as  if  "  he  had  given  up  oaring  for  his  people,  and  withdrawn  into  his  heavenly 
palace."  It  expresses  the  thought  that  he,  to  interpose  for  them,  must  ever  condescend. 
The  vastness  of  the  distance  between  God  and  the  creature  is  expressed — ^in  other  words, 
the  sense  ot  the  creature's  lowliness  and  unworthiness.  Yet  elsewhere,  "  He  is  nigh  unto 
all  that  call  upon  him."  The  chasm  then  presented  in  the  imagination  may  be,  and  is, 
bridged  over.  How  ?  By  prayer — by  calling  upon  him.  "A  sigh  may  bring  the  blessing 
down." 

II.  The  SEEMKja  indiffekencb  of  God.  Nevertheless,  there  are  times  when  the 
"  heavens  are  as  brass,"  and  when  the  God  believed  to  be  "  living  "  stirs  not,  speaks  not, 
gives  no  sign  that  he  hearkens.  As  if  callous  to  his  people's  need,  his  "jealousy" 
slumbers,  and  needs  to  be  "  stirred."  Then  comes  the  "  pain  of  finite  hearts  that 
yearn,"  for  the  sympathy  (the  "  sounding  of  the  bowels,"  ch.  xvi.  11 ;  Jer.  xxii.  20 ; 
xlviii.  36)  and  the  compassion  which  seem  withheld  and  as  if  deliberately  kept  back. 
Such  is  the  tragedy  of  religious  experience — the  old  conflict  between  the  intellect  which 
absolutely  affirms  the  goodness  of  God,  the  heart  which  is  denied  the  present  sense  of  it. 

III.  Faith  in  the  fatherhood  op  God.  "  Thou  art  our  Father "  is  the  cry,  the 
confession,  and  the  appeal  of  the  Church.  In  ch.  Ixiv.  8  the  image  is  associated  with 
that  of  the  "  Potter."  In  1  Chron.  xxix.  10  it  is  "  Lord  God  of  Israel,  our  Father." 
And  with  this  image  again  is  associated  the  Maker  and  Purchaser,  or  Redeemer  (Deut. 
xxxii.  6).  The  nation  is  to  him  as  the  primitive  family  is  to  the  father,  the  head,  who 
enjoys  the  peculiar  patria  potestas.  The  people  is  "  his  son,  even  his  firstborn  "  (Exod. 
iv.  22) ;  "  beloved,  called  out  of  Egypt "  (Hos.  xi.  1) ;  "  nourished  and  brought  up  "  by 
Jehovah  (ch.  i.  2) ;  as  the  Guide  of  its  youth  (Jer.  iii.  4) ;  who  will  not  disown  the 
tie  nor  the  title  (Jer.  iii.  19) ;  Father  of  Israel,  to  whom  Ephraim  is  firstborn  (Jer. 
xxxi.  9) ;  a  Father  whose  heart  is  sore  troubled  for  his  children's  sake,  and  who  is  full 
of  mercy  and  compassion  to  them  (Jer.  xxxi.  20) ;  who  demands  the  honour  and  reverence 
due  to  a  father  (Mai.  i.  6  ;  ii.  10).  And  here  the  name  is  associated  with  that  of  the 
goel,  the  avenger  and  deliverer ;  for  the  people's  history  was  a  series  of  deliverances. 
If  God  is  a  Father,  a  childlike  way  of  speech  is  not  misbecoming  in  prayers.  And  here 
they  ask  why  Jehovah  "  makes  them  to  stray,"  as  if  they  would  throw  the  blame  of 
their  aberrations  upon  him,  and  he  was  the  Cause  of  the  hardening  of  their  hearts. 
"  They  speak  as  if  it  is  not  they  who  need  to  return  to  Jehovah,  but  Jehovah  who  is 
reluctant  to  return  to  them ;  as  if,  instead  of  feeding  his  flock  like  a  Shepherd  (ch.  xl. 
11),  he  has  driven  it  out  of  the  safe  fold  into  the  howling  wilderness"  (Cheyne). 
Yet  the  confidence  oi  the  child  beats  passionately  below  such  language.  God  looks  not 
at  the  mere  words,  but  at  the  heart  in  the  words.  And  it  is  true,  again,  that  from  the 
difficult  problems  of  thought,  this  way  of  thinking  seems  a  better  relief  than  the  dualism 
of  the  Orientals.  It  is  better  to  leave  the  problem  with  the  confession,  "  God  knows 
best "  (cf.  Rom.  ix.  17 — 22).  Jehovah  is  also  King.  The  other  peoples  have  kings  as 
their  gods ;  but  he  is  the  incomparahle  One.  The  calling  on  his  Name  signifies  the 
union  of  him  with  his  people — the  eternal  covenant  (oh.  xliii.  7 ;  Ixv.  1 ;  Deut.  xxviii. 
10;  Jer.  xiv.  9).  The  spiritual  life  moves  between  opposite  poles.  It  has  been  said 
that  in  the  highest  mood  of  faith  there  lurks  some  doubt.  So  in  extreme  despondency 
there  is  still  living  the  germ  of  faith  and  hope.  And  prayer  brings  that  germ  into  life 
and  power. — J. 

Ver.  1. — 3%e  coming  Saviour.  "  Mighty  to  save."  The  question  is  asked.  Who  is 
this?"  and  the  answer  is  given  in  Eastern  figures  of  speech,  which  represent  Christ's 
character  and  work. 

I8AI.AH — n.  2  a 


460  THE  BOOK  OF  THE  PROPHET  ISAIAH,    [oh.  lxiii.  1— 1». 

I.  The  Savioub  comes  with  a  obeat  baobificb.  With  "  dyed  garments ; "  for 
the  cross  lies  at  the  foundation  of  the  world's  recovery.  We  are  weary  of  all  theories 
of  atonement  from  Anselm's  day  downwards,  but  the  atonement  remains  as  the  central 
truth  of  our  religion.  It  rests  on  our  Lord's  own  authority  as  well  as  upon  St.  Paul's ; 
for  he  said  himself,  "  This  cup  is  the  new  testament  in  my  blood,  which  is  shed  for  you 
for  the  ren  ission  of  sins." 

II.  The  Savioxts  comes  in  the  image  of  Ood.  He  is  the  express  Image  of  the 
Father.  "  G  lorious  in  his  apparel,"  so  that  through  all  the  ages  men  may  see  truth 
turned  into  life.  Once  in  all  history  we  see  One  who  washoly,  harmless,  undefiled, and 
separate  from  sinners."     Christ  was  "clothed  with  light  as  with  a  garment." 

in.  The  salvation  is  attested  in  bvebt  age.  1.  Mighty — in  his  own  revealed 
grace  and  power.  2.  Mighty — in  that  every  degree  of  guilt  and  sin  is  reached  by  his 
infinite  arm.  3.  Mighty — ^in  that  he  saves  right  through,  which  is  the  meaning  of 
the  word  "  to  th«  uttermost."— W.  M.  & 

Vers.  1 — 6. — 3%e  earlier  and  the  later  redemption.  The  energetic  and  graphic 
language  of  the  teict  applies  only  in  part  to  that  Messianic  kingdom  to  which  the 
prophet  makes  such  frequent  reference.  It  obviously  relates,  primarily  and  principally, 
to  the  deliverance  wrought  by  Jehovah  in  favour  of  his  people  Israel,  and  is  concerned 
with  the  redressing  of  their  political  wrongs.  But  the  expressions  used  are  strongly 
suggestive  of  a  far  greater  redemption,  in  which  all  the  children  of  men  are  vitally 
interested.     We  look  at — 

I.  Those  featukes  which  ohabactbbize  the  eablieb  bathes  than  the  lateb 
DBUVEEANCE.  1.  The  employment  of  the  outwardly  impressive.  "This  that  is  glorious 
in  his  apparel,  travelling  in  the  greatness  of  his  strength."  Something,  if  not  much,  of 
the  stately,  the  striking,  the  magnificent,  of  that  which  was  fitted  to  awe  and  overwhelm 
belonged  to  the  older  dispensation  —  to  the  theocracy  and  the  divinely  permitted 
monarchy.  Under  Christ  it  is  not  so.  He  himself  "came  not  with  observation" 
(ostentation);  he  was  a  "King  that  came,  meek"  devoid  of  all  the  shows  and  trappings 
of  royal  state.  And  it  is  his  will  that  his  Church  should  shrink  from  rather  than 
secure  the  dignities  and  majesties  of  the  earthly  kingdoms  (Matt.  xz.  25 — 28).  2.  Tht 
use  of  violence.  "  With  dyed  garments.  .  .  .  Their  blood  shall  be  sprinkled  upon  my 
garments  "  (vers.  1,  o).  Jesus  said,  and  surely  still  says  in  respect  of  all  efforts  to 
advance  his  kingdom,  "  Put  up  thy  sword  into  the  sheath  "  (John  xviii.  11).  3.  The 
manifestation  of  Divine  anger.  "  The  day  of  vengeance  is  in  mine  heart "  (ver.  4). 
Contrast  with  this,  "God  sent  not  his  Son  into  the  world  to  condemn  the  world,  but 
that  tlie  world  through  him  might  be  saved"  (John  iii.  17;  xii.  47;  Luke  ix.  56). 

II.  The  fbatubes  which  aee  common  to  both,  but  are  most  strikingly  character- 
istic of  the  later  redemption.  1.  The  manifestation  of  Divine  power.  "Mighty  to  save." 
Great  as  were  the  deliverances  accomplished  in  Egypt,  in  the  wilderness,  in  Canaan,  in 
Assyria,  these  were  small  and  insignificant  compared  with  "the  redemption  of  the 
world  by  Christ  Jesus,"  the  rescue  of  a  guilty  and  degenerate  race  and  its  reinstatement 
in  the  favour  and  the  likeness  of  God.  Hence  is  by  far  the  noblest  exhibition  of  Divine 
power.  2.  The  illustration  of  Divine  faithfulness.  "  I  that  speak  in  righteousness." 
B.y  his  interposition  God  fulfilled  his  word  of  promise,  and  showed  himself  a  covenant- 
keeping  Lord.  But  in  ihe  granting  of  his  "great  salvation,"  and  in  all  the  outworkings 
of  it,  both  collectively  and  individually,  there  are  more  abundant  reasons  for  exclaiming, 
"  God  is  faithful "  (1  Cor.  i.  9).  3.  The  completeness  of  the  Divine  work.  The  picture 
here  is,  throughout,  one  of  victorious  strength.  It  is  the  return  of  a  warrior  who  has 
thoroughly  accomplished  his  work,  by  whom  his  enemies  have  been  utterly  subdued. 
He  has  "  brought  down  their  strength  to  the  earth  "  (ver.  6).  The  work  of  Christ  was 
perfected.  He  "finished"  the  work  the  Father  gave  him  to  do  (John  xvii.  4;  xiz.  30). 
He  offered  himself  "  without  spot "  to  God  (Heb.  x.  14).  He  has  prepared  for 
mankind  a  "  common  salvation ; "  as  exquisitely  adapted  to  the  most  cultured  intel- 
ligence as  it  is  fitted  for  the  most  barbarous  and  savage  peoples.  He  is  working  out 
the  redemption  of  the  race,  and  will  not  rest  until  humanity  has  been  redeemed  and 
restored.  4.  The  single-handedness  of  the  Divine  Conqueror.  "  I  have  trodden  the 
wine-press  alone  "  (vers.  3  and  5).  Though  God  did  use  the  instrumentality  of  his 
people,  it  was  the  prei>eucc  of  his  overcoming  arm  which  made  cUl  the  difi'ereuce  between 


CH.i.Tni.  1— 19.]    THE  BOOK  OF  THE  PROPHET  ISAIAH.  461 

victory  and  defeat.  And  there  were  occasions  when  he  thought  well  to  dispense  with 
human  agency  altogether ;  e.g.  the  destruction  of  the  Egyptians  under  Pharaoh,  and 
of  the  host  under  Sennacherib.  Although  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ  did  not  disdain,  and 
does  not  refuse  to  employ  his  disciples  In  his  cause,  yet  was  there  a  very  deep  and  real 
sense  in  which  he  was  alone  in  his  redemptive  worlt  (see  Robertson  on '  The  Loneliness 
of  Christ').  (1)  He  was  of  such  spiritual  stature  that  none  could  walk  with  him. 
(2)  He  was  engaged  in  a  mission  of  such  deep  and  lofty  character  that  none  could  then 
enter  into  his  great  design.  (3)  He  came  to  make  a  sacrifice  of  himself  in  the  offering 
of  which  none  could  join.  Here  are  reasons  why  we,  as  Christian  men  and  as  workers 
with  Christ,  should  (a)  look  back  with  deepest  gratitude;  (6)  submit  under  dis- 
appointment with  ready  acquiescence ;  (c)  anticipate  with  full  assurance  the  triumph 
which  is  in  the  future. — 0. 

Vers.  7 — 9. — The  greatness  of  God's  goodness.  There  is  music  in  the  sound  and  great 
comfort  in  the  sense  of  these  exquisite  words.     They  speak  to  us  of — 

I.  The  greatness  of  God's  goodness  to  us.  1.  The  hounfi/ulness  of  his  gifts  to 
us.  "  All  that  the  Lord  hath  bestowed  on  us."  "  The  multitude  of  his  loving-kind- 
nesses." His  gifts  night  and  day,  in  every  season,  through  every  stage  of  life ;  all 
material  for  the  body,  all  stores  of  knowledge  for  the  mind,  all  wealth  of  affection  for 
the  heart.  2.  The  distinguishing  favours  he  has  shown  us.  His  "  great  goodness 
toward  the  house  of  Israel."  Every  *'  house,"  every  family,  every  man,  has  some 
special  reason  to  speak  of  Divine  goodness.  3.  The  love  which  prompts  his  bestowals. 
All  his  kindnesses  are  "  loving-kindnesses,"  prompted  by  parental  affection,  granted  in 
a  loving  spirit.  4.  His  kindness  toward  us  in  affliction  (ver.  8).  He  grants  us  Divine 
sympathy — "  In  all  their  afflictions ; "  and  tender  succour — "  he  bare  them,"  etc.,  as  the 
mother  carries  her  sick  child,  the  shepherd  the  wounded  lamb.  His  hand  may  be  upon 
us,  but  "  underneath  are  the  everlasting  arms."  5.  His  grace  m  redemption.  "  The 
angel  of  his  presence,"  etc. 

II.  OuB  WISDOM  AND  DUTY  IN  viKW  OF  IT.  "  I  will  mention."  Here  are  two  parts : 
1.  Recalling  to  our  own  thought.  2.  Reminding  those  around  us.  This  is  our  duty ; 
for  it  is  the  clear  will  of  Christ  that  we  should  make  known  the  fulness  of  his  kindness 
and  the  riches  of  his  grace.  We  exist,  as  his  people,  that  we  may  be  witnesses  to  the 
world  of  all  that  we  have  learned  of  him.  This  is  also  our  wisdom;  for  therein  is  found 
the  one  antidote  to  dissatisfaction,  the  one  unfailing  source  of  gratitude  and  joy. 

III.  God's  expectation  concbbnino  08.  (Ver.  8.)  As  God  gave  to  Israel  all  the 
peculiar  proofs  of  his  remembrance  that  they  might  prove  a  loyal  and  faithful  people  or 
family,  so  with  us  as  a  Christian  Church.  He  has  manifested  marvellous  love,  patience, 
pity,  succour,  toward  us.  And  in  what  expectation  ?  That  we  should  show  ourselves 
loyal  to  himself  and  true  to  our  trust ;  that  we  should  prove  ourselVes  the  "  people  " 
and  "children"  of  God,  by  reverence  of  bearing,  by  submissiveness  of  spirit,  by 
integrity  of  character,  by  faithfulness  in  the  field  of  sacred  work. — 0. 

Vers.  10 — 14. — Bow  Ood  feels  and  why  he  acts.  The  revolt  or  disobedience  of  Israel 
is  said  to  have  "  vexed  [grieved]  his  Holy  Spirit."  We  learn  from  this  and  from  a 
similar  expression  in  Eph.  iv.  30 — 

I.  The  obief  to  which  God  ib  subject.  Men  have  argued  thus.  God  is  a  blessed 
or  happy  Being ;  he  is  infinite  in  all  his  attributes ;  therefore  he  is  infinitely,  perfectly 
happy;  therefore  there  is  no  possibility  of  sorrow  in  his  Divine  nature.  But  such 
reasoning  is  very  precarious  and  unreliable.  We  can  argue  little  from  infinity  of  which 
we  know  nothing,  and  we  must  not  think  of  weighing  any  inference  thus  obtained 
against  plain  statements  of  Scripture.  We  are  there  assured  that  God  is  capable  of 
grief,  and  we  must  believe  that  he  is,  our  logical  conclusions  notwithstanding.  And, 
looking  from  another  point  of  view,  we  might  well  conclude  that  he  is  and  must  be  to. 
For  is  he  not  a  Divine  Father?  And  has  he  not  undutiful,  rebellious  children?  How, 
then,  could  he  fail  to  be  grieved  at  heart?  The  fact  of  God's  fatherhood  is  the  most 
certain  of  all  truths  established  by  Divine  revelation;  no  ground  is  more  solid  than 
that.  Our  human  fatherhood  is  indicative  of  the  Divine;  it  is  the  reflection  of  it; 
it  is  immeasurably  less  than  it;  its  best,  its  tenderest,  its  most  holy  and  generoui 
feelings,  are  hints  and  shadows  of  corresponding  feelings  in  the  heart  of  the  heavenly 


452  THE  BOOK  OF  THE  PROPHET  ISAIAH,    [oh.  lxiii.  1— la 

Father.  If,  then,  in  our  thought,  we  purify,  magnify,  multiply  that  parental  grief  which 
a  father  feels  when  his  children  go  astray,  we  understand  something  of  the  gdef  of  God. 

1.  Our  Divine  Pathei-  has  expended  on  us  boundless  thought,  affection,  treasure, 
training,  patience — a  "  multitude  of  loving-kindnesses."  He  has  "  given  himself  for  us  " 
in  one  supreme  act  of  self-sacrificing  love.  2.  He  looks  for  filial  response  from  us,  for 
eager  attention  to  his  voice  when  he  speaks;  for  the  acceptance  of  his  pardoning  love, 
for  daily  remembrance  of  him  and  communion  with  him ;  for  cheerful  obedience  to  his 
holy  wUl.  3.  He  too  often  finds  stubborn  and  protracted  inattention,  persistent  refusal 
of  his  overtures  of  mercy,  forgetfulness  and  neglect,  a  palnlul  disregard  of  his  will  in 
our  relations  with  one  another — disobedience.  4.  Then  his  heart  is  grieved.  He  who 
should  be  satisfied  with  us  (ch.  liii.  11)  is  disappointed  in  us;  looking  for  fruit,  he  finds 
none ;  his  Holy  Spirit  is  vexed,  is  grieved,  in  a  way  and  in  a  degree  beyond  our  human 
understanding,  with  a  grief  which  is  Divine. 

II.  The  action  which  he  takes.  "  Therefore  he  was  turned  to  be  their  enemy, 
and  he  fought  against  them."  God's  attitude  towards  his  people,  consequent  on  their 
guilt,  seemed  that  of  an  enemy.  He  was  as  one  who  strove  with  them ;  he  sent  them 
discomfiture,  calamity,  exile.  God  may  seem  to  be  our  enemy,  to  contend  with  us. 
He  may  send  us :  1.  Unhappiness  of  heart,  a  sense  of  the  insufficiency  and  uselessness  of 
our  life,  dreariness  and  despondency  of  spirit.  2.  Failure  of  our  temporal  plans  and 
schemes,  and  sense  of  miserable  defeat.  3.  Bereavement.  4.  A  wounded  heart  through 
the  inconstancy  or  the  unfaithfulness  of  a  friend ;  or  some  other  blow  which  bends  and 
threatens  to  break  our  spirit.     Gkid  is  against  us,  we  feel. 

III.  The  bkd  he  has  in  view.  However  we  read  ver.  11,  it  is  clear  that  the 
purpose  of  God  in  thus  striving  with  his  people  was  restorative.  He  meant  to  give 
them  rest,  thus  filling  tlieir  hearts  with  joy  and  "  making  to  himself  a  glorious  Name." 
This  is  the  meaning  of  all  his  adverse  action  toward  us.  He  seeks  our  restoration  to 
himself  and  to  his  service.  There  are  with  us,  as  with  Israel,  two  strong  securities.  1. 
His  past  loving-kindnesses.  He  who  had  bound  his  people  to  his  heart  as  the  God  of 
Israel  had  done  (vers.  11 — 14)  could  not  and  would  not  desert  thetn  in  their  distress. 

2.  The  honour  of  his  holy  Name.  God  is  establishing  a  kingdom  of  peace  and  right- 
eousness, and  he  wants  us  as  his  loyal  citizens.  This  is  the  meaning  of  all  we  are 
enduring.  It  is  a  summons  from  God  to  return  to  ourselves,  to  enter  on  our  true 
heritage,  to  have  fellowship  with  him. — 0. 

Vers,  15 — 17. — ITie  unvarying  Father.  The  habitation  of  God's  holiness  is  the 
habitation  of  his  glory ;  his  glory  is  in  his  goodness,  in  his  faithfulness  (Exod.  xxxiiL 
19).  His  fatherhood  of  man  remains  and  may  be  counted  upon  most  confidently, 
although  there  may  appear  great  obstacles  in  the  way  of  it. 

L  Our  iNsiGNincANOE  among  men  is  no  indication  of  the  absence  of  God's  interest 
in  UB.  Abraham  might  be  ignorant  of  any  one  of  his  children ;  our  illustrious  ancestors, 
our  honoured  contemporaries,  may  know  nothing  of  us ;  we  may  be  dwelling  in  the 
humblest  obscurity;  but  that  need  not  diminish  in  the  very  smallest  degree  our 
assurance  that  God  is  interesting  himself  in  us.  Doubtless  he  is  our  Father.  "  I  am 
poor  and  needy,  yet  the  Lord  thinketh  upon  me." 

II.  Our  standing  among  men  is  no  measure  of  Gfod's  regard  for  us.  Israel  might 
not  be  prepared  to  acknowledge  one  of  his  descendants.  Men  in  high  authority  may 
withhold  from  us  the  light  of  their  countenance ;  but  if  there  be  integrity  in  our  heart 
and  soundness  in  our  life,  that  need  not  greatly  move  us.  It  is  better  to  have  than  to 
lack  the  confidence  of  such  men,  but  we  can  do  without  it,  if  necessary.  With  God 
for  our  Father,  with  Christ  for  our  Divine  Friend,  we  can  dispense  with  "  the  honour 
that  Cometh  fi  om  man  only." 

III.  God's  discipline  of  us  is  no  disproof  of  his  desire  or  determination  to  bless  us. 
God  may  seem  to  have  forsaken  us.  He  once  seemed  to  have  forsaken  his  well-beloved 
Son.  We  may  be  inclined  to  use  such  language  as  he  then  used  (Matt,  xxvii.  46),  or 
as  that  of  the  text  (ver.  15;  and  see  Ps.  Ixvii.  7 — 9).  But  we  may  be  reassured. 
Everything  ho  has  done  or  is  doing  is  consistent  with  his  unchanging  love,  with  a 
fatherhood  that  never  fails.  God  is  only  searching,  pruning,  purifying  us.  He  smites 
that  he  may  heal  us  with  a  wholeness  that  will  make  us  truly  blessed,  most  excellently 
established  and  enriched.     1.  Therefore  let  the  voice  of  prayer  be  heard  in  dark  and 


OH.  Lxin.  1— 19.]    THE  BOOK  OF  THE  PROPHET  ISAIAH.  463 

distressing  hours.  "  Look  down  from  heaven.''  2.  Therefore  let  the  tried  and  stricken 
heart  anticipate  relief  and  recovery.  God's  Name  is,  from  everlasting,  that  of  "  a 
Eedeemer."— -C. 

Ver.  1. — The  Conqueror  from  Edam.  The  land  of  Edom  was  .the  country  inhahited 
by  the  descendants  of  Esau.  1'he  original  enmity  between  Esau  and  Jacob  was  kept 
up  by  the  two  races.  The  Edoraites  were  regarded  by  the  Israelites  as  their  hereditary 
enemies,  and  no  dcubt  the  feeling  was  reciprocated.  The  Edomites  had  special 
opportunities  for  haiiissing  Israel,  by  reason  of  the  proximity  of  their  country.  Bozrah 
was  one  of  the  cliief  cities,  if  not  the  chief  city,  of  Edom.  We  may  try  to  realize  the 
scene  so  graphically  sketched  in  this  passage.  At  a  time  when  war  had  been  raging, 
and  enmity  was  at  its  height,  one  of  the  Israelites  is  represented  as  walking  on  the  hill 
that  overlooked  the  plains  of  Edom.  He  heard  sounds  of  triumph ;  turning  to  the 
direction  whence  the  sounds  proceeded,  he  saw  in  the  distance  the  dust  arising  from 
a  crowd  of  people,  shouting  and  rejoicing  as  they  came  marching  oiu  They  evidently 
came  from  the  chief  city  of  Edom.  Now  he  discerns  one  in  the  very  midst  of  the 
crowd,  all  stained  with  the  blcod  of  battle,  but  crowned  with  the  victor's  crown,  and 
having  a  mien.and  attitude  that  tell  of  readiness  to  do  and  dare  even  yet  greater  things. 
The  man  glories  in  the  triumph  that  has  been  won  over  the  national  foe,  and  hasting 
down  to  join  the  victors,  he  asks,  in  admiration  rather  than  in  inquiry,  "  Who  is  this 
that  Cometh  from  Edom,  with  dyed  garments  from  Bozrah  ?  "  Quickened  spiritual 
vision  sees  the  Messianic  meaning  of  this  prophetic  picture.  We  take  our  stand  in 
the  garden,  where  was  Joseph's  new  tomb,  on  the  greatest  Sunday  morning  that  ever 
dawned  on  sinful  earth.  Forth  from  the  grave  came  One,  stained  indeed  with  the 
marks  of  conflict,  but  glorious  in  his  victory  ;  able  to  "  speak  in  righteousness,"  able 
to  "  save." 

I.  Whence  he  oombs.  "Prom  Edom  and  Bozrah,"  the  land  and  chief  town  of 
Israel's  enemies,  the  Champion  came.  The  great  enemy  of  the  human  family  is  sin, 
and  the  si^n  ot  the  worst  that  sin  can  do  is  the  grave.  "  Sin,  when  it  is  finished, 
bringeth  lortli  death."  Christ  came  forth  from  the  grave,  bursting  asunder  its  bars 
and  gates,  as  the  assurance  that  he  was,  once  and  for  ever.  Conqueror  over  sin,  and 
Conqueror  for  us. 

IL  How  HIS  AFPEABS.  "  With  dyed,  stained  garments."  These  indicate  that  he 
has  waged  a  fierce,  bloody  contest.  Even  in  our  day,  rent  and  blood-stained  garments 
would  tell  of  a  great  fight;  but  these  were  surer  signs  in  Isaiah's  days,  when  battles 
were  direct  hand-to-hand  encounters.  In  the  Apocalypse,  John  saw  our  Bedeemer — 
the  Word  of  God — and  he  was  "  clothed  with  a  vesture  dipped  in  blood."  The  great- 
ness, the  severity,  the  seriousness,  of  our  Redeemer's  conflict  may  be  seen  by  considering 
(1)  ihe  (lower  and  bitterness  of  the  foes  he  encountered ;  (2)  the  wounds  they  gave ;  and 
(3)  the  fact  that  they  actually  had  him  down.  Illustrate  this  third  point  by  reference 
to  Bunyan's  figure  of  the  fight  between  the  pilgrim  Christian  and  ApoUyon,  in  the 
"Valley  of  Humiliation. 

IIL  What  he  can  do.  He  travels  "in  the  greatness  of  his  strength."  He  is 
"  mighty  to  save."  He  is  proved  to  be  strong ;  shown  to  be  "  able  to  save."  He  is 
a  proved  Samson ;  a  tested  David.  He  is  worthy  to  be  trusted  with  the  whole  work 
of  redeeming  us  from  sin,  (1)  its  penalty  ;  (2)  its  power ;  (3)  its  consequences.  In  con- 
clusion, it  may  be  urged :  1.  That  Christ  is  willing  to  apply  to  us  the  full  benefits  of 
his  redemptive  victory.  2.  That  Christ  has,  since  his  resurrection,  made  some  glorious 
displajs  of  his  power  to  save.  Illustrations:  St.  Paul,  the  jailor  at  Fhilippi,  John 
Newton,  Africaner,  etc.  3.  That  there  is  no  limit  to  the  power  of  his  saving  grace. 
Each  one  of  us  may  say,  "  He  is  able  to  save  even  me." — B.  T. 

Ver.  \.~Edom  on  the  skirts  of  Palestine,  Sin  hangs  on  the  borders  of  goodness 
everywhere,  as  just  across  her  southern  boundary-line  Edom  always  lay  threateningly 
upon  the  skirts  of  Palestioe.  We  open  any  page  of  human  history  and  what  do  we 
see?  There  is  a  higher  life  in  man.  It  is  imperfect,  full  of  mixture,  just  like  that 
mottled  history  of  Hebrewdom.  But  always  right  on  its  border  lies  the  hostile  Edom, 
watchful,  indefatigable,  inexorable,  as  the  redoubtable  old  foe  of  the  Jews.  Always  it  is 
■ihe  higher  life  pressed,  watched,  haunted  by  the  lower ;  always  it  is  Judah  with  Edom 


454k  THE  BOOK  OF  THE  PROPHET  ISAIAH,    [oh.  Lxin.  1— W 

at  its  gates.  No  one  great  battle  comes  to  settle  it  for  ever;  It  is  an  endless  fight  with 
an  undying  enemy.  But "  who  is  this  that  cometh  from  Edom  ?  "  Is  it  possible  that 
this  One  that  we  see  coming,  this  One  on  whose  step,  as  he  moves  through  histoiy,  the 
eyes  of  all  the  ages  are  fastened — is  it  possible  that  he  is  the  Conqueror  of  the  enemy 
and  the  Deliverer  of  the  soul?  He  comes  out  of  the  enemy's  direction.  The  whole 
work  of  the  Saviour  has  relation  to  and  issues  from  the  fact  of  sin.  If  there  had  been 
no  sin  there  would  have  been  no  Saviour.  He  cornea  from  the  right  direction,  and 
he  has  an  attractive  majesty  of  movement  as  he  appears.  He  seems  strong.  What 
does  he  say  to  the  anxious  questioner ;  what  account  of  himself  does  he  give ;  what 
has  he  done  to  Edom ;  and  what  mean  those  blood-stains  on  his  robes  ? 

I.  He  replies  to  the  question,  "  Who  is  this?  "  by  saying,  "I  that  speak  in  righteous- 
ness, mighty  to  save."  This  reassures  us.  The  Saviour  comes  in  the  strength  of 
righteousness.  Any  reform  or  salvation  of  which  the  power  is  righteousness  must  go 
dovm  to  the  very  root  of  the  trouble. 

II.  He  replies  to  the  question, "  Wherefore  art  thou  red  in  thine  apparel?"  by  saying, 
"  I  have  trodden  the  wine-press."  It  is  no  holiday  monarch  coming  with  a  bloodless 
triumph.  It  has  been  no  pageant  of  a  day,  this  strife  with  sin.  The  power  of  God 
has  struggled  with  the  enemy  and  subdued  him  only  in  the  agony  of  strife.  What 
pain  may  mean  te  the  Infinite  and  Divine,  what  difficulty  may  mean  to  Omnipotence, 
I  cannot  tell.  Only  I  know  that  all  they  could  mean  they  meant  here.  "This 
symbol  of  the  blood — and  by-and-by,  when  we  turn  from  the  Old  Testament  to  the 
New,  from  the  prophecy  to  the  fulfilment,  we  find  that  it  was  not  only  the  enemy's 
blood,  but  his  own  blood  too,  that  stained  the  victorious  Deliverer's  robes — this  symbol 
of  the  blood  bears  this  great  truth,  which  has  been  the  power  of  salvation  to  millions 
of  hearts,  and  which  must  make  this  Conqueror  the  Saviour  of  your  heart  too,  the  truth 
that  only  in  self-sacrifice  and  suffering  could  even  God  conquer  sin.  Sin  is  never  so 
dreadful  as  when  we  see  the  Saviour  with  that  blood  upon  his  garments,  i^d  the 
Saviour  himself,  surely  he  is  never  so  dear,  never  wins  so  utter  and  so  tender  a  love, 
as  when  we  see  what  it  has  cost  him  to  save  ua.  Out  of  that  love  born  of  his  suffering 
comes  the  new  impulse  after  a  holy  life;  and  so  when  we  stand  at  last  purified  by  the 
power  of  a  grateful  obedience,  it  shall  be  said  of  us,  binding  our  holiness  and  escape 
from  sin  close  to  our  Lord's  struggle  with  sin  for  us,  that  we  '  have  washed  our  robes 
and  made  them  white  in  the  blood  of  the  Lamb ' "  (condensed  from  Phillips  Brooks). 
— E.T. 

Yer.  7. — The  LorcPs  loving-kindneises.  The  great  goodness  seen  in  the  return  of  the 
exiles  from  Babylon  helped  to  a  right  apprehension  of  the  goodness  of  God  to  his 
people  all  down  through  the  long  ages.  Dean  Stanley  eloquently  describes  the  return. 
"  The  restoration  was  an  event  which,  unlikely  and  remote  as  it  might  have  seemed, 
was  deemed  almost  a  certainty  in  the  expectation  of  the  exiles.  The  confidence  of 
Jeremiah  and  Ezekiel  never  flagged  that  within  two  generations  from  the  beginning 
of  the  captivity  tlieir  countrymen  would  return.  The  patriotic  sentiment,  which  had 
existed  as  it  were  unconsciously  before,  found  its  first  definite  expression  at  this 
period.  .  .  .  And  when  the  day  at  last  arrived  which  was  to  see  their  expectations 
fulfilled,  the  burst  of  joy  was  such  as  has  no  parallel  in  the  sacred  volume;  it  is, 
indeed,  the  revival,  the  second  birth,  the  second  Exodus,  of  the  nation.  There  was 
now  '  a  new  song,'  of  which  the  burden  was  that  the  Eternal  again  reigned  over  the 
earth,  and  that  the  gigantic  idolatries  which  surrounded  them  had  received  a  deadly 
shock ;  that  the  waters  of  oppression  had  rolled  back  in  which  they  had  been  struggling 
like  drovming  men ;  that  the  snare  was  broken  in  which  they  had  been  entangled  like 
a  caged  bird.  It  was  like  a  dream,  too  good  to  be  true.  The  gaiety,  the  laughter 
of  their  poetry,  resounded  far  and  wide.  The  surrounding  nations  could  not  but 
confess  what  great  things  had  been  done  for  them.  It  was  like  the  sudden  rush  of  the 
waters  into  the  dry  torrent-beds  of  the  south  of  Palestine,  or  of  the  yet  extremer  south, 
of  which  they  may  have  heard,  in  far  Ethiopia.  It  was  like  the  reaper  bearing  on  hie 
shoulder  the  golden  sheaves  in  summer  which  he  had  sown  amongst  the  tears  of 
winter.  So  full  were  their  hearts  that  all  nature  was  called  to  join  in  their  thankful- 
ness. The  vast  rivers  of  their  new  Mesopotamian  home,  and  the  waves  of  the  Indian 
Ocean,  are  to  take  part  in  the  chorus,  and  clap  their  foaming  crests  like  living  hands 


-H.  Lxra.  1— 19.]     THE  BOOK  OP  THE  PROPHET  ISAIAH.  466 

The  mountains  of  their  own  native  land  are  invited  to  express  their  joy ;  each  tree  in 
the  forest  that  clothed  the  hills,  or  that  cast  their  shade  over  the  field,  is  to  have  a 
tongue  for  the  occasion."  The  point  impressed  is  that,  being  so  deeply  impressed  with 
one  great  blessing  received  from  Omi,  the  whole  course  of  God's  dealings '  with  his 
people  cams  freshly  to  their  view.  In  the  light  of  one  loving-kindness  they  gained 
clearer  views  of  the  many  and  various  loving-kindnesses  which  had  so  constantly  been 
showered  upon  them.  *'  J  will  remember  the  loving-kindnesses  of  the  Lord."  That 
appears  to  be  Grod's  gracious  way  of  dealing  with  U3  all.  Our  lives  are,  in  fact,  full  of 
his  tender  mercies,  but  they  pass  by  us  unheeded.  We  need  something  at  times 
which  may  call  our  attention  to  them.  So  God  gives  us  occasional  great  mercies  as 
reminders  of  the  thousand  lesser  ones.  A  special  gift  from  an  earthly  friend  has 
something  of  this  power;  it  makes  us  feel  afresh  how  good  and  kind  and  tender  he 
long  has  been. 

I.  The  Lord's  Lovnro-KiUDNiissBS  read  in  the  light  op  the  redemption  from 
Babylon.  This  deliverance  altered  all  their  feeling  about  the  past.  It  gave  them  a 
key  to  the  meaning  of  their  very  captivity.  It  set  them  upon  searching  for  rigns 
of  God's  goodness  in  the  national  story.  And  what  a  story  of  mercy  that  long  record 
of  the  Jewish  Church  had  been  I  What  we  can  see  in  it  everywhere,  those  returned 
exiles  saw  in  the  light  of  their  exceeding  joy — forbearances,  long-sufferings,  provisions, 
bestowments,  loving-kindnesses,  defendiugs,  redeemings — the  good  hand  of  their  God 
ever  on  them  for  good. 

II.  The  Lord's  loving-kindnbsbbs  bead  in  the  light  op  the  redemption 
FROM  SIN.  St.  Paul  expresses  this  idea  in  the  words,  "He  that  spared  not  his  own 
Son,  but  delivered  him  up  for  us  all,  how  shall  he  not  with  him  also  freely  give  us  all 
things  ?"  The  "all  things''  come  to  his  mind  when  he  thinks  of  the  great  things.  He 
who  g^ves  eternal  life  will  be  sure  to  nourish  and  feed  all  the  life  he  gives.  He  who 
holds  before  us  the  hope  of  an  exceeding  and  eternal  weight  of  glory  will  be  sure 
to  keep  us  unto  it,  and  fit  us  for  it.  We  may  be  quite  confident  that  he  who  gives 
glory  will  give  j;race,  withholding  no  good  thing  from  them  that  walk  uprightly.  This 
is  the  usual  form  of  Christian  meditations.  We  unconsciously  follow  the  returned 
exiles'  way,  and  begin  with  the  greatest  loving-kindness.  We  tune  our  souls  to  their 
noblest  song  over  redempUm-love  manifested  in  Christ  Jesus.  We  dwell  on  his  oon- 
descension  and  his  suffering  until  our  souls  say,  "Thanks  be  unto  God  for  his 
unspeakable  Gift!"  But  in  the  quietness  after  the  song,  there  seems  to  be  a  light  left 
on  our  whole  life-story,  which,  as  we  watch  it,  grows  brighter  and  brighter ;  falling 
here  and  there  and  yonder,  sliowing  up  mercy  after  mercy,  goodness  upon  goodness, 
we  also  begin  to  say,  "  We  will  remember  the  loving-kindnesses  of  the  Lord." — R.  T. 

Ver.  8. — Ood  the  Saviour.  The  Apostle  Paid,  writing  to  Timothy,  uses  this  figure 
for  God,  but  expresses  it  more  comprehensively  and  suggestively.  "  The  living  God, 
who  is  the  Saviour  of  all  men,  specially  of  those  that  believe  "  (1  Tim.  iv.  10). 

I.  What  is  it  to  save  a  man?  What  does  the  word  "save"  mean  when  we 
apply- it  to  a  man?  A  while  ago  five  heavy  boat-loads  of  saved  ones  from  midnight 
wreck  were  landed  at  Dover.  The  poor,  ragged  city  waif  is  taken  from  the  streets 
into  the  kindly  refuge,  and  saved  from  vice  and  degradation.  The  man  who  has 
embezzled  money,  and  is  in  peril  of  the  judgment,  finds  a  friend  who  pays  the  claim, 
and  he  is  saved  from  prison.  But  these  are  cases  of  saving  men  in  only  an  imperfect 
and  limited  sense.  What  is  it  to  save  a  moral  being ;  one  who  has  will  and  affections ; 
the  sense  of  right  and  wrong,  and  the  possibility  of  gracious  relations  with  God  ?  That 
depends  upon  what  disabilities  and  perils  men  may  have  fallen  into.  If  we  may  read 
other  men  by  ourselves,  then  they  are  wrong  in  life-principle — heart-wrong ;  wrong  in 
conduct — ^bodily  wrong  ;  wrong  in  relations — socially  wrong ;  and  wrong  in  life-issues— 
under  Divine  penalties.  To  save  a  man  must  be  to  save  him  from  cdl  this.  Too  often 
salvation  is  represented  as  saving  from  hell.  That  is  but  a  part  of  it.  It  is  saving  me, 
and  saving  me  now.  To  change  the  ruling  principle  of  the  life  is  the  hopeful  beginning 
of  Balvation ;  but  the  work  must  lie  carried  on.  There  must  be  the  regeneration  of  the 
life  and  conduct,  the  purifying  of  all  motive,  and  sanctifying  of  all  thought,  and  touch- 
ing of  all  the  relationships  with  tender  grace.  So  to  save  a  man  is  a  very  large  and 
wmprehensiye  thing,    A  bit  of  it  is  saving  man  from  overhanging  penalty ;  mosi 


456  THE  BOOK  OP   THE  PEOPHET  ISAIAH,    [oh.  lxiii.  1—19 

of  it  is  saying  him  from  sin  and  from  self.     Self-willed  men  are  only  saved  when  they 
are  brought  to  God  in  trust  and  love. 

n.  What  is  it  for  (iod  to  save  a  man?  Three  points.  1.  God's  salvation 
must  go  to  the  central  nece.ssity  of  man,  cleansing  his  heart-wrong.  2.  God's  salvation 
must  be  a  gracious  persuasion  of  man's  mind  and  will  and  heart.  3.  In  this  gracious 
persuasion  the  Trinity  is  now  engaged.  God's  salvation  for  man  is  God  the  Father, 
Gk)d  the  Son,  and  God  the  Holy  Ghost,  gaining  entrance  with  regenerating  power  into 
a  man's  heart  and  life. 

III.  What  is  it  fob  God  to  save  all  men  ?  The  full  and  final  salvation  of  all 
men  seems  to  be  declared  in  Scripture  to  be  the  Divine  purpose.  All  men  were  placed 
under  disability  by  Adam's  sin  ;  no  man  has  any  standing  before  God.  Now,  in 
the  second  Adam's  righteousness  and  acceptance,  that  state  of  disability  is  removed 
for  the  whole  race,  and  all  men  stand  in  restored  relations.  Humanity  is  relieved  from 
its  curse  by  Christ's  perfect  obedience,  and  all  men  are  in  that  sense  saved.  But  this 
is  only  such  a  salvation  as  there  can  be  apart  from  man's  will,  and  it  is  but  the 
beginning  of  God's  salvation.  A  nation  may  be  pardoned  for  its  rebellion  as  a  nation, 
but  the  king  may  very  properly  require  the  oath  of  allegiance  to  be  taken  by  each 
individual. 

IV.  What  is  it  fob  God  specially  to  save  some  ?  It  is  to  have  some  coming 
voluntarily  into  gracious  relations  with  him ;  and  to  make  such  his  agents  for  the 
winning  and  persuasion  of  others.  We  may  all  of  us  be  sons,  but  some  of  us  may  be 
sons  at  home,  in  the  full  joy  of  accepted  and  gracious  relations.  And  sons  at  home 
are  ever  ready,  waiting  to  do  their  Father's  wilL — R.  T. 

Ver.  9. — God's  suffering  tympatliy.  There  is  a  verbal  difficulty  connected  with  the 
first  clause  of  this  verse.  A  little  Hebrew  word  that  is  employed,  if  pronounced  in  one 
way,  means  "  to  him ; "  but,  if  pronounced  in  another  way,  it  means  "  not."  According 
to  the  one  mode  the  clause  will  read,  "  In  all  their  affliction  there  was  affliction  to 
him; "  or,  as  in  our  English  version,  "  He  was  afflicted."  According  to  the  other  mode 
the  clause  will  read,  "  In  all  their  affliction  there  was  no  affliction ; "  that  is,  nothing 
worth  calling  affliction,  because  his  presence  and  help  were  so  near  to  them  in  their 
time  of  need.  Both  give  good  meanings,  but  the  spirit  of  the  passage  leads  us,  with 
Luther  and  other  expositors,  to  prefer  the  former  one. 

I.  God  oan  feel.  It  may  be  said  that  this  needs  no  proof.  But  the  God  sometimes 
presented  in  theological  systems,  preached  from  our  pulpits,  and  addressed  in  our  prayers, 
does  not  really  feel  as  we  do.  It  is  said  that  "  he  is  complete  in  himself,  infinitely 
full,  infinitely  happy,  infinitely  satisfied.  Nothing  can  add  one  jot  to  his  happiness, 
nothing  can  diminish  his  bliss.  He,  as  a  King,  recognizes  and  punishes  sin  and  rebellion, 
but  he  does  not  feel  hurt  by  it  himself.  No  waves  heave  and  toss  on  the  quiet  ocean 
of  God."  But  is  the  impression  left  on  our  minds  by  all  this  concerning  God  quite 
true?  And  is  that  the  God  we  are  asked  to  love — that  immovable  statue?  We 
want  a  God  whose  bosom  heaves  with  feeling,  whose  face  beams  with  smiles,  who  can 
pity  us  as  a  father  pities.  Too  often  the  impression  left  on  us  is,  that  it  is  only  Christ 
who  can  suffer,  since  he  was  a  man.  God  cannot  feel;  Christ  feels.  Christ  is  in  self- 
sacrifice,  not  God.  But  we  must  be  far  from  the  truth  when  we  divide  our  vision,  and 
with  one  eye  see  Christ,  and  with  the  other  see  God.  Look  with  both  eyes,  and  we 
shall  see  Christ  in  God,  and  God  in  Christ.  This  is  true — God  cannot  be  phyaicaUy 
affected.  We  must  not  think  of  him  as  a  body,  capable  of  feeling  bodily  pain.  He 
cannot  be  struck.  He  cannot  be  subject  to  disease.  God  is  a  Spirit.  But  he  is  a  real 
Being.  He  is  what  we  understand  by  a  moral  being — a  moral  being  who  can  sustain 
relations  to  other  beings,  and  can  be  affected  by  the  conditions  and  doings  of  other 
beings.  Our  deepest  feelings — joys  or  sorrows — do  not  come  from  our  bodies,  but  from 
uur  minds.  And  when  we  say  that  God  can  feel,  we  mean  that  his  moral  being  can  be 
afiected,  and  that  his  precise  glory  lies  in  this — ^he  does  feel  rightly,  suitably,  adequately, 
divinely,  in  every  case.  1.  God  must  feel  if  he  can  be  said  to  have  a  perfect  character. 
We  should  take  no  impressions  from  the  wrongs  or  the  goodnesses  around  us  if  wa 
had  no  power  of  feelins,  and  b*.  there  could  be  no  culture  of  character.  If  God  cannot 
feel  it  is  no  longer  intelligible  to  us  to  say  that  he  is  "good."  that  he  is  "love."  2. 
That  God  can  feel  is  taught  by  the  imagery  of  Old  Testament  Scriptures.     Constantly 


CH.  Lxiii.  1— 19.]     THE  BOOK  OP  THE  PROPHET  ISAIAB".  *67 

he  is  represented  as  though  he  were  a  man.  We  read  of  his  feet,  his  breath,  his  hand, 
his  arm,  etc.  "  He  is  represented  as  blessed  according  to  the  merit  and  beauty  of 
whatever  is  done  that  is  right.  He  smelted  a  sweet  savour  in  Noah's  sacrifice.  He 
has  pleasure  in  them  that  hope  in  his  mercy.  He  is  affected  with  joy  over  his  people, 
aa  a  prophet  represents,  even  to  singing  in  the  day  of  their  restored  peace.  He  is 
tender  in  his  feeling  to  the  obedient,  pitying  them  that  fear  him  as  a  father  pitieth  his 
children.  His  very  love  is  partly  passive ;  that  is,  it  is  a  Being  affected  with  compassion 
by  the  bitter  and  hard  lot  of  those  under  sin.  On  the  other  hand,  by  how  many 
unpleasant  varieties  or  pains  of  feeling  does  he  profess  to  suffer  in  his  relation  to  scenee 
of  human  wrong  and  ingratitude!  The  sighing  of  the  prisoner  comes  before  him  to 
command  his  sympathy.  He  calls  after  his  people  as  a  woman  forsaken  and  grieved 
in  spirit.  He  testifies,  'I  am  pressed  under  you  as  a  cart  is  pressed  that  is  full  of 
sheaves.'  His  repentings  are  kindled  together  in  view  of  the  sins  of  his  people.  He 
is  said  to  be  exercised  by  all  manner  of  disagreeable  and  unpleasant  sentiments  in 
relation  to  all  manner  of  evil  doings :  displeased ;  sore  displeased ;  wroth  ;  angry ; 
loathing;  abhorring;  despising;  hating;  weary;  filled  with  abomination;  wounded; 
hurt ;  grieved ;  and  he  even  protests,  like  one  sorrowing,  that  he  could  do  nothing  more 
to  his  vineyard  than  he  had  done  for  it"  (Dr.  H.  Bushnell).  There  must  be  deep 
moral  meanings  in  these  anthropomorphic  expressions.  3.  Rightly  regarding  the  life  of 
the  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  it  becomes  a  proof  that  Qcd  can  feel.  It  is  said  that  Christ  felt 
because  he  was  human ;  the  feeling  was  part  of  the  humanity.  But  if  there  had  been  no 
human  nature,  would  not  he  have  felt  and  borne  our  sorrows  and  our  sins  just  the  same  ? 
The  great  thing  about  Christ  is  that  he  manifests  God  to  us  in  these  our  human 
spheres,  and  under  these  our  human  conditions.  And  in  him  we  see  not  only  the  glory 
of  God's  holiness  and  claims,  but  the  glory  also  of  his  pitying  feeling.  When  God 
makes  himself  most  evident  to  us — as  he  does  in  the  person  of  his  Son — then  we 
behold  a  loving,  pitying,  suffering  God. 

II.  God  dobs  fbel  in  the  particulak  way  of  sympathy  with  the  supfebing. 
"  In  all  their  affliction  he  is  afflicted."  The  prophet  is  reviewing  the  Divine  dealings 
with  his  forefathers;  recalling  more  especially  that  deliverance  from  Egypt,  and 
guidance  to  the  promised  land,  which  was  the  dearest  of  memories  to  every  Jew. 
God's  interest,  he  declares,  had  been  bound  up  with  that  of  his  people.  He  suffered  in 
their  suffering.  Sorrows  came  upon  that  people  from  outward  circumstances ;  and 
worse  sorrows  came  through  their  wilfulness  and  sin.  We  are  to  understand  that  God 
sympathized  with  them  under  both  kinds  of  sorrow.  The  text  is  as  true  for  us  as 
for  Israel  of  old.  Our  human  troubles  are  so  -overwhelming  because  we  persist  in 
bearing  them  alone ;  we  will  not  let  God  bear  them  with  us,  much  less  will  we  let 
him  bear  them  for  us.  We  even  try  to  persuade  ourselves  that  he  does  not  feel  for 
us  under  certain  of  our  sorrows,  because  the  sin  whence  they  come  is  so  abhorrent  to 
him.  Yes,  the  sin  is,  but  the  sinner  is  not — especially  the  stricken,  suffering  sinner 
is  not. 

III.  We  are  God-like  only  as  we  aee  afflicted  in  others'  afflictions.  Pity 
for  the  suffering  is  a  natural  emotion.  Some  of  us  cannot  bear  to  see  even  the  meanest 
creature  suffering  pain.  There  is  much  of  this  "milk  of  human  kindness"  left  in  the 
sinful,  gwrowful  world,  where  man  is  "bom  to  trouble  as  the  sparks  fly  upward."  But 
we  can  only  be  rightly  "afflicted  with  others'  afflictions"  when:  1.  Like  God,  we  can 
see  sin  at  the  root  of  the  affliction,  and  yet  feel  drawn  to  the  afflicted.  Mere  human 
feeling  is  not  strong  enough  to  draw  us  to  the  sinner.  2.  When  we  can  discern  God 
working  out  through  them  his  purposes  of  grace.  As  mere  sufferings  they  must  be 
borne  alone.  We  cannot  share  the  feeling  of  pain;  but  as  chastisements,  as  discipline, 
we  may  bear  troubles  with  others ;  and  it  is  in  these  religious  aspects  of  human 
suffering  that  a  God-like  sympathy  becomes  possible.  3.  As  we  ourselves  are  led 
through  experiences  of  trouble,  as  life  passes  on,  it  ought  to  make  the  brotherhood  of 
souls  perfect.  Nothing  brings  hearts  together  like  a  common  trouble.  Send  a  woman 
who  has  a  child  in  heaven  to  comfort  the  mother  who  looks  into  a  newly  emptied 
cradle.  God  touches  us  all — touches  us  to  the  quick  sometimes — and  helps  us  thus  to 
feel  for  others'  infirmities.  God's  power  on  us  is  his  fellow-feeling  of  our  infirmities. 
Our  power  on  each  other  must  be  just  this — in  closenesg  of  sympathy  we  bear  on* 
another's  burdens. — B.  T. 


468  THE  BOOK  OF  THE  PROPHET  ISAIAH,    [oh.  txni.  1— 18 

Ver.  \0.—Orieving  the  Spirit.  "But  they  rebelled,  and  grieved  his  Holy  Spirit." 
Dean  Plumptre  says,  "  Here  we  may  note  a  foreshadowing  of  the  truth  of  the  trinal 
personality  of  the  unity  of  the  Godhead,  which  was  afterwards  to  be  revealed.  That 
wliich  "  vexed "  the  Holy  Spirit  was,  in  the  nature  of  the  case,  the  unholiness  of  the 
people,  and  this  involved  a  change  in  the  manifestation  of  the  Divine  love,  which  was 
now  compelled  to  show  itself  as  wrath." 

I.  Thb  Spibit  is  holy  ;  bvebythino  impubb  will  obievb  him.  The  Bible  refers 
to  him  as  the  Holy  Ghost,  the  Holy  Spirit,  as  though  to  suggest  to  us  that  it  is  this 
attribute  of  his  character  which  bears  special  relation  to  us,  and  his  work  in  us.  His 
aim  is  our  .sanctification.  All  the  overcomings  of  sin,  all  the  removals  of  hindrances 
and  evils,  all  the  bestowments  of  peace,  are  intended  to  help  us  toward  that  great 
end.  When  we  first  go  forth  into  life  from  a  pure  home,  how  grieved  we  feel  at  the 
association  of  the  scoffer,  the  swearer,  the  vicious  1  To  a  chasbe  wind  how  grievous 
iudelicacy  is!  So  our  impurities  must  grieve  the  pure  Spirit.  Giir  besetting  sins 
must,  be  they  pride,  or  selfishness,  or  conceit,  or  uncharitableness,  or  the  cherishing 
of  foul  thoughts,  be  a  grief  and  a  vexation  to  him. 

XL  The  Spirit  dbgbs  to  active  wobk  fob  God  ;  whebb  there  is  apathy, 
indolence,  OB  BEBELLiousKBSS,  BE  IS  GBIBVBD.  A.mong  the  Weapons  of  the  spiritual 
warfare  we  read  of  the  "  sword  of  the  Spirit,"  as  though  the  activity  of  the  Christian 
depended  on  the  Spirit.  The  highest  attainments  of  Christian  life  have  been  made, 
not  by  quiet  folk,  who  set  themselves  only  on  personal  culture,  but  by  active  folk,  who 
have  gone  forth  to  witness  for  God,  taking  their  lives  in  their  hands.  Wherever  there 
is  shrinking  back  from  active  service — which  is  virtual  rebellion — ^the  Spirit  is  grieved. 
We  are  grieved  when  we  see  a  man  with  great  powers  abusing  or  neglecting  to  use 
them.  The  Spirit  would  act  through  our  energies,  and  is  checked  if  we  hold  our 
powers  back  from  him.  And  we  suffer  ourselves.  The  spiritual  sluggard's  garden  will 
surely  be  like  the  natural  sluggard's.  Thorns  and  thistles  will  spring  up  and  riot  there. 
If  he  would  but  toil,  and  sow,  and  weed,  and  train,  the  dews  and  rains  and  sunshine 
would  help  on  his  work.  This  is  the  reason  of  our  barrenness,  not  that  we  have  had 
no  dews  from  heaven,  no  Spirit  of  God  with  us,  but  that  we  have  neglected  our  part 
of  the  work,  and,  withholding  our  loving  obedience  and  active  service,  have  grieved  his 
Holy  Spirit.— R.  T. 

Vers.  12—14. — Tht  Spirit  of  God  in  Moses.  "Where  is  he  that  put  his  Holy 
Spirit  in  the  midst  of  them?"  The  shepherds  of  the  flock  are  Moses,  Aaron,  and 
Miriam ;  but  the  chief  reference  must  be  to  Moses.  "  God  gave  Moses  his  Holy  Spirit, 
and  with  him  the  gift  of  performing  miracles,  and  leading  and  teaching  the  people." 
The  images  of  these  verses  may  be  thus  explained.  "  One  might  suppose  that  Israel 
would  have  trodden  with  trembling,  uncertain  steps,  the  strange  way  over  the  bottom 
of  the  sea  on  which  human  foot  was  never  set.  But  it  was  not  so.  Rapidly  and 
surely,  as  the  desert  horse  goes  over  the  flat  smooth  desert  without  tottering,  so  did 
they  march  over  that  strange,  perilous  road.  The  image  of  the  cattle  descending  into 
the  valley  is  very  appropriate  for  marking  the  arrival  of  the  Israelites  in  the  promised 
land  after  journeying  in  the  desert.  The  prophet  thinks  of  the  herds  of  nomads  that 
must  cross  a  mountain  range  or  plateau  in  order  to  reach  regions  rich  in  pasture."  The 
point  to  which  attention  may  be  profitably  directed  is,  that  we  usually  fix  our  thoughts 
on  the  outward  revelations  given  to  Moses,  and  the  actual  material  things  which  he 
was  required  and  strengthened  to  do.  And  yet  there  is  a  secret  mystery  in  Moses 
which  is  full  of  suggestion  for  us,  and  makes  him  a  model  for  us  of  the  Divine  dealings 
with  us  also.  God  was  in  Moses,  dwelling  in  him  by  his  Spirit,  the  impulse  and 
inspiration  of  all  good,  true,  wise,  and  loving  things.  We  may,  therefore,  illustrate 
from  Moses — 

L  The  Spirit  of  God  "job  ub;  our  onARANTSK  of  safety. 

II.  The  Spirit  of  Gc»j  with  its;  our  conpidbnob  op  stjfficibnot. 

III.  The  Spirit  of  God  in  us;  our  inspiration  to  all  goodness. 

As  materials  of  illustration  the  following  emblems  of  the  Spirit  may  be  helpfuL 
Water:  cleansing,  fertilizing,  refreshing,  abundant,  freely  given.  Fire:  purifying, 
illuminating,  searching.  Wind:  independent,  powerful,  sensible  in  its  effects,  reviving, 
Oil:   healmg,   comforting,  illumiuating,  consecraciug.     Bain  and  dew;    fertilizing, 


OH.  Liiv.  1—12.]    THE   BOOK  OF  THE  PROPHET  ISAIAH. 


459 


refreshing,  abundant,  Imperceptible,  penetrating.  A  dove:  gentle,  meek,  innocent, 
forgiving.  A  voice:  speaking,  guiding,  warning,  teaching.  A  seal:  impressing, 
securing,  authenticating. — B.  T. 

Ver.  16.— Good  news  concerning  God.  "  Doubtless  thou  art  our  Father."  The  Jews 
were  the  children  of  God.  But  they  had  been  for  a  long  time  so  neglecting  him  that 
they  had  lost  all  the  nearer  and  dearer  thoughts  of  him  ;  and  imaged  him  to  themselves 
through  the  bleared  and  blinded  vision  of  their  own  indulgences,  wickedness,  and 
sin.  He  became  to  them  only  a  God  to  be  feared,  in  the  sense  of  "  frightened  at." 
Then  the  prophet's  message  of  a  merciful  God,  fatherly  still,  recovering  and  saving 
even  the  guilty,  was  inderd  good  news  from  heaven  tp  such  a  people.  But  that  which 
is  true  of  many  Jews  in  the  times  of  the  later  monarchy,  is,  in  measure,  true  also  of  us. 
We  have  let  our  practical  neglect  of  God  set  him  far  from  us,  and  darken  our  thoughts 
concerning  him.  We  think  of  God  as  hard,  severe,  or  indifferent,  and  let  the  bitterness 
of  orphans  enter  into  our  souls.  Then  it  is  good  news  indeed  concerning  God  which 
is  brought  to  us  when  it  can  be  said,  "  Doubtless  he  is  ow  Father."  Two  consequences 
of  this  assurance  about  God  may  be  illustrated. 

I.  He  wants  us  to  be  his  restored,  obedient  children.  True  children,  worthy 
children,  of  the  heavenly  Father.  But  this  is  a  more  difficult  matter  than  we  at  first 
suppose.  For  what  sort  of  children  are  we  now?  And  what  changes  must  we  go 
through  before  we  can  become  the  children  we  should  be  ?  But  God's  interest  follows 
the  prodigals.  He  can  have  no  rest  until  they  comehome.  Shepherds  never  willingly 
lose  their  sheep.  Mothers  cannot  bear  to  lose  a  child.  Our  Father's  seeking,  saving 
mercy  reaches  even  to  the  height  of  the  sacrifice  on  the  cross.  It  restores;  it  fills 
with  the  home-feeling ;  it  prepares  us  for  the  eternal  home-place.  "  Now  are  we  the 
sons  of  God,"  etc. 

II.  He  wants  us  to  learn  op  him  how  to  be  aooD  fathers  and  mothers  to 
OUB  CHILDREN.  Good  SOUS  and  daughters  make  the  best  fathers  and  mothers.  We 
may  learn  of  the  great  Father :  1.  The  power  of  a  sustained  example  of  purity.  2.  The 
influence  of  the  spirit  of  self-denial.  3.  The  value  of  strictness  to  that  which  is  truthful 
and  righteous.  4.  The  gracious  triumph  of  long-suffering  patience.  These  are  just  the 
things  we  need  for  our  humas  ''«therhood  aud  motherhood. — B.  T. 


EXPOSITION. 


CHAPTER  LXIV. 


Yen.  1 — 12. — Israel's  Prayer  ooimNCED 
and  conoluded.  Not  content  with  praying 
God  to  look  upon  them  onoe  more  with 
favour  (ch.  Ixiii.  15),  Israel  now  asks  for  a 
theophany,  or  manifestation  of  the  Divine 
Presence,  such  as  they  have  experienced  in 
the  times  of  old,  and  such  as  shall  suffice  to 
strike  terror  into  the  hearts  of  their  enemies 
(vers.  1 — 4).  With  profound  humility  con- 
fessing their  manifold  and  grievous  iniqui- 
ties, they  beseech  God  once  "nore,  as  their 
Faliier  and  Maker,  to  have  pU/  upon  them, 
reminding  him  of  the  desolate  condition  of 
Judtea  and  Jerusalem,  and  urging  him  no 
longer  to  "refrain  himself"  (vers.  5 — 12). 
"  The  manner,"  as  Mr.  Cheyne  observes,  "  is 
that  of  a  lilurgical  psalm  ;  the  prophet,  as  it 
were,  leads  the  devotions  of  the  assembled 


Church,"  and  utters  in  impassioned  language 
the  feelings  which  deeply  move  them. 

Ver.  1. — Oh  that  thou  wouldest  rend  the 
heavens !  God  "  dwells  in  the  thick  dark- 
ness" (2  Chron.  vi.  1).  "  Thick  clouds  are 
a  covering  to  him  "  as  he  "  walketh  in  the 
circuit  of  heaven"  (Job  xxii.  14).  The 
Church  would  have  the  covering  "  rent," 
and  God  show  himself  openly,  buth  to  his 
people  and  to  their  enemies.  That  thou 
wouldest  oome  down !  God  "  eame  down  "  on 
Sinai  in  the  sight  of  all  the  people  (Exod. 
xix.  11,  20).  David  saw  him  in  vision  "  bow 
the  heavens  and  come  down ;  and  there  was 
darkness  under  his  feet "  (Ps.  xviii.  9).  It 
is  such  an  "epiphany"  which  the  Church 
now  desires — a  revelation  of  God  in  all  his 
glory,  in  his  might  as  against  "  the  nations" 
(ver.  2),  in  his  meroifulness  as  towards  them- 
selves. That  the  momitauis  might  flow 
down ;  or,  quake.  When  Gnd  desiended  on 
Sinai,  "  the  whole  mount  quaked  gifatly  * 
(Exod.   xix.   18).     When  he  appeared  tt 


460 


THE  BOOK  OF   THE  PEOPHET  ISAIAH,     [oh.  ixiv.  1— li 


David,  "  the  earth  shook  and  trembled;  the 
foundations  also  of  the  hills  moved  and  were 
shaken  "  (Ps.  xviii.  7).  When  he  was  seen 
of  Elijah,  "a  great  and  strong  wind  rent 
the  mountains,  and  brake  in  pieces  the  rocks 
before  the  Lord ;  and  after  the  wind  was  an 
earthquake"  (1  Kings  xix.  11).  Micah  saw 
the  Lord  "  coming  forth  out  of  his  place," 
and  "  the  mountains  were  molten  under  him, 
and  the  valleys  cleft "  (Micah  i.  3,  4).  The 
mountains  represent  that  which  is  most  firm 
and  solid  and  strong  upon  tt^e  face  of  the 
earth.  If  even  they  "melt  and  flow  and 
tremble "  at  the  presence  of  God,  what 
might  must  his  be  I  And  who  may  abide 
him? 

Yer.  2.  — Ab  when  the  melting  fire  hnrneth, 
etc. ;  rather,  as  when  fire  kindles  brushwood, 
and  makes  water  to  hail.  Connect  the 
similes  with  the  last  clause  of  ver.  1.  The 
mountains  shall  be  as  powerless  to  resist 
Jeliovah,  as  brushwood  or  water  to  resist 
fire.  To  make  thy  ITame  known  (comp.  ch. 
Ixiii.  12).  Such  an  "epiphany"  as  the 
Church  prays  for  would  make  the  Name  of 
Jehovah  known  far  and  wide,  exalting  him 
high  above  all  gods,  and  causing  "  the  na- 
tions"— t.e.  the  whole  heathen  world  to 
"  tremble  at  his  presence  "  and  refrain  from 
injuring  his  people. 

Ver.  3. — When  thou  didst  terrible  things 
(comp.  Deut.  x.  21 ;  2  Sam.  vii.  23 ;  Ps. 
xlix.  4 ;  cvi.  22).  The  phrase,  as  Mr.  Cheyne 
remarks,  is  a  "  standing "  one  for  the  won- 
ders of  the  Exodus.  Whicli  we  looked  not 
for ;  i.e.  which  transcended  our  utmost  ex- 
pectations. Thou  earnest  down  (see  Exod. 
xix.  11,  20). 

Yer.  4. — Neither  hath  the  eye  seen,  0  Ood, 
beside  thee,  what  he  hath  prepared,  etc.; 
rather,  as  in  the  margin,  nei^r  hath  the  eye 
leen  a  God,  beside  thee,  which  workettt  for 
him  that  waiteth  upon  him.  The  only 
"  living  God  "  who  really  works  for  his  vo- 
taries, and  does  them  good  service,  is 
Jehovah  (comp.  ch.  xli.  23, 24 ;  xliv.  9,  etc.). 
Yer.  5. — Thou  meetest  him  that  rejoiceth. 
God  "  meets  "  with  gracious  welcome  and 
ready  aid  whoever  rejoices  in  doing  right- 
eousness and  serving  him,  whoever  "  remem- 
bers him  in  his  ways."  But  this,  alas  I  is 
not  the  present  relationship  between  God 
and  Israel.  God  is  "angry"  with  them — 
they  must,  therefore, ' '  have  sinned ;  "  and  so 
they  proceed  to  confess  their  sin.  In  those 
is  continuance,  and  we  shall  be  saved.  This 
is  a  very  difficult  passage.  Mr.  Cheyne 
regards  it  as  hopelessly  corrupt.  Bishop 
Lowth  and  Ewald  attempt  emendations.  Of 
tliose  who  accept  the  present  te.^t,  some 
understand  "  in  those "  of  God's  ways, 
others  of  the  "sins"  implied  in  the  confes- 
sion, "We  have  sinned;"  some  make  the 
last  clause  an  affirmation,  others  a  question. 


Delitzsch  renders,  "  Already  we  hare  been 
long  in  this  state  (of  sin),  and  shall  we  be 
saved  ?  "  Grotius  and  Starck,  "  If  we  had 
remained  in  them  (»'.«.  thy  ways)  continue 
ally,  we  should  have  been  saved." 

Ver.  6. — But  we  are  all  as  an  unclean 
thing ;  rather,  we  are  all  become  as  one  who 
is  unclean  (comp,  ch.  xxxv.  8 ;  lii.  1),  A 
moral  leprosy  is  upon  us.  We  are  like  the 
leprous  man,  who  has  to  rend  his  clothes, 
and  to  go  about  crying  "Tame I  tdmel" 
"  Unclean !  unclean  1 "  that  those  who  hear 
may  get  out  of  his  way.  All  our  righteous- 
nesses are  as  filthy  rags ;  or,  as  a  menstraou* 
garment  (see  Lam.  1 17).  In  the  best  deeds 
of  the  best  men  there  is  some  taint  of  eviL 
As  Hooker  says,  "Our  very  repentances 
require  to  be  repented  of."  We  aU  do  fade 
as  a  leaf  (comp.  oh.  i.  30,  "  Te  shall  be  as 
an  oak  whose  leaf  fadeth;"  see  also  oh. 
xxxiv.  4).  Our  iniquities  . .  .  have  taken  us 
away;  or,  carried  us  away;  i.e.  taken  us 
far  from  God,  carried  ns  into  a  region  where 
God  is  not,  or  where  at  any  rate  "  his  pre- 
sence is  not  felt "  (Cheyne). 

Ver.  7. — There  is  none  that  calleth  on  thy 
Name.  A  hyperbole,  like  Ps.  xix.  1,  3, 
"  There  is  none  that  doeth  good,  no,  not 
one."  A  general  lethargy  and  apathy  had 
come  over  the  people,  so  that  they  could 
with  difficulty  rouse  themselves  to  faith 
and  calling  upon  God.  But  this  general 
lethargy  was  not  universal;  there  was  a 
"remnant"  which  "prayed  and  did  not 
faint."  That  stirreth  up  himself  to  take  hold 
of  thee.  This  expresses  more  than  mere 
prayer ;  it  is  earnest,  intense,  "  effectual  fer- 
vent" prayer.  Perhaps  none  among  the 
exUes  may  have  been  capable  of  such  sup- 
plication as  this,  especially  as  God  had  hid 
his  faoe  from  them,  and  no  longer  looked  on 
them  with  favour.  And  hast  consumed  us, 
because  of  our  iniquities;  rather,  and  hast 
delivered  us  into  the  power  (literally,  hand) 
of  our  iniquities.  Men's  sins  are  their 
masters,  and  exercise  a  tyrannical  control 
over  them,  which  they  are  often  quite  un- 
able to  resist  (comp.  Bzek.  xxxiii.  10,  "  If 
our  transgressions  and  our  sins  be  upon  us, 
and  we  pine  away  in  them,  how  should  we 
then  live  ?  ").  God  at  times  judicially  de- 
livers the  wicked  into  the  power  of  their  sins 
(see  Bom.  i.  24,  26,  28). 

Yer.  8. — But  now,  0  Lord,  thou  art  our 
Father  (see  the  conmient  on  oh.  Ixiii.  16). 
We  are  the  clay,  and  thou  oni  Potter  (comp. 
ch.  xxix.  16;  xlv.  9).  Thy  hands  have 
made  us  and  fashioned  us,  both  as  indi- 
viduals and  as  a  nation.  Thou  hast  lavished 
thy  labour  and  thy  skill  upon  us.  Surely 
thou  wUt  not  "  forsake  the  work  rf  thine 
own  hands  "  (Ps.  cxxxviii.  8). 

Ver.  9. — Be  not  wroth  very  sore.  At  the 
time  of  the  Captivity  (}od  was  wroth  very 


on.  LXiv.  1— 12.]    THE  BOOK  OP  THE  PROPHET  ISAIAH. 


461 


■ore  (Lam.  y.  22).  His  anger  was  hot 
against  the  sheep  of  his  pasture  (Ps.  Ixxiv. 
1).  Bnit  they  had  suffered,  they  had  been 
afSioted  many  years.  Might  he  not  now 
relent,  and  remit  somewhat  from  his  fierce 
anger?  Neither  remember  inijnity  (comp. 
Ps.  Ixxix.  8).  God  had  already  made  a 
promise  by  the  mouth  of  Isaiah,  "  I,  even  I, 
am  he  that  blotteth  out  thy  trangressions, 
and  will  not  remember  thy  tint "  (ch.  xliii. 
25).  The  captives  lay  hold,  as  it  were,  on 
this  promise,  edd  entreat  that  their  "  ini- 
quity "  may  be  not  only  forgiven,  but  for- 
gotten (Jer.  xxxi.  34).  We  are  all  thy  people. 
A  fresh  argument.  "  We  are  thy  children," 
individually  (ver.  8);  "we  are  thy  work, 
thy  creatures  "  (ver.  8),  again  individually ; 
but  also,  "  we  are  all  of  ns  (kulldnu),  collec- 
tively, thy  people  " — the  people  whom  thou 
hast  chosen  to  thyself,  and  over  whom  thou 
hast  watched  for  so  many  centuries.  Surely 
this  consideration,  if  no  other,  will  induce 
thee  to  forego  thy  wrath  and  forgive  our 
iniquity. 

Ver.  10. — ^Thy  holy  cities  are  a  wilderness. 
Commonly  Jerusalem  stands  alone  as  "  the 
holy  city  "  (ch.  xlviii.  2 ;  Ivi.  1 ;  Dan.  ix.  24 ; 
Neh.  xi.  1,  18);  but  here  the  epithet  is 
applied  to  the  cities  of  Judah  generally. 
They  were  all  in  a  certain  sense  "holy,"  as 


being  comprised  within  the  limits  of  "  the 
holy  land"  (Zeoh.  ii.  12)  and  "the  holy 
border  "  (Ps.  IxxviiL  54).  Zion  . . .  Jem- 
salem  (see  the  comment  on  ch.  Ixii.  1). 

Ver.  11. — Our  holy  and  our  I'eantifliV 
house.  This  is  the  true  meanini:;.  The 
exiles  have  the  tenderest  and  moat  vivid 
remembrance  of  the  holiness  and  the  beauty 
(or  glory)  of  that  edifice,  which  had  formed 
the  centre  of  the  national  life  for  above  four 
centuries,  and  liad  been  a  marvel  of  richness 
and  magnificence.  Many  of  them  had  seen 
it  with  their  own  eyes  (Ezra  iii.  12),  and 
could  never  forget  its  splendours.  Where 
our  fathers  praised  thee.  Though  in  the 
later  times  of  the  Captivity  there  were  still 
some  of  the  exiles  who  had  seen  the  temple, 
and  probably  worshipped  in  it,  yet  with  the 
great  majority  it  was  otherwise.  They 
thought  of  the  temple  as  the  place  where 
their  "  fathers  "  had  worshipped.  Bnmed 
up  with  fire  (see  2  Kings  xxv.  9 ;  2  Chron. 
zxxvi.  19;  Jer.  Iii.  13).  Our  pleasant 
things ;  or,  our  delectable  thingt — as  in  ch. 
xliv.  9 ;  the  courts,  gardens,  outbuildings  of 
the  temple,  are  probably  meant, 

Ver.  12.— Wilt  thou  refrain  thyself  for 
these  things?  rather,  at  iheie  thingt — see- 
ing that  these  things  are  so.  Will  they  not 
provoke  thee  to  interfere  f 


H0MILETIC8. 

Yen,  8 — 12. — Fkatfor  mtrey.  Israel  had  three  main  grounds  on  whioli  they  could 
rely  in  pleading  to  God  for  mercy. 

L  God  was  theib  Maeeb.  The  framer  of  a  work  cannot  see  without  dissatisfaction 
the  destruction  of  his  work,  or  its  deterioration,  or  its  depravation  to  purposes  lower 
than  those  intended  for  it.  This  dissatisfaction  is  the  greater,  the  more  considerable 
the  labour  and  the  thought  that  has  been  expended  upon  the  work,  the  greater  the 
care  that  has  been  taken  of  it,  the  longer  Chat  it  has  been  watched  over.  Israel,  as  far 
as  earth  was  concerned,  was  God's  master-work,  that  in  which  God's  creative  efforts  had 
culminated.  He  had  created  the  world  for  mankind,  and  mankind  (in  a  certain  sense) 
for  Israel.  He  had  loved  and  cherished  Israel,  watched  over  his  work,  protected  and 
guarded  it,  for  well-nigh  a  millennium.  Israel  might  well  feel  that  it  had  a  tower  of 
strength  in  the  plea,  "  We  are  the  work  of  thy  hand  "  (ver.  8). 

II.  GtoD  WAS  THEIR  FATHER.  God  had  condescended  to  reveal  himself  as  their 
"  Father "  at  the  time  of  the  Exodus  (Deut.  xxxii.  6) ;  and  ever  since  had  constantly 
addressed  them,  through  his  prophets,  as  his  "  children  "  (Exod.  iii.  22 ;  Deut.  xxxii.  19, 
20 ;  Ps.  Ixxx.  15 ;  Ixxxii.  6 ;  ciii.  13 ;  Prov.  iii.  12  ;  viii.  32 ;  ch.  i.  2, 4 ;  xxx.  1, 9 ;  xliii.  6 ; 
xlv.  11 ;  Ixiii.  8;  Hos.  i.  10  ;  xi.  1,  etc.).  Rebellious,  backsliding  children,  indeed,  bad 
they  been;  yet  still  not  wholly  renounced,  not  wholly  cast  off,  not  deprived  of  the 
name  or  of  the  rights  of  children.  Thus  they  could  plead  virith  God  his  fatherhood 
(ch.  bdii.  16 ;  Ixiv.  8),  and  therewith  claim  his  tender  care,  and  kind  consideration,  and 
merciful  forgiveness,  and  gracious  protection,  and  powerful  aid  against  their  enemies. 
A  Father  could  :aot  but  pity  his  children,  could  not  but  he  ready,  on  their  turning  to 
him  with  true  penitence  and  humble  confession  of  sin  (vers.  6 — 7),  to  receive  them  and 
reinstate  them  in  his  favour. 

III.  God  WAS  THEIR  EiNO.  The  Israelites  were  not  only  God's  "  children  "—they 
were  "  his  people."  He  had  acknowledged  them  as  such  from  the  days  of  Moses  (Exod. 
iii.  7, 10;  vii.  16;  viii.  1,  etc.).    He  bad  taken  them  to  himself  to  be  his  "peculiar 


462  THE  BOOK  OP  THE  PROPHET  ISAIAH,    [oh.  lxiv.  1— 12. 

treasure — a  kingdom  of  priests,  and  an  lioly  nation "  (Exod.  xix.  5,  6).  He  had 
actually  directed  the  jjolicy  of  their  state,  as  king,  for  several  centuries  (Judg.  viii.  23 ; 
1  Sara.  viii.  7  ;  x.  19  ;  xii.  12).  They  had  rejected  him,  when  they  insisted  on  having 
a  king  "like  the  nations"  (1  Sam.  viii.  5);  but,  with  the  Captivity,  his  kingly  right 
had  revived  (Hos.  xiii.  10),  and  they  could  properly  appeal  to  him  as  "  his  people  " 
(ver.  9). 

The  Christian  Church,  "  Israel  after  the  Spirit,"  is  equally  entitled  to  make  these 
pleas  with  "  Israel  after  the  flesh."  God  is  their  Maker ;  God  is  their  Father  (Matt.  v. 
45,  48;  vi.  1 — 9,  etc.).  Christ  is  their  King  (John  xviii.  36).  But  they  have  also  a 
further  plea;  Christ  is  their  Eedeemer;  he  has  borne  their  sins — ^he  has  suffered  in 
their  stead — ^he  has  made  atonement  for  them.  In  his  Name  they  can  "  go  boldly  to 
the  throne  of  grace  "  (Heb,  iv.  16),  secure  that  they  will  "  obtain  mercy,  and  find  grace 
to  help  in  time  of  need." 


HOMILIES  BY  VABIOUS  AUTHOSa 

Vers.  1 — 5. — Longing  for  the  appearance  of  Ood.  "  Widely  yawns  the  gulf  between 
Israel  and  her  God.  A  revelation  on  the  widest  possible  scale  is  necessary  to  smite 
down  unbelief  and  annihilate  opposition ;  God  himself  must  appear." 

I.  FiouEES  OF  THE  MANIFESTATION  OF  GoD.  The  rending  of  the  heavens.  For  the 
time  of  trouble  is  as  the  hiding  of  the  face  of  God  behind  thick  clouds  (Job  xxii.  13, 14). 
The  word  given,  rend,  is  very  strong — tear  asunder,  as  garments  in  grief  (Gen.  xxxvii. 
29 ;  2  Sam.  xiii.  31),  or  as  a  wild  beast  the  breast  of  any  one.  The  faithful  firmly 
believe  that  he  will  find  a  way  to  show  himself  through  the  densest  darkness  of  the  most 
unhappy  time.  The  idea  is  that  of  a  coming  in  power  to  destroy  his  foes  (cf.  Ps.  xliv. 
6,  6).  The  shaking  mountain,  the  fire  causing  the  boiling  of  the  waters,  the  terror  of 
the  nations,  and  the  terrible  deeds  of  Jehovah — all  this  imagery  belongs  to  the  memory 
of  the  Exodus,  where  he  proved  himself  to  be  the  living  God. 

II.  Evangelical  application.  Ver.  4  is  cited  by  St.  Paul  as  illustrating  the  effect 
of  the  gospel  in  producing  happiness  and  salvation  (1  Cor.  ii.  9).  If  the  prophet  urges 
that  no  god  had  ever  done  what  Jehovah  had  done,  and  no  human  being  had  witnessed 
such  manifestations  from  any,  other  quarter,  the  apostle  applies  the  thought  to  the 
manifestation  of  Gud  in  Christ.  For  waiting  men  salvation  is  piepared.  Piety  may  bo 
defined — is  so  defined  in  Scripture — as  waiting  upon  God  (Ps.  xxv.  3,  5,  21 ;  xxvii. 
14  ;  xxxvii.  9  ;  cxxx.  5).  God  had  given  manifestations  of  his  existence  in  the  past, 
of  his  powur  and  goodness,  which  had  been  furnished  to  none  other  than  his  friends. 
And  to  those  interpositions  the  suppliants  appeal  as  a  reason  why  he  should  agaiu 
interpose  and  save  them  in  their  sore  calamities. — J. 

Vers.  5 — 11. — The  cry  of  humiliation  and  of  hope.  I.  The  confession.  "Woe  are 
we,  for  we  are  unclean !  "  Like  the  leper,  dwelling  alone  without  the  camp  (Lev.  xiii. 
44^46),  so  is  the  i  eople ;  as  he  is  cut  off  from  the  scciety  of  men,  so  they  from  the 
converse  of  God  ;  or  as  something  ceremohially  pulluted  and  defiled  (Lev.  v.  2  ;  Deut. 
xiv.  19),  or  morally  defiled  (Job  xiv.  4).  The  language  carries  a  feeling  of  intense 
abhorrence.  Under  another  figure,  their  penal  offences  hare  "carried  them  away  like 
the  wind,"  whither  Jehovah  is  not ;  and  they  are  as  the  leaves  fallen  and  faded,  from 
which  all  beauty  has  disappeared.  In  this  degeneracy  the  very  conscience  and  the 
religious  instinct  is  dend,  or  in  a  state  of  lethargy.  "  How  aptly  is  the  state  of  a  sinful 
world  described !  How  indisposed  to  rouse  itself  to  call  upon  God  1"  No  man  rises  to 
God  without  an  effort;  and  unless  men  make  an  effort  for  this,  they  fall  into  the 
stupidity  of  sin  as  certainly  as  a  drowsy  man  sinks  back  into  deep  sleep.  So  nerveless 
are  they,  they  cannot  "stir  themselves"  to  take  hold  en  God.  He,  on  the  other  hand, 
seems  to  have  hidden  his  face  from  them,  and  to  have  ',)ven  them  over  into  the  hand  of 
their  sins — if  this  be  the  true  rendering.  Their  inio  i'ties  tyrannize  over  them;  they 
pine  in  them,  and  luoral  life  seems,  under  such  conditions,  hopeless. 

II.  The  plea  of  the  Church.  1.  She  reminds  him  of  the  fatherly  relation.  Thii 
includes  creative  eiiergv  and  providential  will.  He  has  made  them  and  moulded  them, 
as  clay  is  moulded  by  the  potter.     He,  therefore,  must  restore  them,  and  he  alone;  for 


JH.  Lxiv^l— 12.]    THE  BOOB   OP  THE  PROPHET  ISAIAH.  463 


they  are  wholly  in  his  hand,  and  under  his  control.  "  The  whole  verse  is  an  acknow- 
ledgment of  the  sovereignty  oS  God.  It  expresses  the  feeling  which  all  have  under  the 
conviction  of  sin,  when  sensihle  that  they  are  exposed  to  the  Diviue  displeasure  for 
their  transgressions.  Then  they  feel,  if  they  are  to  he  saved,  it  must  be  by  the  mere 
sovereignty  of  God ;  and  they  implore  his  interposition  to  '  mould  and  guide  them  at 
his  will.'  Only  when  sinners  have  this  feeling  do  they  hope  for  relief ;  and  then  they 
feel  that  if  they  are  lost,  it  will  be  right ;  if  saved,  it  will  be  because  God  moulds  them 
as  the  potter  does  the  clay."  2.  She  reminds  Mm  of  other  motives  for  his  interference. 
His  holy  cities  have  become  waste,  tlie  holy  and  splendid  house  of  Jehovah  reduced  to 
ruins,  with  all  its  precious  objects.  The  land  and  the  temple  were  alike  dedicated, 
consecrated  to  God,  hallowed  also  by  the  memory  of  ancestral  piety.  And  what  attach- 
ment stronger  than  that  to  places  of  worship  where  our  forefathers  engaged  in  the 
service  of  God?  "  It  would  be  difficult  to  find  any  passage  in  the  Bible,  or  out  of  it,  to 
equal  this  in  pathos.  Here  was  an  exiled  people,  long  suffering  in  a  distant  land,  with 
the  reflection  that  their  homes  were  in  ruins,  their  splendid  temple  long  since  fired  and 
lying  in  ruins,  the  rank  grass  growing  in  their  streets,  their  country  overrun  by 
beasts  and  with  a  rank  vegetation.  To  that  land  they  sighed  to  return;  and  here, 
with  the  deepest  emotion,  they  plead  with  God  on  behalf  of  their  desolate  country.  We 
should  go  to  Gud  with  deep  emotion  when  his  Church  is  prostrate,  and  then  is  the  time 
when  we  should  use  the  most  tender  pleadings,  and  our  heart  should  be  melted  within 
us."  We  are  reminded  also  of  the  lesson  of  childlikeness  in  prayer.  Why  should  we 
ever  be  ashamed  of  the  child-heart  and  the  child's  utterance,  "  crying  in  the  night,  and 
with  no  language  but  a  cry  "  ?  "  Wilt  thou  hpld  thy  peace  f  "  If  there  is  any  mean- 
ing in  the  names  "Father"  and  "child"  in  religion,  then  such  language  is  natural, 
reverent,  justifiable ;  and  the  energj'  of  the  soul  from  which  it  springs  Is  prevailing 
with  the  All-powerful  and  the  All -merciful.  "Here  is  a  model  of  affecdonate  and 
earnest  entreaty  for  Divine  interposition  in  the  day  of  calamity.  Thus  may  all  God's 
people  learn  to  approach  him  as  a  Father,  and  feel  that  they  have  the  inestimable  privi- 
lege, in  times  of  trial,  of  making  known  their  wants  to  the  Must  High.  Thus  pleading, 
he  will  hear  us ;  thus  presenting  our  cause,  he  will  interpose  to  save  us." — J. 

Ver.  7. — The  averted  face.  "  Thou  hast  hid  thy  face  from  us.''  If  so  we  cannot  be 
happy.  The  universe  itself  will  refuse  to  strike  out  its  sweetest  notes  of  joy  for  us.  It 
is  a  Father's  world,  and  must  have  a  Father's  love  in  it  all  to  make  us  blessed  I  One  of 
the  oldest,  sweetest  prayers  in  the  Bible  is,  "  God  he  merciful  to  us,  and  bless  us,  and 
cause  his  face  to  shine  upon  us."  The  Christian  must  have  this  blessing.  You  say, 
"  Ah !  but  men  of  the  world  can  enjoy  nature  and  society  without  God."  It  is  manifest, 
you  declare,  that  they  do.  Certainly ;  but  even  then  it  is  a  surface-joy,  even  then  it 
m»y  be  disturbed  by  the  Egyptian  death's-head  at  the  feast ;  by  memories  flashing 
across  the  mind;  some  vulture  may  suddenly  swoop  down  upon  its  prey  in  their 
hearts.  But  a  Christian  has  his  joy  in  God,  and  without  him  he  is  out  of  health, 
sick,  faint,  weary,  sad.  Spiritual  health  is  necessary  to  the  soul  whx>  has  known  God, 
to  make  enjoyment  complete  and  real. 

L  This  is  not  an  arbitbart  act.  Some  parents  are  by  turn  tender  and  severe ; 
they  indulge  and  they  punish  in  hasty  moods.  Their  frame  of  mind  is  not  regulated 
by  high  principle,  by  a  henlthy  estimate  of  things.  It  is  otherwise  with  God.  The 
earliest  records  tell  us  that  to  deal  with  the  righteous  as  with  the  wicked  is  far 
from  him.  Yes,  very  far  I  We  read  in  Isaiah  that  God  had  hidden  his  face  from  the 
house  of  Jacob,  but  it  was  because  they  had  "  sought  out  them  that  have  familiar 
spirits,  and  unto  wizards."  "  Should  not,"  says  the  prophet,  "  a  people  seek  unto  their 
God  ?  "  And  again  Isaiah  says,  "  But  your  iniquities  have  separated  between  you  and 
your  God,  and  your  sins  have  hid  his  face  from  you."  Tliis  is  the  secret  of  the  hiding. 
Sin  is  against  the  peace,  puiity,  beauty,  order  of  the  imiverse,  and  it  wrongs  a  man's 
own  sold.  Would  it  be  right  to  smile,  then  ?  Mark,  God  does  not  hide  his  face 
because  of  old  sins  that  have  been  repented  of  and  forgiven.  Bememher  that  there  is 
no  humam,  meanness  in  God's  nature.  He  does  not  touch  the  heart  with  pain  about 
old  delinquencies.  "  Thy  sins  and  thine  iniquities  will  I  remember  no  more."  I 
am  told  that  there  are  some  people  who  do  not  pray  for  the  forgiveness  of  sins, 
tiecause  they  are  Christians,  and  all  has  been  forgiven  them  unto  the  end.    That  a 


464  THE  BOOK  OF  THE  PROPHET  ISAIAH,    [cm.  lxiv.  1— W 

perversion  I  Is  not  the  very  test  of  their  being  Christ's  at  all  something  more  than 
present  feeling ;  viz.  that  enduring  unto  the  end  they  shall  be  saved  ?  Then  they  find 
the  Lord's  Prayer  a  difficulty— "Forgive  us  our  trespasses;"  and  they  suggest  that 
that  was  only  a  provisionary  prayer,  until  the  dispensation  of  the  Spirit  came  I  Such 
methods  would  destroy  the  whole  authority  of  Scripture.  A  man  might  hear  me  take 
a  text  and  say, "  ITiat  was  said  to  apostles"  implying  it  was  only  meant  for  them.  No! 
we  sin  every  day,  and  we  need  a  fountain  ever  open  for  sin  and  uncleanness.  We  need 
as  much  the  prayer  for  daily  forgiveness  as  we  do  for  daily  bread.  It  is  when  sin  is 
indulged  in  by  us  who  profess  to  love  him — when  it  becomes  sweet,  when  it  becoines 
habitual,  when  it  has  withdrawn  na  from  the  Divine  fellowship— that  God  hides  his 
face. 

II.  This  ib  dbteimental  to  all  jot.  We  are  made  to  enjoy  nature  and  men.  We 
are  constituted  for  every  variety  of  joy.  But  as  one  nerve  in  agony  can  destroy  all  the 
rest  of  night,  so  a  sin  that  separates  us  firom  God  can  darken  all  other  joy.  Even  in 
the  sweet  summer-time,  when  holiday  comes,  we  still  need  him.  The  golden-sanded 
bay,  the  landscape  full  of  greens  and  greys,  the  iridescence  of  light  through  the  clouds 
above  the  mountains,  the  scent  of  the  pines,  the  delicate  harmonies  of  colour  in  the 
fields,  the  mossy  carpet  of  the  woods,  the  russet  roofs  of  cottages  half  hidden  in  the 
blossoms  of  summer, — all  these,  so  restful  and  refreshing,  lose  their  charm  if  the  Saviour's 
smile  be  absent,  if  we  cannot  hear  his  voice  amid  the  groves  and  hills,  and  at  evening 
feel  "  we  have  walked  with  God  to-day."  It  was  true  in  the  old  dispensation,  when  the 
revelation  was  through  patriarchs,  and  prophets,  and  symbols,  and  sacrifices ;  but  it  is 
intensely  true  now,  that  we  have  seen  God  in  the  face  of  Jesus  Christ — that  God's 
averted  face  is  the  soul's  severest  punishment.  We  have  come  very  near  to  God.  No 
human  priesthood  intervenes  now.  We  have  boldness  of  access  by  faith  to  the  throne 
of  God.  No  veil  is  over  the  holy  of  holies  now.  We  draw  near  through  the  rent  veil — 
that  is  to  say,  Christ's  flesh.  Consequently  enjoyment  deepens ;  consequently  also  the 
sorrow  deepens  when  I  sin.  Why  ?  Because  the  more  clearly  I  have  seen  the  face,  th« 
more  I  feel  its  averted  glance. 

IIL  This  is  the  most  sphiitual  of  all  tests.  It  has  to  do  with  the  life  within 
as  well  as  the  conduct  without.  There,  where  no  eye  of  man  reaches — there,  in  the 
galleries  where  no  foot  of  man  ever  treads — are  the  sights  and  sounds  which  may  drive 
away  the  Divine  Guest.  Long  before  sin  incarnates  itself  in  deeds,  before  it  becomes 
actual  and  open,  the  evil  is  at  work.  The  tree  is  rotten  while  the  bark  is  sound.  First 
make  the  tree  good.  Yes ;  and  remember  that  decay  always  begins  at  central  points 
outside  the  reach  of  man's  observation.  Tes,  and  outside  the  reach  of  our  own  obser- 
vation sometimes.  Hence  the  prayer,  "  Search  me,  0  God,  and  know  my  heart ;  try 
me,  and  know  my  thoughts ;  and  see  if  there  be  any  evil  way  in  me,  and  lead  me  is 
the  way  everlasting."  1.  Men  like  other  tests.  Their  "  opinions,"  their  attendance  at 
sacraments,  their  absolution  by  eonfsjssora,  their  consistency  of  conduct.  2.  Men  realize 
the  power  of  this  in  times  of  amxiety  and  trial.  Now  that  they  are  brought  low  in  sick- 
ness ;  now  that  friends  are  separated  from  them  who  used  to  cheer  and  inspire  them ; 
now  that  they  are  very  near  to  the  valley  of  the  shadow  of  death — nothing  wiU  do  but 
reality  then.  The  words  of  others,  their  good  opinions  of  us, — all  these  stand  for  less 
than  nothing  then.  May  God's  face  shine  in  again  upon  our  souls  now !  That  is 
heaven — at  least,  it  is  the  premonition  of  it.  All  our  worst  sorrows  wiU  flee  like  the 
weird  shadows  on  the  mountains  before  the  bright  b  ams  of  the  Sun  of  Bighteousness. 
It  is  pleasant  for  others  to  smile  on  us — to  walk  in  the  light  of  human  appreciation  and 
love.  Households  feel  this ;  Churches  feel  it.  Sometimes  noble  and  valiant  men  in  great 
Beformatiun  eras  have  to  do  without  it.  The  light  varies  so,  too ;  it  is  so  uncertain  at 
the  best.  But  this  shining  of  the  face  of  God  makes  the  heart  restful  and  gladsome 
everywhere.  We  shall  one  day  enjoy  it  to  the  full.  No  clouds  of  sin  or  doubt  will 
intervene  between  us  and  God.  So  is  it  with  the  blessed  dead.  Many  times  the 
beautiful  descriptions  St.  John  gives  of  heaven  in  the  Apocalypse  are  negative.  "  No 
curse,"  "no  night,"  "no  sorrow,"  "no  more  death."  But  once  it  is  positive:  "They 
shall  see  his  face,  and  his  Name  shall  be  in  their  foreheads." — W.  M.  S. 

Vers.  1 — 5. — Hope  in  God.  The  fervent  language  of  the  text  is  indicative  of  an 
intense  s{»ritual  struggle;  the  heart  of  the  prophet  is  filled  with  onnfliotino;  hopes  a.nd 


OT.  LXiv.  1— 12.]    THE  BOOK  OP  THE  PROPHET  ISAIAH.  4«5 

fears.  Sensible  of  great  national  sins,  but  mindful  of  great  mercies  at  the  hand  of  Qod, 
he  now  fears  lest  Israel  has  gone  beyond  redemption,  and  now  prays  for  Divine  rescue 
and  restoration.    We  have— 

I.  A  SENSE  OF  God's  ovbbwhblmino  powbb.  Israel  was  brought  yery  low ;  her  land 
was  desolate,  her  people  scattered,  her  ordinances  unobserved ;  but  let  God  once  appear 
in  his  majesty  and  his  strength,  and  everything  would  he  subdued  before  him ;  the 
enemy  would  be  utterly  routed,  the  cause  of  truth  and  piety  would  immediately 
triumph  (vers.  1 — 3).  Low  as  the  Church  may  he  found  at  any  time,  it  only  needs 
that  God's  presence  should  be  manifested,  and  his  power  be  exercised,  and  the  strongest 
mountains  of  difficulty  will  melt  away,  prejudice  be  uprooted,  hatred  be  cast  out, 
unbelief  he  dislodged,  indifference  and  indecision  be  consumed,  earnest  thought  be 
enkindled,  piety  and  virtue  be  made  to  burn  and  to  enlighten. 

II.  A  EECOQNiTioN  OF  HIS  RIGHTEOUSNESS.  (Ver.  5.)  God  meets  with  the  tokens 
of  his  favour  those  that  rejuice  to  work  righteousness,  that  remember  him  in  his 
appointed  ways — in  worship,  in  thanksgiving,  in  obedience,  in  filial  submission ;  hut  he 
is  wroth  with  Israel,  and  righteously  so,  for  Israel  has  sinned.  In  every  age  and  land 
he  that  works  righteousness  is  accepted  and  blessed  of  God ;  at  all  times  and  in  every 
place  the  man  that  sins  against  his  conscience  must  confront  the  anger  of  God,  showing 
itself  in  one  or  more  of  a  number  of  ways — in  compunction,  in  ignominy,  in  desolation 
and  ruin,  in  sickness,  in  desertion  and  loneliness,  or  in  early  death. 

III.  A     CONSCIOUSNESS     OF     UTTEB     UNDEBERVBDNBSS.        "In    thoSe    [sins]    IS    COU- 

tinuance ; "  or  long  bave  we  continued  in  our  sins,  "  and  shall  we  be  saved?"  (ver.  6). 
Is  there  salvation  to  he  found  for  the  nation  that' for  whole  generations  has  forsaken  its 
God  ?  is  there  mercy  to  he  had  for  the  individual  soul  that  for  whole  periods  of  life  has 
lived  in  guilty  negligence  of  a  Divine  Father  and  Saviour  ? 

IV.  A   KEMEMBRANCE   OF    HIS    ABOUNDING    GOODNESS.        (Ver.  4.)        It  Is   "JehoVah 

of  hosts"  alone  that  wrought  these  marvellous  deUverances  for  his  expectant  people. 
AU  other  deities  ignominiously  and  pitiably  failed  their  devotees  in  the  hour  of  trial. 
Their  idols  had  mouths,  but  they  spake  not;  they  had  hands,  but  they  handled  not; 
their  voice  could  not  command  the  storm,  nor  their  arm  arrest  the  tide.  But  the 
history  of  the  people  of  God  and  of  the  Church  of  God  is  a  history  of  Divine  goodness 
and  grace,  of  interposition  in  the  time  of  peril,  of  redemption  from  ruin,  of  gracious  and 
glorious  manifestations  of  Divine  affection  and  attachment.    This  encouiages  to — 

V.  A  PRAYER  FOR  HIS  EFFECTUAL  INTERPOSITION.  "  Oh  that  thou  wouldest  rcud 
the  heavens !  that  thou  wouldest  come  dowq  1 "  (ver.  1).  Our  un  worthiness  is  very 
great,  but  thy  mercy  is  large  and  free ;  make  thy  presence  known,  thy  power  felt,  in 
the  midst  of  us. — C. 

Ver.  6. — Life  aa  a  leaf.  There  are  three  volumes  in  the  great  work  of  God  by  which 
he  is  educating  us  —the  written  Word,  Divine  providence,  and  the  world  in  which  he 
has  placed  us.  There  are  many  pages  in  this  last  volume,  and  we  do  well  to  read  them 
with  reverent  spirit.  We  may  learn  many  things  from  the  vegetation  which  clothes 
and  adorns  the  world,  and  which  supplies  us  with  food  and  medicine  and  shelter. 
The  fading  of  the  leaf  is  particularly  suggestive ;  we  are  reminded  that — 

i.  Alt,  is  NOT  lost  to  the  tree  when  the  leap  falls.  The  leaf  has  been  a 
recipient  from  the  trunk,  drinking  in  its  vital  juices,  but  it  has  been  giving  as  well  as 
receiving ;  it  has  been  absorbing  sunshine  and  air  and  moisture,  and  has  been  passing 
these  on  to  the  trunk,  doing  this  in  the  very  act  of  decaying,  so  that  when  the  leaf 
has  fallen  its  most  precious  part  remains  behind.  We  are  large  recipients  from  the 
society  to  which  we  belong,  but  we  should  be  continually  giving  as  well  as  taking. 
Before  we  fall,  and  even  as  we  fade,  we  may  be,  and  should  be,  imparting  wisdom  and 
truth,  all  wholesome  and  helpful  principles,  a  reverent  and  holy  spirit,  by  which  the 
community  will  be  the  better  and  the  richer  when  we  are  no  longer  seen  or  even 
remembered. 

n.  There  is  an  apparent  but  treacherous  beauty  nr  decay.  The  russet 
tints  of  autumn  are  very  exquisite,  but  it  is  the  beauty  of  decay.  Each  particular  leaf 
is  pitted  and  spotted  and  torn,  and  it  owes  its  colour  to  the  decomposition  which  has 
begun.  So  is  it  with  some  fair  human  institutions:  there  may  be  the  grandeur  or  the 
brilliancy  of  external  prosperity— superficially  regarded  they  are  interestiBg,  &ir, 


466  THE   BOOK  OP  THE  PROPHET  ISAIAH,    [oh.  lxiv.  1— 12. 

admirable — but  there  is  no  inward  soundness ;  it  is  not  the  excellency  of  growing  life 
we  are  looking  upon,  but  the  melancholy  beauty  of  decay. 

III.  The  inevitablbness  of  dbolinb.  A  psalmist  and  a  prophet  speak  poetically 
*f  "  trees  whose  leaves  do  not  fade."  But  such  trees,  we  know,  are  not  found  in  the 
vegetable  kingdom.  Buman  hearts  need  not  fade.  They  who  are  ever  drinking  in  the 
sunshine  of  Divine  truth,  who  bathe  in  the  waters  of  Divine  wisdom,  on  whom  fall  con- 
tinually the  dews  of  the  Divine  Spirit — these  are  "trees  planted  by  the  rivers  of 
vvater,"  and  "  their  leaf  does  not  wither ; "  they  keep  their  freshness,  their  purity, 
their  joy  to  the  last ;  they  never  lose  it.  But  human  lives  must.  We  all  do  fade  as  a 
leaf;  the  time  must  be  reached  when  the  physical  and  mental  powers  begin  to  decline, 
and  then  life  lessens  in  its  force  and  its  range  from  year  to  year,  until  the  gust  comes 
which  brings  down  the  faded  leaf  to  the  earth.  Prudence  may  put  off  the  date,  but 
the  experience  is  inevitable  and  must  be  faced.  We  must  be  provided  with  a  true  and 
real  consolation. 

IV.  The  mingling  op  the  gradtjal  with  the  sudden  in  the  decline  op  life. 
Everything,  in  the  history  of  the  leaf,  is  a  gradual  process,  until  the  last  killing  frost  or 
pelting  rain  detaches  it  from  the  bough.  Death  is  seldom  quite  sudden,  usually  much 
legs  so  than  it  seems.  It  is  generally  the  case  that  the  vigour  of  the  frame  has  been 
impaired  and  the  vital  powers  lessened  before  tiie  attack  proves  fatal.  We  all  do  fade 
as  a  leaf ;  we  decline  before  we  die,  we  fade  b(  fore  we  fall,  we  walk  down  the  hill  by 
many  paces  before  we  take  the  last  step  and  touch  the  bottom.  Yet  is  there,  almost 
always,  something  sudden  in  the  great  removal.  The  day  of  the  Lord  still  comes  as  a 
thief  in  the  night. 

V.  Human  life,  unlike  the  leap,  has  no  fixed  time  to  dboop  and  die.  We 
know  the  season  of  the  falling  leaf,  but  the  time  of  failing  health  and  of  the  departing 
spirit  we  do  not  know.     Well  sings  Mrs.  Hemans — 

"  Leaves  have  their  time  to  fall, 
And  flowers  to  wither  at  the  north  wind's  breath, 

And  stars  to  set ;  but  aU — 
Thou  hast  all  seasona  for  thine  own,  O  Death." 

0. 

Ver.  7. — Takt'ng  hold  of  God.  We  do  well  to  associate  with  the  words  of  the  text 
those  of  ch.  xxvii.  5,  "  Let  him  take  hold  of  my  strength ; "  thus  connected,  we  have 
before  us — 

I,  That  which  constitutes  God's  stisbngth  to  its,  or  that  in  him  of  which  wo 
have  the  greatest  need.  The  strenjith  of  the  father  is,  to  the  family,  his  providing  and 
directing  poWer ;  the  strength  of  the  mother  is  her  affection  and  her  unfailing  sympathy ; 
the  strength  of  the  elder  brother  is  his  protection,  of  the  elder  sister  her  example.  The 
strength  of  any  one  to  whom  we  are  related  is  that  in  him  which  most  powerfully 
affects  our  well-being.  There  may  be  in  creation  many  millions  of  beings  to  whom 
God's  strength  appears  to  be  that  of  his  majesty,  his  infinity,  his  omniscience,  his 
holiness.  We  also,  the  children  of  men,  have  a  very  large  and  deep  interest  in  these, 
especially  in  his  holiness.  We  give  thanks  at  the  remembrance  of  it  (vide  Ps.  xxx.  4 ; 
xcvii.  12).  Without  it  we  should  not  be  what  we  are,  and  should  have  no  hope  of 
rising  to  the  noble  heights  we  have  before  us.  But  that  in  QroA  of  which  we  have  most 
conscioiu  need  is  (1)  Divine  mercy ;  (2)  Divine  bounty  and  guidance ;  (3)  Divine  suc- 
cour. The  one  hope  we  have  is  in  the  assurance  that  God  is  strong  in  these,  and  we 
feel  that  if  they  are  hut  directed  toward  us  and  embrace  us  in  their  beneficent  course, 
all  will  be  well  with  us. 

II.  The  kbcbssitt  we  are  under  to  appropriate  it.  It  may  be  said  that  QoA 
is  BO  generous  a  Being  that  he  does  not  wait  for  any  action  on  our  part  to  bestow  his 
blessings  upon  us ;  that,  notwithstanding  human  disregard  and  rebellion,  he  multiplieg 
his  mercies  unto  us ;  that  the  magnanimous  Father  in  heaven  makes  his  sun  to  shine 
on  the  evil  as  well  as  on  the  good.  This  is  true,  but  it  is  far  from  exhausting  the  truth. 
To  what  extent  we  shall  be  recipients  of  Divine  mercy  depends  on  whether  or  not  we 
"  take  hold  "  upon  it.  God  is  so  strong,  so  abundant  in  mercy,  that  his  grace  overflows 
to  those  who  seek  not  for  it,  and  they  are  not  "  dealt  with  according  to  their  sins ; " 
they  derive  great  benefit  from  the  abundance  of  Ood's  patiencfi.    But  if  we  wiib  t« 


OH.  ixnr.  1— 12.]    THE  BOOK  OP  THE  PROPHET  ISAIAH,  467 

know  all  the  fulness  of  Divine  mercy  as  it  is  to  be  known  by  any  seeking  hutnan 
spirit,  we  must  lay  hold  on  God's  strength  in  this  direction.  We  must  "  call  upon  his 
Name"  with  penitential  spirit  and  with  true  faith  in  Jesus  Christ,  and  we  shall 
have  not  merely  the  overflow,  but  the  full  cup  of  Divine  mercy,  his  grace  in  all  its 
riclinpss  and  fulness  outpoured  upon  our  own  heart — the  forgiveness  of  all  past  sin  and 
all  present  unworthiness,  admission  to  his  full  fHendship,  freedom  to  partake  of  all  the 
privileges  which  belong  to  the  child  at  home,  heirship  of  the  heavenly  kingdom.  In 
the  same  way,  it  is  necessary,  if  we  would  experience  the.fiilness,  the  height  and  depth, 
and  length,  and  breadth,  open  to  us  of  God's  hounty  and  guidance,  or  of  his  succour  in 
a  time  of  special  need,  that  we  should  "  lay  hold  on  him,"  on  "  his  strength,"  in  all 
these  things ;  and  we  do  lay  hold  by  (1)  maintaining  toward  him  the  attitude  of 
sonship,  and  (2)  going  to  him  in  the  act  of  earnest,  believing  prayer. 

III.  The  need  fob  holy  BNBRaY  m  our  spiritual  life.  "There  is  none  that 
stirreth  up  himself,"  etc.  If  men  complain  that  they  have  not  felt  the  peace  and  joy, 
or  found  the  provision  and  the  guidance,  or  experienced  the  delivering  succour  which 
they  looked  for  from  waiting  on  God,  the  answer  and  the  explanation  may  be  this — 
that  they  have  been  cold  in  their  approach  and  their  requests  to  God,  when  they  should 
have  been  eager  and  ardent;  formal,  when  they  should  have  been  spiritual;  unex- 
pectant,  when  they  should  have  been  full  of  faith  and  hope ;  languid,  when  they  should 
have  been  energetic;  easily  daunted,  when  they  should  have  been  earnestly  persistent. 
They  have  made  a  feeble  and  futile  effort,  when  they  should  have  thrown  their  whole 
soul  into  the  sacred  exercise,  into  the  spiritual  work.  They  must  arouse  themselves, 
"  stir  themselves  up." — C. 

Vers.  8 — 12. — A  twofold  plea.  The  prophet  addresses  himself  to  God  in  earnest 
prayer  for  Divine  interposition,  and  he  uses  a  twofold  plea. 

L  The  intimact  and  fulness  op  God's  relationship.  1.  God  was  their  Creator. 
He  made  them  as  truly  as  the  potter  fashions  the  clay ;  they  were  his  workmanship 
(ver.  8).  2.  God  was  their  Father.  He  had  oared  for  them  and  bestowed  on  them  his 
parental  love ;  would  he  abandon  his  own  children?  3.  God  was  their  Redeemer.  He 
had  rescued  them  from  bondage,  had  given  them  their  heritage,  had  made  them  "  his 
people  "  (ver.  9).  So  fully  and  so  intimately  is  God  related  to  us  now,  and  we  can  use 
the  same  terms  with  a  deeper  and  larger  meaning,  taught  of  Christ  and  redeemed  by 
his  blood. 

n.  The  severity  of  their  distress.  Zion  a  wilderness,  Jerusalem  a  desolation, 
"  the  holy  and  beautiful  house  "  a  calcined  ruin,  the  beauty  of  the  land  a  barrenness 
and  a  blot.  The  extremity  of  the  Church's  misery,  its  utter  helplessness  without 
Divine  relief,  is  a  strong  plea  with  which  to  come  to  him  who  gave  himself  for  it  and 
lives  to  establish  it. — C. 

Ver.  1. — Prayer  for  hiimhling  manifestationt  of  Ood.  "Vers.  1 — 3  are  parallel  to 
ch.  Ixiii.  15,  but  grander  and  bolder.  There  the  prophet,  in  the  name  of  the  Church, 
petitioned  that  Jehovah  would  look  down  on  the  misery  of  his  people.  Here  a  look  is 
felt  to  be  insufBcient,  so  widely  yawns  the  gulf  between  Israel  and  his  Gtod.  A  revela- 
tion on  the  largest  possible  scale  is  necessary  to  smite  down  unbelief  and  annihilate 
opposition ;  God  iiimself  must  appear  "  (Naegelsbach).  The  prayer  is  for  a  Divine  mani- 
festation suited  to  the  circumstances  and  necessities  of  God's  people  as  truly  as  the 
flre-manifestation  of  Sinai  had  been.  The  prophet  seems  to  think  that  some  over- 
whelming manifestation  of  God  would  silence  the  unbelievers,  and  put  the  hinderers 
out  of  the  way,  as  nothing  else  could.  There  is  always  a  tendency  to  trust  in  the 
extraordinary  rather  than  in  the  ordinary  methods  of  Divine  working.  We  think  men 
will  repent,  if  only  some  one  would  rise  from  the  dead  and  witness  of  eternal  things  to 
them ;  and  God's  answer  in  every  age  is,  "  If  they  hear  not  Moses  and  the  prophets, 
neither  will  they  be  persuaded  though  one  rose  from  the  dead." 

I.  Such  prater  often  shows  that  we  fail  to  notice  God's  wobkino  in  qdieteb 
WAYS.  Men  do  not  pray  for  "  lightning "  who  duly  recognize  what  the  "  light "  ia 
doing.  Yet  the  silent  forces  are  the  mighty  ones.  Atmosphere  does  more  than  wind; 
dew  does  more  than  storms ;  moisture  does  more  than  rains.  God  works  his  best  work 
lilently,  quietly    We  think  big  things  must  make  a  big  noise.   It  is  true  of  oui  ever;- 


168  THE  BOOK  Of  THE  FBOFHET  ISAIAH,     [oh.  lxit.  1— 12. 

day  lives ;  the  things  tiiat  make  our  Iiappiness  and  success  are  not  prominent  things  that 
happen  occasionally,  but  the  ten  thousand  little  things  that  pass  almost  unheeded,  and 
that  seem  to  ub  too  small  to  hold  God.  It  if  true  of  our  spiritual  life.  Living  in  the 
warmth  of  the  smile  of  Ood  does  more  for  us  than  any  special  times  of  manifestation. 
It  is  true  of  the  kingdom  of  God  in  the  world.  It  cometh  on  secretly,  no  maa  knuweth 
how. 

II.   SUOH  PBAYEB  80MBTIME8   SHOWS  THAT  WB   WANT   GOD  TO  WORK   BT  JUDGMENTS 

KATHBB  THAN  BY  MBROiBS.  It  means,  "Appear,  0  Lord,  to  overthrow  our  adversaries." 
That,  indeed,  seems  to  be  the  tone  of  the  prophet's  prayer  in  the  text.  He  at  least  wants 
the  binderers  and  enemies  forcibly  persuaded,  if,  indeed,  he  dous  not  pray  for  them  to  be 
taken  out  of  the  way.  But  it  is  never  consistent  with  the  Christian  spirit  to  take 
prayers  to  God  for  the  judgment  of  anybody.  That  is  not  the  way  in  which  to  pray 
for  hinderera,  slanderers,  or  enemies.  We  are  properly  taught  to  pray  that  God  would 
"  ba£3e  their  designs  and  turn  their  hearts."  If  we  rightly  felt  God's  presence  tuith 
u$  now,  we  should  not  want  to  ask  for  any  coming  of  his  from  heaven. — B.  T. 

Ver.  4. — Man's  ignorance  of  Oofft  goodness  to  him.  "  For  from  of  old  men  have  not 
heard,  nor  perceived  by  the  ear,  neither  hath  the  eye  seen  a  God  beside  thee,  which 
worketh  for  him  that  waiteth  for  him "  (Bevised  Yersion).  A  very  old  weakness  of 
humanity  it  is  to  try  and  find  somebody  who  may  lie  preferred  to  God,  and  this  oomes 
out  of  the  fact  that  God  is  so  very  imperfectly  known,  or  else  is  so  very  strangely 
misunderstood.  A  hint  is  here  given  us  of  the  reason  why  there  is  so  much  misunder- 
standing of  God — he  has  to  le  waited  for.  It  is  quite  true  of  him  that  he  is  always 
working  for  us ;  but  it  is  also  true  that  he  is  often  a  long  time  in  the  working  out  of 
his  purposes.  Then,  because  men  cannot  get  what  they  want  done  done  quick,  they 
foolishly  begin  to  think  that  God  cannot  do  it  for  them,  or  wUl  not  do  it  for  them. 
They  fail  to  see  the  Lord's  goodness.  The  point  of  impression  may  be,  that  in  all  the 
reviews  we  can  take  of  the  past,  God  has  surely  wrought  good  things,  even  if  he  has 
been  long  at  the  working.  We  may,  therefore,  cherish  trustful  thoughts  concerning 
him,  and  be  quite  willing  to  leave  the  unfoldings  of  all  the  future  in  his  supreme 
GontroL 

I.  Bbvibw  God's  ways  of  eduoatino  thb  world.  What  a  long  time  of  prepara- 
tion before  he  could  manifest  his  Son,  and,  through  him,  teach  the  world  the  Divine 
fatherhood ! 

II.  Eeview  God's  ways  of  tbainino  thb  Jews.  Their  good  things  were  always 
long  in  coming.  Canaan  was  forty  years  away  from  Egypt.  Bestoration  was  seventy 
years  away  from  judgment. 

IIL  Eeview  God'b  ways  of  sanctifying  hib  OnnEOH.  Our  hardest  work  nowa- 
days is  to  hold  fast  the  conviction  that  the  Church  t>  sanctifying,  for  the  process  seems 
so  long,  and  the  waiting-time  is  so  trying. 

IV.  Eeview  God's  dealinob  in  pbrsonal  lives.  Who  of  us  has  not  had  to  learn 
the  lesson  of  the  goodness  of  God  in  what  he  holds  off,  out  of  our  reach,  and  makes  us 
wait  for  and  work  for  long?  Do  not  let  us,  then,  ever  mistake  God.  It  is  ours  to  wait 
for  him,  and  to  wait  on  him,  but  we  may  hold  the  good  cheer  of  this  faith — he  is  surely 
"  working  for  every  one  that  can  wait  for  him." — E.  T. 

Ver.  6. — The  sincere  man's  estimate  of  himself.  "  For  we  are  all  become  as  one  that 
is  unclean,  and  all  our  righteousnesses  are  as  a  polluted  garment :  and  we  all  do  fade 
as  a  leaf;  and  our  iniquities,  like  the  wind,  take  us  away."  This  is  the  language  indeed 
of  an  intercessor,  of  one  who  speaks  as  representing  the  nation,  and  tries  to  speak  at 
the  nation  should  speak.  But  such  a  man  must  get  at  the  knowledge  of  the  condition 
of  the  nation  by  a  deep  and  true  estimate  of  his  own  real  self.  There  is  no  sign  of 
conscious  separation  of  himself  from  his  people.  Eight  reading  of  his  own  life  alone 
enables  him  to  read  theirs.  And  this  is  true  for  us  also.  No  man  who_ fails  to  appre- 
hend the  "plague  of  his  own  heart"  will  ever  properly  realize  the  evils  of  his  own 
times.  Pharisee-souls  can  never  know  the  real  sins  of  their  age.  Sincere  and  humble 
souls  find  themselves — as  they  know  themselves— the  measure  of  the  men  around  them, 
as  they  stand  in  God's  sight. 

L  Tbs  binoebb  KAN  FINDS  HIS  GOODNESS  u  siABOHED.    ▲  man'i  owD  gooduess  b 


OH.  LXT.  1— 25.]     THE  BOOK  OP   THE  PROPHET  I8AIAH. 


469 


no  more  than  a  crust  put  over  a  state  of  uncleanness.  Before  God  a  man  sees  it  to  be 
DO  more  than  a  crust.  A  man's  own  goodnesa  is  a  dainty  garment,  which  makes  a 
hraye  appearance.  Before  God  a  man  sees  that  it  does  but  cover  a  foul  person,  and 
the  foul  person  has  polluted  the  dress.  There  is  no  place  where  we  find  out  the  worth- 
lessness  of  our  own  goodness  like  the  place  of  prayer. 

II.  Thb  sikoebb  HAN  IB  IMFRGBSED  WITH  BIS  OWN  FBAILTT.  It  is  not  that  he  finds 
life  fading;  the  thing  that  oppresses  him  is  that  he  can  never  keep  at  a  high  level  of 
goodness ;  he  is  always  fading  from  his  standards ;  he  can  no  more  keep  on  in  goodness 
than  the  leaves  can  keep  on  the  trees  all  autumn  and  winter  through.  One  writer  says, 
on  the  expression  "  we  fade  as  a  leaf,"  "  This  means  that  sin  brings  with  it  the  curse  of 
QioA,  and  deprives  us  of  his  blessing,  both  for  the  body  and  the  soul,  so  that  the  heart 
is  dissatisfied  and  distressed." 

III.  The  bincebe  uan  becoonizes  jusoment  inflioted.  The  past  calamities  of 
life  are  read  aright,  and  seen  to  be  a  man's  iniquities  taking  him  away  from  peace  and 
prosperity.  There  is  no  standing  steady  for  any  of  us  who  keep  in  our  sins.  If  we 
cannot  find  out  liow  our  iniquities  can  he  taken,  away,  we  shall  be  sure  to  find  that  our 
iniquities  will  take  us  away.  When  we  are  truly  humbled  under  God's  hand  concern- 
ing ourselves,  we  are  fitted  to  make  confession  before  God  in  the  name  of  our  nation. 
— B.T. 

Ver.  8. — Owr  Father  and  our  Potter.  "  But  now,  0  Lord,  thou  art  our  Father;  w« 
are  the  clay,  and  thou  our  Putter ;  and  we  all  are  the  work  of  thy  hand."  The  prophet 
here  is  making  no  such  assertion  of  the  absolute  sovereignty  of  God  as  we  associate 
with  the  figure  of  the  potter  because  of  St.  Paul's  use  of  it  in  Bom.  iz.  20,  21.  Here 
the  power  of  the  great  Pi.tter  is  made  the  groimd  of  prayer.  "  The  clay  intreats  him 
to  fasliion  it  according  to  his  will,  and  has  faith  in  his  readiness,  as  well  as  in  his  power, 
to  comply  with  that  prayer.  The  thought  of  the  '  potter '  becomes,  in  this  aspect  oi 
it,  one  with  that  of  the  fatherhood  of  God."  Fausset  says,  "  Unable  to  mould  them- 
selves aright,  they  beg  the  sovereign  will  of  God  to  mould  them  into  salvation,  even  as 
he  made  them  at  first,  and  is  their  Father."  'i'he  idea  of  the  fatherhood  of  God,  as  held 
by  the  Jews,  differs  as  materially  from  the  idea  held  by  us,  as  our  impressions  of  humai 
fatherhood  differs  from  theirs.  To  us  the  association  of  "father"  and  "potter"  it 
incongruous ;  but  to  Easterns,  who  hold  the  absolute  rights  of  fathers,  it  was  quite  a 
natural  association.    What  may  we  learn  by  the  linking  of  the  two  terms  together? 

I.  Potter  reminds  us  that  God  can  answer  our  prayer  bt  the  mabteby  of  ouf 
0IBCI7MSTAN0ES.  The  day  must  yield  under  the  potter's  hands.  He  makes  of  it  wha 
vessel  he  pleases.  He  makes  or  mars  as  he  pleases.  So  we  say, "  Our  times  are  in  thiu 
hands."  All  belonging  to  us  is  fully  within  the  Divine  control.  He  can  mould  as  he 
pleases  the  "  clay  "  of  our  circumstances,  so  that  our  prayers  shall  be  answered.  The 
"  we  "  of  the  text  is  not  "  we  as  individuals,"  but  "  we  inclusive  of  all  our  surroundings 
and  associations." 

II.  Father  reminds  ua  that  God  can  answer  our  prayers  upon  due  oonbidebation 
OF  trs.  Father  brings  in  the  element  of  feeling  and  personal  relationship.  Beyond 
what  God  can  do,  we  have  the  most  gracious  assurances  as  to  what  he  will  do.  This 
should  lead  us  on  to  the  Christian  conception  of  answer  to  prayer,  based  on  our  Lord's 
words,  "  If  ye  then  know  how  to  give  good  gifts  unto  your  children,  how  much  more 
shall  your  heavenly  Father  ^ve  good  things  to  them  that  ask  him  ?  " — B.  T. 


Skotion  XL    God's  Akswkb  to  thb  Exnu'  Fbatbb  (ob.  uzt.X 

EXPOSITION. 


OHAPTEB  LXV. 

Ten.  1 — 7. — Isbael's  Suffebinob  vbx 

JcR  Heed  of  THEm  Sms.    God's  mercy  is 

■och  that  it  even  overflows  upon  those  who 

are  outside  tlie  covenant  (ver.  1).  It  has  been 


ofiiered  to  Israel,  but  Israel  has  rejected  It 
Their  rebellion,  their  idolatries,  and  theii 
pride  have  oansed,  and  must  continue  to 
cause,  their  punishment  (vers.  2 — ^7). 
Ver.  1.— I  am  lOTiylit;  T»Xbiu,ingti(red<i^ 


470 


THE  BOOK  OF  THE  PROPHET  ISAIAH,      [oh.  lxv.  1— 25 


or  conmdted  (comp.  Ezek.  xiv.  3 ;  xx.  3,  31). 
The  application  of  the  text  by  St.  Paul 
(Bom.  X.  20)  to  the  calling  of  the  Gentiles 
will  be  felt  by  all  believers  in  inspiration  to 
preclude  the  interpretation  which  supposes 
Israel  to  be  the  subject  of  ver.  1  no  less 
than  of  vers.  2 — T.  I  said,  Behold  me.  This 
was  the  first  step  in  the  conversion  of  the 
Gentiles.  God  called  them  by  his  mes- 
sengers, the  apostles  and  evangelists.  A 
nation  that  was  not  called  by  thy  Name  (so 
Gesenius,  Uelitzsch,  Kay,  and  others). 
Bibhop  Lowth,  Jiwald,  Diestel,  and  Mr. 
Cheyne,  following  tlie  Septuagint  and  other 
ancient  versions,  render,  "a  nation  that  has 
not  called  upon  thy  Name."  But  this  requires 
an  alteration  of  the  vowel-points,  which 
seems  unnecessary. 

Ver.  2. — I  have  spread  out  my  hands.  Not 
exactly  in  prayer,  but  in  expostulation 
(comp.  Prov.  i.  24,  "I  have  stretuhed  out 
my  hand,"  where  the  verb  in  the  Hebrew 
is  the  same).  All  the  day ;  or,  all  day  long, 
as  in  Bom.  x.  21 ;  i.e.  continually,  day  after 
day,  for  years — nay,  for  centuries.  A  rebel- 
lious people  (comp.  ch.  xxx.  1 ;  and  see  also 
ch.  i.  4.  23;  Hos.  iv.  16 ;  Jer.  v.  23 ;  vi.  28). 
The  "  rebellious  people  "  ('am  sorer)  is  un- 
doubtedly Israel.  In  a  way  tliat  was  not 
good;  rather,  in  the  way  that  is  not  good; 
i.e.  the  ".  way  of  sinners  "  (Ps.  i.  1) — the  "  way 
that  leadeth  to  destruction  "  (Matt.  vii.  13;. 

Yer.  3. — That  saorificeth  in  gardens  (comp. 
ch.  L29;  Ivii.  5;  Ixvi.  17).  The  groves  Mud 
"gardens"  of  Daphne,  near  Antioch.  be- 
came famous  in  later  times  as  the  scene  of 
idolatrous  practices  intimately  bound  up 
with  the  grossest  and  most  shameless  sen- 
sualism. We  have  few  details  of  the  ancient 
Syrian  rites ;  but  there  is  reason  to  believe 
that,  wherever  Astarte,  the  Dea  Syra,  was 
worshipped,  whether  at  Daphne,  or  at  Hiera- 
polis,  or  at  Balbek,  or  at  Aphek,  or  at 
Damascus,  or  in  Palestine,  one  and  the  same 
character  of  cult  prevailed.  Tlie  nature- 
goddess  was  viewed  as  best  worshipped  by 
rites  into  which  sensualism  entered  as  an 
essential  eltment.  Profligacy  that  cannot 
be  described  polluted  the  consecrated  pre- 
oinots,  which  were  rendered  attractive  by  all 
that  was  beautiful  and  delightful,  whether 
in  art  or  natuie — by  groves,  gardens,  statues, 
fountains,  shrines,  temples,  music,  proces- 
sions, shows — and  which  were  in  consequence 
frequentt'd  both  day  and  night  by  a  multi- 
tude of  votai'ies.  And  burneth  incense  upon 
altars  of  brick ;  literally,  upon  the  bricks.  It 
is  not  clear  that  "altars"  are  intended. 
More  probably  the  incense  was  burnt  upon 
the  tiled  or  bricked  roofs  of  houses,  where 
the  Jews  of  Jeremiah's  time  "  burned  incense 
unto  all  the  host  of  heaven"  (Jer.  xix.  13; 
xxxii.  29  ;  Zeph.  i.  5).  Brick  altars  are  no- 
where mentioned.  The  Assyrians  and  Baby- 


lonians made  their  altars  of  either  atone  oi 
metal  ('Ancient  Monarchies,'  voL  iL  pp.S6, 
37 ;  Herod.,  i.  183).  The  Hebrews  in  early 
times  had  altars  of  earth  (Exod.  xx.  24).  Th« 
"  altar  of  incense  "  in  the  tabernacle  (Exod. 
xxx.  1 — 3)  was  of  wood  plated  with  gold; 
that  of  burnt  offeiing,  of  wood  plated  with 
bronze  (Exod.  xxviL  1, 2).  Solomon's  altars 
were  similar.  Elijah  on  one  occasion  made 
an  altar  of  twelve  rough  stones  (1  Kings 
xviii.  31).  The  Assyrians  used  polished 
stone,  as  did  the  Greeks  and  Bomans. 

Ver.  4. — Which  remain  among  the  graves. 
The  rock  tombs  of  Palestine  seem  to  be 
meant.  Persons  "  remained  among  "  these, 
in  spite  of  the  ceremonial  defilement  thereby 
incurred,  either  with  the  object  of  raising 
the  dead,  and  obtaining  prophecies  &om 
them,  or  of  getting  prophetic  intimations 
m:  de  to  them  in  dreams  (see  Jerome's '  Com- 
ment.,' ad  ioo.).  And  lodge  in  the  monu- 
ments ;  or,  tn  the  crypts.  "  N'tsurim  may 
refer  to  the  mysteries  celebrated  in  natural 
oaves  and  artificial  crypts  "(Delitzsch).  An 
account  of  such  mysteries  is  given  by  Ohwol> 
sohn  in  his '  Die  Ssabier  und  der  Ssabismns,' 
vol.  ii.  pp.  332,  et  leq.  Which  eat  swine's 
flesh.  Not  in  mere  defiance  of  the  Law,  but 
in  sacrificial  meals  (ch.  Ixvi.  17)  of  which 
svrine's  flesh  formed  a  part.  Swine  were 
sacrificial  animals  in  Egypt  (Herod.,  ii.  47, 
48),  in  Phcenicia  (Lucian,  'De  Dea  Syre,' 
§  54),  and  with  the  Greeks  and  Bomans. 
They  do  not  appear  to  have  been  employed 
for  the  purpose  either  by  the  Assyrians  or 
the  Babylonians.  It  was  probably  in  Pales- 
tine that  the  Jews  bad  eaten  "  swine's  flesh," 
at  sacrifices  to  Baal  or  Astarte  (Ashtoreth). 
In  later  times  to  do  so  was  regarded  as  one 
of  the  worst  abominations  (1  Maco.  i.  41 — 64 ; 
2  Mace.  vi.  and  vii.).  Broth  of  abominable 
things.  Either  broth  made  from  swine's 
flesh,  or  from  the  flesh  of  other  unclean 
animals,  as  the  hare  and  rabbit  (Lev.  xi. 
5,  6),  or  perhaps  simply  broth  made  from  the 
flesh  of  any  animals  that  had  been  offered 
to  idols  (Acts  XV.  29). 

Ver.  5. — Stand  by  thyself ;  i.e. "  keep  aloot 
— come  not  into  contact  with  me ;  for  mine 
is  a  higher  holiness  than  thine,  and  I  should 
be  polluted  by  thy  near  approach."  Initia- 
tion into  heathen  mysteries  was  thought  to 
confer  on  the  initiated  a  holiness  unattain- 
able otlierwise.  Thus  the  heathenized  Jew 
claimed  to  be  holier  than  the  true  servants 
of  Jehovah.  These  are  a  smoke  ...  a  Are 
(comp.  Ps.  xviii.  8,  "  There  went  up  a  smoke 
out  of  his  nostrils,  and  fire  out  of  his  month 
devoured ;  coals  were  kindled  by  it "),  The 
heathenized  Jews  are  fuel  for  the  wrath  of 
God,  wliich  kindles  a  fire  wherein  they  bum 
continually  (comp.  ch.  Ixvi  24). 

Ver.  6. — It  is  written  before  me.  The  mis- 
conduct of  his  people  is  "written  "  in  Qud'i 


CH.  LX^.  1-  25.]     THE  BOOK  OP  THE  PROPHET  ISAIAH. 


471 


book,  which  lies  open  "before  him,"  80  that 
their  sin  is  ever  in  his  sight  (oomp.  Ps.  Ivi. 
8 ;  Mai.  lii.  16 ;  Rev.  xx.  12).  I  wiU  not 
keep  silence  (comp.  Pg.  L  3).  "Keeping 
silence  "  ia  a  metaphor  for  complete  inaction. 
But  will  reoompense,  etc. ;  rather,  until  Ihave 
recompented,  yea,  recompensed  [them]  into 
their  bosoms  (comp.  Luke  vi.  38).  Gifts  were 
given  and  received  into  the  fold  of  the  beged, 
or  cloak,  which  depended  in  front  of  the 
bosom. 

Ver.  7. — ^Tour  iniquities.  This  is  a  new 
sentence,  not  a  continuation  of  ver.  6,  which 
should  be  closed  by  a  full  stop.  It  is  an 
incomplete  sentence,  needing  for  its  comple- 
tion the  repetition  of  the  verb  ehillamti,  "  I 
will  recompense."  Which  have  burned  in- 
cense upon  the  mountains  (see  2  Kings  zvii. 
11;  Hob.  iv.  13;  Ezek.  vi.  13;  and  oomp. 
ch.  Ivii.  7).  And  blasphemed  me;  rather, 
reproached  me  (see  oh.  xxxvii.  4,  17,  23,  24). 
Therefore  will  I  measure  their  former  work ; 
rather,  therefore  will  I,  first  of  all,  measure 
their  worlt  into  their  bosom.  The  expression, 
"  first  of  all,"  prepares  the  way  for  the  en- 
oouragivg  promises  of  vers.  8 — 10. 

Vers.  8 — 10. — Salvation  pbomtsed  to  a 
Remnant.  In  Isaiah,  and  especially  in  the 
"Book  of  Consolation"  (ch.  xl. — Ixvi.), 
promises  are  almost  always  intermingled 
with  threatenings.  The  threats  extend  to 
the  bulk  of  the  nation ;  the  promises  are 
limited  to  "a  remnant,"  since  a  remnant 
only  could  be  brought  to  "  seek  "  and  serve 
God  (ver.  10).  Here  the  announcement  that 
a  remnant  would  be  spared  is  introduced  by 
a  simile  from  men's  treatment  of  their  own 
vineyards  (ver.  8). 

Ver.  8. — As  the  new  wine  is  found  in  the 
cluster ;  rather,  as  when  new  wine  is  found  in 
a  grape-bunch;  i.e.  as  when  even  a  single 
cluster  of  grapes  is  spied  on  »  vine-stem, 
the  vine-pruneis  say  one  to  another,  "  De- 
stroy not  that  stem,  but  spare  it,"  so  will 
God  refrain  from  destroying  those  stocks 
in  his  vineyard,  which  give  even  a  small 
promise  of  bearing  good  fruit.  Destroy  it 
not.  The  words  are  thought  to  be  those  of  a 
well-known  vintage-song,  which  is  perhaps 
alluded  to  in  the  heading  (Al-tasohith)  pre- 
fixed to  F8.Ivii.,  lviii.,and  lix.  "Each  of  these 
psalms  was  probably  sung  to  the  air  of  this 
favourite  song  "  (Oheyne).  A  blessing  is  in 
it ;  i.e. "  a  boon  from  God  "  (comp.  oh.  xxxvi. 
16;  2  Kings  V.  15). 

Ver.  9. — A  seed  ont  of  Jacob,  and  out  of 
Judah.  Scarcely,  "the  people  of  the  two 
captivities"  (Delitzsch),  though  no  doubt 
many  Israelites  of  the  ten  tribes  did  return 
with  Zerabbabel  (1  OhioB.  ix.  3 ;  Ezra  ii.  2, 
70;  lit  1:  vi.  17;  ?iii  85,  etc.).    Bather, 


a  mere  pleonasm,  as  in  ch.  ix.  8;  z.  21,  22; 
xxvii.  6;  xxix.  23;  xl.  27;  xli.  8,  etc.  (see 
the  comment  on  oh.  xl.  27).  An  inheiitor  of 
my  monntainB,  The  whole  of  Palestine  is 
littl  e  more  than  a  cluster  of  mountains.  The 
cluster  may  be  divided  into  three  groups : 
(1)  TliemouTitains  of  Galilee,  extending  from 
Hermon  to  Tabor,  separated  from  the  next 
group  by  the  plain  of  Esdraelon ;  (2)  the 
mountains  of  Samaria  and  Judaaa,  extending 
from  Carmel  and  Gilboa  to  the  plateau  of 
Mamre  above  Hebron,  which  is  3600  feet 
above  the  sea ;  (3)  the  mountains  of  the 
trans-Jordanic  region,  including  those  of 
Bashan,  Gilead,  Moab,  and  Edom,  separated 
from  the  two  other  groups  by  the  Jordan 
valley.  The  highest  elevation  attained  is 
that  of  Hermon  (9400  feet);  other  minor 
heights  are  Jebel  Jurmuk,  in  Galilee,  4000 
feet;  Safed,  also  in  Galilee,  2775  feet ;  Ebal 
and  Gerizim,  in  Samaria,  2700  feet ;  Sinjil, 
2685;  Neby  Samwill,  2G50;  and  the  Mount 
of  Olives,  2724  feet.  The  plateau  of  Mamre 
reaches  a  height  of  3600  feet.  The  only 
Palestinian  plains  are  those  of  Esdraelon, 
Sbaron,  and  the  Ghor,  or  Jordan  valley. 
Thus  the  land  may  well  be  spoken  of  as 
"my  mountains."  Mine  elect  (comp.  ch.  xliii. 
20 ;  xlv.  4).  The  same  expression  is  used  of 
Israel  in  1  Chron.  xvi.  13 ;  Ps.  Ixxxix.  3 ; 
ov.  6,  43 ;  ovi.  5.  God  "  chose  "  Israel  out 
of  all  the  nations  of  the  earth  to  be  hit 
"  peculiar  people." 

Ver.  10. — Sharon  shall  be  a  fold  of  flocks. 
"  Sharon,"  instead  of  being  "  like  a  wilder- 
ness" (oh.  xxxiii.  9),  shall  once  more  be  "  a 
place  for  flocks" — a  rich  pasture  for  the 
flocks  and  herds  of  the  returned  exiles.  (On 
the  position  and  fertility  of  Sharon,  see  the 
comment  upon  ch.  xxxiii.  9.)  The  valley  of 
Achor  (see  Josh.  vii.  24—26).  The  'Emeq 
'Akor  was  near  Jericho.  The  two  places  seem 
to  be  selected  on  account  of  their  position, 
one  on  the  eastern,  the  other  on  the  western 
border.  Uy  people  that  have  sought  me ;  or, 
inquired  of  me — the  same  verb  as  that  used 
at  the  beginning  of  the  chapter. 

Vers.  11—16. — A  Mixtubb  op  Thbeatb 
WITH  Fbomises.  The  prophet  returns,  in 
the  main,  to  his  former  attitude,  and  resumes 
his  denunciations  (vers.  11,  12) ;  but,  with 
ver.  13,  he  begins  to  intermingle  promises 
of  favour  to  God's  servants  with  threats 
against  the  rebellious,  and  finally  (in  ver. 
16)  turns  wholly  towards  the  side  of  grace 
and  favour,  announcing  the  coming  of  a  time 
when  "the  former  troubles"  will  be  alto- 
gether "forgotten,"  and  the  kingdom  of 
truth  and  right  will  be  established. 

Ver.  11. — But  ye  are  they  that  forsake  the 
Lord ;  rather,  btit  a*  for  you  wbg/vnakt  tht 


472 


THE  BOOK  OP  THE   PROPHET   ISAIAH,     [oh.  lxv.  1— 2S. 


Lord.  And  forget  my  holy  moantain;  i.e. 
either,  literally,  forget  ZioTi,  being  absent 
from  it  BO  long  (Pb.  cxxxvii.  6),  or,  possibly, 
neglect  Zion,  though  you  might  worship  there 
if  you  pleased.  That  prepare  a  table  for 
that  troop ;  rather,  tliat  prepare  a  table  for 
Oad.  There  is  ground  for  believing  that 
"Gad"  was  a  Phoenician  deity,  perhaps 
"  the  god  of  good  fortune  "  (Oheyne),  though 
this  is  not  clearly  ascertained;  sometimes 
worshipi  ed  as  an  aspect  of  Baal,  whence  the 
name.  Baal-Gad  (Josh.  xi.  17  ;  xii.  7) ;  some- 
times connected  with  other  deities,  as  Moloch 
and  Ashtoreth.  The  practice  of  "  preparing 
tables  "  for  the  heathen  gods  was  a  common 
one,  and  appears  in  Herod.,  1. 181 ;  in  Baruch 
vi.  30 ;  in  Bel  and  the  Dragon,  ver.  11 ;  and 
in  the  Roman  lectisternia.  The  tables  pre- 
pared for  the  dead  in  Egyptian  tombs  were 
not  very  different,  and  implied  a  qualified 
worship  of  ancestors  (Eawlinson,  '  History 
of  Ancient  Egypt,"  vol.  i  pp.  423,  424;  vol. 
ii.  p.  39).  And  that  famish  the  drink  offer- 
ing unto  that  number ;  rather,  and  that  fill  up 
mixed  drink  for  M'ni.  M'ni  appears,  like 
Gad,  to  have  been  a  Syrian  deity,  the  name 
Ebed-M'ni,  "  servant  of  M'ni,"  occurring  on 
Aramseo-Persian  coins  of  the  Achsemenian 
period  (Eodiger,  in  'Addenda  to  Gesenius' 
Thesaurus,'  p.  97).  The  word  may  be  sus- 
pected to  be  cognate  to  tlie  Arabic  "Han&t," 
a  god  recognized  in  the  Koran  as  a  mediator 
with  Allah ;  but  can  scarcely  have  any  con- 
nection with  the  Aryan  names  for  the  moon 
deity,  mVi  M^^t),  Mena,  and  the  like.  Its 
root  is  probably  the  Semitic  mdnah,  "to 
number"  or  "  apportion,"  the  word  designat- 
ing a  deity  who  "  apijortions"  men's  fortunes 
to  them  (rixVi  LXX.). 

Ver.  12. — Therefore  will  I  number  yon ;  or, 
apportion  you  (mdnithiy—^  pl^y-  upon  the 
name  of  M'ni.  The  sword  .  .  .  slaughter. 
Not,  perhaps,  intended  literally.  Wicked 
men  are  God's  sword  (Ps.  xvii.  13),  and  de- 
liveiance  into  their  hand  would  be  deliver- 
ance to  the  sword  and  slaughter.  The  exiles 
suffered  grievously  at  the  hands  of  their 
Babylonian  masters  (oh.  xlvii.  6;  xlix.  17, 
etc.).  The  character  of  their  sufferings  is 
given  in  the  ensuing  verses  (vers.  13,  14). 
When  I  called,  ye  did  not  answer  (see  2 
Chron.  xxxvi.  15,  16;  Prov.  i.  20—25;  oh. 
Ixvi.  4). 

Ver.  13. — Therefore  thus  saith  the  Lord 
Ood ;  rather,  thus  saith  the  Lord  Jehovah 
(comp.  ch.  vii.  7 ;  xxv.  8 ;  xzviii.  16 ;  xxx. 
15;  xl.  10;  xlviii.  16;  xlix.  22;  1.  4,5,7,9; 
lii.  4;  Ivi.  8;  Ixi.  1,  etc.).  My  servants 
shall  eat,  but  ye  shall  be  hungry,  etc.  This 
entire  series  of  contrasts  may  be  understood 
in  two  ways ;  literally,  of  the  two  classes 
of  exiles,  the  religious  and  the  irreligious; 
inetaphorioally,  of  God's  servants  and  his 
•dversaries  ftt  all  timea  utd  ia  kU  plMM. 


The  religious  exiles  would  return  to  the  land 
of  promise  as  soon  as  permitted,  and  would 
there  prosper  in  a  worldly  sense — have  abun- 
dance to  eat  and  drink,  rejoice,  and  sing  for 
jiiy  (Ezra  iii.  11 — 13).  The  irreligious,  re- 
maining in  Babylonia,  would  suffer  hunger 
and  thirst,  endure  shame,  cry  and  howl  for 
sorrow  and  vexation  of  spirit.  This  would 
be  one  fulfilment  of  the  prophecy ;  but  there 
would  also  be  another.  God's  servants  at  all 
times  and  in  all  places  would  be  sustained 
with  spiritual  food,  and  "  rejoice  and  sing 
for  joy  of  heart."  His  adversaries  would 
everywhere  feel  a  craving  for  the  "  meat " 
and  "drink,"  which  alone  satisfy  the  soul, 
and  would  be  oppressed  with  care,  and  with 
a  sense  of  shame,  and  suffer  anguish  of 
spirit. 

Ver.  15. — ^Ye  shall  leave  your  name  for  a 
curse  (comp.  Jer.  zxix.  22).  In  their  formulas 
of  imprecation  the  Jews  were  in  the  habit  of 
saying,  "The  Lord  make  thee  like"  this  or 
that  person,  or  this  or  that  class  of  persons. 
The  name  of  the  exiles  should  be  used  in 
this  manner.  ITnto  my  chosen  (see  the  com- 
ment on  ver.  9).  The  Lord  Ood  shall  slay 
thee  (see  the  comment  on  ver.  12).  Some, 
however,  take  the  words  as  part  of  the  for- 
mula of  imprecation.  And  call  his  servants 
by  another  name  (compare  what  is  said  of 
"  new  name  "  in  oh.  Ixii.  2). 

Ver.  16. — That  he  who  blesseth  himself; 
rather,  <o  tluU  he  who  bletses  himself.  The 
sequence  of  the  argument  is  not  altogether 
clear.  Perhaps  it  is  meant  that  God  will  call 
them  by  his  own  Name  (Amos  ix.  12) — "  the 
people  of  God  "  (Heb.  iv.  9);  and  thence  it 
will  become  natural  ibr  them  to  use  no  other 
name,  either  when  they  call  for  a  blessing 
on  themselves,  or  have  to  confirm  a  covenant 
with  others.  In  the  Ood  of  truth ;  literally,  tn 
the  God  of  the  Amen;  i.e.  the  God  who  keeps 
covenant  and  promise,  to  which  the  strongest 
formula  of  consent  was  the  word  "Amen  "  (see 
Numb.  V.  22;  Deut.  xxvii.  15— 26 ;  1  Kings 
i  36,  etc.).  Similarly,  St.  John  calls  our 
Lord  "the  Amen,  the  Faithful  and  True 
Witness  "  (Rev.  iii.  14).  Because  the  former 
troubles  are  forgotten.  When  the  blessed 
time  has  come  wherein  men  call  themselves 
by  the  Name  of  the  Lord,  and  know  of  only 
one  God  as  the  Source  of  blessing  and  the 
confirmation  of  an  oath,  then  the  former  state 
of  human  affairs,  with  all  its  "troubles," 
will  have  passed  away,  and  the  new  era  will 
be  inaugurated,  which  the  prophet  pxooeedi 
to  describe  at  length  (vers.  17 — 25). 

Vers.  17  —  25.— A  PBOUisa  ov  New 
Heavens  and  a  New  Eabtb.  The  final 
answer  of  Ood  to  the  complaint  and  prayer 
of  his  people  (ch.  Iziv.)  is  now  given.  The 
entire  existing  state  of  things  is  to  paw 
•way.    Ood  will  ONftt*  »  mw  bMTUi  wai 


OH.  LIT  1—25.]    THE  BOOK  OP  THE  PROPHET  ISAIAH. 


478 


a  new  earth,  and  place  his  people  therein ; 
and  the  old  conditions  will  be  all  changed, 
and  the  old  grounds  of  complaint  disappear. 
In  the  "new  Jerusalem"  there  wUl  be  no 
sorrow,  neither  "weeping"  nor  "crying" 
(ver.  19) ;  life  will  be  greatly  prolonged 
(rer.  20) ;  men  will  always  enjoy  the  fruit 
of  their  labours  (vers.  21,  22),  and  see  their 
children  grow  up  (ver.  23).  Prayer  will  be 
answered  almost  befoile  it  is  uttered  (ver.  24). 
Finally,  there  will  be  peace  in  the  animal 
world,  and  between  the  animal  world  and  man. 
No  living  thing  will  kill  or  hurt  another  in 
all  God's  "holy  mountain"  (ver.  25). 

Ver.  17. — I  create.  The  same  verb  is. used 
as  in  Gen.  i.  1 ;  and  the  prophet's  idea  seems 
to  be  that  the  existing  heaven  and  earth 
are  to  be  entirely  destroyed  (see  ch.  xxiv. 
19, 20,  and  the  comment  ad  loc),  and  a  fresh 
heaven  and  earth  created  in  their  place  out 
of  nothing.  The  "  new  Jerusalem  "  is  not 
the  old  Jerusalem  renovated,  but  is  a  veri- 
table "  new  Jerusalem,"  "  created  a  rejoicing  " 
(ver.  18;  comp.  Eev.  ixi.  2).  The  germ  of 
the  teaching  will  be  found  in  oh.  li.  16.  The 
former  shall  not  be  remembered.  Some  sup- 
pose "  the  former  troubles  "  (see  ver.  16)  to 
be  meant ;  but  it  is  best  (with  Delitzsoh)  to 
understand  "  the  former  heavens  and  earth." 
The  glory  of  the  new  heavens  and  earth 
would  be  such  that  the  former  ones  would 
not  only  not  be  regretted,  but  would  not 
even  be  had  in  remembrance.  No  one  would 
so  much  as  think  of  them. 

Ver.  18. — I  create  Jerusalem  (comp.  Kev. 
xxi.  2,  "I,  John,  saw  the  holy  city,  new 
Jerusalem,  coming  down  from  God  out  of 
heaven,  prepared  as  a  bride  adorned  for  her 
husband  ").  The  description  which  follows 
in  vers.  11,  12  is  quite  unlike  that  of  the 
old  Jei-usalem.  A  rejoicing.  The  "new 
Jerusalem  "  was  to  be  from  the  first  all  joy 
and  rejoicing — a  scene  of  perpetual  gladness. 
Her  people  also  was  to  be  "  a  joy  "  or  "  a 
delight,"  since  God.would  delight  in  them 
(ver.  19). 

Ver.  19. — The  voice  of  weeping  shall  be 
no  more  heard  (comp.  Eev.  xxi.  4).  The 
reasons  there  given  are  satisfactory:  "There 
shall  be  no  more  death,  neither  sorrow  .  .  . 
neither  shall  there  be  any  more  pain."  But 
these  reasons  scarcely  apply  here.  For 
Isaiah's  "new  Jerusalem"  is  not  without 
deuth  (ver.  20),  nor  without  sorrow,  since  it 
is  not  without  sin  (ver.  20),  nor,  as  there  is 
death  there,  is  it  without  pain.  Isaiah's 
picture,  according  to  Delitzsch,  represents 
the  millennial  state,  not  the  final  condition  of 
the  redeemed;  but  this  trait — ^the  absence 
of  aU  weeping — can  only  be  literally  true  of 
the  final  state. 


Ver.  20. — ^There  shall  be  no  more  thenoe 
an  infant  of  days;  i.e.  there  shall  not  go 
from  the  new  Jerusalem  into  the  unseen 
world  any  infant  of  a  few  days  old.  On  the 
contrary,  even  "the  youth"  shall  reach  a 
hundred;  i.e.  one  who  dies  when  he  is  a 
hundred  shall  be  regarded  as  cut  off  in  hiB 
youth.  The  general  rule  shall  be,  that  old 
men  shall  "fill  their  days,"  or  attaia  to 
patriarchal  longevity.  Even  the  sinner,  who 
is  under  the  curse  of  God,  shall  not  be 
cut  off  till  he  is  a  hundred.  What  is  most 
remarkable  in  the  description  is  that  death 
and  sin  are  represented  as  still  continuing. 
Death  was  spoken  of  as  "swallowed  up  in 
victory  "  in  one  of  the  earlier  descriptions  ot 
Messiah's  kingdom  (ch.  xxv.  8). 

Ver.  21. — They  shall  build  houses,  and  in- 
habit them.  The  curse  pronounced  on  apos- 
tasy in  Dent,  xxviii.  30  shall  no  more 
rest  on  God's  people.  Tliey  shall  have  the 
fruition  of  their  labours.  Nu  enemy  shall 
be  able  to  deprive  them  of  their  crops  and 
houses. 

Ver.  22. — As  the  days  of  a  tree  are  the 
days  of  my  people.  Trees  entlure  for  many 
hundreds,  perliaps  for  thousands  of  years. 
The  cedars  of  Lebanon,  the  laks  of  Bashan, 
were  known  to  have  an  antiquity  of  centu- 
ries. Isaiah  may  have  hai  I  a  knowledge  of 
other  trees  to  which  attached  the  tradition 
of  a  yet  longer  existence.  In  our  own  day 
Brazil  and  California  have  furnished  proofs 
of  vegetable  growths  exceeding  a  millen- 
nium, nine  eleot  shall  long  enjoy ;  literally, 
shall  wear  out ;  i.e.  have  the  full  use  and 
enjoyment  of  the  work  of  their  hands. 

Ver.  23. — They  shall  not  .  .  .  bring  forth 
for  trouble.  Their  women  shiill  not  bear 
children  to  see  them  carried  off  after  a  few 
days,  or  months,  or  years,  by  disease,  or 
accident,  or  famine,  or  the  sword  of  the 
invader.  There  shall  be  an  end  of  such 
"troubles,"  and.  God's  blessing  resting  upon 
those  who  are  his  children,  their  children 
shall,  as  a  general  rule,  "  be  with  them ;  " 
i.e.  remain  to  them  during  their  lifetime, 
and  not  be  lost  to  them  by  a  premature 
decrase. 

Ver.  21. — Before  they  call,  I  will  answer. 
God  is  always  "more  ready  to  hear  than  we 
to  pray."  In  the  "  new  Jerusalem  "  he  will 
be  prompt  to  answer  his  people's  prayers 
almost  before  they  are  uttered. .  It  is  involved 
in  this,  as  Delitzsch  notes,  that  the  will  of 
the  people  shall  be  in  harmony  with  the  will 
of  Jehovah,  and  that  their  prayers  will  there- 
fore be  acceptable  prayers. 

Ver.  25.— The  wolf  and  the  lamb  shall 
feed  together  (comp.  ch.  xi.  6 — 8;  Hos.  ii. 
18).  The  portraiture  here  is  far  less  elabo- 
rate than  in  the  earlier  chapter,  to  which  the 
present  passage  may  be  regarded  as  a  refer- 
ence.    (For  the  sense  in  which  the  entire 


474 


THE  BOOK  OF  THE  PROPHET  ISAIAH,     [oh.  lxv.  1—35. 


picture  Is  to  be  understood,  see  the  comment 
upon  ch.  xi.  6 — 9.)  Dust  shall  be  the  serpent's 
meat.  Here  we  have  a  new  feature,  not  con- 
tained in  the  earlier  description.  Serpents 
shall  become  harmless,  and  instead  of  prey- 
ing npon  beasts,  or  birds,  or  reptiles,  shall 
be  content  with  the  food  assigned  them  In 
the  primeval  decree,  "  Upon  thy  belly  shalt 
thou  go,  and  dust  shalt  thou  eat  all  the  days 
of  thy  life"  (Gen.  iii.  14).  Mr.  Obeyne 
appositely  notes  that  "much  dust  is  the 


food  of  the  shades  in  the  AsByrio-Babylonian 
Harles  "  (see  the  "  Legend  of  Ishtar  "  in  the 
'Eecords  of  the  Past,'  vol.  i.  p.  143,  line  8). 
They  shall  not  hurt  nor  destroy.  Repeated 
from  oh.  xi.  9,  word  for  word.  In  neither 
case  should  we  regard  the  subject  of  the 
sentence  as  limited  to  the  animals  only. 
The  meaning  is  that  there  shall  be  no  vio- 
lence of  any  kind,  done  either  by  man  or 
beast,  in  the  happy  period  described. 


HOMILBTICa 

Ver.  6. — Men's  tins  recorded  in  Ood's  book.  As  far  back  as  the  time  of  Moses,  Qod 
announced  through  him  that  men's  sins  were  "  laid  up  in  store  with  him,  and  sealed 
up  among  his  treasures  "  (Deut.  xxxii.  34).  The  later  prophets  (Mai.  iii,  16),  with  the 
Psalms  (Ps.  Ivi.  8),  and  the  Eevelation  of  St.  John  (xx.  12 — 15),  speak  of  "a  book," 
or  "books,  of  remembrance,"  which  contain  the  record  of  human  frailty.  Jeremiah 
says,  "The  sin  of  Judah  is  written  with  a  pen  of  iron,  and  with  the  point  of  a 
diamond"  (xvii.  1);  and  Daniel,  like  St.  John,  tells  of  a  time  when  the  judgment 
will  be  set,  and  "the  books  opened"  (vii.  10).  The  heavenly  registers  record  the 
acts  of  men,  btoth  good  and  bad ;  and  in  one  register  seem  to  be  written  the  names 
of  those  whom  God  regards  as  "living  ones  "  (ch.  iv.  3).  This  register  is  called  "the 
book  of  life  "  (Eev.  iii.  5 ;  xiii.  8 ;  xvii.  8 ;  xx.  12, 15).  Such  are  the  biblical  state- 
ments on  the  subject.  The  expressions  used  are  doubtless  accommodations  to  human 
modes  of  thought,  and  are  not  to  be  taken  literally.  The  great  truth,  however,  which 
they  convey  is  to  be  understood  in  the  most  absolute  literalness.  Men's  sins  will  not 
be  forgotten,  even  when  they  are  forgiven.  They  are  all  registered  in  God's  memory  ; 
and  perhaps  it  may  be  found  that  each  man's  sins  are  also  registered  in  some  secret 
place  of  his  own  memory,  though  at  present  he  is  unable  to  recall  the  greater  part  of 
them.  All  will  be  taken  into  consideration  at  the  time  of  judgment,  and  all  will  be  set 
forth  in  the  sight  of  men  and  angels.  There  is  nothing  "  secret "  which  shall  not  then 
be  "  revealed,"  or  "  hid  "  which  shall  not  be  "  known."  Men  will  be  judged  and  sen- 
tenced "  according  to  their  works  "  (Eev.  xx.  13) — "  according  to  that  they  have  done, 
whether  it  be  good  or  evil "  (2  Cor.  v.  10). 

Vers.  8 — 10. —  Where  sin  abounds,  grace  yet  more  dhoundt.  The  portrait  of  Israel  in 
vers.  2 — '7  is  painted  in  such  dark  colours  as  to  suggest  that  it  must  almost  necessarily 
be  followed  by  the  absolute  renunciation  of  the  whole  nation.  A  people  "  rebellious," 
"  walking  ia  the  way  that  is  not  good,"  "  provoking  God  to  anger  continually," 
given  over  to  a  sensualistic  idolatry,  and  yet  proud,  piquing  itself  upon  its  elevated 
religious  position  as  a  participant  in  certain  heathen  mysteries  (ver.  5), — what  can  be 
done  with  such  a  nation  of  backsliders?  Must  not  Gfod  sweep  it  from  the  earth? 
Certainly,  if  it  were  not  for  God's  abounding  mercy ;  if  the  sight  of  a  people  given  up  to 
sin  did  not  raise  in  him  as  much  pity  as  indignation,  as  much  compassion  as  resent- 
ment. After  all,  they  are  his  children;  they  are  his  people;  they  are  "all  the  work, 
of  his  hands  "  (ch.  Ixiv.  8).  God,  in  his  compassion,  pours  out  his  grace  freely  under 
such  circumstances.  He  seeks  among  the  lost,  if  so  be  that  any  among  them  may  be 
saved.  He  offers  his  grace  to  them  all,  presses  it  upon  them,  "  spreads  out  his  hands 
all  the  day  "  to  the  rebels,  entreating  them  to  return  and  submit  themselves,  and  be 
saved.  What  mercy  does  he  show  to  Nineveh !  Because  it  is  "  a  bloody  city  ...  all  full 
of  lies  and  robbery  "  (Nah.  iii.  1),  because  "  their  wickedness  is  come  up  before  him  *' 
(Jonah  i.  2),  therefore  he  goes  out  of  his  way  to  send  his  prophet  to  preach  repentance 
to  them.  He  forces  his  prophet  to  go  to  them;  he  puts  his  word  into  his  prophet's 
mouth,  and  makes  that  word,  for  the  moment  at  any  rate,  effectual.  Kineveh  "  repents 
at  the  preaching  of  Jonah,"  and,  on  its  repentance,  is  "  spared  "  for  above  two  cen- 
turies.   Israel  now  is  spareid,  invited  to  return  to  Judsea,  bidden  to  "dwell  thare"  and 


OH.  Lxv.  1—25.]      THE  BOOK  OF  THE  PEOPHET  ISAIAH.  47H 

"inherit  it."    And  "a  remnant"  hearkens,  and  returng,  and  repents,  and  "does  the 
first  works  "  (Rev.  iL  6),  and  becomeB  a  great  and  flourishing  and  religious  people. 

Vers.  13 — 15. — The  contrasts  of  (he  religious  with  the  irreligious  life.  The  prophet 
notices  three  main  contrasts. 

I.  God's  servants  are  fed  with  a  food  that  satisfies;  his  adversaries  abb 
TORMENTED  BY  A  CEASELESS  CRAVING.  Man  is  SO  constituted  that  nothing  short  of 
his  highest  good  contents  him.  Earthly  blessings,  health,  wealth,  success,  fame,  power, 
glory,  leave  a  void  in  the  heart  which  nothing  earthly  can  fill  up.  The  worldling  is 
always  dissatisfied,  always  desires  more  than  he  has,  craves  some  fresh  excitement, 
desires  some  "  new  pleasure."  "  Hungry  and  thirsty,  their  souls  faiut  in  them  "  (Ps. 
cvii.  6).  With  God's  servants  the  case  is  different.  A  Divine  contentedaess  fills  their 
hearts.  They  have  been  given  to  drink  of  a  water  of  which  "  whosoever  drinketh  shall 
never  thirst,"  but  it  "  shall  be  in  him  a  well  of  water  springing  up  into  everlasting 
life  "  (John  iv.  14).  They  have  God  for  their  Saviour ;  they  aie  at  one  with  him  ;  and 
in  this  communion  they  rest  satisfied ;  they  neither  hunger  nor  thirst. 

II.  God's  servants  sing  fob  jot  of  heart;  his  adversaries  howl  iob  vexation 
OF  spirit.  "The  voice  of  joy  and  thanksgiving  is  in  the  dwellings  of  the  righteous" 
(Ps.  cxviii.  15).  The  love  of  God,  which  "casts  out  fear"  (1  John  iv.  18),  reigns 
in  their  hearts,  and  elevates  them  above  the  troubles  and  anxieties  of  ordinary 
human  life.  They  "  know  whom  they  have  believed ; "  they  know  in  whom  they 
trust.  All  their  care  they  have  cast  upon  God ;  and  hence  they  are  without  care  ;  their 
souls  are  full  of  an  inefiable  joy  and  satisfaction ;  they  want  nothmg,  unless  it  be  to 
have  their  communion  with  God  complete  (Rom.  viii.  23 ;  2  Cor.  v.  2,  4 ;  PhU.  i.  23, 
etc.).  But  the  adversaries  of  God  are  always  vexed  in  spirit.  Worldly  cares  trouble 
them ;  worldly  disappointments  annoy  them ;  doubts  and  misgivings  with  respect  to 
ithe  future  weigh  on  them ;  an  awful  fear  lest  they  have  entirely  mistaken  the  true  end 
and  aim  of  life  broods  over  them.  In  the  expressive  language  of  Scripture,  they 
"  howl "  through  anguish  of  heart — complain,  murmur,  proclaim  themselves  pessimists. 
The  world,  to  their  thinking,  is  the  worst  of  conceivable  worlds ;  the  scheme  of  the 
universe,  if  there  be  any  such  scheme,  a  gigantic  fraud  and  mistake. 

III.  God's  servants  bring  a  blessing  upon  the  earth;  his  adversaries 
LEAVE  their  NAME  AS  A  ccTRSE  TO  IT.  "A  little  Icaveu  leaveneth  the  whole  lump" 
(1  Cor.  V.  6).  God  would  have  spared  Sodom  if  it  had  contained  "  ten  righteous " 
(Gen.  xviii.  32).  It  is  the  existence  of  Ids  servants  upon  the  earth  that  tspecially 
commends  the  earth  to  his  care,  and  causes  him  to  watch  over  it,  to  sustain  it,  and  to 
bless  the  increase  of  it.  Moreover,  the  servants  of  God  are  a  blessing  to  mankind  at 
large,  (1)  as  an  example  to  them ;  (2)  as  a  real  help  to  them  if  they  desire  to  amend 
their  ways;  (3)  as  in  many  respects  ameliorating  and  elevating  their  conditiun.  God's 
adversaries,  on  the  contrary,  are  in  every  respect  a  curse  to  the  earth.  They  debase  its 
moral  tone  ;  they  stir  up  strife  in  it ;  they  are  the  authors  of  war,  bloodshed,  enmities, 
calumnies,  uncleanness,  variance,  sedition,  heresy,  blasphemy,  and  the  like;  they 
caused  God  once  to  "  repent  that  he  had  made  man  on  the  earth"  (Gen.  vL  6),  and 
they  cause  him  continually  to  look  upon  the  earth  with  more  or  less  of  disfavour. 
Their  presence  pollutes  the  earth,  and  makes  it  necessary  that  "  the  first  heaven  and 
the  first  earth  "  shall  "  pass  away  "  (Rev.  xxi.  1),  and  be  superseded  by  "  new  heavena 
and  a  new  earth,  wherein  dwelUth  righteousness  "  (2  Pet.  iii.  13). 

Vers.  17 — 25. — The  new  creation.  It  is  difiScult  to  harmonize  the  various  passages 
of  Scripture  which  touch  on  "  the  new  creation."  In  one  place  (Acts  iii.  21)  it  is 
called  an  hroKaTda-Taa-ts,  in  another  (Matt.  xix.  23)  a  wa\iyyey«ria.  Sometimes  its  scene 
appears  to  be  the  present  world  purified  (ch.  ii.  2—4) ;  sometimus  an  entirely  new 
world  created  for  the  habitation  of  God's  people  (oh.  lxv.  17,  18).  Perhaps  the  best 
explanation  is  that  of  Delitzsch,  that  there  ar :  to  be  altogether  three  worlds,  or  three 
ages.  1.  The  first  age,  or  ordinary  human  life,  as  we  have  hitherto  known  it — a 
checkered  scene  of  sin  and  holiness,  of  happiness  and  misery,  of  sorrow  and  rejoicing. 
2.  The  second  aie,  or  the  period  of  the  millennium,  in  which  "  the  patriarchal  measure 
of  human  life  will  return,  in  which  death  will  no  more  break  off  the  life  that  is  just 
beginning  to  bloom,  and  in  which  the  ww  of  man  with  the  animal  world  will  be 


476  THE  BOOK  OF  THE  PKOPHET  ISAIAH,     [oh.  ucr.  1— 2fi. 

exchanged  for  peace  without  danger."  3.  And  the  third  age,  or  a  final  state  of  hap^ 
ness  in  heaven,  or  the  heavenly  Jerusalem,  when  death  will  be  destroyed,  and'sin  will 
be  no  more,  and  tears  will  be  wiped  from  all  eyes,  and  the  former  things  will  be  passed 
•way  altogether  (Bev.  zzi.  4).  The  three  ages  are  distinctly  marked  only  in  the 
apocalyptic  vision  of  St.  John  the  divine  (ch.  xx.,  xxL).  leaiah  and  the  other  Old 
Testament  prophets  have  an  indistinct  view,  in  which  the  second  age  and  the  third 
age  are  confused  together,  the  characteristics  being  chiefly  those  of  Age  II.,  but  some 
of  the  characteristics  of  Age  III.  being  intermingled.  Age  I.  and  Age  III.  are  common 
to  all  the  redeemed.  Age  II.  will  belong  only  to  a  select  few — "  the  souls  of  them  that 
were  beheaded  for  the  witness  of  Jesus,  and  for  the  Word  of  God,  and  which  had  not 
worshipped  the  beast,  neither  his  image,  neither  had  received  his  mark  upon  their  fore- 
heads or  in  their  hands,"  who  will  "  live  and  reign  with  Christ  a  thousand  years  * 
(Rev.  XX.  4). 

HOMILIES  BY  VARIOUS  AUTHORS. 

Vei».  1 — 10. — Tkreateningt  and  promises.  Both,  as  it  would  appear,  addressed  toth* 
chosen  people,  though  many,  including  St.  Paul,  apply  the  earlier  part  of  the  passage  to 
the  conversion  of  the  Gentiles.  There  is  a  polytheistic  party,  and  a  party  of  true 
believers  in  the  nation. 

I.  God  BGFOBEHAMn  WITH  MEN.  He  "allows  himself  to  be  consulted;"  he  "offers 
answers,"  or  "  is  heard  "  by  those  who  came  not  to  consult  him.  He  was  "  at  haiid  to 
those  who  did  not  seek  him."  To  a  nation  that  did  not  call  on  him  he  cried,  "  Here  I 
am ! "  (ch.  Ixiv.  7 ;  xliii.  22).  It  is  actually  he  who  "  spreads  out  his  hands  " — "  in  the 
gesture  of  prayer;  what  a  condescension! "  (cf.  Prov.  i.  24).  And  this  "all  the  day," 
or  continuously — "as  if  God  did  beseech  you."  It  is  a  thought  full  of  deep  pathos 
and  Divine  beauty,  that  God  no  less  seeks  men  than  they  seek  him.  He  in  a  sense 
prays  them  to  be  reconciled  to  him.  While,  therefore,  prayer  is  in  one  aspect  the  going 
forth  of  active  desires  after  God,  on  the  other  hand  it  is  the  response  to  his  action  upon 
us.  Not  a  day  passes  but  the  gentle  mercy  and  love  expressed  in  his  providence  offers 
its  silent  plea  to  heart  and  conscience :  "  Child  of  manl  I  love  thee;  come  to  me,  and 
be  at  peace." 

n.  The  sttxbbobnness  of  man.  The  people  are  described  as  "unruly,"  and  as 
"  walking  in  a  way  which  is  not  good,  after  their  own  thoughts."  In  the  will  and  its 
licence,  falsely  called  liberty,  lies  the  mischier.  The  carnal  mind  is  not  "  subject  to 
God,  neither  indeed  can  be."  In  "  will-worship,"  the  indulgence  of  the  senses  and  the 
caprices  of  the  fancy,  lies  the  source  of  idolatry.  And  thus  they  irritate  Jehovah  to  his 
face  continually.  They  sacrifice  in  the  gardens  and  on  the  bricks,  t.e.  the  tiles  of  the 
houses  (2  Kings  xxiii.  12  ;  Zeph.  i.  6 ;  Jer.  xix.  13),  or  on  altars  of  materials  forbidden 
by  the  Law  (Exod.  xx.  24,  25).  They  appear  to  be  guilty  of  necromancy,  of  the  con- 
sultation of  dreams  or  citation  of  the  departed.  They  incur  ceremonial  pollution  by 
eating  of  swine's  flesh  and  other  animals.  And,  initiated  into  some  heathen  rites,  they 
had  actually  assumed  a  superior  holiness  to  that  of  the  people  of  God,  thus  caricaturing 
the  true  religion. 

m.  The  wbath  ahd  tekgeanoe  of  Jehovah.  Here,  again,  the  strongest  fibres 
are.  employed.  These  abominations  are  "  a  smoke  in  his  nose,  a  fire  burning  all  the 
day  long.  Nothing  can  more  strongly  express  what  is  offensive  and  irritating.  So  in 
Deut.  xxxii.  22,  "  A  fire  is  kindled  in  mine  anger,  and  shall  bum  to  the  lowest  heil" 
(cf.  Ps.  xviiL  5 ;  Ezek.  xxxviii.  18).  And  with  equal  force  the  certainty  of  Divin* 
vengeance  is  described.  Either  the  sin  of  the  Jews,  or  the  Divine  decree  for  its  punish- 
ment, is  written  before  Jehovah.  The  allusion  is  to  the  custom  of  kings  of  recording 
decrees  in  a  volume  or  on  a  tablet,  and  kept  in  their  presence,  so  that  they  might  not 
be  forgotten.  Moreover,  "  the  fortunes  oJ  men,  past,  jiresent,  and  future,  are  all  noted 
in  the  heavenly  registers  "  (ch.  iv.  3 ;  Ps,  Ixvi.  8  ;  Dati.  vii.  10).  A  book  of  remem- 
brance was  written  before  Jehovah  (Mai.  iii.  16).  From  this  follows  the  justice  of 
Divine  punishment.  He  will  not  heep  silence ;  nothing  shall  suppress  his  just  edict  or 
sentence.  He  will  certainly  recompense,  and  in  full  measure ;  the  large  and  loose  bosom 
of  the  Oriental  garment  being,  by  a  figure,  viewed  as  the  receptacle  of  those  Divine 


OH.LXT.  1— 25.]      THE  BOOK  OF  THE  PROPHET  ISAIAH.  flt 

penalties  (Fb.  Izxix.  12;  Jer.xzxii.  18;  Luke  ▼!.  38;  Exod.  iv.  6,  7;  Prov.  tL  27) 
The  firm  scriptural  doctrine  that  the  consequences  of  ancestral  sin  pass  over  to  posterity 
here  appears  (Exod.  xx.  6 ;  xxxiv.  7 ;  Job  xxi.  19 ;  Numb.  xir.  18 ;  Luke  xL  50,  61). 
There  seems  to  have  been  a  fotmding  and  an  accumulation  ef  crime  which  now 
threatens  to  sweep  down  every  barrier  before  it. 

lY.  The  beam  of  hope.  In  this  extreme  of  denunciation  and  despair  a  transition, 
as  ever,  occurs.  His  mercy  is  not  "  clean  gone  for  ever."  The  majority  of  Israel  may 
be  evil,  for  all  that  there  is  ever  a  "  remnant "  according  to  the  election  of  grace.  The 
vintagers,  finding  but  a  few  good  grapes  on  a  cluster,  say  to  each  other — perhaps  it  is  the 
snatch  of  a  vintage-song — "  Destroy  it  not,  for  a  blessing  is  in  it."  We  are  too  ready 
to  deal  with  men  in  the  lump  and  in  the  mass — they  are  a  "  bad  lot,"  In  familiar 
language  we  say.  But  the  Divine  eye  marks  the  dement  of  worth  amidst  the  most 
corrupt  and  worthless  mass  (cf.  ch.  i.  9  ;  vii.  3 ;  x.  21 ;  xi.  11 — 16).  That  which  has 
the  germinal  principle,  the  seed-life  in  it,  he  cherishes ;  he  will,  in  spite  of  all  that  is  of 
another  quality  in  the  midst  of  which  it  may  be  imbedded,  preserve.  So  here,  the 
mountains  and  the  whole  land  from  east  to  west  shall  be  preserved  by  the  people  (ch, 
xxxiii.  9 ;  Josh.  vii.  24 — 20).  Tillage  is  the  very  symbol  of  peace,  plenty,  prosperity 
(ch.  XXX.  23,  24).  A  traveller  may  see  in  the  valley  of  Sharon,  when  the  sun  ^Ids  the 
mountain-top,  and  the  flocks  are  returning  to  their  fold,  a  visible  expression  of  the 
future  Paradise  of  God.  "  What  a  Paradise  was  here  when  Solomon  reigned  in  Jeru- 
salem, and  sang  of  the  roses  of  Sharon  1  What  a  heaven  upon  earth  will  be  here  again, 
when  he  that  is  greater  than  Solomon  shall  sit  on  the  throne  of  David ;  for  in  his 
days  shall  the  righteous  flourish,  and  abundance  of  peace  so  long  as  the  moon 
endureth  I " — J. 

Vers.  11 — 16. — The  doom  of  the  idolaters.  L  The  bins.  On  the  one  hand  it  is  tha 
forsaking  of  Jehovah,  the  forgetting  of  his  holy  mountain.  It  is  the  keeping  aloof 
from  the  true  worship  celebrated  on  Mount  Moriah.  But  the  heart  of  man  knows  no 
deeper  need  than  that  of  worship ;  and  the  setting  of  the  tables  before  the  images  of 
heathen  deities  Qectisternia)  witnesses,  even  as  an  aberration  and  a  caricature,  to  that 
yearning  for  communion  with  the  Divine  which  true  religion  and  revelation  recognize 
and  offer  to  satisfy.-  Here  Gad,  a  Canaanitish  god,  is  named ;  and  M'ni,  a  Syrian  deity. 
Similar  rites  prevailed  among  the  Greeks  and  Komans,  and  other  peoples  of  antiquity. 
In  the  first '  Hiad,'  at  the  sacrificial  feast,  the  god  is  supposed  to  be  present,  himself 
a  partaker,  and  a  listener  to  the  people's  song  of  praise.  Between  such  worship  and 
that  of  the  Eterntd,  tiie  sole  and  incomparable  Holy  One  of  Israel,  there  could  be  no 
oompromise. 

II.  The  oAirsB.  Hie  sword.  There  may  be  an  extreme  of  human  obstinacy  and 
perversity  for  which  there  is  no  cure  but  the  sword.  And  thus  we  may  even  see  in 
war  a  Divine  purgative,  and  allow  some  truth  in  tha  stem  saying  of  one  of  our  poets, 
"  Tea  I  carnage  is  thy  daughter."  So  the  invasion  of  the  Chaldeans  was  recognized 
as  a  scourge  sent  to  chastise  the  abominations  of  the  priests  and  the  people  (2  Chron. 
xxxvi.  14,  16, 17).  Want  and  poverty,  and  all  the  associated  sufferings.  And  here 
again  it  must  be  admitted  the  "  curse  does  not  causeless  come."  There  is  a  general 
connection  at  least  between  poverty,  famine,  and  some  neglect  of  Divine  commands ; 
and  it  may  be  seen  in  the  lore  of  ancient  nations  in  general.  The  time  of  drought  was 
•rer  recognized  as  a  time  for  special  prayers  and  sacrifices.  The  name  of  the  unfaithful 
ones  shall  become  as  a  byword  in  formulas  of  imprecation. 

III.  The  FAiTHFUti  AND  TEOB  GoD.  Evcr,  against  the  background  of  hnman 
infidelity  and  fickleness,  he  shines  out  in  the  splendour  of  self-cousistency,  the  "  God 
of  the  Amen,"  the  "  Faithful  and  True  Witness."  The  "  Amen  "  seems  to  refer  to  the 
solemn  associations  of  the  oath  and  the  covenant  (Deut.  xxvii.  15).  He  stands  in  a 
tacramental  mutual  relation  to  his  people.  "  They  my  people,  I  their  God."  If  they 
be  true  to  him,  he  will  be  certain  to  bless  them.  Religion  has  a  deep  mystical  root — 
a  conscience  toward  God,  which  in  purity  is  the  foimt  of  all  blessing,  the  defilement  of 
which  is  the  origin  of  all  curse. — J. 

Vers.  17 — 25. — The  new  creation.  It  seems  that  the  leading  thought  of  the  prophet 
is  the  transformation  of  nature  in  harmony  with  the  changed  nature  of  man.     It« 


478  THE  BOOK  OP  THE  PROPHET  ISAIAH.       [oh.  lxv.  1—26. 

grandeur  needs  not  to  be  pointed  out.  Ordinarily,  indeed,  we  think  of  man's  depemlence 
on  nature.  If  the  thought  be  pushed  to  its  limits,  it  ends  in  materialism.  Spiritual 
religion,  on  the  contrary,  sees  in  the  changes  of  nature  a  human  pathos ;  its  waste  and 
desolation  the  efiuct  or  human  sin,  of  violated  Divine  laws ;  iti  flourishing  aspect  and 
fertility  the  eifect  of  human  obedience  and  true  religion  (cf.  eh.  xi.  6 — 9 ;  xxx.  26 ; 
xliii.  19  ;  li.  16).  Upon  the  difficult  interpretation  of  such  language  much  diffcienoe  of 
opinion  na,turally  arises ;  but  it  is  open  to  all  to  catch  the  inspiration  of  the  thoughts. 

I.  The  Divine  exultation  on  the  new  creation.  It  was  said  of  the  Creator  at 
the  beginning  that  he  looked  with  complacent  joy  upon  his  works.  All  was  very  good. 
It  was  the  "joy  of  God  to  see  a  happy  world."  How  much  deeper  the  Divine  com- 
placency In  moral  renewal  I  NTote  the  emphasis  and  iteration  of  the  thought.  Rejoicing, 
exultation,  is  the  very  key-note  of  the  passage ;  weeping  and  the  sound  of  crying  is  to 
be  as  unheard  as  at  the  gayest  scene  of  festival.  And  may  we  not  feel  that  beneath  all 
the  sadness,  the  discord,  the  gloom  of  this  enigmatic  world,  the  prophetic  pulse  of  the 
Divine  creation,  love,  is  ever  exultantly  beating?  May  we  not  believe  that  there  is  ever 
before  his  eye  the  picture,  rising  to  clearness  of  outline  and  brilliancy  of  colour  out  of 
Erebos  and  Chaos,  of  eternal  day,  of  the  new  heavens  and  earth  wherein  dwell  right- 
eousness? There  should  be  in  every  heart  a  prophetic  sympathy,  which  should  vibrate 
in  unison  with  these  oracles  of  God. 

n.  Paradisaic  pict[7rbs.  Under  imagery,  partly  endeared  to  the  Hebrew  heart  and 
fancy,  partly  of  Oriental  tinge  in  general,  the  heart  of  man  resents  the  doom  of  an 
"  untimely  "  death — it  seems  contrary  to  the  intention  of  nature ;  and  aspires  to  length 
of  days  as  a  good.  Here  it  is  predicated  that  no  death  in  infancy  shall  occur ;  that  one 
who  dies  at  the  age  of  a  hundred  .shall  be  regarded  as  early  lost,  and  even  the  wicked 
shall  not  be  cut  off  before  their  hundredth  year.  "  The  number  of  their  days  shall  they 
complete,  aLd  they  shall  grow  old  in  peace,  and  the  years  of  their  happiness  shall  be 
many"  (Book  of  Enoch,  v.  9).  Similar  is  the  picture  of  the  silver  race  in  the  'Works 
and  Days'  of  Hesiod,  ver.  130.  The  human  race  shall  attain  the  longevity  of  the  oak, 
the  terebinth,  the  cedar,  or  the  cypress.  The  proverbial  sic  van  nan  vdbis  will  have  lost 
its  applicability.  One  wiU  not  build,  and  another  enter  the  finished  habitation ;  one  will 
not  sow,  and  another  reap ;  but  each  man  will  "  see  the  fruit  of  his  labour ; "  the  work 
of  their  hands  the  elect  shall  use  to  the  full.  The  rising  hope  of  parents  shall  not 
be  nipped  in  the  bud ;  nor  shall  the  travail  of  body  or  of  mind  be  mocked,  as  it  too 
often  seems  now,  by  an  empty  result.  That  element  of  contradiction  or  seeming  con- 
tradiction to  the  benevolent  scheme  of  the  world,  which  has  perplexed  the  thought  of 
sages  in  every  time,  shall  disappear  even  from  the  animal  world.  The  wild  animals 
shall  lose  their  ferocity,  and  the  malignant  infernal  serpent,  as  it  would  seem,  shall  be 
banished  to  his  subterranean  domain.  Here,  again,  we  find  parallel  pictures  in  Oriental 
poets,  and  in  the  Romans  Virgil  and  Horace.  Perhaps  few  would  be  disposed  to  take 
these  descriptions  literally.  It  is,  perhaps,  impossible  'to  conceive  of  the  animal  world 
remaining  what  it  is  in  other  respects,  yet  with  its  native  instincts  changed.  Yet  how 
great  a  marvel  is  the  conversion  of  a  single  human  soul !  If  the  savage  passions  which 
rage  there  can  be  subdued  and  brough  t  under  the  obedience  of  Christ,  why  need  we  despair 
of  a  nation,  of  a  race  ?  At  any  rate,  all  things  assume  a  changed  aspect  to  the  renewed 
•oul,  which  means  the  purged  eyes,  the  deeper  insight  into  the  perfect  wisdom  and  love 
which  preside  over  the  universe.  The  discontent  we  feel  with  the  present  scheme  of 
things  is  a  hint  that  the  soul  is  secretly  acquainted  with  their  other,  their  ideal  oi 
Divine  side. — J. 

Ver.  23. — Requited  toU.  "They  shall  not  labour  in  vain.''  This  is  God's  comfort 
to  all  his  faithful  servants.  Success  is  not  to  be  measured  by  our  sight,  or  by  the 
Btatistics  and  "  seemings  "  of  superficial  men. 

I.  Harvests  are  sometimes  long  delated.  It  has  been  so  in  our  foreign  mission 
fields,  and  it  is  so  often  here  at  home  in  our  Christian  Churches,  and  it  is  so  in  our 
families.  But  the  Divine  seed  only  "  slumbers ; "  it  does  not  "perish."  Harvests  often 
sprout  in  greenness  and  wave  in  g  Iden  glory  over  men's  graves. 

II.  Habvbbts  ABE  NOT  TO  BE  MEASURED  BY  THEiB  FiBSTFBniTS.  There,  in  a  schooI 
or  a  church,  some  Henry  Martyn,  some  Wilberforce,  some  Heber,  some  Livingstone, 
if  brought  into  Christ's  fold.    Perhaps  that  soul  is  the  only  one  loul  we  van  make 


OH.  LIT.  1—26.]      THE  BOOK  OP  THE  PROPHET  ISAIAH.  479 


estimate  of  in  a  whole  year's  toil  We  may,  perhaps,  feel  disappointed— only  one ;  but 
that  one  soul  may  be,  under  God,  the  means  of  giving  spiritual  life  to  a  new  continent. 
We  must  wait  and  work,  and  never  weary,  (or  Christ  must  reign.  And  the  sower  AcUl 
in  due  season  reap,  if  he  faint  not. — W.  M.  S. 

Vers.  1 — 7.— 2%«  offentiveness  and  the  doom  of  tin.  The  passage  brings  out  in  m  rerr 
graphic  form — 

I.  The  offensiveness  of  bin,  1.  Assumption.  ""Walking  after  their  own  thoughts  " 
instead  of  reverently  inquiring  God's  will  (ver.  2).  2.  Positive  disobedience  in  the 
manner  of  Divine  worship  (ver.  3),  3.  Superstitious  practices,  implying  discontent 
with  the  disclosures  God  had  made  in  his  holy  Word  (ver.  4).  4.  Irreligious  self- 
indulgence  (ver.  4).  5.  Spiritual  pride.  "  I  am  holier  than  thou  "  (ver.  5)  All  these 
things  were  hateful  to  the  Holy  One  of  Israel ;  they  constituted  "  rebellion "  in  his 
sight  (ver.  2) ;  they  amounted  to  a  defiant  provocation  of  his  wrath  (ver.  3) ;  they  were 
as  a  continual  smoke  in  the  nostrils  (ver.  5).  All  sin,  whatever  be  its  form  or  name,  is 
"  an  abominable  thing  which  God  hates ; "  it  is  to  his  pure  eyes  unutterably  loathsome ; 
it  is  as  the  leprous  skin  to  the  eyes  of  man — he  "  cannot  look  upon  "  it.  It  draws  down 
his  righteous  condemnation. 

II.  Its  inevitable  doom.  1.  We  must  not  argue  non-observance  or  indifference  from 
temporary  silence.  "  Behold,  it  is  written  before  me :  I  will  not  keep  silence "  (ver. 
6 ;  Ps.  1.  21).  2.  Guilt  accumulates  with  time  (ver.  7).  God  mercifully  postpones 
punishment,  thiis  giving  opportunity  for  repentance  and  escape.  But  if  there  be  impeni- 
tence and  continuance  in  sio,  there  is  an  awful  "  treasuring  up  of  wrath,"  an  accumula- 
tion of  guilt  against  a  day  of  account.  Nations,  families,  Churches,  individual  souls, 
may  well  take  earnest  heed  to  this  solemn  truth.  3.  There  is  an  absolute  certainty  and 
fulness  of  penalty  to  the  obdurate.  "  I  will  recompense,  even  recompense,"  etc. ;  "  I 
will  measure  their  work,"  etc.  4.  Those  who  have  abused  their  trjst  must  look  for  a 
humiliating  displacement  (ver.  1).  God  will  remove  the  chosen  intiirument  of  his  truth 
and  grace,  and  he  will  find  another  to  do  his  work.  Let  the  too-tonfident  "  children  of 
the  kingdom "  beware  lest  they  have  to  make  room  for  those  whom  they  have  been 
accustomed  to  despise. — C. 

Ver.  6. — I%e  hopeless.  The  husbandman  is  often  tempted  to  tear  up  the  vine,  or  to 
pluck  up  the  herb,  or  to  plough  up  the  crop,  when  patience  and  painstaking  would 
result  in  flower  and  fruit.  In  the  spiritual  world,  it  is  often  found  tiiat  where  death 
seemed  to  prevail,  there  was  life  beneath  the  surface. 

L  The  appeabanob  of  spiritoal  death.  The  Ghio'ch  is  so  degenerate,  that  the 
teaching  of  Di  vine  truth  is  found  to  be  ineffectual ;  the  nation  so  corrupt,  that  the 
statosm.iii  au'l  ihe  niag'strate  and  the  teacher  are  powerless ;  the  family  so  Aeipmyei, 
that  it  is  a  ]icst  to  the  community;  the  child  so  wayward, -that  parental  authority  is  no 
restraint.     Then  is  entertained — 

II.  The  POLicr  of  abandosment.  Those  who  are  pure,  reverent,  loyal ;  they  to  whom 
iniquity  is  found  to  be  hateful ;  men  that  are  anxious  to  use  their  opportunities,  so  as 
to  get  some  spiritual  returns ; — these  say,  or  are  inclined  to  say, "  Let  us  leave  these  souls 
so  fast  imbedded  in  sin  whom  we  cannot  extricate,  and  let  us  seek  and  save  those  who 
can  be  reached  and  rescued."     Then  comes — 

III.  The  PLEA  OF  faith  and  pity.  "Destroy  it  not;  for  a  blessing  is  in  it."  "Let 
it  alone  this  year  "  (Luke  xiii.  6 — 9).  That  root  that  looks  dead  is  not  dead,  and  under 
careful  nouiishment  it  will  revive.  That  soul  that  seems  dead  is  not  dead  ;  there  is  a  seed 
of  li'e  in  it  still ;  beneath  all  its  folly,  its  waywardness,  its  vice,  its  guilt,  there  is  a  pos- 
sibility of  true  repentance ;  there  is  a  sensibility  which  will  respond  to  patient,  human 
love ;  there  is  a  spiritual  capacity  which  the  truth  of  God,  made  mighty  by  the  Spirit 
of  God,  will  touch  with  renewing  power,  and  from  which  unsuspected  beauties  and 
graces  will  arise.  Within  the  ugliest  and  most  worthless  souls  there  may  lie  concealed, 
germs  of  real  nobility.  Wait  long,  very  long,  before  you  abandon  to  destruction.  Over 
them,  and  of  them,  the  Divine  voice  may  be  whispering,  "There  ii  a  blessing  in  thtm 
for  the  loving,  patient,  prayerful  workman." — 0. 

Vers.  9, 10. — From  depression  to  prosperity.    We  learn  bere^ 


480  THE  BOOK   OF  THE   PROPHET  ISAIAH.       [oh.  mt.  1—25. 

L  That  the  people  op  God  mat  fall  into  a  state  of  sad  depbzssioV.  "  Jacob  " 
•nd  "  Judab,"  at  the  time  of  this  prophecy,  were  reduced  to  a  yeiy  low  estate.  It  leemeid 
as  if  they  would  produce  nothing. 

n.  That  coufobt  mat  thkm  bk  fouhd  nr  Gbo's  belation  to  Taiiii.  They  are 
■till  "  mine  elect ; "  still  those  whom  the  Divine  Father  pities  and  purposea  to  bless, 
for  whom  the  Divine  Saviour  died,  with  whom  the  Divine  Spirit  pleads. 

HI.  That  thet  should  spend  thbib  strsnoth  in  seekiho  and  in  sEsynra.  "  My 
servants  shall  dwell  there  ...  for  my  people  that  have  sought  me."  In  the  time  of 
difSculty  and  distress  let  good  men  be  earnest  and  constant  in  prayer ;  let  them  be 
consistent  in  life  and  active  in  holy  labour.     Then  they  will  find — 

IV.  That  thet  mat  look  fob  a  eenewbd  and  a  noble  hebitaoe.  From  end 
to  end  of  the  land  (from  Sharon  to  Achor)  the  scenes  of  pastoral  industry  shall  be 
witnessed,  and  Gf^od's  servants  shall  dwell  in  the  land ;  there  shall  be  fulness  and 
perTnaneiux  of  blessing. — 0. 

Ver.  20. — The  Christian  view  of  age.  These  words  are  not  to  be  taken  literally;  they 
are  distinctly  pictorial,  highly  hyperbolical;  they  indicate  a  state  of  future  blessedness, 
employing  images  most  likely  to  be  impressive  and  inspiring  at  the  time  of  utterance. 
They  may  suggest  to  us  the  Christian  aspect  of  old  age. 

L  That  Christian  life  tends  to  length  of  dats.  Health,  and  therefore  life, 
depends  most  on  habit.  What  shortens  life  is  folly,  irregularity,  excess,  anxiety, 
sorrow;  Christian  principles  guard  against  these,  or  materially  modify  them.  What 
lengthens  life  is  purity,  temperance,  serenity,  and  cheirfulness  of  spirit;  Christian 
principles  are  a  secujity  for  these. 

II.  That  Cheistian  life  tends  to  pebbeeve  the  child-heabt  in  the  ased  maw. 
A  beautiful  object  is  a  "  green  old  age ; "  an  excellent  thing  it  is  when  "  he  that  is  a 
hundred  years  old  dies  a  youth."  The  best-preservative  of  freshness  of  spirit,  opennef^ 
of  mind,  youthfulness  of  heart,  is  an  unselfish  habit.  Disinterestedness  of  soul,  broad 
and  generous  sympathies,  active  participation  in  all  onward  movements,— this  will  keep 
the  heart  of  youth  in  the  form  of  age. 

in.  That  the  Chbistian  pbomise  points  to  the  lonq  putubb.  "The  shorter 
life,  the  earlier  immortality." 

rV.  That  wb  mat  die  todng,  and  tbt  fill  up  the  measubb  of  oub  dats.  Our  Lord 
died  a  young  man,  and  yet  he  "finished  the  work  which  the  Father  gave  him  to  do." 
Many  martyrs,  many  devoted  labourers  in  the  field  of  usefulness,  have  failed  to  reach 
extreme  old  age,  but  they  have  not  failed  to  accomplish  the  task  which  the  great  Leader 
had  set  them.  The  excellency  of  life  depends  on  its  qualit;,  not  on  its  quantity. 
"  One  day  in  thy  courts  is  better  than  a  thousand,"  etc.  "  Though  the  sinner  die  a 
hundred  years  old,  he  shall  be  accursed,"  and  hb  life  will  be  a  l^ne  and  a  blot.  A 
very  few  years  (or  months)  of  holy  service  may  be  of  inestimable  service  to  tke  oause  ot 
Chnst  and  of  man. — C. 

Ver.  24. — ITie  Divine  readiness.  Man  is  slow  to  respond.  1.  His  limited  intelligence 
makes  him  slow  to  apprehend  what  is  needed.  2.  His  imperfect  sensibility  makes  him 
slow  to  feel  the  urgency  of  the  need.  3.  His  feebleness  of  execution  makes  him  slow  to 
interpose  and  to  effect.  God  is  not  under  these  limitations.  His  peifect  readiness  ii 
seen  in — 

I.  His  anticipation  of  oub  necessities.  Providing  this  world  for  our  habitation  ; 
preparing  its  soil  and  its  seed  ;  storing  its  coal  and  its  metals,  etc. ;  providing  for  oui 
wants  in  sunshine  and  in  rain,  etc.,  which  come  without  our  asking  for  them ;  having  all 
kinds  of  truth  and  knowledge  reaJy  for  our  inquiry ;  etc. 

II.  His  answbbb  to  oub  pkatebs.  1.  Sometimes  literally  granting  our  requests  at 
the  very  lime  of  our  asking  (Dan.  ix.  20,  21).  2.  Always  virtually  meeting  us  with 
an  immediate  response;  for  when  he  does  not  grant  us  all  we  ask  in^^taiitly,  as  he 
could  not  do  with  any  regard  to  our  real  and  spiritual  interests,  he  does  hear  us  and 
heed  us,  and  determine  in  what  way  he  will  bless  us. 

III.  His  response  to  oub  appeal  in  sorrow  and  in  penitence.  There  are  two 
t  'ings  in  regard  to  which  the  words  of  our  text  are  emphatically  tme.  1.  When  in 
I  arrow  we  ask  for  his  s]/mpathy.    When  the  cares,  anxieties,  disappointments,  losses. 


OH.  Lxv.  1—25.]      THE  BOOK  OP  THE  PROPHET  ISAIAH.  481 

Reparations  of  life,  overtake  us,  then  the  stricken  heart  of  man  turns  and  looks  for  the 
healing  hand  of  Q-od,  then  the  troubled  child  goes  to  his  heayenly  Father ;  aad  aerer 
vainly.  For  in  the  very  act  of  an  appeal,  while  we  are  yet  upon  our  knees,  before  we 
have  left  the  sanctuary,  Grod  has  laid  bis  kind  hand  upon  us,  Jesus  Christ  has  spoken 
"  peace  "  to  our  agitated  spirit.  2.  When  in  penitence  we  ask  for  his  pardon.  When, 
away  in  the  far  country  of  unbelief,  or  of  wrong-doing,  or  of  irreligiou,  or  of  unfaithful- 
ness and  baeksliding,  or  of  indecision  and  procrastination,  we  hear  the  summons  from 
the  Father's  home,  and  when  we  say,  "  I  will  arise  and  return,"  what  happens  then  ? 
A  Divine  readiness  to  receive  us,  even  as  the  great  Teacher  has  shown  us.  Then  the 
Father  of  souls  does  not  wait  to  be  convinced,  and  to  be  induced  to  pardon  and  reinstate 
us.  He  comes  forth  to  meet  us  ;  he  anticipates  our  action ;  he  breaks  in  upon  our  con- 
fession with  his  words  of  forgiving  and  accepting  love  (Luke  XT.  21, 22) ;  heoyerwheliBB 
us  with  the  proofs  of  his  Divine  affection. — C. 

Vers.  1 — 3. — Divine  reproache$.  In  the  two  previous  chapters  we  find  the  prophet, 
pleading  in  the  name  of  Israel,  had  urged  that  God  kept  strange  silence  when  his  people 
were  so  long  held  captive,  and  their  land  lay  so  desolate.  In  this  chapter  we  have  the 
Divine  answer  to  the  prophet's  plea.  There  was  good  reason  for  the  long  delay.  Instead  of 
the  people  reproaching  their  God,  their  God  might  much  more  reasonably  reproach  them, 
for  they  had  rejected  his  long  and  earnest  appeals ;  they  had  put  the  stumbling-blocks 
in  the  way  of  their  own  restoration.  They  were  not  "  straitened  in  God ; "  they  were 
"  straitened  in  their  own  selves."  "  He  has  called  his  people,  but  in  vain ;  they  have 
been  obstinately  deaf  to  him,  unfaithfui,  and  superstitious.  The  unfaithful  shall  be 
punished^  but  a  faithful  remnant  shall  be  saved  and  restored  to  Zion,  and  from  them 
the  promises  shall  take  effect"  (Matthew  Arnold).  The  Divine  reproaches  here  may 
he  regarded  as  addressed  to  three  classes — the  negligent,  the  wilful,  and  the  insolent. 

I.  DlviNB  REPKOACHEB  OF  THE  NEGLIGENT.  There  are  always  among  us  those  who 
give  no  heed  to  God,  whether  he  speaks  in  thunder-voice,  or  with  the  still  small  voice ; 

.in  judgments  or  in  mercies;  from  Sinai  or  from  Zion.  This  is  the  most  perplexing 
difficulty  with  which  God's  ministers  have  to  deal.  Men  hear,  but  give  no  heed.  They 
even  recognize  the  truth  and  importance  of  what  is  declared,  but  fail  to  see  any  relation 
in  which  it  stands  to  them.  No  harder  work  Is  set  before  the  servants  of  God  than  to 
break  down  pride  and  self-satisfaction,  and  awaken  personal  concern.  Indifference  to 
heavenly  and  Divine  things  keeps  men  away  even  from  God's  "  feast  of  fat  things,  and 
wines  on  tfae  lees  well  redned."  Ministers  have  constantly  to  be  the  arousing  trumpet- 
blast,  which  cries,  "Awake  thou  that  sleepest.and  arise  from  the  dead, and  Christ  shall 
give  thee  light." 

II.  Divine  bepboaches  of  the  wilfot..  The  secret  of  wilfulness  is  over-confi- 
dence in  self,  A  man  persuades  himself  that  it  "  is  in  man  that  walketh  to  direct  his 
steps."  Or,  as  Isaiah  puts  it,  a  man  is  quite  comfortable,  walketh  "  after  his  own 
thoughts,"  even  though  he  goes  in  a  way  that  is  not  good.  Such  a  man  opposes  all 
Divine  voices  and  messages,  because  he  finds  the  beginning  of  every  one  of  them  is 
this, "  Humble  yourself  under  the  mighty  hand  of  God."  Wilful  people  will  have  <Ae*r 
way,  but  they  will  not  have  Ood's  way. 

III.  Divine  eeproachbs  of  the  insolen't.  (Ver.  3.)  "Provoketh  me  to  angei 
continually  to  my  face."  It  is  strange  that  we  must  recognize  a  more  hopeful  condition 
in  active  opposition  to  God,  than  in  dogged  and  sullen  resistance,  or  in  weak  indifference. 
The  man  who  can  oppose  has  strength  of  character,  and  Divine  reproach  may  be  con- 
vincing to  him. — B.  T. 

Yer.  6. — The  pride  of  tuperior  holineei.  D»  W.  Kay  has  a  luggestive  not*  on 
this  verse :  "  A  deep  insight  is  here  given  us  into  the  nature  of  the  mysterious  fascina- 
tion which  heathenism  exercised  on  the  Jewish  people.  The  Law  humbled  them  at 
every  turn  with  mementoes  of  their  own  sin,  and  of  God's  unapproachable  holiness. 
Paganism  freed  them  from  this,  and  allowed  them  (in  the  midst  of  moral  pollution)  to 
cherish  lofty  pretensions  to  sanctity.  The  man  who  had  been  offering  incense  on  the 
mountain-top  despised  the  penitent  who  went  to  the  temple  to  present  'a  broken  and 
contrite  heart.'  If  Fbariiiaism  led  to  a  like  result,  it  was  because  it,  too,  had  emptied 
the  Law  of  its  spiritual  import,  and  turned  its  provisions  into  intellectual  idols." 

ISAIAH — n.  2  I 


482  THE  BOOK  OP  THE  PROPHET  ISAIAH.       [oh.  lxt.  1— 26. 

Henderson  says, "  The  conceit  of  imaginary  holinesB,  accruing  from  certain  external 
relations,  and  the  performaQce  of  certain  ritual  or  bodily  exercises,  such  as  the  Jews 
have  long  entertained,  and  which  is  also  awfully  prevalent  among  nominal  Christians, 
Jehovah  here  declares  to  be  peculiarly  offensive  to  him."  The  illustration  of  this 
"  stand-by  "  attitude  is  found  in  our  Lord's  parable  of  the  Pharisee  and  the  publican. 

I.  Holiness  of  nrnjAL.  Religion  may  be  a  doing  or  a  heing.  The  religion  of  doing 
ia  the  minute  and  careful  observance  of  ritual.  It  may  be  ritual  as  appointed  by  God, 
or  it  may  be  ritual  as  arranged  by  man.  A  certain  goodness,  righteousness,  bringing 
with  it  much  self-satisfaction,  and  a  great  disposition  to  despise  others,  may  come  out  of 
a  religion  of  doing.  Thousands  have  been  fascinated  by  it  in  every  age.  And  yet  it  is 
but  an  external  matter,  of  the  senses  and  of  the  mind ;  and  it  has  always  been  fuund 
possible  to  keep  it  up  along  with  heart-impurities  and  life-immoralities.  The  ritualist 
is  not  at  all  bound  to  be  a  clean-living  man.  Pharisees  thought  themselves  holy,  on 
the  ground  of  their  precise  obediences ;  and  it  was  a  Pharisaic  commonplace  to  live  in 
self-indulgence  and  sin.  Matthew  ArnoW,  writing  of  such  mere  ritual  holiness,  says, 
"  Doing  all  this  out  of  superstition,  and  out  of  the  vain  notion  that  it  will  be  of  religious 
avail  to  them,  they  insolently  repel  their  unsuperstitious  and  fiithful  brethren  as  less 
holy  than  themselves."  In  a  thousand  ways,  and  constantly,  it  is  needful  to  press  on 
attention  that  ritual  is  an  aid  to  holiness,  not  holiness,  and  the  danger  of  ritual  is  (1)  that 
it  may  blind  us  to  the  goodness  of  those  who  are  not  holy  in  the  same  way ;  and  (2)  it 
may  make  us  indifferent  to  the  claims  of  spirittud  holiness. 

II.  Holiness  of  eeakt.  (See  the  kind  of  holiness  acceptable  to  God,  shown  in 
a  former  homily  on  ch.  Ixvi.  1,  2.) — R.  T. 

Vers.  13 — 15. — Contrasted  lots  of  those  who  serve  God  and  those  who  forsake  him. 
This  passage  should  be  compared  with  Luke  vi.  20 — 26.  "The  blessedness  of  those 
that  serve  God,  and  the  woeful  condition  of  those  that  rebel  against  him,  are  here  set, 
the  one  over  against  the  other,  that  they  may  serve  as  a  foil  to  each  other." 

I.  Contrast  the  two  kinds  of  life.  The  man  who  fears  God  and  sets  his  heart  ' 
upon  serving  him,  finds  the  promises  fulfilled — "Verily  thou  shalt  be  filled;"  "None 
of  them  that  trust  in  him  shall  be  desolate."  He  may  take  his  place  in  anxious  and 
troublous  times,  but  since  he  is  God's  servant,  he  shall  be  even  as  Elijah,  fed  by  ravens, 
or  by  poor  widows,  if  need  be.  The  man  wlio  fears  not  God  is  left  to  ordinary  human 
devices,  and  may  be  left  hungry  and  thirsty  and  desolate.  He  holds  no  guarantee. 
The  Giver  of  all  good  is  under  no  covenant-pledge  to  see  that  he  wants  no  good  thing. 
"  God's  servants  shall  eat  and  drink ;  they  shall  have  the  bread  of  life  to  feed,  to  feast 
upon  continually,  and  shaU  want  nothing  that  is  good  for  them.  But  those  who  set 
their  hearts  upon  the  world,  and  place  their  happiness  in  it,  shall  be  hungry  and  thirsty, 
always  empty,  always  craving.  In  communion  with  God  and  dependence  ujxjn  him 
there  is  fiill  satisfaction;  but  in  sinful  pursuits  there  is  nothing  but  dissatisfaction  and 
disappointment." 

IL  Contrast  the  two  kinds  of  dispositions.  Trust  in  God  brings  peace  and  heart- 
rest.  Those  who  know  what  soul-rest  is,  find  it  easy  to  sing  and  give  thanks.  "  The 
joy  of  the  Lord  is  their  strength."  There  is  good  cheer  and  high  hope  in  their  souls. 
"  God's  servants  shall  rejoice  and  sing  for  joy  of  heart ;  they  have  constant  cause  for 
joy,  and  there  is  nothing  that  may  be  an  occasion  of  grief  to  them  but  may  have  an  allay 
sufficient  for  it.  But,  on  the  other  hand,  they  that  forsake  the  Lord  shut  themselves 
out  Irom  all  true  joy,  for  they  shall  be  ashamed  of  their  vain  confidence  in  themselves, 
and  their  own  righteousness,  and  the  hopes  they  had  built  thereon.  When  the  expecta- 
tions of  bliss,  wherewith  they  had  flattered  themselves,  are  frustrated,  oh,  what  con- 
fusion will  fill  then-  faces ! "  (Matthew  Henry).  "  The  joy  of  the  world  resembles  a 
torrent.  As  upon  a  glut  of  rain,  you  shall  have  a  torrent  come  rolling  along  with 
noise  and  violence,  overfiowing  its  banks,  and  bearing  all  before  it ;  yet  it  is  but  muddy 
and  impure  water,  and  it  is  soon  gone  and  dried  up:  such  is  all  the  joy  this  world  can 
give.  It  makes  a  great  noise,  it  is  commonly  immoderate,  and  swells  beyond  its  due 
bounds ;  yet  it  is  but  a  muddy  and  impure  joy ;  it  soon  rolls  away,  and  leaves  nothing 
behind  but  a  drought  in  the  soul.  Now,  since  the  world's  joy  is  but  such  a  poor  empty 
thing  as  this,  it  is  most  gross  folly  for  us  to  lay  out  our  best  love  upon  that  which 
cannot  itpay  us  with  the  best  joy"  (Bishop  Hopkins). — R.  T. 


OH.  LXT.  1— 25.J     THE  BOOK  OF  THE  PROPHET  ISAIAH.  48ft 

Ver.  17.—^  new  earth.  The  idea  is  that  God  will  be  sure  to  take  care  that  a  man'i 
surroundings  match  the  man  himself.  He  will  have  a  new  earth  for  regenerate  men. 
He  will  have  heaven  for  those  who  can  be  "  holy  still."  The  fundamental  idea  of  the 
verse  is  that  nature  itself  must  be  transformed  to  be  in  harmony  with  regenerate  Israel. 
Long  life  shall  be  one  of  the  marked  peculiarities  of  the  "new  earth."  Cheyne  quotei 
the  following  similar  passage  to  ver.  20  from  the  Book  of  Enoch :  "  And  they  shall 
not  be  punished  all  their  life  long,  neither  shall  they  die  by  plagues  and  judgments ; 
but  the  number  of  their  days  shall  they  complete,  and  they  shall  grow  old  in  peace, 
and  the  years  of  their  happiness  shall  be  many,  in  everlasting  bliss  and  peace,  their 
whole  life  long."  Some  take  this  text  as  a  poetical  representation  of  the  new  condition 
into  which  the  returned  exiles  entered ;  and  in  that  view  we  have  an  ideal  picture  of 
what  ought  to  have  been.  We,  however,  take  the  more  general  principle  that  God 
makes  a  new  earth  for  the  new-born  man;  everything  to  him  becomes  new.  Ami  God 
makes  a  new  earth  for  his  sanctified  Church — does  make  it,  in  a  sense,  now,  and  will  make 
it,  in  a  larger  sense,  by-and-by.  In  what  sense,  then,  can  we  be  said  to  want  a  "new 
earth"? 

I.  Not  in  the  bensb  op  a  changed  world  of  things.  It  is  not  possible  for  us  to 
conceive  of  anything  better,  more  restful,  more  satisfying,  than  this  paradise  of  earth, 
which  God  has  made  and  decked  for  us,  with  its  hills,  and  vales,  and  streams,  and  seas, 
and  flowers,  and  trees,  and  hoar-frost,  and  harvest-fields,  and  spring-time  greenery,  and 
autumn  tinting.    We  love  our  earth,  fair  earth,  and  do  not  want  it  changed. 

"'Twas  a  fair  scene — a  land  more  bright 

Never  did  mortal  eye  behold  I  .  .  . 

Those  valleys  and  their  fruits  of  gold 
Basking  in  heaven's  serenest  light; 
Those  groups  of  lovely  date  trees  bending 

Languidly  their  leaf-crown'd  heads. 
Like  youthful  maids,  when  sleep  descending 

Warns  them  to  their  silken  beds; 
Those  virgin  lilies,  all  the  night 

Bathing  their  beauties  in  the  lake. 
That  they  may  rise  more  fresh  and  bright 

When  their  beloved  sun's  awake." 

(T.  Moore.) 

We  can.  Indeed,  only  conceive  of  heaven  as  like  earth,  all  of  it  as  beautiful  u  some  of 
the  earth  is  to  ua.     Poetry  anticipates  that 

"  There,  on  a  green  and  flowery  mound. 
Our  weary  souls  shall  sit." 

And  Scripture  figures  heaven  as  a  city  in  a  paradise.     No  sense  of  wanting  relief  from 
the  ever-exquisite  associations  of  earth  comes  to  us.     Even  earth's  dark  things,  her 
night,  her  winds,  her  storms,  her  winter,  are  precious  to  us,  and  we  scarce  would  have 
them  otherwise. 
n.  But  in  the  sense  of  a  changed  world  of  beinos.    There  are  lands  when 

"...  every  prospect  pleases, 
And  only  man  is  vUe ; " 

and  it  is  just  that  "vileness  of  man"  which  lias  made  earth  so  sad,  life  so  bitter,  and 
death  so  terrible.  Could  we  clear  the  human  race  away,  as  with  another  flood  or  fire, 
and  start  again  the  cleansed  earth  with  a  race  in  whom  righteousness  should  dwell, 
then,  verily,  we  should  want  no  other  heaven— earth  would  be  heaven.  Illustrate  these 
points:  1.  The  good  man  makes  a  new  earth  of  his  sphere.  2.'  The  good  parents  make 
a  new  earth  of  their  home.  3.  The  holy  Church  helps  to  make  a  new  earth  of  social  life. 
4,  The  well-principled  statesman  tries  to  make  a  new  earth  of  the  nation.  5.  Those 
who  believe  in  God  and  know  his  i-edemption  strive  to  make  a  new  earth  of  the  sorely 
smitten  heathen  lands.  We  all  want  that  new  earth  in  which  holiness  shall  be  every- 
viriiere— holiness  the  glorifying  sunshine  that  makes  earth  to  be  summer-time  always ; 
holiness  shall  jingle  from  the  very  bells  of  the  horses.  Call  that  new  earth  wliat  yov 
may  please,  it  will  be  heaven  — B.  T. 


484  THE  BOOK  OP  THE  PROPHET  ISAIAH,    [ch.  lxt.  1— 26, 

Ver.  20. — The  woe  of  agtd  sinners.  There  are  three  special  periods  of  life  in  which 
men  are  peculiarly  exposed  to  the  power  of  temptation  and  siu.  Most  men  that  fall, 
fall  either  into  young  men's  perils,  full-grown  men's  indulgences,  or  old  men's  sing. 
A  pure,  humble,  godly  old  man  is  one  of  the  noblest  sights  to  be  seen  under  heaven. 
And  by  so  much  as  that  is  beautiful,  a  godless,  characterless,  debased  old  man  is  a 
shame  and  contempt.  "  A  hoary  head  is  a  crown  of  glory  if  it  be  foimd  in  the  way  ot 
righteousness."  Yet  old  age  has  its  special  evils.  Temptations  to  those  sins  which  tha 
Bible  gathers  up  into  the  word  "  uncleanness."  Often  uncleanness  of  word  and  con- 
versation ;  oflen,  alas  I  of  life  and  conduct  also.  It  would  appear  that  bodily  lust  and 
passion  gathers  itself  in  old  age  for  one  last  struggle  to  gain  the  mastery.  The  flame 
flares  up  in  the  socket,  and  old  men  need  to  keep  very  near  to  God,  very  much  in  the 
power  of  the  sanctifying  Spirit,  if,  having  withstood  all  the  perils  of  youth  and  man- 
hood, they  do  not  fall  under  the  temptations  of  old  age.  What  an  awful  sight  is 
the  foul-mouthed,  leering-eyed,  depraved  old  man,  tottering  on  the  very  edge  of  the 
eternal,  where  "  he  that  is  filthy  shall  be  filthy  still "  I  The  prophet  tells  of  the 
time  when  there  shall  be  no  confusions  about  the  state  of  aged  sinners,  because  they 
are  in  great  state,  or  are  spared  long.  "  The  sinner  being  an  hundred  years  old  shall 
be  accursed." 

I.  The  woe  qf  aged  sutkebs  comes  or  bittebhgss  of  suFFEBiNa.  The  self-indulgent 
life  ensures  an  unusually  suffering  old  age.  There  are  natural  and  necessary  penalties, 
which  are  first  smitings  of  Divine  judgment. 

n.  The  woe  of  aged  sinners  combs  in  the  estimate  op  those  who  tend  them. 
The  aged  sinner  outlives  his  so-called  friends,  who  shared  his  self-willed  doings,  and 
might  have  sympathized  with  him.  He  is  put,  for  tending,  into  the  hands  o!  a  new 
generation,  who  only  see  the  wreck  and  ruin  of  body  and  character  which  the  life  has 
led  to.  He  feels  despised;  he  feels  the  misery  of  being  despised.  He  knows  well 
enough  that  they  wish  him  gone. 

HL  The  woe  of  aqed  sinnebb  comes  in  feabs  of  the  future.  It  comes  on  a  man 
sooner  or  later  that  he  will  have  to  "  give  an  account  of  his  stewardship."  His  body 
was  not  his  own ;  liis  time  was  not  his  own ;  his  talents  were  not  his  own ;  his  posses- 
sions were  not  his  own ;  his  relations  were  not  his  own.  Presently  he  asks  himself — 
What  have  I  done  with  God's  property,  which  was  entrusted  for  a  while  to  my  care  1 
Conscious  of  having  diverted  God's  property  to  his  own  uses,  he  may  well  fear  to  meet 
his  offended  God.— B.  T. 

Yer.  24. — Sivi/t  answers  to  prayer.  The  answer  comes  even  when  the  prayer  ia  but 
•  thought,  ia  only  a  sigh ;  for  God  is  the  Infinite  Thought-reader. 

"  Flayer  is  the  burden  of  a  eigh. 
The  falling  of  a  tear ; 
The  upward  glancing  of  an  eye. 
When  none  but  God  is  near." 

One  of  the  wonderful  revelations  of  the  day  that  is  coming  will  be  God's  showing  ni 
the  many  answers  he  sent  to  prayers  of  ours  that  never  took  shape  in  human  words, 
that  were  no  more  than  the  outlook  and  uplook  of  our  souls.  The  point  impressed  by 
the  propliet  here  is  that,  by  reason  of  man's  sinfulness,  delays  in  answering  his  prayers 
are  nften  necessary,  delay  doing  a  very  essential  disciplinary  and  corrective  work.  But 
if  a  man  were  holy — in  full  harmony  with  God's  will — there  would  never  be  any 
question  about  his  prayers,  never  any  need  for  delay  in  answering  them.  God  could 
respond  at  once.  "In  man's  experience  of  men,  often,  as  things  are  now,  in  his 
relations  with  God,  there  is  an  interval  between  prayer  and  answer.  In  the  new 
Jerusalem  the  two  would  be  simultaneous,  or  the  answer  would  anticipate  the  prayer." 
God's  I  iresent  method  in  relation  to  prayer  may  be  illustrated  from  Dan.  ix.  23 ;  Luke 
xviii.  1 — 7 ;  2  Cor.  xii.  8. 

I.  What  is  it  in  us  that  makes  answeb  to  pbateb  slow  and  even  unoebtaih? 
It  is  certain  that  God  is  more  willing  to  hear  than  we  are  to  pray.  He  has  made  large 
and  firm  promises  of  answer  if  we  pray ;  and  yet  sometimes  his  answer  is  a  refusal,  and 
at  other  times  it  is  a  delay,  and  at  yet  other  times  the  gift  of  something  which  we  did 
not  desire.    The  explanation  is  in  us ;  we  either  ask  for  wrong  things,  or  else  we  ask  in 


ixvi.  1— 24.]    THE   BOOK  OF  THE   PROPHET   ISAIAH. 


485 


a  wrong  spirit.    We  need  rebuff,  or  we  need  correction.    An  unanswered  prayer  should 
always  set  us  upon  "  examining  ourselves." 

II.  What  is  it  in  cs  that  makes  answeb  to  pbayeb  comb  swiftly?  The 
conformity  of  our  desires  with  God's  will,  and  the  offering  of  ourselves  In  the  spirit  of 
■ubmission,  dependence,  and  trustful  love,  which  becomes  obedient  children. 


"  Lord,  teaoh  na  how  to  ptay  aright.'* 


B.T. 


Baanois  XIL    Final  Thbbatbningw  aho  PBoiossa  (oh.  i.xti.X 


EXPOSITION. 


CHAPTER  LXVI. 


Vol.  1 — 1. — The  Umoodlt  Exiles  bb- 
bcked.  Israel,  being  about  to  return  from 
the  Captivity,  had  the  design  of  rebuilding 
the  temple  and  re-establishing  the  temple 
worship.  God  rebukes  this  design  in  persons 
devoid  of  any  spirit  of  holiness,  and  warns 
them  that  mere  formal  outward  worship  is 
an  abomination  to  him  (vers.  1 — 3).  In  ver. 
4  he  threatens  them  with  punishment. 

Ver.  1. — Heaven  is  my  throne,  and  the  earth 
is  my  footstool  (comp.  Ps,  xi.  4;  ciii.  19). 
The  Hebrews,  while  they  earnestly  desired  to 
have  a  material  emblem  of  the  presence  of 
God  in  their  midst,  were  deeply  impressed 
with  the  feeling  that  no  temple  could  be 
worthy  of  him,  or  other  than  most  unworthy. 
"Will  God,"  said 'Solomon,  "indeed  dwell 
on  the  earth?  behold,  the  heaven  and 
heavens  of  heavens  cannot  contain  thee ;  how 
much  less  this  house  that  I  have  builded  ?  " 
(1  Kings  viii.  27).  And  again,  "Who  is 
able  to  build  him  an  house,  seeing  the 
heaven  and  heaven  of  heavens  cannot  con- 
tain him  ?  Who  am  I  then,  that  I  should 
build  him  an  house,  save  only  to  bum  sacri- 
fice before  him?"  (2  Chron.  u.  6).  Thus 
Isaiah's  note  of  warning  was  no  novelty,  and 
might  find  responsive  echoes  in  the  hearts 
of  many.  Where  is  the  house  that  ye  bnild 
unto  me  ?  rather,  what  manner  of  houte  it  it 
that  ye  wnuld  build  to  me,  and  what  manner  of 
place  for  my  reet  f  God  needs  no  "  Ijouse ; 
and  they  cannot  build  him  a  house  that 
oould  be  in  any  way  worthy  of  him.  They, 
moreover,  are  unworthy  to  build  him  any 
house,  which  is  the  real  ground  of  the  refusal. 
There  was  no  refusal,  when  the  better  part 
of  the  exiles,  having  returned,  took  the 
building  in  hand  (see  Ezra  iii.  8 — 13;  Ti. 
14,  15;  Hag.  L  8—14;  Zech.  i.  16;  ir.  9, 
etc.). 

Ver.  2. — All  these  things — i.e.  heaven 
and  earth— ^hath  mine  hand  made ;  i.e.  have 
I,  Jehovah,  brought  into  existence.  How, 
then,  can  I  need  that  men  should  build  me 


a  house?  All  these  things  have  been,  saith 
the  Lord.  The  sentence  seems  incomplete. 
Mr.  Oheyne  supplies,  "I  spoke."  The 
sentence  will  then  run,  "I  spoke,  and  all 
these  things  came  into  being,  saith  Jehovah;" 
i.e.  heaven  and  earth,  and  all  things  that 
are  therein,  came  into  being  at  my  word 
(comp.  Gen.  i  1 ;  ii.  1).  But  to  tlus  man 
will  I  look ;  i.e.  though  I  have  made  all 
things  and  all  men,  I,  will  not  equally  re- 
gard all.  Him  only  will  I  respect  who  is  of 
a  poor  and  contrite  spirit,  etc.  (comp.  oh. 
Ivii.  15). 

Ver.  3. — He  that  killeth  an  oz  is  as  if  he 
slew  a  man ;  literally,  tg  a  manslayer.  The 
full  meaning  seems  to  be,  "He  that,  not 
being  of  a  poor  and  contrite  spirit,  would 
offer  me  an  ox  in  sacrifice,  is  as  little  pleasing 
to  me  as  a  murderer."  Sacrifice,  without 
the  true  spirit  of  sacrifice,  is  an  abomination 
(comp.  oh.  i.  11,  "  To  what  purpose  is  the 
multitude  of  your  sacrifices  unto  me?  saith 
the  Lord,"  etc.).  There,  however,  the  sacri- 
fices are  actually  offered ;  here  they  are  hy- 
pothetical. The  ungodly  exiles  design  to 
offer  sacrifice  to  God  in  his  temple,  when 
they  have  rebuilt  it  (ver.  1).  God  rejects 
their  offerings  by  anticipation.  As  if  he  out 
off  a  dog's  neck ;  i.e. "  would  no  more  please 
me  by  the  sacrifice  than  if  be  were  to  make 
an  otiTering  of  the  unclean  dog."  (On  the 
uncleannesB  of  the  dog,  see  Deut.  xxiii.  18.) 
He  that  offereth  an  oblation;  or,  a  meat 
offering  (see  Lev.  ii.  1 — 1 5).  He  that  bumeth 
inoense.  With  his  meat  offering,  as  directed 
in  Lev.  ii.  1,  2.  Such  a  one  is  no  better 
than  he  that  blesseth  (i.e.  worships)  an  idol. 
It  may  be  suspected  that  the  ritual  acts 
selected  for  comparison  with  those  of  the 
I^evitical  law  are  practices  to  which  the 
exiles  were  given  (comp.  oh.  Ixv.  3, 4).  Yea, 
they  have  chosen,  etc. ;  rather,  as  they  hav* 
chosen.  The  clause  stands  over  against  the 
first  clause  of  ver.  4,  "As  they  (gam 
hSmmah)  have  ehosen  their  ways,  so  I  (gam 
dni)  have  chosen  their  delusions." 

Ver.  4. — ^Their  delusions ;  or,  their  ehUdith 
foUiet  (LXX.,  iiamlyiiaTOL).  As  Gh>d  sends 
on  some  men  "strong  delusion  that  thev 


-«6 


THE  BOOK  OP  THE   PROPHET  ISAIAH,     [oh.  lxvi.  1— 2* 


■hould  believe  a  lie  "  (2  Thess.  ii.  11),  bo  on 
others  he  sends  a  spirit  of  childish  folly, 
which  makes  their  conduct  silly  and  head- 
Btrong.  Persons  whose  characters  are  of  this 
Btainp  are  especially  liable  to  vain  and 
groundless  "  fears."  When  I  called,  none  did 
answer  (comp.  ch.  Ixv.  12,  and  see  the 
ooDunent  on  that  passage). 

Vera.  5— 14.  — The  Godly  Exiles  en- 
OOTIBAGED.  The  Bcoffs  which  liave  long 
greeted  ttose  who  believed  God's  promises 
and  expected  the  restoration  of  Zion,  will  be 
put  to  shame.  The  silence  in  which  Zion 
has  lain  will  be  broken ;  she  will  be  once 
more  a  city  "  full  of  stirs,  a  tumultuous  city  " 
(ch.  xxii.  2).  Suddenly,  without  any  pains 
of  travail,  she  will  bring  forth ;  and  her  off- 
ipring  will  be  •'  a  nation  born  at  once  "  (ver. 
8).  The  godly  exiles  are  called  upon  to  re- 
joice at  the  prospect  (ver.  10),  and  promised 
peace  and  comfort  in  the  restored  city  (vers. 
11—14). 

Ver.  5. — Hear  ...  ye  that  tremble.  The 
godly  are  addressed — those  that  have  a 
reverent  fear  of  God's  word  (comp.  ver.  2, 
ad  fin. ;  and  see  also  Ezra  ix.  4 ;  x.  3).  Yotir 
brethren  that  .  .  .  cast  you  out;  rather. 
that  put  you  away  (Cheyne),  or  thrust  you 
from  them  (Delitzsch).  The  verb  used  came 
in  later  times  to  designate  furmal  excom- 
munication ;  but  here  it  points  merely  to  a 
practical  renunciation  of  fellowship.  Said, 
Let  the  Lord  be  glorified :  but  he  shall  appear 
to  yonr  joy ;  rather,  said.  Let  Jehovah  glorify 
himself, that  we  may  see  your  joy ;  i.e.  "said 
sarcastically.  May  the  prophecies  be  fulfilled, 
and  God  humble  Babylon,  and  release  Israel, 
and  restore  her,  that  we  may  witness  your 
rejoicing.  We  should  gladly  see  all  this; 
but  we  do  not  in  the  least  expect  it."  And 
they  shall  be  ashamed;  rather,  but  as  for 
them  (i.e.  those  who  so  speak)  they  shall  be 
ofhamed.    The  event  shall  shame  them. 

Ver.  6.— A  voice  of  noise  from  the  city  . . . 
from  the  temple.  The  "  city  "  and  "  temple  " 
are  suddenly  in  existence — they  have  sprung 
into  being.  The  prophet  sees  Jerusalem 
rebuilt,  restored,  and  hears  sounds  go  forth 
from  it — partly,  perhaps,  the  sounds  of  ordi- 
nary city  life ;  but  amid  these,  there  is  a  voice 
of  the  Lord,  rendering  reoompeuse  to  his 
enemies.  The  Jewish  state,  restored  by 
Zerubbabel,  did,  after  a  time,  bring  under 
subjection  several  of  its  ancient  adversaries. 

Vers.  7,  8. — Before  she  travailed,  etc. 
Without  any  long  delay,  without  any  labour 
pains,  Zion  wiU  bring  forth  a  man-ohild^a 
whole  nation,  which  will  be  born  at  once, 
and  not  grow  up  by  slow  degrees.  The 
occupation  of  Jerusalem  by  the  great  body 
■>{  tiie  returned  exiles  (Ezra  ii  1;  iii.  1)  ia 


intended.  Such  a  second  birth  of  a  nation 
was  strange,  and  without  precedent  (comp. 
ch.  xlii.  9;  xliii.  19).  Shall  the  earth  be 
made  to  bring  forth  in  one  day?  rather,  can 
a  land  be  brought  forth  in  one  day  1  It  ia 
not  only  a  people,  but  a  country,  that  is 
bom  anew ;  not  only  the  Jews,  but  Judraa. 

Ver.  9. — Shall  I  bring  to  the  birth,  etc.  1 
i.e.  "  Should  I  arrange  all  the  preliminary 
circumstances  for  the  restoration  of  my 
people,  and  stop  there?"  (Cheyne).  Nay, 
should  I,  having  done  so  much,  interpose  at 
the  last  moment,  to  shnt  the  womb  ?  With- 
out such  interposition,  matters  have  pro- 
gressed so  far,  that  the  result  must  come. 

Ver.  10. — Bejoioe  ye  with  Jerusalem  .  .  . 
all  ye  that  love  her.  The  call  to  rejoicing 
is  general.  Bestored  Jerusalem  is  to  be 
hailed  with  joy  "by  all  who  love  her," 
wliether  her  own  children  or  foreigners.  To 
both  she  will  be  a  blessing  (vers.  11 — 13). 

Ver.  11. — ^Ihat  ye  may  suck.  Bestored 
Jerusalem  will  be  as  a  mother  to  all  who 
love  her,  to  all  who  have  mourned  for  hex 
when  she  lay  as  it  were  dead  (1  Sam.  xt. 
35 ;  2  Sam.  xiv.  2).  She  will  have  "  milk  " 
to  give  to  all — "the  sincere  nulk  of  the 
Word"  (1  Pet.  ii.  2)— and  from  her  both 
Jew  and  Gentile  will  "suck  out  no  small 
advantage  "  (Ps.  Ixxiii.  10).  She  will  also 
impart  to  them  from  the  abundance  of  her 
glory. 

Ver.  12. — ^I  will  extend  peace  to  her  lika 
a  river ;  literally,  I  will  direct  peaee  to  her, 
like  a  river.  The  waters  of  streams  are  in 
the  East  directed  hither  and  thither  by  the 
agriculturist.  God  would  have  given  his 
people  "  peace,  as  a  river,"  long  previously, 
had  they  permitted  him  (ch.  xlviii.  18).  And 
the  glory  of  the  Gentiles  (comp.  ch.  Ix.  5, 
11;  Ixi.  6,  etc.).  Like  a  flowing  stream; 
literally,  as  an  overflowing  torrent.  There 
is  perhaps  a  contrast  intended  between  the 
former  and  the  latter  times.  In  the  former 
times  Assyria  had  swept  over  Israel  like  an 
overwhelming  flood  to  destroy  her  (ch.  viii. 
7i  8) ;  now  the  glory  of  the  whole  Gentile 
world  should  similarly  overflow  and  over- 
whelm, but  only  to  enrich  and  exalt.  Ye 
shall  be  borne  upon  her  sides  (see  the  com- 
ment on  ch.  Ix.  4).  It  is  Jerusalem,  and 
not  the  Gentile  world  (Delitzsch,  Cheyne), 
that  will  thus  care  for  and  caress  her  children. 
The  continuance  of  the  metaphor  from  ver. 
11  is  marked  by  the  repetition  of  the  verb, 
"ye  shall  suck." 

Ver.  13. — ^As  one;  litentlly,  a»  a  man. 
Israel  is  now  looked  upon  as  grown  up,  and 
receiving  comfort  from  Gt>d  himself  in 
Jerusalem. 

Ver.  14. — ^Tonr  bones  shall  flourish  like  «o 
herb  (comp.  oh.  Iviii.  11).  In  the  time  of 
calamity,  Israel's  "bones"  have  been  "con- 
sumed "  (Ps.  xxxi.  10),  and  "  waxed  old  * 


OH.  Livi.  1— 24.]    THE  BOOK  OP  THE  PROPHET  ISAIAH. 


481 


(Ps.  xxxii,  3),  and  "  bumed  with  heat "  (Job 
XXX.  30).  Now  they  Bball  enjoy  a  time  of 
refreshing  from  the  Lord.  New  life  shall 
enter  them,  and  health  and  growth  shall 
follow.  The  nation  shall  be  rejuvenated, 
and  "flourish"  in  more  than  its  pristine 
strength.  The  hand  of  the  Lord  shall  be 
known;  or  recoo;n{zed,  both  in  this  merciful 
treatment  of  his  servants,  and  also  in  the 
indignation  with  which  he  will  visit  his 
enemies.  This  last  clause  conveniently  in- 
troduces the  following  "theophany"  (vers. 
15-18). 

Vers.  15 — 18. — THBVENGEANOBwmoHGtoD 
WILL  TAKE  ON  HIS  ENEMIES.  A  signal  Out- 
pouring of  God's  vengeance  upon  his  enemies 
precedes  the  settlement  of  the  Church  in  its 
final  glorious  condition,  both  in  Isaiah  and 
in  the  Bevelation  of  St  John  (see  ch.  xxxiv., 
XXXV.,  and  Kev.  xix. — ^xxi.)-  The  wicked 
have  to  be  removed  before  the  righteous 
can  be  established  in  peace.  Here  the 
agencies  employed  against  the  wicked  are 
"fire"  and  "sword"  —  fire  pointing  (as 
Delitzsch  remarks)  to  destructive  occurrences 
of  nature,  and  the  sword  to  destructive 
occurrences  of  history.  God  himself  is  re- 
presented as  guiding  and  directing  both 
agencies,  to  the  punisliment  of  the  ungodly 
and  the  relief  of  those  who  trust  in  him. 

Ver.  15. — Behold,  the  lord  will  come  with 
fire.  "Fire"  is  a  usual  accompaniment  of 
a  "theophany."  God  descended  on  Sinai  "  in 
fire"  (Exod.  six.  18),  and  led  the  Israelites 
through  the  wilderness  by  the  pillar  of  the 
cloud  and  of  fire  (Exod.  xiii.  21,  22),  and 
filled  the  tabernacle  with  a  glory  as  of  fire 
(Exod.  xl.  34),  and  "  answered  David  from 
heaven  by  fire  upon  the  altar  of  burnt  offer- 
ing" (1  Chron.  xxi.  26),  and  in  the  same 
way  answered  Solomon  (2  Chron.  vii.  1)  and 
Elijah  (1  Kings  xviii.  88).  Isaiah  almost 
always  describes  a  theophany  as  a  "  coming 
with  fire"  (see  ch.  x.  16 — 18;  xxvii.  4; 
xxix.  6;  XXX.  27,  30;  xxxiii.  12,  14,  etc.). 
The  agency  of  fire  in  the  judgment  that 
will  overtake  the  wicked  simultaneously 
with  Christ's  second  coming,  appears  in  2 
Thess.  L  8;  2  Pet.  iii.  7—10.  With  his 
chariots  (comp.  Ps.  Ixviii.  17;  Hab.  iiL  8). 
"  Chariots,"  in  the  plural,  may  be  regarded 
88  symbolizing  the  "  hosts  "  of  natural  and 
supernatural  forces  that  God  has  at  his 
command  (Cheyne).  Like  a  whirlwind. 
The  whirring  of  the  wheels  of  chariots,  tlieir 
noise,  the  swiftness  of  their  pace,  and  the 
destruction  that  they  cause,  make  this  simile 
most  appropriate.  To  render  his  anger ;  or, 
to  expend  hie  anger — to  vent  it. 

Ver.  16. — By  fire  and  by  his  sword  (see  the 
hitroduotory  paragraph).    The   "sword  of 


Jehovah "  is  spoken  of  also  in  oh.  zxvii.  1 
and  xxxiv.  5,  6  (comp.  Eev.  xix.  15,  21). 
Will  the  Lord  plead  with  all  flesh ;  rather, 
wUl  the  Lord  judge  allfleih  (comp.  Jer.  xxv. 
81,  where  the  same  phrase  occurs). 

Ver.  17. — They  that  sanctify  .  .  .  them- 
selves in  the  gardens  (comp.  ob.  L  29 :  Izv. 
3;  and  see  the  comment  on  the  latter 
passage).  Behind  one  tree  in  the  midst; 
literally,  behind  one  in  the  midst.  It  seems 
quite  impossible  that  "  one  "  can  mean  "one 
tree,"  when  no  tree  has  been  mentioned, 
and  gardens  do  not  necessarily  contain  trees. 
The  marginal  rendering,  "  one  after 
another,"  is  also  impossible.  The  "one 
in  the  midst"  must  have  been  either  a 
hierophant  who  directed  the  ceremonies 
(Gesenius,  Hitzig,  Knobel,  Delitzsch),  or 
an  image  of  a  deity  (Scaliger,  Voss,  Grotius, 
Lagarde,  Cheyne).  In  the  latter  case,  we 
must  suppose  that  the  worshippers  had  a 
scruple  about  mentioning  the  deity's  name, 
and  were  accustomed  to  call  him  "  one,"  or 
"a  certain  one"  (comp.  Herod.,  U.  171). 
Isaiah  adopts  their  usage.  Eating  swine's 
flesh  (comp.  ch.  Ixv.  4).  And  the  abomina- 
tion. The  word  is  used  generically  of  all 
the  "abominable  things"  forbidden  to  be 
eaten  in  Lev.  xi.  4 — 30,  as  the  camel,  the 
coney,  the  bare,  the  eagle,  the  vulture,  the 
ferret,  the  chameleon,  the  lizard,  etc.  Th« 
mouse.  Probably  the  jerboa  (see  Lev.  xi 
20). 

Ver.  18. — ror  I  know  their  works.  There 
is  no  verb  in  the  Hebrew  text,  from  which 
something  has  evidently  fallen  out.  Mr. 
Cheyne  supplies,  "I  will  punish;"  Gratz, 
"  I  have  seen."  "  I  know  "  is  supported  by 
the  Targums,  the  Syriao  Version,  several  ma- 
nuscripts of  the  Septuagint,  and  the  authori- 
ties of  Saadiya,  Vitringa,  and  Gesenius.  And 
their  thoughts ;  t.e.  I  know,  not  only  their 
works,  but  even  the  thoughts  &om  which 
the  works  proceeded.  It  shall  come;  t.e. 
"  the  time  shall  come."  (For  the  full  phrase, 
see  Jer.  IL  33 ;  Ezek.  vii.  7, 12.)  All  nations 
and  tongues.  This  expression  has  been  com- 
pared with  Daniel's  "  kindreds  and  nations 
and  languages"  (iii.  4,  7,  29;  iv.  1;  v. 
19,  etc.),  and  has  been  regarded  as  a  sign 
of  late  authorship.  But  "nations"  and 
"  tongues  "  are  coupled  together  in  Scripture 
as  early  as  Genesis  (x.  S,  20).  They  shall 
come,  and  see  my  glory;  i.e.  "see  the  glory 
that  I  shall  get  me  upon  my  enemies  "  (ven. 
15—17). 

Vers.  19— 24.— The  Pinal  Condition  o» 
THE  Church  of  the  BEDBEMEn  on  Eabth. 
When  the  enemies  of  God  have  been  con- 
sumed, there  shall  go  out  from  the  Church 
missionaries,  who  shall  convert  the  distant 
Gentiles,  and  unite  them,  and  the  Jews  who 
dwell  among  them,  into  a  single  body  U 


THE  BOOK  OF  THE  PROPHET  ISAIAH,     [oh.  lxvi.  1— 24. 


worshippers,  which  shall  inhabit  the  new 
Jerusalem  on  equal  terms,  and  join  continu- 
ally in  a  common  worship  of  Jehovah.  The 
awful  destruction  of  the  wicked,  and  their 
eternal  sufferings,  shall  at  the  same  time  be 
held  in  remembrance. 

Ver.  19. — I  will  set  a  sign  among  them. 
Dr.  Kay  suggests  that  the  "sign"  is  the 
resurrection  of  our  Lord,  or  poss.ijly  a  mira- 
culous manifestation  of  Christ  which  is  to 
precede  his  coming  in  judgment.  Mr.Cheyne, 
less  venturesome, finds  in  the  prophet's  words 
merely  a  suggestion  of  "some  mysterious 
erent,  which  he  leaves  his  awesi  ruck  readers 
to  imagine."  Those  that  escape  of  them. 
Not,  surely,  those  of  God's  enemies  that 
survive  the  slaughter,  but  "the  remnant" 
of  Jews,  that  are  uot  among  God's  enemies, 
unci  so  "  escape."  These  shall  be  sent  (as 
missionaries)  to  the  distant  nations;  not 
liteially  to  those  enumerated,  but  to  such 
as  ut  the  end  of  the  world  occupy  a  position 
which  the  nations  mentioned  occupied  on 
Isaiah's  horizon.  Of  these  nations,  Tarshish 
(Tartessus)  was  at  the  furthest  limit  west- 
ward, Pul  and  Lud,  or  rathtr  Phut  and  Lud, 
at  the  fui'thest  limit  southward.  Tubal  and 
Javan  at  the  furthest  limit  noith  ward.  Fnl, 
which  occurs  nowhere  else  in  Scripture  as  a 
geographic  name,  is  almost  certainly  a  wrong 
reading  for  Phut,  which  occurs  in  Gen.  x.  6, 
and  also  three  times  (Jir.  xlvi.  9;  Ezek. 
zxvii.  10  ;  xs.x.  5)  in  connection  with  Lud. 
Phut  designates  an  African  nation,  probably 
the  Nubians,  whom  the  Egyptians  called  Pet, 
and  who  were  noted  as  bowmen.  Wetstein's 
conjecture  of  "Pun  "  (Punici, '  Phoenicians '), 
commended  by  Mr.  Cheyne,  is  quite  un- 
supported and  highly  improbable.  lud.  It 
is  tempting  to  connect  '■  Lud "  with  the 
Lydians,  wl.o  were  certainly  known  as 
"Ludi"  ti>  the  Assyrians  of  the  time  of 
Asshur-bani-pal  (B.C.  669—626).  But  the 
other  scriptural  notices  of  "  Lud  "  (Jer.  xlvi. 
9 ;  Ezek.  xxvii.  10  ;  xxx.  5),  which  uniformly 
connect  it  with  Phut,  point  rather  to  an 
African  people.  See  also  Gen.  x.  13,  where 
the  1  .udim  are  a  subdivision  of  the  Egyptians. 
That  draw  the  bow  (comp.  Jer.  xlvi.  9).  To 
Tubal,  and  Javan.  Tubal  stands,  no  doubt, 
for  the  Tibareni,  a  people  of  the  Asiatic 
liighland  west  of  the  Upper  Euphrates, 
called  Tuplai  or  Tabali  by  the  Assyrians. 
They  would  occupy  Isaiah's  northern  and 
north-western  horizon,  in  company  with 
Javau,  or  the  lonians  {'idfoves).  who  were 
among  the  chief  people  of  Asia  Minor. 
Javan,  Tubal,  and  Meshech  (VlSaxoh  Mnskai) 
are  joined  in  Gen.  x.  2  and  Ezek.  xxvii.  13. 
The  isles  afar  off ;  i.e.  the  shores  and  islands 
of  the  Mediterranean. 

Ver.  20.— They  shall bringall  your  brethren 
(or  an  offering  unto  the  Lord.    When  the 


distant  Gentiles  have  been  converted,  they 
shall  bring  to  Christ  tlie  Jews  of  the  dis- 
persion, who  dwell  with  them  in  the  remote 
paits  of  the  earth  (comp.  Zeph.  iii.  IQ). 
Upon  horses.  The  "  new  Jerusalem  "  being 
localized,  .the  converts  from  the  distant 
regions  are  represented  as  journeying  from 
their  own  lands  to  the  "holy  mountain," 
and  bringing  the  Jewish  exiles  with  them 
by  various  methods  of  conveyance — upon 
horses,  mules,  and  dromedaries,  in  chariots, 
and  finallyin  palanquins  or  litters.  "Litters" 
were  used  by  the  great  men  among  the 
Egyptians  from  a  very  early  date  (see  Ilosel- 
lini,  'Monumenti  Civili,'  pi.  xciii.  fig.  2; 
Wilkinson,  'Ancient  Egyptians,'  vol.  ii.  p. 
20S).  They  were  also  employed  by  the 
Persians  (Herod.,  iii.  116)  and  by  the  later 
Bomans.  Aa  the  ohildren  of  Israel  bring  an 
offering ;  rather,  bring  the  meat  offering.  The 
existence  of  the  temple,  and  the  continuance 
of  the  Levitical  rites  at  the  time  of  the 
delivery  of  this  prophecy,  are  clearly  im- 
plied. 

Yer.  21. — ^And  I  will  alio  take  of  them  for 
priests  and  for  Levites;  literally,  and  J  wt'2I 
alto  take  of  them  unto  the  priests  and  unto 
the  Levites;  Le.  I  will  add  to  the  existing 
body  of  priests  and  Levites,  who  are  pre- 
sumably Jews,  fresh  members  from  the 
newly  converted  Gentiles.  The  existence 
of  a  sacerdotal  order,  with  distinctions  of 
ranks,  in  the  Church  of  the  redeemed,  is  im- 
plied, and  the  gracious  declaration  is  made 
that  the  privilege  of  furnishing  members  to 
both  ranks  of  the  order  shall  be  conferred 
upon  the  Gentile  proselytes. 

Ver.  22. — As  the  new  heavens  and  the  new 
earth,  which  I  will  make,  shall  remain.  The 
"new  heavens  and  the  new  earth,"  once 
created,  continue  for  ever  (comp.  Bev.  xxL 
1—27;  xxii.  1 — 5).  So  shall  your  seed 
and  your  name  remain.  This  statement  is 
usually  taken  to  be  a  promise  of  some  special 
pre-eminence  to  the  Jew  over  the  Gentile 
lu  the  final  kingdom  of  the  redeemed.  But 
St.  Paul  speaks  of  all  such  privileges  as 
already  abolished  in  his  day  (C!ol.  iii.  11); 
and,  if  the  priesthood  is  to  be  common  to 
both  Gentile  and  Jew,  the  principle  of 
equality  would  seem  to  be  conceded.  Per^ 
haps  no  more  is  here  meant  than  that,  as 
the  "new  heaven  and  new  earth"  will 
always  remain,  so  there  will  always  remain 
a  seed  of  true  beUeven  to  worship  God  in 
them. 

Yer.  23.— Trom  one  new  moon  to  anofhar, 
and  from  one  sabbath  to  another.  Not  that 
"new  moons"  and  "sabbaths"  will  con- 
tinue to  be  observed,  for  "  new  moona  "  have 
already  lapsed,  and  "sabbaths"  too  will 
lapse  when  life  is  one  perpetual  sabbath 
passed  in  the  worship  of  God.  The  phraaa 
I  used  by  the  prophet  ia  intemled  to  aipieii 


BH.  nvi.  1— 24.]     THE  BOOK  OP  THE  PROPHET  ISAIAH. 


48S 


absolute  oontinnance  without  an  internal. 
Shall  all  flesh  oome  to  worship  before  me 
(oomp.  Ps.  IxT.  2).  The  prophet  still  uses 
habitual  modes  of  expression,  though  speak- 
ing of  a  time  and  oircnmstances  to  which 
they  are  no  longer  appropriate.  "The  literal 
meaning,"  as  Dr.  Pusey  says  ('Prophecy  of 
Jesus,'  p.  39),  "  was  physically  impossible." 
"All  flesh,"  in  all  regions  of  the  "new 
earth,"  could  not  worship  in  one  spot,  "  and 
BO  it  was  plain  that  Isaiah  spoke  of  a 
worship  other  than  that  at  any  given  place  " 
— of  a  worship  such  as  that  whereof  our  Lord 
■poke  to  the  Samaritan  woman,  "Woman, 
believe  me,  the  hour  cometh,  when  ye  shall 
neither  in  this  mountain,  nor  in  Jerusalem, 
worship  the  Father  "  (John  iv.  21). 

Yer.  24. — And  they  shall  go  forth,  and 
look  upon  the  carcases,  etc  Here  is  more 
imagery,  which  It  is  impossible  to  understand 
literally.  The  carcases  could  not  remain 
always  to  be  looked  at,  nor  while  they  re- 
mained could  the  sight  of  them  be  other- 
wise than  loathsome  to  God's  redeemed 
saints.  Again,  they  could  not  be  at  the 
same  time  burnt  with  fire  and  eaten  by 
worms.  "The  prophet,  by  the  very  mode 
of  description  adopted  by  him,  precludes  the 
possibility  of  our  conceiving  of  the  thing  set 
forth  as  realized  in  any  materia]  form  in 
this  present  state.  He  is  speaking  of  the 
future  state,  but  tn  figuret  drawn  from  the 
present  world  "  (Delitzsch).  Does  he  mean 
more  than  this — that  the  redeemed  shall 
have  in  their  thoughts,  at  any  rate  from 
time  to  time,  the  fact  that,  while  they  have 
by  God's  great  mercy  been  saved  and  brought 
into  his  kingdom,  there  are  those  who  have 
not  been  saved,  but  lie  for  ever  under  the 
awfid  sentence  of  Qod'e  wrath?    This  ia  a 


knowledge  which  the  redeemed  mnst  have, 
and  which  may  well  produce  a  salutary 
effect  on  them,  intensifying  their  gratitude 
and  maintaining  in  them  a  spirit  of  reverent 
fear.  Their  worm  shall  not  die,  neither  shall 
their  flre  be  quenched  (oomp.  Mark  ix.  44, 
46,  48).  It  cannot  be  b;  chance  that  the 
evangelical  prophet  concludes  his  glorious 
prophecy  with  this  terrible  note  of  warning. 
Either  he  was  divinely  directed  thus  to 
terminate  his  teaching,  or  he  felt  tlie  need 
that  there  wasofhisempbasizingalltlie  many 
warnings  dispersed  throughout  his  "book 
by  a  final,  never-to-be-forgotten  picture.  The 
undying  worm  and  the  quenchless  fire — 
images  introduced  by  him — became  appro- 
priated thenceforth  to  the  final  condition  of 
Impenitent  sinneM  (Jud.  xvi.  17;  Ecclus. 
vii.  17),  and  were  even  adopted  by  our  Lord 
himself  in  the  same  connection  (Mark  ix.). 
The  incongruity  of  the  two  images  shows 
that  they  are  not  to  be  understood  literally ; 
but  both  alike  imply  everlasting  continu- 
ance, and'  are  incompatible  with  either  of 
the  two  modem  heresies  of  universalism  or 
annihilationism.  They  shall  be  an  abhor- 
ring unto  all  flesh  (comp.  Dan.  xii.  2,  where 
the  word  derSon  is  rendered  "contempt"). 
The  Jewish  rabbis  regarded  it  as  anomalous 
that  any  portion  of  Scripture  should  con- 
clude with  words  of  ill  omen.  When,  tliere- 
fore,  this  chapter  was  read  in  the  synagogiii-, 
or  the  last  of  Ecclesiastes,  or  Lamentation  a 
or  Malachi,  they  directed  that  after  the 
reading  of  the  last  verse,  the  last  verse  but 
one  should  be  repeated,  to  correct  the  sad 
impression  that  would  otherwise  have  been 
left  upon  the  mind.  But  Isaiah  thought  it 
salutary  to  leave  this  sad  impreiHon  (oomp. 
oh.  xlviii  22 ;  Ivii.  21> 


H0MILETIC8. 

Yer.  l.—God  to  be  worshipped  in  buildings,  though  no  building  oon  be  worthy  of  him. 
Of  a  surety,  God  "  dwelleth  not  in  temples  made  with  hands "  (Acts  vii.  48)  in  any 
such  sense  as  to  be  accessible  in  such  places  exclusively.  There  ia  truth,  as  well  as 
grandeui,  in  the  words — 

"My  altars  are  the  mountains,  and  the  ocean, 
Earth,  air,  sea,  all  that  springs  from  the  Great  Whole, 
Who  hath  produced,  and  will  receive,  the  soul." 

And  H  is  always  to  be  borne  in  mind  that  we  are  in  his  presence  everywhere ;  that  he 
may  be  worshipped  everywhere ;  that  "  the  heaven  and  the  heaven  of  heavens  cannot 
contain  him  "  (2  Chron.  ii.  6) ;  that  he  inhabits  all  space,  as  he  inhabits  all  eternity 
(ch.  Ivii.  15).  But,  in  condescension  to  the  infirmity  of  human  nature,  he  has  been 
pleased  in  all  ages  that  men  should  build  him  "houses,"  and  has  condescended,  in 
a  certain  sense,  to  localize  himself  therein.  At  Sinai  he  gave  exact  and  most  elaborate 
commands  for  the  construction  of  the  tabernacle  and  its  appurtenances  (Bxod.  xxv. — 
XXX.)  To  David  he  communicated  by  his  Spirit  "  the  pattern  "  of  the  first  temple — 
"  of  the  porch,  and  of  the  houses  thereof,  and  of  the  treasuries  thereof,  and  of  the  upper 
uhambers  thereof,  and  ol  the  inner  parlours  thereof,  and  of  the  place  of  the  mercy-seat, 


490  THE  BOOK  OP  THE  PROPHET  ISAIAH,    [oh.  Mvi.  1— 34 

and  of  the  courts  of  the  house  of  the  Lord,  and  of  all  the  chamhers  round  ahout,  and  of 
the  treasuries  of  the  house  of  Grod,  and  of  the  treasuries  of  the  dedicated  things" 
(1  Chron.  xxviii.  11, 12).  On  the  return  from  the  captivity  he  required  the  Isriielites 
to  "go  up  into  the  mountain,  and  bring  the  wood,  and  build  the  house,"  and  declared 
that  he  would  "  take  pleasure  in  it  and  bo  glorified  "  (Hag.  i.  8).  Under  Gbristianity  the 
first  church  was  the  "upper  room"  where  "all  continued  with  one  accord  with  prayer 
and  supplication,  with  the  women,  and  Mary  the  mother  of  Jesus,  and  with  his 
brethren"  (Acts  i.  13,14).  Churches  are  human,  not  Divine,  necessities;  but  God 
has  been  pleased  to  give  them  his  sanction,  as  needed  by  man.  Without  them  worship 
would  decay,  if  not  disappear ;  for  men  cannot  live  in  the  rare  atmosphere  of  mere 
spiritualism. 

Vers.  10 — 14. — The  htessedness  of  the  restored  Church.  The  restored  Church  is  to 
Isaiah  the  Church  that  will  endure  from  the  return  of  the  captives  to  the  end  of  the 
world.  The  later  Jewish  period  and  the  entire  Chiistian  period  are  with  him  blended 
into  one,  and  present  themselves  to  him  as  constituting  a  single  phase  of  the  Church's 
life.  Here  he  speaks  to  encourage  the  exiles,  and  dwells  especially,  though  not  exclu- 
sively, on  the  immidiate  blessings. 

I.  The  Chubch  will  teach  her  children  sound  dootbinb.  This  is  the  special 
object  of  the  existence  of  a  Church,  which  claims  to  have  a  revealed  "  deposit "  com- 
mitted to  it  by  Gud,  and  has,  as  the  first  end  and  aim  of  its  being,  to  communicate 
this  revelation  to  all  who  come  within  the  S|ihere  of  its  teaching.  Doctrine  is  thfl  milk 
on  which  the  Church  nourishes  her  children,  and  the  restored  Church  vidll  teach  a 
doctrine  wliich  may  well  "satisfy"  and  which  will  be  full  of  "consolation"  (ver.  11). 

II.  The  Church  will  be  glorious,  and  will  impart  to  hee  children  of  her 
OLORT.  Though  the  Church  is  frequently,  if  nut  even  continually,  oppressed  and  down- 
trodden by  the  world,  yet  a  glory  attaches  to  her,  whereof  no  persecution,  no  contempt, 
no  contumely,  can  altogether  deprive  her.  She  is,  whatever  the  world  may  think  or 
say,  "  the  holy  Catholic  Church,"  with  Christ  as  her  Pounder,  with  Christ  as  her  Lord 
and  Master,  with  Christ  as  her  King,  the  oldest  and  most  venerable  society  in  the 
Western  world  at  any  rate,  and  one  in  which  membership  cannot  but  ever  be  a  high 
honour. 

III.  The  Church  will  enjot,  bt  God's  blessing,  much  outwabd  and  inwabd 
PEACE.  Peace  was  our  liOrd's  legacy  to  his  Church :  "  Peace  I  leave  with  you ;  my 
peace  I  give  unto  you"  (John  xiv.  27);  and  notwithstanding  the  facts  of  external 
persecutions,  and  internal  quarrels  and  schisms,  which  occupy  so  large  a  space  in  Church 
histories,  and  so  large  a  share  in  the  thoughts  of  most  Christians,  it  is  nevertheless  true 
that,  on  the  whole,  peace  has  flowed  over  the  Church  "  like  a  river,"  and  has  flowed 
into  the  hearts  of  the  bulk  of  her  true  members  like  an  abounding  stream.  "  There  is 
no  peace,  saith  my  God,  to  the  wicked"  (oh.  Ivii.  21);  but  in  the  soul  of  the  true 
Christian  is  a  "  peace  that  passeth  all  imderstanding,"  that  wells  up  continually  as  from 
an  inexhaustible  fountain,  and  spreads  around  him  an  atmosphere  of  happiness. 

IV.  The  Church  wnx  derive  honour  from  the  coming  in  of  the  Gentiles. 
Purther  and  further,  as  time  goes  on,  does  the  light  of  Christianity  shine,  and  more  and 
more  are  the  dark  places  of  the  earth  illuminated.  Long  since  did  the  Gentiles  begin 
to  come  to  the  Church's  light,  and  "kings  to  the  brightness  of  her  rising"  (ch.  Ix.  3). 
But  the  process  is  not  yet  complete.  Not  a  year  passes  but  the  gospel  is  carried  into 
some  new  region  by  faithful  and  tnie  missionaries,  and  the  Lord  adds  to  the  Church 
fresh  souls  wl:om  he  wills  to  be  saved.  The  incoming  of  the  Gentiles  does  not  now 
bring  her  wealth  or  worldly  honour ;  but  it  is  yet  more  for  the  true  honour  of  the  Church 
than  it  was  when  she  converted  the  court  and  camp  and  people  of  the  Csesars.  For 
now  her  efforts  bring  her  no  worldly  gain.  She  has  to  go  out  into  the  highways  and 
hedges — the  wild  lands  of  savage  tribes  or  the  yet  wilder  courts  and  allies  of  great 
towns — and  to  bring  in  the  poor,  and  the  mafmed,  and  the  halt,  and  the  blind,  the 
downtrodden,  and  the  ignorant,  and  the  criminal,  and  the  houseless;  to  civilize  and 
train  them,  and  frequently  to  feed  them  and  clothe  Hbsm ;  thus  following  the  com- 
mands of  her  blessed  Master,  and  preparing  for  herself  the  high  honour  of  hearing  on* 
day  the  glorious  words,  "Well  done,  good  and  faithful  servant :  enter  thou  into  tk« 
joy  «f  thy  Lord." 


OH.  LXVL  1— 24.]     THE  BOOK   OF   THE  PROPHET   ISAIAH.  4»1 

V.  The  Chubch  will  derive  oontindal  comfort  from  her  Lord.  "  I  will  not 
leave  you  comfuitless,"  said  tlie  blessed  Jesus  ;  "  I  will  come  to  you"  (John  xiv.  18). 
la.  all  their  difficulties,  in  all  their  troubles,  Christ  coml'orts  his  people — comforts  them 
with  his  Word  of  truth,  comforts  them  with  hia  gracious  promises,  comforts  them  with 
his  presence  in  their  hearts  and  souls.  He  comes  to  them,  and  makes  his  abode  with 
them,  and  is  a  continual  inward  sustaining  power,  raising  theai  above  the  cares  and 
troubles  and  vexations  of  the  world,  inspiring  in  their  hearts  love  and  joy  and  peace. 

Vers.  15 — 17. — The  purging  of  the  earth  by  the  destruction  of  the  wicked.  The  king- 
dom of  Christ  cannot  be  fully  set  up  in  all  its  blessedness  until  the  earth  is  prepared  for 
its  reception;  and  the  main  preparation  required  is  the  elimination  from  it  of  those 
wicked  persons  who,  while  they  remain,  must  always  constitute  a  disturbing  element, 
'.nimical  to  the  earth's  peace  and  a  hindrance  to  the  Church's  happiness.  The  teaching 
of  Scripture  is  that,  before  the  Church  is  finally  established  in  the  blissful  position 
which  it  is  intended  to  occupy,  the  removal  of  this  element  will  have  taken  place. 
Partly  by  wars  and  tumults,  by  their  swords  being  turned  against  each  other,  but  still 
more  completely  by  some  miraculous  outpouring  of  Grod's  wrath,  typified  under  the 
figure  of  fire,  the  wicked  will  be  cleared  out  from  all  parts  of  the  earth's  surface,  and 
only  the  godly  will  remain.  The  description  of  the  day  of  vengeance  is  given,  with 
the  greatest  fulness,  in  the  Revelation  of  St.  John  (xix.  11 — 21),  where,  however,  it  ii 
difScult  to  determine  how  much  is  imagery,  how  much  literal  description.  "  I  saw 
heaven  opened,"  says  the  beloved  apostle,  "  and  behold  a  white  horse ;  and  he  that  sat 
upon  him  was  called  Faithful  and  True  [comp.  ch.  iii.  14],  and  in  righteousness  does  he 
judge  and  make  war.  His  eyes  were  as  a  flame  of  fire,  and  on  his  head  were  many 
crowns ;  and  he  had  a  name  written,  that  no  man  knew,  but  he  himself.  And  he  was 
clothed  with  a  vesture  dipped  in  blood :  and  his  name  is  called  The  Word  of  God. 
And  the  armies  which  were  in  heaven  followed  him  upon  white  horses,  clothed  in  fine 
linen,  white  and  clean.  And  out  of  his  mouth  goeth  a  sharp  sword,  that  with  it  he 
ghouM  smite  the  nations:  and  he  shaM  rule  them  with  a  rod  of  iron:  and  he  treadeth 
the  winepress  of  the  fierceness  and  wrsith  of  Almighty  God  [comp.  ch.  Ixiii.  1 — 6].  And 
he  hath  on  his  vestiu-e  and  on  his  thigh  a  name  written.  King  of  kings,  and  Lord  of  lords. 
And  I  saw  an  angel  standing  in  the  sun ;  and  he  cried  with  a  loud  voice,  saying  to 
all  the  fowls  that  fly  in  the  midst  of  heaven.  Come  and  gather  yourselves  together  unto 
the  supper  of  the  great  God ;  that  ye  may  eat  the  flesh  of  kings,  and  the  flesh  of 
captains,  and  the  flesh  of  mighty  men,  and  the  flesh  of  horses,  and  of  them  that  sit  on 
them,  and  the  flesh  of  all  men,  both  free  and  bond,  both  small  and  great.  And  I  saw 
the  beast,  and  the  kings  of  the  earth,  and  their  armies,  gathered  together  to  make  war 
against  him  that  sat  on  the  horse,  and  against  his  army.  And  the  beast  was  taken, 
and  with  him  the  false  prophet  that  wrought  miracles  before  him,  .  .  .  these  both  were 
cast  alive  into  a  lake  of  fire  burning  with  brimstone.  And  the  remnant  were  slain  with 
the  sword  of  him  that  sat  upon  the  horse,  which  sword  proceeded  out  of  his  mouth : 
and  all  the  fowls  were  filled  with  their  fiesh." 

Vers.  22 — 24. — Eternal  suffering  and  eternal  glory.  Holy  Scripture  sets  before  us, 
as  Moses  set  before  the  people  of  Israel  iu  the  wilderness,  a  tremendous  alternative — 
"  life  and  death ; "  one  the  eternal  foil  and  counterpart  of  the  other,  with  the  exhorta- 
tion a  thousand  times  repeated  in  a  thousand  different  forms — "  Choose  life  "  (Deut. 
XXX.  19).  Man's  desire  is  to  separate  what  God  has  inseparably  connected,  and  to 
retain  "  everlasting  life,"  "eternal  glory,"  "endless  bliss,"  but  to  get  rid  altogether  of 
their  counterparts — "  eternal  suffering,"  "  everlasting  contempt,"  "  endless  death."  But 
man  cannot  alter  the  system  of  God's  universe,  nor,  could  he  do  so,  is  it  to  be  supposed 
that  he  would  find  himself  able  to  improve  it.  Deep  down  in  the  nature  of  things  lies 
the  eternal  antagonism  between  good  and  evil — an  antagonism  which  would  seem  to  be 
necessary  to  the  very  existence  of  good  in  created  beings ;  and  the  teaching  of  Scripture 
oleady  is  that  this  antagonism  continues  for  ever  (see  Dan.  xii.  2 ;  Matt.  xxv.  46 ;  Mark 
ix.  St;  John  v.  29;  Rev.  xx.  10,  16;  xxi.  8;  xxii.  11,  15).  Of  the  nature  of  the 
eternal  glory  and  the  eternal  suffering  reserved  for  souls  in  the  world  to  come,  it  it 
impossible  for  us  in  this  life  to  have  anything  more  than  a  dim  and  faint  conception. 
Bur  somi-  points  may  be  laid  down  negatively. 


492  THE  BOOK  OP  THE  PBOPHET  ISAIAH,      [oh.  lxvi.  1—24. 

L  The  paikb  akd  jots  are  not,  necebbarilt,  nr  ant  benbe  haterial.  For  (1) 
they  exist  in  the  intermediate  state  (Luke  xvi.  23 — 25),  where  men  have  no  bodies, 
the  resurrection  not  having  as  yet  taken  place ;  and  (2)  they  are  described  by  contra- 
dictory material  images,  which  would  certainly  not  hare  been  the  case  had  the  descrip- 
tions been  intended  literally. 

II.  The  pains  and  jotb  are  of  various  degrees  of  intbnsitt.  For  (1)  we  hear 
of  "  few  stripes  "  and  "  many  stripes,"  of  rule  over  "  five  cities  "  and  over  "  ten  cities  " 
(Luke  xii.  47,  48 ;  xix.  17,  19) ;  and  (2)  we  are  told  that  the  rewards  and  punishments 
shall  be  apportioned  exactly  according  to  men's  deserts,  and  nien's  deserts  vary  infinitely 
by  infinitesimal  degrees. 

III.  The  main  punishment  of  mant  mat  not  consist  in  positive  pain  at  all. 
Medieeval  divines  spoke  of  many  souls  in  the  place  of  punishment  as  sufiering  only  the 
p^na  damni,  or  "  sense  of  loss  "  inseparable  from  being  shut  out  from  God's  presence, 
from  the  presence  of  the  holy  angels,  and  from  that  of  the  spirits  of  just  men  made 
perfect.  This  is  quite  possible,  and  in  no  way  contradictory  to  the  statements  •£ 
Scripture. 

IV.  There  mat  not  impeobablt  be  an  amelioration  m  the  condition  of  some 
OF  the  sufferers.  It  cannot  but  be  the  case  that  the  suflferers  may  bear  their 
punishment  with  different  degrees  of  patience,  of  obduracy,  or  of  rebellion.  As  the 
determinedly  rebellious  would  deserve,  and  may  receive,  an  augmentation  of  punish- 
ment, so  the  more  submissive  and  patient  may  conceivably  have  their  burdens  light- 
ened. The  very  act  of  submission  lightens  the  weight  of  a  suffering,  and  a  merciful 
God  might  be  expected  to  show  his  approval  of  the  submission  by  some  positive 
alleviation  of  the  pain. 

These  are  thoughts  which  may  tend  to  mitigate  the  horror  wherewith  some  persons 
regard  the  entire  doctrine  of  eternal  punishment,  and  prevent  them  from  viewing  it  as 
incompatible  with  God's  essential  attribute  of  mercy.  At  the  same  time,  it  must  be 
granted  that  the  whole  subject  is  mysterious,  and  awful  in  the  extreme — so  mysterious 
and  so  awful  that  the  greatest  caution  is  needed  lest  we  dogmatize  upon  it  beyond  the 
teaching  of  Scripture.  Here,  if  anywhere,  the  warning  of  the  preacher  applies,  "  Be 
not  rash  with  thy  mouth,  and  let  not  thine  heart  be  hasty  to  utter  anything  before 
God:  for  God  ia  in  heaven,  and  thou  on  earth:  therefore  let  thj  words  be  few" 
(Eocles.  T.  2). 


HOMILIES  BY  VARIOUS  AUTHOR& 

Ver.  6. — SpMtual  and  unspiritual,  worship.  I.  The  obaclk  of  Jehovah.  "  The 
heavens  are  my  throne."  What  majestic  poetry  in  that  word  1  How  sacred,  then,  the 
heaven  I  How  profane,  if  once  we  rightly  think  of  the  force  of  what  we  say,  to  use  the 
adjuration,  "By  heaven"!  So  Jesus  teaches  (Matt.  v.  34  ;  xxiii.  22).  It  is  natural  t<i 
"  look  up  "  when  we  think  of  God ;  and  then  to  "  look  down  "  on  the  "  things  of  earth," 
which  is  but  his  footstool.  "  What  manner  of  house  would  ye  build  for  me  ?  "  The 
Infinite  cannot  be  defined ;  God  may  not  be  localized.  All  forms  may  represent  him ; 
none  can  adequately  set  him  forth.  "  His  abode  is  not  known ;  no  shrine  is  found  with 
painted  figures ;  there  is  no  building  that  can  contain  him  "  ('  Records  of  the  Past,'  vol. 
Iv.  p.  109).  Herodotus  says  that  the  Persians  impute  folly  to  those  who  raise  statues 
and  temples  and  altars  to  the  gods, "  because  they  do  not  think  the  gods  to  be  of  human 
nature,  as  do  the  Greeks"  (i.  131 ;  cf.  Acts  xvii.  24).  But  why  should  God  despise 
the  beautiful  temple?  Is  anything  more  beautiful  or  true  than  the  work  of  art?  To 
disparage  art  we  have  to  give  way  to  dark  superstition.  Everything  that  proceeds 
from  the  mind  God  has  made,  he  must  delight  in — it  is  his  work.  But,  above  all,  he 
delights  in  the  humble,  throbbing,  trembling  human  soul.  "The  most  acceptable 
temple  is  a  pious  mind."  The  allusions  which  follow  are  to  some  cf  the  darkest  features 
of  heathen  worship — the  animal  sacrifice,  and  the  anima)  worship— a  form  of  religion 
hardly  intelligible  to  ourselves,  but  once  widely  diffused  in  ancient  times,  and  prevailing 
t-till  in  some  parts  of  the  world.  According  to  the  religion  of  Jehovah,  man  is  made  in 
the  image  of  Grd,  and  in  the  logos  or  reason  of  man  must  be  found  the  true  reflection 
.1  him.     To  worship  an  animal  must  be  to  lowei  the  intelligent  ^nd  spiritM^  tone  of 


m.  Lxvi.  1— 24.]     THE  BOOK  OP  THE  PROPHET  ISAIAH.  493 

religion.  And  some  conscionsneas  of  this  we  must  believe  to  have  been  dimly  present 
in  such  worshippers'  minds. 

XL  Ths  denunciation  of  Jehovah.  False  worship  is  rooted  in  the  depraved  wilL 
They  have  "  obosen  their  own  ways;"  they  "  have  pleasure  in  their  abominations."  For 
religion  is  either  stagnant  or  progressive.  The  soul  rests  in  sloth  upon  custom,  upon 
the  dear  and  apprehensible  object,  or  it  strives  and  strains  after  the  higher  and  yet 
higher  and  invisible  good — ^not  to  be  found  in  the  creature,  but  only  in  the  Creator. 
God  will  exercise  retribution  upon  such  idolaters,  sending  on  them  calamity  and  terror, 
"  The  man  who  places  all  his  confidence,  hope,  and  comfort  in  his  estate,  his  friend, 
or  greatness,  so  that  upon  the  failure  of  any  of  these  his  heart  sinks,  and  he  utterly 
desponds  as  to  all  enjoyment  or  apprehension  of  any  good  or  felicity  to  he.  enjoyed  by 
man,  does  as  really  deify  his  estate,  his  friend,  or  his  greatness,  as  if  in  direct  terms  he 
should  say  to  each  of  them, '  Thou  art  my  god,'  and  should  rear  an  altar  or  temple  to 
them,  and  worship  before  them  in  the  humblest  adoration.  Nay,  it  is  much  more ; 
since  God  looks  upon  himself  as  treated  more  like  a  deity  by  being  loved,  confided  in, 
and  depended  upon,  than  if  a  man  should  throng  his  temple  with  a  whole  hetacomb, 
sacrifice  thousands  of  rams,  and  pour  ten  thousand  rivers  of  oil  upon  his  altars" 
(South). 

Ill,  WoBDs  TO  THE  FAiTHFtTL.  "  Men  who  tremble  at  his  Word."  It  is  another 
way  of  describing  those  of  humble  and  contrite  heart.  They  are  hated  by  their  brethren ; 
they  have  suffered  in  the  cause  of  true  religion.  They  are  exposed  to  taunts — Where  is 
their  God?  Let  Jehovah  show  himself  glorious!  Nevertheless,  his  fiat  has  gone 
forth,  "They  shall  be  ashamed."  Siiame  and  pain  are  the  inseparable  effects  of  sin; 
the  "  wages  assigned  to  it  by  the  laws  of  Heaven ; "  the  rightful  inheritance  of  the 
sinner.  Nor  is  there  anything  which  the  nature  of  man  does  so  abhor  as  these.  They 
are  destructive  of  all  our  enjoyments.  They  touch  both  soul  and  body — shame  being 
the  torment  of  the  one,  and  pain  of  the  other.  "  The  mind  of  man  can  have  no  taste 
or  relish  of  any  pleasure  in  the  world  while  it  is  oppressed  and  overwhelmed  by  shame. 
Nothing  does  so  intolerably  affect  the  soul  as  infamy ;  it  drinks  up  and  consumes  the 
quickness,  gaiety,  and  activity  of  the  spirit;  it  dejects  the  countenance  made  by  God  to 
look  upwards ;  so  that  this  noble  creature,  the  masterpiece  of  the  creation,  dares  not 
80  much  as  lift  up  either  his  head  or  his  thoughts,  but  it  is  a  vexation  to  him  even  to 
look  upon  others,  and  yet  a  greater  to  be  looked  upon  by  them  "  (South). — J. 

Vers.  6 — 9. — 77ie  enemies  of  Jehovah  and  his  people.  I.  He  is  heard  from  his 
TEMPLE.  With  "  a  sound  of  uproar,  a  sound  from  the  temple."  He  is  issuing  forth  to 
render  their  deserts  to  his  foes.  "  He  will  render  to  every  man  according  to  his  deserts  " 
Is  a  great  leading  word  in  religion.  God  must  be  feared  as  well  as  loved — nay,  cannot 
be  truly  loved  unless  feared.  From  that  same  seat  whence  go  forth  the  sweet  sounds 
of  reconciliation,  the  sound  of  the  gospel's  silver  trumpet,  go  forth  the  thunders  of  the 
God  who  appears  to  execute  judgment  upon  human  guilt.  He  is  a  "  consuming  Fire." 
His  wrath  may  be  "  ki  i.dled ; "  we  need  to  beware  "  lest  he  be  angry."  He  is  an  awful 
God  of  whom,  nevertheless,  it  may  be  said,  "  This  awful  God  is  ours." 

U.  The  restoration  of  Israel.  With  great  energy  the  thought  is  put  before  us 
that  Israel  in  these  last  days  has  sprung  into  new  birth  and  life.  The  gift  of  male 
children  was  especially  dear  to  the  Israelif  heart.  Now  there  is  to  be  a  great  and 
sudden  increase  of  Zion's  children.  "This  re. era,  probably,"  says  Barnes,  "to  the  sudden 
increase  of  the  Church  when  the  Messiah  came,  and  to  the  great  revivals  of  religion 
which  attended  the  preaching  of  the  gospel.  Three  thousand  were  converted  on  a 
single  day  (Acts  ii.),  and  the  gospel  was  speedily  propagated  over  the  known  world." 
Something  unlike  the  usuai  course  of  nature  and  of  human  affairs  is  hinted.  Slow  is 
the  growth  of  vegetation,  slow  the  growth  of  human  institutions.  Here  an  event  as 
startling  as  the  breaking  forth  of  the  tree  out  of  the  seed  in  a  single  day  is  contemplated ; 
*'  a  nation  born  at  once  I "  In  fact,  Christianity  is  such  a  wonder.  A  plant  out  of  a  dry 
ground,  mysterious  in  its  origin,  despised  in  its  professors,  humble  in  its  early  associa- 
tions, yet  speedily,  almost  suddenly,  overshading  the  lands  with  its  branches,  and 
jrielding  fruit  and  healing  for  the  nations.  "  The  expansiveness  of  Zion  is  such  that 
nought  but  Omnipotence  will  be  able  to  check  it ;  and  as  Omnipotence  has  no  motive 
*»  iJtacking  it,  Zion  has  nothing  to  fear  in  heaven  or  earth  "  (Cheyne). — J. 


4M  THE  BOOK  OF  THE  PROPHET  ISAIAH,     [oh.  lxvl  1— 24 

Vers.  10 — 14. — Sympathy  with  the  ChurcKa  joy.  I.  Sympathy  should  be  fblt 
WITH  THE  FBOSFEBITY  OF  THE  Ghitbch.  ZioB  stands  for  the  Church  of  the  ages ;  in 
her  weal  is  wrapped  up  the  weal  of  the  world.  If  we  love  humanity,  we  love  th« 
institution  created  foi  the  good  and  salvation  of  humanity.  Every  revival  of  religion  at 
home,  every  fresh  conquest  in  the  fields  of  heathendom,  affords  fresh  occasion  of  such 
joy.  "  Those  who  have  no  true  joy  when  souls  are  bom  into  the  kingdom  of  God; 
when  he  pours  down  his  Spirit,  and  in  a  revival  of  religion  produces  changes  as  sudden 
and  transforming  as  if  the  earth  were  suddenly  to  pass  from  the  desolation  of  winter  to 
the  verdure  and  bloom  of  summer;  or  when  the  gospel  makes  sudden  and  rapid 
advances  in  the  heathen  world, — ^have  no  true  evidence  that  they  love  God  or  his  cause. 
They  have  no  religion.  Such  scenes  are  fitted  to  excite  the  highest  joy  and  praise. 
They  awaken  deep  interest  in  the  bosoms  of  angels,  and  of  God  the  Saviour,  and  they 
who  love  that  God  and  Saviour  will  rejoice  at  such  scenes,  and  mingle  their  joys  and 
thanksgivings  with  those  of  the  converted  and  s.ived"  (Barnes). 

II.  The  ideal  of  the  Chuboh.  She  is  like  a  mother,  and  the  blessings  she  imparts 
are  like  mother's  milk  (cf.  ch.  xlix.  23 ;  Ix.  16).  "  They  who  sympathize  with  her 
shall  be  nourished  by  the  same  truth  and  comforted  with  the  same  sources  of  consola- 
tion." She  is  a  mother  full  of  tenderness,  even  of  caressing,  towards  her  children;  full 
also  of  sweetest  power  to  comfort.  Such  is  in  every  age  the  true  ideal  of  the  Church. 
All  that  is  rich  and  sweet,  deep  and  tender,  should  be  associated  with  her;  and  in  her 
the  hearts  of  weary  men  should  find  full  expansion  and  rest.  Peace  is  also  strongly 
associated  with  the  Church ;  and  that  in  the  comprehensive  sense  in  which  the  prophet 
uses  the  word — for  all  manner  of  prosperity  (ch.  ix.  6,  7 ;  xxvL  12 ;  zxxii.  17 ;  xlv. 
7  ;  xlvi.  16  ;  lii.  7 ;  liv.  13 ;  Iv.  12 ;  Ivii.  19).  The  image  seems  to  be  that  of  a  broad 
majestic  river,  like  the  Nile,  overflowing  its  banks,  and  producing  prosperity  on  every 
hand.  Another  image  is  that  of  the  bones,  dried  up  like  the  branches  of  a  withered 
tree,  now  full  of  sap  and  vigour  (ch.  Iviii.  11  j  Prov.  iii.  8;  xv.  20;  xvi.  24).  It  is 
true  religion  which  causes  the  family,  the  home,  the  ecclesiastical  institution,  the  state, 
to  flourish.  Beligion  stimulates  all  that  it  touches — morality,  art,  political  life ;  and 
decay  of  patriotism  and  of  morals  may  be  traced  to  the  languor  of  religious  life.^T. 

Vers.  15 — ^24. — The  manifestation  ^Jehovah.  L  It  is  A  manifestation  m  fibe. 
Very  common  is  the  representation  of  this  coming  by  or  in  the  element  of  fire.  Its 
associations  are  of  judgment,  vengeance — devouring  fire  (Ps.  1.  3).  So  it  is  associated 
with  the  pestilence  (Hab.  ii.  5).  It  consumes  God's  enemies  (Ps.  xcvii.  3).  Nor  can  we 
deny  that  such  representations  do  in  part  enter  into  Christianity  (2  Thess.  L  8 ;  Heb. 
X.  27 ;  2  Pet.  iii.  7 ;  cf.  also  Ps.  xviii.  8 ;  ch.  xxix.  6 ;  xxx.  30).  The  whirlwind  is 
poetically  congruent  with  the  fire :  a  swift  and  sudden  descent  is  thought  of  (Ps.  civ. 
3 ;  Jer.  iv.  13).  The  image  of  the  charioteer  is  full  of  warlike  energy  (of.  Hab.  iii.  8), 
and  the  furious  and  fiery  anger  of  his  advance  points  to  the  same  conception  ;  and  the 
slain  will  fall  before  him  in  multitudes.  Do  these  figures  strike  us  as  inconsistent  with 
the  Christian  conception  of  God — the  "  Father  of  Jesus,  God  of  love  "  ?  How  are  we  to 
reconcile  them  ?  If  tliere  is  a  Providence  in  the  violent  revolutions  of  the  nations ;  if 
"the  wrath  of  man  praises  him;"  if  no  terrible  war  but  becomes  the  means  of  a 
purification ; — then  these  figures  may  be  taken  as  the  poetic  representation  of  a  great 
truth.  We  can  hardly  conceive  deep-rooted  evils  giving  way  except  to  some  violent 
agency  of  change. 

II.  The  denunciation  of  idolatbt.  This  is  the  great  evil,  in  all  its  forms,  which 
draws  down  God's  fulminations.  Men  are  seen  undergoing  purifications  prepaiatory  to 
initiation  into  heathen  mysteries,  probably  of  some  licentious  god  or  goddess.  Unclean 
things  have  been  iudulged  in,  contrary  to  the  Law  of  Moses.  We  may,  perhaps,  take 
the  general  de^icriptiun  of  idolatry  and  of  idolaters  as  pointing  to  the  enemies  of  God, 
who  are  destined  to  be  consumed  by  his  vengeance.  These  enemies  are  to  be  gathered 
together — in  some  valley,  perhaps  (Joel  iii.  2) ;  and  the  glory  of  his  judicial  splendour 
will  be  unveiled  to  them.  The  section  closes  with  vague  adumbrations  of  comiiig 
judgments. 

ni.  Visions  of  fdtcbe  wobbhip.  Amid  all  that  is  obscure  in  the  imagery,  we  may 
discover  some  great  leading  thoughts.  1.  There  is  tite  univertal  effulgence  of  Jehovah's 
glory,  which  is  to  shine  among  distant  lands,  and  those  that  have  not  hitherto  heard  ol 


3H.  LXTi.  1— 24.]     THE  BOOK  OF  THE  PBOFHET  ISAIAH.  495 

his  Name.  And  this  is  equivalent  to  the  spread  of  one  religion  thronghout  the  earth. 
2.  Z%ere  it  to  be  tmity  of  worship,  Jerusalem  and  the  sacred  hill  of  Ziou  are  to  form 
the  great  centre.  Prom  all  quarters,  and  by  different  modes  of  conveyance,  the  dispersed 
ones  are  to  come  thronging  thither.  There  will  be  a  renewed  consecration  of  the  chosen 
people  to  its  God ;  they  will  be  like  the  sacred  meal  offering.  3.  Exdusiveness  will 
he  broken  down.  The  strict  Levitical  system,  it  seems,  will  give  way;  and  Gentile 
converts  as  well  as  Jews  will  be  admitted  to  share  in  the  sacred  ministry  of  the  temple. 
For  the  Jewish  priestly  system  was  only  for  a  time,  was  provisional ;  and  the  people 
were  one  day  to  be,  as  a  whole, "  priests  of  Jehovah  "  (ch.  Ixi.  6).  4.  The  permanence  of 
true  religion.  The  seed  and  the  name  of  the  people  shall  stand,  even  so  the  new 
heavens  and  the  new  earth.  No  more  of  the  old  order  changing  and  giving  place  to  the 
new,  the  successive  efforts  of  men  after  frivolity  in  religion  being  successively  defeated ; 
but  at  last  fixity  and  rest.  5.  Simplicity  of  true  religion.  "  The  old  forms  of  religion 
have  been  reduced  to  the  utmost ;  new  moons  and  sabbaths  alone  remRin."  For  the 
multitude  of  times  and  seasons  and  of  ceremonies  is  burdensome  to  flesh  and  blood,  and 
they  tend  to  obscure  the  spirituality  of  true  religion.  We  are  reminded  of  the  first 
chapter,  where  it  is  said  that "  Jehovah  cannot  away  with  them."  6.  Universality  of 
true  religio7i.  We  take  the  language  as  poetical,  symbolic,  to  be  understood  in  the 
i^eal  and  inward  sense.  Where  is  the  true  seat  of  worship  ?  Not  on  Mount  Gerizim, 
■or  even  on  Mount  Zion  (John  iv.  21).  The  spirit  of  man  is  the  true  temple.  And 
who,  in  best  and  most  loving  moments  of  worship,  does  not  feel  that  the  heart  of 
humanity  beats  with  one  pulse,  is  stirred  by  one  faith,  is  secretly  gathering  around  one 
spiritual  centre  ?  Let  us  cease  with  this  verse,  which  we  are  told  the  Jewish  readers 
repeated  to  correct  the  sad  impression  of  the  last. — J. 

Ver.  13. — Tender  condition.  "As  one  whom  his  mother  oomforteth,  so  will  I  com- 
fort you."  These  are  the  analogies  of  truth  that  reach  the  heart  through  the  life- 
experience  when  mere  intellectual  disquisition  is  vain. 

I.  The  mother-ideal  cebates  the  consciousness  of  tenderness.  God  is  the  great 
Mother  as  well  as  the  great  Father  of  all  flesh.  Therefore  Christ,  who  came  to  reveal  the 
Father,  was  perfect  humanity.  In  taking,  as  the  Divine  Son  of  the  Pnther,  our  flesh, 
he  revealed  in  "  humanity  "  not  only  perfect  manhood,  but  perfect  womanhood  too. 

II.  The  motheb-ideaii  ebvbals  what  trite  comfort  means.  1.  Sympathy  with 
our  frailties  and  mistakes,  2.  Succour  at  supreme  self-cost,  3.  Eopg/'ulnesa  even  to 
the  last.—W,  M.  S. 

Vers.  1,  2.—iride  homily  on  ch.  WL  15, 16.)— 0. 

Vert.  3, 4. — The  rebuke  of  unrighteousness.    We  have — 

L    FOUB  OFFENCES  SPECIALLY  HATEFUL   TO  THE   HoLT   ONB.      1,   Ingincerity.      TheSe 

worshippers  who  brought  their  bullocks,  their  Iambs,  their  prescribed  oblations,  were 
as  guilty  in  the  judgment  of  God  as  if  they  brought  to  his  altar  that  which  was  an 
abomination  in  bis  sight.  Their  guilt  lay  in  their  insincerity ;  their  heart  was  far  from 
God  when  their  feet  were  nigh  his  house.  2.  Heedlessness.  When  God  calls  and  we 
pay  no  heed  to  his  voice,  we  commit  an  aggravated  offence  against  him.  3.  Wilful- 
ness. The  "  choosing  of  our  own  ways,"  instead  of  submitting  to  the  Divine  will,  is  a 
perpetual  disobedience,  a  sustained  disloyalty.  4.  Arrogance.  "Doing  evil  before 
mine  eyes,"  though  conscious  of  the  presence  and  the  observation  of  God. 

II.  God's  grave  kebdkb  of  this  unrighteousness.  1.  Ee  will  make  the  fears  of  the 
guilty  to  be  fulfilled — will  "  bring  their  fears  upon  them."  The  apprehensions  of  guilt 
may  safely  be  taken  as  prophecies  of  evil.  Sin  is  at  least  as  mischievous  as  it  seems 
to  the  sinner.  If  men  who  are  living  in  obdurate  rebellion  against  God  have  impres- 
sions or  intimations  of  evil  consequences,  they  may  be  sure  that  ruin  is  on  the  road, 
and  will  before  long  confront  them.  2.  Ee  will  visit  with  unexpected  sorrow.  "  1 
will  choose  their  delusions  [calamities]."  Not  that  God  ever  arbitrarily  punishes  his 
children,  but  that  he  does  often  bring  down  upon  the  guilty  sorrows  and  calamities 
which  they  did  not  apprehend — from  wh'ih,  indeed,  they  imagined  themselves  to  be 
lecure.  No  man  can  possibly  foresee  where  a  sinful  course  will  lead  him,  aud  in  wh»t  it 
nill  land  him,— 0. 


496  THE  BOOK  OF  THE  PROPHET  ISAIAH,     [oh.  lxti.  1—24 

Yer.  13. — Ood  our  Comforter.  It  is  the  province  of  the  teacher  to  instruct,  of  ths 
father  to  direct,  of  the  elder  brother  t;  lead,  and  of  the  mother  to  console.  She  is  the 
comforter  of  the  troubled  heart.  God,  as  revealed  in  Jesns  Christ,  is  to  us  all  of  these 
in  one.    Like  as  a  mother  comforts  her  children,  he  comforts  us. 

L  Ab  tendeblt  as  bhb.  In  a  way  so  gracious  and  considerate  that  one  who  had 
received  much  of  his  healing  ministry  could  write — 

"  Oh,  'tis  a  blessed  thing  for  me 
To  need  thy  tenderness  I " 

n.  Ab  usFAiLHiaLT  as  she.  No  child  feels  that  the  number  of  times  he  (or  she)  has 
come  before  us  is  any  reason  for  doubting  the  welcome  that  he  will  receive  if  he  comes 
again.    There  is  an  inexhaustible  supply  of  sympathy  in  that  pitying  heart. 

III.  Ab  ETFECTUAiiLY  AB  SHE.  The  true  mother  knows  in  what  way  to  comfort, 
whether  in  silence,  or  by  speech,  or  by  action.  God,  who  knows  our  hearts  as  even  a 
parent  does  not,  will  adapt  his  comforts  to  our  natures  and  our  necessities. — 0. 

Ver.  16. — "  The  slain  of  the  Lord."  While  it  is  doubtful  as  to  what  special  Jnnotnre 
the  prophet  refers  when  he  says  that  "  the  slain  of  the  Lord  shall  be  many,"  it  is  pain- 
fully and  practically  certain  that  at  all  times  these  slain  ones  are  many.     For — 

I.  The  yiGTiMS  of  sm  abb  tss  slain  of  the:  Lord.  The  laws  which  work  the 
penalty  they  suffer  are  God's  laws.  It  is  under  his  administration  that  pain,  weakness, 
impotence,  trouble,  sorrow,  death,  slay  guilty  souls.  These  are  his  sword,  and  they  do 
his  work,  his  "  strange  work,"  but  yet  his. 

II.  iWiB  NUUBEB  IB  TEBBIBLT  LABOE.  Who  shall  count  the  number  of  those  that 
have  fallen,  or  of  those  that  are  falling  now?  In  every  city,  town,  village,  hamlet, 
men  are  to  be  found  who,  through  their  foUy,  or  their  vice,  or  their  crime,  or  their 
ungodliness,  are  suffering  pitifully  from  the  sword  of  Divine  retribution. 

III.  We  mat  bbino  them  into  the  peesenoe  of  the  Divine  Healeb.  Many  of 
the  slain  survive.  Our  mission  is  to  bring  these  to  that  merciful  and  mighty  One  who 
can  and  will  "  make  them  whole." — 0. 

Vers.  19 — 23. — A  vision  of  the  future.  Prom  these  verses,  which  present  ns  with  a 
glowing  vision  of  future  triumph  and  blessedness,  we  learn — 

I.  That  God  may  oali.  us  to  unwelcome  but  excellent  bebvioe.  The  Jews 
could  nut  have  anticipated,  nor  would  they  have  desired,  such  a  disposition  of  them- 
selves, and  such  a  use  of  their  powers  as  is  indicated  in  the  nineteenth  verse.  It  was 
strange  to  their  thought,  alien  to  their  sympathy.  Yet  it  was  a  most  admirable  service, 
with  which  they  might  well  be  contented.  Thus  God  often  blesses  us  now  with  oppor- 
tunities we  do  not  court,  but  which  prove  to  be  excellent  and  adnurable  indeed. 
Possibly  he  may  deal  with  us  in  a  way  very  similar  to  that  before  us.  As  the  perse- 
cution of  the  early  disciples  resulted  in  their  going  everywhere,  away  from  home  and 
friends,  preaching  the  gospel  (Acts  viii.  8),  so  some  providential  ordering  which  is 
unpleasant  at  the  time,  removing  us  from  scenes  that  are  inviting  or  from  persons  that 
are  dear  to  us,  may  place  us  in  conditions  of  great  usefulness  and  blessing. 

n.  That  God  invites  us  all  to  a  noble  victobt.  There  had  been  bitter  hatred 
and  bloody  strife  between  Jew  and  Gentile ;  each  had  sought  to  triumph  over  the 
other  on  the  battle-fleld ;  each  longed  to  have  his  feet  on  the  other's  neck.  The  peaceful 
picture  of  the  text  (ver.  20)  supplies  a  beautiful  and  blessed  substitute.  One  is  to 
bring  the  other,  in  friendly  and  honourable  conveyance,  and  to  present  him  in  holy 
sacrifice  to  God.  Not  to  wreak  vengeance ;  not  to  obtain  civil  supremacy ;  but  to 
bring  to  God's  house  and  to  introduce  to  his  service,  is  to  gain  the  true  victory  over 
our  brother. 

III.  That  God  is  effeotino  a  wondrous  and  lastino  renovation.  He  is  creating 
new  heavens  and  a  new  earth  which  will  endure  (ver.  22  and  ch.  Ixv.  17).  _  He  will 
make  all  things  new.  This  kingdom  of  sin  and  folly  which  has  so  long  prevailed^  shall 
disappear,  and  in  its  place  shall  be  seen  a  kingdom  of  "  righteousness,  peace,  and  joy ; " 
a  far  greater  change,  more  wonderful,  more  difficult  of  accomplishment,  more  to  be 
desired,  than  the  displacement  of  the  material  elements  and  the  substitution  of  others 
in  their  place.    This  new  kingdom  is  one  which  will  be  essentially  Divine.     L  It  will 


ML  LXTi.  1— 24.]     THB  BOOK  OF  THE  PROPHET  ISAIAH.  497 

be  «f  Qod.  He  "  will  make  it,"  2."  It  will  be  cJiaracterixed  hy  reverence  for  htm,  and 
one  of  its  main  features  will  be  regular  and  universal  worship  (ver.  23).  It  will  be 
durable  at  the  strongest  of  his  handiworks.    It "  shall  remain." 

IV.  That  God  will  eecbivk  those  furthest  away  to  neabest  intebcoubse 
WITH  HIMSELF.  Of  the  Gentiles  themselves  God  would  take  "  for  priests  and  for 
Levites "  (ver.  21).  This  was  a  startling  promise,  and  never  was  literally  fulfilled. 
But  it  finds  a  glorious  fulfilment  in  the  kingdom  of  Christ.  Now  we  (Gentiles)  who 
were  afar  off  are  brought  nigh.  We  worship  and  serve  in  the  sanctuary ;  we  sit  down 
at  "  the  table  of  the  Lord ;  "  we  have  freest  and  fullest  access  to  God ;  every  barrier  in 
the  way  of  perfect  intercourse  has  disappeared ;  we  are  admitted  to  the  royal  presence, 
and  "  stand  before  the  King  j "  nay,  we  ourselves  are  "  kings  and  priests  unto  God," 
That  which  once  seemed  hopelessly  impossible  has  become  a  constant  privilege  under 
Jesus  Christ. — C, 

Vers,  1,  2. — The  place  of  OodCs  rest.  This  passage  should  be  associated  with  that 
second  temple  which  was  raised  by  the  returned  captives  from  Babylon,  at  the  direc- 
tion of  Ezra  and  Nehemiah,  and  under  the  inspirations  of  the  prophets  Isaiah,  Haggai, 
Zechariah,  and  Malachi,  A  subtle  peril  lies  in  building  any  house  for  God,  That 
peril  lay  in  the  building  of  the  first  house.  It  still  lies  in  the  erection  of  every  new 
house.  It  is  the  danger  of  thereby  limiting  and  materializing  our  idea  of  Gt>d.  If,  in 
our  thought,  God  actually  comes  to  dwell  in  any  earthly  temple,  we  limit  the  infinite ; 
we  lose  that  wide,  sublime,  spiritual,  unnameable  glory  that  properiy  belongs  to  the 
Deity,  We  are  in  danger  of  making  him  take  a  place  among  the  idol-gods  who  are 
attached  to  a  certain  mountain,  or  stream,  or  wind,  or  country,  or  shrine.  To  this  peril 
the  people  were  exposed  who  watched  the  second  temple  arise  from  amidst  the  ruins  of 
the  first.  Though  cured  of  their  idolatries  by  their  sufferings  in  Babylon,  they  yet 
might  fail  to  retain  those  nobler  thoughts  of  God  which  were  the  treasure  of  tHeir  race. 
Therefore  Isaiah  pleads  with  them  as  in  this  text, 

I,  Gk)D  BEVEALuro  HIMSELF.  By  the  aid  of  outward,  sensible  figures  Ckid  discloses  his 
spiritual  nature,  his  moral  attributes,  his  character,  "  The  heaven  is  my  throne,  the 
earth  is  my  footstool."  We  are  bidden  to  look  for  help  towards  realizing  QtcA  from  the 
great,  the  solemnizing  things  of  nature.  All  creation  with  which  we  have  to  do  was 
made  to  serve  the  moral  and  spiritual  culture  of  God's  reasoning  and  free  creatures. 
Everywhere  around  us  things  are  full  of  God.  They  are  pictures,  illustrations,  words, 
suggestions,  of  the  Divine,  The  great,  the  majestic,  the  oppressive,  is  around  us.  The 
noonday  sky,  with  its  serene  height  of  blue ;  the  midnight  sky,  with  its  myriad  worlds 
crowding  the  infinite  depths;  mountains  rising  to  pierce  the  clouds,  or  hanging  In 
frowning  precipice ;  the  great  floods  of  water  rolling  in  their  ceaseless  tides ; — all  compel 
us  to  say,  "How  marvellous  are  thy  works!  in  wisdom  hast  thou  made  them  all:  the 
earth  is  full  of  thy  greatness."  One  instance,  illustratiTig  the  figure  "  Heaven  is  my 
throne,"  may  be  given,  A  star  in  the  far  depths  attracted  the  attention  of  an  observer. 
It  seemed  to  be  a  single  star,  but  to  his  educated  eye  it  resolved  itself  into  two  stars. 
Those  two  proved  to  be  each  a  star,  o$::tre  of  a  planetary  system  like  our  own.  Those 
two  stars,  which  seemed  but  one,  were  really  distant  from  each  other  five  hundred  times 
the  distance  separating  our  earth  and  the  sun.  Who  of  us  can  conceive  such  sublime 
spaces  as  are  thus  unfolded  ?  What  must  he  be  who  walketh  among  the  shining  lights, 
whose  throne  rises  higher  than  these  stars,  whose  canopy  is  gemmed  with  myriad  suns  I 
And  if  the  telescope  can  put  such  meaning  into  the  figure  of  the  heavens,  the  micro- 
scope puts  equal  meaning  into  the  figure  of  the  earth,  God  needs  this  whole  earth  for 
•  "  footstool  This  great  earth,  with  its  giant  trees,  and  inaccessible  mountains,  and 
unfathomable  waters,  and  millionfold  forms  of  life,  cannot  hold  God ;  it  is  but  a  rest- 
ing-place for  his  foot, 

IL  God  afpbalino  to  man  to  find  him  vest.  "  Where  is  the  place  of  my  rest  ?  " 
We  should  not  have  dared  to  represent  God  as  seeking  rest.  The  marvel  of  his  con- 
descension is,  that  he  does  need  his  creatures,  and  even  seeks  his  rest  in  them.  If  Qod 
wei«  only  the  embodiment  of  wisdom,  greatness,  and  power,  then  his  rest  might  be 
foond  in  some  of  the  everlasting  hills.  But  every  being  seeks  rest  according  to  his 
spiritual  nature,  his  character.  The  infinitely  pure  One  can  only  seek  rest  in  goodness, 
T^M  infinitely  condescending  One  geeks  rest  in  humility,  Tbt  infinittly  Ivving  One 
IBAUB— n.  S  K 


486  THE   BOOK  OF  THE   PROPHET  ISAIAH,      [oh.  lxti.  1— 24. 

■eekg  rest  in  love.  The  eternal  Father  finde  his  Eatisfactton  in  hit  aons  and  hii 
danghteni. 

in.  Man  yainlt  offbbino  God  bbbt  nr  THiNaB.  The  first  shrine  for  hmnan 
worship  was  the  open  firmament  of  heaven.  It  was  the  only  worthy  one.  The  only 
befitting  walls  were  the  distant  horizon  and  the  eternal  hills ;  the  only  suitable  roof 
was  the  illimitable  sky.  Yet,  from  the  first  of  human  sin,  this  temple  has  proved  too 
vast,  too  glorious,  for  man  to  use.  So  he  has  planted  groves  to  circle  God  to  a  space ; 
and  consecrated  mountain-peaks  to  fix  God  to  a  point ;  and  built  temples  and  churches 
to  narrow  the  Infinite  to  human  grasp.  Too  often  man  has  ofiered  his  temples  as  an 
act  of  sacrifice.  He  has  given  them  to  God  in  the  vain  hope  that,  satisfied  with  them, 
Gh>d  would  cease  to  ask  for  higher  and  holier  things.  We,  indeed,  in  these  days,  flood 
no  altars  with  the  blood  of  sacrifices,  yet  do  we  not  think  to  ofier  God  rest  in  the 
beauty  of  our  churches  and  the  charm  of  our  services?  Are  we  not,  even  under  this 
spiritual  dispensation,  ofiering  God  things  instead  of  persons  ?  And  yet  even  we  men 
cannot  he  satisfied  with  things ;  then  how  can  we  expect  our  God  to  be  ?  Our  hearts 
cannot  rest  in  the  artistic  fittings  of  our  dwellings,  the  creations  of  genius,  or  tixe 
associations  of  culture.  We  want  love ;  we  must  have  persona.  Lord  Lytton  ezpresaes 
our  deepest  feeling  thus— 

*  O  near  ones,  dear  ones !  you  in  whose  right  hands 
Onr  own  rests  calm ;  whose  faithful  hearts  all  day 
Wide  open  wait  till  back  from  distant  lands. 
Thought,  the  tired  traveller,  wends  his  homeward  wajl 

"Helpmates  and  hearthmates,  gladdeners  of  gone  jeaia, 
Tender  companions  of  our  serious  days. 
Who  colour  with  your  kisses,  smiles,  and  tean. 
Life's  warm  web  woven  over  wonted  ways. 

"Oh,  shut  the  world  out  from  the  heart  ye  cheer  I 
Though  small  the  circle  of  your  smiles  may  be^ 
The  world  is  distant,  and  your  smiles  are  near ; 
This  makes  you  more  than  all  the  world  to  me." 

We  are  "  the  figures  of  the  true ; "  shadows  in  our  feeliiig  ol  the  feeling  of  God.  He, 
too,  puts  aside  all  the  things  we  offer  him,  be  they  temple,  or  gold,  or  work,  and 
persuasively  pleads  thus  with  us,  "  My  son,  give  me  thy  heart."  We  may  give  him 
our  things,  if  we  have  given  him  ourselves.  Things  dead  cannot  please  him.  Things 
alive  with  holy  love,  quickened  by  the  humble,  contrite,  thankful  heart,  may  find  for 
him  the  rest  he  seeks.  We  may  give  him  our  buildings  when  they  are  sJive  with  the 
spirit  of  consecration,  our  services  when  they  are  filled  with  the  spirit  of  reverential 
worship,  our  works  when  they  are  animated  with  gratitude  and  devotion.  Of  the 
living  temple  he  will  say,  "  This  is  my  rest  for  ever :  here  will  I  dwell ;  for  I  have 
desired  it.  I  will  abundantly  bless  her  provision :  I  will  satisfy  her  poor  with  bread." 

IV.  Man  suocbbsfullt  offebino  God  best  in  himselp — m  the  poob  and 
ooNTBiTE  HBAET.  The  One  thing  towards  which  we  must  think  Gtod  is  ever  moving, 
ever  working,  by  creation,  by  gracious  providences,  by  the  mission  of  his  Son,  is  to 
sway  the  heart  of  man  towards  himself,  and  constrain  him  voluntarily  to  say,  "  This 
God  is  our  God  for  ever  and  ever."  But  it  is  only  the  man  of  poor  and  contrite  spirit 
who  will  ever  thus  turn  to  God,  and  give  himself  over  to  him.  Bruised  and  broken, 
in  the  sense  of  our  ingratitude  and  sin,  penitent  and  contrite  alone,  shall  we  ever  be 
found  willing  to  turn  our  faces  towards  our  Father.  We  can  give  QoA  nothing.  We 
can  bring  him  just  our  consciously  unfaithful  and  sinful  selves.  A  man  can  come, 
unresei'vedly  exposing  his  whole  heart  to  the  eye  of  God.  He  can  say,  "  Slay  me,  0 
Gk>d,  if  thou  wilt ;  I  deserve  it.  I  am  miserable,  but  leave  me  not  sinful  thus.  Put  me 
to  shame;  I  am  shameful.  Behold!  I  hide  nothing.  Thou  art  Light j  expose  my 
darkness.  I  will  not  palliate.  I  am  worse  than  I  know.  Show  me  all  that  I  am.  I 
cannot  heal  myself.  If  I  must  die,  I  will  die  in  thy  light."  "  In  this  lies  the  simplicity 
of  faith.  He  has  trusted  himself  to  the  Judge  of  all  the  earth ;  he  has  abandoned  aU 
self-justification ;  his  heart  is  broken,  and  is  ready  to  welcome  mercy  undeserved.  Guile> 
lessnesB  (the  contrite,  bumble  heart)  is  the  whole  secret  of  Pivine  peace."— R,  T, 


OH,  Lxvi.  1— 24.]     THE  BOOK  OP  THE   PROPHET   ISAIAH.  499 

Ver.  12. — "  Peace  like  a  river."  "  Behold,  I  will  extend  peace  to  her  like  a  river.'' 
The  prophet  U8ed  the  image  of  a  river  by  intention,  and  in  contrast  with  the  figure  of 
the  sea.  In  ancient  times,  and  Eastern  lands,  the  sea  was  a  terrible  thing;  so  the 
prophet  figures  the  wicked  as  like  the  "  troubled  sea,  whose  waters  cast  up  mire  and 
dirt."  The  sea  is  restless,  is  storm-tost,  is  a  devourer.  In  ancient  times  there  seemed 
to  be  no  music  in  her  ripple,  her  wave-swell,  or  the  bass  of  her  ceaseless  moan.  We 
feel  quite  differently,  because  for  us  the  sea  is  almost  conquered.  It  is  a  servant  whom 
we  may  employ,  and  not  a  vague  mysterious  god  whose  trident  we  must  fear.  The 
state  of  mind  and  heart,  the  conditions  of  relation  and  circumstances,  for  those  who 
know  the  redemption  of  G-od  in  Christ  Jesus,  will  not  go  into  any  figures  taken  froir 
the  sea.  Their  peace  is  like  a  river.  How  does  a  river  differ  from  a  sea?  We  note 
that  their  peace  is  like  a  river;  it  is — 

L  Supplied  fbom  exhaustlebs  foumtains.  The  peace  and  joy  of  the  worldly  and 
the  wicked  can  only  be  likened  to  the  "  crackling  of  thorns  under  a  pot,"  very  noisy, 
very  short-lived.  At  the  back  of  the  good  man's  peace  is  the  "  God  of  all  peace ; "  and 
"when  he  speaks  peace,  who  shall  make  trouble?"  Christ's  peace  is  given  to  us. 
"  My  peace  I  give  unto  you."    It — 

II.  Flows  on  thbouoh  a  whole  lute.  Yon  cannot  stop  the  rivers.  Dam  them 
up  a  little  while,  and  they  are  sure  to  gather,  and  flood  the  land  until  they  can  find  the 
stream  again  and  flow  on.  So  the  cares  and  sorrows  of  life  may  seem  to  stop  the  good 
man's  peace.  But  it  cannot  be ;  over  and  under  and  rouud  the  Divine  waters  will  flow, 
find  their  way  back  to  their  channel,  and  flow  on  again.    It — 

HI.  Bepreshbs  and  blesses  all  the  land  thbouoh-  which  rr  flows.  The 
bordering  fields  are  rich  with  grass  and  flowers ;  the  trees  drink  up  its  moisture,  and 
hold  out  great  leaf-clad  branches,  and  the  "  little  hills  rejoice  on  every  side."  So  the 
good  man,  the  man  of  peace,  the  peace-lover,  and  the  peace-maker,  sweetens,  soothes, 
sanctifies,  all  the  society  in  which  he  takes  his  place.  He  makes  a  reviving,  delightful 
atmosphere  wherever  he  may  be.  We  rejoice  in  him,  even  as  thirsty  lands  rejoice  in 
the  sweet  pure  river,  that  day  and  night  flows  on  unceasingly,  past  bank  and  brae. 
— B.T. 

Ver,  14. — The  LorcPt  indignation  ;  or,  the  Divine  goodness  and  severity.  "  The  hand 
of  the  Lord  shall  be  known  towards  his  servants,  and  his  indignation  toward  his 
enemies."  Here  two  sides  of  the  Divine  nature  are  declared,  which  we  find  it  difScult 
to  conceive  as  harmonious  in  one  person.  It  is  not  only  true  that  God_  is  gracious 
toward  his  people,  and  angry  with  the  wicked ;  it  is  also  true  that  in  dealing  with  his 
people  he  is  both  gracious  and  severe. 

t  In  the  God  of  revelation  we  find  both  uebot  and  indignation.  Nature 
blends  rains  and  storms,  sunshine  and  hurricanes,  spring  breath  and  volcanoes.  The 
revelation  to  the  Jews  provides  illustration.  1.  See  the  early  traditions  of  the  world 
preserved  by  the  Jews — Eden — the  Flood — Sodom.  2.  See  the  story  of  the  great 
Patriarchs  of  Jacob,  of  the  Israelites  in  the  wilderness.  3.  See  the  records  of  the  Jews 
as  a  nation.  Raised  to  heaven  with  privileges,  crushed  into  the  deep  with  judgments. 
4.  See  the  conditi6n  of  the  Jewish  nation,  as  now  scattered  over  the  earth.  Every 
scattered,  landless,  homeless  Jew,  against  whom  the  world's  byword  is  cast,  is  set 
forth  before  men  to  plead  with  them  and  say,  "Behold  therefore  the  goodness  and 
severity  of  Gkni.''  6,  See  the  last  revelation  made  to  men  in  Christ  Jesus.  (1)  Note 
how  the  Messiah  was  described  beforehand  in  prophecy  (ch.  Ixiii,  3,  4).  (2)  Note  the 
exclamations  of  those  who  saw  the  babe  Messiah.  (3)  Note  the  outbursts  of  righteous 
indignation  during  the  ministry  of  Christ.  (4)  Note  some  sentences  used  in  his  public 
teaching  (Matt.  xxv.).  The  following  words  were  characteristic  of  Christ's  teachings : 
"everlasting punishment;"  "destruction  ;"  "death;"  "fire;''"worm  that  never  dies;" 
"  gnashing  of  teeth ; "  "  thirst ; "  "  torment ; "  "  outer  darkness."  (5)  Note  the  apostolic 
doctrine  of  Christ.    In  it  there  is  a  place  for  the  "  wrath  of  the  Lamb." 

II.  In  the  Qod  of  cub  apprehension  wb  find  both  merot  and  nmioHATioN. 
L  Give  the  testimony  of  man's  reason.  It  recognizes  that  the  good  man  will  be  sure 
to  blaze  into  indignation  at  wrong-doing.  2.  Give  the  testimony  of  man's /ear.  What 
is  man  afraid  of  if  he  has  no  notion  of  God  as  able  to,  and  bound  to,  punish  transgres- 
sors?   Men  do  not  tremble  before  a  God  who  is  all  mercy.    We  fear  ^e  Chid  a| 


600  THE  BO'OK  OF  THE  PBOPHET  ISAIAH,     [oh.  lxti.  1— 24. 

indignations,  who  can  cast  body  and  soul  Into  hell.  How  wicked  it  is  for  any  of  us  to 
go  on  in  sin,  presuming  npon  Ood's  mercifulness  I  What  sinners  have  to  do  with  k 
Oo^s  indignation.— R.  T. 

Ver.  17. — Vain  attempts  to  sanctify  sdf.  "They  that  sanctify  themselves  .  .  . 
shall  be  consumed  together."  The  prophetic  allusion  is  to  those  who  attempted  to 
secure  themselves  by  "  fearing  the  Lord,  and  serving  other  gods."  They  wanted  to 
secure  all  possible  Israelite  privileges,  yet  wanted  to  sanctify  themselves  by  means  of 
the  heathen  rites  which  were  the  fashion  of  their  times.  "  Such  a  blending  of  incom- 
patible elements  was  eminently  characteristic  of  the  reign  of  Manasseh."  The  things 
specially  noticed  are  wilful  throwings  off  of  all  the  restraints  of  the  Mosaic  Law.  These 
mistaken  ones  dared  to  indulge  in  swine's  flesh,  and  eat  even  other  unclean  foods. 
Yan  Lennep  has  a  curious  note  on  eating  the  mouse.  "The  mouse  is  extremely 
common  in  Western  Asia,  and  the  Mosaic  prohibition  of  Its  flesh  continues  to  bis 
generally  observed.  We  have  reason  to  believe  that  those  who  have  tasted  the  flesh  of 
the  mouse  acquire  as  great  a  relish  for  it  as  the  Frenchman  does  for  his  frog  diet,  or  the 
German  for  sauerkraut.  We  once  had  a  servant  from  one  of  the  Greek  islands  who 
was  addicted  to  this  habit,  and  could  be  induced  to  relinquish  it  neither  by  expostula- 
tion nor  by  ridicule."  Swine  are  always  spoken  of  in  both  the  Old  and  New  Testa- 
ments with  horror  and  disgust,  especially  for  their  close  association  with  pagan  rites. 

I.  Attempts  to  sanctify  self.  Explain  the  forms  such  work  has  taken  in  old 
times,  and  is  taking  now.  There  is  a  proper  sanctifying  of  self,  which  goes  with  due 
dependence  on  God's  sanctifying,  and  is  our  "  working  out  our  own  salvation  with  fear 
and  trembling ; "  but  what  is  reproved  here  is  trying  to  sanctify  one's  self  in  one's  own 
strength,  in  one's  own  way,  and  for  one's  own  ends. 

n.  The  vanity  of  attempts  to  sanctify  self.  We  cannot.  It  is  running  after 
a  "Will-o'-the-wisp."  It  is  hurrying  to  drink  of  the  "mirage."  Solomon  tried  to 
satisfy,  if  we  may  not  say  to  sanctify,  himself,  and  ended  with  a  wail,  "  Vanity  of 
vanities ;  all  is  vanity ! " 

III.  The  DEGKADATioN  OF  ATTEMPTS  TO  SANCTIFY  BXLF.  We  are  suTe  to  come 
down  from  trying  high  things  to  trying  low  ones.  We  come  at  last  to  making  much 
of  some  tree,  or  eating  swine's  flesh,  or  abominable  mice,  or  counting  beads,  or  grovel- 
ling among  stones,  or  drinking  of  so-called  "  holy  wells,"  And  there  is  no  hope  in  God 
for  any  of  us  until  we  are  wholly  vfilling  to  give  up  all  these  attempts,  and  just  take 
God's  way  of  sauctifying  us,  which  is  at  once  tiie  only  way,  and  the  best  way. — B.  T. 

Ver.  23. — TJie  universal  worship.  "  From  one  sabbath  to  another,  shall  all  flesh 
come  to  worship  before  me,  saith  the  Lord." 

I.  In  meeting  together  fob  public  worship  WB  follow  the  NATURAL  IMPULSE  OF 
OUR  own  hearts,  as  WELL  AS  OBEY  TBS  OOHXANSMENTB  OF  OUR  GOD.      To  look  Up  and 

pray  is  one  of  the  most  original  and  essential  impulses  of  humanity,  one  of  the  com- 
monest characteristics  of  the  race.  Prayer  is  properly  associated  with  the  whole  circle 
of  our  relations  with  God.  As  spirits  we  are  Qod'a  children,  and  God's  erring,  wilful 
children ;  we  must  find  expression  for  our  conscious  need  of  spiritual  blessings.  Our 
bodies  are  the  Divine  creation,  the  care  of  Divine  Providence,  and  out  of  the  sense  of 
the  relation  of  our  bodily  life  to  God  we  are  impelled  to  pray  for  temporal  blessings. 
We  are  set  in  close  associations  one  with  another,  as  families ;  and  as  those  having 
similar  preferences  and  convictions ;  out  of  such  relations  come  our  united  fomily  and 
sanctuary  worship.  There  are  even  larger  associations  into  which  we  enter  as  fellow- 
citizens,  fellow-countrymen,  fellow-men.  Our  welfare  in  all  these  relationships  directly 
depends  on  him  who  is  Lord  of  natural  laws.  Lord  of  storms.  Lord  of  pestilences,  Lora 
of  faarvests,  Lord  of  sunshine.  Lord  of  the  wrath  of  men,  and  Lord  of  their  wealth.  So 
far  as  we  feel  this  aright  we  shiill  be  impelled  to  say  to  every  fellow-creature,  made  in 
the  image  of  God,  and  made  for  God  even  as  we  are,  "  0  come,  let  us  worship  and  bow 
down :  let  us  kneel  before  the  Lord  our  Maker."  We  have  not  to  seek  for  reasons  that 
may  prove  persuasions  to  worship.  What  men  have  to  seek  for  is  excuse  for  their 
neglect  of  the  universal  worship.  It  is  not  sufficiently  recognized  that  God  deals  with 
us  collectively  here  on  earth.  We  have  no  reason  for  assuming  that  there  are  separate 
chHrobe*  ia  heaven ^  or  organized  fiuuilies;  «r  towns  with  Icwal  interests;  or  nations 


OH.  LXTi.  1— 24^]    THE  BOOK  OF  THE  PBOPHET  ISAIAH.  601 

with  national  interests  and  national  characteristics.  These  are  all  eartUy  conditions, 
and  in  these  conditions  is  laid  the  basis  for  collective  prayer,  for  public  and  united 
worship.  The  man  that  refuses  to  unite  in  public  worship  is  breaking  away  from  the 
cUums  of  nis  common  humanity ;  refusing  to  recoguize  the  conditions  under  which  Qod 
has  placed  him ;  and  withholding  the  sympathy  which  his  fellow-creatures  have  a 
right  to  demand  from  him.  Further,  it  may  be  shown  that  in  meeting  for  public  or 
uniTersal  worship,  we  do  but  follow  the  indications  that  have  been  given  us  of  the 
Divine  will.  In  Jewish  history  great  importance  attached  to  large  national  gatherings 
for  acts  of  worship.  From  the  time  of  the  great  meeting  between  the  Mounts  El»l 
and  Gerizim  down  to  ths  times  of  Messiah,  there  were  three  great  religiouB  meetings 
of  the  people  every  year,  besides  occasional  special  gatherings.  The  Jewish  service 
included  praise  and  prayer,  in  which  the  whole  people  might  unite.  The  best  men, 
such  as  David,  turned  from  the  joys  of  private  devotion  to  the  yet  higher  joys  of  Qod's 
house  and  worship.  Our  Lord  set  the  example  of  private  prayer,  but  the  evangelists  are 
careful  to  remind  us  that  "  he  went,  as  he  was  wont,  into  the  synagogue  on  the  sabbath 
day."  And  the  apostles  urge  the  early  Christians  "not  to  forsake  the  assembling  of 
themselves  together." 

n.  In  neolectino  public  wobshif  we  have  to  delude  oubselves  ST  MAKnrs 
YEBT  UNWOBTHT  EXCUSES.  To  put  our  reasons  out  into  the  light,  to  get  them  fairly 
expressed,  is  to  malse  us  feel  ashamed  of  them.  Some  incline  to  say,  "  Tour  worship 
is  not  intended  for  us;  it  is  meant  only  for  those  whom  you  call  specially  Christians, 
and  we  do  not  call  ourselves  by  that  name."  Our  worshipinng  arrangements  have 
certainly  been  made  on  this  principle ;  but  the  worship  of  God  is  for  ni«n,  all  men, 
everywhere.  Whether  men  agree  with  our  ideas  or  not,  let  them  come  and  worship 
the  God  that  made  them,  clothes  them,  feeds  them,  cares  for  them,  loves  them, 
and  would  save  them  from  their  sins.  Perhaps  most  of  those  who  stay  away  from 
worship  do  so  in  sheer  heedlessness ;  they  yield  to  the  indifference  which  settles  down 
on  men  who  are  simply  living  to  self  and  sin.  The  real  evil  is  that  sinful  man  i* 
indisposed  to  worship;  the  only  shrine  he  cares  for  is  the  shrine  of  ease  and^  self- 
indulgence.  We  must  try  to  make  God  more  real  to  men,  and  so  get  the  persuasion  of 
his  love  as  the  constraint,  urging  men  to  offer  to  him  their  "  gold,  frankincense,  and 
myrrh."  We  must  try  to  make  the  services  of  our  sanctuaries  more  suitable  for  the 
expression  of  the  universal  dependence  and  the  universal  praise.  Christian  worship 
should  be  the  best  possible  medium  for  lifting  up  the  hearts  of  men,  as  men,  unto 
God ;  the  best  utterance  of  the  universal  sense  of  the  Divine  Creator-hood.  It  should 
be  man's  acknowledgment  of  God,  our  God,  the  one  God,  the  holy  God,  the  redeem- 
ing God.  It  is  "he  that  hath  made  us,  and  not  we  ourselves."  It  is  he  that  "re- 
deemeth  our  life  from  destruction."  It  is  even  he  "  that  sent  his  Son  into  the  world, 
that  we  might  live  through  him."  "Let  ui  knetl,"  l«t  us  all  kneel  together,  "Mm 
th«  Lmd  oar  Maker."— B.  X. 


HOMILETICAL  INDEX 


TO 


THE  BOOK  OF  THE  PROPHET  ISAIAH. 


VOLUME  IL 


CHAPTER  XXXVL. 

THBin  rAOx 

Wise  and  Foolish  Trust     ...           ...  6 

The  False  Boastings  of  the  Wicked 

confuted  by  the  Event    ...            ...  6 

Silence  the  Best  Answer  to  many  an 

Argument         ...           ...           ...  7 

HezeUah  and  the  Assyrian              m.  8 

The  Broken  Staff...           .m           m.  9 

Contemptuousness              m*           m.  10 

Treacherous  Trusts             ...            ...  10 

The  Invitation  of  the  Enemy             ...  11 
Eight  Attitude  in  Times  of  Threaten- 
ing     ...            ...           ...            ...  12 

Satire  on  onr  Human  Confidences     ...  12 
Mistakes   concerning  him  whom  we 

trust    ...            •••            ...            ...  18 

Claims  to  speak  for  God     ...            ...  14 

Security  of  Stable  Government         ...  11 

Insult  offered  to  our  God    ...            ...  15 

The  Strength  of  Silence     ...           ...  16 

CHAPTEB  XXXVII. 

Spiritual  Advice  in  Time  of  Need  not 

to  be  despised,  even  by  Great  Kings  23 
Taking  our  Cross  to  God,  and  casting 

all  our  Care  upon  him     ...           ...  21 

Faith    neither   Blind    to    seemingly 
Adverse  Facts,  nor  Chary  of  ad- 
mitting them    ...            ...            ...  24 

Hezekiah's  Besources         ...           ...  25 

Oautibn  against  Fear          ...           ...  26 

Our  Highest  Solicitude      ...           ...  27 


The  God  in  whom  we  tmtt 

M. 

nam 
28 

Bighteousness  in  Prayer     .m 

... 

28 

The  Intoxication  of  Success,  ete. 

... 

29 

Boot  and  Fruit,  or  Character  in 

its 

Completeness    ... 

••• 

30 

Beturning  on  our  Way       ... 

••• 

31 

Carrying  Troubles  to  God  ... 

■•• 

31 

Besponsibility  of  Prayer-Leaden 

•  •• 

32 

God's  Message  to  the  Troubled 

••• 

33 

The  God  of  all  Kingdoms  ... 

•  •* 

34 

"Holy  One  of  Israel" 

... 

34 

God's  Agents  are  never  beyond 

his 

Bestrainings 

... 

35 

«•  The  Zeal  of  the  Lord  "     ... 

... 

35 

Humiliating  Judgment!     ... 

M. 

35 

CHAPTEB  XXXVIII. 

The  Duty  of  Men,  in  View  of  Death, 

to  set  their  House  in  Order           ...  40 

The  Power  of  Prayer          ...            ...  40 

Sickness  and  Beoovery  of  Hezekiah ...  41 

The  Song  of  Hezckiah        ...           ...  43 

Hezekiah's  Prayer  heard    ...           ...  44 

TheGriefof  Old  Age         ...           ...  45 

Music  in  the  Heart             ...           ...  45 

A  Vision  of  Death              ...           ...  46 

Human  Life;  the  Kindness  of  Ood 

and  the  Wisdom  of  Man ...  ,        ...  47 

Health  and  Sickness           ...            ...  47 

The  G'-eat  Disclosure         ...           ...  48 

The  Life  of  our  Life          ...           ...  49 

Parental  Obligation            ...           .„  49 


INDEX. 


FAOS 

The  Strain  ofNotlae  to  die              ...  49 

Private  and  Personal  Prayer            ...  60 

Man's  Fair  Estimate  of  his  own  Life  51 

Signs  for  the  Help  of  Faith              ...  51 

Figures  of  Life  and  Death ...           ...  52 

Life  a  Borden       ...            ...            ...  53 

Going  softly  after  Sickness               ...  55 

God's  Way  with  Sin           ...           ...  55 

CHAPTER  XXXIX. 

Carnal  Joy  the  Prelude  to  Spiritual 

Sorrow               ...            ...            ...  58 

The  Dangers  of  Prosperity...           ...  59 

Perishing  Things...           ...           ...  60 

The  Best  Blessings            ...           ...  60 

Complaoenoy,  Bebnke,  and  Acquies- 
cence ...            ...           ...           ...  61 

The  Home,  seen  thongh  not  shown  ...  62 

Friendship  that  serves  its  own  Ends  62 

The  Sin  of  Presuming        ...           ...  63 

Shadows     projected     from     Coming 

Trouble             ...            ...            ...  61 

Our  Submiasioni  may  be  Selfish      ...  M 


OHAPTBB  XL. 

Comfort  after  Trouble 

... 

M. 

70 

God's  Promises  Sure 

... 

... 

71 

God  the  Shepherd  of  his  People 

... 

72 

God  in  Creation    ... 

... 

... 

73 

Tho  Prophet's  Commission ... 

... 

73 

Jehovah  Licomparable 

... 

... 

75 

Idolatry  Ridiculous 

... 

M. 

76 

Despondency  reproved 

... 

... 

77 

Divine  Consolations 

M« 

... 

78 

The  Golden  Age  ... 

M. 

... 

79 

The  Imperishable 

... 

... 

79 

Present  Reward    ... 

... 

... 

80 

Weakness  made  Strong 

••• 

... 

80 

Spiritual  Faintness 

... 

... 

81 

Renewal  of  Strength 

... 

... 

81 

Pardon  and  Penalty 

... 

... 

81 

Human  Preparation  for   the  Divine 

Advent  ...  ...  ...  82 

The  Passing  and  the  Abiding          ...  83 
Ood :  his  Presence,  Power,  and  Grace  83 
•*  The  Grace  of  onr  Lord  Jesus  Christ "  84 
The  Greatness  of  God,  and  the  Little- 
ness of  Man       ...           ...           ...  84 

The  Hopelessness  and  the  Simplicity 

of  Divine  Service  ...  ...  89 

The  Degradation  vt  the  Diviaa       m  M 


THXHS  WA»a 

The  Distingnishing  Love  of  Gh)d      ...  86 

The  Impiety  of  Impatienco              ...  87 
The  Need  and  the  Gift  of  Spiritnal 

Power...           ...           ...            ...  87 

The  Comfort  of  God's  Restored  Favour  88 

Needed  Preparations  for  Christ         ...  89 

Christ,  as  the  Lord's  Glory                ...  91 

The  Transitory  and  the  Permanent ...  91 

God,  in  Clirist,  Shepherding             ...  93 

Wanted,  a  Likeness  for  God              ...  94 

Darkness  breeding  Doubt  ...            ...  94 

He  who  has  Power  alone  can  give  it  95 

CHAPTER  XLL 

God'«  Strength  made  Perfect  in  Weak- 
ness   ...            ...            ...           ...  100 

The  Futility  and  Absurdity  of  False 
Systems  do  not  prevent  them  from 

keeping  their  Hold  on  Men '          ...  101 

Argument  with  the  Nations              ...  102 

The  Blessed  Condition  of  Israel        ...  103 

Weakness  made  Strong      ...            ...  103 

The  Claims  of  Jehovah      ...           „.  104 

Mutual  Help        ...           ...           ...  105 

Water  in  the  Wilderness    ...           ...  106 

The  False  Refuge  and  the  True       ...  108 

His  Grace  and  our  Heritage              ...  108 

God  onr  Strength                ...            ...  109 

The  Triumph  of  the  Truth                ...  109 
The  Pity  and  the  Purpose  of  Christ 
and    his    Church:    a    Missionary 

Sermon              ...           ...           ...  110 

A  True  Test  of  Divinity     ...           ...  Ill 

The  Eternal  Alpha  and  Omega        ...  Ill 

Man's  Devices  to  do  without  God     ...  112 

The  Divine  Choices  are  Wise  Selections  113 

The  Supreme  Promise        ...            ...  113 

The  Supreme  Prayer          ...           ...  114 

Doing    Surprising    Things    in     the 

Strength  of  God              ...           m.  114 

The  Helplessness  of  Idols  .m           m*  US 

CHAFTEB  XLn. 

The  Servants  of  Qoi,  and  the  One 

True  Servant    ...           ...           ...  ISO 

The  Duty  of  Sympathizing  with  the 

Joys  of  Others  ...           ...           ...  121 

The  Blindness  of  Israel      ...           ...  122 

The  Servant  of  Jehovah     ...  198,130 

Mission  of  Jehovah's  Servant           :..  128 

A  New  Song  to  Jehovah    ,.,           „  184 


INDEX. 


The  Tenderness  of  God     .> 
Christ's  Sure  Conquest       ... 
The  Cbnstian's  Conquest  ... 
Light  and  Bight  ...  ... 

Spiritual  Blindnesi 


FAOE 

124 
125 
125 
126 
126 


The    Characteristics  -of    the    True 

Iieader              ...            ...            ...  126 

Qnietness  of  Method  and  Hopefulness 

of  Spirit            127 

Ood  and  Man:  Refusal,  Retribution, 

Bestoration        ...            ...            ...  128 

The  Unrecognized  Path     ...           ...  128 

The  Hidden  Hurt               129 

The  Adaptations  of  Divine  Oraoe    ...  131 

Divine  Persistency             ...            ...  182 

The  Uniqueness  of  Jehovah              ».  133 

Tlie  Surprising  Life-Guide                ...  133 

The  Honouring  of  God's  Law           m.  135 

Ineffective  Judgments        ...           m.  135 

CHAPTER  XLIO. 

Man  made  for  the  Glory  of  God       ...  141 

Witnesses  for  God  and  against  him  ...  141 

Three  Deliverances             ...            ...  143 

The  Folly  of  Self-Jnstiflcation  before 

God     ...           ...           ."..           •••  143 

The  Love  of  Jehovah  to  Israel         ...  144 

The  Great  Controversy      m.           •«.  145 

Memories  of  Exile              ...           ».  145 

God,  in  Trouble    ...            ...            ...  W6 

The  Supreme  Claim   «nd  the   Sure 

Stay 146 

Succour  in  Sorrow              ...           ...  147 

The  Goodness  of  God  to  Man           ...  148 

The  Witness  of  God's  Servants         ...  148 

Righteousness,  Guilt,  Mercy             ...  149 

Personal  Relations  with  God  ...  149 
Safety    for   the   Sonl   in    Times   of 

Trouble             ...           ...           •••  15® 

God  the  Saviour  ...           ~.           •..  151 

God  the  Redeemer             ...           ...  152 

The  True  End  of  Life        ...           «•  153 

Wearying  of  Gted's  Worship             ...  153 

Forgirenesa  for  God's  own  Sake       ...  1S4 

OEIAPTBR  XLIV. 

Water  a  Symbol  of  Divine  Grace  ...  159 
The    Utter   Folly  of   all    Kinds   of 

Idolatry             160 

The   Dnty   of    Kiagi  to  be   God's 

Shepherd*        .»           .«•           •••  1^1 


rAoi 

The  Offspring  of  Israel      ».           m.  162 

Jehovah  and  the  Images    ...            m.  163 

True  and  False  Bread        ...            ...  164 

The  Indispensable  Blessing             ...  165 

The  Irrational  and  the  Religious     ...  165 

The  Vanity  of  Irreligion    ...           ...  166 

Joy  in  God's  Redeeming  Power       ...  167 
Revival  promised  in  the  Power  of  the 

Spirit 168 

God's  Kingdom  entered  One  by  One  169 

God's  Witness  to  his  own  Rights      ...  1G9 

The  Ill-fed  Soul 170 

God's  Way  of  Pleading  with  Men    ...  170 

God's  Bights  in  the  Individual        ...  171 

CHAPTER  XLV. 

In  what  Sense  God  " creates  Evil"  ...  177 
Murmuring    against  God's   Arrange- 
ments at  once  Foolish  and  Wicked  178 
The  Conversion  of  the  Gentiles  Gradual, 

hut  ultimately  Complete                ...  179 

Cyrus,  the  Anointed  of  Jehovah       ...  180 

The  Sovereignty  of  God     ...            ...  180 

The  Conversion  of  Egypt   ...           ...  181 

God,  Israel,  and  the  World                ...  181 

Jehovah :  his  Nature  and  Purposes  ...  182 

God  in  our  Past  Life           ...            ...  183 

The  Eye  of  the  Soul           183 

The   Unfelt    Hand   on    the  Human 

Heart  ...            ...            ...            ...  184 

An  Old  Perplexity              ...           ...  185 

The  Argument  for  Acquiescence      m.  186 

Divine  Concealment            ...            ...  186 

What  shall  the  End  be? 187 

Our     Great    Hope:     a     Missionary 

Sermon              ...            ...            ...  188 

The  Secret  of  Assured  Success         ...  189 

The  Divine  Sumaming       ...            ...  189 

One  Source  of  Evil  and  Good           ...  191 

The  Sin  and  Folly  of  resisting  God ...  191 

The  Joy  of  Mystery  in  God              ».  192 

Seeking  in  Vain    ...            ...            ...  193 

Just  and  Saving  ...           ..•           ...  193 

Salvation  by  Looking        .m           —  194 

The  Ijord's  Final  Triumph               n.  194 


OHAPTEB  XLVl 

The  Effect  of  God's  Temporal  Jndg. 
ments  upon  Nations  on  the  Religions 
History  of  the  World      .„  m.    U7 


INDEX. 


THEHI  'A0» 

The  Beligion  of  Jebovah  oontrasted 

with  Idolatry    ...            ...           ...  198 

God's  Care  for  the  Aged    ...           ...  199 

Men  bearing  Qode,  and  God  bearing 

his  People         ...            ...            ...  199 

Manliness  in  Bektion  to  Beligion    ...  200 

Grace  for  a  Long  Life         ...            ...  200 

God's  Call  to  exuroise  Eight  Reason  201 

The  Goodness  of  God's  "  Pleasure  "  ...  202 

Stout-heartedness                ...            ...  202 

God's  People  are  God's  Glory           ...  203 


CHAPTER  XLVII. 

The  Fall  of  Ancient  States  a  Warning 

to  Modern  ones ...  ...  ...  207 

The  Fall  of  Babylon  ...  ...  208 

Many  Counsellors  ...  ...  209 

What  -we  owe  to  the  Aged  ...  m.  209 

Spiritual  Infatuation  ...  ...  210 

Hnmiliation  the  Divine  Judgment  on 

Pride 211 

Doing  God'g  Work  unworthily  ...  212 

Due  Begard  to  Consequences  ...  212 

Man's  Helplessness   in   Presence   of 

Divine  Calamities  ...  ...  21S 

The  Weariness  of  Self-Serrioe  m.  213 


CHAPTEB  XLVHL 

SweaHng  by  the  Name  of  God         ...  218 

God  the  First  and  the  Last               ...  218 
The  Separate  Personality  and  Divine 

Authority  of  the  Holy  Spirit        ...  219 
Lessons    from     the     Fast     to     the 

Future               ...            ...            ...  219 

The  New  Bevelation          ...           ...  220 

The  Bevealing  Truth         ...           ...  221 

Hidden  Things     ...            ...            ...  221 

Things   worth    Heeding    concerning 

God  and  Man  ...            ...            ...  223 

The      Divine      Aim      in      Human 

AfBiction           ...            ...            ...  223 

Human  Freedom  and  Divine  Begret  224 

Peace :  Appearance  and  Beality      ...  225 

The  Offence  of  Insincerity ...           ...  225 

Obstinacy             ...           ...           ...  226 

God's  Supreme  Motive        ...           ...  226 

The  Refining  Power  of  Affliction     ...  227 

The  Blessings  of  Obedience             ...  228 

Ohrisf s  Peace  and  Bighteonsness    ...  229 

The  Unrest  of  the  Wicked  ...           ...  229 


CHAPTEB  XLIX. 


The   Lowest   Humiliation    and    the 

Highest  Glory  meet  in  Christ       ,„  284 

The  Love  of  God  for  his  Church       ...  235 

Jehovah  and  his  Servant    ...  ...  236 

Despondency  comforted      ...  «..  238 

A  Mistaken  Estimate  ...  ...  238 

A  Light  to  the  Gentiles      239 

The   Claim,  the  Confession,  and  tlie 

Consolation  of  the  Servant  of  God  239 

The  Greater  Mission  ...  ...  240 

The  Kingdom  of  Christ:  a  Missionary 

Sermon  ...  ...  ...  240 

God  thinking  upon  us        ...  ...  241 

The  Fear  which  may  be  Fearless,  etc.  241 

Fitness  for  God's  Service   ...  ...  242 

Mistaken  Ideas  of  Success  m.  ...  243 

The  Great  Commission        ...  ...  213 

"The  Acceptable  Time"    ...  m.  244 

The  Ideal  State 245 

Ever-recurring  Doubts       ...  ...  245 

The  Closeness  of  the  Divine  Interest  246 

No  Shame  in  waiting  for  Gk>d  ...  246 

CHAPTEB  L. 

God's  Power  over  Nature   ...  „.  219 

No  Condemnation  for  those  whom  QoA 

justifies  ...  ...  ...  250 

Jehovah  and  his  Servant    ...  ...  250 

A  Searching  Query  ...  ...  251 

Explanation  of  Exile  ...  ...  252 

The  Hearing  Ear  and   the  Helpful 

Tongue  ...  ...  ...  252 

Signs  of  Faithful  Service   ...  ...  253 

Inefiectual  Light  and  Guilty  Darkness  253 

Selling  Ourselves ...  ...  ...  254 

Words  in  Season  ...  ...  ...  255 

Contumely  endured  in  God's  Service  255 

God's  Help  in  Time  of  Need  ...  256 

The  Justifier's  Protection   ...  ...  257 

Counsel  for  those  who  walk  in  the 

Dark  ...  ...  ...  ...  257 

Disappointed  Self-Tmst     ...  m.  258 

CHAPTEB  LL 

The  Servants  of  God  must  not  fear  fho 

Beproaoh  of  Men  ...  ...  882 

No  Sorrow  nor  Mourning  in  the  Final 

Kingdom  of  the  Redeemer  ...  263 

A  Just  Confidence  in  Grod  is  a  Seouity 

against  Cowardly  Fears  ...  ...  264 


INDEX. 


Ood  pleads  the  Canse  of  his  People  264 

Instmctiona  to  the  Spiritual  Israel  ...  261 

The  Aim  of  Jehovah          ...           ...  266 

Expostulation  against  Unbelief       ...  266 

Encouragement  for  Jerusalem          ...  267 

Ancient  Memories              ...           ...  267 

God  tlie  Comforter              ...           ...  268 

The  Nervous  Temperament              ...  268 

"The  Garden  of  the  Lord"               ...  271 

A  Sure  Criterion  of  Character,  etc.  ...  272 

The  Force  in  Reserve         ...            ...  273 

Spiritual  Stupefaction         ...            ...  273 

Lessons  of  the  Past            ...           ...  274 

God's  Bcvelation  a  Light   ...            ...  274 

Things  Earthly  and  Things  Spiritual  275 

" Fear,"  and  "  Fear  not "    ...            ...  276 

Joy-Song  on  the  Way  to  Zion           ...  276 

Man,  God's  Agent               ...            ...  277 

God  our  Advocate  with  himself        ...  277 

Divine  Judgment  on  Perseoutora     ...  278 

CHAPTER  LIL 

G^od  helps  those  who  help  themselves  281 
The  Special  Need  of  Purity  in  them 

that  bear  the  Vessels  of  the  Lord  ...  281 
The  Wisdom  of  Messiah's  Life  upon 

Earth 282 

The  Redemption  of  Jerusalem          ...  282 
The  Servant  of  Jehovah :   his  Won- 
drous Career     ...            ...            ...  284 

Beautiful  Messengers         ...           ...  285 

The  Strength  of  the  Church             ...  285 

The  Beauty  of  the  Church 286 

The  Dignity  of  the  Church...            ...  287 

The  Liberty  of  the  Church...           ...  287 

Christian  Pilgrimage          ...            ...  288 

The  Wisdom  of  Suffering  Service     ...  288 

The  Restored  Castaway      ...            ...  289 

A  Priceless  Redemption     ...            ...  290 

Knowing  God's  Name         ...            ...  291 

The    Message    glorifying   the    Mes- 
sengers             ...           ...            ■■•  291 

The   World    taught    through    God's 

Dealings  vritb  his  People               ...  292 

Cleanness  a  Condition  of  Service      ...  292 
Surprise  at  the  Appearence  of  Qod'a 

Servant            ...          ...          •«.  293 


CHAPTER  LUL 

"  The  Sufferings  of  Jesus  "...  ...    299 

TUp  Pufferinf  Servant  of  Jehovah    ...    300 


THfiuR  rAei 

Patience  and  the  Divine  Purpose     m.  301 

The  Depraved  Eye             ...           ...  802 

The  Rejected  Saviour         ...            n.  303 

The  Divine  Atonement       ...            ...  303 

The  Attractive  and  the  Unattractive 

in  Jesus  Christ...           ...           ...  303 

The  Man  of  Sorrows           ...           ...  304 

The  Divine  Account  of  the  Sufferings 

of  Christ            ...            ...            ...  305 

Departure  and  Distance  from  Gtod   ...  306 

The  Submissive  Spirit        ...            ...  307 

The    Shortness    but    SufScienoy    of 

Human  Life      ...            ...            ...  307 

The  False  Accusation         ...            ...  308 

Strange  Reception  of  Divine  Messages  308 
Man's  Disposition  to  reject  his  Best 

Blessings          ...           ...           ...  309 

Man's  Thoughts  of  God's  Sufferer    ...  810 

Where  shall  Iniquity  be  laid  ?          ...  811 

The  Triumph  of  Silence     ...            ...  312 

A  Soul-Offering «.  813 

Satisfied  for  Sore  Travail   ...           ••.  818 

CHAPTER  LIV. 

The  Relation  of  the  Church  to  God 

that  of  a  Wife  to  her  Husband      ...  316 

Man's  Righteousness  is  of  God         ...  316 

The  Future  of  the  Church ...           ...  817 

Perennial  Kindness             ...            ...  SIS 

The  Eternal  Constancy :  a  Meditation 

on  Change         ...            ...            ...  319 

Enlargement  and  Consolidation        ...  321 

Superabounding  Goodness  ...            ...  322 

The  Prize  of  Life,  and  its  Pursuit     ...  322 

The  Heritage  of  Faithful  Service     ...  323 

Divine  Enlargements          ...            ...  324 

The  Husband-Figure  for  God           ...  324 
God- Worshippers  outside  Judaism  ...  325 
Lessons  from  Noah's  Times              ...  326 
Divine  Favour  reaching  to  the  Chil- 
dren      327 

The  Secret  of  Stability       ...           ...  827 

The  Divine  Control  of  Evil  Foioee  ».  888 

CHAPTER  LV. 

The  Earthly  Objects  of  Desire  do  not 
satisfy :   the  Heavenly  Objects  not 

only  satisfy,  but  delight ...            ...  38] 

The  Vital  Force  of  the  Word  of  God  381 

The  Messianic  Blessings     ...            ...  832 

Exliortations  and  Assurance             ...  833 


»1 


INDEX. 


rAoa 

The  Soul's  Thirst  satisfied ...            ».  334 

Foolish  Investmeuts            ...            ...  334 

Man's  True  Glory               ...            ...  335 

The  Provision  which  cannot  l|   pur- 
chased                „,            ...  335 

Wasted  Strength  ...            ...            ...  336 

The  Leadership  of  Christ   ...            ...  337 

OoA'a  Especial  Nearness     ...            ...  337 

Distance — Beturn — Welcome            ...  338 

The  Human  and  the  Divine              ...  338 

The  Fruitfulness  of  Sacred  Truth     ...  339 

Man's  Need  and  God's  Provision      ...  339 

The  Thirst  of  the  Soul  quenched     ...  340 

Vain  Expenditure  on  Things            ...  341 

The  Time  for  seeking  after  God        ...  342 
Man's  Preparations  for  receiving  God's 

Pardon               ...            ...            ...  342 

God  is  like  yet  unlike  Man                ...  343 
Change   and    Permanence   in   God'a 

Word 343 

CHAPTER  LVI. 

Ontward  Defects  and  Defilements  no 
Hindrance  to  Full  Communion  in 

the  Church  of  God          ...           ...  346 

When  their  Spiritual  Guides  go  astray, 

the  Flock  of  Christ  suffers            ...  346 

The  True  Ohservance  of  the  Sabbath  347 

The  Neglectful  Shepherds...           ...  348 

Service   ...           ...           ...           ...  349 

The  Attitude  of  Holy  Expectation  ...  350 

The  Open  Gate     ...           ...          ' ...  350 

Un&ithful  Ministry            ...            ...  351 

God's  Nearness  a  Plea        ...           ...  352 

The  Sabbath  a  Test  of  Obedience    ...  3.')2 

D  Isabled  Ones  sharing  God's  Blessings  353 

God's  House  of  Prayer  for  Everybody  3.53 

Worthless  Shepherds          ...           ...  854 

OHAPTEB  LVIL 

The  Ministry  of  Angels      ...           ...  859 

The  Humlli^  of  God         ...           ».  360 

Pictures  of  Idolatry            ...           ...  860 

The  Character  of  Jehovah  ...            ...  861 

The  Weariness  of  Life        ...            ...  362 

Three  Pictures  of  the  Human           ...  864 

Weariness  in  Sinful  Error  ...            ...  864 

The  Fate  of  Folly  and  the  Beward  of 

Wisdom            ...           ...           ...  865 

The  Greatness  of  God  and  the  Hope 

of  the  Humble  ...           ...            ...  865 


The  Course  of  the  Sool      ...  ...    866 

Mercy  and  Wrath  in  the  Death  of  the 

BighteouB         ...  ...  ...    867 

Insult  of  Gkxid  Men  is  Insult  of  God        368 
The  Worship  of  Stones       ...  ...    369 

The  Wt»rines8  of  Sinful  Ways  ...  369 
Wrong  Thoughts  of  God  keep  Men 

from  Bepentance  ...  ...    370 

The  New  Test  of  Beligion ...  ...  370 

The  Unrest  of  the  Wicked ...  «.    871 

CHAPTEB  LVIU. 

Bightfnl  and  Wrongful  Fasting  need 

to  be  carefully  distinguished  ...  874 
Eightful  and  WrongfuJ  Keeping  of  the 

Sabbath  need  to  be  distinguished ...  375 

True  and  Spurious  Fasting  ...  376 

The  Claims  of  the  Sabbath  ...  377 

Delight  in  God     ...  ...  m.  878 

Practical  Godliness  ...  ...  378 

A  Beligious  Fast ...  ...  ...  379 

The  Break  of  Day  ...  ...  379 

The  Sabbath  Ideal  ...  ...  379 

Beligion :  its  Semblance,  its  Substance, 

its  Beward        ...  ...  ...  880 

The  Day  of  Sacred  Best      ...  ...  381 

The     Ofienee    of    Merely     External 

Beligiousness    ...  ...  ...  382 

Selfishness  spoiltng  Beligious  Habits  382 

God's  Idea  of  Fasting  ...  ...  383 

Conditions  of  Answer  to  Prayer        ...  384 

Guided,  Provided,  and  Befreshed     m.  384 

The  Uuiversal  Sabbath-Lav  m.  885 

CHAPTEB  LIX 

The     tJnsatisfactoriness     of     Sinfol 

Courses  ...  ...  ...  888 

Tmth  the  Foundation  of  Morality    ...  389 

The  Church  Indefectible     ...  ...  390 

The  Separation  of  the  Soul  from  God  891 

Jehovah  as  Champion  of  the  People  392 

The  Divine  Ability  ...  ...  892 

Alienation  from  God  ...  m.  392 

Salvation— not  in  Man       „,  ...  893 

The  Successful  Standard    ...  ...  393 

The  True  and  the  False  Account  of 

Divine  Inactivity  ...  ...  893 

Webs  that  will  not  make  Garments  ...  394 

The  Goal  of  Guilt  ...  ...  895 

Human  Hopelessness  snd  Divine  Be- 

.M  M.  ...  395 


INDEX. 


Til 


TheHopeoftheBtuse        ...           ...  896 

Misoonseptions  of  the  Divine  Delay...  396 

Sin-Clouda  between  us  and  God       ...  397 

Sin  in  Thoughts  ...            ...           ...  898 

Salvation  by  Ood  through  Man        ...  398 

The  Standard  of  the  Spirit...           ...  399 

The  Gospel-Covenant         ...           ...  400 

CHAPTER  LX. 

The   Charaoteristics    of    the    Final 

Church  of  the  Redeemer...            ...  401 

The  Rebuilding  of  the  Temple         ...  404 

The  Favour  of  Jehovah  to  his  People  405 

The  Blessed  Dawn              ...            ...  406 

A  Promise  to  Israel            ...           ...  406 

Btemal  Day         ...           ...            ...  406 

Departed  Grief     ...           ...           ...  408 

Multiplication      ...           ...           ...  408 

The  Church  Triumphant    ...            ...  409 

The  Call  to  shine  if  we  have  Light ; 
or,  the  Duty  of  Doing  as  well  as 

Knowing            ...            ...            ...  410 

God's  Presence  the  Glory  of  Gkxl's 

House                ...            ...           ...  411 

Open  Gospel-Gates             ...            ...  411 

The  Condition  of  Xational  Prosperity  412 

Glorifying  the  Second  Temple          ...  412 

"  The  Mighty  One  of  Jacob  "           ...  413 

Our  Everlasting  Light        ...            ...  413 

The  Heaven  of  Universal  Righteous- 

11688       ■••                 •••                 •••                 •••  iX^ 


CHAPTER  LXL 

The  Purposes  of  Messiah's  Mission  ...  416 

Rejoicing  in  tlie  Lord         ...  ...  419 

Message  of  Grace  to  Zion  ...  ...  420 

Spiritual  Joy  in  the  Eternal  ...  421 

The  Coming  Saviour  ...  ...  421 

Comfort  and  Cheer  ...  ...  422 

Restoration  ...  ...  ...  422 

Fulness  of  Joy      ...  ...  ...  424 

The  Beneficent  Mission      ...  ...  424 

Christ  our  Comforter  ...  ...  424 

Privilege,  Reputation,  Hope  ...  425 

Wise  Exultation  ...  ...  ...  426 

Messiah's  Mission  to  the  Troubled  ...  426 
The  Year  of  Acceptance  and  the  Day 

of  Vengeance     ...  ...  ...  427 

God  glorified  in  the  Joyous  and  the 

Beautiful ...  427 


...    435 
...    436 


THEHE  PjLOI 

The  World's  Priests  and  Preachers  ...  428 

Blessed  Children  ...            ...            ...  428 

Joy  in  the  Divine  Adomings           ...  429 

CHAPTER  LXIL 

The    Teaching    of    Scripture    with 

Respect  to  Names            ...            ..,  431 

Promises  of  Future  Glory  ...           ...  432 

Tlie  Homeward  Call           ...            ...  433 

Fellowship  with  God         ...           ...  433 

From  Night  to  Noon  ,„ 

The  Value  of  Security,  etc. 

God's  Summons  to  the  Enslaved       ...  436 

Godly  Desires  for  the  Church          ...  437 

The  Lord's  New  Name  for  his  People  437 

The  Bunyan  Figure  of  the  Beulah- 

Laad  ...            ...            ...            ...  433 

The  Work  of  the  Praying  Men  amongst 

18       43a 

The  Mission  of   those   who    remove 

Hindrances        ...            ...            ...  439 

The  Nearness  of  the  Lord's  Coming 

used  as  a  Persuasion       ...            ...  440 

CHAPTER  LXm. 

The   Idumseans    a    Type    of  God's 

Enemies            ...            ...            ...  444 

God  affiicted  in  the  Afflictions  of  his 

People                ...            ...            ...  446 

The  Right  of  God's  People  to  address 
him  with  Complaint  and  Expostula- 
tion    ...            ...            ...           ...  447 

An  Outburst  of  Thanksgiving         ...  447 

The  Remembrance  of  the  Past          ...  448 

Tlie  Church's  Pi-ayer           ...            ...  449 

The  Coming  Saviour          ...           ...  449 

The  Earlier  and  the  Later  Redemp- 
tion   ...            ...            ...            ...  450 

The  Greatness  of  God's  Goodness    ...  451 

How  God  feels  and  why  he  acts       ...  451 

The  Unvarying  Father       ...           ...  452 

The  Conqueror  from  Edom               ...  453 

Edom  on  the  Skirts  of  Palestine      ...  453 

The  Lord's  Loving-Eindnesses        ...  454 

God  the  Saviour  ...            ...            ,„  455 

God's  Suffering  Sympathy...            ...  456 

Grieving  the  Spirit             ...            ...  458 

The  Spirit  of  God  in  Moses              ...  458 

Good  News  concerning  Ood              ...  459 


▼ifl 


INDEX. 


CHAPTER  LXIV. 

FAOI 

Pleas  for  Mercy     ...           ...           ...  461 

Longing  for  the  Appearance  of  God  462 

The  Ciy  of  Humiliation  and  of  Hope  462 

The  Averted  Face              ...           ...  463 

Hope  in  God        ...           ...           ...  464 

Life  as  a  Leaf      ...           ...           ...  465 

Taking  Hold  of  God          466 

A  Twofold  Plea 467 

Prayer  for  Humbling  Manifestations 

of  God              467 

Man's  Ignorance  of  God's  Goodness 

to  him               ...            ...            ...  468 

The  Sincere  Man's  Estimate  of  him- 

self 468 

Onr  Father  and  our  Potter              »•  469 


CHAPTER  LXV. 


474 


Men's  Sins  recorded  in  God's  Book  .. 
Where  Sin  abounds,  Grace  yet  more 
abounds  ...  ...  ...    474 

The  Contrasts  of  the  Religious  with 


the  Irreligious  Life 

... 

475 

The  New  Creation              ... 

475, 477 

Threatenirigs  and  Promises 

••• 

476 

The  Doom  of  the  Idolaters ... 

••• 

477 

Requited  Tod       

•  •■ 

478 

The  OffensivenesB  and  the  Doom 

of 

Sin      ...            ... 

•  •• 

479 

The  Hopeless       ... 

••• 

479 

From  Depression  to  Prosperity 

••• 

479 

Tha  Christian  View  of  Ago 

••■ 

480 

•»• 

480 

THEHE  PAOB 

Divine  Reproaches             ...           ...  481 

The  Pride  of  Superior  Holiness        ...  481 
Contrasted  Lots  of  those  who  serve 

God  and  those  who  forsake  him    ...  482 

A  New  Earth       ...           ...           ...  483 

The  Woe  of  Aged  Sinners  ...           ...  484 

Swift  Answers  to  Prayer    ...           .1.  484 

CHAPTER  LXVL 

God  to  be  worshipped  in  Buildings, 
though  no  Building  can  be  worthy 

ofhim...            ...           ...           ...  489 

The    Blessedness    of    the   Restored 

Church              ...  490 

The   Purging  of  the  Earth  by  the 

Destruction  of  the  Wicked             ...  491 

Eternal  Suffering  and  Eternal  Glory  491 

Spiritual  and  Unspiritual  Worship  ...  492 

The  Enemies   of   Jehovah    and    his 

People               ...            ...            ...  493 

Sympathy  with  the  Church's  Joy     ...  494 

The  Manifestation  of  Jehovah          ...  494 

Tender  Condition  ...            ...            ...  495 

The  Rebuke  of  Unrighteousuesi       ...  495 

God  our  Comforter              ...            ...  496 

"TheSlainof  the  Lord"  ...            ...  496 

A  Vision  of  the  Future       ...            ...  496 

The  Place  of  God's  Rest     ...            ...  497 

"  Peace  like  a  River  "         ...            ...  499 

The   Lord's    Indignation;    or,    the 

Divine  Goodness  and  Severity       ...  499 

Vain  Attempts  to  sanctify  Self         ...  500 
The  Universal  Worship     m          —606 


