ii!!!;






.....Uj-IH.

!M|iii-
1 iiiuruUiHtiiiJ

'lIU nil IMl
niMlllj li'M



tUHllI tdlllKt

Jill III uiUiiir

I (tuiin iiiM

lIMMIlllIK
llllltlllllll
lUflllillU
III



lUHIItll



I 1 (II ,
I II (Hi



Una



r.onrjn i uNiVFRSiw lihrahy



3 1924



01



IL4IIIM Kill MMl<1(HIMt**lf

i4ui>iiuitiJMiiilini!iiit(U

l4lU(IUl( 11411111111. 1 UMfU(
uillUUlllUulcilliUlMUft^
li UK lllllltUJumiUUMH



iilMi I iinnii



Mill iiii



lit liitii' la

IIKtllllll Hi
llltllKUUJHtMl,



ilhiiiiitiiiit




umi uHuiu



.-.,. ...a.,Tll( l[ |IUUUliniHUH(»!l(HUHm|HU«(lU(IH(iHUl"(llU««^

tiiiiiiHiiMii lit! ii{ t(< H iUmtiAitimuiiunuuiHituMHHHmmiHinuiimuii^

i'HimiHK-iun- ■^■--

,.............„.iau«nnui(«i-. -,.--,

,,, -HHiii ni(m(Uiiuiw<(muHiH«wi:imiH(m(it««
mimHUuUiiiHiiUiiiHUHitiutiiumuuiiiiiuiuuuum



( HHHIH in- -- ..

)Hintllll44l(< \\\ H

lltll1|tlill('« t^ t+

IjHHilHHlH' f



Ht^lulHIHIH l^ If if H («i«4«H«MniHI(«««HWnH(ltU«(!«ttillHWI«««l«(Hl«MH'.«tMiIM "(i' ' >i x '



HHiHlllHIliHm ., ,
4(HH1(1HM»"H' i*4"

MH^jlltHIHItltl^ If <li{^

TIin]UHllil(4«(( in « tl «lii4Mh«Jl«Uu<H<HH«lU«HulMMl(nt«[{»«tMtU«UtI«'.Hl'-«'.'.U'«i"»l"
tHiHHHHimtliii H- it H H«tlHmi«««l«l«Hli(»«UnUllH«MMlUl««itUiiUUttHi(«««UM«Hl^tM"

(i)mMMllH«"« IH " Ifi^MOWHiHiHIflHWUHlttMlt'^ilHtlMWIHtllfMttHMMHUWUmtHt'W^'WMV'l'fM*''

HlimHlidHiUi iH It ^^^^«^IlH«Hl|H^^t^^Ht^^^l^«^^(^^«m^^J^»^ti^t^««■lfK««««««^«t«««««t^^I ik-'h"m ""

^MtHHIHHHMH ll^^^tf 11^4MtM41H«M«WItl«H14Hl«iH1ttHim<H4UUHIltmM«K««if««M««« 't*«'41 « «U



HH«H [« U tl«M4M41HiiH««1Itim«4H1«iH1ttH««<H4UUHIltmM«K«««««M««« 't*«'41 ^'

;im«(ii(iii(tmn ill ih m«HHmf4fHW4iHH«m(««mf(ii«miH«H«tHMHtum««iiiHi«««M u4h««



!«}|4444(ijI(44iHU fi It Mf4ffl«H«H44«lilHHMii44*t44l4«llklH4fwil44H«M4«414«4««l*W«t«4«Ht«4t4t it



,,... ,....,....► .. " U«ti4)««44i41««4«W444(im«t«««l«4«iW4*vW«t«mt«««4f«4'««t«f *'t



:»t(tmtitifwtmf
!44mm»m*i«4fr
miitmttitttittiii'
tittmtt«)««tn«-



W«£W«W«5u^-y



<»0"-lWiC-«-«t«v^ l



I (UHuElHltl)Ill!M(l((tlI({{MHi{f4IU'IUtiHt41l(Uui({4(H{(i^B

iHumHi44<(ii(nnmiliiiri<i»(«iui)i(iU((m((iitt(hit«»4«^R
itinIitInMHtihniiuw»Nniin{nM«iiHitmfU'.i«(»<«uijM(«
H(nHMimuiUHmHHini;u"«i4iii«n^iH{i(HrH«(H(i{iriruu(('.t«tui"wv
uiiili«ttMiMU«(M«iiui(fH»t(f«(i<niit(iHf(U[mu«{(H(t[ua<ui((t(<''U(«

H(miuimiHiiin!imtmiml«(H((mnfiunnmm«u««i(««(iut«(n (<m'
(fi«(i(fU«i«iiHiH«niimrtnH[mH«mittHH(tm«Hfi!Ufi{t(t(i«iii'-< i m
HUH)inH»4ti(iWH«"niHtH«im(«<iitut(Ht[««nu((t[(irruf!Htnn d'

»U4IH«l«444liH«(UH<(tl(«Ml«lt«IHl("4HU««HM«Ul(M(r.4«^<H«'.U'M '
M f»«ltI((44{l(HIIHt4HtiU!l«l(i«imHtMU«il(U«(i|UlMUtMWH<(«i('-<H 'M



.«tmKmu(iH(iitm")[(i(iilMHnmnt»«ifttHmni«4«H((«'.i(Wn
4m4»H»MmHMmi(i(H(umn'.ununt(iit(ti(»iwn«Htmt<i«««« <

i«(({iiM44iiH4l((«iiHimft(ntr<m(tnm(U(H<«tnt!<tii««!("«««t* <






m4iimnm«4i«t m\ « 44««Hif+«4t1lHHm*«44HtiM«««M1H«H«M^t««ii«t^^44M4«««fl«tn4t «f fi fl" H I
44Hitl»»H<;Il*<"i Ht1 « 4mt4l«*4flH141*(44«(«H!I«Mit4aift"«t««*tt««*M«««MI«HUMitMt4t t fmt * «Him 't

^4i4tHlMJl«4444k it M \k H44Ht4HH4hM444Mt«4H444ilMMM««4444'«I«444(M«mil«44«««4*MlM 1

«iitu ■ ■

_ .J«44«t

14441HHtm(«f4«






4tmi«4H4«H«MmM«t<tMiHH«H«t4HrM«m(t(miHM<«««4«t««<t««< WtHt««tt«*4«H-W««Cyftt«y«'C^-ggJiW^^



lijtC4Ht4tttH«HUjHi«l



!V|M(«I|I«« H4 « H""tH5fK44(«ll1««4«4M4«l44t«««t«m4mW«l(«tt«W^ ^*«f W^<*'«*"t*'"iS?*ii^;211'5S:2S'^:^S;S£^^^'^

„„...,. .....X... ... Hi««W«4|lU«Mrt««44«««lMS4Mt4k^^^

«li4t44lHH(fiH4lt4fcH414141tH4t4t'H44m<«414im4«««14U«4U444t4«rt««4i«W*«W<W4««*mMt'tm««««

4i444HHHt« m M\ IM h 44 4 44444444 414444 44444 W4H4il44««444W 44 1 H4t4444 444 l«44tti«<«*HM mHMnt«t«<« t Wt4 « I * t <«*W(^!
HM444|t4»44(444llu Ht « 1(44l44«44««4H44M4444ri444Mlfltkl44444t4444«t44t4ittt44t««41«4iM««^
H :,ii{};j;jJ,1„iJ, H U 444444444H4lii4H4il4l4t4m44l«4»4l44(44*144444444414444444ll4*«t4M<44tmi««-'«mfl^^



(44*Mi«444fHiii44tl«it 144 1444444(144444t14M4Mtmtt44t4444444444t444t444«4t«444t44444«Mt4*«Hai**t44«««««-ia«««SH«ttt«>
14 HH+Jrtlllt 14IH 4t 4t 4«4il44M4«144*444l44M«»4t4t4MI444444f44M4144«4t41«1444M44W4t«fM444^^
t4irjn4444"44U*4MM«' |+^«1«1«W^



Hi H4 H444i444M H iam4i4ii(tt441t414t44tt414«t«44144t44441M«m4lM4I414
4 llmHHHMmt 18 m [4444tl44*1«i*4t414M4«444f ^'^ -.—>.-« ..*«.«,^^« .^

t444l4MM44H«H4« t« 144 m444H4mt4mt4««4«t1
f444t4nil4HIJfH4H 444 [44 |t4I44«H144t4t4«444i4t444i

ilimiriltJil llilt* lit « l!l!4*144m4«4l%«W4«44«444«4««
|H4H4M!1im4tf « 41 tMl44444 4«4«4W414144«4j4lt4t4t4«44««^^^^



..^4444ti44*4«4*4t414M4«44444t44i«W*(44H44ttt44414f444«Wtt<1V4^t*mi4I*44t«tt4£««'««««WH£
!4t*4M44li444flW4ttW«4«tt4I444tt444«4*t44*f4f44lt4444«44T4H4144t4441<«m
- ■■!---" t,... -„ —■"'"—""■"""MtMt««4m44tf'4'*t44M44'«W1



IMt44«414t4444t44444t4t4444n4t44I44tfMI*KK«tt*M«<«'t«-«M«««it«at«M
lIti444«44<«4«414ttt4444«4444tt«fl«4««t«4t«44*4f«M44-M«44««-nWtW



4flH4It»41H4«14141
4I4f4 1 14*444444114 M4 \.

444111111



HHMimtl m HI l444«444i44tM«4«4«tt4«44fl44tt44<4444t1«««4«14144(41(44ttMt44«4ttMtt*«W144'lf"

m«t mit If (14 tWtM414«l41l44t4f4t4tt4144«444!44444t14t4*414w|(4M4t4t1ftr«4tmit«mim«^

{J]ji'4^i]^1 }„ {{fl tHi44l44«444444tl4444t44444414144444m44t144111«4tt44ttt41Ui4t44«Wl2;rtmt2***^^^



44HH11 44 (414H4tt4t4( t43t44l44l141l144H4«41t4t44444^^^44^11144Mt+4^^41«^t4^4^'14W4W4«rtf4«1Wtt^^

!4 im44444414444t44144 14t41t«44 1«11 4l1t44*Mt441«#l«tW44<4W-''^-^--^-
l414444414H4«4414tt4«4«44M 144411 4«4tfttt«««W11«*« tWtfl
l441441t11t41tt44«imft14f1444444t14114W+W414144tl4m««1WH

., „.^,J44li44«mm4im444114411t41t41(«444t44«M44t1141«WtmiWl«1 ,

liltlillll I H 1H1 414 At fkl^ltlHW H414144M144 tl4t4m44t444m«4imi'mittMimM«4 (♦1«tt«l««1



i..,.i.i.i.i.i..-M.^ ..' ...J.... ..,.„....—, .......mn4t4i4«ti4i.t-.--..-r- re c— i" ^----

HHtt1H444lH44H« 14* 4« 4ll«44im44444114444411111«t41t«44t«1imit4ttM1111«WTO4.W4<41t4«ttt««tK««tt^ -

441441 14 H1444tl444It 14< 114 {l«YHH444414444144414tt4444«14t11441111«4«ttW««W11«4«t4Wfl«J«^^



i i 1444 i H i 1 \K\ n4t4tiiM44i(3i i iHMiimti-iMii BiHMttwwiHWt '4m««ttHit4i4tTtinttjiii4«^

■■■' -*"M«m«mm«444114444411-"— "*"""— ^'"'^*"""

111 ilHiH14444414H4«44i4t— .„,„.--. ^^^^^^

4t4til4414i41liH4i«fMf 141 44ttl441444t11t41tt44«11I1fM4M444144t14114t«1tH411t44«4t«««1W+41«mt^^

*14r«4444411t111fW HI Ml lIi44li141*t44«Ml«144«44441f4im(«444t444Mli4t1411«WtmiWlt«m^
tt"tl«411tH1H1411t ttf M< lim«4H114144M144t14t4m44t444trt«4imHt«tW1t1«1*11 -"-"-'— J
1H»« Iinmt4lt4« m 14M'Hl444lH1f(!
414144 1t41H4fl1H4* 4n 44* 4114111 l*mi
H4414iH44441t4tlHt l«pffl1H«*«"«t'

■■^tf" .....^-



!f 1 mM4«4m41tt«««tt«t'



Mttlllllltf



.Hlttlltfli MIWtHIIWttM-Mm'
M4fl4-tm«tl«4M1ttt1tt4«l«t«1i -....

[4witm4«t4«ii f nicittuwttmiti

"'11ttt«114W«r4lMtt41tft1tt«««



4t4HttM414irt4144tfltHiit* MllWHIIIItltlMIIIIIIWIKMIIHl,. „-,,-.,-. , -^ -^ -^ ^.^.^

imt4mt4tt«441Hf m rtt H414*M4{«41t4tf114tt1ttt1tt(t(tm4*14441lit14«4timihl4Itl11ttM«ttt«ttOT^^



:|ffl«!«i«8J!SK! ffi s; !!l«a'1!1!fflffii'ffl«ffi!if1ffi!e



■ ■■■- -^'^^ff^f Hit'' — ' ' ..—.-.—.— .^j. -.—"—.. ^...-..-.**..*»i-i

i« ifiiifliHtiiiiiittfmm'ltWMMtHi+iW'nm



114*11 444411*4t44*4T <4flMT (11 « 141111144 fWtlltIf till H11M1-W11«imimi«11 Wtttmtttl-
i,'^}}}{4^Ji;iJi|lii(tlfrtM+ 11414441(141 ftlhl14411t1t11«t111441flWtttmi1tll111tt«t11441*
mJJJJSJmSJmmm* ffi 4-W fl14»4«41l444444M«44t1l4Tt«1114t111t!«imiK-' ■■'^■"'^



[4ntt44itttiM4««iW4iiitrmi«!fm!!'



[+^ Wtniittl'HI 1414 till 114141411 mi111i111tttltttttt«11

11+ nw4iii4i«i44ii4imti4ijfiiiiittit«iititttttrt*tm

^n* «tM4tt«t1t1I«11(f144tHmit1li4«lH1rt«4«+mi4t4'

'■ iiiiiiiitmiti4itiiitmittiitiim4iit4iiitttit«tmtti««wili-«tmtitiwi
irtm4ittnmiTiimtttiiit4«iititiiMiii«mittttitm«tHttttttM!^<*W4i_^

H141441 f t44m444114M lI111l411«1lll1l1«lM«1Mlit41*14l|t11*«ttl«*«mf^^




CORNELL

UNIVERSITY

LIBRARY





The original of tiiis book is in
the Cornell University Library.

There are no known copyright restrictions in
the United States on the use of the text.



http://www.archive.org/details/cu31924101104879



THE

PULPIT COMMENTARY,

EDITKD BY THE

VERY REV. H. D. M. SPENCE, D.D.,

DEAN OF GLOUCESTER;
AND BY THE

REV. JOSEPH S. EXELL, M.A.

WITH

I N T R O D tJ C T I O N S

BY XHE



VTIN. AECHDEACON F. W. FAERAR, D.D., F.E.S.—RIGHT KEY. H. COTTEEILL, D.D., F.E.S.a

—YESY EEV. PEINCIPAL J. TULLOCH, D.D.— EEY. CANON G. EAWLINSON, M.A.

— EEV. A. PLUMMER, M.A., D.D.



FUNK & WAGNALLS COMPANY
Nbw. York and Toronto.



THE



PULPIT COMMENTARY,



EDITED BY THE



REV. CANON H. D. M. SPENCE, M.A.,

VICAR AND RURAL DEAN OF ST. PANCRAS, AND EXAMINING CHAPLAIN TO THE lORD
BISHOP OF GLOUCESTER AND BRISTOL ;



AND BY THE



RET. JOSEPH S. EXELL,

EDITOR OF "THE HOMILETIC QUARTERLY."



JOSHUA.

Introlrnclions.

REV. A. PLUMMER, M.A., and REV. J. J. LIAS, M.A.

(Ejeposition anb f omiletics.
REV. J. J. LIAS, M.A.,

TICAR OF ST. EDWARD'S, CAMBRIDGE, AND LATE LECTURER IN HEBREW *T
LAMPETER COLLEGE.

igomilics bg barions <^titl)orB.

REV. E. D. PRESSENSE, D.D. REV. R. GLOVER.

REV. J. WAITE, B.A. REV. W. F. ADENEY, M.A.

REV. S. R. ALDRIDGE, LL.B., B.A.



FUNK & WA#NALLS COMPANY
New Yohk an* T«r«nt<».



INTEODUCTION

TO IH>

EISTOEICAL BOOKS : JOSHUA TO NEHEMIAH.

■T

THE EBV. A. PLUMMEE, M.A.,

HASIBB or UHITSBBUY OOIXBaB, DUBHAH.



In tragio interest alone the history of the children of Israel dnring the period befora
ns — from Joshua to Nehemiah — ^is unique.* Perhaps some of us in the experience
of life have known what it is to see a young man of good birth and ability enter
upon a noble inheritance which has long been waiting for him, and for the manage-
ment and enjoyment of which wise and affectionate friends have been giving him
the best training and preparation in their power. Such a sight kindles n hopeful
enthusiasm, which, however, in thoughtful minds will be tempered with something
of anxiety. Perhaps we have known also what it is in such a case to have our
enthusiasm kept up but for a very short time, our hopes only very partially ful-
filled, while our anxiety is more than justified. The fair inheritance, during a
career of some brilliancy, chequered by grievous mistakes, is ruinously mishan. jd,
and at last lost altogether ; and the gifted owner, soured by disappointment and
vitiated by reckless misconduct, becomes an outcast — almost a beggar. Such things
are not uncommon. And there are cases not frequent, but often possible, where,
after weary years of struggling, the ruined outcast wins his way back to the
possessions which Jie had (mainly by his own fault) lost. What a contrast between
the first taking possession and the second I The brightness of the inheritance is
gone, and still more the brightness of him who enters upon ii Heavier work,
heavier responsibihtieB lie before him ; and he has only crippled resources, ia
health, in energy, and in fortune, for meeting both. The task which oonfi-onted
Hm at the beginning of life confronts him again at the end of it. But the work
has waxed while he has waned ; and he has all his work to do with cold and palsied
hands. There is stiU much to hope for, much to be thankful for ; but more to
regret, stiU more to fear. The joy of returning is almost counterbalanced by the
misery of contrasting the past with the present, and what is with what might have
been (Ezra iii. 12, 18).

An instance of this kind awakens keen interest and sympathy when we witness
it in the case of an individual. How much more, then, when the chief actor is not
an individual, but a whole people, and that people one of the leading, one of the

• In writinK this Introduction the works of the foUowing writers among others have been
used :— Edersheim, Ewald, Perowne, Smith, Stanley; together with articles m the Dictionary
of the Bible and various oommentarie*.

JOSHUA. A



INTEODUCTION TO THE HISTOBIOAL BOOKS:



typical nations of the world I The remark, therefore, which was made at the out-
get seems to be justmed ; that in tragic interest alone the history of the Israelites
from Joshua to Nehemiah is unique. And of course for the phUosophio student,
and still more for the Christian student, the dramatic element in the history of the
Jews is far from being either the most interesting or the most important. Whether
the religion be regarded as true or false, this much must be admitted by the
philosopher; that to Judaism we owe the spirit of religion, as to Greece that of
culture and philosophy, and to Eome that of order and law ; and these things com-
bined make up nearly the whole of what is really precious in civilisation. If again,
as St. Ambrose says, Novum testamentum in vetere latet, vetua testamentum in
novo patet; and if, as many of us know from the deepest experience, our own
spiritual vicissitudes, both as a Church and as individuals, are writ large, for
guidance and for warning, in the chequered history of the Chosen People ; then for
the Christian this history must ever have an interest, which, for profandity and
extent, is absolutely without a rival.

A comparison between the two chief figures which stand, the one at the begin-
ning, and the other at the close of our period, will be suggestive and instructive.
Joshua and Nehemiah seem to be alike in this, that both were bom in the land of
captivity, and both were taught by serving in youth how to command in manhood.
Joshua was bom in Egypt, " the house of bondage," and had reached middle life
before he quitted it; and we first catch sight of Nehemiah as cupbearer to
Artaienes Longimanus, king of Persia, in the winter palace at Shushan. But how
different wag the condition both of their servitude and of their command ! Joshua'«
servitude was one of suffering and degradation, Nehemiah's of luxury and honour.
Yet, if Joshua was braced by his lot, Nehemiah would seem to have been in no
wise enervated by his. And if the effortless overthrow of the walls of Jericho is in
strange contrast with the painful rebuilding of the waUs of Jerusalem, and the six
yearn' rapid conquest of six strong nations, with the tedious watching against
treacherous foes, yet the two great leaders are splendidly alike in the disinterested-
nefls of their motives and the integrity of their conduct. Joshua, after forty years
bondage in Egypt and forty years wandering in the wUdemess, might have claimed,
»t the age of fourscore years and over, to be allowed to hand over to one of •
younger generation the toils and responsibUities of an invading general, to be suc-
ceeded by the invidious labour of dividing the conquered land. But no such plea
ever crosses his lips. Nehemiah gave up a post of influence and emolument at the
first court in the world in order to rescue his defenceless feUow-countrymen from
the misery of a ceaseless menace. And in the discharge of the difficult oflaces
which they undertook this may be said of both — and it can be said of very few
leaders of whom we know so much — that there is not a single blot upon their cha-
racter. If Nehemiah is somewhat self-conscious, while Joshua seems to have all
the sunplicity of a child, yet in both we have the beautiful spectacle of great ability
and great authority employed without any taint of selfish aims. It may weU add
to our pleasure in studying the period which Ues before us to find that it begins
and ends with so conspicuous an example of true patriotism and disinterested
statesmanship.

ThK OONQnBST OF C^NAAlr.

" Moses My servant is dead." Such is the Divine greeting to the already aged
Joshua with which the book that bears his name opens. It was a message that
n»i«t have tried even hig fortitude ; and it came from Hitti who alone could send it



JOSHUA TO NEHEMTAH.



with assurance of perfect certainty. Moses was dead— just at the very moment, it
would seem, when his people and those who had helped him to lead them needed
his guidance most. The ascent of Pisgah was not to be, Kke the ascent of Mount
Sinai, followed by a return, after which their leader was even more divinely
illuminated than before. They were never to see him again, nor even to know
where his bones were laid. Henceforth they must be content with the guidance of
" Moses' minister " (Exod. xxiv. 13 ; Num. xxvii. 18 ; Deut. i. 88). It would seem
as if they loyally accepted Joshua. Certainly he accepted with childlike trust and
simplicity the high but heavy charge that was thus suddenly laid upon him.
Neither elated nor depressed by it, he at once set to work to carry outthe Divine
command. The remaining thirty years of his life are a cahn, unwavering response
to the exhortation of Jehovah : " Have not I commanded thee ? Be strong and ol
a good courage ; be not afraid, neither be thou dismayed : for the Lord thy God is
with thee whithersoever thou goest " (Josh. i. 9).

It is easy for those who have laid down for themselves as an axiom, that a
miracle is an impossibility, to set aside the Book of Joshua as unhistorical, because
of the large amount of miraculous details contained in it. Even if the miracles of
the Book of Joshua stood alone, we might fairly protest against so summary a mode
of dealing with what bears aU the impress of historic reality. But the miracles
which attended the conquest of Canaan stand or fsQl with aU those which have
marked God's dealings with His Chosen People, whether imder the Law or under
Gospel ; and to a fair mind these are simply a question of evidence. The simple
truthfulness of the author of the Book of Joshua, and the worthiness of the object
for which the miracles which he records are wrought, may rightly be allowed to teU
for, rather than against, the truth of miracles as a whole.

It is also possible from another point of view to do but scant justice to the con-
tents of the Book of Joshua. What (it might be asked), at this distance of time
and space, have we to do with the invasion of an insignificant tract of country, less
than half as large as Scotland, by one of the endless swarms of nomads that find a
home in Asia ? But even firom this Umited point of view the conquest of Palestine
by the Israelites is by no means devoid of interest or significance. It fills an
important place in a long series of invasions of the same tract of country, which
occupy the pages of history almost from its earliest chapters down to oiu: own day.
What conquests may have preceded those of the Philistines we hardly know. It ia
likely enough that those whom they displaced were themselves invaders ; but that
old race of " giants," who seem to us hke the traces of a primseval age preserved in
shadowy outhne in the rocks, is too Uttle known to us for anything to be asserted
positively as to their origin. The Semitic Ammonites, Moabites, and Edomites
contributed with the Philistines to the destruction of these primitive populations.
After them come the children of Israel ; to be followed in a long train through
three thousand years of history by Egyptians, Assjrrians, Babylonians, Greeks,
Eomans, Arabs, Saracens, Crusaders, French, and Enghsh. And who will venture
to say that the hst of iavaders is closed ?

But it is a very narrow view to take of the conquest of Canaan by Joshua to
regard it merely as one of a series of more or less similar invasions of the same
territory. In its most important aspects the conquest vmder Joshua stands quite
apart from most of the other conquests of Palestine, and in some aspects stand*
alone. Along vrith those of the Assyrians, Babylonians, and Bomans, it was the
f nifilm nnt of deolaratious made by the Almighty beforehand ; but whereas they



ir INTRODUCTION TO THE HISTOEIOAL BOOKS:

took place in falfihuent of a threatened pnnisliiaent, it was the folfilinsnt of a
promised blessing. And the yictories of Joshna were not only the snbjeot of
prophecy, they were a prophecy themselves — a type and an earnest of the blessings
whioh Jehovah had in store for His people, and on their darker side a type and an
earnest of His judgments npon those who refuse to know Him and fight against
Him.

In the plan of the campaign against the Canaanites we see that it yr&s a
sagacious appreciation of ability whioh caused Moses to select Joshua as a com-
mander in the battle with Amalek at Eephidim, where he won his first victory
Bome years before. Joshua certainly had some, if not most, of the qualities which
make a great general— firmness and gentleness, winning ready trust and obedience
fi:om his men, decision and rapidity, whereby the enemy was sometimes virtnaUy
defeated before the action began. The plan of the invasion shows true military
bWII. Joshua succeeded in doing what French generals attempted and signally
faMed to do in the recent war with Germany. He chose a weak point near the
middle of the fi-ontier and pushed on to the centre of the country and beyond it,
thus cutting the invaded land in two. The southern half was conquered or won
over before the northern half had quite recovered fi-om its panic, or could agree what
to do against the invaders. The south being successfully subdued, the north was
then conquered in like manner. The Canaanites were beaten in detail. Prom the
miraculous ford at Jordan he pushed on to Jericho, firom Jericho to Ai, fi-om Ai to
Gibeon, and firom Gibeon to the Beth-horons, where his first great decisive battle
was fought and won against the five kings of the Amorites, on the same spot where
Judas MaccabsBus more than twelve centuries later as triumphantly vanquished
the Syrian army under Seron. There is no need to trouble ourselves with specula-
tions as to the way in whioh the standing still of the sun and moon at the prayer
of Joshua are to be reconciled with modem science. The mode of all miracles
eludes us : the fact is all that concerns us to know. And if we cannot know the
way in which somethiag is created out of nothing, water becomes wine, and the
like, it is idle to ask how that way is to be reconciled with other things. The rising
and setting of the sun is always an illusion to our sight, for hght takes time to
travel. Science itself tells us that under certain conditions hght travels more
slowly than at other times, and those conditions are in the Almighty's control.
He who said, " Let there be hght," can stiU make the Hght do His bidding, and did
so in a signal manner at Beth-horon, that His servants might once more be assm-ed
that He was with them and fought for them, and that the foul inhabitants of
Canaan might be dismayed.

The victory on the road between the two Beth-horons was soon foUowed by the
others. Makkedah, Libnah, Lachish, Eglon, Hebron, and Debir (Kiriath-sepher),
were captured one after another. And as it is said of Lachish alone that Israel
'took It on the second day" (Josh. x. 32), we are perhaps to understand that
a smgle day sufficed for the capture of the other cities, so irresistible did the
Israe ites under Joshua appear to be. " So Joshua smote aU the country of the
hiUs (the mountain district of Judah), and of the south (the i^geb, a limestone tract,
haH wilderness), and of the vale (the lowlands, or "plain of the Philistines")
and of the springs (or perhaps the slopes, i.e., the ewelUng uplands between tha
"vale and the " hills "), and aU their kmgs : he left none remaining, but utterlv
flestroyed aU that breathed, as the Lord God of Israel commanded (Josh. x. 40)

XhiM, in a o»mpaign of a few weeks at the most, tb« conquest of the "south was



JOSHUA TO NEHEMIAH.



•ceomplished. But even wlien we have recognised the excellence of the plan of the
campaign, and the rapidity with which Joshua carried it out, we might still be
surprised at his ahnost uahroken success, if it were not for the fact that " the Lord
fought for Israel," and gave to them the elements as their aUies. This southern
portion of Palestine, Judah, Benjamin, and Ephraim, are strategically very strong,
and capable of being obstinately defended. The deep valleys of Judah, and the
ravines of Benjamin, running right and left from the central backbone, cut up the
country into a number of more or less isolated eminences, equally suggestive of a
hill-fort for defence, or a "high place" for worship. The very names Gibeon,
Gibeah, Geba, which all mean " MU," point to the physical character of the district
It shows what a panic had fallen upon the inhabitants that these natural defences
were not utilised in withstanding the invaders. The fate of Bavarian armies in the
Tyrol in the present century sufficiently illustrates what would be the probable
result of an invasion of southern Palestine, if the country were stoutly defended by
the population. But in this case the inhabitants were " discomfited " (ch. x. 10 ;
comp. Judges iv. 15 ; 1 Sam, vii. 10 ; 2 Sam. xxiL 15) ; troubled and dismayed by
Ood, so that they could not hold together and organize a systematic resistance.

The conquest of northern Palestine follows. The combination of the five kingg
in the south arranged by Adoni-Zebek, king of Jerusalem, is imitated by Jabin,
king of Hazor, who hopes to make a more successful combination of native
sovereigns in the north. To strengthen it he tries to include such of the northern
tribes also as would venture to try their fortune again — the Amorites and the
Hittites, with the stiU unoonquered Jebusites. The attempt is so far Bucoessfiil
that he gathered together " much people, even as the sand that is upon the sea
shore in multitude, with horses and chariots very many " (Josh. li. 4). But once
more the promised help of Jehovah and the rapidity of Joshua's movements
secure the victory for Israel. Without waiting to be attacked, " Joshua came, and
aU the people of war with him, against them by the waters of Merom suddenly;
and they fell upon them " (ch. xi. 7). The result was the utter defeat of the con-
federates, a defeat which carried with it the submission of the north, as that at the
Beth-horons had decided the fate of the south. The extermination of the Anakim
followed, that old giant race of which we know so little ; and then " the land rested
from war " (ch. xi 23). The conquest of Palestine, so far as it required the united
forces of all Israel, was over ; not that there -was not an immense deal still to be
done in putting down risings, in consolidating what had been won, in capturing
isolated and still unconquered cities ; but this was left for the most part to the
energy of the tribe to which the territory in question was assigned. The warlike
half of Joshua's great task was accomplished : the more peaceful work of dividing
the conquered territory between the victorious tribes remained. The second hali
of the Book of Joshua (chs. xiii. — xxii.), the Domesday Book of Palestine, is mainly
taken up with the details of the distribution. They are no less honourable to the man
who carried them out than the details of the campaign which rendered them
possible. The division of Palestine among the tribes will bear comparison for
equity, sagacity, and permanent results with perhaps most divisions of conquered
territory in modem times, from the Norman conquest of England downwards.
With characteristic unselfishness he waited until every one else had received their
share before asking anything for himself; and then it was but a small portion in
the rough mountain country that had been assigned to his own tribe of EphrainL
Here he buUt the city of Timnath-Serah, and spent the remainder of his days.



INTEODUOTION TO THE HISTOEIOAL BOOKS:



How long he enjoyed the rest which something like a centniy of toil had esnied,
we do not know, for there is no clear indication of the number of years occupied by
the conquest and division of the land. But he reached the age of a hundred and
ten, and the end of his life was in harmony with the rest of it. His last public act
was to summon the tribes with their officers to Shechem, abeady a place of solemn
associations (Josh. viii. 30—85 ; Gen. lii. 6, 7 ; xxxiii. 18 — 20 ; iixv. 2, 4), and the
destined resting-place of the bones of Joseph (Josh. xxiv. 32), and gave them a
farewell charge to remain ever faithful to Jehovah. It might seem as if such a
charge could scarcely be needed ; self-interest alone would suffice to secure fidelity ;
for never before or since has an invading force had such manifest help from Heaven,
But Joshua knew his own nation. The murmurings and rebellions and idolatries
in the wilderness were stiU fresh in his memory ; and therefore, almost with his
last breath, he exhorted them to beware of the abominations with which they had
come in contact, and reminded them of the consequences both of obedience and
disobedience. It is not as a warrior that the aged commander addresses them : it
is not to talk over old campaigns, or to stir them up to future conquests, that he
has sent for them : rather as one on the brink of the grave he would speak to them
of the one thing needful — hohness and the fear of the Lord. " And it came to
pass after these things, that Joshua the son of Nun (no longer " Moses' minister,"
but now like Moses) the servant of the Lord, died, being a hundred and ten yean
old " (Josh. xxiv. 29). Thus, in the simpUcity of mind in which he had lived, and
fought, and ruled, this aged servant of the Lord passed away to that better country,
of which the one which he had conquered was but a figure, and to a closer know-
ledge of Him under whose visible command he bad fought at Jericho (ch. v. 13 —
vi. 5), and of whom he bad through hfe in so many particulars been a type.

The writer of the Epistle to the Hebrews (ch. iv. 8) seems to direct our attention to
Joshua as a type of the Swviotir (comp. Acts viL 46). Certainly Christian writer*
outside the New Testament, from Justin Martyr downwards, have dehghted in
this aspect of the son of Nun. The very name suggests it, although in interpreting
Scripture we must be on our guard against fanciful ideas suggested by names.
Hoshea (salvation) became Jeho-shua, or Joshua (God's salvation, or God the
Baviour). See Num. xiii. 16 ; xiv. 6, 30. And in the LXX. the Greek translation
of the name is 'Iritrovc (Jesus), the form which the name assumes in the New
Testament, where our translators have unfortunately retained the Greek, instead
of returning to the Hebrew form (Acts vii. 45 ; Heb. iv. 8). The following points
seem in this case to justify our accepting the name as " nomen et omen " of a career
full of blessed meaning. (1) Joshua began his life by sharing the sufferings of his
brethren in Egypt ; so Jesus took upon Him the form of a servant, and shared the
lot of His brethren. (2) The imperfect work of Moses was taken up and completed
by Joshua : in a far higher sense it was taken up and completed by Christ ; the
Law was perfected in the Gospel. (3) In accordance with their common name,
both saved the people given to them by the Father from their enemies. (4) Both
" went forth conquering, and to conquer ; " and both conquered after being at first
apparently defeated through the sins of others. (5) Joshua brought the Chosen
People into the Promised Land, and gave them rest and a home in it. Jesus brings
the elect into the kingdom prepared for them, and gives them rest and an eternal
home in the "many mansions" of the Father. Other analogies in matters of
detail are at least interesting, although to some they may seem less certain than
those abready noticed. (6) Both entered on their ministry on the banks of Jordan.



JOSHUA TO NEHEMIAH. vfl

(7) Under Joshua the passage of Jordan as the road to the Land of Promise was
freed from difficulty and danger. The river of death by which we must enter into
our rest has been robbed of its terrors by Christ. (8) The twelve stones taken
from the bed of Jordan and set up as witnesses to the people of their deliverance
may represent" the twelve living " witnesses of His resurrection," and of our
deliverance through His resurrection appointed by Christ. (9) Joshua, when he
had completed his work, ascended the mountain of Ephraim, and dwelt in security
from his enemies. Jesus, having finished the work which the Father gave TTim to
do (John xvii. 4), ascended up on high and sat down on the right hand of God ;
from henceforth expecting till His enemies be made His footstool (Heb. x. 12, 13).

From very early times the extermination of the Ca/naomites in obedience to the
command of God ( " Thou shall save alive nothing that breatheth ; but thou shalt
utterly destroy them " — Deut. ii. 16, 17 ; comp. Num. ixi. 2, 8, 85 ; zxxiii. 52-64),
has been urged as an objection against the morality of the Old Testament. Is such
cruel severity in harmony with the Divine attributes ? This question seems to call
for some notice here. The following considerations are of importance in forming
a judgment on it : — (1) The age was one of imperfect knowledge of God, and
consequent imperfect morality. " Because of the hardness of men's hearts," acts
were allowed and even commanded under the Law which are discouraged or
forbidden under the Gospel. (2) It was also an age in which the idea of individual
lights and individual responsibihty was very imperfect. Property belonged to the
community, not to the individual Communities were held responsible for the »ct6
of individual members, and, conversely, communities exacted retribution for vnrongs
done to individual members. The punishment of a whole nation was therefore quite
in harmony with the prevailing sentiment of justice. (3) It was more important
that this strong sentiment of justice should be turned in the right direction, viz.,
against the worst forms of sin, than that in its exercise it should carefolly dis-
criminate between a criminal and his connections. God's revelations are gradual ;
and as man could not learn the morality of the Gospel all at once, the most
necessary elements were insisted on first. (4) Although it would have been
possible to punish the Canaanites, as Sodom and Gomorrha were punished, without
employing the sword of Israel, yet this would have been less generally beneficial.
The Israehtes were the trustees of the morahty of the world. If they had lost
their sacred deposit in the abominations of Canaan, the whole human race might
have sunk to the level of Sodom. Warnings, like the fate of Korah and his
company, lost their effect in time. Nothing could impress the hatefulness and
peril of sin bo strongly upon the Israelites as to make them themselves the
instruments of God's vengeance on those who persisted in sin. These considera-
tions will go far to explain God's command so far as it affected those who had to
execute it. With regard to those on whom it was executed we must remember
further : (5) That it was a punishment for sins of the most abominable and conta-
gious kind. (6) That the Canaanites were not only heinous sinners, but sinnew
against light : they had had the pure lives and pure worship of the patriarchs
among them for generations. (7) They had had the warning of the fate of the
cities of the plain at their very doors, even if the tradition of the flood had perished
among them.

It remains to say a few words about the book in which the history of these great
types and warnings is contained. Its single and inartificial style leads us to place
It earlier than the less archaic Books of Kings and Chronicles. The Jews believed



Till INTBODUOTION TO THE EISTOBICAL BOOKS:



it to be written by Joshna, and this view was followed by the Fathers, and m
regards much of the book, at any rate, is still advocated by some modem critic*
It is clear that the account of Joshua's death, and the statement that "the
Jebusites dwelt with the children of Judah at Jerusalem " (oh. xv. 63), point to » date
later than Joshua. Moreover, the conquests of Hebron by Caleb, of Debir by
Othniel, and of Laish by the Danites, were almost certainly not completed until
after the death of Joshua (comp. Josh. xv. 13—20, and xix. 47 with Judg. i. 10—16,
and ch. xviii. 7). On the other hand, the book seems to be written during the lifetime
of Eahab (ch. vi 25), and by one who took part in the campaign (ch. v. 1), and
must certainly be earlier than the time of David (oh. xv. 63). The hypothesis that
it was written, or at least completed, after Joshua's death by some one who obtained
a great deal of material from Joshua himself, seems to harmonize with all these
points, and also to account for the great minuteness of detail which characterizes
portions of the books. Its contents are alluded to in the Psalms (xKv. 2, 3 ; Ixvui.
12—14; lixviii. 64, 55), in the Prophets (Isa. xiviii. 21 ; Hab. iii. 11 — 13), and in
the New Testament (Acts vii. 46; Heb. iv. 8; xi. 80—31 ; James ii. 25) ; and its
canonicity has never been disputed either among Jews or Christians. It stands in
somewhat the same relation to the Pentateuch as the Acts of the Apostles to the
Gospels. While the Pentateuch gives the origin and principles of Judaism, and the
Gospels those of Christianity, in the Books of Joshua and of the Acts of the Apostles
we see those principles in action. The two books give us the youth — the one of the
Jewish and the other of the Christian Church. In each case we are introduced to
the first beginnings of ecclesiastical history. It is important to keep this aspect of
the Book of Joshua constantly in view, in order to retain an adequa,te appreciation
of its significance. Neither the Pentateuch nor the Gospels are primarily historical.
They are rather the text-books of the Old and New Covenant ; and the historical
elements which they contain is there not so much as history as in order to explain tie
origin, and illustrate the meaning, of the covenant in each case. The Book of Joshua
and the Acts are primarily historical. There object is to show how the promises
made to the Church were in the first instance fulfilled, and how provision was made
for a still larger fulfilment in the future. If this estimate of the two books is correct,
we must at once give up the notion that the Book of Joshua is a mere appendix to
the Pentateuch, possibly by the same hand. It would be more reasonable to regard
it M a preface to the books that follow. Yet, strictly speaking, it is neither ; it is a
complete whole in itself, a necessary link in the great chain of events by which
the Jewish dispensation prepared the way for the GospeL

The Age op the Judges.

Although, in one sense, we are still in the same period of Jewish history, that
which is commonly called Vbe Theocracy, yet we feel that we have passed into a dif-
ferent atmosphere when we pass fi:om the rule of Joshua to the rule of the Judges.
It is something like passing from the age of heroism to the age of chivalry ; from
an age in which the chief figures seem to be far above us, and almost to belong to
another world, to one in which we feel at home, because the prominent characters
both in their strength and in their weakness are like ourselves. Where they are
great, it is not an unapproachable grandeur, but one that we could imagine to belong
to our own generation ; and they are not always great. When they fall they prove
to us that the age of chivalry is not very far removed from that of barbarism, and
even contains some taint of savagery in itself. Something of this kind may be is



JOSHUA TO NEHEMIAS.



tmx thotlghta when we leaye the cahn, majestic guidance of Moses and Joshna tot
the torbulent rule of Gideon, Jephthah, and Samson.

Of all the books in the Bible the Book of Judges is perhaps the most human. In
most of the books the Divine element is so strong, or we are in the habit of keeping
it so constantly in view, that we are apt to forget that the actors in the various scenes
are not merely instruments in the hands of the Almighty, but men and women with
wills and passions Kke ourselves. In the history of the Judges it is impossible to
forget this. The difficulty is rather the other way : viz., to understand how men bo
faulty, so barbarous, one might almost say, so brutal, came to be chosen by Almighty
God as the deliverers and rulers of His people. In this respect the Book of Judges
and the Book of Euth may go together. The one gives the roughness and wUdness,
the other the sweetness and tenderness of life ; but both in their way are intensely
human. There is manifest gain in this, and it may be one of the special lessons
intended to be conveyed by these two writings. Just as in the case of Jesus Christ
Himself it is possible to lay so much emphasis on His Divinity as to lose sight of
His perfect humanity ; so also in the revelation which He has granted to us, of
His dealings with mankind, it is easy to fix our eyes so continually on the Divine
decrees and their fulfilment, as to forget that throughout it all man's wiU was
free, and that God worked not with soulless machines, but with persons who had
the terrible privilege of being able to foUow their own wUls rather than His, if they
BO pleased. This is everywhere apparent in the Book of Judges. Not only is God's
Chosen People as a whole frequently in rebellion against Him, but those who were
specially selected out of them (ffcXen-oiv ^icXeicrorfpoi), as agents peculiarly set apart to
carry out His purposes, are wayward to a degree that makes the question, *' Qvds
eustodit ip8oa custodes," eminently pertinent respecting them.

There is a wild freshness about the Book of Judges which tells of youth and
independence, and freedom from restraint and care : the freshness of nature and
ihe freshness of human life. It is mountain and woodland scenery fiUed with the
thrilling incidents of the romances of ohivah-y. It is a tale of ancient times, and
therefore it has all the interest of what lays outside our own everyday experience.
It is a tale of men and women Hke ourselves, and, therefore, we can realise it aU.
But the freshness and the independence have their dark side. It is an age in which
freedom too often means Hcense, and anarchy, and violence. Wliat is human is too
often barbarous, even savage and bestial. The lower part of man's nature is ever
eoming to the front and often takes the upper hand. Hence the story is no mere
idyll of pastoral brightness, no mere epic of the triumph of what is noble and pure.
The cry of Buffering alternates with the cry of victory, and the tragic element is
not wanting ; the right is too often a "random right," and there is abundance of
" random wrong." Thus the pathos of tragedy and the brilliancy of romance go
hand in hand. There is yet another element, not prominent but distinctly present
here and there, which must not be passed over, because it makes the picture all
the more true to life. A vem of humour, almost of drollery, comes to the surface
at times, makmg us feel still more at home with those of whose doings we read.
We almost see the twinkle in the eyes of the men of Dan as they say to their
brethren, " Do ye know that there is in these houses an ephod, and teraphim, a
graven image, and a molten image ? now, therefore, consider what ye have to
do" (oh. xviii. 14). And, agam, when they have carried off these things, and tha
owners come after them to complain, there is the same spirit of fun in their ques-
tion, " What »ileth thee that thou oomest with such a company ? " (ver. 23). This



INTBODtJOTION TO THE HIBTOBIOAL BOOKS:



♦lernent is specially strong in the history of Samson, whose exploits have a rollick-
ing air about them, which appeals at once to the spirit of adventure and mischieJ
with which we all of as have more or less sympathy. Note especially the grim
humour with which, in the last terrible scene, he prays to be avenged "for one of nqr
two eyes," according to the emended translation.

It is not dif&cult to catch the narrator's own point of view. Four times in the
course of his narrative he reminds us that "in those days there was no king in
Israel " (ch. xvii. 6 ; iviii. 1 ; xix. 1 ; ixi. 25), and twice he adds, as the natural
consequence of this, " every man did that which was right in his own eyes." This
is the refrain, the echo of which resounds throughout the whole book. And
what was the result of every man doing that which was right in his own eyes ?
In a sentence of still more ominous frequency (chs. ii. 11 ; iii. 7, 12 ; iv. 1 ; vi. 1 ;
X. 6 ; xiii. 1), he tells us again and again that " the children of Israel did evil ia
the sight of the Lord," " the children of Israel again did evU in the sight of
the Lord." Thus we have a regular cycle of cause and effect — sin produce!
punishment, and punishment amendment, and amendment dehverance, and
dehverance presumption with fresh apostacy and sin, with which the cycle begin*
again. So long as Joshua and his contemporaries hved (ch. ii. 7, 10), the Israehtea
remained faithful to Jehovah ; but after them arose a godless generation who feH
into the snares of which Joshua had warned them (the seductive idolatries of the
nations round about them), and served Baal and Ashtoreth. The period is one of
transition ; the old rulers, Moses and Joshua, have passed away and kings have not
yet arisen. And now that the external pressure of common dangers is removed,
another great bond of union is taken away. The nation is in danger of disintegra-
tion almost before it is formed, and is falling apart into tribes, or at most groups of
tribes, each with separate, and sometimes, conflicting interests. This is the peril
from within. And there is peril also from vrithout. Tlie conquered populations are
neither expelled, nor absorbed, nor perfectly subdued. Like the Britons under the
Saxons, and the Saxons under the Danes and under the Normans, they still kept
possession of large districts and important points. They were biding their time,
and perhaps, like the Saxons in the case of the Danes, might still get the upper
hand. Moreover, the nations outside Palestine were not friendly to the invaders,
who might any day cross the border and turn against them. Thus a great deal of
the work of Joshua had to be done over again. Cities and districts had to be
reconquered ; and where the Israelites had fallen away into idolatry, there ww
reconquest on the side of the Canaanites. What with division and apostasy withia,
seduction and hostility without, it looked as if the possession of the Promised Land
by the Israelites was destined to be very brief.

Yet, although in certain respects the period under the Judges is retrograde, it m
retrogression preliminary to and possibly necessary to further advance. The tide
was advancing, though the waves frequently went back ; and human progress is no
river, but a tide that ebbs and flows and moves in ofrcles fitfully. In two marked
particulars this time of apparent disintegration and anarchy had great influence on
the future development of the nation. First, the IsraeHtes were passing through
the all-important change from a nomad to a settled life ; they were ceasing to be
mere herdsmen, and were becoming agriculturists. Secondly, the isolation of the
wilderness was at an end ; they were becoming rapidly acquainted, both for good
and for evil, with other civilisations besides their own.
The change from a wandering to a stationary life was not made loddeDly,



JOSHUA TO NBHBMIAH.



Dttring their loBg halts in tlie wUdemeBS there had been some preparation for it;
Mid a fertile tract will tempt even permanently nomadic tribes to settle long enough
» sow and reap a harvest. And now that the Israelites had reached their goal,
and looked forward to no more wandering, we need not suppose that the wanderers
settled down at once, each on his own allotment. Within the limits of each tribe
there would be room enough for much changing before a permanent home was
made ; for the theory that the divisions of property made by the Canaanites were
adopted, just as they stood, by the Israehtes cannot be regarded as probable, or
more than in a very remote degree possible. Everything Canaanitish was an
abomination. Be this as it may, tiie important fact remains that during this period
a large portion of the Israelites became agriculturaL

The change from a life of isolation to one of constant intercourse with others was
scarcely less pregnant with results. The hermit-nation had returned after long
years of soUtude into the world ; and had at once come in contact with nations
whoso language was near enough to their own to render intercourse easy, and
moreover who, in trade, and art, and civilisation generally, were greatly in advance
of themselves. As we might expect, this was specially the case with the nations
who inhabited the sea-board of Palestine, and whose opportunities for commerce
were the greatest— the Phoenicians and the Philistines. Tyre and Sidon had
already reached a condition of strength and prosperity, and seem, like the nation of
traders that they were, at once to have made the coming of the Israelites a mere
matter of business. Neither side appears to have attempted to molest the other,
and commercial relations soon began to eiist between the Phoenicians and the
Israehtes. It would seem that the easy-going life of the Sidonians had passed mto
a proverb (Judg. xvui. 7) ; the fact probably being that, so long as then: commerce
was secure, they never troubled themselves to fight for anything ;— the " peace-at-
all-price " poUcy of a mercantile nation. It was very much otherwise with the
Philistines. Their intercourse with the Israehtes was by no means of so friendly a
nature. Immigrants like the Phoenicians and the Israelites, but at a very early
age, they were much less disposed than either to rest peaceably vrithin the limits of
the territory which they had occupied. They were a warhke rather than a com-
mercial people, and seem to have possessed a considerable mihtary organization.
Their five confederate cities, Gaza, Askelon, Ashdod, Gath, and Ekron, were
strong enough to dispossess Dan, to conquer Judah, and towards the end of this
period to make their heavy hand felt in other tribes as weU. While the Phoenicians
remained friendly or indifferent towards the new-comers, the PHlistines were
actively aggressive. The attitude, therefore, of these two important nations
towards the Israehtes may serve very well as samples of the varied influences to
which the Chosen People were subjected now that they had come into contact at
every comer of the land, and here and there in the veiy centre of it, with strangers.
Eoughly speaking, the Israehtes held the hill-country while the Canaanites held
the plains. The Israehtes had hardly anything but infantry, and in the plams,
where cavaby and chariots were most effective, they were at a great disadvantage
against the Canaanites, who were often very strong in both. It is scarcely too
much to say that throughout the greater part of then: sojourn in Palestine, the
Israehtes were not masters of their ovra plains ; these were so constantly at the
mercy of either Canaanites or Syrians.

These two facta— the change from a nomadic to a stationary and generaUy an
agricultural Ufe, and the intercourse, Mendly or hostile, vidth other nations— ar*



rii INTBODtrOTlON TO THE HISTOBIOAL BOOKS:



among the chief forces which are at work during the period of the Judges to mould
the nation into the form in which we find it under the early kings. And indeed,
other seed is heing sown to bear fruit in a stOl more distant future. In the selfish
indifference with which one tribe regards the calamities of another, in the jealous
rivalry which shows itseK between them, especially between the more powerful
tribes, we see the first beginnings of the strife which was to end in the permanent
disruption of the nation. Deborah complains bitterly of the apathy of Reuben,
Dan, and Asher, during the oppression of Zebulon and Naphtali ; and any joint
action between Judah and Ephraim was evidently not looked for. Judah is not
even mentioned, as if its absence on such an occasion was a matter of course.
This BUence respecting Judah is not confined to the Song of Deborah. During the
whole period there is very little mention of this tribe. On the principle that happy
is the nation that has no history, we may consider this silence as being to the
credit of those whose doings are left unrecorded. Simeon, the neighbour of Judah,
■hares this honourable obscurity. We can only conjecture the cause ; but it is not
improbable that these two tribes, secure in their mountain fastnesses, remained
fdoof from the others, neither mixing in their squabbles nor sharing their dangerou*
intercourse with the heathen. Omitting Ibzan and Shamgar as doubtful, only one
of the numerous Judges belonged to Judah — Othniel, who was perhaps the first of
the Judges. The reason may have been that, being comparatively free from the
disorders which troubled the rest of the Israelites, these two southern tribes had no
need of exceptional deliverers and rulers. And even Othniel was not in the
strictest sense of Judah. He is called " son of Kenaz" (ch. i. 18), and his elder
brother Caleb is described both as a " Kenezite " (Num. xxxii. 12), and also of Judah
(Num. liii. 6). The Kenezites belonged to the old inhabitants (Gen. xv. 19), so
that some of them at any rate must have been allowed to unite with the tribe of
Judah, and to be counted as members of the tribe. This remarkable adoption by
so exalted a tribe as Judah is of great interest, and has a parallel in the case of the
Kenites. Kenaz was a descendant of Esau ; and if the Kenites were Midianites,
they also sprang from Abraham ; so that the Kenezites and Kenites, though not
Israelites, were not absolute aliens. The fact that Othniel, the Kenezite, delivered
Israel from an invasion which came from the north, seems to show that in this first
oppression, and probably in this one only, the whole land was overrun. From
most of the troubles of this period Judah remained exempt ; and we have some
evidence that this was due to its own good conduct. First, we have the beautiful
picture of quiet and pure domestic Hfe preserved for us in the Book of Euth, in
tremendous contrast to the episodes of Micah and the Danites, the men of Gibeah
and the Benjamite war, the act of Jael, and the whole history of Samson and of
Jephlhah. Secondly, there is the evident superiority of the tribe of Judah, so soon
as it emerges from its obscurity under David. True that Judah did not altogether
escape the oppression of the Amorites, and still lees that of the Philistines ; yet
they were not ground down as were other tribes by these oppressions ; and in
David's time they more than paid their debt to both. The remainder of the tribes
on the west of Jordan were far from united among themselves ; but the tendency
was to acquiesce in the pretensions of Epbraun, which lost no opportunity of
asserting itself. Thus the way was steadily being prepared for the future division
of the kingdom. The two-and-a-half tribes on the other side of the Jordan were
cut oflf by this natural barrier from much intercourse with their brethren. Nor
were they united among themselves. Here also, as on the west bank, the southern-



JOSHUA TO NEHEMIAH.



most remained aloof. But the isolation of Reuben was fax less honourable than
that of Judah. Eeuben, tho first-bom, sinks down into an obscurity from which it
never emerges. Out of Eeuben arises no judge, no hero, no prophet. Deborah
singles it out for scornful reproach, and this is almost the last mention of the tribe.
While Gad and Manasseh produced valiant men, and sometimes gave a refuge to
tbeir suffering brethren from the western bank, Eeuben remained apart in waU-to-
do repose, absolutely cut off from Judah by the Dead Sea, and not having aiuch
intercourse even with Gilead.

Thus, then, the nation which had entered Canaan in the strength of internal
purity and union under one leader, had fallen apart into at least four unequal and
irregular groups, two on each side of the Jordan. On the west bank (1) Judah and
Simeon, probably for the best representatives of the old purity and discipline, and
for this reason, as well as from the character of their territory, the strongest of the
groups. (2) The remainder of the tribes on this bank, not really united, but all more
or less acquiesciag in the precedence claimed by Ephraim. On the east' bank (8) half
Manasseh and Gad, on fairly good terms with the western tribes, but prevented by the
Jordan from being very intimate. (4) Eeuben, in comfortable and ignoble solitude.

It would have gone very hard with the IsraeHtes during this period of serious
dismemberment if something of the same kind had not prevailed among the
Canaanites also. We have seen the Hi-success of the hastily formed leagues, first
in the south and then in the north, against Joshua. A successor, and possibly a
descendant of the Jabin, king of Hazor, who formed the northern league on that
occasion, was the author of the twenty years of oppression from which Deborah and
Barak delivered Israel. Only so long as his general Sisera kept the key of the
position with his 900 chariots at Harosheth of the Gentiles, could the domination
of Jabin be maintained. If the various Canaanite cities (which still remained
scattered about like so many dark islands, in the midst of the tribes) had combined
with Jabin, the Israelites would have been enclosed in a network of hostile
fortresses, firom which it might have required another miraculous campaign, hka
that of Joshua, to free them. Gezer in Ephraim, Jebus in Benjamin, Bethshean,
Ibleam, Taanach, Megiddo, and Dor in Manasseh, Kitron and Nahalol in Zebulon ;
while in the ease of Asher and NaphtaU the proportion of Canaanites was so large
that, whereas of other tribes it was said that " the Canaanites dwelt among them,"
of them it was said that " they dwelt among the Canaanites" (Judg. i. 82, 88). The
map will show how these facts illustrate the statement made above, that the.
IsraeUtes could not gain possession of the plains. Gazer and Dor are in the plana
of Sharon ; Bethshean, Megiddo, and Taanach in the plain of Esdraelon. Nahalol
was probably in the plain of Esdraelon also, but neither the name nor the sitiiation
of the city can be determined with certainty. During Jabin' s domination the
northern taibes were practically prisoners in their own land; and had these
constellations of Canaanite cities jomed vigorously with him his success would have
been stiU greater, and might have been mdefinitely prolonged. But Jehovah had
willed it otherwise. Even as it was, these Canaanites cities worked disaster
enough : they were permanent centres of rehgious and moral corruption.

Thus far, then, we have arrived at these characteristics of the period under
consideration. (1) It was a time of great freedom tending to anarchy. The
paternal rule of Moses and Joshua was removed, and the tnbes resori;ed to
democratic government before they were in the least degree ripe for it. The result
wan that there waa very Uttle government at alL (2) A krge proportion of th«



liv INTBODUOTION TO THE HISTOEIOAL BOOKS:



nation was rapidly changing from the pastoral to the agricultural state ; an advanca
without which the future development of the nation would have been impossible.
(3) Both inside and outside Palestine the Israelites were abandoning a condition ol
isolation for one of contact and intercourse with a variety of nationalities, in culture
superior, in religion and morality vastly inferior, to themselves ; a change pro-
ductive of calamitous results, but not unmixed evil. (4) The external pressure ol
a common and imminent danger being removed, and the bulk of the territory being
conquered, the tribes were falling apart from one another, each following its own
selfish interest. A common danger at times reunited those who felt its pressure ;
but generally there was a tendency to separate into loosely connected groups. The
worship of Jehovah was to a large extent deserted for Canaanitish idolatries, and
thus the highest of aU bonds of union was lost. Hence (S) their various enemiea
gained strength and subjugated large portions of the country from time to time.
Had their enemies been united among themselves, and had the suffering which
they inflicted failed to check the canker of political and religious disintegration
which was ruining Israel, the land would probably have relapsed into the hands of
its former owners, and the Israelites would have been reconquered and absorbed.
But the sharp medicine administered again and again at last did its work : and after
a long and uneven struggle the purer religion and the nobler race prevailed.

But meanwile the purer religion was almost lost. In the wUdemess the Israehtes
had lived, as it were, in a religious hothouse. They had been kept apart from the
common atmosphere, and had lived in a world of their own. In this way they had
been brought up to a spiritual elevation, which was partly supernatural and partly
artificial. The supernatural influences of perceptible communication with Jehovah
had ceased ; the artificial restraint of complete isolation had been thrown aside ;
and they appeared to be left to do " what seemed good in their eyes." The result
showed that they were quite unequal to so severe a trial. Those who lived at a
distance from the tabernacle at Shiloh at most went up to it only once a year,
probably for the most attractive and joyous of the feasts, that of Tabernacles. What
was out of sight soon went out of mind, and the ordinances of religion were
one by one forgotten. With no one to read the Law to them, with no religious
ceremonial to teach them by the eye, large numbers grew up in the grossest
ignorance as regards creed and worship. Superstitious observances grew up under
trees and in high places. Jehovah was represented by images. This soon led to a
■till graver profanation. The image of Jehovah became only one of many, and Hia
worship was mingled with that of heathen deities. In many cases the last and final
step was taken, and the worship of the one true God was entirely abandoned for
that of Baal and Ashtoreth. Thus the belief of Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob in the
unity of God, the creed which had ennobled and sustained Israel through so many
generations, was tampered with, and corrupted, and in many oases lost. Such was
the price which Israel paid for premature intercourse with higher civilisations.

And thus, as in the case of Paradise, the Divine ideal had been frustrated by the
free-will and self-wiU of man. Had God's commands been obeyed, the poUuting
mfluenoe of the Oanaanites would have been expelled or extinguished, and His
people would have been free to receive and cherish and develop, in His own good
time, the revelation which He had partly given and partly had still in store for
them. Secure from seductions and hindrances from vrithout, bound together by
their common privileges within, they would not only have preserved their old level
of spiritwJ enlightenment, but would have risen steadily to a still higher one. But



JOSHUA TO NEHBMIAH.



M of old, the forbidden fruit seemed " good for food," and " pleasant to the eyes,"
And a thing " to be desired to make one wise ; " and when once it was tasted the
mischief was done. The whole Jewish race from that day to this has paid the
penalty ; jnst as the whole human race has paid the penedty of Adam's brans
gression. The two Captivities with their lasting consequences were the direct result
of the idolatry which dates from this forbidden intercourse with the Canaanites.
The lesson is similar to that taught in Eden. Man's free-will involyes the possibility
of a fall, and one fall renders another fall probable. Man's fallen nature can be
regenerated only through suffering : and thus, what was in the first instance a
punishment, by God's mercy becomes in the end a blessing. The certainty of
punishment for sin, the possibility of repentance, the discipline of suffeiing — these
are the great lessons of the Book of Judges.

The period has been compared with the heroic age in G-reece and other pagan
lands. The analogy holds good in several interesting points. In both there is an
iavasion of new territory, and the prowess of the heroes is exhibited in the struggl*
with the primitive inhabitants for possession. In both there is a startling mixture
of virtue and vice, of what is noble with what is vUe, of splendid self-sacrifice and
bravery with savagery, treachery, and lust. The analogy foils, however, in one
most important particular. Even in the wildest of the Jewish heroes we find a
consciousness of a divine mission, and a reliance on God, of which pagan heroes
show little trace. And although brutal acts of licentiousness and cruelty are only
too frequent amongst both, yet the popular conscience regards them with abhorrence
in the one case, while it applauds them or looks upon them as a matter of course in
the other. A truer analogy seems to be found in the age of Christian chivahy ; e.g.,
in the Crusades, a struggle for the same territory. There also we find a hideous
amount of evil mired with the good ; there also the evil too often triumphed while
the good failed : but this must ever be the case where an appeal is made on a large
scale to force. Yet there was the moral, the religious purpose at bottom, however
much it might be alloyed or overlaid with ignoble motives. And in the general
outcome of the period of the Judges, as of the Crusades, the world has been greatly
the gainer. Along with a mere love of adventure, which is neither right nor
wrong, along with treachery and cruelty and other grievous crimes, committed both
in the name of and in defiance of religion, there was a power and a reality in
both, calculated to bring out aU that is heroic in human nature : love of liberty,
admiration of prowess, sympathy with suffering, patient endurance when hope
seemed gone, perseverance to the end

The chronology of the period is involved in obscurity, but this need not cause any
•erious difficulty. Chronology is not what the compiler of the various narratives
aimed at giving us ; and therefore we need not be surprised that clear marks of
time are wanting. The whole period is perhaps about a century and a half, as
seemi to be indicated by the genealogies. To add up the years of alternate oppres-
sions and rests given in the book itself would only lead us astray: for (1) the
narratives possibly run parallel to one another in certain cases, bemg accounts of
what was going on in different parts of Canaan at one and the same time ; (2) no
great reUance can be placed upon the frequently recurring numbers, twenty (chs. iv. 8 ;
XV. 20 ; ivi. 31), forty (chs. iiL 11 ; v. 81 ; viii. 28 ; xiii 1), eighty (ch. iii. 80). which
may be round numbers with no pretension to exactness. Modem ohronologers vary
from 150 to 800 years; ancient writers give double that amount; e.g., Josephus
692. Eusebius 600. The data of the compilation of the book and the name <A th«



xti INTEODUCTION TO THE HISTOEIOAL BOOKS:

compiler are both imlmo-wii. In its present form it must be comparatively late, for in
what is sometimes called the Appendix (chs. xvii. — xxi.) the vmter shows that not
only Shiloh has ceased to be the seat of the tabernacle (ch. xviii. 31), and that there
have been kings in Israel (chs. xvii 6 ; xviii. 1 ; xix. 1 ; ixi. 25), but also, according
to the more probable interpretation, that the Assyrian captivity has taken place
(ch. xviii. 30). This would place the writer of this portion after b.o. 721, and prob-
ably a still later date must be taken for the final redaction in its existing form. But
the best scholars are not agreed on the subject ; and for ordinary students of tha
EiMe to attempt to pronounce an opinion on these different theories is perhaps not
• profitable exercise. It will be wiser for us to study what this unknown writer has
preserved for us, and to be thankful to Him through whose providence it has been
preserved.

There are no quotations from the Book of Judges in the New Testament, but
there are references to its contents in Acts xiii. 20 and Heb. xi 32. Allusions in the
Psalms and in the Prophets are frequent.

The Booli of Buth, as already indicated, may be considered as another Appendix
to the Book of Judges. It gives us the other side of the picture ; natural affection,
domestic piety, gentleness, and quietude, in contrast with the troubled scenes in
which Gideon, Jephthah, and Samson move. Probably neither Appendix is in its
proper chronological position ; but the effect is for that very reason all the mor«
striking. From the hideous deed of the men of Gibeah and its bloody consequences,
we turn with relief and refreshment to the beautiful devotion of Euth the Moabitess,
and to the sunny corn-fields of Bethlehem. Besides this the book contains the
genealogy of David, from the time of the patriarchs onwards ; from Pharez, the son
of Judah and Tamar, to Jesse the Bethlehemite. This genealogy is of great historical
value, not only as a portion of the genealogy of the Messiah, and as containing
that portion of it which marks the founding of the house at Bethlehem, but also as
ft guide to the chronology of the period. Sahnon, the husband of Eahab and first
proprietor of Bethlehem, is the grandfather of Obed, the grandfather of David ; i.e.,
three, or possibly four, generations cover the period of the Judges. Excepting so far
as this genealogy agrees with those in St. Matthew and St. Luke, and may be one
of the sources used by the Evangelists, there is no quotation from the Book of Euth
or any reference to it in the New Testament. The typical character of the book
must also be borne in mind in connexion with the lineage of the Messiah. The
union of Euth the Moabitess with a man of the tribe of Judah foreshadows that
union of Jew and Gentile in Him who sprang from this marriage. Those who are
admitted to the high honour of being ancestors of Christ, are an earnest of the all-
embracing character of His kingdom. If among them are included the incestuous
Tamar, the harlot Eahab, and the Moabitess Euth, there are none who may not
hope, by doing the will of God, to be equal to His brother, and sister, and mother
(Mark iii 86).

The Last of the Jitdges. Ell

At first sight it may appear strange that the two last who held the office of Judge
in Israel are not included in the Book of the Judges, but are noticed at the beginning
of a series of books, which in the Vulgate bear the appropriate names of the First,
Second, Third, and Fourth Books of Kings. The common titles, derived from tha
printed Hebrew Bible, are less appropriate, for of the Ffrst and Second Books o<
Baakoel only part of the First Book tella of Samuel, aU the remainder of the two



JOSHUA XO NEHEMIAH. xvii



Books being filled with the reigns of Saul and David. The including of Eli and
Samuel m this series rather than in the Book of Judges would seem all the more
strange, if (as some suppose) all these five books were compiled about the same
time, and possibly by the same hand. And yet the arrangement is perhaps not
.only a justifiable one but the best that could have been made. For (1) the judgeship
of Eli and Samuel is a very difl'erent office fi:om that which was held by Gideon,
Ehud, or Samson ; (2) the importance of Samuel does not consist in his dosing the
list of Judges, but in his preparing the way for the monarchy, and in particular for
David, the type and most notable progenitor of the Messiah.

The judgeship of Eli and Samuel was permanent, sacerdotal, and perhaps, in
virtue of its connexion with the sacerdotal office, was intended to be hereditary.
The office of the earher judges was the reverse of all this. It was exceptional and
provisional ; like the dictatorship among the Romans, a temporary concentration
of the power in the hands of one man in order to meet a crisis. Moreover, it had
no connexion with the priesthood ; not one of the earlier Judges was of priestly
descent. The attempt of Abimelech, the son of Gideon, to inherit some of his
father's power failed. In what way the office became so changed as we find it in
Eli's hands is unknown. Between Samson's overthrow of the FhiUstine temple at
Gaza and the FhUistines' overthrow of the sanctuary at Shiloh, there is a blank in
the sacred narrative which we cannot fill. How did Eli, who belonged to the
family of Ithamar, Aaron's second son, become high-priest, although the line of
Eleazar, the eldest son, was not extract ? How did Eh come to be both high-
priest and judge ? These are questions which we can only answer conjecturally.
~Bat it may easily have been the case that Eh was elected judge for exploits against
the Fhiliatiaes early ia life, and that, being a descendant of Aaron, the fact of his
being judge led to his obtaining the high-priesthood also. The kind-hearted old
man whom we find sitting at the entrance to the sanctuary of Shiloh, when the
narrative begins again, can scarcely be one who gained office by violence or firaud.
Nothing of the kind is laid to his charge, when for his sons' ioiquity and his weak-
ness in not restraining them his family is brought to ruin. But the great infiueuoe
which he enjoyed is shown by the fact that, even after the heavy blow fell upon his
house, we find his descendants, Ahijah with Saul, and Abiathar with David, in
honourable priestly offices.

Kothing shows more clearly the depth of the moral degradation into which the
people had fallen during the time of the Judges than the conduct of EU's sons.
In the very sanctuary itself, and in the ministers to it, we find the most barefiioed
cupidity and wantonness. Hophni and Phinehas are the prototypes of grasping
and sensual ecclesiastics throughout all ages ; and the consequences of their nns,
to the congregation, to the sanctuary, and to themselves, are warnings of the judg-
ment which must fall sooner or later upon corruption and profligacy ia high and
sacred places. Micah's Levite in the Book of Judges is a similar though less
glaring instance. And yet, great as the plague-spot is, one sees that Israel is still
sound at heart. The conduct of the priests is felt to be a scandal ; it is not ignored
or laughed at : " men abhorred the offerings of the Lord." The depth has not yet
been reached when " My people love to have it so " (Jer. v. 31).

The superstitious carrying of the ark of the covenant into the field of battle is
another sign of the corruption of the times ; and it again has its counterpart in
more modern times in the carrying of the consecrated host as a sort of charm against
danger. The guilty priests, having no spiritual or moral influence with the peopl«,

JOSHUA. *



xviii INTBODUCTION TO THE HISTOBICAL BOOKS:



resort to this material emblem as a means of inspiriting the disheartened troops.
The battle-field of Aphek, close to the scene of happier auspices, Beth-boron, and
itself the scene of a victory a few years later (1 Sam. vii. 12), was to decide whether
the Philistines should be the slaves of the Hebrews, or the Hebrews of the
Philistines. "On the success of this wager of battle the priestly rulers of the
nation had staked the most sacred pledge of their religion." Staked and lost both
it and the sanctuary, and their own miserable lives also. The Philistines, believing
that they were contending against terrific odds, and that the God of the Hebrews
was in the ranks of their opponents, fought with the courage of despair. We read
of the capture of the ark and of the death of Eli ; but of what must have followed
soon after, the violent overthrow or rapid decay of the sanctuary of SMlob, we are
not told. But its desolation passed iato a proverb •■ » monument of Divine
judgment " Go ye now unto My place which was in SMlob, where I set My
name at the first, and see what I did to it, for the wickedness of My people Israel "
(Jer. vii. 12). *' Then will I make this house like ShUoh, and wiU make this city
a curse to ajl the nations of the earth." " This house shall be like Shiloh, and this
city shall be desolate without an inhabitant " (Jer. zxvi. 6, 9). Still more striking,
because so incidental, is the notice of it at the end of the Book of Judges. " Shiloh,
which is in the land of Canaan." " Shiloh, which is in the north side of Bethel, on
the east side of the highway that goeth up fi:om Bethel to Shechem, and on the
south of Lebonah " (ch. xxi. 12, 19). At the time when this was written the very
site of Shiloh was bo little known that it needed to be thus minutely described ;
And this exact description enabled Dr. Bobinson in 1888 to discover the site. He
found the name still surviving among the shepherdsof the neighbourhood as SeUiin.
Each of the three great epochs in the history of the Jews ends with the destruc-
tion of the visible sanctuary. The fact may teach us, as Ewald points out, that
the history of Israel is the history of a religion rather than of a nation. " They
are not all Israel which are of Israel ; " and " he is not a Jew which is one
outwardly " (Bom. ix. 6 ; iL 28). The Theocracy ended with the downfall of the
sanctuary at Shiloh, directly or iadirectly through the spoliation by the Philistines.
Tha monarchy ended with the destruction of the first temple of Jerusalem by the
armieg of Babylon. The period after the Captivity ended with the destruction of
the last temple of Jerusalem by the armies of Titus. Each overthrow was worse
than the previous one, and each might have warned the Jews that along with their
sanctuary a period of probation had passed away. The destruction by the
Chaldeans prepared the deathbed, the destruction by the Romans prepared the
funeral, of the Jewish religion. The glory of it departed with the one, tha very
possibility of life was extinguished by the other. Since the ruin wrought by Titus
the keeping of the law has been a physical impossibility. But the overthrow of
the first sanctuary was a judgment that was turned into a blessing. It inspired a
yearning and prepared the way for something higher — for a more glorious
sanctuary on a nobler site, where a renovated priesthood should minister to a
chastened and purified people.

Ths Last or the Jvdgis. SAutm.

Samuel, like tha Baptist, doses one great era and inaugurates a new one ; Uke
the Baptist also, he nominates a successor greater than himself Both men, grand
in themselves, the one at the beginning, the other at the end of " the goodly fellow-
ship of the prophets," derive their chief importance from that which they inaugurate



JOSHUA TO NBHEMIAH.



xu



iftther than from that which they are, or do, themselves. Samnel has this farther
eharaoteristio peculiar to himself; he inaugurated the new system against his own
previous convictions. He himself regarded the new departure as a lamentable
abandonment of what had hitherto been the ideal, the ideal of Sinai and of Ebal
and Qerizim. And yet, as soon as he saw that the change was inevitable, with all
the generosity and wisdom of a noble nature and an open mind, he flung himself
into the new movement, if not with enthusiasm, at least with energy and devotion.
If a new constitution must come, it should be the very best that he could make it.
The people had refused to listen to him and had insisted on their own cravings ;
that should not make him stand moodily aloof while they blindly followed the evil
models of Canaanitish monarchies. At first he did his utmost to make the old
system meet the requirements of the age ; when he found out that this was im-
possible, he had the courage to own it to himself, and the nobleness to transfer his
energieg to the movement which he personally disliked. As was natural, his
interest in it grew with the work ; and that which at first he would have prevented
from existing, he before long loved and fostered as his own child.

The judgeship of Samuel resembles that of Eli more than that of the previous
Judges, but it was not the same. Samuel and Eli were alike in this, that both were
ecclesiastics holding the highest civil office, and that the office was permanent and
not provisional But Samuel, though a Levite and a Nazarite, was not of the
family of Aaion, and therefore could not be, as Eli was, high-priest. On the other
hand, Samuel was what EU was not, a prophet, and from the first was recognised
as such (1 Sam. iii. 19—21). This supernatural fact a great deal more than com-
pensated for his not holding a high-priestly office. Indeed, in Eli's time, the
priesthood had fallen so low that probably the office gained far more influence from
his personal character and civil dignity than it conferred by its peculiar sanctity.
On the whole, the history of the Jewish priesthood, from Aaron to Caiaphas, is the
history of a tremendous failure ; a conspicuous illustration of the maxim, eorrvjitio
optvmi fit pessima.

A Levite by birth, a Nazarite by the devotion of his parents, judge by the election
of the people, prophet by the consecration of Jehovah, Samuel united in himself aU
the moral and spiritual gifts by which he could most powerfully influence the people
whom he had to rule. How long an interval elapsed between the death of Eli and
the election of Samuel we do not know ; but the trouble into which the victory of
the Philistines at Aphek plunged the land would make the people soon feel the need
of another ruler : and the fact of Samuel being already recognised as a prophet
would point him out as the man. Nor is it quite certain whether his being judge
led him to assemble the people at Mizpeh, or whether his victory led to his being
elected judge. Be this as it may, on the very same field of Aphek, he so broke
the power of the invading Philistines that for years they never again crossed the
frontier, and moreover had to surrender the cities near the frontier which they had
won from the Israelites. The warlike Amorites also, in the western mountains of
Judsea, now withdrew from then: connexion with the PhUistines, and accepted the
protectorate of IsraeL But we are, perhaps, not to suppose that the Philistine yoke
was absolutely thrown off ; at any rate, perfect Uberty, if it was regained for a time,
was lost again before long. The shameful state of subjugation in which we find the
Israelites in the second year of Saul's reign (1 Sam. xiii.) must have begun under
the rule of Samuel.

In his character of Nazarite it is natural to compare Samnel with the predecessoi



XX



INTEODUOTION TO THE HISTOBICAL BOOKS :



who -was, like him, both Nazarite and judge, Samson. The hirth of both waa
promised beforehand. Both were dedicated as Nazarites from their birth ; not
(according to the common Nazarite vow) for a Ihnited period, but for life. Both, in
their way, prevailed. But here the likeness ends. Samson was a Nazarite in the
letter, but knew nothing of the Nazarite's spirit ; Samuel was a Nazarite in heart
and in life. Samson prevailed by superhuman strength over men's bodies ; Samuel
influenced their minds. The work of the one was to destroy and to slay ; the work
of the other to restore and to create. In Samson we see how a work, most
manifestly blessed by God, may be marred by the self-will and self-mdulgence of
man ; in Samuel we see what divine things can be wrought when a man of great
gifts yields himself with self-sacrifice and devotion to work under and with the
Almighty.

It was the high privilege of Samuel to effect two reunions, impossible to over-rate
in importance. He reunited the tribes among themselves ; he made united Israel
once more at one with Jehovah. Under his leadership even Judah and Ephrainj
work together ; at his urgent exhortation "the children of Israel did put away
Baalim and Aahtaroth, and served the Lord only " (1 Sam. vii. 4). Thus what had
been the weakness and curse of Israel under the earlier Judges, the pohtical and
religious dissolution was for the time at least cured. It was, possibly, to typify this
new birth of the nation that Samuel " took a sucking lamh " as his first public
sacrifice on behalf of the people. It was in contrast to the sacrilegious greed of
Hophni and Phineas that he " offered it for a burnt offering wholly unto the Lord"
(1 Sam. vii. 9). The answer was the victory of Aphek, or Ebenezer, already noticed.
In the presence of this prophet, who received such immediate and visible answers
to his prayers, reunited Israel knew that it once more had the minister of Jehovah
hving among them. The dreary interval during which God's voice had been heard
so seldom had passed away, and as in the days of Moses their heavenly King in the
person of His prophet was ever present to His people. At Eamali, his birthplace,
which he fixed upon as his abode, ho " judged Israel all the days of his Ufe," making
circuits every year to the sacred centres of Bethel, Gilgal, and Mizpeh, and thence
returning to Eamah. For as yet there was no national centre ; each judge fixed his
own for himself Personal and family ties were still paramount ; a fixed national
metropolis arose first under the monarchy. Thus ha continued, " spending and
being spent " for Israel, with the care both of the whole Jewish Church and of the
whole Jewish nation on his shoulders. As prophet he was the centre and organ of
the religious life, as judge he was the centre and organ of the political life of the
people. What many popes have claimed to be, what a few of the greatest of them
have earnestly striven to be, Samuel, without any self-seeking or lust of power, was.

We shall be altogether mistaken if we regard any portion of the Books of Samuel
as a biography of the prophet whose name they bear. They are not that any more
than the Book of Joshua is a biography of Joshua, or the Book of Judges a series of
lives of Jewish leaders. None of the books of the Bible are that. The historical
books both of the Old and New Testament are all alike in this, that they are his-
tories not of individuals but of the kingdom of God. Hence, among other charac-
teristics, the comparative neglect of chronology ; for it is the exception when
chronology has importance in the history of His kingdom, with whom " one day is
as a thousand years, and a thousand years as one day " (2 Peter iii. 8). We are
once more without a date in the sacred narrative, and we once more have a blank
which we can fill only tentatively. Just ss in the Gospels, "He went down with



JOSHUA TO NEHEMIAfl. «xl



them, and came to Nazareth, and was subject nnto them,'' and " increased in
■wisdom and stature, and in favour with God and man " (Luke ii. 51, 52), is all that
we know of the Messiah's life during an interval of about seventeen years, so here,
" Samuel judged Israel " covers an interval of perhaps nearly double that duration.
We leave him a young man setting up the memorial stone of Ebenezer ; and when
the narrative begins again he is old and faiHng in strength, and has made his sons
judges to help him. During the interval the poUtioal atmosphere has become more
and more heavily charged with the desire for a change of government, and a com-
paratively small thing precipitates it. Joel and Abiah, the two sons of Samuel, are
not satisfactory as judges. They are not scandalously wicked, hke Hophui and
Phinehas, but they are tainted with what has ever been the plague-spot in the ad-
ministration of justice in the Ea: t —bribery— and also with esorbitant usury. " They
turned aside after lucre, and took bribes, and perverted judgment " (ch. viii. 3).
Samuel's uprightness is wanting in his sons, just as Eli's piety in his, to the sorrow
and shame of the parents. And thus the proverb against which Ezekiel protests
so emphatically is reversed: "The children eat the sour grape and the fathers'
teeth are set on edge." The " elders of Israel " come to Samuel and formally
request him to nominate a king. Whether the judgeship as administered by
him had been adequate to their needs or not, certainly it was not at all so as
administered by his sons. The old evils would soon be conaing back again ; the
tribes would be falling away into their fatal state of division and isolation, if there
were not some central power, which all could respect, to hold them together. Even
as it was, the Philistines were still in the land, and had been so for years, because
there was no one to take the lead in driving them out. This feeling had been in
the air at least since Abimelech, the son of Gideon, made his ill-advised attempt at
royalty (comp. Judg. viii. 22) ; and it had evidently been increasing. The miscar-
riages of justice in the hands of Samuel's sons brought matters to a crisis. The
wave of national despair at the loss of the ark, and the still more powerful wave of
national enthusiasm at its recovery, which had carried Samuel to the high position
in which his great gifts had since then maintained him, had by this time subsided ;
and popular discontent now made itself formally heard. It had been proved by the
Bad experience of centuries that the Theocracy under a repubhcan form of govern-
ment was too high an ideal for the Israelites ; experience of so stem a kind must
cot be thrown away, and the time had now come for a change to a constitution
which, if less lofty in conception, would be more beneficial in fact.

" But the thing displeased Samuel." The demand stocked him, not so much
because it was a revolution as because it was a revolt ; a revolt against Jehovah.
The Almighty sanctioned this view ; but at the same time instructed Samuel to
yield to the demand. He was first to explain to the people what monarchy meant,
and then, if they stiU wished for it, to comply.

The case reminds us of that of Balaam. In both the Almighty grants a petition
with which He is displeased ; and inasmuch as He granted what was asked, tho
thing asked for cannot in itself have been wrong. What then displeased Him in
the petition ? The answer seems to be the same in both cases — the sphit which
dictated it. It was lawful for Balaam to go to Balak ; but to do God's wUl, not hia
own, A rebeUious hope of being able to get his own way, at least in part, lurks in
Balaam's mind to the last. It was lawful for Israel to have a king. It had been
promised to Abraham that Ttings should come out of him (Gen. xviL 6) ; Jacob had
'foretold that the iceptre should not depart from Judah till ShUoh oome (Gen. zlix.



ixii INTEODUCTION tO THE BtlSTOEICAL BOOKS J

10) ; and the Law itself expressly proyided for tihe possibility of a, regal form ol
government (Deut. rvii. 14 — 20). But the spirit in which it was demanded was
faulty. It implied that their invisible King was unable to go out before them and
fight their battles, to free them from the Philistines, and protect them against the
Amorites (1 Sam. xii. 12) ; they must have a visible king. In other words, there
was no faitih in their request ; it was a desire not so much to know God's will as
to obtain their own. The very wording of their reiterated demand seems to show
this, " Nay, but we will have a king over us; that we also may be Uke all the
nations; and that our king may judge us, and go out before us, tmiflffht our
battles " (1 Sam. viii. 19, 20). The picture which Samuel faithfully drew of Oriental
despotism, as it existed all around them, had an effect the exact opposite of which
he had intended. " Nay, that is the very thing we want ; the pomp to dazzle, and
the strong hand to rule."

Thus Samuel " stood between the dead and the living," between the dead past,
with which all his affections were buried, and the living future, in which hope had
scarcely begun to shine. But God's command was enough for him, little as he
might understand it. Had he been " seeking the living among the dead " ? and
were the people right, after all? Or was God "giving them a king in His anger,"
as He gave them flesh to eat in the wilderness ? At any rate, the course of His
prophet was clear : henceforth to devote his thought and care to the moulding of
this new form of government, to directing the stream of the current which he wag
powerless to stem.

There is something inexpressibly touching in Samuel's complete surrender of the
convictions and aspirations of a lifetime. After growing gray in a devoted effort to
make the system committed to him meet the needs of the people over whom he
ruled, he was suddenly called upon to break with the past, and not only give up his
own supremacy in the civil government, but himself inaugurate the system that
was to supersede him. It was not merely as if what was nearest and dearest to
him was slain before his eyes ; it was not merely as if, hke Abraham, he was
ordered to strike the fatal blow himself. He was called upon to do this and more ;
to take a stranger to his bosom in the place of the slain, and to foster Viim as his
own son. We shall measure the sacrifice of will better if we compare it with
another ; and we shall at the same time measure the difference in power between
the philosophy of a pious heathen and the faith of a pious Hebrew. When the un-
welcome truth was forced upon Cato that the republic to which he had devoted his
life was dead, his religion allowed him, and his philosophy counselled him, to die
with the political system for which he had striven in vain. And so the last upholder
of the old Boman republic committed suicide at Utica. It never occurred to hiia
that Heaven and his country still claimed services which it was no longer possible to
render to aparticular system; or that Heaven had better things in store for Ms country
under a new regime. To transfer his energies to the side of Csesar in order to make
the new regime as beneficial as possible would to Cato have been inconceivable.
Aud this is precisely the kind of sacrifice, intensified by being a sacrifice of religious
as well as of political conviction, that Samuel without a murmur made. It would
take time to work out, but it should be done. There is a bursting, as of heart-
strings, a wrench, as of one who ie parting from what is dearer than hfe, in the
simple utterance with which the discussion ends : "And Samuel said imto the men
of Israel, Go ye every man vmto his city" (oh. viii. 22). There was no power to say
mor«.



smnvk no NESEMtAa ism



The Monaboht. The Fibst Eins. Saul.

It was by a Divine revelation that Saul, the son of Kish, a Benjamite, was
pointed out to Samuel as the future captain over Israel, to save the people out of
the hand of the Fhihstiaes ; but we may reverently notice the wbdom of the choice.
The danger being from the PhUistities and the Ammonites, the king must be from
one of the southern tribes. A king from the northern groups would, perhaps, have
been negligent of pressure and danger in the south, or at least would have known less
well how to deal with it. Of the southern tribes Simeon or Benjamin would be
preferable to Judah or Ephraim ; for had the first king been taken from either of
the two great rival tribes, only too probably the other tribe would have yielded a
very imperfect aUegianoe. As between Simeon and Benjamin, there was not
much to recommend the first and a great deal in favour of the second. Of the
southern tribes Benjamin was the most central. It contained Bethel, perhaps
of all the sanctuaries of Palestine the most ancient ; Mizpeh, where the great
asstsmbUes of all Israel took place (Jndg. z. 17; xi. 11; xz. 1; 1 Sam. viL 6); and
Gibeon, "the great high place." It had had the honour of sheltering the ark at
Kirjath-jearim, perhaps also of being the home of Samuel; but the situation of
Bamah is uncertain. It was warUke and powerful, quite out of proportion to its
members or the size of its territory. The dying patriarch foretold that " Benjamin
should ravin as a wolf ; " and the way in which it defended itself against the rest of
Israel, in vindication of the horrible deed of the men of Gibeah, is one of the most
extraordinary things in the military history of the Jews. Among this tribe of
warriors Kish, Saul's father, was a powerful chief; and Saul himself was in stature
almost gigantic, with strength and activity equal to his frame (2 Sam. 1. 23). AH
these details are very significant, and help us to understand the meaning of God's
dealing with His people in yielding to their importunity, and granting a king.
The gift was at once a judgment and a blessing. It punished the people for the
wrong spirit in which they had demanded a king, and at the same time disciplined
them for the future, so that when a worthy king was found, a people worthy of him
was ready. In some sense Saul was the chosen of God, in the fullest setise he was
not. God pointed him out to Samuel as the future king ; not, however, as being
His own choice (1 Sam. xv. 11, 35), but as being such as the people would desire.
David was the " man after God's own heart ; " Saul was rather the man after
Israel's own heart. The Almighty was giving them a king such as they had
longed for, the goodliest man in all the land ; perhaps to show them that, although
when such men have His blessing they succeed, yet without it they are powerless
as the smallest child, whether against His friends or His enemies. Saul might be
" swifter than an eagle, and stronger than a lion ; " but when the Lord was no longer
with him, " the race was not to the swift, nor the battle to the strong."

" And it was so, that when he had turned his shoiilder (that great shoulder by which
he was afterwards so conspicuous) to go from Samuel, God gave him another heart "
(ch. X. 9). In other words, like his far greater namesake in the New Testament,
Saul was an instance of what we are accustomed to call " sudden conversion."
From this, as well as from the expression of astonishment, which has since become
a proverb, " Saul also among the prophets 1 " we gather that in his earlier life he
had been by no means a very religious man. In this, as in so much else, Saul was
a great contrast to the ruler whom he superseded. Prom his childhood upwards
Samuel had "ministered unto the Lord," and " the Lord had been with him"



xriY INTEODUCTION TO THE HISTOBIGAIi BOOKS:

(ch. ill. 1, 19). There has been no sndden change, hut a steady growth in holiness.
Hence the cahn steadfastness, the " sweet reasonableness " of all his conduct, even
nnder the gravest provocation. He can be tender, and he can be severe, bnt he ia
never fanatical. With Saul it is otherwise. A novice in reUgion, his spiritual
experiences are a series of surprises to him and throw him off his balance. There
is excitement and fanaticism in his religion almost fi-om the first ; and as he takes
little pains to deepen and make sure the change of heart which had been granted
to him, what is left of religion in him becomes, for the most part superstition mixed
with a strong kind of frenzy, which may have been something akin to religious
mania. We see the want of judgment and of reasonableness in his " forcing him-
self " to offer sacrifice, in his ill-advised adjuration, in his sparing the best of the
Amalekite spoil for sacrifice, in his fierce extermination of wizards, and in his
himself inquiring of the Lord through a witch. His career is a standing warning
to those who presume upon great spiritual blessings which they take no pains to
appropriate and secure ; from such an one " shall be taken away even that which
he hath." So it was with Saul. The modest, retiring conduct which charms us
so much at the outset is quite wanting in his later life ; instead of it we have his
ostentatious triumph over the Amalekites (Agag was spared to grace the procession)
and his envy of David's praises. The clemency which he shows at the outset to the
men of Belial, who scoffed at his election,is forgotten in his slaughter of the Gibeonites
(2 Sam. xxi. 1), and the savage massacre of the priests with all their families (1 Sam.
xxii. 17—19). In this he reminds us of our own King Henry IV. The sullen stern-
ness at the close of Ufe is so unlike the .bright generosity at the beginning of it.
The explanation in both cases is perhaps the same : disease, both of body and mind,
coupled with the reproaches of an iU-informed conscience. But, nsTno repente
turpiasinms : almost to the last Saul has his better moments, and in these nothing
is more conspicuous than his tenderness for David, whom at other times he had
come to regard with frantic hatred. In the whole of the Old Testament there is
no biography more tragic : the nearest to it, perhaps, is that of Samson. In both
we see the utter wreck of great powers through the indulgence of an unbridled wilL

It is a reUef to turn from the lurid Hghts and deepening gloom of Saul's last years
to the last years of the man with whom we have contrasted him. In spite of the
bitter trial which the establishment of regal power was to him, and the bitter
disappointment which the first king's recklessness caused him, Samuel remains
cahn and steadfast to the last ; steadfast aUke in his loyalty to God, to the heedless
king, and to suffering Israel. For a time he shared the supreme power with Saul
(oh. xi. 7). After the confirmation of the regal power, in the enthusiasm caused by
Saul's victory over the Ammonites (ch. xi. 14), he made his great testimony before
the people (ch. xii.), and then seems to have retired somewhat from the conduct of
affau-s, retainmg, but perhaps without being often called upon to exercise, his office
as judge (ch. viL 16), and appearing chiefly in his character as prophet. It is in
his character as prophet and as the anoiuter of David that his fanportance in the
history of the kingdom of God chiefly consists. The first point might have been
noticed earlier in the section speoiaUy devoted to Samuel; bnt the second must
have remamed over until now in order to avoid confusion. To consider the two
pomts together adds to the significance and impressiveness of each ; and with them
we may bring this section to a close.

As prophet, Samuel has mainly two aspects : (1) he is the founder of the sohoola
ot the prophets ; (2) he is the inspked exponent of the will of Ood.



JOSHUA TO KEHEMIAH.



■sn



(1) Although there had been prophets, and at least one great one before Samnel

—Moses, Miriam, Balaam, Deborah, and others (Num. xi. 26 ; Judg, vi. 8) yet he

was the first of the regular succession of prophets, which extends throughout the
whole period of monarchy. St. Peter seems to express this fact in his address to
the people in Solomon's Porch, " AU the prophets from Samuel and those that
follow after" (Acts. iii. 24). Henceforth we begin to read of those societies called
the " company of the prophets," and the " sons of the prophets " (1 Sam. x. 6, 10;
&o.), over which Samuel presided (ch. xix. 20). These schools, in which sacred
dance and music, both vocal and instrumental, were studied, together with the law
and prophetic utterances, have been compared with mediaeval universities. Theit
appearance precisely at this time, and their having their first seat in Bamah,
Samuel's own dwelling-place, leaves little doubt that he was the founder of them.
No one more fitted to found them could have arisen, for he had been a prophet
from childhood ; and this, so far as we know, was true of no other prophet imtil the
time of Isaiah.

(2) The law, in spite of the number of its enactments, could not possibly cover
aU cases in the infinite complexity and variety of life. Moreover, the law was
but imperfectly known, and when known it was often neglected. Hence there was
abundant of room, side by side with the law, for an authoritative statement of the
Divine will ; and indeed, in the numerous crises through which the Chosen People
had to pass, there was a crying need from time to time for such a statement. To

make it, to interpret God's dealings to man, to declare His counsels, to exhort and
warn in His name, were the functions of the prophet. The law might instruct
them about sacrifices, and purifications, and the elements of justice and charity;
but it required the tmmpet-voice of the prophet to remind king and people alike
that an obedient spirit is better than sacrifice (1 Sam. xv. 22), and that what the
Lord requires is not a self-satisfied conformity with written enactments, " but to
do justly, and to love mercy, and to walk humbly with thy God " (Mioah vi. 8).
The eternal principles of right and wrong, the unwritten law of God, these ore the
subjects of the prophet's utterance from Samuel to Malachi.

The Christian poet Keble ( ' Christian Year,' Second Sunday after Easter) longs
for " ft sculptor's hand " to set forth in stone the wild figure of Balaam uttering his
compulsory blessing over Israel. A subject that might make one yearn for a
painter's skUl is that of the aged Samuel uttering his sorrowful denunciation of the
king that he had himself anointed. The long, flowing locks, across which no razor
had passed, now snow-white with age, the spare, austere figure, the judge's bear-
ing, the prophet's eye, the long, flowing mantle, by which Saul tried to stay him,
and by which he recognised his apparition on the eve of his own death ; all these
form a picture, the majesty of which, if we cannot see it for ourselves, we gather
from the exclamation of the woman of Endor, " I see a god ascending out of the
earth " (1 Sam. xxviii. 18). To her the form seems superhuman and Divine.

It remains to notice Samuel as the anointer of his stUl greater successor, David.
This is his importance in the long prelude to the kingdom of the Messiah ; he is
the " spiritual father " of the greatest of the Messiah's progenitors. He not only
inaugurated the monarchy which typified Christ's kingdom, but he Uved to super-
sede the first unworthy king and to elect the man after God's own heart, the lion
of the tribe of Judah, the sweet Psalmist of Israel. Both the people's king and
the Lord's king receive their consecration from his hand ; and, therefore, whethe*
Vro trace the kingdom of Israel to the beginning of the monarchy, or the royal



tvd iNTBObtCl^iON TO THJl aiSfORlCAL BO0K8j



line of Christ to the beginning of its royalty, we come to Samuel as th«
vicegerent of Jehovah in instituting it. But this shows that, great as Samuel
is in himself (and he is one of the grandest figures in the Old Testament), yet in
his chief aspect his greatness is relative. He is great chiefly because he pre-
pares the way for David, just as the Baptist is great chiefly because he prepares
the way for Christ. Thus we see that the arrangement and division of the Books
of Samuel are fully justified. Eh and Samuel are too closely connected to be
severed, and as Samuel's place in the history is that of the inaugurator of the
kingdom and the anointer of David as king, it follows that the notices of Eli and
Samuel must come as a prelude to the history of the Kings rather than as a
conclusion to the, history of the Judges. This fact will also explain the omission
of nearly the whole of Saul's reign except the beginning and end of it. It ifl
immaterial to the history of the kingdom of God.

" And Samuel died ; and all the Israelites were gathered together, and lamented
him, and biuried him in his house at Bamah " (1 Sam. xxv. 1). Such is the simple
but pregnant account of the end of the grandest figure in Jewish history from the
conquest to the captivity. " All the IsraeKtes were gathered together," a fact to
which the narrator a second time directs our attention. " Now Samuel was dead,
and all Israel had lamented him, and buried him in Bamah, even in his own city "
(ch. xxviii. 3). With one voice they had responded to his challenge respecting
his integrity " (oh. xii. 5) ; with one voice they had all entreated him to pray
for them, when he brought home to them their sins in demanding a king (ch.
xii. 19) ; and now with one voice they lamented him, and sent representatives
from all parts of the land to pay the last tribute of respect to him. Bamah, his
birthplace and his dwelling-place, became his tomb; but inasmuch as the site of
Bamah remains unknown, it may be said of him, as was said of Moses, " No man
knoweth of his sepulchre unto this day."

The Fikst Einq of the Line of Judah. David.

We once more have to admire the infinite variety of Scripture. It has been
noticed as one of the various ways in which " the Spirit bloweth where it listefh,"
that we have this wonderful variety in the Bible. Had the Bible (which, be it
remembered, is an inspired library rather than an inspired hooV) been put togethe'
by men, no matter how learned and holy, this variety would have been wanting.
We should have had a more or less useful and edifying, but probably more rather
than less insipid, volume, suited at best to the needs of the generation in which its
compilers lived, and probably of only a limited portion of that. Instead of this, we
have, both in form and in matter, a many-sidedness and variety of which the world
has never wearied, and in which every person can find something to dehght his taste,
and every soul something to satisfy its needs. Side by aide with the stormy and
blood-stained pictm-es of the Book of Judges we have had the bright oasis of the
Book of Buth ; the vile conduct of the sons of Eh is narrated in the same chapter
with the sweet innocence of the child Sajnuel ; and here, as the reign of Saul darkens
through his withdrawing more and more from God, and God at last withdrawing
His Spirit from him, we have bright lights constantly breaking in from the life of
the yoimg son of Jesse. His guileless youth, the gloomy king's love for him, never
quite quenched even in Saul's darkest days (1 Sam. xxvi. 25) the touching friend-
ship with his persecutor's son, the exquisite lament over Saul and Jonathan, all
these things are a relief and a refreshment in the' midst of such scenes as Saul'i



JOSfitJA To NfiSEHlAfi. tM



bloodthirsty hunt after David (madness, as often, turning love into hate), th«
massacre of the priests, the night visit to Endor, the suicide on Mount Gilboa.

In treating of David in a summary of the present kind, the difficulty is to keep
within boimds, so rich are our materials. The age of David seems to have been
recognised almost at once by the Jews themselves as the grandest epoch that the
nation has as yet known ; as we can now see that it has never since been surpassed.
Hence the record of it has been preserved with a fulness of detail found nowhere
else in the historical books of the Bible. The narrators pour forth their knowledge
with a buoyant exuberance that is never weary and has no fear of wearying others.
Everything is of interest that belongs to that glorious time ; every one is of import-
ance whose fortunes are entwined with the career of that glorious king. Hence we
have a full account, not merely (as in the case of Saul) of the opening and close of his
reign, but of the whole of it. Hence also we have (what is wholly wanting in the
history of Saul) a very vivid account of a great deal of David's Ufe previous to his
ascending the throne. And it is probably owing to the fact that the earlier portion
of David's life is so much bound up vrith the latter days of Saul, that we know as
much as we do about those gloomy days. They derive their importance not from
the reigning, but from the future king. And it ig not only that our materials respect-
ing this period as a whole are specially full ; our means of knowing the central
figure of it are in the Old Testament unique. As in the case of St. Paul, and to a
much more limited extent of St. Peter and St. John, " we have the advantage of
comparing a detailed narrative of his life with undoubted works of his own com-
position ; and the combined result is a knowledge of his personal character, such
as we probably possess of no historical personage before the Christian era, with the
exception of Cicero, and perhaps of Csesar" (Stanley). Plato and Aristotle, like
St. John, we know more from their own writings than from what others have
written about them ; and, if the choice had to be made in the case of David, it is
the Psalms that we should keep while we let the history go. In them we have the
outpourings of his spirit and the secret workings of his soul, the key not only to
that age and that reign, but to the human heart throughout all ages. But God's
providence has preserved both for us ; and we have the rare privilege of comparing
the picture unconsciously drawn by himself in his songs with that which the
native historians give us of him. Thus we are able to penetrate to the springs of
the actions which they record, and also to judge how the events in which he shared
told on that noble and tender spirit.

As in the case of Saul, the anointing of the future king is preceded by a sacn-
ficial feast. And here we once more have an opportunity of observing how, in spite
of their frequent aberrations into idolatry, and their constant neglect or ignorance
of God and His law, the Israelites ever remained a religious people at heart. In
their hour of darkest need they ever " cried unto the Lord," and in their victories
they thanked Him. Trouble and blessing alike are recognised as ?oming from His
hand. A summons to a great sacrifice is never made in vain; and although the
sanctuary at ShUoh is in ruins, and the ark has no proper home, yet the worship
of God continues at local centres and in the family circle. It is in the complete
family circle at Bethlehem, gathered together for an act of solemn worship,
rendered specially solemn by the unexpected presence of the prophet, that we are
first introduced to the future king. His name (David =beloved) may perhaps
indicate that, like Joseph, he was his father's darling. Certainly, Uke Joseph, he
seems to have been estranged from his brethren (1 Sam. xvil 28) ; and in the



txtiii INTEODUOTION TO THE HISTOEIOAL BOOKS:

— __ — — ^wrf

solitary life wHoh lie lived, tending the flocks apart from them, much of tha
fouiitlation of his future life was laid. The impress which this period left upon his
mind is clearly traceable in the Fsahns (viiL, xix., zxiii., zxix., Lsxviii. 70,
72, &o.) ; and the devotion with which he guarded his sheep at the risk of his
own life (1 Sam. ivii. 34, 35) was an earnest of the Belf-sacrifioing spirit in which
he would rule over Israel.

It would seem as if David himself remained in ignorance of the meaning of
his anointing by SamueL No explanation is recorded, and no signs are given,
as there were to Saul, to confirm the anointing. When the young Psalmist was
summoned to exercise his skill in mnsio on the vexed spirit of the king, he prob-
ably never dreamed that he was to succeed him ; and when he went out to risk
his life against the giant of Gath, he knew not that he was risking his own king-
dom along with it. Still less did Saul know that the stripling before him was his
successor ; at Samuel's entreaty that had carefully been avoided (eh. xvi. 2)i And
so much had his mental depression and temporary derangement affected Saul's
faculties, that on the battle-field of Bphesdammim he did not recognise the skilful
young harper in the slayer of Goliath.

" David lost nothing by his encounter with the giant, not even his temper "
(Jaoox). Let those who think this latter point small praise consider what a trial
it is to a high-spirited young man, conscious of strength and activity, to be twitted
with his youthfulness as a boy unworthy of notice. He lost nothing, but he gained
much ; he gained his entrance into an entirely new sphere of life, which was to be
his second school of preparation for the throne. The victory over the giant was
thus a crisis in his life ; it "took him away from the sheepfolds" and introduced
him to court life.

His character suffered nothing in consequence ; on the contrary, it developed
rapidly. His promotion was rapid, but it did not turn his head. He became the
king's armour-bearer, the bosom friend of the king's son, the accepted lover of the
liing's daughter. In the midst of this success, jealousy of his praises, combining
with Saul's mental derangement, turned the favour of the king into hatred.
Henceforth David's position became one of the utmost deUcacy. It was scarcely
possible to be loyal at once to Saul, to Miohal, and to Jonathan. But David, who
as a lad had proved himself to be " prudent in matters " (ch. xvi. 18), in this difficult
position also " behaved himself wisely in aU his ways " (ch. xviii. 14). He won
Michal's hand, he retained the love of Jonathan, and he escaped the murderous
frenzy of SauL

He had yet another school to go through before his education for the leadership
of God's people was complete — the school of adversity.. The faithful shepherd had
become the prudent courtier : he must now become the vigilant, active, enduring
outlaw. This phase of life helps still further to ripen his character, specially in
two directions— chivalrous generosity and reliance upon God. His harp accom
panics him here also, and no doubt shared many a sad hour in the oaves of Engedi,
or on the slopes of Mahanaim. There is the true spirit of chivalry in his sparing
Saul's life twice when others would have taken it, in his readiness for recon-
cihation, in his burning protestation of his own innocence. " Jehovah, my God, if
I have done this ; if there be iniquity in my hands ; if I have rewarded evil unto
him that was at peace with me ; yea, rather, I have delivered biTn that without
cause is my enemy. Let the enemy persecute my soul, and take it ; yea, let him
tread down my life upon the earth, and make my gloiy abide in the dost " (Psa.



JOSHUA TO NEHBMIAH. xrU



viL 8 — 6). The eame psalm opens with a declaration of trust in God : " Jehovah,
my God, in Thee have I fonnd my refuge." The hmited outcast, seeking shelter
among the crags and rooks, and sometimes only escaping through his nimblenesi
and fleetness of foot, sings how Jehovah had " made his feet like hinds' feet, and set
him on His high places" (Pss. xviii 83). Jehovah is his "rook," his mountain fast-
ness, where he is safe (Psa. xviii 1, 2, 30, 81, 46 ; Ixii. 2, 6, 7) ; " His right hand holds
him up; " " He makes room for his steps under him, that his ankles do not sUp."
Such passages might he multiplied largely. And here we may remark two things
with regard to the Psalms, which teU of his sufferings and persecutions, whether at
this period or later on in his life. (1) They contain imprecations on his enemies
painful to read, so wanting is the spirit of forgiveness, the spirit that prays for
enemies. This is the particular in which the Psahns fall so immeasurably short
of the Gospel. Otherwise in reading them, one sometimes feels inclined to ask.
What has Christianity to give that is higher and nobler than this ? (2) On the other
hand, his enemies are never named: the denunciations are general, not speoiaL
There is no mention of Saul, or Doeg, or Ahitophel, or Sbimei. And in this also,
no doubt, he was ruled by the Spirit. Songs that were to be the heritage of
religious souls throughout all ages could not be marred by personal animosities.
And words which were laimched against the head of David's persecutors, Christian*
may utter as against the opponents of Christ.

The moment when the crown passes into the hands of the man who had gone
through this long and diversified training for it, is one of the strangest complication.
David, with a formidable force of 600 men, has crossed the border, and taken
service under the Philistine king, Aohish. Ziklag is granted him for an abode, and
he remains there sixteen months. And it is significant of the national feehug
respecting him, that a contingent from Saul's own tribe comes over to him here
(1 Chron. lii 1 — 7). But the lords of the PhUistines did not share Achish's trust
in David, and would not let him march with them against Israel. Thus David
was spared the misery of having to choose between faithlessness to Achish or
treason against SauL He returned to find that Ziklag had been plundered by the
Amalekites, and while he was taking vengeance on them, and recovering captives
and spoil, the fatal battle of Gilboa was fought, and the first news that greeted him
after his return to Ziklag was that Israel had been defeated by the PhUistines, and
that Saul and Jonathan were slain. The noble ode which celebrates their memory,
royal in its generosity, in its tenderness, and in the beauty of its language, is in
every way worthy of its subject and its composer. Perhaps there is no finer elegy
in any language. Its echoes had scarcely died away, when its author was called
apon to fill the vacant throne.

It augurs well for the new king's rule that he is no way eager to seize the
orown. The kingdom sought him, not he the kingdom. " For at that time day by
day there came to David to help him, until.it was a great host, hke the host of
God " (1 Chron. liL 22). But not until " the Lord said unto him, Go up " (2 Sam.
ii. 1), did David cross over into Judah, and by His special direction fix his seat at
Hebron, the ancient sacred city of the tribe, the tomb of the patriarchs, and the lot
of Caleb. Here he was anointed king, and reigned over Judah for seven and a half
years. It shows how entirely he Bubmitted himself to the Divine guidance, that he
made no attempt to grasp the rest of the kingdom, and did not oppose the setting
up of Ishbosheth as Saul's successor, but waited for God to give him the kingdom in
His own way. In this respect Dsivid is a striking contrast to Jeroboam and J«hq.



XXX INTEODUOTION TO THE HISTOBICAL BOOKS:

The yiotoiy of tho Fhilistmes had given them the oentral part of western
Palestine, and they veiy possibly conquered the north also : but in any case the
north was cut off from David's Idngdom in the south. In eastern Palestiae, Abner,
Saul's cousin and commander-in-chief, seems to have established himself -with
Ishbosheth, the only surviving son of Saul. Gradually they won back territory
from the Philistines ; then Ishbosheth was proclaimed king, and by the end of five
years was recognised as king by all but Judah. He, like David, chose an ancient
and sacred city as his seat of government — Mahanaim, on the borders of Gad and
Manasseh. The war between the rival kings was none of David's seeMng. Abner
provoked it by trying to gain possession of " Gibeah of Saul " in Benjamin, as a
capital for his puppet, Ishbosheth, no doubt with a view to ousting David, and
ruling over all Israel in Ishbosbeth's name. This bold stroke proved the ruin of
himself and the house of Saul : aai after his and Ishbosbeth's death (murders of
which David was wholly guiltless, and which he publicly condemned) there was no
other claimant to the throne. David was rewarded for his trust in God's promises,
and for his chivalrous conduct towards the house of Saul, and became undisputed
king of all IsraeL

During this brief period of limited rule over Judah, amid much that is promising,
we notice the beginning of two evils which are among the curses of Oriental
monarchies. (1) In order to strengthen himself, he seeks or accepts connexions by
marriage with various powerful £a,miUes. To Ahinoam and Abigail he adds four
new wives, and as a hold upon Abner, when he was willing to desert Ishbosheth,
he demanded back Miohal, whom Saul had taken from him. Thus a harSm, with
all its banefiil influences, was begun. (2) Being not yet firmly established, he was
obliged to humour his powerful relatives. Men whom he could not do without,
and whom he could only imperfectly control, acted without consulting him, or in
defiance of his wishes. His passionate lament over the murder of Abner, which he
could neither prevent nor punish, is the beginning of an enforced nepotism, which
throws a shade over the whole of David's reign.

All Israel now recognised the claims of the man, who, even in Saul's hfetime, had
ever led them to victory, and to whom Jehovah had said, " Thou shalt feed My
people Israel : " and he was anointed king in Hebron. He belonged to them &^
not to Judah alone. " All the tribes of Israel came to David and spake, saying.
Behold, we are thy bone and thy flesh " (2 Sam. v. 1). There had been no such
unanimity since the burial of Samuel, and it anticipates the feeling when in after
years David was recalled to the throne : " We have ten parts in the king, and we
have also more right in David than ye " (ch. xix. 43). Seldom, perhaps, has a
king been welcomed with greater enthusiasm than David. For long it had been
true of him, that "whatever the King did, pleased all the people " (ch. iii. 36), and
it remained true of him through nearly the whole of his reign. He was *' as an
angel of God " (ch. xiv. 17, 20 ; xix. 27) in their eyes ; he bowed their hearts " as the
heart of one man" (ch. xix. 14) ; he was "the light of Israel" (oh. xxi. 17). And
the enthusiasm was well founded. Like the greatest of our own kings, Edward I.,
David came to the throne thoroughly understanding and thoroughly disciplined for
the task that lay before him. In both cases there was a kingdom needing an
adequate organization for preserving internal unity and effective means of national
defence. Both rulers had learned much from the errors of the previous reign ; and
both knew that only with the sympathy and help of the people whom they ruled
could the great needs of the kingdom be supplied. Both had enlarged theiz



JOSHUA TO NEHEMIAH. xxxl

political and military experience by Bervice abroad ; and David probably learned
much from the excellent military system of the PhUistines. One more point of
resemblance, and it is the highest of all. Both kings were qualified for doing far
more than restoring unity and energy to a disorganized and disheartened people :
they were fit and ready to start then on a new career of order, and hope, and
progress.

Thus, without any advantage of birth, without any dexterous scheming or -nolent
revolution, in ripeness of mind and body, at the moment when he was most needed,
the greatest man of the age reached the highest position in it, the headship over
the whole of God's Chosen People. The shepherd-lad, musician, courtier, warrior,
poet, outlaw, and tribal king, had reached a pinnacle to which no one had risen
before, the throne of united Israel. He had experienced the trials of sohtary
watching in the wilderness, of jealousies and plots at court, of being hunted Hke a
wild beast in the mountains, of being an exile in the land of Israel's deadUest
enemies. There remained the severest trial of all, the possession of supreme power.
It remained to be seen whether one who had met with such transcendent success
would now lose his reUanoe on Jehovah, and begin to trust in himself

His first exploit is strong proof both of his sagacity and of his vigour. As king of
all Israel he could not remain at Hebron, it was not nearly central enough. On
the other hand, it would have affronted his own tribe to seek a capital entirely
away from Judali. Therefore some strong place on the northern frontier of Judah was
wanted. Jehus fulfilled aU these conditions, and the fact that the Canaanites had
been able to maintain themselves there for centuries, was evidence of its value as a
stronghold; indeed, they scoffed at the notion of its, being taken. Joab won the
post of commander-in-chief by being the first to scale the rooky side of the fortress,
a fact of no small influence on David's reign ; and then the citadel of Zion, now first
named in history, was soon taken.

Here David estabhshed his seat of government, and centuries of history have
ratified the wisdom of his choice. The creation of the national capital is therefore
contemporaneous with the estabUshment of the monarchy in its complete form, and
both aje the work of David. That it should be called "the city of David" was
doubly justified by his having captured it, and by the use he made of it. It com-
mands the country as no other place does ; for it stands on the broadest ridge of the
network of hills which runs through Palestine, firom Carmel to the wilderness of
Paran, forming the watershed between the Great Sea and the Jordan. Strategically
its position is very strong. Most of the approaches to it are too intricate and pre-
eipitoufl for large armies ; and the one that is least so, the one that has almost
invariably been used by hostile armies, is very circuitous— from Jaffa and Lydda,
over the pass of the Beth-horons to Gibeon, and thence over the hills to the north
aide of Jerusalem. History shows that the armies of Egypt and Assyria often
marched by along the plain, and sometimes fought there, without in any way
interfering with Jerusalem.

The moral effect of the capture was immense. All the surrounding nations waited
in suspense to see what the conqueror would attempt next. The efi'eot was felt as
far as Tyre, for Fiyxm sends workmen and cedar- wood to build a palace for David
in his new capital. The palace was built ; and we once more see the weakness of
fraU humanity in David's great work, in his violating the law (Dent xvii. 17), by
multiplying wives to himself; though he never seems to have done as Solomon did
to hi» own ruin, take wives from heathen nations. The Philistines also -n-e;-*



xxxii INTBODUCTION TO THE HISTOEIOAL BOOKS.

moved by the capture of Zion, and did not wait to be attacked, but invaded the land
and were twice utterly routed. The friendship of Hiram and the defeat of the
Philistuies secured peace for Israel along the whole of the sea-coast.

Thus fer David had been urged on by pohtical necessity : it was impossible to
undertake higher work till a seat of government was established and a prospect of
peace secured. But his heart had been elsewhere throughout. For fifty years
or more the ark of God had been homeless. It was still in its temporary
resting-place at Kirjath-jeaiim ; it must be brought to Zion and a new house
bmlt for it. First the Philistines' inroad and then the death of Uzzah — a terrible
warning to those who irreverently seek God "not after the due order'' (1 Chron.
XV. 13) — caused delay : but at last the half of David's wish was accomplished, and
the ark was brought up to Jerusalem; the other half, of building a house for it, he
was commanded to leave for his son. It is one more proof of the irrehgionsneBs of
the court of Saul that his daughter Michal considered the prominent part which
David took on this joyous occasion nothing but a shameful lowering of the royal
dignity. Her father had known how to keep priests in order, and now her husband
was making himself as one of them : and " she despised him in her heart."

Various psalms bear strong evidence of having been composed for this great
festival. Chief of these are Psahns czxxii., Ixviii., and xxiv. ; to which it., ei., and
perhaps xxix. and xxx., may ba added.

The seat of empire and the seat of worship being thus secured and united, David
proceeds to consolidate his kingdom both within and without. The details of his
military and civil administration, and of his religious institutions and successful
wars, are told U8 at great length. His victories, celebrated in Peahns Ix. and ex.,
carried the frontier of Israel to its furthest limits (Umits maintained for httle over
half a century), and then the brightest portion of his reign is over. His great sin,
the adultery with Bathsheba and murder of Uriah, follows and clouds the rest of his
Hfe. Immediately before it we have a fair spot to rest on for a moment, his tender
kindness to Mephibosheth, the crippled son, and apparently the only child of Jona-
than. Now that the most pressing work of his reign is completed, David remembers
his compact with Jonathan, that "Jehovah should be between them and their seed
for ever," and that " he would not out off his kindness from Jonathan's house for
ever " (1 Sam. xx. 42, 16). He makes inquiries for the descendants of Saul, liears
of Mephibosheth from the crafty Ziba, and generously provides for the depressed and
timid prince, who, but for his grandfather's sins, might have been king of Israel.
It is the last unclouded spot in David's life.

" Be sure your sin shall find you out " (Num. xxxii. 23). The rest of the life of
David is one long commentary on the solemn text. In tragic horror and pathos, in
psychological interest, in spiritual instruction, the history of David's sio and repent-
wice and punishment has scarcely an equal. Lust and murder, the common sins
of Oriental despotism, may be traced in part at least as the natural outcome of what
has already b«en pointed out as the plague-spot in David's royal state. No con-
sideration of pmdence, or honour, or gratitude, no fear of God hold's him back.
Bathsheba was the granddaughter of Ahitophel his counsellor ; Uriah was one of
hia " thirty mighty men," and was at that very moment risking his life for David.
It seems to show how prosperity and luxury had weakened David's character that
he remained indolently at Jerusalem while aU Israel was in arms against Ammon
and Syria. The sending of the ark to Rabbah seems also to indicate a change for
the wore*. The king's attempt to cover his crime showg the nobility of Uriah's



JOSSUA TO NEHEMIAH. ixziii

character, and as a reward for it he is made to carry his own death-warrant back to
the war. The atrocity of David's plot is scarcely excused by the fact that a similar
one had been laid against himself by Saul ; and the empty commonplace with
which David answers the message that there has been heavy loss of life, including
that of Uriah (2 Sam. zL 2S), is evidence of the slumber in which his conscience is
lulled. But there was soon to be a fuU awakening.

It is one more evidence how morally sound the Chosen People were at heart,
that the sin even of one so exalted, of one so dear to them, was not in any way
palliated wherever it became known ; and it is proof of how truly, in spite of it all,
he was " a man after God's own heart," that he made no attempt to excuse it, but
at once admitted it in its true colours. The noble courage of Nathan in rebuking
his sovereign is equalled by the nobility of David's complete confession and submis-
sion. " felix culpa I " one is almost tempted to exclaim, when one reads the
history of David's penitence, and still more when one appropriates the passionate
outpouring of remorseful struggle, of sense of guilt, of sorrow for sin, of yearning
for purity, of submission to God, of joy for the peace of reconciliation, in which he
has given a voice to the penitence of the whole world &om that day to this (Psahns
xxxii. and li.).

Sin has three consequences in this world — ^weakening of the sinner's own cha-
racter ; the force of bad example to others ; misery entailed on the sinner and those
connected with him. Every one of these can be distinctly traced in the case of
David's sin. For evidence of the first there is the cruelty to the conquered Ammon-
ites (2 Sam. xii. 31), the leaving Amnon unpunished, and the other great sin of
numbering the people ; for the second there is the outrage on Tamar, the murder
of Amnon, the revolt of Absalom, with the treatment of David's concubines ; for the
third there is the death of Bathsheba's first child, the efficient aid given by her
grandfather to Absalom, the immense power over David which complicity with the
murder of Uriah gave to the headstrong and impetuous Joab. No one can con-
sider these facts in themselves and in their pregnant consequences, and then think,
because of Nathan's declaration, " The Lord also hath put away thy sin ; thou shalt
not die," that God spared sin in the man after His own heart. There is no royal
road to forgiveness. And if any one thinks that David's sins ore any excuse for
his own, let him first try to measure the difference between the Law and the Gospel,
and then measure his own by David's repentance.

It is among the many curses of polygamy that the children of the different wives
grow up from the first in an atmosphere of sensual indulgence ; secondly, that there
is sure to be rivalry between them, and intriguing among their mothers, with a
view to their father's favour and the succession to his property. All this is abun-
dantly illustrated in the history of David's children, especially of Amnon, Absalom,
and Adonijah.

Absalom, the Hebrew Alcibiades, beautiful and bad, fascinating in manner and
hollow of heart, is the instrument by which the curse pronounced by Nathan was
fulfilled, " Behold, I will raise up evil against thee out of thine own house '' (oh. xii
11). The warnings taught by the troubles of Eli and Samuel seem to have been
unheeded ; for his children also grow up unchastened and unrestrained. It is signi-
ficant of the corrupt atmosphere of the harfim that Tamar thinks that David wiU
consent to an Incestuous marriage between her and her half-brother (ch. xui 18).
The murder of Amnon, similar to that of Shechem by Simeon and Levi, probably
left Absalom eldest son. In the irksome idleness of his enforced exile he oonoeivad

JOSHUA. «



xxxiT INTBODUCTION TO THE HISTOBICAL BOOKS:

bold Bohemes of self-advancement, and after four years of sldlfal preparation, flung
himself into civil war with a light heart. His complete sncoesa, especially in Jadah,
points to some falling off in David's popularity, the result, perhaps, of his conduct in
the Ammonite war, especially in the matter of Uriah. But both Absalom's success
and Absalom's overthrow were alike full of misery for David ; probably the heaviest
blows that had ever fallen on him in a long life of adventure and triaL Psalm iv.
seems to have been written for the evening, and Psalm iii. for the morning after
David's flight from Absalom ; Psalm xlii, may possibly refer to the exile beyond
Jordan ; Psalms Iv. and oix. are beheved to point to the treachery of AhitopheL
David's return was marred by an ominous quarrel between Judah and the rest of
the tribes. The rebeUion lingered on in the north, but was quelled by the vigour of
Joab. Once more the kingdom and its troubled king had peace.

We pass to the last period of David's Ufe. It has only one strongly marked in-
cident, and that a sad one, the numbering of the people — at the suggestion of Satan,
as we are expressly told (1 Chron. xxi. 1). The idea would seem to have arisen
from a proud desire to revel in the knowledge of the forces which were at his com-
mand, the result of his own new military system. If so, it would be similar to that
which brought a judgment on Nebuchadnezzar. " Is not this great Babylon, that
I have built for tiie house of the kingdom by the might of my power, and for the
honour of my majesty? " (Dan. iv. 80.) The thing was so hateful even to the not
too scrupulous Joab, that he left out the tribes of Benjamin and Levi, and would
not complete the census. This time David was permitted to choose his own punish-
ment ; three years of famine, three months of flight before his enemies, or three
days of pestilence. He had already experienced three years' fiaimine in punish-
ment for the " bloody house " of Saul ; and three months' flight before Absalom, in
punishment for his own sin with Bathsheba. He chose three days of pestilence.
And thus, as if to teach us the vanity of aU that is mortal because of the taint of
sin, this threefold i-piKu/ita eaewv, these three triplets of woe form the landmarks in
the reign of the greatest king that ever ruled over Israel. The three years' famine
had taught that God is " a jealous God, visiting the sins of the fathers upon the
children." The three years' flight had shown that God visits the sins of the fathers
on the fathers through the children. The three days' pestilence would prove that
the sins of a prince may be the scourge of a whole people, that the Lord gives and
the Lord takes away, and that He who oonld make Israel as the stars of heaven or
the sand of the sea for multitude could also unmake the nation with a word.

The rebellion of Adonijah, the eldest surviving son of David, who, with the aid of
Joab and Abiathar, tried to secure the throne for himself, troubled the last days of
the reign. But the aged king showed that his infirmities had not robbed him of
the power to rule. Solomon was solemnly proclaimed king, and the chief con-
spirators took sanctuary.

The end of this life of almost ceaseless change and eventfolness was one of peace.
David gave his last charge to his successor, and then " died in a good old age, full of
days, riches, and honour." It is characteristic of the age rather than of the man
that his last recorded words are words of vengeance. We see in this, as already
noticed respecting the Psalms, how very far short of the Gospel was the very best
that the Law could produce. In sparing Shimei's Ufe during his own hfetime, David
was above the moral level of his age ; but with regard to Shimei, as with regard to
Joab, he leaves to his son Solomon a legacy of vengeance, as though he repented
<'f his own lofty clemency. It almost shookg us to find th* sweet Psalmist of Israol



JOSHUA TO NEHEMIAH. rssy

ending his life, not with a Nunc dvmiitis, hut with the charge, " B3s hoar head bring
Thou to the grave with blood."

In the varied elements of his hfe and character there is no one in the whole of
the Bible like David. A ILTa teeming with vicissitudes, with romance, with pathos,
and those startling changes of fortune which make history so much stranger than
fiction. What drama ia equal to it for tragic and romantic interest alone, to say
nothing of instruction ? His character is as varied as his hfe. It reminds to no
small extent of him whose writings in the New Testament hold somewhat the same
place as the Psalms in the Old, the Apostle St. John. In both there is all the
strength of man with all the tenderness of woman. In both there is the same in-
tensity — intensity of action, intensity of thought and word, intensity of love and
hate. They could hate with the same fervour that they loved. They abhorred that
which was evil in cleaving to that which was good ; the one implied the other.
But, as we might anticipate from the difference of the dispensations under which
they Uved, the indignation which St. John feels for the wrong done to his Lord,
David often feels for the wrong done to himself. He has strong words, and strong
deeds sometimes, for those who treat him Ul. With the exception of his dastardly
eonduot to Uriah there is no meanness about him. There is nobility even in his
faults ; and certainly his repentance is noble. Is there any one in the whole of the
Old Testament of whom we know so much, and yet find so much to admire, and
praise, and love ? With his chivalry and generosity, with his passionate love for
his friend and for his son, with his sweetness and deUcaey, his energy and courage,
do we not feel him to be a man after mcm's own heart as well as after God's ?
Whether we take the world's rough measure and judge him by what he did, or look
deeper and judge him by what he was, we must admit that in him we have a king
who was at once a true hero and a true saint.

He was binried " in the city of David," i.e., on Mount Zion, in a tomb which he
had probably prepared for himselE Even the site of it is now unknown. But he
had reared himself another monument far more lasting in those imperishable hymns
which have secured him a memorial iu the hearts of all mankind. Of course not
all the Pgahns are his ; perhaps by no means all of those which bear his name. But
they are his in spirit, if not in fact: the Divine insjuration flows through him to
those who were moved to imitate him. They belong to no Church, eastern or
western, not even to Christianity itself, although the Gospel alone can give them
their full meaning. They are the possession of the whole human race wherever it
knows its God. Smce the day on which he gave them to the world, the Psalms of
David have never ceased to rise to the eternal throne.

It may be thought that this survey of the life of David ifl in extent out of aU
proportion to the remainder of the summary. But the example of Scripture itself
would seem to show that this is not so. Whether we regard the influence of David
himself upon the people he ruled, or the growth and development of the people
under his guidance, or the instruction which his hfe supplies for each individual
soul, or the deep analogies which lie between the history of Israel at this its most
glorious period and the history of the Christian Church, the age and reign of David
stands alone in the history of Israel If Samuel had founded a school of prophets,
David had founded a school of heroes, a nation of warriors, consecrated, like a great
military order, to the work of fightmg for the Lord against the heathen, for Hmj
who now first begins to be commonly known as " the Lord of hosts." Coming, like
JoMi of Arc, from deep pastoral sohtudes to take the lead in armies and stand at the



txxvi INTfiODUOTION TO THE HISTOEIOAL BOOKS:



tiglit hand of Mngs, lie had reanimated and raised from disgrace to glory a nobl«
but disheartened nation. A man of the people himself, and owing nothing to hia
birth, he was a living witness to all, that the very highest advancement was pos-
sible to every man who worked with the blessing of Jehovah. Thus the whole
nation felt itself ennobled in him, and reverenced him with an enthusiastic devotion
both on the throne and in his grave. This enthusiasm was not the creation of David :
it met tiTTTi half way, and was the greatest of aU his advantages ; second only to the
aid of Jehovah Himself. Thus he and his people mutually acted and reacted on
one another, a type and an earnest of the relations between Christ and His Church.
He abode among them, and they were represented and glorified in him, each
rendering still further advance more possible for the other. From that uncertaJn
period, which is neither childhood nor manhood, the nation had emerged into the
strength and self-possession of the prime of life. How long will it remain there ?
For the prime of a nation's life has no necessary limits. If the right conditions
are there, the hmits may be extended indefinitely. This question will £nd an
answer only too soon in the history of the next reign.

The Last Eino of United Isbasl. Solomon.

We pass from the deathbed of King David to a scene of almost dazzling splendour.
The few detailed narratives that have come down to us of events in the reign of
Solomon are enough to show us that : and fresh from the abundance of information
preserved for us respecting David, we are perhaps surprised that comparatively so
little is told us about the son who succeeded to aU, and more than all, his grandeur.
The fact of this almost sudden check in the full stream of the history is evidence of
one thing at any rate — that, whatever may have been the opinion of his ovm age
with regard to Solomon, later generations did not find the picture of his reign so
dehghtftil to dwell on as that of his father's era : and it was they, and not the con-
temporary writers, who had to decide what should be preserved and what not of the
annals of those times. It was pleasant to remember Solomon's miracles of vdsdom,
the treasures he accumulated, the splendour of his court, and the extensiveness of
his commerce. His temple, his palaces, and his public works remained as lasting
evidence of aU this magnificence. But at the same time men had come to know by
profound experience how dearly the magnificence had been bought. Israel through-
out long generations was paying the cost of Solomon's glory. Limitation of liberty
and heavy taxation at the time, followed in the next reign by a permanent schism ;
this was the heavy price. It might be worth while for Judah and Benjamin, who
had this magnificence and its accompanying expenditure in the midst of them, to
submit to some loss of freedom and to taxes which came back to them in trade ; but
what had Ephraim and the other tribes to gain by it aU ? Moreover, not even in
Solomon's day had the kingdom been preserved in its full integrity. Contrary to
the law (Lev. xxv. 18 — 84), he had given away a portion of the inheritance of Israel
to Hiram, king of Tyre (1 Kings ix. 11).

These considerations will explain to us why our materials for the reign of Solomon
are comparatively so scanty. Ko doubt there are higher causes still. In making
their compilations the sacred historians were guided to the preservation of what
was of permanent value for the history of the kingdom of God. Mere worldly
opulence and splendour has httle instructiveness about it. A prolonged narrative
of Solomon's magnificence and power would have had scarcely a higher moral
value than the " Thousand and One Nights." Enough is told us to enable us to ap-



JOSatJA TO NESEMIAS. smil

llf f i iri jT Bn' i l i l i T i ' I • r ■ I I II — ..»K»i.^.^__B

preoiate God's boiinty to the young man who deliberately preferred wisdom to wealth
and power, and to see the powerlessness of mere wisdom and onlture, eyen of tha
highest kind, when dissevered from the fear and love of God, agaiast human pa6-
sion and human pride. Under Solomon the star of Israel continues still to rise fbr
a time, and under him the zenith of the nation is reached. Yet his reign is not on
that account greater than his father's, which was a continual growth from first to
last. On the contrary, it is the lamentable distinction of Solomon's reign that with
him, and largely in consequence of his faults, begins a decline which was never
reaUy arrested and which in the end proved fatal. The lesson of his life is to a large
extent that of Samson's and of Saul's combined : miraculous powers neutralised by
self-indulgence ; great natural gifts rendered baneful by desertion of God. There-
fore a few scenes of splendour, the canker, and its consequences, are all that aire
needed to be told. The remaiader, however flattering to himself and his age, has
little instruction for ns.

Solomon seems to have been one of those men who try to serve God with one
hand and themselves with both. The one hand soon becomes weary of its doable
duty, and the end is devotion to self alone. Unlike his father, he was bom in the
purple, and had never known the bracing influences of difficulty or adversity.
Brought up in tho constant society of his mother, of whom we know much evil and
no good, and in expectation of a glorious crown, we can hardly wonder that his
character does not bear the strain of the posseBsion of enormous wealth and power.
Nothing had occurred to prove to him his entire dependence on God. His prayer
»t Gibeon, high and noble as it was, and " pleasing to the Lord," was not the
highest. It is the prayer of the Stoic rather than of the saint, of one who seeks to
be self-sufficing rather than of one who feels that dependence on God is his only
hope and stay. What would David have asked for had he had the choice ? His
psalms leave the answer scarcely doubtful : to be delivered from his transgressions,
to have a clean heart and a right spirit, to hold fast by God ; or, in one word, hoh-
ness. The widest range of wisdom without that was worthless, not only in God's
eyes but for bringing peace to the heart. This truth, Solomon, with aU his varied
knowledge, did not know ; and had to learn it through a dreary round of the bitterest
disappointments.

Solomon began well. He " loved the Lord, walking in the statutes of David hia
father" (1 Kings iii. 8), and almost his first care is to accomplish the desire, inherited
from his father, of building " the house of the Lord," for which David had long
since been collecting materials. But even at this early date, when all seems so fefr,
the germs of evil are not wanting. There is something astounding in finding that
one of his first acts was to seek a wife out of Egypt, the house of bondage. Since
the Israelites " spoiled the Egyptians " there had been no intercourse between the
two nations. Solomon's marriage was probably a diplomatic one, to gain the aid
of Pharaoh against Edom, or at least to -withhold him from helping Edom. It was
the beginning of those many imions with strange wives who in the end led him into
abominable idolatries. But he is nowhere said to have bmlt altars to any Egyptian
god, so that we may perhaps conclude that Pharaoh's daughter became a proselyte,
and that for this reason the marriage was not specially condemned. But the con-
nexion with Egypt, if it did not lead to idolatry, led to another violation of the
law. In direct contravention of Deut. xvii. 17, Solomon had horses brought out
of Egypt (1 Kings x. 28). Again, the oppressive slave-work to which not only the
surviving Canaanites, but even free-bom Israelites, were subjected in building the



jutTiii INTRODUCTION TO THE HISTOEICAL BOOKS-



temple (1 Kings v. 18, 14) is an unpleasing feature in the work. The prophecy at
Samuel (1 Sam. viii. 16) was being abundantly fulfilled. It has been suggested that
it was partly in order to keep out of sightand hearing the misery that he was causing
to these huge gangs of enslaved Israehtes and Canaanites, that Solomon had every-
thing made ready for the temple before it was brought to the site, so that it could
be put up there with little trouble and noise. Be this as it may, it is not improbable
that in the superb magnifioenoe with which he adorned the house of God, Solomon
foimd salve for a conscience disqxiieted by his luxvuious self-indulgence. If the
Lord had a large share of his opulence he might safely enjoy the rest.

In his temple, and in the prayer with which he dedicates it, Solomon appears as •
man with an ideal far above that which he actually practised. There is no harm
in this ; nay, it is what must be the case with all ideals, espeoiaUy with ideals in
religion. The fatal thing is when there is no effort to make the practice {^proach to
the ideal ; when a man rests content with having set up a high standard which he
does not strive to reach. This comes to be the case with Solomon ; and the solemn
warning which he receives immediately after the dedication leads us to suppose that
something is amiss already (1 Kings ix. 6 — 9). It would be startling to turn from
the eighth to the eleventh chapter of the First Book of Kings, if such inconsistencies
and falls were not among the common experiences of Ufe. First, the multitude of
sacrifices, and then the multitude of wives : first, the temple to the Lord G-od ot
Israel, and then the high places for Chemosh and Molech and ABhtoreth. The God
of light, and love, and purity is supplanted in the heart of the wisest of men by the
deities of darkness, and cruelty, and lust. "Whether the idolatry, which Solomon
certainly aided and appears to have shared, was the result of an unwise toleration ; or
of weak indulgence to his wives ; or of his great knowledge of nature, leading him
to seek forbidden ways into her mysteries ; or of his foreign policy, wliich might
eeem to make the permission and even support of foreign rehgions a pohtioal
necessity ; or of several of these combined — we cannot decide. Certain it is that
he was dragged down from the high spiritual level on which he started, and that
the nation was dragged down with him. In David's time monarch and people
mutually helped one another to rise. In the latter half of Solomon's reign the
reverse is the case, although for awhile the dazzling briUianoy of the age prevented
the germs of evU from being seen. Long peace gave a sense of security ; increased
commerce encouraged luxury and indolence ; and there waa the king himself show-
ing them tiie way to enjoy them. They were forgetting Him who had given and
could take away ; and this was in itself a half-way house to idolatry, with which
their foreign trade was again making them dangerously famihar. While this was
true of the more prosperous half of the people, the rest were being ground down by
Solomon's oppressive taxation and task-work, which were preparing a seething
mass of discontent ready to boU up at any moment. Thus David's nation of devoted
warriors was on the road to beoommg a nation of mmgled voluptuaries and serfs.
And if Solomon did not raise his people to a higher moral level, but rather the con-
trary, neither did his people help to raise him. They did not meet him, as they
did his father, with a warm and enthusiastic sympathy. There is enthusiasm about
him at first, but it is for his father's son rather than for himself ; and if for himself,
rather for the beauty of the young king's form, and for the inteUeotual dehght
•fforded by his conversation, than for what he did with them and /or them. He
was not, as David had been, one of themselves. They were not so sure of his sym-
p»thy, of his being able to understand them. Above all, it would seem ag if he had



JOSHUA TO NEHEMIAH. xxxii

little hold over their moral and spiritual life. Of his thousand and fiv6 songs
(1 Kings iv. 82), not one gained hold enough on the people to live ; and if they
e:xpressed the life -which is lamented OTer in the Book of EccleBiastes, it is as weU
that they have perished. Of the Psalms, only two by the Hebrew titles bear his
name (Ixxii. and cxxvii.), and of these the former is possibly, and the latter probably,
not his. Thus what was one of the strongest links between David and his people
was altogether wanting in the case of Solomon.

But there was not merely an increasing want of union between the sovereign and
the nation, there was also an increase in the old evil of disunion in the nation itselfl
Its chief bond of union lay in its reUgion ; and through the royal tolerance and sup-
port of idolatry the reUgious tie was being rapidly weakened. Would religious
men make pilgrimages to Jerusalem for the feasts only to be scandalized when they
arrived there by high places for Chemosh and for Molech, " on the MU that is before
Jerusalem," within sight of the temple itself? (1 Kings xL 7.) And if Jerusalem
was an offence to them, why should it remain their capital ? And what offended
religious Israelites did not attract others ; for those who lapsed into idolatry could
have their own impious altars at home. There was no need to go to the Mount of
OUves to worship. Thus for aU classes, religious and irreligious aUke, the tie that
bo;md them to the capital was fast becoming weaker, and in the next reign it
snapped altogether.

Of Solomon's last days and death we know nothing. If the traditional belief,
that the Book of Eoclesiastes is his confession of the vanity of his hfe, is correct, we
•re still far from knowing in what state he died. The book itself is an enigma. But
whatever be the interpretation of its half-melancholy, half-scornful estimate of hfe
in general, and specially of the Preacher's own, how different is it from the fifty-first
Psalm I In his persistency in sin and in the gloominess of his repentance Solomon
is utterly unlike his father. There is a calculating reflectiveness about the Preacher's
recantation, as apparently also about his sins, which forms the strongest contrast to
the passionate yearning with which the Psahnist flings himself and his sin before
Jehovah, and leaves all to Him.

This, then, is the moumfal conclusion : the wisest, wealthiest, and most powerful
king of the noblest nation — at that time the only noble nation — ^ia the world, at the
most glorious period of its career, writes this at the end of a long life and reign at
the sum of his experiences : " AU is vanity."

Before passing on, let us remind ourselves that we are following not so much the
history of a people or the Uves of individuals, as the history of a religion, the history
of the kingdom of God. The history of the people and of its leaders is real and not
fictitious ; but at the same time it is typical, and was divinely ordered throughout
to be so. The history of the people shows forth in a figure the mysteries of redemp-
tion, and both in figure and in fact God's moral government of the world. The
Uves of the representative leaders set forth in a figure each some fragment of the
life of Christ. The Messiah is Priest, Prophet, and King. All these great offices
of the Theocracy find their highest representative ia Him : all, therefore, who held
these offices under the law were each in their measure types of the Messiah. In
the supreme rulers of united Israel we have just had examples of aU three : Eh the
priest, Samuel the prophet, Saul, or David, or Solomon the Mng.

The high-priest was the representative of the people before God, the intercessor
between God and man. He went into the holy of holies once a year to make atone-
ment for sin with blood. But the holy of holies was no perfect sanctuary, for it



INTRODUCTION TO THE filSTGRlOAL BOOKS J



was made with hands. The atonement was no perfect atonement, for it needed to
be repeated. The sacrifice was no perfect sacrifice, for it was the blood of a brute
beast, which can never take away sins. Above all, the priest was no perfect priest,
for he had to make atonement for his own sins before he interceded for the people.
AU the ordinances respecting him and his sacrifice proved to the people that though
he was divinely ordained, and a true type, yet he was no more than a type. They
must look elsewhere for the true Priest, and true Intercessor, and true Eepresenta-
tive, who would offer one perfect sacrifice for ever putting away sin.

As the priest represented man to God, so the prophet represented God to man.
He came to declare God's wiU : His commands, His promises, His judgments. He
came to denounce the priest, who forgot his high calling and profaned the sanctuary
or allowed others to do so ; to warn the people who forgot that the Lord was their
King, and that the Lord was their God ; to rebuke the king who forgot that he had
to obey as well as to rule, and that for Viitn too there were punishments for wrong-
doing. But the prophet, though he bad a Divine commission, which was often
attested by miraculous powers, was manifestly not perfect. He declared at best
only a fragment of the truth ; and he often uttered that fragment so dimly anil
obscurely that it was hard to gather his meaning ; sometimes he himself did hot
understand the meaning of his own message. Therefore he too, though a true
prophet sent from God, was but a type and an earnest of the perfect Prophet, who
should not only teach what was true, but Himself be the Truth ; who should not
only declare God's word, but Himself be the Word of God.

But, while the prophet declared God's wiU, he had no power to enforce it : he did
not rule, he did not govern. There needed, therefore, to be yet another representa-
tive of God in the Theocracy ; one who should represent not so much His will as
His authority. This was the king, the vicegerent of Jehovah, " the Lord's anointed."
He represented " the Lord of Hosts " as " Captain over His people " (1 Sam. ix. 16 ;
X. 1 ; xiii. 14 ; 2 Sam. v. 2 ; 2 Kings xx. 5) ; he represented " the Judge of all the
earth," as appointed to execute judgment and justice between man and man. But
in giving this lofty type of royalty to His people, God showed to them that it was
» type and no more : for their captain could not promise them victory, and their
judge was not infallible in judgment. The perfect King, the great Anointed One,
was still to come. (See Perowne • On the Psahns,' i. pp. 49 — 52.)

And if it was clear from the very nature of the offices themselves that they were
only types of something more perfect, stiU more clear did this become when the
people had experience of the men who held the offices. Each of these offices had
in turn come to be supreme in Israel ; and therefore it might perhaps have seemed
as if the great representative of each bad come. But it was impossible that EU,
whose weak fondness had tolerated the enormities of his sons, and who had himseU
been rebuked for his shortoomiags, could be the perfect priest. It was impossible
that Samuel, who also was discredited in his sons, who feared to do God's bidding
lest Saul should kiU him, who mistook Eliab for the Lord's anointed, who was
bidden to set another in his own place as supreme ruler, could be the perfect prophet
It was impossible that Saul the strong, or David the well-beloved, or Solomon the
magnificent, could be the perfect king ; for was it not also true to call them, Saul
the suicide, David the adulterer and murderer, Solomon the idolater ? From the
men themselves, therefore, as well as from the nature of the offices which they held,
it was manifest to aU that the true Priest, Prophet, and King was not yet given ta
IsraeL It was their duty still to watch, still to prepare for Him.



lOSStTA TO NEHEMIAS, stl

The time of waiting was long and dark. The types, especially in the perma"
nent offices of priest and king, grew less rather than more perfect, as the men who
held them grew less worthy of them. The kingdom was rent in twain, and in the
true sense of the title there was no kiag of Israel, no captaia of the Lord's people.
" The prophets prophesied falsely, and the priests bare rale by their means." And,
worst of all, the "people loved to have it so." WeU might the prophet ask, " What
will ye do in the end thereof ? "

The Divided Kingdoms of Judah and Isbaei..

We may pass on rapidly now. In a sketch of this kind it would not be possible,
nor if possible be worth while, to give a detailed notice of each of the kings that
for a time reigned over the divided kingdoms of Judah and Israel. It wiU suffice to
state the general chrvracteristics of each kingdom, and to trace the tendencies in
each from the division of the monarchy to the Captivities. There is a dismal mono-
tony about many of the reigns, especially in the northern kingdom. The special
features of each, and the lessons which they seem to inculcate, will be found in the
commentaries on the Books of Kings and of Chronicles.

Sometimes a weak rule following a strong one is a clear gain : the nation is able
to advance more firmly, and develope more freely, for the relaxation which follows
after discipline. Such might possibly have been the case had Behoboam made wise
concessions to the reasonable demands of his subjects. As it was, there was an
unhealthy reaction, a severing of ties both political and religious in a way that almost
precluded the possibility of reunion. It was a severing of ties which had long
fretted some of those who were bound by them, and who were therefore all the less
likely to seek to be reunited. The rivalry between Ephraim and Judah has been
compared to that between the houses of York and Lancaster in our own history ;
but the parallel fails in several obvious particulars. In England we had not the
miserable result of two rival kingdoms perpetuated for centuries. Again, the con-
test was between two royal families and their followers ; there was no deep cleft
running through the whole nation. When the familios ceased to quarrel, the nation
at once reunited. Lastly, our civil war was not embittered by differences of
religion : neither party set up a religious as well as a political schism. From the
time of the conquest of Canaan the leadership of Israel had been more or less
with Ephraim. Joshua had belonged to it, and Ephraim held bis tomb. Shechem
with the two sacred mountains, and ShUoh tlie ancient sanctuary, were within its
borders. The territory of Ephraim was both rich and secure. Its fruitful plains
could scarcely be approached by an army either from the east or from the west, and
no attack from either quarter is on record. Its vulnerable, though not very vulner-
able, side was the north, and here, from the plain of Jezreel, Shalmaneser invaded
it. These advantages fostered the haughty spirit which was natural to the tribe.
Hence their jealous complaints against Gideon (Judges viii. 1), against Jephthah
(Judges xii. 1), and against David (2 Sam. xix. 41). The death of Ishbosheth and
the personal popularity of David staved off the rupture for a time, and retained
Ephraim in uneasy union with Judah : but the success of Absalom's revolt shows
how insecure the tie between the rival tribes was. Had Solomon succeeded in kiUing
Jeroboam (1 Kings xi. 40), the union might possibly have continued for some time
longer for want of a sufficiently able leader to head the secession. Eehoboam's
selecting Shechem rather than Jerusalem for his coronation shows that he wag
not ditdnolined to recognise Ephraim's claims on the reigning houM. But it was



xia INTBODUOTION TO THE HISTOBIOAL BOOKS:

far too late for a trifling concession of this kind to do much to'wards soothing angi7
and ambitions Epkraimites. It might even irritate them by flaunting a pomp
before them which they knew was to be paid for by oppressive taxation : and Eeho-
boam was the last king of Judah who visited Sheehem as part of his own dominion ;
the last also who, having ventured bo far, returned home unmolested.

The history of the kingdom of Israel is mainly the history of the tribe of Ephraim ;
and some of the prophets call attention to this fact by calling the kingdom not
" Israel," or " Jacob," or even " Joseph," but simply Ephraim (Hosea iv. 17 ;
V. 8—14 *c. ; Isa. vii 2—17; a. 9, 21, &e. ; Zeoh. ix. 10, 13). " The ten tribes"
was a geographical rather than a political expression. Of the northern tribes it
still remained true that they "dwelt among the Canaanites" (Judges L 82, 83),
rather than the Canaanites among them ; and the tribes east of Jordan remained,
as before, very much cut off from their brethren. Simeon and Dan gravitated
towards the kingdom of Judah, together with the greater part of Benjamin ; bo
that the kingdom of Israel is mainly the lot of Joseph ; i.e., Ephraim and Man-
asseh. This fact must be borne in mind in considering the nature of the disrup-
tion. Here, as so often, we are in danger of confounding occasions with causes.
It was not the ambition or abOity of Jeroboam, it was not the task-work and
taxation of Solomon, it was not the folly of Eehoboam, which were the causes
of the rupture. All these things combined made a very favourable opportimify
for it : but the real causes lay deeper ; viz., in the ambition of Ephraim stimulated
by its undoubted advantages and its jealousy of Judah, a jealousy of 400 years
standing.

The kingdom of Israel had a grand opportunity of justifying the BeoessioD. It
might resolutely have set to work to avoid and to remedy the grievous errors which
had disfigured the latter part of the reign of Solomon. The fatal mistake consisted
in supposing that these could be avoided by mere severance from the house of
David, and that no remedy was needed. Had Jeroboam and his successors honestly
laboured to aboUsh idolatry, to moderate taxation, and to strengthen the frontier,
they would have retained the aUianoe of the prophets, the most powerful moral
force of the age, and would have won the respect and lasting affection of the
tribes. But they cared for their own dynasty much more than for the true religion,
and to surpass Judah much more than to put down and thrust back the heathen.
Thus even in the first period (from Jeroboam to Ahab, B.C. 976 — 900), which is one
of hostility between two kingdoms, although Israel gains considerable advantages
over Judah, yet what advance is made is wholly in the southern kingdom, while
the northern simply goes back. Jeroboam, in order to make the break with the
capital of Judah as decided as possible, made a clean sweep of aU that could remind
his subjects of the glory of David and Solomon, and with it of a large portion of
the existing civihsation. Thus his kingdom was at once sent back to the rudeness
of the age of Saul ; and before long was plunged in the anarchy and consequent
weakness which had distinguished the age of the Judges. Hence in the kingdom
of Israel there seems to be nothing to compensate for the evil of division. For the
evil of division in an empire is by no means necessarily unmixed. Sometimes the
several portions develope all the more healthily for being independent, if only they
have sufficient internal force and sufficient scope for action. The kingdom of Israel
was deficient in both ; and the force which it possessed was misdirected, so that
what scope it had was thrown away.
In the kingdom of Judah the schism was by no means all loss, although the



JOSHUA TO NEHEMIAH. rijii

balance was on that side. It lost seriously in prestige and population, but it gained
in compactness. It had the incalculable advantage oi preserving the true reUgion,
It possessed the temple, and (thanks to the wicked and shortsighted policy ol
Jeroboam) it possessed the sympathy and support both- of the hierarchy and of
the prophets. Jeroboam's idolatrous sanctuaries at Bethel and Dan drove aU <Jia
priests and Levites to Judah, and threw the prophets into irreconcilable opposition:
and although the southern kingdom remained by no means free from the abomina-
tions of idolatry, stOl these existed side by side with the worship of Jehovah, and
not (as in the northern kingdom) in place of it. Of the prophets whose writings
have been preserved, only three seem to have mmistered in the northern kingdom

Jonah, Hosea, and Amos ; and of these Amos was a native of Judah.

These advantages and disadvantages on the one side and on the other existed
from the first ; others showed themselves in the course of time. In the kingdom
of Judah the crown remained in one family, the house of David, which possessed
the enormous prestige of the promise of the ^Messiah. In Israel, on the contrary,
a dynasty never lasted for more than a few generations, and a new dynasty was
generally introduced by a bloody revolution. Thus in the two centuries and a half,
during which the kingdom of Israel lasted, it had nineteen kings, while Judah in
the same period had only twelve. This of course was the result of the violent
deaths which generally marked a change of dynasty in IsraeL Israel in this
respect sunk to the level of ordinary Oriental kingdoms, while the permanence of the
house of David was probably absolutely unparalleled, and was therefore perpetual
evidence of God's blessing. We have seen that the period of the Judges is summed
up in the statement that " in those days there was no king in Israel, but every
man did that which was right in his own eyes " (Judges xvii. 6). Similarly the
history of the kingdom of Israel may almost be summed np in one simple and
typictJ. narrative ; " the people that followed Omri prevailed against the people that
followed Tibni : so Tibni died, and Omri reigned." Might is right, and the weakest
goes to the wall ; but the mere change of names in the rivals adds nothing to the
interest or instructiveness of the history. It is a dreary round of tyranny over-
turned by violence and succeeded by tyranny again.

Along with this contrast as regards the stabUity of the reigning house a contrast
soon showed itself between the individual sovereigns in each kingdom. Israel
produced a few kings who deserve to be called successful rulers, e.g., Jehu and his
descendant Jeroboam II., but not one who was morally even respectable. Jehu's
" zeal for the Lord " was apparently sheer hypocrisy : he put down Baal-worship
because poUtioal capital might be made out of such an auto-da-fe, whUe he retained
{he worship of the calves because it appeared to be politically expedient to do so.
In Judah, on the other hand, although there was abundance of idolatry and other
wickedness among the kings, and although Solomon's erections on the Mount of
Olives to Chemosh and Moloch remained, and probably were used, for four centuries,
yet upright and even holy kings were not wanting, some of whom carried out very
thorough reforms, e.g., Asa, Jehoshaphat, Jotham, Hezekiah, and Josiah.

After ft consideration of all these difTerenoes between the two kingdoms, and
others might be added [e.g., fixedness of the capital on one side, and change on the
other ; subordination of the army in the one case, insubordination in the other), we
are prepared for the final result— that the kmgdom of Judah lasted for 180 years
longer than that of Israel, and that its punishment was limited in duration, whereas
that of Isra«l oontinnes to this day. No doubt a considerable number of the captives



sllT INTEODtrOtlON TO TfiE SlSTOBlOAL BOOKS i



from Israel shared in the restoration of Judab, but the bulk of them have been
merged in Oriental populations. The astounding fiction that the English nation
is descended from the lost ten tribes contradicts the very first principles of history,
ethnology, and philology ; and even if it were true would be worthless for the
purposes which it is supposed to serve ; for the promises made to the patriarchs and
their descendants are now transferred to the Christian Church, Not Jews, whether
known to be so or not, but Christians are heirs to the promise. If this remains
doubtfd, surely St. Paul has written in vain. But of this more hereafter.

A more profitable question remains: Was the disruption of the Tcmgdom fMl*
foAiourable to the special mission of the Jewish Church ? That mission was to
keep rehgious truth alive in the world, to preserve the worship of the one true God,
and to prepare a field for the Gospel. Even if united Israel, had it remained true
to its caUing, would have fulfilled the Divine purpose in the best way possible, yet
it is not difficult to see how, imder the conditions existing in the reign of Solomon,
this purpose may have been better accomplished by the kingdom of Judah than by
the whole nation. Let us remember that the Canaanite was still in the land, m
the northern tribes perhaps stiU in a majority ; that there was extensive commerce
between Tyre and the northern tribes, and that this promoted idolatry and its
attendant corruptions ; that Syria, conquered and garrisoned by David (2 Sam. viii 6),
had under Bezon begun to shake itself free (1 Kings xi. 23 — 25), and to produce
a baneful effect upon the north of Israel From all these evil influences the king-
dom of Judah was very considerably protected by the barrier of the northern king-
dom. Ag^ain, the expulsion of the priests and Levites from Israel, and their
concentration in Judah, helped the cause of true religion in that kingdom. For,
however much the hierarchy may have fallen below the level of their sacred
office, they at least kept aUve a knowledge of Jehovah and of His worship,
wherever they were ; and Judah now possessed the whole of this teaching, which
before had been diffused through all the tribes. Above all, the kingdoms being two
instead of one, it was possible for one to be a lesson and a warning to the other.
This was certainly the case latterly, to the great benefit of the true rehgion in Judah.
"Would Hezekiah's reign have been as godly, would Manasseh have repented, would
Josiah have been able to carry out his pious reforms, had there not been before
the eyes of all the awful judgment which had overtaken the sister kingdom of
Israel ? Add to this the notable fact that precisely the period when Judah has
friendly relations with Israel, and the two kingdoms are to some extent reunited,
is perhaps the very worst period both morally and politically in the history of Judah.
For all these reasons we may believe that, although the disruption oi the monarchy
was an abandonment of the highest ideal, yet in God's Providence good was brought
out of evil ; and, as in the earliest disruption of all, when the patriarch.- broke their
family bond by selling Joseph into Egypt, the wrong-doing of the few was turned
into a blessing for many, iaoluding in the end even the wrong-doers themselves.

The Captivity of Israel.
After a duration of 255 years the kingdom of Israel came to an end in the reign
of the nineteenth king, Hoshea. He was the last and the best of that unholy and
irregular line of monarohs. It might perhaps surprise us that the annihilating
bbw should fall in the reign of the best king. But " the best king of Israel " is an
expression of diminished blame rather than of praise. " He did evil in the sight of
the Lord, but not as the kings of Israel that were before him " (2 Kings xyii. 2),



JOSHUA TO NEHEMIAH. xh



He is not good, but somewhat less abominaWe than his predecessors. We are not
told in what this diminution of wiekedness consisted. We may conjecture that
when the golden calves were carried away, the one at Dan by Tiglath-Pileser, and
the one at Bethel by his son Shalmaneser, Hoshea did not set them up agaui, nor
enforce the polioy of the arch-apostate, of preventing his subjects from going up to
Jerusalem to worship. It is not said of him, as of nearly all of his predecessors,
that " he departed not from the sLas of Jeroboam, the son of Nebat, who made
Israel to sin." Even had Hoshea been like his contemporary Hezekiah, we maj
doubt whether the fate of Israel would have been averted. There is a point in t)ie
character of nations, as of individuals, at which gravitation acts irretrievably, and
at which there is no possibility of redemption in the natural order of things. God
may work a miracle of grace and turn the course of nature, but we have no right
to expect Him to do so, even in answer to prayer, any more than to expect Him in
answer to prayer to stop the avalanche which we have set rolling; and in this case
there would seem to have been no prayer. If this is true of character, much more
is it true of the natural results of character, the miseries which follow in the train of
persistent wrong-doing. Kepentance may be granted, but it may come too late to
avert any of the temporal consequences of sin. " The case is become desperate :
and poverty and sickness, remorse and anguish, infamy and death, the effects of
their own doings, overwhelm them, beyond possibility of remedy or escape " (Butler,
•Analogy' I. ii.). Or, as the contemporary prophet Hosea testifies (oh. vii. 1, 2),
" When I would heal Israel, then the iniquity of Ephraim is discovered, and the
wickedness of Samaria : for they commit falsehood ; and the thief cometh in, and
the troop of robbers spoileth without. And they consider not in their hearts that I
remember aU their wickedness ; now their own doings have beset them about; they
are before My face." The next verse seems to imply that, whereas in former
times it was the kings that " made Israel to sin," in this last reign it is the people
that take the lead in iniquity. " They make the king glad with their wiokedness,
and the princes with their Ues." Thus the unrighteousness of sovereigns and their
subjects acts and reacts one upon the other. Israel's wounds were incurable
(Micah i 9), her cup of iniquity, bloodshed, idolatry, and impurity was full, and
the only cleansing that remained was that they and their sins should be swept
away together.

Although the reign of the last Mng was morally superior to that of the others,
yet politically the monarchy preserved its irregular character to the last. Like
exactly half his predecessors, Hoshea was an adventurer, who gained the throne by
the slaughter of his sovereign. In nineteen kings we have nine different dynasties,
four of which end with the conspirator who founded it; among the whole nineteen
" not one calling upon the Lord " (Hosea viL 7). And thus the Lord was ever giving
Israel a king in His anger, and taking him away in His wrath (ch. xui 11).

The last terrible end did not come without warning. Over and above the
permanent declarations of the Law, and the frequent denunciations of specially
commissioned prophets, two lighter calamities heralded the coming of the final blow.
In the last reign but one, Tiglath-Pileser (b.o. 740) had carried into captivity the
three tribes east of Jordan (1 Ohron. v. 26), " and GaUlee, and aU the land of
NaphtaU" (2 Kings xv. 29). At the beginningof Hoshea's reign Shalmaneser made
an attack on Phoenicia and terrified the new king of Samaria into becoming tribu-
tary without a contest. All Phoenicia was conquered except Tyre ; and its success
in holding out perhaps encouraged Hoshea to endeavour to throw off the yoke which



dfl INTEODUCTION TO THE HISTOEICAL BOOKS:

Le had accepted. To strengthen himself he made an alliance, not with Hezekiah,
who also was revolting, but one forbidden by the law, with So king of Egypt,
probably the Sabaoo of Herodotus or the Sevechus (SeYiohos) of Manetho. Thus
the same dark power which had tried to strangle the Chosen People at its birth,
which had lent its sinister aid to the founding of the schismatical kingdom of Israel,
now by once more lending aid contributed to its final overthrow. So truly was
Egypt like the reeds of its own river, "on which if a man lean, it will go into
his hand and pierce it " (2 Kings xviii. 21). The alliance was made known to
ShaJmaneser, who at once called Hoshea to account and put him in prison. And
thus Samaria's king " is out off, like a chip upon the water " (Hosea x. 7). Samaria
held out stubbornly, like Jerusalem after it, defending its walls, its " crown of
pride " (Isa. xiviii. 8), with the courage of despair. JChis death-struggle, the last
of an expiring people, lasted three years ; at the end of which the place was taken
by Sargon, the successor of Shalmaneser. BKs "veni, vidi, vici" is stiU in existence :
" Samaria I looked at, I captured : 27,280 who dwelt in it I carried away." This
was the common policy of Oriental conquerors — to transplant the inhabitants of
conquered territories, and occupy their land with other populations. This served
various purposes. It weakened both of the nations interchanged, and kept them
for a time at least submissive ; for their energy would be expended in settling in their
new home. Sometimes a trustworthy people near at home was exchanged with a
troublesome nation near the frontier : this was precisely the case with the Israelites.
Sometimes a more advanced people were planted as a centre of civilisation in the
midst of ruder tribes. The Israelites were not only transported but dispersed, no
doubt with a view to prevent concerted action in the future, a policy which has
been entirely successful (2 Kings xvii. 6; xviii. H). A few may. have escaped the
Assyrian net and remained in Samaria, or have returned thither afterwards, to
mingle with the Samaritans. A few returned vsdth the Jews and became merged with
them in Judaea. Many would coalesce with the Jews in Babylon and become part
of the " Dispersion." It is worth noting in reference to the last two cases that
Ezekiel, after the captivity of Judah, speaks of the captives as Israel (ch. ii. 8 j
iii. 1 — 7; iv. 3, 13, &o.). The bulk probably carried their habitual love of idolatry
with them into exile, and became lost by intermarriage with the heathen popula-
tions of Assyria. The imagination of Jews and ChristianB alike has tried to pierce
the veil which history has drawn over their ultimate fate. The black Jews of
Malabar, the Bed Indians of North America, Afghan tribes, Himalayan tribes, the
Nestorians, have all had their advocates as the representatives of the lost tribes. It
was reserved for the present generation to suggest and maintain almost as an article
of faith, or even as the announcement of a new gospel, the most wildly impossible
theory of all, that the present descendants of these Semitic ancestors are the Aryan
inhabitants of Great Britp;in. To some persons this astonishing hypothesis seems
too absurd to be worth combating, whUe others allow it to pass as a harmless
delusion.

The following questions demand a clear and reasonable answer from all those
who advocate the doctrine :

(1) If Anglo - Israelism is true, how is that not a single fheologia/n, or
historian, or philologist of any eminence lias accepted it, or even admitted its
possibility ? True that the Gospel was in the first instance hidden from the wise
and prudent and revealed to babes ; but it does not therefore follow that what the
Wise and prudent reject, and babes accept, is true. Moreover, the wise U}4



JOSHUA TO NEHEMIAH. xlrii

prudent accepted the Gospel when it became known to them. Here the wise and
prudent disbelieve, not because things are hidden from them, but because they are
known. It is those who do not know aU that their own theory involves who
believe.

(2) The change of a Semitic race into an Aryan race, of a Semitic language into
an Aryan language, would be a miracle of the very highest order. Where is the
evidence of the miracle f It is trifling with faith to believe in a miracle utterly
unsupported by evidence. A nation disappears from history ; after a lapse of
many centuries another nation, entirely different in type and language; grows up in
quite a different part of the globe ; and we are asked to beUeve, without anything
that can seriously be considered evidence, that the one has become the other. We
might as well believe that the rose-trees in the Temple gardens sprang from the
olive-trees of Gethsemane, through cuttings brought home by the Crusaders.

(8) Even if the theory were true, what would he its value f As already stated,
the blessings promised to Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob have passed over to
the Christian Church. " He is not an Israelite who is one outwardly." Human
generation has nothing to do with spiritual regeneration. "If righteousness
comes by the law," if spiritual blessings depend on descent from Abraham, " then
Christ died for nothing " (GaL ii. 17).

Thus much with regard to the past seems to be in place and necessary in the
present historical sketch. It would be altogether out of its scope to inquire into
the future by discussing the hidden meaniug of unfulfilled prophecy. We may
leave on one side, therefore, the controversy as to the restoration of Israel. The
prophesied restoration has been at least in part fulfilled by the share which Israel
took in the return of Judah ; and St. Paul seems to intimate (Eom. xi.) that hence-
forth the restoration will be spiritual, not literal. The Holy Land to which Israel
needs to return is not that which once flowed with mUk and honey, but the kingdom
of God.

One other point remains to be noticed — the condition of the land from which the
captive Israelites were withdrawn. The matter is one of considerable obscurity as
regards details, but the general outlines are clear. That the bulk of the Israehto
population was withdrawn, that heathen populations were pnt in its place, and
that these formed the large majority, is manifest. It is also certain that it was
Tiglath-Pileser who carried away much people from Beuben, Gad, eastern
Manasseh, Naphtali, and Galilee (2 Kings iv. 29 ; 1 Chron. v. 26), and Sargon,
who carried away a great many more from Samaria (2 Kings ivii. 6). Again, it is
certain that it was Esarhaddon, Sargon's grandson, who planted heathen colonists
in place of the captive Israehtes (Ezra iv. 2), and that a great variety of such
eolonists came under the leadership of " the great and noble Asnapper " (Ezra
ir. 10). What is nnoertain is, whether Sargon literally depopulated the country,
or left a large number in the rural districts, how long an interval elapsed between
iHae deportation under Sargon and the first importation, whether there was any
importation previous to that under Esarhaddon, whether the immigrants led by
Asnapper were those whom Esarhaddon sent or others. But none of these details
are of serious moment. We know that the new inhabitants of central Palestine
are heathens to so complete an extent that a Hebrew priest with assistants has to
be sent back from Assyria, in order to " teach them the manner of the God of
the land" (2 Kings xvii. 27), so that the Israelites left behind by Sargon, il
numerous, must have been grossly ignorant. We also know that the nation -whiah



xlyiM INTKODUOTION TO THE HISTOBIOAL BOOKS;

grew out of these varied heathen elements and this insignificant Israelite element
became hostile to the Jews on their return from captivity (Ezra iv. 1, &o.)»
oontinaed so during New Testament times (Matt. x. 5 ; Luke ix. 63 ; John iv. 9 ;
viii. 48), and remain so to this day. The religion which prevailed among the
Samaritans was at first as mixed as the nation themselves. The priest sent back
from Assyria would almost certainly be one of those instituted for the worship of
calves, for the original priesthood had from the first retired to the southern king-
dom. His settling at Bethel, the chief seat of Jeroboam's calf-worship, confirms
this ; and his teaching the new inhabitants to worship after the manner of the
land can hardly mean anything but that he taught them to worship Jehovah
Tinder the image of a calf, which had been the manner of the land for two centuries
and a half. The study of the Pentateuch and the proximity of the Jews after the
return would tend to purify the religion of the Samaritans more and more until at
last idolatry died out altogether. A people who claimed to keep the Law more
Btrictly and have a purer worship than the Jews themselves would have made
themselves ridiculous if they had tolerated idolatry; and this claim the later
Samaritans made. But at first the hybrid nation not only worshipped God in a
very imperfect, ignorant way, but were idolaters as well : " they feared Jehovah,
and served their own graven images" (2 Kings xvii. 83, 41). Thus the goodly
heritage of Ephraim, with its sacred spots and associations^Jaoob's well, Ebal and
Gerizim, Joshua's tomb, Shiloh, and Shechem — ^passed into the hands of strangers.
What a glorious past ! " When Israel was young then I loved him, and out of
Egypt I called my son." What a miserable present I "Israel is swallowed up:
now are they among the Gentiles as a vessel wherein is no pleasure." Yet there
is stiU some hope in the future : " I will heal their falling away, I wiU gladly love
them : for my anger is turned away " (Hosea xi. 1 ; viii. 8 ; xiv. 4).

The CAPirviTY of Judah.
There was a moment when the two kingdoms of Israel and Jndah were in m
condition of great prosperity together. The reign of Jeroboam II. was the most
prosperous period of the kingdom of Israel. When it was half over, the youthful
Uzziah came to the throne of Judah, which he was destined to fill for half a
century. He was one of the ablest of the kings of Judah, victorious over Edomites
and FhilistiueB, fortifying the capital and the country round it, and promoting
agriculture. It was at this time, towards the close of the reign of Jeroboam II., that
Hosea began to prophesy, and he looked with longing eyes toward Judah, and dared
to hope that even yet the children of Judah and the children of Israel might be
gathered together under one head (oh. i. 7, 11). Uzziah had the happiness of being
succeeded by a son equal to himself as a ruler, whereas Jeroboam's success ended
with himself. But under Jotham the general prosperity produced a love of luxury
and wantonness of life against which Isaiah pronounced strong denunciations.
Hence when the weak and wicked Ahaz succeeded the virtuous Jotham, he found
a people only too ready to be pleased with him. The idolatrous party in the gtate
now came to the top, and even heathen rulers were invited from abroad to take
office. The grandest utterances of the grandest of the prophets seem to have had
no lasting effect, and he continued his wicked course to the end. The group of
righteous men that had gathered round Isaiah were cheered in spirit by a change
at ruler. Wicked kings were still the exception rather than the rule in Judah,
whacMM Israel, now just at the close of its career, had never known a good king.



JOSHUA TO NEHEMIAH. ^^



At the time when Israel was swept into oaptiyity, Hezekiah was reigning in
Jerusalem, the noblest prince that ever sat on the throne of David. Not only wa»
it said of him, that he " did that which was right in the sight of the Lord, according
to all that David hia father did," praise that had not been given for nearly two
centuries, but " he trusted in Jehovah, God of Israel ; so that after him was none
Uke him among all the kings of Judah, nor any that were before him." Solomon,
Asa, Jehoshaphat, Joash, and Amaziah had fallen away in their latter days;
Uzziah had been guilty of gross profanity ; but Hezekiah " clave to Jehovah," and
as a consequence of this " Jehovah was with him " (2 Kings xviii 1 — 7). This had
been said of no king since David (2, Sam. v. 10). His fidehty waa not untried.
Assyria, having punished Samaria for its alliance with Egypt, prepared for taking
vengeance on Egypt also. In such a struggle the Uttle kingdom of Judah might
be crushed as a pebble between two millstones. Repulsed from Egypt, Senna-
cherib feU back on Jerusalem. A victory there would cover his failure. It seemed
an hour of the utmost danger for Jerusalem, and Hezekiah tried to buy the invader
off. Sennacherib took the treasure, but still continued to march on Jerusalem;
for the treasure increased his desire to capture the city. Thus was Hezekiah
punished for trusting even for a moment in bribes rather than in Jehovah. Isaiah,
in a strain of magnificent defiance (2 Kings xix. 21 — 34), brought the king and the
people round again to the attitude of supreme confidence in the Lord of Hosts ;
and just at the moment when the king of Assyria appeared about to swallow up
the city, two irresistible disasters annihilated his huge army — panic and plague.
In a single night thousands died by the visitation of God. The rest returned with
their crest-fallen king to Nineveh. No dehveranoe like it had been known since
the death of the first-born in Egypt.

The strain and excitement of the crisis brought Hezekiah to death's door ; but at
his passionate entreaty fifteen years were added to his life. The psalm of thanks-
giving which he composed on his recovery shows that he too, like the king whom
he resembles, was a true poet and a pious one ; but it also shows the dreary, hope-
less horror which crushed out every other thought in the mind of even a saintly
man in the expectation of death. In the case of the sweet Psalmist of Israel we have
noticed how the want of the spirit of forgiveness makes the Psalins so different
from the Gospel. In the case of his great successor we notice another point of
inferiority — ^the attitude of mind in the contemplation of death.

Hezekiah was the last king of Judah who did not outlive his feUcity : he was
prosperous to the last. His enemy, Sennacherib, died about the same time as
Hezekiah, and along with them the man who had exercised such an influence over
the lives of both, the prophet Isaiah. When Isaiah's voice was silenced by death,
and the godly Hezekiah was succeeded by the impious Manasseh (Coramodus suc-
eeeding Marcus Aurelius), it might well seem as if the star of Judah had set, and
as if the fate that had just overtaken Samaria must soon overwhelm Jerusalem.
The prophets uttered the severest warnings, and Manasseh, unable to intimidate
them, silenced them by death ; among them, according to tradition, the aged
Isaiah. This was the crowning act of iniquity which sealed the doom of the king-
dom of Judah. " He fiUed Jerusalem with innocent blood, which the Lord would
not pardon " (2 Kings zziv. 4). The crisis to some extent resembles that of the
struggle between Ahab and the prophets. There, however, the prophets in the
person of EUjah were victorious ; but a decline in the spirit of prophecy in the
northern kingdom may perhaps be traced from that victory. In this later struggle

^os^C4, 4



1 INTEODUOTION TO THE HISTOEICAL BOOKS:

in Judah the persecutor was for the time at least successful (Jer. u. 80 ; Zeph.
iii. 4) ; and it may be doubted whether the prophets ever regained their former
position. They appear no more in the history of this long reign. But the truths
to which they had borne witness, both in life and in death, were eternal and could
not lose their power. And this horrible period, equal in its abominations and
cruelties to the reign of a Caligula or a Nero, forced home two truths upon the few
who in sorrow and indignation remained true to Jehovah ; (1) that the Messianic
hope, the salt of the kingdom of Judah, must now be transferred to a remote
future ; (2) that there must be a reward hereafter for those who had suffered so
terribly for the truth in this life; their bodies might perish, but their souk
were indestructible : if in this hfe only they had hope in Jehovah, they were of all
men most miserable (1 Cor. xv. 19). They saw, however, that even in this life
Manasseh's wickedness brought its proper punishment. Esarhaddon's army found
Jerusalem so weakened by the tyrant's enormities that it could make no resistance,
and Manasseh was cairied away to repent in the prisons of Babylon. When he
was allowed to return, there was a great change for the better in his government :
the altar of Jehovah was restored, and foreign idolatry was to some extent put
away, although not the forbidden worship in the " high places." But the evil had
eaten too deeply into the heart and iatelleot of the people to be cured by a partial
reform of this kind, or even by the more searching reformation under Josiah. The
bright gleam which is again shed over Jerusalem during the reign of this young
reformer extended even to the inhabitants of the northern kingdom. TTih orders
for the extirpation of idolatry were obeyed throughout Palestine, and it might even
•ppear as if the time were coming when the whole land should be once more under
the rule of one king, a righteous prince of the house of David. These bright hopes
were quenched by the untimely death of the virtuous king : the random arrow of
an Egyptian ended the hfe of the best-beloved sovereign that had reigned since
David. His loss was bewailed with the profoundest lamentations by his heart-
broken people.

The eye finds nothing pleasing to rest upon in the reigns of his four miserabl«
successors. Their faithlessness and imbecility placed them at the mercy of the
Assyrians, who never wanted a fair pretext for attacking them or an excellent
prospect of success. Troop after troop of captives was carried away (2 Kings xviiL
13 ; xxiv. 14 ; xxv. 11 ; 2 Chron. xxxvi. 20 ; Jer. Iii 28, 29 ; Dan. i. 2, 3). The final
blow fell when Zedekiah, the last ting of Judah, was led away, childless and sight-
less, to Babylon, when the walls were broken down, the temple laid in ruins, and
all but a scanty remnant of the surviving population carried into captivity. It wa«
the sad fate of Jeremiah to witness the complete fulfilment of his darkest pro-
phecies. He survived the city whose overthrow he had predicted; survived to
lament over it in elegies which for pathos and beauty are perhaps without an equal
in Uterature. They remind us of David's lament over Saul and Jonathan ; but
with this great difference ; that whereas David finds comfort in the former glory of
the fallen, this to Jeremiah is but an aggravation of his sorrow, so fuU is his mind
with every detail of the unspeakable calamity that has fallen upon the guilty city.
King and people, temple and priest, were involved in a common ruin • and the
worst feature of aU was that the ruin was more than deserved. It was but the
inevitable outcome of a long series of royal and national and sacerdotal sins.

If the miserable apostasy and consequent overthrow of the two kingdoms of
lankel and Judah might lead us to question whether after all this renegade wd



JOSHUA TO NEHEMIAH



ruined nation -was the Chosen People of Jehovah, the hietorjr of the Jewish exUes in
Babylon might reassure us of the fact. It is marvellous that the Jews still retained
their nationality ; still more marvellous that they continued to cherish hopes of a
return and of a happy future imder the promised Messiah. Their removal to a
strange land, amid strange people and strange rites, the knowledge that their city
was a ruin, their king a captive, their kinsmen slaughtered, failed to destroy either
the one or the other. Even in the hour of His wrath Jehovah would still remember
His covenant with Abraham and David. This they beheved; and He alone could
have kept alive such a belief under conditions which seemed emphatically to give
the lie to it. They had one great assurance that their Divine King had not entirely
deserted them. In this hour of their sorest need the voice of prophecy, so far from
being silenced, was heard all the more clearly. Of the four " Great Prophets,"
three fall within the period of the exile. From Egypt, during the first period of the
Captivity, Jeremiah continued the strong warnings and protests which had been the
forerunners of the city's fall In the land of exile itself Ezekiel and Daniel con-
tinued to make known the judgments of God to the captives and their conquerors.
This alone sufficed to prove that Jehovah had not utterly forsaken His people.
Moreover, their conquerors were moved to treat them kindly. They became not
slaves but colonists ; they were allowed to preserve their own laws and customs,
their distiactions of rank and family ; they might even rise, as Daniel did, to high
of&ca in the state. Lastly, there was a conspicuous contrast between their fate and
that of the nations round about Judah, who had exulted over the dovTnfaU of their
hereditary foe, Edom, Ammon, and Moab. These also, before long, felt the heavy
hand of Nebuchadnezzar, and it crushed them utterly. As Jeremiah had foretold
even before the destruction of Jerusalem : " Fear thou not, O Jacob my servant,
■aith Jehovah, for I am with thee : for I will make a fuU end of all the nations
whither I have driven thee : but I wiU not make a full end of thee, but correct the«
according to justice ; but I cannot leave thee wholly unpunished " (Jer. xlvi. 28).

These words of Jeremiah, and others like them, would be in the minds of the Jews
when they saw the armies of Cyrus pouring through the streets of Babylon ; and it
must have been with hope and pride that they noticed how, amidst all the changes
of sovereigns, it was stiU a Jew who was foremost among the statesmen at their
court. Under Hebuchadnezzar, Belshazzar, Darius the Mede, and Cyrus, Daniel
is constantly prominent and always prosperous ; and we may confidently attribute
it to his influence that one of the first acts of Cyrus, when he began to reign alone
in Babylon (b.o. 636), was to issue a decree for the restoration of the Jews to their
native land, and for the rebuilding of the temple.

The Betubn feom CAPUvrrr.

It is remarkable that the author of the Book of Ezra makes no mention of Daniel
in connexion with the decree of Cyrus for the restoration of the Jewish nation and
temple; he simply says, "that the word of the Lord by the mouth of Jeremiah
might be fulfilled." The decree states that God had charged Cyrus to build Him
an house at Jerusalem, which impUes a knowledge of the prophecy of Isaiah (xhv.
28) ; and no one is more likely than Daniel to have told Cyrus of the prediction.
Moreover, the parenthetical " He is the God " (Ezra i. 8) recalls Dan. vi. 26.

It shows how weU they had been treated in the land of their exUe that only
about 50,000 were found willing to avail themselves of the offer. The bulk preferred
tp remain in their new homes. Of these, some followed later; the rest formed tht



lii INTBODUOTION TO THE HISTORICAL BOOKS:

Babylonian branch of " the Dispersion,'' a rery nmnerous branch, as the Book of
Esther ehows. Jnst as the whole nation had emerged from its first oaptiTity in
Egypt laden with the silver and gold of their panic-stricken taskmasters, so now
this remnant goes forth from their second captivity, strengthened with the gifts not
only of their brethren who remained behind, bat of the heathen population also.
Perhaps those who declined to leave their comfortable settlements for the chance of
returning to the ruined Jerusalem eased their consciences by contributing to help
those who were more willing to make sacrifices for Zion and for the glory of Jehovah.

With what thoughts did Zerubbabel and this band of exiles recross the Jordan
on the way to regaia their desolated homes I We have no record of the journey ;
but at this point the imagination would gladly picture something of the scene. The
place, the crossing, the name of the high-priest who accompanied them, oould
scarcely fail to remind them of that first triumphant crossing under Joshua 900
years before. This wreck of the nation was stauding just where their ancestors had
stood before them : but with how different a past, with how different prospects I
Then Israel had been triumphantly wrested out of the hands of tyrannical oppres-
sors ; had vanquished all who came in contact with them in their long journey
from Egypt, so that all the suiTounding nations trembled at their approach ; had
before them the Promised Land flowing with milk and honey. Now the remnant
of a few tribes had been condoaoondingly allowed to depart out of the land of their
half-pitying, half-contemptuous masters ; had passed unopposed through the inter-
vening populations ; and now stood on the threshold of their own home in fear and
dread lest any of the surrounding nations should forbid them to enter it Before
long their fears were realised. No sooner had they begun to rebuild the temple
than the Samaritans asked to take part iu the work. To have allowed this would
have been to risk the purity of the religion, for polluting which they had already
suffered such punishment ; and Zerubbabel and Jeshua refused. By machinations
at the Persian court the Samaritans succeeded in discrediting the Jews, and the
work was stopped by order of " Aitasorxes," who is possibly Gomatea, otherwiso
known as PseudO'Smerdis in profane history.

Once more we see how readily men acquiesce in a bad state of things so long as
their own personal comfort is not at stake. We have just seen how the bulk of the
exiles were content to remain with maimed rites and ceremonies, cut off from Mount
Zion and the worship of the temple, cut off from the Land of Promise, with all its
sacred associations, in a heathen land, where they Uved on sufferance at the mercy
of an idolatrous sovereign ; and all because they had obtained comfortable settle-
ments, which they did not care to sacrifice. Now we find that those who rose above
that temptation are in danger of falling victims to a similar snare in the home
which they have recovered. The prophet Haggai rebukes them in the sternest
language for then: readiness to leave God's house desolate if only then- own houses
were buUt and properly adorned. " Is it tune for you to dweU m your inlaid
houses, and this house lie waste ? " " Mine house is Laid waste, and ye run every
man for his own house " (ch. L 4, 9). Thus, under the constant exhortation of Haggai
and Zeohariah, the work went on; and the second temple was finished in the sixth
year of Darius, 21 years after its commencement, and about 70 years after the
destruction of its predecessor. At the dedication offerings were made for all tweha
tribes; those who had returned being considered the representatives of all Israel
Here again we notice a mournful contrast with the glories of the past. The new
temple had less loftjrdimensions and wag far less magnificently adorned. It had



JOSHUA TO NBHEMIAS. M

no Sheohinah. Of the 24 orders of priests only four were there to conduct th*
saryices. And compare the 712 animals offered at this dedication with the thou-
sands sacrificed by Solomon I

It is here, probably, that we may insert the episode contained in the Boole of
Esther, the most purely historical Book in the whole Bible. Of course it may be
used to point a moral — whether that " blood is thicker than water," or that " pride
goes before a fall : " but the main purpose of the book is simply to give tm his-
torical account of the origin of the feast of Piirim. That the author has no reh-
gious object in view may be inferred &om the fact that God is not even mentioned ;
nor is there any allusion to His worship, or the temple, or Jerusalem. The absence
ef these is a guarantee for the truth of the narrative. Had the whole been a fiction
for the glorification of Esther, or Mordecai, or the Jews, the author would 60iu:cel7
have omitted to give us some reflections on the providential character of the whole.
As it is, the story is left to speak for itsel£ Only once, and then qtdte incidentally,
the spirit of the author appears ; and it is wholly in accordance with the spirit of
Scripture generally : " Who knoweth whether thou art come to the kingdom for
such a time as this ? " (ch. iv. 14.) Just as the Book of Judges teaches us that God
often selects very faulty and imperfect men to be His special instruments, that He
can work with a Samson or a Jephthah no less than vrith a Moses or a Daniel, so
the Book of Esther teaches us that in the ordinary careers of individuals and of
nations, in which no miraculous element is present, no supernatural direction visible,
it is still God's hand that combines. His providence that guides, the endless com-
plexities of human life. We call it chance that the king could not sleep, that he
preferred reading to wine or music, that he asked for the chronicles rather than
poetry, that the reader came upon the account of Mordecai's services, that Haman
entered the court at that moment, and that the king heard him, &a. But
chance is only the name under which we hide our ignorance of causes, or our in-
difference towards them : and in aU these " chances " Jew and Christian alike will
trace the directing hand of God. The senseless caprices and fitful passions of
Xerxes may work His will no less surely than the conscious and willing service of
Joshua or SamueL The burning bush and the dry or dripping fleece may be
granted to Moses and to Gideon : but although we have them not, it may still be
true of each one of us in the place to which we have been called, that we " have
come to it for such a time as this." And if it be so with men's work and duty, so
also is it with God's blessing and protection. Though there is no drying up of the
Eed Sea or of Jordan, no falling down of the walls of Jericho, yet evil does not
therefore prevail. He who by miracles delivered His people from Egyptians and
Canaanites can without miracles deliver them from Haman.

We return from this episode respecting the Jews of the Dispersion in Persia to
those who had returned to Judsea. Their children had not kept up to the moral
level of the devoted band who had left their prosperous settlements to rebuild
Jerusalem. True, that the old fatal plague of idolatry was utterly eradicated, and
a deep reverence for the law had taken its place ; but the first enthusiasm of the
return had passed away. Zerubbabel's descendants and the house of David had
gunk into obscurity ; the change of language from the old Hebrew to the Chaldee
caused the bulk of the people to be strangely ignorant of the Law : many abuses
crept in ; marriages with the heathen, usury, neglect of the sabbath, and the like.
When Ezra, under the favourable rule of Artaxerxes Longimanus, Xerxes' successor
en the Persian throne, led a fresh caravan of returning exiles to Jemsalem, he found



tiv INlEODtrOTiON TO THE SISTOEIOAL BOOKS:



much work necessary in the way of reformation. This was specially the case with
regard to marriages with the heathen, by which the pnre descent not merely of the
nation but even of the priests was being contaminated. We could hardly have a
stronger proof of the change wrought by the Captivity, in turning the people from
love of foreign idolatry to devotion to their own law, than the fact that they con-
sented to snap the strong ties of wedlock and fatherhood, when they became
convinced that the law required it of them.

We need not suppose that the decree of Cyrus allowing the Jews to return and
rebuild the temple and Jerusalem was an act of wholly unmixed generosity. There
was probably something of Persian statecraft in it; viz., the wish to place a nation
bound by ties of gratitude to Persia, for deUvering them from Babylon and letting
them go free, on the dangerous frontier that looked towards Egypt. At any rate,
the generosity of the Persian kings had thus far been limited by their jealousy of
possible rivals or rebels ; and they had hitherto not allowed the Jews to rebuild the
walls of a place strategically so strong as Jerusalem. The fortifications and gates
of the city were stiU in the same ruined state to which they had been reduced by
the armies of Nebuchadnezzar. Consequently the Jews Uved in constant dread of
falling victims to the avarice, or jealousy, or animosity of their neighbours. A
deputation was sent to the Persian court, where Nehemiah, a Jew holding high office
among the great king's personal attendants, became their spokesman. Here again,
as in the history of Esther, we may trace the workings of Providence in the
poUtical history of the world. Previous events had contributed not a little to pre-
dispose Artaxerxes to listen to Nehemiah's trembling request. The Persian empire
had just received heavy blows from the Athenian admiral, Oimon. His victories,
especially the last, in the midst of which he died, compelled Persia to abandon all
attempts at aggression and to adopt a defensive position. She bound herself not
to allow her armies to approach within three days' march of the sea. Jerusalem,
^eing just about this distance, became a military position of the highest importajice :
and as risk must be run somewhere, it was better to allow Persian vassals under a
native ofl&cer of tried fideUty to fortify it than to risk its falling into the hands of
the enemies of Persia. Hence the secrecy vrith which Nehemiah acts, not only in
the interests of the Jews but of the Persians. However, in spite of the active
opposition of the Ammonites, Arabs, and Samaritans, the fortification of Jerusalem
was successfully completed. And then Nehemiah, Uke Ezra, had to direct his
attention to internal reforms. Abuses of the grossest kind, especially in the way of
cruel oppression of the poor by the rich, had again crept in. By example and sharp
exhortation Nehemiah rectified this, and, in conjunction vrith Ezra, renewed the
often forgotten covenant between the people and Jehovah ; after which he returned
to the Persian court (c. b.o. 433).

It must have made this self-denying and generous statesman indeed sick at heart
to find on his return to Jerusalem, after some years of absence, that he had all this
miserable work to do over again. The solemn covenant had been forgotten as soon
as his back was turned. The high-priest himself had profiled the temple ; the
sabbath was systematically violated ; and mixed marriages had again taken place,
the grandson of the high-priest being one of the offenders. It is in the midst of the
reformation of these evils that we lose sight of Nehemiah. His concluding prayer
has been heard ; he has been " remembered for good " (ch. xiii. 81. 14). His good
deeds have not been wiped out, but are preserved in the canon of Scripture tat m
memorial and an example for ever.



JOSHUA TO NEHEMIAH,



Here the historical books of the Old Testament come to an end. The fignreg
which fiU the narratives contained in them have passed before ns in their mar-
vellous variety of office and character, of greatness and littleness, of virtue and vice ;
commanders and judges, priests and prophets, warriors and poets, kings and sub-
jects. But their doings have been presented to ns not for their own sake, bat aa
indications of the working of those great principles upon which the moral govern-
ment of the world in general, and more especially God's dealing with His Chosen
People, depends. "We have seen that every great crisis in the hfe of the children
of Israel has turned mainly on this one point of supreme importance — the relation
ezisting between the nation and its invisible King. Other factors have had great
power — the relations between the people and its rulers, between the rulers and the
prophets, between tribe and tribe. But the main importance of all these has lain
in the influence which they have exerted on the chief question of all — the attitude
of the whole people towards Jehovah. Great men influence critical conjvmctures,
but they do not create them. It would be more true to say that the conjunctures
create the great men ; at any rate, they give such men an opportunity of proving
their greatness. Their influence is of the most diverse kind. Sometimes, like Jero-
boam or Jehu, they may precipitate a crisis ; sometimes, like Hezekiah and Josiah,
they may retard it. The greatest, such as Samuel and David, strive to guide the
nation through the critical period. Of others it may at least be said that they have
" come to the kingdom for such a time as this ; " and of none perhaps may this be
affirmed with more certainty than of the two leaders who stand, the one at the open-
ing and the other at the close of our period — Joshua and Nehemiah. But whatever
be the influence of such leaders, it is not with them that the student of sacred
history has principally to deal, but with principles and institutions. The leaders,
great or small, obtain significance mainly as illustrating the principles and work-
ing the institutions. Neither the principles nor the institutions were perfect, but
progressive ; they pointed to something nobler in the fature, for which they were
preparing the way. In their origin they were manifestly Divine; for (1) they were
frequently authenticated and sanctioned by exhibitions of miraculous power ; (2)
they were immeasurably superior to those of other nations, who in culture and
material civilisation stood on a much higher level. But although Divine, they were
Booially, morally, and spuritually imperfect. It is of the utmost importance to
recognise this fact and keep it constantly in view. "Without it the history of the
Chosen People is worse than unintelligible ; and what ought to be a pillar of fire^ to
give light by night becomes a cloud and darkness. Life is full of mysteries, which
we shall never explain on this side of the grave : while they awe and sober us, they
need not confuse us. But let us beware of adding to them by enigmas and per-
plexities of our own making: and to refase to acknowledge that the Almighty and
Omniscient Buler of the universe works out His purposes by means which, though
relatively good, in themselves are imperfect and even evil, is to make not only the
historical part of Scripture, but all history whatsoever, a hopeless riddle. Nothing
is gained by foisting upon Divine institutions a perfection which does not belong to
them ; this is not humbly to honour God, but ignoranily to flatter Him. "What
would be miserable fare, or even slow poison, to a healthy man, may be the best
diet for a sickly child ; and this applies to moral laws no less than to doctrme. God
could, if it had pleased Him, have antedated Pentecost by fifteen hundred years, and
have revealed to Moses what He revealed to St. John ; just as He might at any
moment restore the whole human race to Paradise with a word. But this woBld



i,i iNTBODtlOTlON TO THE HiStOftlOAL BOOKS'.



be to destroy the educational progress of mankind, or, in other words, to eliminate
the moral element from history.

Study of the past is generally our best, sometimes our only, guide to imderstand^
ing and using the present. But the study must be reverent and patient, or it will
be misleading. The question is not what God must do (according to our precon-
ceived notions), but what He does ; and " His thoughts are not as our thoughts, nor
His ways as our ways." Bearing this in mind, we shall find much comfort and
guidance in deahng with the difficulties which confront Christians and Churchmen
in our own day by studying those which beset the chosen people and the chosen
tribe three thousand years ago. This much at least has been demonstrated by all
the experience of Israel — ^that belief in a Personal God, who has given men a law
to live by, and to whom they must give account, is of all influences that have ever
been tried, the only one that can tame and ennoble the fallen nature of man. In
spite of the hopeless failure of Solomon, and the ruin of Israel and Judah, we are
again being told that culture may be made a substitute for conscience, and that
responsibiUty has no higher meaning than self respect. In spite of the indeUble
Btigma which Scripture has written as the epitaph of Jeroboam, " who made Israel
to sin," and the steady degradation of the kings and the kingdom of Israel, we are
still assured that schism is a valuable expression of hberty, and that unity of doc-
trine and of worship means tyranny or narrowness of mind. There are errors in
quite another direction also, for which the historical books of the Old Testament
contain a cure. There are Christians who are staggered at the slow progress which
the Gospel has made after eighteen centuries of preaching, at the slow progress
which, with all its enormous advantages, it continues to make stilL Were the
prospects of truth, especially when seen in the light of the past, more hopeful, when
Jeremiah uttered his solemn protests in Egypt, or Ezekiel his unflinching rebukes in
the land of the Chaldseans ? The Divine light, instead of spreading, however slowly,
seemed on the eve of being utterly extinguished. And yet, all the while, the road
for the Gospel was being surely though darkly prepared. Again, there are Churchmen
who are chafed and irritated, even if they are not utterly perplexed, at finding the
Church as it now exists so wofuUy unlike the ideal which they find in Scripture,
or which they have constructed for themselves. Some men in their uneasiness
shift from one branch of the Church to another, often with the result of finding
their disquietude increased rather than allayed : others, in despair, go out of their
own communion and enter no other ; so intolerable do external interferences or
internal scandals appear to tliem, so incompatible wdth thefr idea of a true Church.
"When we are disposed to think " the tyranny of the state," whether it comes from
" secular courts," or from a " non-Christian parliament," to be fatal to the very
existence of a church, let us think of Manasseh's infamous persecution, and be
patient. Perhaps there never has been an age when the Church, whether Jewish or
Christian, has not had much to bear from the powers that be. And why should she
not? Why should she in this fare better than her Divine Head? And why should
this age claim to be exempt? Again, when some grievous scandal, whether <rf
simony or sacrilege, or false doctrine openly taught, makes men inquire whether
a communion in which such things are possible can be a branch of the Church at
aU, let us remember the idolatrous erections of Solomon, tolerated within sight of
the temple for four hundred years, and again be patient. But just as there are
persons who take pride in making out that their own particular maladies or troubles
are in excess of those of their neighbours, so each generation flatters itself that it



iOSaUA TO NEHEMlAfl. Ivil

is passing tlirough a great crisis, and that society, or religion, or the Church, wag
nev«r in such peril before. It is never our duty, of course, to bUnd ourselves as ta
the existence of evil ; but there are cases in which to ignore evil is less disastrous
than to exaggerate it. The one need not interfere with the accomplishment of •
great deal of good ; the other by causing a panic is almost certain to do so. " In
quietness and in confidence shall be your strength."

At the close of this historical section of the Pulpit Commentary it may perhaps
be permitted to offer a suggestion for the consideration of preachers. It is in th«
historical portion of Holy Scripture that the most generally useful material for the
preacher's purpose may be found : yet on the whole it is very much neglected,
greatly to the loss of congregations ; especially of uneducated congregations.
There are many who cannot understand — or, if they understand, take but a languid
interest in — abstract theology, or abstract morality, who yet wUl listen with intelli-
gence and eagerness when the doctrine or the morality are clothed in flesh and blood.
The variety of character and incident given us in Holy Scripture ig practically
unlimited ; and there is perhaps scarcely a doctrinal truth or ethical precept that
could not be illustrated from some event or biography in the sacred narrative. The
example of Scripture itself would seem to give us a guide in this matter: the
historical element greatly predominates over the didactic in the Old Testament and
somewhat predominates in the New. Or, to take higher ground stUl, that which is
given us in the Gospel for our instruction and guidance is not so much a code, or a
creed, as a Ufe; a life involving both definite rules and definite behefs, no doubt ;
but still it is the pattern life that comes first. " Though ye believe not Me, believe
the works " (John x. 38) : that is the first step. And the second is on the same
ground : " Believe Me for the very worTcs' sake " (ch. xiv. 11). It is with what
Christ does, that is, with His life, that we must begin. And this apphes in a lower
degree to all the lives that are set before us in Scripture for instruction and warning.
It is but an illustration of the well-worn saying, that " example is better than
precept." People can comprehend and will listen to the encouragements and
cautions to be derived from the doings and sufferings of men and women like them-
selves, who would carry nothing away fi:om eloquent dissertations on virtue and
vice. The command, " Go, and do thou likewise," the home-thrust, " Thou art
the man," will go direct to the heart in many a case in which the Decalogue, or any
part of it, would never pass beyond the ear.

The following tables, drawn from the portion of the Old Testament which we have
been considering, will illustrate the suggestion just made. They could be greatly
enlarged even within the limits of this portion of Scripture. Of course, if the whole
of the sacred history were placed under contribution, the illustrations might be
increased and improved to a very large extent. But a stronger case is made out
by showing how much may be done with no more than the section of the Bibia
immediately before ns.

The Divine AtteIbutes.

f The cutting off of Jordan.
Poww. . . . . j The walls of Jericho.

iThe destruction of Sennacherib's army<
The forgiveness of David.
Meroy - The respite granted to Abab.

,The sparing of Nineveh.



liiil INTBODUOTION TO THE HISTOBIOAL BOOKS.

It ' ' 1 1

^The punishment of David's sina.

The miserable ends of the disobedient prophet, of Jezebel,
Justice . . . .- and of every dynasty in the kingdom of Israel.

The different fates of the kingdom of Israel and the Mug*
^ dom of Judah.

I The whole period of the Judges.
The many opportunities granted to Saul.
The many opportunities granted to the kingdoms of Isnel
and Judah.
Tiriith. (The covenant kept with David.

'I The fulfilment of prophetical warnings and blessings.

The Ten CoMMANDMENia,
First Elijah and the prophets of Baal.
Sficond. Jeroboam and the worship of the ealvea.

(Saul's sacrifice.
Saul's iU-advised adjuration.
Saul's inquiring of the Lord by a witch.
Fourth. Nehemiah and the sabbath-breakers.
Fifth. Euth's filial piety. Absalom's rebellion.
Sixth. The cruel vengeance of Joab and of Jehu.
Seventh. Bathsheba.

Eighth. Micah robbing his mother, and robbed by the Danitei
Ninth. Ziba and Mephibosheth. Jezebel and Naboth.
Tenth. Achan. GehazL

The Three Theological Vietues.
Faith. The widow of Zarephath.
Hojpe. Hannah.
Chwrity. Bizpah, the daughter of Aiah.

The Foub Cabdikal Virtues.
Justice. Solomon's early administration.
Prudence. David at the court of Saul.
Temperance. Josiah. The Beohabites.
Fortitude. Deborah. Esther.

Thb Seven Deadly Sini,
Pride. Nebuchadnezzar. Haman.
Covetousnesa. Ahab and Naboth's vineyard.
Lust. The men of Gibeah. Samson. Amnon.
Envy. Saul and David. Haman and Mordeoai.
Ghitfony. Hophni and Phineha.s.
Anger. Saul and the priests.
SlotTi. EU. Joash and the arrows.

It would not be difficult, especiaUy if the Pentateuch and New Testament wew
•dded, to illustrate in this way the Creed, the Lord's Prayer, and the Sermon on
the Mount



THE BOOK OF JOSHUA.



INTKODUOTION.



§ 1. Origin and Date of the Boos or Joshua.

Except, perhaps, the Book of Daaiiel, there are no parts of Holy Scripture
conoeming the date and authorship of which so lively a conti'oversy has
raged as the first six books of the Old Testament. To mention all the
various theories that have been advanced would be impossible. We will give
a brief sketch of some of the most noticeable, and then proceed to examine
more in detail the arguments which have been advanced to support them.

1. There is the view that the book is a contemporary document. This is
the early Jewish tradition. The Talmud states that it was written by
Joshua himself; that Eleazar wrote the account of Joshua's death, and
that Phinehas added the verses containing the narrative of the death of
Eleazar.* This view has been maintained, among later authors, by the
learned Havernick, at least in its main features ; for he holds that the first
part of the book, up to ch. xii., and the last chapters, were written by
Joshaa, the passage relating to the deaths of Joshua and Eleazar having,
of course, been added by a later hand.

2. Ken and others regard it as a treatise of somewhat later date than the
time of Joshua, composed about twenty-five or thirty years after his death.

8, Ewald's theory is a very elaborate one. He regards the book as a
composition of the Deuteronomist in the time of Manasseh. This con-
clusion he bases on the very slight foundation that there is an allusion in
Deut. ixviii. 68 to the condition of Judsaa in the time of Manasseh, or even
later. This argument, again, rests upon the assumption that prophecy is

• We read in the Babylonian Talmud (Nedarim, fol. 22 b), that had the Israelites not
transgressed the law they would have needed no other canonical books than the Pentateuch,
to which the Book of Joshua must be added, because It contains the account of the settle-
ment of the tribes in the Land of Promise. In the same Talmud (Baba Bathra, 15 a), we
are told that Joshua wrote the book which goes by his name, aa well as the last eight yersei
of Denteionomy (see note on ch. i. I).



il^T&ODtCTlOiJ



impossible, a postulate which many will be indisposed to grant. But his
method is, as he states, " scientific," which seems to mean that he takes
everything for granted which is necessary to establish his theory. The
many indications of earlier origin and authorship he quietly disposes of by
assuming that they were portions of some earlier work, imbedded pre-
cisely as they stood in the mass of fiction which the writer of later
times has evolved from his own moral consciousness. Not only so, but
scientific criticism, he beheves, can disintegrate these fragmeats with un-
failing accuracy, and assign them to their proper owner. There are thus,
he holds, (1) a few fragments of contemporary works inserted verbatim in the
midst of the mass of later history or tradition. These consist (a) of a book
quoted by name in Num. xxi. 14, " The Book of the Wars of Jahveh," or
Jehovah ; (6) the Biography of Moses ; and (c) the Book of Covenants, from
which all the legal or quasi-legal matter is derived ; written, as he says, in
an age of confusion, when men tried to secure themselves by covenants with
their neighbours. Then (2) about the time of David comes the great Book
of Origins (Tol'doth — the use of this word frequently marking the extracts
from the book). Lastly (8) we have the prophetic narratives, written by
the prophets subsequently to David's time. Among these we have a tMrd,
fourth, and fifth narrator, and finally, the Deuteronomist of a time later
than the reign of Manasseh, who reduced the whole into shape,* not by
re-writing the whole from the materials before him, but by inserting bodily
into his compilation passages from older authors, and adding his own gene-
rally fictitious narrative, composed with a view of imposing the author's
own view of the law of Moses upon a corrupt and decaying people.

4. Ewald has found various imitators, among whom the principal is
Enobel. Adopting De Wette's view of the discrepancies in the text of the
Pentateuch and Joshua, and Ewald's general method of explaining it,
Enobel nevertheless proposes a different arrangement of the original
materials from which the supposed mosaic of the Pentateuch and Joshua
is made up. Enobel, like Ewald, also finds it possible to assign each of
the various extracts of which the Pentateuch and Joshua are made up to
their respective authors. But he has not only discovered by his analysis
different authors to Ewald, but he assigns different portions to them.
Ewald's system he pronounces " so complicated and obscure a fabric," so
devoid of all tenable hypotheses, that it fails to convince (p. 496) ; while he
complains that critics like Hengstenberg and Haveraick and Eeil, because
they do not accept hia methods, " convert a scientific inquiry into a theo-

• Or rather, ont of shape ; for the whole narrative in its present condition, we are told,
teema with the most obvious blunders and inaccuracies, while its style wonld resemble an
English history made up of extracts from Bobert of Oloucester, MandeviUt, WioUI, Lord
EeiiMrtt Hnma, and Macanlay.



TO THE BOOK OF JOSHUA.



lo^'cal controversy." Therefore lie plays the part of Tycho Brahe to E vald'a
Ptolemy, and invents a theory which renders a few of the latter's epicycles
annecessary. Thus there is (1) an Elohistio document, clear, orderly, and
historical, free from the marvellous occurrences in which the later works
abound, which constitutes the groimdwork of the whole narrative. Then
follows (2) a Book of Laws or first Jehovistio source. Then (3) the Book
of Wars, or second Jehovistic source. Then we have (4) the Jehovist
himself. Lastly (5) the Deuteronomist appears, to whom aU Deuteronomy,
with the exception of certain specified portions, and all the parts of Joshua
which refer to Deuteronomy belong.

5. Noldeke subjects Knobel to a similar simplifying process to that whicli
Knobel subjects Ewald. According to Noldeke, there are two sources ; (1)
an outline history (Elohistic), and (2) a history filling up that outline ;
composed (a) by the second Elohist, and (J) by the Jehovist. Lastly, we
have two editors. The first combined these into a consistent whole. The
second added Deuteronomy and remodelled Joshua, bringing it into accord-
ance with his fictitious additions to the Mosaic narrative.

6. Bleek feels himself compelled to still further reduce the number of
histories, and thereby approaches nearer to a consistent and sational expla-
nation of the facts. Documents existed, he believes, at an earlier period.
But the first author, whom he calls the first Elohist, appeared at the time of
Saul, and his history contains the greater part of Joshua. In the time of
David appeared the Jehovist, who revised and re-wrote, with the aid of
earlier documents then existing, the greater portion of the Elohist. Lastly,
at the time of Manasseh, or thereabouts, arose the Deuteronomist, who
reduced the book into its present shape.

Buch is an abstract of some of the chief theories which have been put
forward regarding the authorship of Joshua. It is needless to say that the
opponents of the authenticity and single authorship claim for their methods
the exclusive title of scientific investigation. Ewald, with lofty infallibility,
places Hengstenberg, Keii, Dehtzsch, Kurz " outside of all science." But
those who adopt bis method, and venture only to question its application,
fare scaroely more favourably at his hands. Thus, when he commences his
researches, he examines what has been before written in the direction in
which his predilections lead him. He finds that Hgen takes a step on the
right road, but always loses it again. " There was," he complains, " much
perversity of attempt and aim mingled with " the otherwise praiseworthy
attempts of these early investigators. They "were too easily satisfied with
hunting out mere contradictions in the books and resolving everything into
fragments," and were " unable to distinguish a real incongruity from a
merely apparent discrepancy " (p. 61). Nor do his successors in the inve8<
ti|;atiou please him any more than the pioneers who preceded him, Hup<



INTBODUCTION



feld and Knobel, we learn from a note to a later addition, are "unsatisfactory
and perverse." We have already seen what Knobel's opinion of Ewald is.
It may, therefore, not be entirely unscientific if we venture to suspend
our judgment, and examine the facts anew, with the desire to arrive at a
satisfactory conclusion.

For first of all it may be remarked that the conclusions of writers like
Ewald, Knobel, and Noldeke are extremely improbable in themselves, and
would require very clear and cogent evidence before a truly scientific mind
could be induced to adopt them. We are required to believe that in a
nation which had early reached a high degree of civiUsation, which in
the days of Solomon had added to that civilisation a considerable amount
of material prosperity,* which even in its decline maintained no small
amount of intercourse with the great nations around it (see, for instance,
2 Kings XX. 12), which still possessed great wealth and resources (Isa. ii. 7 ;
iii. 18 — 23 ; vii. 23), a historical document came into existence which at
once obtained credit, and superseded the regular chronicles which, we are
repeatedly assured, were regularly kept in those days. This document
was made up of disconnected fragments of earlier compositions of various
dates, and thsown together without the slightest attempt to fuse together
differences of style, or to harmonise the most glaring contradictions. So
badly was the work done that it is possible, after a lapse of 2,600 years,
to disintegrate the whole and to assign the various fragments, with an
accuracy beyond dispute, to their respective authors. Yet neither the patch-
work character of the history, nor its frequent and palpable contradictions,
were able, in an age of some pretensions to cultivation, to hinder its im-
mediate reception as authentic and even inspired history. All this is
necessary to the theory ; and we have also to explain the very remarkable
historical and psychological fact that the law, to which the Jews have for
centuries cherished so profound and even passionate attachment, and for
the neglect of which they conceive their banishment from their own land to
be owing, never, according to this theory, existed at all, but was the invention
of the priests in the hom* of national degradation, to account for the miseries
suffered by the people, and that this fable was greedily swallowed, and has
ever since been most firmly believed among them. Surely so unique a fact
in the world's history ought to be established on better evidence than this.

The industry and research which has been expended upon the task of
establishing these theories is beyond all praise. Knobel, especially, has
devoted the most minute attention to the words and phrases of the Hebrew
Scriptures. But the objection is made, not to the utmost possible minute-

• Pax alma et commercmm dona sua nbiqne largiebantnr. Inter tot humanitatis et
opulentiffl emolumenta procnl dubio litters et foeaa aon soidebant. (Donaldson, ' Jaehar.'
p.86.)



TO THE BOOK OF JOSHUA.



ness of study of the phrasee of Holy Writ, but. to the method pursued
by the observers. In minuteness of observation the German critics have
been anticipated and surpassed by the Eabbis, in whose hands this minute
observation yields results in precisely the opposite direction. It is not mere
minute observation, but the use that is made of it, which is required. And
this so-called " scientific " criticism is carried on by methods diamietrically
opposite to aU which science has hitherto recognised. For if there be one
principle better established in science than another, it is that in scientific
processes nothing must be taken for granted but the most self-evident truths.
Now the " scientific" critics of the Old Testament proceed upon two
assumptions which can by no means be regarded as self-evident truths.
First, they assume that there is no such thing as the supernatural in
revelation, that all prophecies were written after the event, and all miraclen
are the result of legends gradually gathering round the facts of history in
later ages. And next, they assume that it is possible, on purely subjective
grounds, to determine without risk of error the authors of the respective
fragments of which the Hebrew Scriptures are composed. But it may be
observed, in reference to this second point, that in no two hands do the
same premises yield the same results, a fact which in any other branch of
science would lead us to suspect the accuracy either of the data or of the
method. As to the method itself, when we find Knobel assigning, for
instance, without the smallest doubt or hesitation, a passage in which
"1-13^5 occurs to one author, 7?|I3 to another, and nilii"?!? to a third, we are
naturally driven to ask what would be the result if a similar process were
applied to an English author who uses indifferently the phrases on account
of, became of, by reason of, and the like. Again, in science it is usual,
when a law is believed to be established by a sufficiently wide induction,
to reverse the process, assume the truth of the law, apply it to known facts,
and see if the results correspond to observation.* Have the so-called
" scientific " critics of the Old Testament done this ? Will their methods
enable us to analyse historians like Motley or Macaulay, and to assign
■without fail the various portions of their history to the sources from which
they have avowedly obtained them ? Is there any method ia existence
which will enable us, without risk of error, to assign to Shakspere and his
contemporaries the various portions of the works known to have been
written by them in common ? And if no method has been discovered which

* Whewell, 'Philosophy of the Inductive Sciences,' ii. 440. This was Newton's methoi
Bacon, in the first book of his ' Novum Organum,' speaks of science ascending " con-
tinnonsly and by degrees" to the discovery of general laws. The brief abstract given
above of German criticism on the Hebrew Scriptures, shows that what has been called
scientific criticism has had to recede " continuously and by degrees " from the hasty
generaliaatioss to which it at first committed itseU.



INTRODUCTION



will enable us to do this in the case of authors whose works we know, and
who wrote in a language we are daily using, how shall such a method
be infalUble when applied to records written thousands of years ago, in a
dead language, and when a million helps to the right understanding of the
history have irrecoverably perished ?

It must be confessed that these " scientific " theories, if not sound, are
extremely ingenious. It is very difficult to reply conclusively to a critic
who has a theory ready made to meet every emergency. Thus, if the author
of the Book of Joshua displays an accurate and minute acquaintance with his
subject, he is quoting an early and authentic document. If he states any-
thing which is not at first sight easily reconcUeable with what he has stated
elsewhere, he has taken it out of another less early and less authentic one.
If he quotes the Book of Deuteronomy, which according to all the laws of
literary criticism proves it to have been in existence when he wrote, he was
himself the author of it, and was engaged in the task of mingling its con-
tents with real and veracious history. If a ' Book of the Wars of Jahveh '
is quoted, as in Num. xxi. 14, 15, it is an older document. If a 'Book oi
the Law of Jahveh,' he wrote it himself. This is not to inquire, it is to
make inquiry impossible. It is to substitute dogma, the dogma of the
destructive school, in the place of the dogma they have so persistently
decried, which assumes that the books of Scriptm-e, as a rule, were
written by the persons whose names they bore. Is the one dogma one
whit more scientific than the other ?

The authenticity of the Book of Deuteronomy is a question on which we
are of course precluded from entering. But the question of the hand the
Deuteronomist had in the compilation of the Book of Joshua is one which
falls within our limits. There is not the slightest evidence in the book
.itself to lead to the conclusion that it was a production of the time of
Manasseh, a conclusion which the opponents of the genuineness of Deu-
teronomy have based upon the very slender foundation of the prophecy in
ch. xxviii. 68. If, as is assumed, the Deuteronomist embodied the
references to his own work into the Book of Joshua, in order to facilitate
the reception of his pretended laws of Moses, the question forces itself
irresistibly upon us, Why did he not introduce more of them ? Why did
he confine his extracts from the ' Book of the Laws of Jahveh ' to the
passage at the end of ch. viii., and a few exhortations to " be strong and of
good courage," and the hke, which is all we find elsewhere ? These extracts
are not enough for his purpose, were he introducing them for the purpose
of gaining acceptance for the precepts he was desirous of enforcing.

We proceed briefly to notice some objections to the narrative of Joshua
which meet us in the pages of Ewald, Dr. Davidson, and others. Ewald
supposes Joshua to be the " ideal king " of the times of the Deuteronomist



TO THE BOOK OP JOSHUA. lii

(' Historj of Israel,' i. 116). Now there is not one single trace of the kingly
idea throughout the Book of Joshua. The severe simplicity of his hfe, the
remarkable absence of anything like kingly claims (see especially ch. xix.
49, 50), is one of the most striking features of the book. As well could
we suppose the characters of Brutus or Cincinnatus to have been ideals of
civic virtue called up to animate dying Eoman patriotism iu the days of
Elagabalus, as to suppose that the writer of the Book of Joshua had the
Orisntal type of king before his eyes, such as existed ia Judaea and th«
neighbourhood in the reign of Manasseh.

Next, Ewald remarks on the archaic character of Josh. xvii. 14 — 18, which
he describes as "rough. and hard as a stone." Yet Knobel, who was no
mean Hebraist, assigns the passage to the " first Jehovist." And if Ewald's
view be right, the passage may easily be explained on the hypothesis that
■we have here the ipsissima verba of Joshua himself.

In the pages of Dr. Davidson's well-known work other objections will be
found. They are open to the same reproach that we have already brought
against the other productions of his school, namely, their unduly dogmatic
tone. And this is adopted, not merely towards those of an opposite school,
but to his own allies. Thus (i. 424) he complains that Knobel " has un-
"warrantably robbed the Deuteronomist of his due," a statement which w«
are apparently to take on Dr. Davidson's Authority, since he vouchsafes no
proof of it. But to proceed with his objections to the authenticity of the
Book of Joshua as it stands, he teUs us that the narrative at the end of
ch. viii. has got into the wrong place, and triumphantly asks,. How, then, can
the genuineness of the book be maintained ? as if such a supposition as an
error of the copyist were quite out of the question. A similar use is made
of the discrepancy in numbers between oh. viii. 8 and ch. viii. 12, as though
here again (see notes on the passage) a slip of the pen in very early times
might not have caused all the confusion. Then we are told that the Levites
in the historical portion of the book are called "the priests, the Levites,"
while in the geographical they are called " sons of Aaron," and that the
former is a Deuteronomistio, the latter an Elohistio expression, as though
the expression " sons of Aaron " in ch. xxii. were not clearly opposed to
'• sons of Kohath, Gershom, and Merari." Oh. vi. 26 contains, on the sup-
position of the early date of Joshua, the record of a prophecy fulfilled long
afterwards. It is assumed that the prophecy was invented after its sup-
posed fulfilment. Yet, unless the writer of the book were a deliberate im-
postor, endeavouring to palm off his work as one of an earlier date — a rather
strong supposition — is it conceivable that he would have avoided all mention
of the fulfilment of the prophecy in this place ? Again, we are told that the
twelve stones could never have been placed in the middle of the Jordan.
Ordinary attention to the words of the passage (see notes on oh. iv. 9)

JOSEUA. ^



ym INTEODUCTION



would show that they never were said to have been placed in the middle ol
Jordan, at least as we understand the words. The etymology of the word
Gilgal, again, presents some difficulties (see note on ch. v. 9). But it i's
surely cutting the Gordian knot in a very summary manner to assume that
this etymology was invented at the time of Manasseh. The placing the
tabernacle at Shechem is, we are told, another instance of inaccuracy. But
without resorting to the hypothesis of a copyist's blunder again here, though
it is less violent than Dr. Davidson's, is it quite inadmissible to adopt the
explanation that the author was narrating facts, and did not stop to con-
sider what difficulties his simple narrative might present to those who, many
centuries after, were not in full possession of the details ? Is not this far
more probable than the theory that the redactor, or inventor, or by whatever
name he be called, had quite forgotten, or never observed, what he had
stated six chapters previously ? Are we to believe that the compiler of the
time of Manasseh never took the trouble to read over his own work, or that
no one in his own day was likely to ask the questions which occur at once
to every reader now? The Shoterim, again, we are told (see note on ch. i.
10), were an institution of later date, and their place in Joshua's time was
supplied by the fathers and heads of the tribes. No proof of this assertion
is given. But is it credible that a vast invasion, in which their wives and
families accompanied the warriors, can have been conducted without a con-
siderable organisation, or that the Israelites could have Uved in a civilised
country like Egypt without being familiar with that principle of division
and subdivision of labour' without which no great undertaking can possibly
be carried out ? Then we are asked to observe the discrepancies between
oh. xi. 16—23 and ch. xiii 1—6 ; between chs. x. 86, 88; xi. 21; xv. 14 — 17,
and Judg. i. 10, 11 ; and between chs. xv. 63 ; xvi. 10, and 1 Kings ix. 16.
These questions wiU be found fully discussed in the notes. The only question
which will be asked here is this. We have supposed that the later, or geo-
graphical, portion of the book is the expansion of the passage in ch. xi. 28,
which concludes the historical portion. But if this explanation be not
accepted, how comes it, we ask again, that such a bungling mass of contra-
dictions could have been accepted in a civilised age like that of Manasseh,
when ex hypothesi a large body of literature was in existence ? There were
the Chronicles, as we have seen, of the Kings of Israel and Judah. There
was, according to Knobel, the " clear and orderly " narrative of the Elohist
The historian's calling, if we may trust Ewald, had become a special art
('History of Israel,' i. 59) which "needed ability and dexterity" (ib.), and
tha result is described as " elegant and perfect " (p. 60). The perfection ol
a method which gives, as we are required to believe, three inconsistent
Tersions, from rarious sources, of the conquest of Hebron, Debir, and the
A n akim , which describes the cotmtry as completely sabdned when the work



TO THE BOOK OP JOSHUA. is



of subduing it had hardly begun, which displays so little literary skill as to
copy out of an old record a statement (ch. xv. 63) which had ceased to be
true for three centuries and a half, may seem a little doubtfuL But if
this be a mere question of taste, the more formidable difficulty remains
behind, how such a narrative ever came to be received, in the later days of
the Jewish kingdom, as authentic history.

It is not contended that no difficulties are presented by the history as it
stands. What is denied is that what has been called the " destructive
criticism " has found a way out of them. On the contrary, it involves us in
far greater difficulties than it removes. When dealing with a narrative of
such remote antiquity, which does not pretend to be an exhaustive record of
everything that happened, it would be strange indeed if we did not find
difficulties. And we must be content to leave them unsolved, for the simple
reason that we have not sufficient information at hand to explain them.
The theory that some of the passages that suggest a later date were inter
polations is an arbitrary one. But it cannot therefore be dismissed, as
is dismissed with lofty scorn by Ewald, as entirely untenable. It offers at
least a possible solution of some of the difficulties that beset us. And it is
by no means impossible that the greatest difficulty of all in the way of
the earlier origin of the Book of Joshua, the citation of the Book of Jasher,
may be thus explained. The most natm'al interpretation of 2 Sam. i. 18
would lead us to conclude that the Book of Jasher was not composed till
the time of David. Therefore its citation in Joshua proves that book not
to have been written earlier than the time of David, unless we believe the
passage to have been an interpolation. The only other alternative is to adibpt
the explanation of Maurer and Eeil, that the Book of Jasher was a collection
of national songs, to which additions were made from time to time.*

We proceed to enumerate the reasons for believing that the Book of Joshua
was composed at an early date. The first is, the entire absence of any
allusion to the later condition of Israel in it. We have already noticed
how entirely the idea of regal pomp or authority is absent from the whole
conception of Joshua's character, and from the whole treatment of the sub-
ject. That it was written before the time of David seems clear from the
statement (ch. xv. 63) that the Jebusites dwelt among the children of Israel
" until this day." The mention of the place which Jehovah " should choose "
implies, not only that the temple was not yet built, but that its site had not
yet been fixed upon. The mention of the Gibeonites without any reference
to Saul's neglect of the solemn promise made to them in God's name would
lead to the belief that it was written before the time of SauL We have a
yet more distinct intimation of an early date in cL zvL 10. It could hardly

* See noteg on oh. x. 12 — IS.



INTEODUOTION



he said that the mhatitants of Gezer serve nnder tribute " nnto this day "
when Israel was groaning under Canaanitish oppression. Such language
could hardly have been used, at least after the time of Othniel. Nor do the
other occasions on which the words " unto this day " are used of necessity
imply a very remote future.* Again, it is not denied that the author of the
book, whoever he was, must have had access to authentic contemporary
information. Is it probable that information of the precise, yet by no means
minute, character that the book contains could have been drawn up in its
present form four or five hundred years after the events recorded, when
Israel and Judah had been long divided, when the former kingdom had
been carried away captive, and when confusion and disorder reigned in the
latter ? The last half of the book points clearly to an earlier period, and,
whether we admit occasional interpolations or not, must have existed at
that early period in something very near its present form.

The style of the book strongly supports this conclusion. Even those
who study it in a translation only cannot fail to be struck with one cha-
racteristic it has in common with the books of Moses. This is the
peculiar habit the author has of repetition, which marks an age of great
literary simplicity. We lose this feature to a very great extent in the later
historical books. As greater polish of style was attained, the writer
learned how to impart emphasis to his sentences by other means. This
repetition is chiefly found in the earUer portion of the book, which, tried by
this test, should be pronounced the older portion. But it may also bo
detected in the later, t

Verbal criticism is a more difficult task. Yet though we may safely
take exception to the theory that it is possible by verbal criticism alone to
resolve the Book of Joshua into its component parts, yet there is a whole
class of phenomena which have been somewhat unjustly passed over by
those who have devoted most time to a verbal analysis. No satisfactory
attempt has been made to explain the fact that in the Pentateuch there is
but one form for the masculine and feminine of the demonstrative pronoun
Nin, and that the feminine form first presents itself in Joshua. A more
interesting instance of the gradual development of the inflexions of a lan-
guage can scarcely be found. In the Pentateuch, the archaic form bn (these)
is often met with for n^N. This ancient form leaves us in Joshua. It may
also be asked, if Joshua be a redaction of earlier documents by the hands of
the Deuteronomist, why he always used inT for Jericho in the Pentateuch
and the fuller form mn' in Joshua? So we have ni^DD and S3j? in the
Pentateuch and ni3^DD and KMp in Joshua. n^Vn for " to kindle a fire," and

• Oh. iv. 9 ; vi. 25 j vii. 26 ; viii. 28 ; ix. 27 ; xiv. 14.

t Of. eh. zi. 17 with ziL 17 ; xiv. 18—16 with zt. 18, 14 ; oL zzL iA—U, and th«
threefold repetition eoncemiiig the inheiitanoe of hem.



a!0 THE BOOK 01" JOSStA. il

nJS, " to alight," are not found in the books of Moses, nor is the term y^p for
a prince or captain. Such phenomena as these cannot justly he left out of
the account in a fall investigation of the question of the authorship and
date of this book. And their force is being silently recognised in Germany.
Later writers, like Sfcahelin and Bleek, have been forced considerably to
modify the violent theoiies of Ewald and Knobel, and the former, so Keil
tells us, in the later editions of his vrork, has quietly dropped out much
which he had embodied in the former. We may regard this as the earnest
of a time rapidly approaching, when the advance of criticism in England
shall have produced the same result among ourselves.*

But we are not without some nearer indications of authorship. The far
greater familiarity displayed with the concerns of the tribe of Judah than
any other indicates that the author was resident within the limits of that
tribe. And not only so, but his acquaintance with the personal history of
Caleb (eh. liv. 13 — 15 ; xv. 13 — 19), and with the city of Hebron in par-
ticular (ch. ixi 11 — 13), seems to mark him out as a resident there. But
Hebron was one of the priestly cities. Combining this with the repeated
mention of the fact that no inheritance was given to the tribe of Levi, we
infer that the writer was himself a priest. He was not Phinehas himself,
for we find by ch. xxiv. 33 that Phinehas dwelt in Mount Ephraim. But
the writer may well have been intimately acquainted with him. He refers
to the settlement of the Danites at Laish (ch. xix. 47), with the events
resulting from which we know, from the last three or four chapters of the
Book of Judges, Phinehas was largely mixed up.t His description of the
scene between the tribes on the occasion of the erection of the altar
bears evident tokens of the presence of an eyewitness. And such we know
Phinehas was; and our author may have heard the story from his hps.
Living at Hebron, the author would no doubt have been on terms of friendly
intercourse with Othniel, and from him had heard the story of the allot-
ment of the springs to Achsah.

On the whole, therefore, we conclude, as well from the arbitrary assump-
tions to which those are driven who assign the book to a later date, as from
the internal evidence of the book itself, that it was written vrithin forty or
fifty years at the least of the death of Joshua ; that its author was one of
the priestly race ; that he dwelt in the tribe of Judah, and most likely in
the city of Hebron ; that by his family connection with Phinehas, and hia
residence among the relatives of Caleb, he had the fullest opportunity of
acquainting himself with the facts ; and that we have therefore in this book

• For varionB indioationa of minute personal knowledge of the events deBoribed, which
are hardly compatible with a later date, see notes on oh. ii. 14 ; ix. 10 ; x. 2, 4, 6, 18, 33.

t This alone, unless the passage be interpolated, disposes of the theory of Joshua'*
•nthorship.



INTKODUOTION



an authentic account, by one every way qualified to write it, of the conquest
and occupation by the Israelites of the Promised Land.

H. On Difficulties in the Book op Joshua.

The principal objections which have been made against the Divine
inspiration of the Book of Joshua are of two kinds, moral and scientific.
The first class of objections is raised against the slaughter of the Oanaanites
as inconsistent with the goodness and mercy we know to be attributes of
the Divine Being. The second class take their stand on the inconsistency
of miraculous parts of the history with the known laws of nature as revealed
by science.

I. The moral objection admits of a very simple answer. How, it is asked,
could the revolting and cruel command have been given by the God of love
and mercy to Moses and Joshua, to massacre an unoffending population
under circumstances of the grossest barbarity ; involving aged men, weak
women, and harmless children in the same slaughter with the warriors and
leaders of the people ?

(1) We reply, in the same spirit as Bishop Butler, that, whatever objec-
tion applies to the God of Kevelation on this ground applies equally to the
God of Nature. If it be of any force at all, it proves that the Supreme
Being is a cruel being.* For it is one of the most palpable facts of history
that He has permitted such massacres to take place throughout the whole
course of the world, from the beginning until our own time. And not only
so, but massacres with wicked refinements of cruelty which cannot be
charged against the Jews. We may go further stiU. The God of Nature
has not merely permitted such atrocities, He may be said, in a sense, to have
enjoined them. For it has been an invariable law of His providence that
when civilised peoples steeped in luxury, vice, and immorality have become
the prey of peoples simpler and purer than themselves, these cruelties, and
far more than these, have always taken place. Assyrian, Babylonian, Persian
conquerors were not more, but far less merciful than Joshua. The Greeks
and Eomans alone can be said to have been milder ; but even the progress
of their arms has not been unstained by crimes from which Joshua was
whoUy free. The violation of women and children, and even crimes of a
fouler kind, have not been unknown. The dedication of captives to the impure
worship of Mylitta or Aphrodite (see 'Eecords of the Past,' iii. 86, 89 — 50) f

• The force of tHa argument has been felt by so keen a reasoner &n John Stnart Mill .
In his Essay on Nature he accepts the position. He regards nature as immoraJ and imper-
fect, asserts that " blind partiality, reckless injastioe, atrocious cruelty, abound to excess
in the commonest phenomena of nature," and regards nature and life as "the product of a
struggle between contriving goodness and an intractable material," the ii\»/, in fact, of tha
QncwticB and Manicheans.

t The Moabite stone, too, tells us how Mesha devoted the pure virgins of Israel to thi
toul orgies of Ohemosh.



TO THE BOOK OF JOSHUA. xfll

was almost universal. And it is quite possible that death itself may have
been preferable — and by many it was regarded as preferable — to a life-long
bondage. The miserable condition to which such slaves were often reduced
is touchingly represented in the Hecuba of Euripides, where the desolate
mother, once a queen, now bereft of husband, sons, friends, a bondslave in
a foreign land, is driven in her desperation to appeal to the only hope left,
her daughter, who is permitted, though not a lawful wife, to share the bed
of Agamemnon. And though this is but fiction, we can hardly doubt that
it is fiction in which fact is not too highly coloured. But if Eoman and
Greek ambition had learned that extending privileges of citizenship to
the vanquished would largely increase the power of the victor, we have a
return, and more than a return, to the older order of things at the downfall
of the Roman Empire. The worst atrocities of the early ages found a
parallel in the scenes of bloodshed, last, and rapine which marked the
steps of the barbarian swarms who destroyed the remains of Eoman power.
Goths, Vandals, Huns, Lombards, Franks, Saxons, Bulgarians, and Turks
vied with one another in pitiless cruelty. Even later times still have known
a "Spanish fury" and a sack of Magdeburg. And were civilisation again to
fall into decay, and the savage tribes of Africa or Asia once more to gain
the mastery, the old law would once more assert its force, and the sins of
races enervated by luxury would receive their usual punishment. Thus,
then, we are face to face with the same vast difSculty whether Joshua
received any command from God or not. We have the same question to
answer, how God could permit, nay, even apparently arrange for the com-
mission of, these awful crimes, with the intense suffering which they must
necessarily bring in their train,* and yet retain His character for mercy and
loving-kindness. And the only answer that can be found is that Ihere
is another order of things in the future, whereby it is His will to remedy
whatever inequalities He has permitted to exist here.

(2) But we may carry the argument a step farther. The conception of
God which we now put forward as an objection to the morality of the Old
Testament is derived from the teaching of the New. No such idea of God
as that which we now entertain was entertained by earlier ages. Why this
was the case we cannot tell. That it is a fact can hardly be denied. It
can be no matter of wonder if men in those days acted according to their
belief They conceived of God as a God of strict and vigorous justice.
No other view of Him had been as yet made known. Where is the inconsis-
tency of their considering themselves, and acting as, the ministers of One
who has shown, both before and since, that He does take terrible vengeance

• There la a remarkable passage in the Saxon Chroniole on the miseries suffered by
English people dniing the reign of Stephen, when the Norman barons worked their will,
nnoheoked by authority, " when men said openly that God and His saints slept."



Hf iNTBODtOTIOlJ



upon the sins of meB ? For more than four thousand years men were
ignorant of the conception of God with which we are now familiar. This
is an undeniable fact in the economy of Providence. It is surely un-
reasonable to require men to act upon any other principles than thos«
which God had then permitted to be known.

(3) For it must be remembered that the severe punishment inflicted by
Joshua upon the Canaanites who fell into his hands was not a mere out-
burst of savage cruelty. The institutions and principles of the Jews were
far more humane than those of any other nation in those early times.*
The precept to exterminate the Canaanites owed its origin to a stem indig-
nation against vices which were sufficient of themselves, according to
God's righteous order, to destroy by a more lingering, and therefore a more
cruel, death any nation who yielded to them. It was a part of God's curse
against that sin, the existence of which has been in many ways man's
greatest difficulty in comprehending God. The awful catalogue of abomin-
ations which we scarcely venture to read in Leviticus xviii. — xx., are
distinctly said to have been committed by "the men of the land" (ch. xviii.
24 — 30; XX. 23), and the land was "defiled" therewith, and God "ab-
horred " it. The power of grown-up women to lead the Israelites into such
sins had been already fatally proved (see Numbers xxvi.). In days before
men were endowed with supernatural strength from on high, there seemed
no safeguard against the seduo^ive influences of the sensual creed of
Palestine but the destruction of those who professed it. The neglect to
to carry out the command was at once followed by a relapse into these
abominable idolatries, and as lust and cruelty are strangely and nearly
allied, the land was filled with bloedshed, and injustice, and crime,
culminating in the atrocious custom of the sacrifice of innocent children at
the altar of the infernal Moloch. It may even be questioned whether, in
view of the inevitable results of a eultus like thit of Palestine, severity might
not have been, as it often is, the truest kindness ; whether, had the Jewish
law been fulfilled, the Canaanites extirpated, and Jewish ascendancy been'
established from Lebanon to the wilderness, from Euphrates to the river of
■Egypt, the principles of humanity now gaining ground among us might not
have been antedated, and the inhabitants of Palestine have been socially and
pohtically almost as much gainers by the Jewish polity as the world at large
by the religion of Christ.

(4) "We are entitled, besides, to remember that the revelation of God
through Moses was an immense advance in the moral education of the world.
Perhaps we have been too much absorbed in its visible failure as regards the
many, to observe that, as regards the few, it was as conspicuous a success

* This is not the place for a detailed examination of the statement. It propexly belougi
to the treatment of the Pentateuch.



To THE BOOK OF JOSStIA,



Our minds have been bo occupied -with St. Paul's view of it as demonstrating

to man his utter inability to satisfy God by exact compliance with the

conditions of a rigid covenant of law, that we have omitted to notice what a

vast stride it was in the moral education of the world. The history of the

conquest of Palestine can compare favourably with the history of any other

conquest the world has known, in the simplicity and absence of personal

aims of its leader, in the absolute fairness and equity of his conduct, in the

wisdom and humanity of the institutions it established, in the provision, not

only for religious worship, but for the moral instruction of the people. The

dispersion of the Levites throughout the ten tribes, with the duty of

expounding and enforcing the Jewish law, was a means of moral elevation

greater than any other nation possessed. Nor, though it did not succeed in

securing the obedience of the nation at large, can it be held altogether to

have failed. The schools of the prophets raised up men who for their

energy, courage, moral grandeur, and sometimes (as in the ease of Samuel)

political capacity and honesty, can challenge comparison with any great

men that have been produced elsewhere. David was a monarch of a type

unknown to the world in that or even in far later times, and the one crime

into which he was betrayed by irresponsible power would not have excited

equal reprobation in an Alexander, a Ca3sar, a Charlemagne, a Charles V.,

or a Napoleon ; though an honest and independent prophet could foresee that

it would " cause the enemies of the Lord to blaspheme " when committed

by " the sweet Psalmist of Israel," the man who in his ingenuous youth

was the "man after God's own heart." Thus the objection that Moses

and Joshua were not in every respect in advance of their age would seem

inconclusive, when weighed ag&inst the fact that in so many respects they

were in advance of it. So far from the Jewish religion having introduced

barbarity into the world, it greatly mitigated such a spirit, while the

Jewish law was the seed-plot from whence sprung that vast improvement,

both in humanity and morality, which has contributed not a little to the

happiness and the excellence of mankind.

II. A more formidable objection by far is raised to the miraculous portion
of the Book of Joshua. The progress of modern physical science has
altogether altered the position of miracles among the evidences of Chris-
tianity. In earher ages the marvels that were believed to have been
wrought by God at the inauguration both of the old covenant and the new,
were regarded as among the most conspicuous proofs of the Divine origin of
both. Now these very miracles are the greatest difficulties in the way of
the reception of Christianity. The discovery of the laws of force by which
the universe is governed, and the apparent invariability of their action, is
calculated to throw considerable doubt on the accuracy of a narrative which
records so startling a departure fi-om the ordinary course of nature. The



INTBODUOTION



more what used to be considered wonders or portents in nature are brought
within the range of nature's ordinary laws, the harder it becomes to beheve
that on some special occasion, and for special reasons, those laws were
altogether set aside. And this view of things derives additional strength
from two important facts : first, that, in the infancy of aU nations alike, the
occurrence of prodigies of the strangest nature was devoutly believed ; and
next, that, down to our own day. La countries where superstition is
predominant, the same childish tendency to the marvellous is constantly
observed. If we are to believe the stories of the miraculous passage of the
Bed Sea or of the Jordan, it is asked. If you wish us to accept the story of the
appearance of the angels to the shepherds, or of the performance of a
number of extraordinary miracles in Palestine at a certain epoch, on what
grounds can we withhold our credence to the visions of Lourdes and La
Salette, or the apparitions at Knock ? And if every man of common sense
rejects the latter, on what principles can the former be defended?

It cannot be denied that there is force in this argument. For if the facts
of Jewish history are guaranteed by the festivals of the Jewish nation, by
the evident sincerity and steadfastness of its belief, which has survived the
lapse of time, and a long course of trials and vicissitudes which might have
shaken the stoutest faith ; if the truth of the Christian miracles be confirmed
by the Christian sacraments,* and attested by the affirmations of competent
witnesses, we have also respectable evidence for a long list of curee at
Lourdes, La Salette, Knock, and elsewhere ; and we find in the pilgrimages
to these places the clearest proof that the evidence for them has secured
acceptance at the hands of some of the most cultivated and intelligent
persons in Christendom. And nothing makes it harder to defend revelation,
whether under the Old Covenant or the New, than these eccentricities
of its professed allies. Yet it is only fair to notice that the cases are not
exactly parallel. Paley's argument that miracles are the only way in
which a revelation can be shown to be such, if over-stated, is not without
its force. At least those who impugn it ought to state how, in their judg-
ment, a revelation could be recognized as such without the aid of miracles.
This, so far as we know, they have never done. If, then, Mosaism and
Christianity were both special interventions of God in the moral and
spiritual order of the world — and this, though denied, is not disproved — it
seems at least highly probable that they would be attested by some
miraculous occurrences, some signs of a Hand overruling the natural, as
these revelations have unquestionably largely affected the moral and
spiritual, order of things. It will be observed, in conformity with this
view, that the . promulgation of the Mosaic law and the settlement of Israel
in Palestine were attended with a groater display of the miracnloas than at

* See Dr. Macleai's Boyle Iiecturea.



TO THE BOOK OF JOSHUA. xtB

any earlier or later period in Jewish history. That the miraculous element
was not entirely withdrawn throughout the greater part of the Jewish
history previous to our Lord's coming, that portent and prophecy were still
to be met with, may be accounted for by the unique position of the Jews as
the only people to whom a revelation had been vouchsafed, and the necessity
of extraordinary aids to sustain the faith of a people placed in so peculiar
and difficult a position. The renewed manifestation of the miraculous
which attended the preaching of the Gospel has in it nothing surprising, if
our Lord were really what He represented Himself to be — the Eternal Word
of God, by whom all things were created. On the contrary, we could not
expect so exalted a Being to manifest Himself without a display of the
power inherent in Him. The gradual cessation of the miraculous after His
ascension is satisfactorily accounted for by the fact that this was the last
manifestation of His wiU. All that was necessary for the salvation of man
had now been given, and since faith was to be the transforming power which
was to fit men for their eternal inheritance, all further appeals to the senses
would be out of place. No such reason exists, or is assigned, for the
modern miracles of the Eoman Catholic Church. It is not pretended that
the perpetual visible appearance of God the Son on earth is necessary for
the success of His scheme of salvation. It is not contended, even by them-
selves, that the principle of salvation by the operation of faith needs the
perpetual visible intervention of the objects of faith, still less of any subor-
dinate assistants in the work, if indeed the Virgin Mary and her husband
Joseph can be said any longer to be subordinate agents in the work of
salvation. * Nor are the nature of the prodigies the same. The miracles
of the Old Testament and the New were at least palpable undeniable facts,
if we can believe the accounts that have been handed down to us. If there
were any apparitions of celestial beings in a blaze of light, it was but to
herald the appearance of One who, whatever may be thought of Him,
was undeniably an historical personage. Nor, again, is the kind or thS
concurrent weight of such testimony the same. It is obviously suicidal,
with the late Professor Mozley, to hold that, " if we hold certain doctrines
to be false, we are justified in depreciating the testimony of their teachers
to the miracles worked in support of them.t For then those who believe
revealed religion to be false have as much right to reject without examina-
tion the Christian miracles as we those of the Eoman Catholic Church.

• Lignori's ' Glories of Mary ' is notorious enough for the ahnost, if not quite, Diviue
honour it pays to the Blessed Virgin. It is not, perhaps, so generally known that St.
Joseph is now acknowledged to be the universal patron, protector, and guardian of the
whole Churoh, and that the new trinity of " Jesus, Maiy, and Joseph" has •baoit^ if not
quite, nsnrped the place of "Father, Son, and Holy Ghost."

t Bampton Lectures, Lect. viii.



svlii INTBODtrcTION

But in truth there is the utmost difference possible between the two cases.
In the Eoman Catholic Church we have an already existing institution,
with a priesthood whose sacerdotal pretensions have received an altogether
abnormal development, who are not entirely beyond the suspicion of pious
fraud,* who rest mainly upon the support of a people CEedulous almost
beyond belief, t and who resort to every expedient to maintain their influence
over such people in order to hold their ground against the opposing forces of
Protestantism and infidelity. If we inquire into the character of those on
whose testimony these apparitions are believed, we are referred to a few
children, not over-distinguished for truthfulness, or an Irish housekeeper,
who can scarcely be regarded as a first-rate judge of evidence, backed up by
the stout affirmations of a peasantry not regarded as altogether the most
enlightened in Europe. And the Eoman CathoHc Church has invariably a
reserve of enthusiasm to fall back upon ready to welcome any prodigy,
however improbable, which might redound to the honour of their Church.
The circumstances under which the Jewish and Christian miracles were
worked was in every way different. In the latter case there was no
reserve of enthusiasm to fall back upon, for the founding of the Christian
society, even with the alleged support of these miracles, was a task of the
utmost difficulty, and all the miracles were worked under the eyes of a band
of prejudiced and most watchful opponents. The miracles themselves
were of an altogether different character, such as precluded altogether the
possibility of mistake. Even if we give up all the miracles of healing as
due to the influence of imagination, there remains a host of others which
cannot be bo disposed of. And lastly, the character of the witnesses is
altogether different. Not only had they every' inducement to disbeUevo
what they saw, or to say they disbelieved it if they did not ; not only did
they gain no personal ends by maintaining to the last the truth of their
story, but their whole subsequent career shows that we have in them no
half-crazy fanatics who were ready to throw away their lives for an idea,
but hard-headed men of business, who set to work with the utmost cool-
ness and shrewdness to attempt the morally impossible, and by dint of
patience and practical tact, added to the force of an assured conviction,
actually accomplished it. The miracles of the Old Testament are distinct
either from those of the New or from the prodigies of later times. The
evidence for them is more distant, the period one of less enlightenment.

• Some curious stories are told of pilgrimages to Borne on the part of poor working
people who had seen the straw on which the poor " prisoner of the Vatican " reclined, and
of their astonishment at contrasting what they had been told with the reality.

t See Professor Eensoh's crushing exposS of German superstition in his • Die Deutschen
Bischbfe und der Aberglauhe.' Professor Keusoh is no prejudiced antagonist. At present
he holds a position midway between the Old Catholics and the Soman Oatholio Chuioh.



TO THE BOOK OF JOSHUA. lis

But if we may trust our histories, they were worled for a definite purpose,
ill the eyes of a whole people, and in a manner which admits of no mistake.
Tliey were no apparitions seen, or believed to be seen, by a few ignorant and
credulous people ; they were marvels publicly wrought on behalf of a nation in
arms, and they facilitated one of the most memorable conquests to be found
in all history. The evidence for them rests upon the credibility of the
documents that relate them. And if we are not entitled to assume that
these were contemporary documents, we have no right, on the other hand, to
assume that, from the mere presence of the miraculous in them, they must
be relegated to a later date. If the events related will generally stand the
test of criticism, we cannot detach the miraculous portions from the
remainder. The evidence that the writer had access to authentic informa-
tion in one part of his work gives him at least serious claim on our attention
throughout. At least, therefore, we are entitled to contend that the
Scripture miracles must be allowed to stand on an altogether different
basis than occasional apparitions to women and children, occurring for
reasons of which it is impossible to give a rational explanation.

It is with pain that in the foregoing remarks we have felt ourselves
compelled to reflect with severity upon the religion of a vast number of
our brethren in Christ. No. good can be done by going out of the way to
attack the belief of one's neighbours. And nothing but a deep conviction
of the cruel injury done to the cause of revealed religion among the thought-
less and superficial by this endless crop of spurious wonders would have
justified these reflections. But in view of the way in which these supposed
miracles have been used to discredit revelation, it has become necessary to
show that the miracles of the Bible rest on altogether different grounds to
those of the Eoman Catholic Church. It remains to deal with an objection
to the miracles of the Old and New Testament alike, that they are contrary
to the laws by which modem discovery has proved that the physical uni-
verse is governed. Those laws, we are told, are invariable, and any state-
ment, it is added, asserting that their action has been suspended must be
discredited. It would lead us too far were we to enter upon the fuU con-
sideration of this question. The question of the possibility of the miraculous
has been ably dealt with by others.* Suffice it here to say that science has
not only proved the invariability of forces and their laws, it has proved much
more. It has proved that invariable forces, acting by invariable laws, are
the most plastic instruments possible in human hands. The most extra-
ordinary physical and moral results are being produced upon the face of the
globe by the moral agent will, when at work upon the physical agencies
whose action is said to be invariable. All that is claimed for God in these

* See, for instance, Dr. Mozlej'ii Bampton Leotuies, and Deiku Mansel's Eeeay ia
: Aida to Faith.'



»



INTEODUOTION



pages is the possession of what is unquestionably possessed by man, the
power, without suspending the action of a single force, so to control its
operation as to produce the results He desires. If man can drain marshes
at his will, and turn them into fruitful fields, why should not God be able,
at His will, to make a path across the sea, or arrest the course of a river ?
K man can, by touching a wire, cause an explosion that might lay half
London ia ruins, how can we assert it to be impossible for the Creator of
heaven and earth to bring the walls of Jericho to the ground by means the
secret of which is known to Him, but which is, and may for ever remain,
hidden from us ? So far from the discoveries of science rendering the
belief in miracles impossible, it is, in fact, supplying the defenders of revela-
tion with the strongest evidence in the opposite direction. For if during
the last few years man has become possessed of powers the existence of
which, previous to their discovery, would have seemed in the highest degree
incredible, there is the best reason for believing that Nature possesses powers
and possibilities yet unknown, which, in the hands of the Author of Nature,
may produce results which appear to us beyond measure extraordinary
and portentous.

It now remains to consider the vexed question of Joshua's command to
the sun and moon to stand still, which has been so great a difBculty, not
only to commentators, but to aU apologists of revealed religion. It may be
well first to state the various interpretations which have been given of the
passage, before discussing it more particularly. Maimonides (a mediseval
writer, be it remembered), whom Eabbi ben Gerson among the Jewish,
Grotius * and Masius among the earlier, and Hengstenberg among the
later Christian commentators follow, regards it as simply a poetic way of
saying that the day was long enough to enable the Israelites to complete the
slaughter of their enemies. We read in his ' Moreh Nevochim' (iL 35) : " Siout
diem integrum mihi videtur inteUigi dies maximus et longissimus (Thamim
enim idem est quod schalem, perfectus), et idem esse si dixisset quod dies ille
apud ipsos in Gibeone faerit siout dies magnus et longus in SBstate."
Masius is very confident in this view, and says that if Kimchi thinks other-
wise, it is only a proof how Httle the Jews of his day knew of their own
scriptures. The earlier Eabbis are imanimons that the sun UteraUy stood
still, though they differ, like the Fathers, as to the time that it remained
above the horizon. David Kimchi thought that the period was twenty-four
hours, and that after the sun bad set, the moon stUl remained stationary that

* Keil repreBents Orotiua as being in favoni of the notion of a refraotion which kept th«
sou'b appearance above the horizon long after it sank below the horizon. But his inter-
pretation is the one stated above, although he adds, " quanquam impossibile Deo non est
BoUs cuisiim morari, ant etiam post soils ocoasum gpeoiem ejus in uube super horizontem
ustauti reperousBum ostendere."



TO THE BOOK OF JOSHUA. xii

Joshua might complete the slaughter of his foes.* The Fathers generally
take the hteral view of the passage, and suppose the sun to have literally
stood still in the heavens, some for a longer, some for a shorter period, some
supposing it to be forty-eight, some thirty-six (so Justin Martyr, * DiaL
Tryph.' 182), some twenty-eight hours (as Cornelius a Lapide, whose
commentary is of course based on the patristic writings). Keil seems finally
to have decided in favour of what he calls a " subjective " lengthening of ths
day. He believes that the day was supposed by the Israelites to have been
lengthened, they being too fully engaged in the conflict with their enemies
to take any very accurate note of time. Curiosities of interpretation, such
as that of Michaelis,t who supposed that the lightning which accompanied
the hailstorm was prolonged far into the night; or that of Konig,! who sup-
poses that the hailstorm which, according to the history, preceded the
standing still of the sun, was a consequence of that occurrence, need only
be noticed to be rejected.

We come next to inquire which of these views is the most probable. And
here, with Keil and Grotius, we may dismiss all notions from our mind of
the impossibility of the miracle. He who holds the heavens in the hoUow of
His hand could arrest the revolution of the earth and prevent aU the tre-
mendous consequences (as they seem to us) of such a cessation, as easily as
a man can arrest the progress of a vast machine more than ten thousand
times as powerful as himself. The former event is not more antecedently
incredible than the latter, but the contrary. But though it seems eminently
unreasonable to doubt the possibility of such an occurrence, we may, with
far more reason, doubt its probability. It is a fair question whether a
miracle of so stupendous a kind were really worked for such a purpose by
Him, the economy of whose means to His ends is one of the most striking
features of His works. It may be reasonably doubted whether He who do-

• The following specimens, for whicli I am indebted to the IdndneBS of a well-known
Babbinio scholar, of the way in which this subject is treated in the Babbinical writings
wUl not be without interest. In the Midrash on Genesis (Bereshith Babba, cap. 6)
we read that the Book of Deuteronomy was Joshua's banner. When God spake to him as
recorded in Josh. i. he had the Book of Deuteronomy in his hand, and he was bidden (says
B. Simeon ben Jochai) not to let it depart out of his hand. Thus, in the thick of the fight
at Beth-horon, he raised the Book of Deuteronomy on high, and said, " As I never ceased
(D-n) to study this book, so do thou stand still (Q-n) in the heavens." E. Isaac says that
Joshua addressed the sun as follows : " Thou wicked servant, art thou not the slave of my
father (Joseph) T Did not my father see thee thus in a dream t " Others held that the
standing stUl of the sun and moon, and the retiring of the waters, were part of the original
compact with them at the beginning of the world.

t J. D. Miohaehs, 'Deutsche Uebersetzung des Alten Testaments, mit Anmerkungenfui
Ungelehrte.' 1774.

X Cited by KeU, who is, however, very inacourats la bis rejiresentationB of the views of
the aathoxs he mentious.



INTEODTJOTION



olined, at the snggestion of the tempter, to suspenS the laws of natnre that
He might be fed, who never has suspended those laws in such a manner for
the benefit of His creatures, would have suspended them for their slaughter.
And while steadfastly maintaining the genuineness and authenticity of the
Soriptures, and their accuracy on aU the main points of their narrative, it
has never yet been authoritatively decided that they i^ere free from error on
every point. From the time of St. Jerome downwards it has been held that
mistakes in minor points might be admitted in them without invalidating
their claim to be regarded as authoritative exponents of the will of God.
Thus, then, the writer will have satisfied all the conditions of authentic his-
tory, if he tells us what was the current belief in his own day. The success
of the Israelites was so far beyond their expectations, the slaughter of their
powerful enemies so immense, that it may have been their firm belief that
the day was mu-aculously lengthened on their behalf. But we are not driven
to this view of the case. The quotation has an obviously poetic form, as
every one must admit. The Book of Jasher (although Jarchi, as well as
Targum, thinks it is the Pentateuch, and other Eabbis believe it to be
the Books of Genesis and Deuteronomy respectively) has been very
generally supposed to be a collection of national songs existing in early
days, and receiving additions from time to time. This is Maurer's belief,
and it has been adopted by Keil and others. We are not compelled
therefore to regard Joshua's prayer and the whole paragraph as more
literal than the apostrophe of Isaiah, " that thou wouldst rend the
heavens and come down, that the mountains would flow down at Thy
Presence," or the statement of Deborah and Barak that "the stars in
their courses fought against Sisera." Bat, again, the words of the original
have been singularly exaggerated. Li' orally translated (see notes on the
passage) they amount simply to this: " Then spake Joshua to (or before,
as Masius) Jehovah in the day when Jehovah gave the Amorite before the
sons of Israel. And he said before the eyes of Israel, Sun, in Gibeon be still,
and moon, in the vale of Ajalon. And the sun was still, and the moon stood
tiU a nation was avenged of its enemies. Is not this written in the book of
the upright ? And the sun stood in the midst of heaven, and did not haste
to go down, as (or like) a perfect day. And there was not a day like that
before or after it, for Jehovah to hearken to the voice of a man, for Jehovah
fought for Israel." It is obvious that the actual meaning of the author
is involved in much obscurity. It is certainly not asserted that the sun
remained in the heavens twenty-four, or twelve, or even one hour beyond
its usual time. All that is stated is that Joshua in impassioned words
demanded that the sun and moon should not set until his work was done,
and that this (to the Israelites) extraordinary request was fulfilled. He
had perfect day until Israel was avenged of their enemies. Avast lea,gue oi



TO THE BOOK OF JOSHUA. Xxiii

civilized states, with all the best appliances of warfare banding together to
resist a nation unused to military exploits, defeated with tremendous
slaughter, and annihilated in a single day, would doubtless seem to Israel
a stupendous work of God's hand. Well might they embody it among
their national songs, and relate for ever after how the sun remained above
the heavens until the victory was more than complete, and how the moon
continued to give her light imtil the scanty remnant of the mighty host
were pursued to their strongholds. Nor is this view of the passage without
corroboration. Hengstenberg (' Geschichte des Eeiches Gottes,' p. 231 sqq.)
does not fail to notice the fact that in all the allusions — and they are
many — to the great things God had done for Israel, not one is found to
this supposed miracle, until the time of the son of Sirach (ch. xlvi. 4),
save a very doubtful passage in Habakkuk iii. This is surely decisive aa
to the view Scripture itself has taken of the passage, and it is as true
of the New Testament as of the Old. Thus, therefore, we conclude that
the whole passage is so obscure and difficult, besides being very probably
a quotation — perhaps even an interpolation — from another book, that we
are at least justified in considering its importance to have been exag-
gerated both by assailants and defenders. The interpretation which
supposes it to refer to a vast natural convulsion, wrought by the Almighty
in order to complete the defeat of the Canaanites, though a possible, is,
as has been shown, by no means the only possible explanation of the words
of the narrative. And this position once established, the whole fabrio
of controversy that has been raised on this much-vexed passage falls to
the ground.

§ HI. Thb Obioinai. Inhabitants of Palestine.

The people who inhabited Palestine at the time of the .Israelite invasion
are regarded in history from two very opposite points of view. To the
Israelites, in whom the moral sense strongly predominated over culture, they
appeared as monsters of iniquity, deserving of nothing but absolute extirpa-
tion. To profane history, regarding mankind from a more material point
of view, they appear as the parents of civilization, the founders of literature
and science, the pioneers of commerce, the colonists of the Mediterranean.
These views may be to a certain extent harmonized. It is not necessary to
regard the Jews as the opponents of aU culture, because they were stem
avengers of moral depravity. The time when the Phoenician power attained
its utmost height was coincident, as recent discoveries show, with the time
of the Israelite sojourn in Egypt. Civilization, as it usually does, brought
luxury, and luxury demoralization ; and the same fate attended the Phceni-
cian supremacy which attended the supremacy of all the great empires of
the ancient world, a dissolution of morals and consequent decay. The

^OBBUA. /



xsit INTEODUOTION



severe lesson taught by Joshua's invasion seems not to have been without
its effect upon the Sidonians and Tyrians, who retained their commercial
pre-eminence to a considerably later date.* But the rest of Phcenicia seems
gradually to have sunk from that time, and her supremacy in literature and
the arts was irrecoverably gone.

Modern research has only just recovered for us a great deal of the history
of the Phoenicians which had long been lost. We knew of them as the race
who introduced letters to the Greeks from the legend of Cadmus, and the
ancient Hebrew letters were no doubt borrowed from their system. We
knew that Phoenician colonies had been found at Cyprus, Rhodes, Crete,
Asia Minor, Sicily, Sardinia ; and that Carthage derived its appellation of
Punic; and even its language, from them.t We knew from the Bible that
they were a Turanian race.| But what we did not know was that under
the name of Hittites, or rather Chittites (a name preserved at the town of
Citium, now Chitti, in the Phoenician colony of Cyprus, the abode, according
to Scripture, of the Chittim), they were among the leading peoples of the
world at an early period ; that Carchemish was their capital, and that they
had there held a position of equahty both with the Babylonian and Egyp-
tian powers. The recent researches at Carchemish, discovered in 1874 — 75
by Mr. Skene, the British consul at Aleppo, § on the west bank of the
Euphrates, have established this fact. Previous to these discoveries the
only authentic account of them, as distinct from tradition, was to be found in
the monuments and records of those who had subdued them. || They appear
to have been originally known to the Egyptians as Euten or Eutennu. IT After-
wards they were known as the Kheta or Khatti, and many fierce and de-
structive wars were waged against them by the Babylonians and Egyptians.**
Their power received a rude shock in the occupation of the south-western
portion of their empire under Joshua, and the final blow to their pre-eminence

* See notes on Tyre and Sidon (ch. zix. 29, and zi. 8).

t Kenriot, ' Phoenicia,' ohs. iv., v., Movers, 'Die Phonizier,' ii. 3. Inscriptions have been
fonnd in Ghreeoe, Malta, Oarthage, in precisely the same alphabet and language as is found
on the Moabite stone. And the Carthaginian passage in the Posnulns of Plautua, though
Tofnlly disfigured by transcribers, is easily translatable, as Movers has restored it, when
written in the Hebrew character. See a paper on this passage by Mr. Eodwell in the
'Tians. Boo. BibL Arohaol.,' ii. 235.

I Gen. ii. 18 ; xl. 16 — 18. Whether this be regarded as an ethnological or geographical
view of these nations, the Scripture clearly regards them as Toraniaus.

S See Timet of Aug. 19, 1880. Mr. George Smith fully concuned with Mr. Skene in
identifying the ruins as those of Carchemish.

II See the great expedition of Thothmes III. against Carchemish, which took place during
the life of Moses and before the Exodus (' Beoords of the Past,' ii.).

IT 'Becords of the Past," u.Slsqq. Thothmes HI. speaks of the Syrians as Eharn,andiii
one place as Katu, according to the translation of the account of the battle of Megiddo.
Palestine is spoken of as Taneter and Eefa, and its inhabitants m Eefau (ibid. p. 89 sqql.

** • Trans. Soo. BibL Archtsol.,' iii 83 sqfi..



TO THE BOOK OF JOSHUA. ixv

Was dealt by Eameses II. in his expedition against the Syrians.* Their
Turanian origin cannot be said to be disproved by their adoption of the
Semitic language. In whatever difiSculties such a theory may involve us,
we are not entitled to contradict the plain assertion of Scripture (see above).
It is corroborated by the fact that traces of a Turanian occupation of Pales-
tine are to be found in Phoenician words, f Moreover, that Turanians and
Semites were much intermingled in those regions is an admitted fact.
Eecent investigation has conclusively established the truth of the Scripture
statement, that Babylon was originally inhabited by a Turanian race,J and
that this race was afterwards subjugated by a Semitic one.§ Instances of
nations abandoning their language and adopting another are not unknown.
The Bulgarians and the Northmen are cases ia point. || Lenormant H thinks
that though their language can scarcely be distinguished from Hebrew, it
was not necessarily confined to the Semitic races, and he remarks on similar
phenomena, as they appear to him, in the languages of ancient Babylonia.
Movers, who inclines on the whole to regard them as the primitive inhabi-
tants of the land, in spite of the Greek traditions which speak of their having
emigrated from the shores of the Eed Sea, notices that they were not con-
nected together by any very close genealogical ties.** He remarks ft that
the fact that the Israelites, wMle they speak of the B'ney, or sons of Israel,
Moab, Ammon, always, with one remarkable exception, speak of the inhabi-
tants of the land as the Canaanite, Amorite, Jebusite, &c. The one exception
is the B'ney Khet, or Heth, which is in accordance with what we know from
other sources, that they were a powerful people beyond the borders of
Palestine. This view is confirmed, he believes, by the thirty-one kingly
cities which are mentioned in ch. ii. 9 — 24, as having been taken by Joshua.

* See note on ch. i. 4, and ' Becords of the Past,' ii. 65 Bqq. ; vr. 25. CarchemiBh waa
finally conq^uered by Sargon I., and it afterwards became the great mercantile emporium
of the East.

t TomMn's ' Studies on the Time of Abraham,' p. 95. J Gen. x. 6 — 10.

I The early language of Babylon, the Accadian, was a Turanian one. See Smith's
'Notes on the Early History of Assyria,' pp. 3 — 16 ; Sayce, 'Babylonian Literature,' p. 6

• Trans. Soo. Bibl. Archaol.,' i. 298.

II See Freeman's 'Hist of the Korm. Conq.,' L 196; Oibbon's 'Decline and Fall,' oh.
«lii, and Smith's notes on ch. Iv.

IT ' Manual of the Ancient History of the East,' i. 72.

** Lenormant, on the contrary, thinks that they were preceded by the Eorites, Bephaim,
iind others. But Moyers remarks on the uncertainty of the Greek traditions which may
(1) haye originated from a misapprehension of the origin of the word Phoinix, and (2) may
have been founded on (a) the Israelitish, [b] the Philistine, or (c) the Assyrian (see 2 Kings
xvii. 24) inhabitants of Canaan. Moreover, he shows from Deut. ii. 20 — 23, that the
Moabites, Ammonites, Edomites, and Philistines were later invaders of Canaan, but there
is no trace of any conflict between the Canaanites or Hittites and the aborigines. The
Babylonian myths represent the Phoenicians to have had their origin in Mesopotamia, tbe
eradle of the human race. ft ' Die Phduizier,' II. i. S.



XXTl



INTBODUCTION



It is still farther confirmed by the fact that Gibeon -was differently governea
from the rest,* as well as by another fact which Movers points out, that the
Hivites were scattered over Palestine.! The term Oanaanite is regarded by
Movers as referring, not to a genealogical descent, but to the situation of
the inhabitants in the lowlands of Palestine, while Perizzite in his opinion
means the separated or scattered agricultural families (see ch. iii 10). Thus
it seems not at all improbable that a variety of races may have emigrated
to the shores of the Mediterranean, have adopted the same language,
manners, and religious customs, J and constituted what has been known to
history as the Phoenician people.

The Phoenician religion seems to have been the parent of the religions
of Greece and Eome. Baal seems to have been equivalent to Zeus, and
Ashtaroth § to have combined the characteristics of Artemis and Aphro-
dite. Asherah was the prototype of Ehea or Oybele, and her rites seem to
have consisted in a combination of the phallic worship with the idea of
the fecundity of nature. The worship of Moloch was not known to the
Israelites till later times, and he is thought by some to have been an
Ammonite deity and identical with Milcom. Yet it is probable that in the
worship of the Phoenician representatives of Cronos, the bloody rites
ascribed in the Scripture to Moloch were observed. || Thammuz,1[ known
later as Adonis, was fabled to have died on Lebanon, and the temple at
Apheka, or Aphaca, was dedicated to the mourning Aphrodite. The
remainder of the chief deities known to Greece had their place in the
Phoenician, as they appear to have done also in the Babylonian, pantheon.
The general character of the worship, as described by Lenormant in his
' Manual of the Ancient History of the East,' fully justifies all that is said of
it in the books of Moses. " The Canaanites," he says, " were remarkable
for the atrocious cruelty that stamped all the ceremonies of their worship,
and the precepts of their religion. No other people ever rivalled them in the
mixture of bloodshed and debauchery with which they thought to honour
the deity. As the celebrated Oreuzer has said, ' Terror was the inherent
principle of this religion ; all its rites were bloodstained, and all its cere-
monies were surrounded by bloody images.' " **

Of their poUtical institutions we know but little. They seem, like ancieni
Greece, to have been split up into a number of separate states, the great
majority of which seem to have adopted a monarchical, but some, as

• See notes on oh. ix. 8 ; z. 9. t See note on oh. m. 10.

{ Movers does not fail to lemark that the Moabites and Ammonites, though Bemitia
peoples, adopted the Fhcsniciau religion. It was difficult, he might have added, to prevent
the Jews from doing the sarnie. § See note on Ashtaroth, ch. xii. 4.

II Kenriok, 316. Lenormant thinks he was originally the fire-god. Movers identifiaa him
with Heracles and Ares, as well as with the fiie-god or destroying principle.

T Ezek. vijj. 14. • Vol u. p. 38^



*o mmE BOOK OS* Joshua. ixvii

gi i — •

Gibeon, a republican government. Society, as has been intimated, waa
highly organized among them. They had already reached a high degree of
civilization and culture. The land had long fallen into the hands of private
landholders. The slight glimpses we get (as in chs. ii. 1, 2 ; ix. 1 ; x. 1, 8,
6 ; xi, 1, 2) into the interior life of the cities leads us to beUeve that the
kings possessed autocratic power, nor do we read of any assembly of their
people in the Book of Joshua. This agrees with the picture of a king given
in Deut. xvii. 14 — 18, taken, no doubt, from the kings of Canaan. The
character of the inhabitants seems on the whole to have been peaceful, as
we might naturally expect from their mercantile pursuits,* though there
seems to have been considerable cohesion among them, since the leagues
formed by the northern and southern tribes after Joshua's invasion were
apparently formed without any difficulty. This slight tendency to defection,
however, may have been due to Joshua's unconcealed purpose of exter-
mination, of which the Gibeonites were obviously aware. It seems probable
that the kings of Palestine had owed a sort of feudal allegiance to their
Hittite head at Carohemiah. But he seems to have had no power to
aid them in the time of Joshua. Possibly, therefore, the great Hittite
power was already on the wane. The centre was losing its hold on the
extremities, and the confederacies of which Jerusalem and Hazor were the
heads had become in a great measm-e independent of the central power.
This accounts for the fact which otherwise would be surprising, that no
attempt was made by the Hittites beyond Palestine to regain their lost
territory. Of their literary activity we know but little. Yet the legend of
Cadmus, the ancient name of Debir, Kirjath-Sepher, the city of the book,
as well as the recent discoveries at Carohemish, prove them to have attained
a high pitch of cultivation. Their commercial achievements are better
known. Tyre and Sidon retained (see note) to a much later period their
mercantile pre-eminence. The colonial development of the Phoenicians arose
out of the commercial. It was for trading purposes that these settlements
were formed. And so enterprising were they, that while other nations —
the Jews among the rest — sought the seas with fear and trembling, the
Phoenicians ventured beyond the Pillars of Hercules, and set on foot a
brisk trade with the inhabitants of these otherwise unknown islands for tin
and other metals. Against such a people was Joshua's memorable expedi-
tion directed. Of its leader, and the singular military skill he displayed
in the choice of a spot for the invasion, and in his conduct of the enterprise,

• Movers, ii. book i. 2 section 2, remarks on the absence of any signs o. a warlike cha-
racter among them in the Book of Genesis, and on their peaceful reception of strangers, as
evidenced by the whole narrative. But society was evidently far more highly organized in
ihe time ofJoshua, and, as a natural consequence of the wealth gained by commerce, mi
hm peoeaful, bat infinitely more coinipt.



txtiil INTEODUOTION



nothing need be said here. Those subjects mil be found folly discussed
in the notes. The moral aspect of the invasion has already been considered.
It remains only to add that, many as are the memorable conquests on
record, conquests whose results have had an abiding influence upon aftei
ages, this one is the most memorable of aU. The occupation of this small
strip of territory scarcely larger than Wales, though it led to no further
results in the way of conquest, has nevertheless to a great extent moulded
the moral and religious history of the world. Christianity and Moham-
medanism have alike sprung from it ; and though at first the latter seemed
to have surpassed the former in political and warlike activity, supremacy
has at length fallen unchallenged into Christian hands. Thus the Israelite
conquest of Canaan was in fact an event of primary importance to man-
kind. It was one which might well have been ushered in with portent and
prodigy, and certainly it was one which will always occupy a foremost place
in men's minds. No amount of destructive criticism can dispose of the
fact that the subjugation of Palestine was achieved by a people without a
rival in the influence it has exerted on the destiaies of the human race.

§ IV. The Settlement op Palestinb.

A few remarks on the landed and governmental system of Palestine may
not be out of place. The iustitutions of the people as a whole may of
course best be studied in the Mosaic law, but it is not unimportant to
endeavour to gain from the condition of Palestine after the conquest some
idea of the way in which it was originally designed that this law should b«
administered. This question divides itself into two heads, the system of
government and the tenure of land.

I. What the system of government was in Joshua's time is clear enough.
It was virtually what we now call a constitutional monarchy, though
rather of the type which such a monarchy took at the time of William IIL
than that which exists among us at the present day. Joshua was supreme,
yet simply by force of character, not from any supposed inherent right he
possessed to such supremacy, still less, like many successful soldiers, by a
military despotism. For great as his authority unquestionably was, he
never acted alone. Whenever we see him discharging the functions of
chief magistrate, he reminds us of an early Anglo-Saxon sovereign. His
Witenagemot, his council, the representatives of the tribes, the high officers
of Church and State, were always around him (ch. viii. 83 ; xviii. 1 ;
xxii. 11 — 14 ; xxiiL 2 ; xxiv. 1). But after his death the tribes assumed
a form more like the United States in Holland and America. Each one
had its own defined portion of territory, apportioned to it by lot, and was
sovereign within its own borders, but common dangers and common interestd
Tore discussed at a general assembly. There appears, however, to hun



TO THE BOOE OF JOSStJA. txlt



been no organized system of united action, no fixed time for the general
assembly to meet, but such assemblies were only held under the pressure of
extraordinary need (Judg. ix. 1). Therefore, when the personal influence
of the " elders that over-lived Joshua " was removed, the acknowledgment
of the theocracy, the provision for united worship, was not found sufficient
to band the tribes together, and the once formidable confederacy soon fell
to pieces. Its integrity was seriously threatened as early as the events
recorded in Judges xx. It had already ceased to exist in the time of
Deborah and Barak. The internal unity of each tribe or clan was much
better preserved. Its organization was extremely complete. The tribe was
divided into its ninatj'D or septs, its ni3Nrrn<3 or families, and its D^??
or heads of households. The b*9-1^t5 or thousands, which have been held
to correspond to the mriBtJ'p, were probably a military division parallel to,
but independent of, the genealogical one, and bore some analogy to the
hundred or wapentake of our own island. The question which has been
learnedly argued concerning Anglo-Saxon institutions, whether the national
system was one of aggregation or subdivision, does not arise here. For
Israel was, as the name implies, a family, the family of Jacob. From
hence the minor divisions arose by subdivision, the tribe into the sept, the
sept into the family, the family into the household. Thus the political
unit, which in early English society was the mark or vDlage, in Palestine
was the tribe. The government thence arising was partly aristocratic,
partly representative. The heads of the tribes had no doubt to summon
to the council all the heads of the households,* but they themselves, as the
lineal descendants of the eldest son, had the greatest weight in the decision
(see Josh. xxii. 14). The powers of the head of a household were great,
though by no means so absolute as in many of the primitive Aryan com-
munities,! where the house-father had an absolute power of life and death.
The Mosaic law knew nothing of the fierce rigours of this patriarchal
tyranny. It did not subsist in the households of Abraham, Israel, and
Jacob, If it had had a tendency to grow up in Egypt, the Mosaic law
would have checked it. It is clear from Bxod. xxi. 15 — 17, from Levit. xx. 9,
firom Deut. xxvii. 16, and above all from Deut. xxi. 18 — 21, that the Jewish
head of a household had not, like the Aryan house-father, the power of life
and death over his children. Though the members of his iamily had no
representative at the general council of the tribe, he was responsible for his
treatment of them to the laws of the land. By whom those laws were
administered we know not. The judges were originally (Exod. xviii. 25)

• Bometimea, as in oh. xxi. 1, only the heads ol the familut were present. Compaia
the greater and lesser Skuptsohina in Servia.

t As in India (see Maine, ' Village Communitiei,' Leot. iv.). And in Greece and Bom«
(««« Heam, ' Aryan Household,' oh. iv.).



xtx INTBODUOTIOH



appointed by Moses. No doubt Josbua continued to appoint them during
his lifetima But we hear of no provision for their appointment after his
death. Possibly they were appointed by the general assembly of the tribe,
but in the rapid disintegration of Jewish institutions which followed, wa
find their office usurped by the military leader who had for a time retrieved
the fallen fortunes of Israel.

n. The land system of Israel differed much from the Aryan land systems.
There, originally, land appears to have been held in common by the in-
habitants of the mark, and to have been divided into three parts, for wheat,
spring crops, and fallow, beside the pasture grounds ; and originally to have
been shifted from time to time, when exhausted.* The Semitic and
Turanian tribes seem to have differed from the Aryans in having grasped
much earlier the idea of private property in land. The Egyptians, by
Joseph's advice, had converted the vast bulk of Egyptian proprietors then
existing into the tenants of the crown. In Palestine, as early as the time
of Abraham, the Hittites appear also to have recognized the rights of
private proprietors. It is impossible to read the narrative of Gen. xxiii., t
and fancy that we are reading of an account of the permanent acquisition by
Abraham of a portion of the ager publinis.X The ground was evidently the
property of Ephron, and the other children of Heth were but the witnesses
and guarantors of the legality of the transaction. A similar purchase is
recorded in Gen. xxxiii. 19. § But the land system of Palestine received a
remarkable modification when it fell into the hands of the Jews. Jehovah
Himself became the actual owner of the land ; each head of a household
received his inheritance in fief and in perpetuity from Him. The institution
of the year of release secured that no property should be permanently
alienated from its owner. Thus every Israelite was a landed proprietor ; and
not only so, but a landed proprietor in perpetuity. Each had, therefore, an
equal stake in the community. No system could be better adapted to the
stabiUty of the commonwealth. But there is reason to suppose that it

• " Neqne qnisqnEun agri modum certum ant fines habet proprioB." Csesar, ' De Bello
Gallioo,' vi. 22 ; Tacit. ' Germ.,' 26 ; Btubbs, ' Constitutional Hietory,' vol. i., ch. ii ;
Freeman, ' Norman Conquest,' ch. i. pp. 89, 90. The Germans seem to have acquired
some notions of private property in land between the time of Cffisar and that of Tacitus.
It appears clear that they brought the idea with them to this country. But much of the
land was still hold in common at that time (see Stubbs, ' Constitutional History,' vol. i.,
oh. v.). t Especially w. 8, 10, 14, and 17.

I This view U taken in an article on the land tenore of Palestine in the Church
Quarterly Beview, October, 1880.

§ Here again I am unable to follow the reviewer. Jacob, we are told in the Hebrew,
obtained the allotment of the field where he had pitched his tent. There is no hint that
the sadeh here was the ager pnblicus. If so, how could it be alienated, and how wai
it that if private property in land were unknown among the Hivitea, Jacob io Mwily
obtained it for himself 1 (See also Josh. zziv. 33.)



TO THE BOOK OF JOSHtJA. xsti

was not long maintained. First, the repeated invasions of Israel, and
next the usurpations of kings (1 Kings xxi. 8), destroyed it, and in the later
days of the Jewish history we find that even the person of the Israelite
was no longer sacred from slavery (Jer. xxxiv. 8 — 11).

One feature of the Jewish land system seems to have approximated to
the Aryan custom. A certain amount of pasturage (see note on E'^^P
" suburbs," cL xxi. 2) was reserved for the Levites in the neighbourhood of
the cities assigned to them. It seems to have been used in common by
them, and not to have been accompanied by any assignment of arable land.
As the Levites, we are frequently told, had no inheritance with the rest
of their brethren, the view taken in the notes seems the most probable one,
that they dwelt in the cities with their brethren of each tribe, the right
of pasturage for their cattle being the only right reserved to them. The
rest of their subsistence they derived from the offerings of the people (see
eh. ziii. 14).

i V. Contents of thb Booii.

As has been already said, and as will be found in the notes on ch. i 1,
the Book of Joshua is clearly a continuation of the Book of Deuteronomy.
It commences (oh. L 1 — 9) with God's charge to Joshua, embracing (1) the
extent of the dominion to be given to the children of Israel, and (2) instruc-
tions to himself as to the grounds of his confidence, and the way in which
he is to seek it. He is to be successful, if he studies and keeps the law of God.

In ch. i. 10 — 15 we have Joshua's instructions to the people, (1) to the
officers to see that the necessary preparations were made, and (2) to the
tribes who had already received their inheritance, concerning the part they
were to take in the impending struggle. Vers. 16 — 18 contain the people's
acceptance of Joshua as leader in the place of Moses, and their promise of
a most implicit obedience.

Oh. ii. (see notes) is parenthetical. It contains the preparations Joshua
had already made for the invasion of Canaan, by sending spies to reconnoitre
the first city he intended to attack. They excited the suspicion of the
king, and had to take refuge in the house of Eahab. There they learn the
terror which the news of their approach had inspired in the hearts of the
Canaanites, as a people behoved to be under the protection of a mighty
deity. They were hidden by Eahab under the stalks of flax (it being the
time of the earlier harvest), were then let down the city wall, after having
promised to save Eahab and her family in the sack of the city. Certain
tokens were agreed upon for the performance of this promise, and then the
spies departed, hid themselves in the mountains, thus escaping pursuit, and
finally returned in safety to Joshua.

Oh. iii. contains the narrative of the crossing of the Jordan. The people
followed the ark at a fixed distance, until they had reached the place



i»^ tNTBOBtJOWON



appointed for crossing. The waters, as usual at the time of barley harvest,
had overflowed the banks. The priests bearing the ark dipped their feet in
the brim of the water at the point to which the waters had then reached ;
the course of the river was at once arrested and the Israelites crossed on
dry land.

Ch. iv. contains the continuation of the narrative. Joshua gives orders
for the erection of two memorials, one on the Canaan side of Jordan, where
they first rested for the night, the other on the eastern side, at the spot on the
brink of the swoUen river where the priests had stood during the crossing.
The first memorial consisted of large stones taken out of the bed of the
Jordan. The others (whence they came we are not told) were set up in the
shallow water where the priests had stood. The crossing complete, the
priests cross with the ark, and as soon as they have reached the dry land on
the other side the waters flow as before. The memorial is then set up
at GUgal, and its purpose is explaiaed.

Oh. V. 1 — 9 relates the formal renewal of the covenant by the rite ol
circumcision, which appears (see notes) to have been suspended since the
rejection of the people in Num. xiv. In vers. 10, 11 we read of the keeping
of the passover', which may have been intermitted altogether, but had
certainly not been kept by the whole nation for thirty-eight years. Ver. 12
notes the cessation of the manna.

We come next (ch. v. 13 — ^vi. 27) to the taking of Jericho. Joshua was
near Jericho, either engaged in meditation or in reconnoitring the city,
when a vision (ver. 13) appears to him in the shape of a man with a drawn
sword, who (ver. 14) announces himself as the " captain of the Lord's host "
and (ver. 15) as a Being of Divine nature. This Being proceeds to give
directions for the capture of the city (ch. vi. 2 — 5), which, as the first step
in the conquest of Canaan, was to be of an entirely supernatural character.
The directions are abbreviated in the narrative, but we afterwards learn
more fully what they were. The men of war, followed by seven priests
bearing seven trumpets and the ark, and they, in their turn, by the rest of
the people, were to march round the city once for six days. On the seventh
they were to march round it seven times. Then a prolonged blast was to
be blown on the trumpets, the people were to raise the shout of victory, and
the wall of the city would fall down and the people dehvered into their
hands. The spoil of the city was to be solemnly devoted to God. These
directions (vers. 6 — 21) were fulfilled, and the result was as had been
promised. "We next (vers. 22 — 25) read of the destruction of the city and
the fulfilment of the promise to Eahab. Verses 26, 27 relate the curse
pronounced against any one who should rebuild Jericho, and the effect of its
fall upon the rest of the people of the land.

Oh. vii brings ns to the episode of Aohaa Joshua sent a small detaob<



¥0 THE BOOS OF JOSHt^A. xxaJUi



ment to effect the capture of Ai, following the advice of his scouts, who
pronounced it to be an insignificant place. The result was a slight repulse
This produced an effect on Joshua and the people which would have been
altogether disproportionate had it not been regarded as a sign of Jehovah's
displeasure (vers. 2—6). Joshua prays to God, and is told that such was
actually the fact, for the ban on the spoil of Jericho had been transgressed.
He was ordered to take the tribes, families, households, and lastly individuals
by lot, and to burn the transgressor for his sin (vers. 6 — 15). Joshua fulfils
the injunction (vers. 16 — 19) and Achan is discovered to be the transgressor
(ver. 8). Adjiured by Joshua, he confesses his misconduct, which is placed
beyond doubt by the discovery of the secreted goods (vers. 19 — 23), and
Achan is burnt, with all his family and goods, and ft monumental heap raised
to commemorate the event (vera 24 — 26).

Joshua next (oh. viii.) proceeds to the capture of Ai. He now regards it
•8 a task of importance sufficient to employ his whole force, and is instructed
by God to do so (vers. 1 — 8). He gives directions for the attack, which was
to consist of a feint by the main body of the Israelites to draw the defenders
away from the city, while the real attack was to be made by a detachment
placed in ambush (vers. 4 — 9). The stratagem succeeded. The detachment
in ambush occupied the city, thus denuded of its defenders, and set it on fire,
while the warriors of Ai, with the Israelite host turning upon them iu front,
and their city in flames in their rear, were seized with a panic, and were
nnable to offer any effectual resistance. Ai, its king and people, were utterly
destroyed, and the city made a heap of ruins (vers. 10 — 29).

It is here that the majority of MSS. place the fulfilment of the instruc-
tions of Moses in Deut. xi. 29 and zzvii., to inscribe a copy of the law upon
the altar at Ebal (cL viii. 80 — 85), which was fulfilled in the presence of
the people.

In ch. ix. we read of the effect of these successes upon the people of the
land. While they stirred the kings to resistance (vers. 1, 2) they induced
the Oibeonite republic to prefer an accommodation. Aware, by some
means, that the inhabitants of Canaan were doomed to destruction, they
resorted to the expedient of representing themselves as a distant people, and
the artifices are recorded whereby they sought to gain credence for this
statement (vers. 8—18). The Israelites, not regarding the matter of
sufficient importance to refer to Jehovah, fell into the trap. They
afterwards discovered the fraud, and doomed the Gibeonites to perpetual
servitude, sparing their lives on account of the oath they had taken to do
BO (vers. 14 — 27).

This submission of the Gibeonites .appears to have disconcerted the
preparations which were making for a general league of all the sovereigns of
Palestine against the invaders. Startled by the imminence of the dangeri



txsJy lN*RODtCTlON



the kings of southem Palestine hastily gathered their forces together, not
to attack Joshua, but to reduce ^Gibeon (ch. x. 1 — 5), Their plans are dis-
concerted by the celerity of Joshua, who, on the receipt of tidings of the
attack on Gibeon, falls suddenly upon the allies in the morning, and routs
them -with immense slaughter (vers. 6 — 10). A violent storm (ver. 11)
assists in the discomfiture of his enemies, and Joshua adjures the sim and
moon not to go down until his victory is complete, an adjuration which is
fulfilled (vers. 12 — 14). We next read (vers. 16 — 27 : for ver. 15 see notes)
of the death of the five kings, tod the pursuit of the flying enemy. Then
come a series of sieges (vers. 28 — 43), those of Makkedah, Libnah, Lachish,
Eglon, Hebron, and Debir, as well as the annihilation of an expedition from
Gezer, with the view of forcing Joshua to raise the siege of Lachish (ver. 33).
The result of this was the subjugation of the country from Gibeon to Eadesh*
barnea and Gaza.

Oh. xi. brings us to a combination of the cities of northern Palestine,
under Jabin king of Hazor, to resist the progress of Joshua. The rendezvous
appointed was at the lake Merom, not far from the Anti-Lebanon range
(vers. 1 — 5). But once more the danger was averted by the promptitude of
Joshua, who fell upon them before their preparations were complete, and
totally routed them, and destroyed many of their cities (vers. 6 — 14). But the
reduction of northern Palestine was a more serious matter than that of the
south. We are expressly told that Joshua made war a long time with those
kings (ver. 18). But the result was the reduction of the whole country
with certain exceptions, of which we afterwards read (ch. xvii. 12). The
supremacy of Israel was, however, not contested, as the payment of tribute
shows (vera 15 — 20). In vers. 21 — 23 we read of the destruction of the
Anakim, who had probably taken refuge in Philistia, but who had clearly
taken advantage of Joshua's prolonged campaign in the north to repossess
themselves of their cities. It was not until a later period that this territory
was given by lot to Judah, for this tribe must have been engaged with the rest
in the campaign in the north. The reduction of the Anakim, exhausted by
their previous defeats, does not seem to have been a difficult task.

Oh. xii. commences the second portion of the book, which relates to the
territory conquered by Israel, and its distribution among the tribes. The
district beyond Jordan, inhabited by Beuben, Gad, and the half-tribe of
Manasseh, is first mentioned (vers. 1 — 6). In the remaining verses the
territories of thirty-one kings are mentioned as conquered by Joshua.

Oh. xiii. commences with the mention of the portions of Palestine as yet
nnoonquered, and proceeds to a more minute specification of the conquered
territory eastward of Jordan. The unconquered territory consisted (1) of
Philistia (vers. 2, 8) ; (2) of the lowlands bordering on Sidon (see notes^
(8) the country near Aphek; (4) the land of the Giblites; and (6) th«



TO THE BOOK OF JOSHUA. rtiv

extreme nortliem portion of Pale'stine, including the great Lebanon range
(vers. 4 — 6). Joshua is now commanded to assign the land beyond Jordan,
which is described in detail, with occasional references to the condition of
the country when the book was written, and the remark, several times
repeated, that the Levites had no share in the allotment (vers. 7 — 14). Then
follows a stiU more detailed account of the territory beyond Jordan, and the
races displaced (vers. 15 — 83).

Ch. xiv. tells us that the inheritance was made by lot, and repeats, after
the author's manner, the statements that the country beyond Jordan was
given to the two and a half tribes, and that the Levites had no part in the
distribution (vers. 1 — 5). The remainder of the chapter (vers. 6 — 15) is
devoted to Caleb's request, and its fulfilment.

Oh. XV. divides itself into three parts. The first (vera 1 — 12) traces out
the border of the tribe of Judah. The second (vers. 13 — 19) narrates an
interesting incident in the fanuly of Caleb. The third (vers. 22 — 63)
enumerates the cities of Judah.

Ch. xvi. describes the border of Ephraim.

Ch. xvii. begins by mentioning the families of the portion of the tribe
whose inheritance was west of Jordan (vers. 1 — 6), specially noting the fact
that " Manasseh's daughters " had an inheritance with his sons. Vers. 7 — 11
give a very imperfect outline of the territory of Manasseh. Vers. 12 — 18
record the complaint of Ephraim and Manasseh, that the portion allotted to
them was not sufficient, and Joshua's answer.

Ch. xviii. gives the account of the fresh survey ordered by Joshua (vers.
1 — 9), and the fresh division (ver. 10) in consequence. In ver. 11 begins
the description of the border of Benjamin, which is continued to ver. 20.
Then follows (vera. 21 — 28) an enumeration of the cities of Benjamin.

Oh. xix. 1 — 9 names the cities in the territory of Simeon. The border of
Zebulon follows (vers. 10 — 16), and is succeeded by the border of Issachar
(vers. 17—23); Asber (vers. 24—81) follows; then Naphtali (vers. 82—89);
and lastly (vers. 40 — 48), Dan, whose later migration northward when they
found the territory too small for them, is here recorded. When all the allot-
ments had been made, Joshua himself received his portion (vers. 49 — 51).

Oh. XX. contains the appointment of the cities of refuge; and ch. xxi. that
of the Levitical cities.

In ch. xxii. the history is resumed. The two and a half tribes on their
return, after a solemn farewell from Joshua, to their inheritance, fearing
that they shall be regarded as outcasts beyond Jordan, erect an altar on
their way homeward, as a token of their connection with Israel (vers. 1—10).
The remaining tribes, regarding this act as an infraction of the law of
Moses, gather together lq assembly, prepare for war, but first send an
embassy, consisting of 'the heads of the nine tribes and a hajf westward of



xirvl INTRODUCTION



Jordan, accompanied by Phinehas, as the representative of the priesthood,
to remonstrate (vers. 11 — 20). They receive the unexpected reply that, so
far from the erection of this altar being significative of an intention to break
the law of Moses, it had precisely the contrary object, and was intended to
show their deep reverence for that law, and an evidence of the right they
had to consider themselves subject to it (vers. 21 — 24). The reply is re-
garded as eminently satisfactory (vers. 80 — 34), and is received with deep
thankfulness by Israel at large.

Ch. xxiii relates a charge given by Joshua to the children of Israel when
advanced in age. He first (vers. 8 — 5) reminds them of what God has done
and promises to do. Then (vers. 6 — 11) he reminds them of their duty in
consequence, and warns them (vers. 12, 13) of the danger of neglecting it,
concluding with a final appeal in which he alludes to his long career, in which
God has signally fulfilled His promises, and his approaching death.

Ch. xxiv. contains the history of another great gathering, following, no
doubt, closely on the former, in which Joshua seeks to bind the Israelites
once more before his death, by a solemn ceremony, to their duty of obedience
to God. He commences with a brief summary of the history of Israel (ver.
2 — -IB), and while bidding them choose their gods for themselves, declares
his fixed determination to serve Jehovah only (vers. 14, 15). The people
reply by declaring that it is impossible for them to serve another god (vers.
16 — 18). Joshua reminds them of the difficulty of the task, yet without
shaking their purpose (vers. 19 — 21). He calls them to witness against
themselves that they have made the promise, to which they assent, bids
them put away all strange gods, and writes the covenant then made in the
book of the law, and places a great stone as a memorial of the event, after
which the people separate (vers. 22 — 28). In the remaining verses we read
of the death and burial of Joshua (vers. 29, 30), of the faithfulness of the
children of Israel after his death (ver. 81), of the interment of the bones of
Joseph (ver. 82), and lastly (ver. 83), of the death and burial of Eleazar.

§ VL Obhioaii and Exegehoal Helps.
Those who find it easy to consult authors in the learned languages will
find much help in OiiiaEN's ' Homilies on Joshua,' which we have in a Latin
dress. These, with the 'Questions' of Theodoret and AuGUSTmE, may be
found in various editions. The commentary of Eabbi Solomon Jakohi
(Eashi) originally written in Eabbinic, has been translated into Latin, and
is very brief, and often much to the point. Calvk's Commentary may be
foimd in Latin and Trench, and an excellent English translation has been
issued by the Calvin Society. His treatment of Joshua is neither so striking
nor so suggestive as his works on the New Testament, but his sound mas-
caliae understanding is often displayed in valuable thoughts. Masids,



TO THE BOOK OP JOSHUA. xxxyQ

QttoitfjB, and others maybe consulted in the ' Oritici Sacri,' and the learning
and industry of BosENMnLLEB, as well as the brief and pregnant, though often
hazardous, suggestions of Maubeb, may either be consulted in their own
works, or in Babbbtt's ' Synopsis.' Cobnelius k LApms is a most favour-
able specimen of the Jesuit commentator, and is terse, pointed, and acute.
MioHAELis' ' Anmerkungen fiir Ungelehrte' are in German, There is a
learned Commentary by Oalmet. Poole's ' Synopsis ' combines many
of the older cojjimentators with skill and accuracy. Of later aids to the
critical study of the Book of Joshua we may mention Keil, Fat (in Lange'a
Commentary), and the abbreviated and often improved edition of Keil in
the volume containing Joshua, Judges, and Euth, by Keil and Delitzsoh.
All these have been translated in Messrs. Clark's Series. Knobel's learned
and most valuable work can only at present be consulted in the original.
Blbek's ' Introdudtion to the Old Testament ' has been translated by Mr.
Venables (Bell and Co.). Dr. Davidson's ' Introduction ' contains much valu-
able matter, but the student must expect to find the " destructive criticism "
in his pages. In Ewald's ' History of Israel ' the reader will find much
light thrown upon the history of the period. The geography of Palestine
has been profusely illustrated. The best known works are those of Dr.
Robinson, Dean Stanley, Mr. J. L. Poeier, and Canon Teistbam, while
the latest information is to be found in the publications of the Palestine
Exploration Fund. The Book of Joshua, by Dr. Espin, in the ' Speaker's
Commentary,' contains the latest information to be obtained on the subject,
while of smaller works much geographical and general information may bo
found in Dr. Maolear's ' Joshua,' in the Cambridge Bible for Schools.

The Book of Joshua does not seem to have been a favourite one for
homiletio treatment, but much may be gathered in this department from
the works of Adam Glabke and Thomas Soott, and above all, from the pious
and thoughtful labours of Matthew Henry. Hall's ' Contemplations ' are
a perfect mine of reflections on the particular points selected, while Dr.
Vadghan's ' Heroes of Faith,' and the late Bishop Wilbebfobos's ' Heroes
of Hebrew History,' will also be very useful to the preacher.



Note A., Introduction, p. xi

The number of expressions found in Joshua and not in the Pentateuch given in
Section I. is incomplete. We may add the peculiar form of the infinitive in ch. xxii.
26, where see note. The word njXl. occurs first in ch. xxii. 24, though many worda
for anxiety and fear are to be found in the Pentateuch. The use of B'ln adverbially
occurs only in Josh, ii 1. The word iTlin occurs first in ch. vii. 19. If the word
Bgnifies prcme here, as it does elsewhere (as in Fsa. xxvi 7, &o.), the use of the
word if » very decided indication of different authorship from the Pentateuch.



xxxria INTRODUCTION— NOTES.

And the seKse oonfetdcm appears to be quite a later one. It is only fonnd in
Ezra X. 11. The Hiphil of pX* in the sense of setting up, in the place of the
original meaning, to pour out, is first found in Josh. vii. 23. This use is only found
elsewhere in Job, where it frequently means " molten," and thence " hard," " firm."
The adverbial use of the infinitive pn or I*3n is peculiar to Joshua. The
tn*3 or lance is first mentioned there. The Pentateuch has another word, riDI.
^aKD for darkness is only found in oh. xxiv. 7. The word DD3 for " goods " is
almost peculiar to Joshua, and is described by Gesenius as a " word of the later
Hebrew." But why it is found in Joshua and not in the Pentateuch is hard to
explain on the Deuteronomist revision theory. It only occm-s elsewKere in Chronicles
and Eoolesiastes. Another word occurring first in Joshua is '3"lD for the lords of
the Philistines, implying that now, for the first time, the Israelites bad come in con-
tact with them, and therefore a strong argument for the early date of Joshua and
for the Pentateuch having been written before the invasion of Palestine. Other
words not found in the Pentateuch are TS (or if we read the Hithpahel of TX the
word is still, in this form, peculiar to Joshua— see note on ch. ix. 12), yV TIE'S stallcs
of flax ; mpn cord. The phrases TlJ? HiS and 1"W ISH appear first in Joshua, and
so does the verb "IKH applied to a boundary line. But this last can hardly be quoted
as in any way assisting to determine the date of the book, since the Pentateuch has
httle or nothing about boundaries, and that the word was previously in existence is
shown by the noun INn, which is found in Genesis. On the whole the lingmstio
phenomena of Joshua are strongly corroborative of the view taken in Section I.
The number of words occurring for the first time are few. Nearly ten times as
many occur for the first time in Judges. But (1) the Book of Joshua is a brief his-
torical narrative, in which few unusual words would be hkely to occur ; and (2) if
written soon after the Pentateuch, when that was the only book of importance
Hebrew literatiure possessed — a book, moreover (Josh. i. 8), which was held in the
highest reverence — it would be Ukely to agree in its main features with the diction
of its predecessor. Long settlement in Palestine, with a life of much greater liberty
and dignity, would bring many new words into use. And such words we find in
unusual numbers in the comparatively small Book of Judges.

Note B., p. zi.
To the passages indicating minute personal knowledge on the part of the author
of the events he was describing, ch. xvii. 14 ; xx. 7 ; xxi. 2, 4 ; xxii. 8, 17, 22, may
be added, beside many others '•eferred to in the notes.

Note C, pp. xxi v., xxvii.

The conclusion to which a perusal of the latest authorities would lead the stndeni
is that Palestine was a congeries of nationahties gathered together for commercial
purposes, that the Hittite element formed the larger portion of the people, and that
in some way or other these independent communities had managed to escape
subjection to the Hittite monarch at Carchomish, as also to Egypt

General Nott.

It has been the object of the writer of the following exposition to gather togethei
the notices of locaUty to be found in the Old Testament, so that if a preaehei
finds a name mentioned elsewhere he may turn to the Book of Joshua £ar ftdditioaf^
information (see Geographical Index)



THE BOOK OP JOSHUA.



EXPOSITION.



CHAPTEE I. 1—4.



Joshua's commission. — Ver. 1. — Now
Bfter the death of Moses. The form of
the Hebrew is the visual historical one for
the continuation of a narrative before com-
menced. The Book of Joshua is thus
shown to be, and to be intended to be, a
continuation of the Book of Deuteronomy,
■which ends with the death of Moses (see
Speaker's Commentary in loc). This hnk
of connection is lost in the English version.
The question forces itself upon the critic,
At what time was this consecutive narra-
tive — ^written, as is admitted, in various
styles, in the language of obviously distinct
periods — first oomposedand palmed ofE upon
the Jews as the genuine work of a writer
contemporary, or nearly contemporary, with
the events he describes? The servant of
the Lord. This term (Eeil) is apphed to
the heavens and the earth (Pea.cxix. 91), to
the angels (Job iv. 18), to the prophets
(Jer. vii. 25, <fec.), to Abraham, Isaac, and.
Jacob, to the Jewish people (Exod. xix. 6),
to Zerubbabel (Hag. ii. 23), and even to
Nebuchadnezzar (Jer. xxv. 9, &c.), as the
appointed minister of God's wrath, and to
pious men in general (Gesenius; see Psa.
xxxiv. 23, &c.). It is also applied to the
Messiah (Zeoh. iii. 8 ; comp. the word Trait
similarly applied in Acts iv. 27). It origin-
ally implies the position of a slave, whether
born in the house or bought with money
(see Levit. xxv. 39 ; and Gen. ix. 25 ; Exod.
xiii. 8, 14). In all cases it expresses a closer
and more familiar relation than the term
minuter below. Keil says that it is applied
so frequently to Moses that it has become
almost his " ofiScial title " (see Deut. xxxiv.
6, and the Book of Joshua passim, and cf,
Heb. iii. 6). It is, however, still more fre-

lOBHUA.



quently applied to David. But it suits well
vrith the special and peculiar luiciiiun which
Moses had above the rest of mankind. He
was, as it were, the household servant of the
Most High, His steward and representative,
ruling over th^ family of God in His name,
and giving to them the directions of which
they stood in need. That the Lord spake
tmto Joshua. Either by Urim and Thum-
mim, which seems at least probable (see
Num. xxvii. 21, and Josh. ix. 14). But the
great majority of commentators prefer the
idea of an inward revelation, since the words
are frequently used in this Book of God'g
revelations to Joshua ^osh. iii. 7 ; iv. 1, 15 ;
y. 2, 9 ; vi. 2, tio.). The manner of these
inward revelations is also a matter on which
much difference of opinion exists. They, no
doubt, were frequently made through a vision
or dream, as to Abraham at Sodom (Gen.
zviii. 1), Jacob at Bethel, and Joshua him-
self (ch. V. 13). But it is by no means clear
that they were always so. The voice of
God in answer to prayer is recognised by
Christians in a strong inward persuasion of
the desirability or necessity of a particular
course. Of this kind would seem to be the
answer to St. Paul's prayer In 2 Cor. xii. 9.
And it is quite possible that in passages
such as Gen. xii. 1, xxii. 1, 2, nothing more
is meant than that the persuasion, by God's
permission or inspiration, was strongly felt
within. And so it is possible that one so
specially and divinely commissioned aa
Joshua discerned, in a strong and appa-
rently irresistible conviction, the voice of
God (cf. Acts xvi. 7 ; 2 Cor i. 17). Joshua't
name was originally Hoshea (like the pro-
phet and the IsraeUtish king of that name).
The name originally meant salvation, or
deliverance, but it was changed, either when
he entered into Moses' service, or when he



THE BOOK OF JOSHUA.



[CH. I. 1—4.



was atout to figlit the AmaleHtes (Num.
xiii. 8, 16 ; Deut. zxxii. 44), into Jehoshua,
or Joahna (either " God shall save," or
" God's salvation "). It is not stated in
Holy Writ when the name Joshua was
given. In Exod. xvii. 9, where Joshua is
named for the first time, he is called hy the
name Moses gave him, and is mentioned
incidentally as a person well known to the
writer and Ms readers. The reader need
hardly be reminded that in the form Jeshua
(Gr. 'Iijoowj) it was the name of our Blessed
Lord Himself, and that the Name which is
now above all other names is used of Joshua'
in two places in the New Testament, in Acts
Tii. 45, in Heb. iv. 8. It was a common name
in later times, as Col. iv. 11 and Acts xiii. 6
will serve to show. In later Hebrew, as in
Neh. viii. 17, Joshua is called Jeshua, and the
names of Joshua and Jeshua are given in-
discriminately to the high priest, the son of
Josedeoh, who was contemporary with the
building of the second temple. For Joshua
as a type of Christ the reader may consult a
deep passage in ' Pearson on the Creed,' Art.
n., from which some of the most striking
parts Kre here quoted : — " First, it was he
alone, of all which passed out of Egypt, who
was designed to lead the children of Israel
into Canaan, which land, as it is a type of
heaven, so is the person which brought the
Israelites into that place of rest a type of
Him who only can bring us into the presence
of God, and there prepare our mansions for
ns. Besides, it is further observable, not
only what Joshua did, but what Moses could
not do. The hand of Moses and Aaron
brought them out of Egypt, but left them
in the wUdemesg. Joshua, the successor,
only could effect that in which Moses failed.
Moses must die that Joshua may succeed
(Rom. iii. 20 — 22). The command of dr-
oumcision was not given to Moses, bat to
Joshua ; nor were the Israelites circumcised
in the wilderness imder the conduct of Moses
and Aaron, but in the land of Canaan under
their successor. Which speaketh Jesus to
be the tme circnmoiser, the author of
another circumcision than that of the flesh
(Eom. ii. 29 ; Col. ii. 11). If we look on
Joshua as the 'minister of Moses,' he is
even in that a type of Christ, ' the minister
of the circumcision for the truth of God.'
If we look on him as the suceessor of
Moses, in that he represented Jesus, inas-
much as ' the law was given by Moses, but
grace and truth came by Jesus Christ.' If
we look on him as judge and ruler of Israel,
there is scarce an action which is not pre-
dictive of our Saviour. He begins his office
at the banks of Jordan, where Christ was
baptized and enters npon the public exer-
cise of His prophetical office ; he ohooseth



there twelve men out of the people to carry
twelve stones over with them, as our Jesus
thence began to choose His twelve apostles,
those foundation-stones in the Church of
God (Bev. zxi. 14). Joshua smote the
Amalekites and subdued the Canaanites, by
the first making way to enter the land, by
the second giving possession of it. And
Jesus in like manner goeth in and out
before us against our spiritual enemies,
subduing sin and Satan, and so opening and
clearing our way to heaven ; destroying the
last enemy, death, and so giving us posses-
sion of eternal life." Pearson quotes Justin
Martyr, Tertullian, Theodoret, and others
as justifying his view of the history. Theo-
doret, moreover, in his ' Questions on
Joshua,' remarks on the coincidence be-
tween Josh. i. 17 and John v. 46. And
Origen, in his first ' Homily on Joshua,'
remarks on the fact that the first time the
sacred name meets us iu the Book of God,
it is as the leader of an army (Exod. xvii. 9).
Another way in which Joshua was a type of
Christ is this. Under Moses there are con-
stant murmurings and disputings, for " the
law made nothing perfect" (Heb. vil. 19).
Under Joshua all is confidence and triumph,
for " by one offering Jesus hath perfected
for ever them that are sanctified " (Heb. x,
14). Moses' minister. This word is princi.
pally used of service in the house of God.
Thus it is used of Aaron and his eons,
Exod. xxviii. 43 ; xxxix. 41, &c. : of Samuel,
1 Sam. ii. 11 ; iiL 1, &o. : of the priests and
Levites, 1 Chron. vi. 32 ; xvi. 4 ; Ezek. xiv.
5 ; Joel i. 9, &o. In these places it seemj
to be equivalent to the LXX. Xsrroupyof.
But it is by no means confined to such ser-
vice. In Exod. xxxiii. 11, where it is ap-
plied to Joshua, it is rendered in the LXX.
by Bepamav, and it is quite clear that
Joshua's service to Moses was not exclu-
sively of a religions character. Some com-
mentators have suggested the word aide-de-
camp, but this would be equally incorrect
in the opposite direction, since Joshua's
services (see Exod. xxiv. 13 ; xxxiii. 11)
were clearly not rendered only in time of
war. The word is used of Abishag the
Shunamite, 1 Kings i. 4, 16; and of
Elisha, 1 Kings xix. 21.

Ver. 2. — Moses my servant Is dead.
' ' When you see Jerusalem overthrown, the
altar forsaken, no sacrifices, no holocausts,
no drink offerings, no priests, no Levitioal
ministry, when you see all these things
cease, say it is because Moses the servant of
God is dead, and Jesus the Son of God ob-
tains the leadership" (Origen, Horn. 2 on
Josh.). This Jordan. Called "this "because
it was now close to them, just as we have
" this people," " this Lebanon " (see not*



OH. I. 1 — 4.]



THE BOOK OF JOSHUA.



on ver. 4), &o. The name Jordan signifies
"Descender," from the verb TV *" de-
scend. The word fitly describes the head-
long current of the river, which,' according
to Mr. Maogregor ('Bob Eoy on the Jordan,'
p. 282), has a fall of fifteen feet per mile,
and if we subtract the Lake of Gennesareth
and the lake and attendant marshes of
Huleh, of thirty feet. Between the Sea of
Galilee and the Dead Sea, however, the ave-
rage fall is much less. Just after leaving
the Sea of Galilee its fall is over forty
feet. (Conder, 'Handbook,' p. 216). It
may be interesting to compare with this
the average inclination of some of our own
English rivers. The swiftest is the Dee, in
Aberdeenshire, which has a fall of 16 '5 ft. per
mile. The Tweed and Clyde have a fall of
16 ft. and 14 ft. respectively, while the
Severn has but 26^ in. , the Thames 18 in. ,
and the Shannon 9 in. per mile. This
comparative table will give the best idea of
the rapidity of the Jordan. The various
explorers bear testimony to the swiftness of
its current. Thus Eobinson, in his ' Bib-
lical Eesearches,' says, " The current was so
strong that even Komeh, a stout swimmer
of the Nile, was carried down several yards
in crossing." " It was so swift," says Dr.
Bartlett (' Egypt and Palestine,' p. 452),
" that a gentleman of another company,
who went to bathe, was not suiiered by his
friends to do so without a rope most un-
romautically attached to his person." This
was in March, at the time of the overflowing
(see chap, iii.), and he adds, " the turbid
stream rushed along like a mill-race."
Canon Tristram, visiting it in April, de-
scribes it as "rushing with tremendous
force." It rises among the snows of Her-
mon, dashes down headlong into the lake
Huleh, the Merom of the Book of Joshua, and
thence, with a descent of 60 ft. per mile, into
the Sea of Galilee. Thence it shapes its
course, as we have seen, with greatly dimin-
ished velocity into that strange depression
where the Dead Sea Ues, at alevel of 1,290 ft.
beneath the level of the Mediterranean. I
do give, literally, I am giving ; i.e. , at this
moment, when you are preparing to enter
it.

Ver. 3. — Every place that the sole of your
foot doth tread upon. These words are a
quotation, almost word for word, from Deut.
xi. 24, but the original promise is to be found
in Gen, xii. 1 — 7, with which we may com-
pare Gen. xiii. 14—17; xv. 18; xvii. 8.
Comp. also Josh. xiv. 9 ; Bxod. xxiii. 30,31,
&Q. It was God's purpose that the whole
land should belong to the children of Israel ;
• purpose which, as usual in Hebrew pro-
phecy, is signified by the use of the perfect
tease here. The couqaest was intended to



be complete. Not a foot's breadth was to
rest in the hands of its former owners. But
here, as elsewhere in Holy Writ, we may
mark the way in which man's sin and want
of faith has marred the purposes of God. In
the Book of Judges we read that the Canaan-
ites were not only not driven out, but that
the children of Israel made marriages with
them, worshipped their gods, and practised
their abominations. Jerusalem remained in
the hands of the Jebusites untU the time of
David, while the Philistines remained in
possession of their portion of Palestine until
it was reduced under the power of the king
of Babylon; We may observe that, according
to all the ordinary laws of criticism, this
citation of Deuteronomy is a proof that that
Book existed when the Book of Joshua wag
written. For the cumbrous scheme of
Elohists, Jehovists, Deuteronomists, and
the like, by which this natural conclusion
is overruled, see Introduction. Have I given
it. The preterite here denotes God's pur-
pose (of. Gen. i. 29).

Ver. 4. — From the wlldemess and this
Lebanon, The words suppose a line to be
drawn from the desert of Arabia on the south
and the range of Lebanon on the north, to
the Eiver Euphrates on the one hand and
the Mediterranean Sea on the other, laelud-
ing the land of the Hittites (see 1 Eings iv.
24; 2 Chron. ix, 26), Tiphsah, the later
Thapsacus, was far north of the utmost
limits of Palestine, and almost in the lati-
tude of Autioch. Azzah is generally termed
Gaza in our version. See note on chap, xi,
22. Thelaudof the Hittites here (Keil) seems
to be taken for the land of Canaan in general
(see 1 Kings z, 29 ; 2 Kings vii. 6; Ezek. xvi,
3), but extending far beyond their border,
and including Syria, Moab, Ammon, the land
of Bashan,and part of Arabia. This was never
actually in the hand of the Israelites save
during the reigns of David and Solomon, when
these regions were either tributary to them,
or had been actually reduced under their im-
mediate sway. " The promise," says Theo-
doret, " was not undefined, but ' if ye shall
keep my commandments and ordinances'
(Deut. xi. 22, 23). But they, inasmuch as
they immediately transgressed the law, did
not obtain the perfect promises. The Divine
Apostles, on the contrary, not only conquered
those places on which they set their foot,
but even those in which their all-wise writ-
ings were read ; and the land that was before
a desert they displayed as a Divine Para-
dise." This Lebanon. This expression is no
doubt nsed because Lebanon was visible
from the spot where Joshua was standing.
There is nothing surprising in this. We
learn from travellers that its range, which
there is no doubt included that of Antl*



THE BOOK OF JOSHUA.



[oh. 1. 1—4.



Lebanon, with its lofty peak Hermon, the
highest point in Palestine, is visible from
all parts of the Holy Land, even from the
depths of the Jordan vallpy near the Dead
Sea. Dr. Thomson ('Land and the Book,'
p 2) says that it is visible from Cyprus.
Canon Tristram ('Land of Israel,' p. 609)
tells how he had seen. Hermon from Tyre,
Sidon, Carmel, Gerizim, from the neigh-
bourhood of Jerusalem, from Gilead, from
Nebo, and from the Dead Sea. The name

Lebanon, derived from \27 to be white, like

the Arabio lebanon, milk, is supposed by
Eobinson to have been given trom the
whitish colour of the chalk or limestone
rook (so Conder, ' Handbook,' p. 206). But
it is at least equally probable that it derives
its name, like Mont Blanc in Savoy, from
its snowy peaks. Hermon is still called by
the Arabs Jebel-el-Thelj, or "the snowy
peak." The Jordan, the river of Palestine
par excellence, derived its copious and ever-
flowing streams, so essential in that " thirsty
land," from the Anti-Lebanon ran ge. " Abana
and Pharpar, rivers of Damascus," as well
as the Orontes, and the Litany or Leontes,
derive their waters from the same source
(see Tristram, ' Land of Israel,' chap. xxv. ;
Thomson, ' Land and the Book,' pp. 172,
173). We have a vivid description of the
region of Lebanon and the adjacent range
of Anti -Lebanon and Hermon, in the
spring, at the time of the melting of the
snows, in the 4;2ud Psalm. There David,
recalling to mind his sojourn in the " laud
of the Jordan," and of Hermon, speaks of
the "deep calling uuto deep," of the noise
of the cataracts as they dashed from rock to
rock and foamed al jng the mountain sides ;
and he describes his sorrows as overwhelm-
ing him by their number and magnitude,
just as the multitudinous torrents that rose
in that snowy region threatened to engulf
the unwary traveller in their onward sweep.
The far-famed cedars of Lebanon are in-
digenous to this region, and to it alone, but
the climatic changes which Palestine has
undergone have reduced their number largely,
and comparatively few specimens now re-
main, in a wild condition, of that noble tree,
once the pride of the dwellers in the land.
"We cannot study all the ] assages in the Old
Testament which refer to the cedar, without
feeling certain that iu ancient times it was
a far more conspicuous feature in the land-
scape than it is now " (Tristram, ' Land of
Israel,' p. 631). The great river, the river
Euphrates. Das urosxe llVisscr Phnith
(Luther). The Hebrew name is as Luther
gives it. The Greeks ndilt-d the euphonic
Byllable at the commencement, according to
tiuwe who assign to the word a Semitio



derivation. Others, however, derive it from
an Aryan source, and regard it as equivalent
to " the flowing river." This mighty stream,
especially after its junction with the Tigris,
far transcended ia size any other with
which the Israelites were acquainted. The
plains of Mesopotamia, even as far as
Nineveh and Babylon, were destined to have
been occupied by the Jewish race, had not
their impiety and rebellion prevented ; and
the world-empire obtained by Nineveh and'
Babylon might, and had they been obedient
would, have been theirs. All the land of the
Hlttltes. The Hittites, or Chittites, seem to
have been the most considerable of the tribes
which inhabited Canaan. We find them in
possession of Hebron in the time of Abraham
(Gen. xxiii), but their more usual dwelling-
place was in the valley. They appear from
the narrative above quoted to have been a
peaceable people. We have records of them
in Egyptian and Assyrian inscriptions. Thus
we hear of the Khita in the inscriptions of
Eameses II., who reigned between 1383 and
1322, B.C. ; that is, about the time of Deborah
and Barak C Becords of the Past,' ii. 67 —
78 ; iv. 25 — 32). They were the inhabitants,
however, of a region fm-ther to the north-
ward, beyond the borders of the Holy Land,
on the Imnks of the Orontes. So a Mohar,
or scribe, of Rameses II. , in an account of
a tour in Palestine, in which he mentions
Kirjath Anab, Achsaph, Megiddo, and the
land of Hamath, describes Khita as to the
north, bordering on this latter territory
(' Records of the Past,' ii. 106). The various
translators of the Assyrian inscriptions of
Assur-bani-pal, Tiglath POeser, Shalmaneser,
and Sennacherib recognise the Hittites in the
people mentioned as dwelling to the north
of Palestine (ibid. iii. 52 ; v. 21, 32, 33 ; vii.
61), though Ewald thinks that the Khatta
there mentioned must be sought still fur-
ther north. Prof. Sayee, in a recent lecture,
regards the Hittites as having occupied a
large portion of Asia Minor, and as having
had great influence upon early Greek art, and
adds, " TiU within the last few years the
Bible alone has preseryed the name of a
people who must have had almost as great
an influence on human history as Assyria
or Egypt." Shalmaneser mentions the
kings of the Hittites, just as they are men-
tioned in the later narratives of Kings and
Chronicles (see note on chap. iii. 10). Unto
the great sea. As the Euphrates was the
greatest river, the Mediterranean was the
greatest sea, known to the Jews. Unlike the
race they displaced, the Canaanites — or, to
call them by a title by which they are hotter
known to profane history, the Phoenicians —
the .lews were no sailors. It may have been
even before the conquest of Canaan under



ca. 1. 1-4.]



THE BOOK OP JOSHUA.



Joshua that the Phoenician fleeta sailed ont
beyond the pillars of Hercules, and brought
back tin from the British isles. For Canaan,
or Phoenicia, was a powerful and civilised
country when conquered by the Jews. But
■whether it were before this period that
Britain was discovered, or whether the fleets
of Tyre and Sidon first sailed thither at a
later period, to the Jews the Mediterranean
Btill remained the great sea. They knew
nothing of the vaster ocean into which it



flowed. It seems strange that, with the ex-
ample of Tyre and Sidon before them, the
Israelites should have been so indifferent to
navigation. Even in the time of David, it
was Hiram's ships that brought him his
treasures and building materials. The later
navies of Solomon and Jehoshaphat did but
coast along the Bed Sea and the Persian
Gulf to Ophir, which has been identified
with India, or more probably with Arabia.



HOMILETICS.

Vers. 1 — 4. — Josfnmh Commission, This passage may he viewed under two
main aspects : (1) regarding Moses as the type of Christ and Joshua of His ministers ;
and (2) regarding Joshua as himself the type of Christ. As these points of view
suggest two perftctly distinct and independent lines of thought, it is obvious that
they are better fitted for two separate discourses tlian for being combined in one.

I. Joshua as the type of God's ministers.

1. After the death of Moses, the task devolves vpon his •minister. So
after the death of Christ, the task of conquering the world devolved upon His
ap,ostles, His " ministers." They who waited on Christ during His human life, wlio
were with Him in His temptations, were the men appointed to carry on His
work when He had gone hence.

2. By the express command of God. So the apostles not only had Christ's
commission, " Go ye into all the world and preach the gospel to every creature "
(Mark xvi. 15 ; xxviii. 19), and " As my Father hath sent me, even so send I you "
(John XX. 21), but they were bidden to wait till the time was fixed (Acts i. 4), and
the Spirit poured out upon them from on high (Acts ii. 4). Hence we learn that
no work, however high and holy, should he undertaken without the express intima-
tion that it is God's pleasure we should attempt it ; that no motives, however pui-e,
will justify us in putting our hand to the ark (2 Sam. vi. 6, 7) unless we are or-
dained by God to touch it. And if we ask how we are to know when we are so
ordained, the answer — is {a) by seeking counsel of God; (6) by scrutinising carefully
the purity of our own motives, lest we may have mistaken pride or self-interest for
the voice of God. That intimation will be given in various ways. We know not
how (see note on v. 1) Joshua was stirred up by God. But men are marked out for
special tasks in three ways : (1) by circumstances. Thus Joshua, as the minister
of Moses, most closely acquainted with his modes of thought and course of action,
became naturally his successor. So Timothy takes the place of St. Paul (2 Tim.
iii. 10). (2) By external authority ; that of those who have a right to exercise it, like
the high priest when he sought counsel of God by Urim and Thmnmim. (8) By
inward intimations of God's Spirit, which cannot be mistaken, save by those who
have blinded their own eyes by self-seeking and self-conceit.

8. The commiamdds based upon Moses' deith. So all the work of God'a
ministers derives its energy from the death of Christ. It was the one all-suffi-
cient sacrifice and satisfaction for the sins of the whole world that was the salt of
the Apostles' mission. It is that same atonement which gives power to their
successors now.

4. The work is of God, hut the ministers cure humam. God might have perforned
His work without the intervention oi means. But He has chosen to act thro rgh
human instrumentality. Thus He magnifies His greatness even more than if He
had done the work Himself. For human infirmities sorely mar the work of God.
And yet that work goes 6n, and even human infirmity is overruled to God's glory
(1 Cor. ii. 4,5; 2 Cor. iv. 7 ; xii. 9). So it was with Joshua's error in judgment
regarding the Gibeonites (oh. ix. 14), and so it often is with our own.

5. D'iffioulties often present themselves, insuperable hut by the hand of God.
**Go over this Jordan." But how? The river was full to overflowing, til*



THE BOOK OF JOSHUA. [ch. 1 1—4-



passage dangerous ; in fact, for the whole mnltitude, in the face of the enemy,
unpossible. Yet the hand of God was stretched out, the river dried up, and what
would have been a task of the greatest peril to themselves was instead a sourca
cf terror to their adversaries. So at the outset of great spiritual undertakings
we are often confronted with difficulties far beyond our power to overcome. But
•' God showeth his voice," and they " melt away." . a ,

6. The result, possession of the promised Icmd. The land promised to the
Israelites was a limited space, but the spuitual Israel has the promise of the whole
earth (see Gen. xii. 3 ; Psa. ii. 8 ; Isa. xi. 9 ; Dan. ii. 35, &c.)

II. Joshua as the type of Christ.

1. After the death of Moses. The law could never give ns our inheritance
(Heb. vii. 19) ; therefore Moses must die and Joshua arise. Again : the law was
crucified together with Christ (Eom. vi. 6, 10 ; vii. 4 ; GaL ii. 19 ; v. 24 ; Eph. ii.
15, 16; Col. ii. 14 ; also 2 Cor. iii. 14 in the Greek). As long as the law existed,
man could only dwell in the wilderness, be dead in trespasses and sins, wander
about without power to enter the promised land. He was continually confronted
with a standard of holiness utterly beyond his strength to reach. But when Moses
— i.e., the law — is dead, the true Jesus arises and leads His people into their inherit-
ance, giving them the power to fulfil a law which He has written within.

2. Joshua was Mosea' minister. So Christ was "made under the law" (Gal.
iv. 4), and was bound, by His Father's will, to keep it. By His obedience alone
was His sacrifice made acceptable to His Father. The law could but condemn us
for being " weak through the flesh " (Bom. viiL 3) ; we could not fulfil its precepts.
But Christ condemned sin (1) by His perfect fulfilment of God's law, and (2) by
submitting to death, as the " wages " of that sin which mankind, whom He repre-
sented, had so fiilly deserved. Thus did He gain the right to be our leader into
the inheritance God had promised us.

3. Jordan must be crossed; i.e., Jesus must die. As oiu- representative, He
dies once for all to sin, and His death translates us into a new hfe. Henceforth,
by virtue of His atonement, " siu has no more dominion over us," and we are,
nnder His leadership, to destroy its empire for ever. And we must follow Him
through Jordan ; that is, we too must die to sin and rise again unto righteousness.
The river which divides our old condition from the new, which separates the
wilderness from the promised land, is sui eternal boundary between our condition
by nature and our condition by graee. The waters of Jordan are likened by some
to the waters of baptism, whereby we are " baptized into Christ's death ; " and by
others to the moment of conversion, when, by the power of God alone, we are
changed from wanderers and outcasts into the covenant people of God.

4. The land must he conquered. It was a wicked land ; a land the sins of
whose inhabitants contaminated it by their example; a land which called for
condign chastisement from on high. The land with which Christians have to do
is either (1) the whole world, or (2) the human heart. In the first case it is the
duty of the Church, in the second of the individual, in each case under Christ as a
leader, to wage unceasing warfare against evil, in whatever forms it may be found.
The character of that warfare will be indicated later. At present it will be sufficient
to remark that the nature of the warfare itself is not changed, though its conditions
are. The servants of God are eternally pledged to root out evil without com-
promise, and without mercy.

6. It was a land flowing with milk and honey. Every blessing was to be
obtained there. Not only food, but delights. It is caUed emphatically " the good
land" (Deut. iii. 25; iv. 22). It contained every good thing man could desire
(Deut. vui. 7 — 9). So the steadfast determination to foUow Christ, to him who is
resolved to do so, insures us every blessing we need — the supply of our wants,
means of defence against our enemies, and the means, moreover, of happiness and
enjoyment — provided alwajrs that we do not cease the combat until all our enemiea
be dettrojred.



CH. 1. 1—4.] THE BOOK OF JOSHUA.



HOMILIES BY VARIOUS AUTHORS.

Vers. 1, 2. — Consolation for bereaved workers. In these woj:ds, addressed to
Joshua, we have the most effectual consolation that can be offered to believers,
when one has been taken away from their midst whose life seemed indispensable
to the work and service of God. They are words appKcable to the family no less
than to the Church. Moses had just been taken from the people, from his Mends,
from Joshua his faithful servant. The great leader of Israel through the wilderness
journey, the captain who had gone forth with their hosts to battle, the medium of
the highest revelations of God to the nation, had vanished from among them. Israel
would look no more on that noble face which had caught and kept the brightness of
the glory of God revealed upon Sinai. The prophetic voice of him who had talked with
God as a man talketh with his friend was hushed in lasting sUence. He had been
struck down on the very borders of the land of promise, to which he had safely led
the sons of Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob. There was a peculiar sadness in the death
of Moses just at this time. Have we not often felt the same when we have seen
the strong man fall at the very moment when he was about to reap the fiToit of his
patient labours, and to win the hard-fought fight ? The words spoken by God Him-
self for the consolation of Israel may suggest thoughts helpfiil to lis under similar
circumstances.

I. God's work does not depend on any one worker, even the greatest. It
goes on, uninterrupted by the strokes of death. " Go over this Jordan, thou and all
this people, unto the land which I do give to them, even to the children of Israel."
Thus the cause stiU advances. Moses may die ; his work cannot. Nay, it is ex-
tended, and assumes new developments. Moses has led the people to the verge of
Jordan. Joshua will carry them over. Both Moses and Joshua are only instru-
ments which may be broken and laid aside ; but He who uses them will never be
stopped in His work of love. "• My Father," says Jesus Christ, " worketh hitherto"
(John V. 17).

II. As God only works by His servants, these must never rest in an idlk

RELIANCE ON HiS POWER ; THEY MUST TAKE UP THE WORK JUST WHERE IT IS
HANDED OVER TO THEM, EVEN THOUGH THEIR HEARTS MAY BE BROKEN BY SORROW.

Thus the Lord says to Joshua : " Arise, go over this Jordan." We majnot sit still
mourning even over our beloved dead ; we are to arise and take up their work. To
carry it on is a sweet consolation ; vf% feel ourselves still linked with the departed as
we trace their blessed footsteps, and deepen the furrows they have already made. It
brings us into closer fellowship with them. Joshua, as he took up the charge laid
down by Moses, was more than ever brought into oneness of spirit with him.

III. God, in speaking op Moses as His servant, gives to the survitors

THE SWEET ASSURANCE THAT He HAS TAKEN HIM TO REST IN HiS OWN PRESENCE.

The recognition of his faithftd service imphes that of his sure reward. Undoubtedly
he, lik fl Sn the sons of men, was an unprofitable servant, but he nevertheless re-
ceived from God that grand word of commendation, " Well done, good and faithftd
servant ; " and this is the word which sets before him who receives it an open
heaven. Thus to know that God never leaves His work incomplete, that He gives
it to us to carry on, and that those who have gone before us have entered into His
rest, while we take up their unfinished task — this is the threefold solace of the sor-
rows alike of the Church and of the Christian family. Thus both " he that soweth
and they who reap rejoice together" (John iv. 36). — E. de P.

Vers. 2, 8. — QoWs gift to the CTvwrch. The loss of a privilege teaches us how
inadequately we have appreciated its worth. The removal of an honoured servant
of God often awakens a deeper sense of the blessing that has been in our midst.
And sometimes a tendency is thus created to dwell unduly on the past, to become
morbid, and to neglect the present, imdervaluing what still remains to us. Mourn-
ing has its proper Ihnits. In the text God impresses on the peopk the duty ol
reooguiging facts. " Moses is dead." True, you will never look upon his Hke again ;



THE BOOK OF JOSHtJA. [oh. 1. 1-4.



but also true, that all your regrets will not restore him to his -wonted place. There
is to be no standstill in the kmgdom of God. A new leader is Bi imm oned to the
front. Joshua must succeed to the vacant post

I. We have a new leader and a fresh start. As if to magnify Joshua in the
eyes of the IsraeUtes, the command is at once given to prepare for that entrance
into the land of promise which Moses had so ardently longed for but was not per-
mitted to witness. " One soweth, another reapeth." The law paved the way for
the gospel. It is well to follow a period of inaction by vigorous measures. Active
employment would turn away the people's thoughts from unduly dwelling upon the
absence of Moses, and would prove that all wisdom and energy had not died with
him, nor had God also perished in His servant's death. And so to-day the class
in the Sunday-school shall continue its training, though the much-loved teacher
has been compelled to renounce his work ; the congregation shall be instructed as
heretofore, though by a different voice. Let class and congregation rally aroimd
their new chief. The appointment of a new leader should be the signal for a fresh
advance. Let " Onward ! " be the cry.

II. The title of possession. The real claim of the Israelites was grounded on
the gift of God. Consider the earth (a) Materially, as belonging to God. " The
earth is the Lord's." Men are but His tenants-at-will. The justification of the
Israelites in driving out the Canaanites is to be sought in the fact that tlie in habit-
ants had made an ill use of the land. He who owned it had revoked His grant,
and conferred it on His chosen people. The lesson enforced by oui- Ijord in the
parable of the talents is of wide apphcation. Not only agriculturists but merchants
must regard their property as held at the disposal of the Creator. Nevertheless
there is something in the possession of a " foot of ground " which seems to connect
us immediately with the Lord of the earth, and renders impiety amid scenes of
nature the more guUty. (6) Spiritually, as given through Christ to the Cliurch.
The commission of Christ to the disciples embraced the whole world. Every nation -
of right belongs to God, and the estabhshment of missions is but claiming the laud for
its Great Owner. God hath given to every company of believers a " land " to possess,
a neighbourhood to be evangehsed, cruelty and vice and selfishneBS to be expelled,
that peace and love and righteousness may dwell in the conquered territory. The
text may remind us, therefore, of the aggressive measures which the Church of
Christ is required to undertake.

III. The Divinb gift no supersession of human effort. First the Israelites
must cross the river Jordan, and then seize the gift offered. They had literally to
tread with the " sole of the foot " upon the land they desired to receive from God.
Every promise of Scripture is intended not as a sedative, but as a stmiuluB, to ex-
ertion. We have to " labour to enter into the rest." There is a Divine law, " Seek and
ye shall find ; knock and it shall be opened," The redemption that is in Christ will
not benefit unless appropriated. The " treasures of wisdom and knowledge " will
be ours by taking them m Christ from the outstretched hands of God. In all church
operations we must be mindful that " Christ expects every man to do his duty."
The heathen are His inheritance, but wUl be made His only as the Church is stirred
np to diligent activity in moral conquest. Thus the gifts of God are conditional
upon human service. Not, of course, that God simply aUocates the land as did the
Popes formerly, expecting the grantees to secure it for themselves ; for He helps us,
and without Him our efforts would be vain.

IV. The recorded promise intended for all generations. " As I said unto
Moses." There is evident reference to the utterance of Jehovah forty years before
(Exod. xxiii. 81). He had not forgotten His word. Should the unbelief of the
people make His " promises of none effect" ? That Moses had not allowed the de-
claration to slip from his memory is seen in Deut. xi. 24. Intervening years do not
render the fulfilment of God's promises less sure. Thousands of years rolled away
between the first prediction of a Messiah and His actual appearance. Let not our
hearts fail to trust in God. " As I said unto Moses " may be turned into a general
promise, as the Epistle to the Hebrews did with the speoific utterance of ch. v. 5 to
Joshua (Heb. xiii. 6). It may be kept before us as a message of hope and assurance,
— ^A.



ea. 1. 1-4.] THE BOOK OF JOSHtTA. •

Vers. 1 — 9. — Josfma the successor of Moses. The very name Joshua, Jesui,
" Obd's salvation," is enough of itself to awaken special interest in the man ivho,
on the page of Scripture, first bears it. It is suggestive at once of the natuie of
his life-work, and it leads us to anticipate some points of analogy between him
and the Saviour of the world. Joshua is one of the few Old Testament characters
against whose name there is no reproach. Not that this Book presents any formal
dehneation of his character or pronounces his praise. It is but a simple, matler-
of-faet record of great events in which he took a leading part. His illustrious
deeds are their own eiilogium. He stands before us as the tjrpe of a godly warrior,
reverent in spirit yet fuU of practical energy, blameless and fearless, gentle and
strong, spending a long life in unselfish and unwearied devotion to the cause of the
people and of God. He was the brave soldier whose work, dark and terrible as it
was, was consecrated by the inspiration of a Divine call and of a beneficent purpose.
A general view of Joshua's position in the annals of the Hebrew race is suggestive.

I. It reminds us how, at critical periods in human history, God raises

UP MEN AS FITTING INSTRUMENTS FOB THE ACCOMPLISHMENT OF HiS PURPOSES.

The death of Moses marks a crisis in the career of the chosen people. He who has
been their "leader and commander" through all the forty years' wandering in the
wilderness and has brought them to the borders of the land of promise, is taken
from them just when they seem most to need him. Only Jordan now rolls bet\\ een
them and the fruition of their hopes ; the prize is within their reach. Shall they
fail, and, after all, come short of it ? They would have failed if God had not been
with them, moving, working among them, fulfilling His own will, magnifying His
own name. Joshua's uprising is itself a Divine interposition. He is not the
product of the mere natural working of events and second causes. He is a dehverer
whom God has provided, well named God's salvation. The lesson is an important
one. When God has any great work for men to do. He never fails to call forth
those who can do it. The history of the Church, the general course of the world's
life, establish this law. The demand and the supply, the hour and the man,
always meet. When those who are in the high places of the field fall, others step
forth, often from very unlikely quarters, to fiU the gap and carry on the work to riper
issues. This continuity of the Divine purpose and of the path of its development
is very wonderful —

•* The voice that from the glory came

To tell how Moses died onseeu,
And waken Joshna's spear of flame

To victory on the mountains green,
Its trumpet tones are sounding stiU,"

kindling our expectations, rolising our energies, rebuking our distrost. Through
the shifting clouds of circumstance we catch " glimpses of the unchanging sky."
God's redeeming purpose shines on through aU human and earthly changes. We
need not fear but that He " wiU plead his own cause," and when new emergencies
arise provide some new instrument or agency to meet them.

II. It REMINDS us OF THE PROCESS BY WHICH GOD IS WONT TO PREPARE MEN

FOR THE WORK He HAS FOR THEM TO DO. Joshua was a divinely chosen and
ordained dehverer (Nimi. xxvii. 18 — 23 ; Deut. xxxi. 14 — 23). But God's choice
is never arbitrary, reasonless. There is generally some native quaUty, or circum-
stantial advantage, that makes the chosen man the more fitting instrument.
(Examples : Moses, David, Gyrus, Paul, Luther.) Joshua grew up as a slave in
the brick-fields of Egypt. Born about the time when Moses fled into Midian, he
must have been forty years old at the exodus. It may seem strange that such
greatness as his should have been nursed amid such associations. But when God
has fixed His choice on a man He can make what seem to be the most adverse
conditions a school of preparation. And, perhaps, the rough influences of such a
lot were, after aU, the best school In servitude as a youth, he learnt how to com-
mand as a man. No doubt sudden emergencies have often developed unlooked-for
qualities in men. Tender spirits, nursed in the lap of luxury, have been found



10



THE BOOK OF JOSHtTA-



[CH. L 5—9.



ealm in danger, trave in battle. Still, as a rule, to "bear the yoke in one's youtb"
is the best preparation for the stem struggle of after life. Moreover, the trials and
responsibilities of life are graduated. The right discharge of lesser duty qualifies
for higher positions of trust. Joshua proved, in the previous expeditions on which
Moses sent bim (Exod. xvii. 9; Num. xiii. 17), his fitness to take the place of the
great leader. " He that is faithful in that which is least is faithful also in much."
" If thou hast run with the footmen," &c. (Jer. xii. 5). Again : other circumstances
of a different kind — miraculous manifestations, Divine revelations — had their part
in Joshua's preparation. He had witnessed the wonders in Egypt and at the Red
Sea, had been with Moses in the mount, had had direct communication from God
to himself (Deut. xxxi.). We are reminded of the higher, diviner influences that
help in the formation of all noblest human character ; there is always the blending
of natural and supernatural elements, ordinary associations of Hfe mingled with
direct heavenly visitations, innate qualities sanctified and glorified by special
ministries of the grace of God.

III. It illustrates the heboism that springs feom faith. Faith, the faith
that brought him into personal contact with the living God, was the spring of all
Joshua's strength and courage. He had no prophetic gift as regards the vision of
the future, for it was through the priest Eleazar, " after the judgment of Urim,"
that he was to ask counsel of the Lord (Num. xxvii. 21). But as military
leader of Israel he was divinely inspired; and his inspiration was the energy of
faith. This has ever been the prohfio root of the noblest forms of character and
deed. By it " the elders," whose names shed lustre on the ages of the past,
" obtained their good report." And so it always will be. There is no heroism like
that which springs from the soul's living hold on the unseen and eternal. The
hope of the world for deliverance from the iUs that afBiet it, and its being led
into the heritage of a brighter future, is in the men of faith. And he is an enemy
to his race who would attempt to dry up this spring of power. " This is the
victory," &c. (1 John v. 4).

IV. It presents us with an interesting historic type of gospel salvation.
Many points of typical resemblance have been traced. This, at least, is clear, —
as Joshua, " Moses' minister," consummates his work, leads the people into tke
promised land, divides to them their inheritance ; so Christ, "made under the law,"
brings in the richer grace. He is the " end of the law for righteousness," &o.
(Rom. X. 4). The Captain of salvation leads many sons, His redeemed ones, to
glory and eternal rest. — ^W.



EXPOSITION.



CHAPTEE I. 5—9.



The source op Joshua's conitdence. —
Ver. 6. — Tliere shall not any man be able
to stand before tbee. Literally, rao one shall
set himself up against thee, i.e., successfully
resist thee (avnarricrerai, LXX.). As I was
witb Mosea. Literally, as I have been with
Moses : that is to say, was with him and
remained with him unto the end. The con-
tinuity of the work of God under the old
dispensation is thus as clearly marked as
that of the new in Matt, sxviii. 20, and
John XX. 21 — 23. The promises made to
Abraham, the law given to Moses, the gift
of a new life in Christ, are so many parts
of one great work, and that work the re-
generation of mankind. I will not fall thee.
Literally, I will not be weak towards thee,



relax towards thee. God is ever the same,
If His attitude to us be altered, it is not
He who has changed, but ourselves.

Ver. 6. — Be strong and of a good courage.
Literally, be strong and vigorous. The word
does not refer so much to the character of
Joshua as to his actions. He was to be a
man of action, alert, prompt, ready to act
when occasion demanded (see Deut. xxxi.
6, 7, 8, 23). Which I sware unto their
fathers (see note on ver. 3).

Ver. 7.— Be very courageous. The word
is the same as is translated " be of good
courage " above. Knobel remarks that the
phraseology here is similar to that of
Deuteronomy, but "strange to the other
Books " of the Pentateuch. This may be
from the fact that Deuteronomy is through-
out hortatory, while the other Books ai«



Oh. I. B—9.]



THE BOOK OF JOSHUA.



11



historical. But the recurrence of the
hortatory phrases of Deuteronomy here is
at least remarkable (see ver. 3). Prosper.
Bather, perhaps be wise (cf. Deut. xzix.
9, though, according to Calvin, the word
means, "not only to act prudently but
sueoessfully '"). The only true wisdom is
that obtained from God, whether in answer
to prayer, or in meditation on His law
(see 1 Cor. i. 17—31 ; ii. 12—16 ; iii. 19).

Ver. 8. — This book of the law. The law
was, therefore, embodied in a written docu-
ment when the Book of Joshua was written ;
and as the antiquity of this Book may be
regarded as proved, we may quote thus an
early authority for the genuineness of at
least some portions of the Pentateuch.
There was a " book of the law" in Joshua's
time, according to this early testimony, and
we may conclude from vers. 3 — 7 that
Deuteronomy formed a part of it (see also
Deut. xvii. 19 for a similar precept. And
for the fact see Deut. xxxi. 24 — 26). Medi-
tate therein (cf. Fsa. i. 2. Ixiii. 7,



ozliii. 5, in the original. Also Deut. zzd.
26). Observe to do. Literally, keep to do,
thus impressing on us the care necessary in
deciding on our actions. All that Is written
therein (of. for the expression Deut. xxviii.
68, 61 ; xxix. 19, 20, 26 ; xxx. 10). ShaU
have good success. The word is the same
as is translated " prosper " above, and not the
same as that rendered "prosperous " in this
verse. " Men," says Calvin, " never act
skilfully, except in so far as they aUow
themselves to be ruled by the Word of God."
Have I not commanded thee 7 "An em-
phatic inquiry is a stronger form of afSrma-
tion, and is generally employed by those
who wish to infuse into another courage
and alacrity" (MichaeUs). Moreover rcjp«ti-
tion is a remarkable feature of Hebrew
composition, as we may observe from the
second chapter of Genesis onward, and is
designed to give emphasis to what is com-
manded or related. Calvin would lay stres*
on I: " Have not I commanded thee t "
But this is not borne out by the Hebrew.



HOMILBTICS.

Vers. 6 — 9. — The source of Joshua's confidence. J. He had been chosen bt
God. Moses was dead, and Joshua's heart might well have failed him. For
the great lawgiver had found the task of leading the Israelites from Egypt to the
borders of the promised land too much for his strength and spirit (Exod. xviii. 13 — 17 ;
Num. xi. 11 — 17 ; Deut. i. 9 — 15). Constant rebellions and murmurings had weakened
his hands. " They provoked his spirit, eo that he spake unadvisedly with his hps
(Psa. cvi. 33), and in consequence he was not permitted to lead them into Canaan.
To Joshua a harder task was assigned. He was not only to lead the Israelites, but to
lead them in battle, and against foes more numerous and better prepared for war
than themselves. Yet the sense that he had been marked out for the task, as well
as hia determination to obey the orders he had received, sustained him. He was
never known to waver but once (oh. vii.), nor did the confidence of his followers in
him ever falter. So may all those who have received a charge from God rest assured
that they will be able to execute it.

II. Hk ebposed upon God's peomisb. He " believed God," and it was not only
" counted unto him for righteousness," but his faith led him to victory. Nothing
could have nerved him for such a task but the consciousness that God was with
him. For he had no personal ambition (ch. xix. 49), such as often stimulates men to
great tasks. Thus the Christian warrior of to-day, who contends not for himself
but for his Master, may emulate Joshua's courage and confidence, for the same
promises are his as were Joshua's (Heb. xiii. 6, 6 ; Eph. vi. 10 ; 2 Thess. iii. 3).

III. He was diligent in the study of the Scriptuees, and he guided
HIMSELF BT THEIR INJUNCTIONS. He had Only the law of Moses, but he kept it
(ch. v., vi., vii.). He had been warned to extirpate the Canaanites, and he obeyed the
command to the letter (ch. x., xi. 15). The Christian who would conquer in his
conflict with the powers of evil must be diUgent in his study of God's Word, and
careful to frame his life by its precepts. He must "meditate therein day and
night (cf. Psa. i. 2 ; cxix. 1; 97—99; also Deut. iv. 9; xi. 18—20; xvii. 18, 19), and
must take heed to carry out the lessons he has learned.



n THE BOOK OF JOSHUA. [oh. i. »— 9.



HOMILIES BY VARIOUS AUTHORS.

Vers. 6 — 9. — A renewed covenant. The covenant made with the patriarchs, and
afterwards with their descendants when they came out of Egypt, is here renewed
in aknost the same words. The promises are identical (vers. 4, 6), and also the con-
ditions of their fulfilment, which are smnmed up in fideUty and obedience :
" Observe to do according to all the law which Moses my servant commanded
thee " (vers. 7, 8). This renewal to each generation of the covenant between God
and His people is a law of rehgious history. It results both from the nature of that
covenant and from the character of those who enter into it.

I. This aUiance is, in its essence, the restoeation of the bond of love between
MAN AND God, by the obedience of faith. Now love is a feeling which needs to be
constantly renewed. The love of one generation will not avail for the next. 1 1
must be rekindled and find fresh expression.

II. The covenant must be made between the true God and man made in His
image ; it must be spikitual and spontaneous in its chaeactee. It cannot be
signed upon parchment or graven in the insensate stone ; it must be written upon
living hearts. Hence it ought to be perpetually renewed, though it gladly avails
itself of the strengthening influence of its glorious antecedents. It recognises as its
essential principle the free and sovereign initiative of Divine love. " We love him
because he first loved us" (1 John iv. 19). Nor is it enough that this Divine cove-
nant be renewed with each successive generation ; it must be entered into by every
individual soul. This was true, indeed, in relation to the higher rehgious life, even
under the old covenant. How much more under the new — the covenant of the
Spirit — which is ratified not by circumcision but by conversion. " Except a man be
bom again he cannot see the kingdom of God" (John iii. 3). — E. de P.

Vers. 5, 6. — The leader's promise. Such is God's word to Joshua when com-
mencing his great task. He needed the urgent precept and the supporting promise.
He was no youthful dreamer, but one long past middle life, who had no exaggerated
estimate of Israel's faithfulness, and no illusions about its task. He needed, and here
he gets, the quickening influence of a sacred charge. As God spake to him, so he
would speak to all who are constrained by a sense of duty to God or man to undertake
some task that seems beyond their powers. Let ub take its general lessons to aU.

I. Heeoes pass away, but the power that made them still eemains. When
Moses left his task it seemed as if the work must come to a stand. Where should
they find such grace again ? or how coidd they do without it ? Such a combination
of courage and meekness, faith to follow anywhere, patience with those who had
hardly faith to foUow at all ; such wisdom, such love — could it be repeated ? could
it be dispensed with ? Especially now, when the finish of their great enterprise
was so full of dif&oulty. They know little of the human heart who imagine
that Joshua could gaUy assume the responsibilities of his command. They who
enter into great wars "with hght heart" do not take long to gather heaviness.
And Joshua, advanced in Ufe, acquainted with the difficulties of his task, doubtless
was tempted to feel that with Moses the heroic age had ended, and prosaic common
life alone remained. Probably the people shared this feeling ; and with the departure
of this great hero there was the feeling that aU greatness and glory was gone. The
first thing that wUl quicken men with hope is this — heroes leave us, but God re-
mains. Before the special promise will operate its special comfort there must be
this general thought of comfort cherished and realised. And we all shall be pre-
pared to reaUse the promises which suit ourselves, if we realise that amidst all
changes God remains unchanged, and whatever leaves us He abides. We are all
apt to say that former times were better than the present ; to imagine that former
greatness cannot be grown now ; that grandeur of thought, saintliuess, courage,
will come no more " to dignify our times ; " that there was special grace vouchsafed
to past ages which made them rich, and which has evaporated long ago. Churchmen
look back to the Fathers : Dissenters to the Reformers of the Church. Now the mu>



CH. 1. 8—9.] THE BOOK OF JOSHUA. IS

tyis of the ancient days, now the stalwart heroes of Puritan times, are gilded with our
reverent memory ; and then rises the pensive thought that "the tender grace of the day
that is dead" will never return. "As I was with Moees, so wiU I be with thee.*
Revere the saintly past, but recognise the Divine present. The great ones have gone ;
that which made them great remains. The fixed constancy of their maturer service
makes us forget with what gradualness their characters grew. How by lowly ven-
tures, by diflB.cult waiting, by support only sufficient to prevent despair, they rose
step by step ; God's grace entering them ever the more largely and obeyed ever the
more fully. So, blade to ear, ear to full corn in the ear, their character grew ; and
so may ours. To-day the Spirit of all grace broods on humanity, kindling all
wakeful spirits, entering and employing them. Still Christ's love helps and harbourB
aU. The peculiaritif } of the nineteenth century do not enfeeble God. And He is
here, fresh and strong to-day. He wiU hallow, not equalise, varieties of constitu-
tion ; will not make a Joshua into a Moses, nor an Elisha into an Elijah ; but
with special grace for their special task will equally endue each. Despair not of
God's Church ; tremble not for the ark of God ; despair not of our country, or of
mankind. Whoever, whatever has gone, God remains. " As He was with our
fatliers, so He wUl be with us."

II. With every duty combs the power to do it. " I will not fail thee, nor
forsake thee." If the first clause of the text promised the presence, the second
pledges the power and help, of God. He wUl be with Joshua — not merely in sense
of ubiquity, but in sense of interest ; not to watch faults and failures, but to pre-
vent them. There was the fear that in this enterprise many things might "fail "
them. The people's courage might fail ; they might withdraw from allegiance to
him ; his wisdom might be at fault, his endurance might fail. But God comes
in and says, " I wUl not fail thee." WiU disappoint no expectation, withhold no
nef'ded help ; will not fail you when you are weak, nor forsake you when you are faulty.
AVith the duty there wiU be the power, for God will not fail us. There is no part
of the gospel more necessary or more sweet than this — that with duty power always
comes ; they walk hand in hand. The moment the Saviour's precept makes it the
man's duty to stretch forth his hand, that moment he has power to do it. When
the disciples are bidden to feed the multitude they have power to do so. The ac-
ceptance of a charge opens the heart to God, and He floods it with His grace. If
the disciples are sent out to cast out devils they have the power to do so, for God
does not fail them. They never get power apart from Him, of which they can be
conscious and proud. But He is there — by them, in them ; and when they are feel-
ing all weakness, and unfitness. He, not failing, charges them with all the grace they
need. Tou are called to confess Christ; to forsake some pleasant or profitable
course of evil ; to stand alone ; to take up some forlorn hope of philanthropy. . . .
and you feel no strength, energy, vigour for your task. Take fliis comfort : with
duty there invariably comes the power to discharge it. " I will never fail tliee, nor
forsake thee." Observe lastly —

III. COURAOB IS THE SUPREME REQUIREMENT OF God'S SAINTS, AND STRENGTH

GOES WITH IT. " Be strong and of a good courage." It is striking how large a
place exhortations to courage hold in all the Bible. " Add to your faith, courage "
(not virtue), Ba,ya Peter; and so saying sums up many testimonies. You cannot
easily count the " fear nots " of the Bible. And these are not merely soothing
words, calming solicitude, but quickening words, calling to conflict and to victory.
Take tli e eleventh chapter of Hebrews, and you will find that in almost every instance
in which the writer attributes men's greatness to their faith he might have done so
with equal truth to their courage. Fear is the parent of every kind of vice ; fear
of conflict, fear of shame, fear of failure, fear that God will leave fidelity imrewarded
and prayer unanswered. " They were afraid to confess him," says the Evangelist
of tbose who sold their birthright for a mess of pottage. " I was afraid and went and
hid my talent." Fear exaggerates difficulties, murmurs at duties, shrinks from re-
proach, postpones duty, then neglects it, and then hates God with the bitterness of
despair. Be of good courage. If seeking God, seek hopefully, expecting to find
Him. If distressed with doubts, face them bravely, and calmly wait the riaing of th«



14 THE BOOK OF JOSHUA. [oh. l 6—9.



broader light which will include aU that is best of old and new. Are yon afflicted,
bereaved, and broken ? Be brave and of good courage. Look the grave in theface,
and summon your energy to meet the falsehoods of despair. Are you failing —
" feet ahnost gone," " perplexed," and all but in despair ? Be of good courage, for
hardihood of spirit, while it is needed, is sufficient for what youhave to do. Strength
goes with it. The momentum of a projectile is the product of itsmass and velocity;
and a lighter ball, if driven with greater force, will do all the work of a heaviel
one that moves more slowly. And this law of mechanics is true of souls. There
is many a soul light, fragile, weak, but which hurls itself with energy against
resisting forces, which has a power of overcoming far in excess of that possessed by
many stronger and lordlier natures. Be strong and of good courage. If God e^p-
points the task and leads the way, you are in a course in which fear of failure is
superfluous. Let the eye be brighter ; go not to your task burdened with melan-
choly of dark foreboding. Courage gladdening, strengthening you is duty and
strength in one. Joshua obeyed the precept, and exceedingly abundantly above aU
he thought realised the promise. Let us act like him, and then from a pinnacle of
high performance and blest success we shall look back and praise our God for the
" faithful word on which he caused us to hope." — G.

Ver. 8. — 'ITie study of the Bible. Who without secret misgiving could succeed to
the position of Moses, that large-hearted, clear-sighted, faithful servant of God ?
How overwhelming the anxiety of him who would aspire to be leader of the
Israelites ; a fickle people who, " like bees about to swarm, were ready to aUght on
any bough." He who summoned Joshua to occupy the vacant post promised to
stand by and strengthen him. He gave him the direction contained in the text, to
study well the book of the law. He seemed to say, " Take it ; it shall be thy food,
live upon it : carry it as a torch, and it wiU illumine thy pathway in the thickest
darkness : in the vigour of thy manhood it shall be thy wand of truth to scatter
doubt and error from before thee, and it shall be a staff to sustain thee in the
decrepitude of age." Surely the advice given to Joshua is apphcable to aU who are
in positions of responsibility or perplexity. How fitted for the young! What
better can any of us do than seek wisdom at the oracles of God ? Let us group our
thoughts under three headings.

I. Meditation.

1. Its subject-matter. " This book of the law." This recommendation stamps
the Pentateuch with authority. Joshua was favoured with direct oommuuications
from the Almighty, sometimes by an inward revelation, sometimes by the appear-
ance of an angel in visible form. He could also consult the wishes of God by
means of tlie high priest's Urim and Thummim. Yet was he to study the written
word. Meteoric flashes were not to make him careless of the steady hght that burned
in the lamp of God's truth. Provision was made for a pubho rehearsal of the law
every seven years, at the Feast of Tabernacles (Deut. xxxi. 10), and it was the duty
of a king on ascending the throne to write out a copy of the law (Deut. xviii. 18).
How intense should be the eagerness with which we meditate on the whole Bible.
The rapturous strains of the Messianic prophets, the simple and sublime gospel narra-
tives, the epistles — those commentaries on the preparatory dispensation and on
Christian doctrine — do not all these "testify" of the Saviour? Well may we
" search the Scriptures." Consider the fitness of the Bible to be a general text-book.
It contains lessons suited to aU capacities ; the flowing river for the man, the
purling brook for the httle chUd, doctrines for the learned, pictured stories for the
common people. It contains all truth needful to make us " wise unto salvation,"
and contains it in a compact form, so portable that each may have a Mentor always
at his side. It teUs us things of the utmost importance which we could not know
without it ; and it comes in to verify the conclusions of our reasoning. It lends to
the utterances of conscience the might of Divine testimony.

2. The character of the meditatior enjoined. Constant — " day and night." So
close a companion that it was not to " depart out of his mouth." It should become
hie mother-tongue ; his speech should be redolent of the law. Constant reading alone



OH. 1. 6-«.l THE BOOK OF JOSHUA. If

can make us 'familiar -with the contents of Scripture, so as to be well equipped
at all points for the Christian warfare. Many knotty questions would Joshua have
to decide ; and many are the occasions on which men err grievously through " not
knowing the Scriptures." The command of the text implies that it was to be no
formal perusal, but an endeavour to grasp the real meaning of the law. Glancing
at the pages of the word can do httle good ; we want to enter into and imbibe the
spirit of _ that we read. A good plan to read the Scriptures regularly through.
There wiU be many an oasis ia what we called a desert, and many a pretty flower
on what we deemed only a sterile rock. It is profitable to read " at morning and
at night." He is well armed for his struggle with temptations and annoyances
who goes to his work fortified by previous study of the Scriptures ; and after the
battle of the day is over, when the shadows of evening surround him or the gloomier
shadows of trouble threaten to enclose him, there is naught so effectual to dissipate
the darkness as the kindled rays of the heavenly lamp. Then " at evening time it
BhaU be hght."

IL Action. Meditation is to be followed by appropriate conduct. " That thou
mayest observe to do according to aU that is written therein." The inference is
plam — that the law contains, as we should expect in a law, precepts to be observed.
And the whole Bible may be considered as a law. There are general regulations
and positive institutions. " This do and thou shall live " is common both to the
Old and New Testament, the difference being in the things to be done, and the
spirit that is to characterise the doing thereof We may teat the value of owr
•meditation by the obedience which results. Obedience is a proof of holding the
things read in due estimation. " Why call ye me, Lord, and do not .... say ? "
Obedience springs from faith, a hearty acceptance of the wiU and ways of God.
Obedience brings its own confirmation of the truth. " If a man love me, he will
keep my words, and my Father will love him, and we wiU. come unto him." " If
any man wUl do his will, he shall know of the doctrine whether it be of God."
"Hereby we do know that we know him if we keep his commandments." Ohedienea
ia to extend to the amalleat matters, " Observe to do according to alL" The only
question with Joshua to be, " What is written in the law ? how readest thou ? " We do
not plead for the "letter" as against the " spirit," nor forget that many Scripture
precepts are expressed in a general form, and one must be compared with another
to ascertain the intention of our Lawgiver. But many persons are for drawing
distinctions, for keeping greater and violating lesser commandments. Some wiU.
compoimd with God. These ordinances they will observe, those they will neglect.
Such resemble the strangers imported into Samaria, who " feared the Lord and
served their own gods" (2 Kings xvii. 33). A little Christian service and a little
idolatry, a Uttle self-denial, and a little worldliness to make the former palatable.
We see the necesaity of the frequent injimoiion, " Be strong, very courageous."
Joshua would have often to act in opposition to the prejudices and desires and
clamours of the multitude. He who will follow Christ must " be courageous," must
be prepared to act in the teeth of worldly wisdom, to forego " good openings," to
refuse to give dishonest measure, though his gains be thereby slow in accumulating.
We want a knowledge of the Bible, not merely as words and sentences but as
influential principles. Not the Hebrew and not the Greek do we want so much as
a translation of them into thought and feeling and conduct. He has not read his
Bible to good purpose who^ has not repented of sin and thankfully accepted God's
weU-beloved Son as his Saviour, his Eedeemer " from aU iniquity."

III. Pbospbbity. The reward of obedience. 1. Regard prosperity, first, as the
natural conaequence of acUng on good ad/vice. The rules framed for the guidance
of the Israehtes evince consummate wisdom. Experience proved how disastrous
was any attempt to depart from the Hnes of procedure there laid down. And many
famiUar instances show that, in modem days, he who steers by God's compass and
chart is preserved frona many rocks and shallows, and is most likely to reach the
haven of his legitimate desire. A pure, temperate Christian life is likeliest to win
real success in any department of activity. 2. Regard prosperity as a proTniseA
reeult. He who consolt* Omniscience ia helped by Omnipotence. A finger-post



1«



THE BOOK OF JOSHUA.



[cH. I. 10-16.



may indicate the way, it can do no more. God is a living Guide ; He has written
directionB and He aids in the perfonnance of them. " No good thing shall fail of
all that he has promised concerning us." " Seek first the kingdom of God, and all
otlier tilings shall be added unto you." Blessed is the man whose " delight is in
the law of the Lord," so that " in it he doth meditate day and night. He shall ba
like a tree .... shall prosper" (Psa. i. 2, 8). — A,



EXPOSITION.



CHAPTER I. 10—15.



Joshua's command to the peoplk. —
Ver. 10. — Then Joshua conuoanded the
officers of the people. The Shoterim, a term
derived from the same root as an Arabic word
signifying " to write." Different ideas have
been entertained of their duties. Eeil, Jahn
(Hebrew Commonwealth), and others believe
that they were genealogists ; but it seems more
probable that their original duties were to
keep processes and minutes, and that, like our
Indian " writers " and the " Master of the
KoUs " at home, they exercised some kind
of judicial functions, with which, moreover,
active duties were sometimes combined. The
ii'ea that they were genealogists is contrary,
as Gesenius shows, to the context in many
places. Thus in Exod. v. 6 — 19, they seem
to have had to see that the specified tale of
bricks was delivered up ; and we know from
the recently deciphered Egyptian inscrip-
tions that very accurate registers of such
matters were kept. In Deut. i. 16 (cf. Deut.
xvi. 18; Josh. viii. 33; xxiii. 2; xxiv. 1,
&c.) they appear to have exercised judicial
functions in connection with the " princes "
(not " captains," as in our version, which
would lead to the idea that they were mili-
tary ofEeere). In Num. xi. 16 they are
connected with the elders. In 1 Chrou. xxvi.
29 they seem again to have exercised judicial
functions, whereas in 2 Chron. xivi. 11 their
duty appears to have been to keep the muster
rolls, in Prov. vi, 7 we find them once more
with active duties as in the text. The LXX.
equivalent, ynafiiiarivQ, is rendered in Acts
xix. 35 by " town-clerk," an officer with
active as well as merely secretarial duties.
Here they seem to have acted as officers of
the commissariat, civil and military func-
tions being naturally largely interchange-
able in the then condition of the Israelitish
people, juat as they were in the early days
of our Indian empire.

Ver. 11. — Prepare you victuals: Literally,
game, the term being applied to meat ob-
tained by hunting. Thus it is applied by
Isaac to Esau's venison in Gen. xxvii. Here
it ineans food of any kind, but especially
animal food. It U therefoiie obvious that



the miraculous supply of manna was soon
to cease (of. ch. v. 12). Within three daya.
Much difficulty has been created hereby the
fact that another three days are mentioned
in chap. iii. 2 as elapsing after the return of
the spies, which has been supposed to have
taken place between this command and the
period then mentioned. Three more days
were spent (eh. ii. 22) by the spies in
eluding the puisuit of the men of Jericlio—
one day in going thither, and one more ia
returning to Mosea. Consequently eight
days, if not more (see oh. iii. 7), must
have elapsed between this proclamation and
the actual crossing of the Jordan. But when
we remember that the Hebrew language
possesses no pluperfect tense, that there are
many instances, such as (very probably) Gen.
xii. 1, and more certainly Gen. iii. 1, vi 6, ix.
18, xxvi. 18, 82, where the Hebrew narrativ*
has clearly departed from the chronological
order, and that the chronology is obscured by
this chasm in the Hebrew linguistic system,
we may suppose that the narrative in th«
second chapter is parenthetical, and relates
to.events which occuired before the occasion
now spoken of. This is the view taken by
Josephus and the Kabbis, and our transla.
tors have adopted it in the margin — a pro-
ceeding which, as their preface shows, may
frequently be held to imply that in their
opinion it is the preferable interpretation.
It is energetically impugned by Keil, who
maintains that there are insuperable diffi-
culties in the way of this arrangement. He
does not, however, make out a very powerful
case againat the simple explanation of Cor-
nelius k Lapide, that the spies left the camp
on the 3rd Nisau, returned on the 6th, that
Joshua gave bis order on the 7th, and that on
the 10th (ch. iv. 19) the crossing was efiected.
Stripped of all verbiage, Eeil's argument ap-
pears to amount simply to this, that it was
not Ukely that the account of the narrative
would be thus interrupted by an account of
a tranaaction out of its proper chronological
order. It may be added that it seems doubtful
whether we must not render the word ^DS
in ver. 12, by the pluperfect, for it seemi
very probable that the word of command to



OH. 1. 10—18.]



THE BOOK OF JOSHUA.



11



the two tribes and a half who had obtained
their inheritance beyond Jordan had been
given before this, and that therefore it may
have preceded the oommand given to the
spies, in which case one of Eeil's chief ob-
jections falls to the ground. Other explana-
tions than that of Cornelius & Xiapide have
been suggested. Thus Kimchi supposes that
the spies left on the 5th Nisan and returned
on the 8th ; while Masius supposes that they
were sent out simultaneously with these
orders. Augustine's explanation, that Joshua
did not speak by revelation, but was influenced
by human hope, is noticeable, as proving that
the early fathers did not always take the
strictest view of inspiration.

Ver. 12. — And to tJie Reubenltes, and the
Gadites, and the haU-trihe Of Manasseli (see
Num. xxxii. 1 — 33). We have here a re-
markable instance of undesigned agreement
between the various books of the Old Testa-
ment : one of those signs of the genuineness
of the narrative which would be almost im-
possible to a compiler oi fictitious records.
We are told In the passage just cited that
the reason why these particular tribes desired
an inheritance on the other side Jordan was
because they were particularly rich in cattle.
Now we leaxn from other passages that this
region was — and travellers tell us that it is
to this day — a region particularly suited for
pasture. The ' Jewish Chronicle,' in De-
cember, 1879, mentions a scheme projected
by Mr. Laurence OHphant for colonising
this district for agricultural purposes under
the auspices of a company. The " fat
bulls of Bashan " were almost proverbial in
Scripture. Mesha, king of Moab, was a
"sheep-master," we read (2 Kings iii. 4),
and his tribute, rendered in sheep to the
king of Israel, was a very large one ; espe-
cially when we remember that Moab was at
that time but little larger than an ordinary
English county (see also Deut. xxxii. 14 ;
Ezek. xxxix. 18). The land to the east of
Jordan b.ire the name Mishor, or level land,
as contraated with the rooky region on the
other side of Jordan.

Ver. 13. --Remember the Tirord. The sub-
stiinne. and not the ipsissima verba, of the
directions of Moses in Num. xxxii. is here
given (see also Deut. iii. 16 — 20). Hath
given you rest Perhaps, rather, hath caused
you to rest — Jiath permitted you to settle ;
tl)OUgh the LXX. here has Kariiravaev, and
tliB Vulgate, dediivobis requiem (of. Heb. iii.
11—18 ; iv. 1—11 ; and Psa. xov, 11). Thl3
laiid, i.e., that in which they then were, on
what we call che further side of Jordan.

Vsr. 14.— Armed. This word, translated



harnessed in Exod. xiii. 18, only occurs be-
sides here in ch. iv. 12, and in Judges vlL
11. In the first cited of these passages it
has given rise to much discussion among
those whose studies have been confined to
the text of the English Bible, excluding even
the margin. But its meaning is much de-
bated among scholars. There seems no
authority whatever for the translation armed
or harnessed. We must either take it (1) to
mean in Jive divisions, the usual manner of
marching under Moses (see Num. ii.), "di-
vided into centre, right and left wings, van
and rear guard " (Ewald) ; or (2) fierce, eager,
brave, from a Semitic root found also in the
Arabic. So BosenmiiUer and Gesenius —
who does not, however, as Keil asserts, derive
the word from E^DD to be fat, but from a
root akin to DOH violence, and Yt?fl to be
pungent. The former refers to the parallel
passage in Num. xxxii. 17, where for D'B'BtJ
we find D^Ci'n quick. The first interpretation
is rendered probable by Num. ii., where the
order of march is described as a fivefold
order, and by the similarity of the word to
typn five, f'.ud is not excluded }.y Judges Vu.
11, where tie ariay, though disorganised,
may have stil' been arranged ic its fivefold
divisions. The fart that there is an Arabic
V ord, almost precisely similar, which is ap-
plied to the fivefold division of an army,
makes it almost certain that this is the true
meaning. But some scholars prefer to
render it " brave," or "eager for war" (ef.

'S'li'n Josh. iv. 13). This last word is also
found in the parallel passages in Num. xxxii,
and Deut. iii. 18 — 20. Its original meaning is
expeditus — unencumbered. See note on the
la^-t-mentioned passage. All the mighty
men of valour. The number of fighting
men in these tribes would be, from a com-
parison of Num. xxvi 7, 18, 34, remembering
that half only of the tribe of Manasseh must
be counted, between 110,000 and 111,000.
But we read in Josh. iv. 13 that 40,000 only
of them went over. Above 70,000 must
have remained behind to guard their women,
children,and flocks, a precaution both reason-
able and necessary. So indispensable, in fact,
was it, that in this apparent discrepancy we
may find one of the strongest proofs of the
genuineness of our narrative. For, as Calvin
remarks, in a country not yet pacified, all
the women and children would infallibly
have been massaoied had they been lett
unprotected.



JOSHUA,



M THE BOOK OF JOSHUA- [oh. i. 10— ISu



HOMILETICS.

Vers. 10 — 16. — JoihmoUt command to the people.

I. We must wokk with the graob of God. All these promiseB of God were not
intended to supersede human effort. God had promised to be with Joshua, but
Joshua must act on the promise. He had promised to plaat the people in the Holy
Land, but not without exertion on their part. Where their own action was impos-
sible, as in crossing the Jordan, He did aU for them. When a rign of His presence
with them was necessary, as at Jericho, He did likewise. But in the rest of their
warfare He did but prosper their own endeavours. So we are both to pray and
work, save in cases where to work is denied tu, and then our weapon must be
prayer alone.

II. We need provision fob the way. Without meat we should " faint by the
way." But we have " meat to eat" that the world " knows not of," even the flesh
and blood of Christ. And this we must " prepare ; " that is, we must take pains
to obtain it. "This kind goeth not forth but by prayer and festing," and by
endeavours to serve Christ. Whether in the sacrament of His love, or in any other
way in which He vouchsafes to impart His humanity to ns, there needs on our part
(1) an earnest petition for the gift ; (2) steady self-denial in our Uves ; (8) steadfast
efforts to do His will. It is remarkable that the miraculous provision failed as soon
as there was no more need for it. So exceptional provision for our spiritual needs
is withdrawn so soon as we find ourselves within reach of the means of grace.
These we must use with due diUgence and forethought if we would derive benefit
from' them.

III. We fight, not fob ouesblves alone, but foe othees. The two tribes and a
half had received their inheritance, yet they were not allowed to settle down in it.
They had been solemnly bound to help their brethren. Nor may we Christians sit
down in the exclusive possession of religious privileges, but must impart them to
our brethren, whether (a) by nature, as the heathen, or (b) by grace, as in the case
of Christians less favoured than ourselves. We cannot cease our labour till they
are as well off as we. Thus the duty is incumbent upon us of co-operating in every
good work, whereby the temporal or spiritual benefit of others is attained.

IV. Each has his appointed task. As Christ gave to His disciples to set before
the multitude (John vi. 11, &o.), so Joshua " commands the officers" to " command
the people." All are not apostles or prophets, but each has his proper office in
God's Church. Some are set over the flock to guide and exhort them, while others
have to listen and carry out the voice of exhortation. They were to go up chcmm-
thim, in battle array (ver. 14), with van and rear, with wings and centre, each in
his appointed rank. And we, too, shall only throw the army of Jesus into disorder
if we fail to keep the place which God's providence has assigned us.

v. Some, by theib position, abe denied a paet in the general conflict. As
Christ forbade the demoniac to attach himself to His person, but bade Viim " go
home to his friends " (St. Mark v. 19), so there are those, like the women and
children here, whose work for Christ is the simple discharge of domestic duties,
whom Christ has not called to any more pubUc efforts in His cause.

HOMILIES BY VAEIOUS AUTHOES.

Vers. 10 — 19.— Joshua and the Beubenites. The Beubenites and Gadites had
already settled on the banks of the Jordan. They were at rest ; they had not to
await the ordeal of the conquest. As far as they were concerned, they had already
received the promise. And yet they were not to be allowed to remain in idleness,
and in selfish enjoyment of their own good. They were not to forget their brethren.
"Ye shall pass before your brethren armed," said Joshua, "and help them."
" And they answered Joshua, saying, AU that thou oommandest us we will do."
Such was the response of these vaUant and true-hearted men. We have here an
admirable Illustration of the great bond of solidarity which makes all the peopU
of God 0B«.



CH. L 10—16.] THE BOOK OF JOSHUA. 18



I. In reality, no section of God's people can live an isolated life. It
■would be vain for the Eeubenites to dream that they could rest at ease under their
vines and fig trees. The defeat of their brethren would recoil upon them, and
should the Canaanites be victorious the Eeubenites would quickly find themselves
driven out of the land. And it is the same with the Church — each for all, and all
for each ; this is the Church's motto. Therefore it is that all should rally round
the great standard of the army.

II. FoK ANT section OF God's PEOPLE TO ISOLATE THEMSELVES in their prosperity
is not only the sure way to impoverish and ultimately to ruin themselves, but it is
TREASON TO THE KiNG OF THE SPIRITUAL KINGDOM ; for it implies that the first object
of desire is prosperity for themselves, not the glory of the King ; that He is loved,
not with a pure, but with a selfish love.

III. Such isolation hardens the heart. It is a violation of the first law of
the kingdom — the law of love. Its tendency is, as far as possible, to obUterate that
law. It ignores the fact that we receive only to give again. Let us fully grasp,
then, this great truth, that every blessing received is a trust placed in our hands
only that we may diffuse it among our brethren. The applications of this great
precept of Christian love are innumerable. Do we possess in large measare the
good things of this world ? It is that we may communicate to our less favoured
brethren. Are we rich in spiritual gifts ? It is that we may impart to those less
privileged and of fewer opportunities than ourselves. And as we are indebted to
the Church, so are we also to humanity, for are we not all one flesh? Hence the
claim of missions, both at home and abroad, as a means of imparting the gifts of
God already received by us to those who as yet are ignorant of them. Nor is this
all. After having won the victory for ourselves, we have to begin the battle over
again, and to suffer in sympathy with those who have yet the Jordan to cross. Let
us never forget Him who left the blessedness of heaven to undertake our caus«,
and who, though He was rich, yet for our sakes became poor. — ^E. db P.

Vers. 12 — 15. — Duties of brotherhood. We have here a fine appeal, and a fine
answer to that appeal. Arrived at the Jordan, they are about to make that invasion
of Palestine which gave the Church of God a country and truth a home. At first
the settlement of all the twelve tribes in the country between the Jordan and the
sea seems to have been the design of Moses. But "the region beyond Jordan"
was fertile — a finer land for flocks than Canaan itself. It was not surprising,
therefore, that the pre-eminently pastoral tribes of Eeuben, Gad, and Manasseh
should desire to settle there. And when the opposition of Og, king of Bashan, and
Sihon, king of the Amorites, necessitated war, and ended in their defeat, the
desire of these tribes found expression in a formal request. On the condition that
their settlement on the nearer side of Jordan was not to be a " secession," and that
they would help their brethren in the conquest of the whole land, Moses had granted
their request, and divided the territory between them. Now Joshua, on the death
of Moses, requires their fulfilment of their pledge. Eest would have been pleasant,
and selfish reasons in plenty forthcoming for evading the fulfilment of their
promise ; but the claim for brotherly help was made to men of brotherly nature.
This chapter shows their prompt response, and the remainder of this Book shows —
one might almost say all the subsequent books of the Bible do so — the splendid
results of their brotherliness. I find a very perfect illustration of a great theme,
viz., the duty and blessedness of the more favoured helping their less favoured
brethren. Observe —

I. The duty of those more early, ob more richly blessed, helping their
less favoured brethren. There are those more and those less favoured. Those
that attain the desire of their hearts much earlier and much more fully than their
brethren. God does not divide His favours as a communistio philosopher would do.
All are largely, but all unequally and diversely, blessed. So it happened here. The
two and a half tribes had got all their fighting over before the others had well begun.
Had Israel entered the land of Canaan by the south, as they probably would have
done if they had not shrunk from the enterprise on the return of the spies, then



10 THE BOOK OF JOSHUA. [oh. i. 10— 16*

Judab wonld have been tLe first to find its home secure ; and Eeuben, Gad, and half
Manasseh would have been the last if they still desired the district of Gilead. It
is not the peculiar virtue of the latter that it should be earlier, nor any fault of
the former that it should be later. It is due simply to their entering now from the
east instead of from the south. So in the contrasted condition of these tribes wa
have but a type of the contrasted conditions of men. There are some have made
their fortune by the time others are just beginning to struggle for it. To some,
truth comes with clear evidence as a bright heritage of their youth, while others
only reach it with protracted struggle. Some are favoured with a knowlege of
the gospel, while others are in densest ignorance. Some nations have vast wealth
of liberty and justice, when others are just beginning to achieve the first sweets of
freedom. And in such circumstances the more fortunate are very apt to enjoy
their comforts, regardless of the struggles of their brethren ; just as these tribes
might have argued with plausible ingenuity that they should be excused from
rendering assistance to their brethren. The struggle with Bashan — that district
which rises like an island of rook from the pastoral plains, and which is the great
natural fortress, the " keep " of the whole district — had been arduous. The
remains of the cities of Bashan, so strongly built that three thousand years has
not been able to reduce them to ruins, show the energy and developed eivUisation
of their foes. There are not a few indications that the stress of the conflict fell
on the two and a half tribes. How easily they might have been tempted to settle
down, indifferent to their . brethren's welfare. Besides, they had respectable
excuses. Who would defend their wives and children when aU their mighty
men were across the Jordan ? What would become of their cattle ? What
security was there against the Bedawin, then, as now, roving about intent on
spoil? Might they not act as rear-guard, and keep the communications open —
secure a safe retreat ? But Moses, Joshua, God, all expect the more to help 'the
less fortunate, and the generous instincts of their own hearts assent to the doctrine,
and the nobility of their action testifies to all posterity that privilege canies
responsibility, and that all who have are bound to aid all who lack. " Go forth
before your brethren armed, till the Lord hath given them rest." Let the upper
classes of our country share rather than monopolise education, power, enjoyment
of hfe. Let the rich aid the poor ; the strong the weak. Let those who have the
gospel help those who are in darkness to attain its light. The successful have a
duty to the struggling to aid them, not feebly, but with their full strength. If
this example illustrates the duty of the more helping the less favoured, it illus-
trates with equal clearness, secondly —

II. Thb blessedness of doing so. One does not Uke to contemplate what
would have been the results had they withheld their help. The Amorites, strong in
their mountain fastnesses, the Canaanites — the race we know better under the
name of Phenicians, strong in their civilisation, wealth, commerce, maritime enter-
prise, inhabiting the sea-board plains — were not enemies to be lightly overcome.
Ten out of the twelve spies — all brave men — reported the conquest impossible ; and
the other two hoped for it only because they had the faith that remembered nothing
was impossible. What would have been the effect on the world if Phenician
religion,^ with its unutterable vileness and cruelty, destruction of morality and
virtues in all their forms, had extirpated Hebrew religion, with its inspiration of
virtue, truth, hberty, and all things high, one is content to leave unguessed. But
Israel was fighting the world's battle of truth and righteousness against enormous
odds, and the two and a half tribes nobly taking their share in the conflict.
Observe what blessed results followed.

1. They had the reward of bring grandly useful- in the service they rendered.
They did not fail, nor were discouraged untU, as the result of three or four years of
war, the whole land from Hebron in the south to Baal Gad in Lebanon was
theirs. And God's people, God's Church, and God's Truth had an earthly house.
The candle was set on a candlestick, and gave light to all surrounding nations and
Buooeeding ages. Thy brotherly help, in whatever direction rendered, will newi
t>« in v^in. Nothing hag such success »nd so little failure as kindly help.



OB. 1. 10—15.] THE BOOK OP JOSHUA. 11

2. Their service resulted in the development of a finer brotherhood. Not
a perfect one, as there will be too much occasion to mark, but yet a relationship in
■which there was on the one hand the genial interest we always take in tliose we
help, and on the other there was the gratitude always felt where service is
promptly and freely given. They know not what they lose who never render help.
Serve and love your brethren and they will pray for you and love you, when
perhaps their love and prayer wiU. turn the scale between hope and despair.

3. There was developed in these tribes a noble sentiment of heroic patriotism.
"We make our acts : but otir acts make us. And a noble deed increases the
nobility of nature from which it sprung. The service now rendered by the tiibes
inhabiting Gilead lived in their memory, an inspiration to similar service. Gideon
and Jephthah headed the tribes, and twice over delivered Israel from her oppressors.
And in later times this same region gave Israel her grandest prophet — the great
Elij ah — who restored pure and undefiled religion to its throne. The service you render
ennobles you, and makes you more capable of nobler service in all time to come.

4. There was the direct outward reward. They lost nothing by it even in
material wealth. No enemy attacked their -families. They hrought back great
store of spoil, more wealth than herding could have given them in the interval.
And through aU their future history the service now rendered by them was
repayed to them. So tliat, though exposed in situation, the first to feel the
brunt of the attacks of Syria and Ammon, they retained, by help of their brethren,
their possessions and their freedom, right down to the days of Ahab. It is no
slight reward which waits on brotherly kindness and charity, but one which makes
men richer than with any wealth of selfishness they could possibly be. Go thou,
and in thy sphere do as these tribes did — render prompt, willing, rich, lengtliened
service to your less favoured brethren, and " exceedingly abundant above all
you ask or think " wiU you find your reward in heaven. — Q-.

Ver. 13. — An agreement remembered. The latter part of this chapter recounts
the preparations made for the entrance of the Israelites into Canaan. Joshua was
already showing himself " the right man Ln the right place." Having given orders
with respect to the food necessary for the next march, he now addresses the tribes
who_ had been permitted to choose an inheritance on the east of the Jordan. He
reminds them of their promise to send their armed men as a van-guard to the
people. Though under the sheltering wings of the Almighty no prudent precau-
tions must be neglected, no vigilance relaxed, the honour of God demands that
reasonable care should be exercised to prevent surprise and the consequent disgiace
that would attach to His holy name. God helps ns not only outwardly but
inwardly, teaching us how to live a sober, righteous, and godly life, and so to van-
quish the machinations of the enemy.

I. A COVENANT REMEMBERED. If the Kcubenites and Gaditea had forgotten it,
not so Joshua. Nor does God faU to recollect the vows we have made. As He
recalled Jacob to a sense of his ingratitude and remissness (Gen. xxxv. 1), so He will
not have us treat our promises lightly. It is part of the functions of a faithful leader
to bring to light forgotten duties. A minister reminds his people of their engage-
ments. What declarations of devoted adherence to Christ were uttered at conver-
sion I how they bound themselves henceforth to live to the glory of God I The
people's promises to God must be insisted on, as weU as the cheering promises
which God has made to them. Let us not be angry nor revile such admonitions
as the preaching of the la.w instead of the gospel. An appeal was made to au-
thority. The agreement had been a commandment on the part of Moses. Joshua
enforced compliance therevnth. On the same grounds we draw attention to the
precepts of prophets and apostles, as well as to the direct dictates of the Lord.
These holy nien were inspired, and to dispute their utterances is to call in question
the authority of the Master whose servants they were. Joshua thus sanctioned
Moses as Peter afterwards bore witness to Paul (2 Pet. ui. 16).

II. Principles recognised in the covenant.

I. Famwr* merit tome grateful retwn. The land of Gilead and Bashan mi



M Uma BOOK Oi* JOSSttA. [m. i. ld-i«.

desired by these two-and-a-half trihes on account of its fruitful pasturage. It wag
adapted for flocks and herds, and the sight of such fertile territory caused the
owners of much sheep and cattle to be willing to settle down at once, rather than
to occupy soil in the " land of promise " itself. Their request was not pleasing to
Moses, as it seemed to put a sUght upon Canaan, and to threaten a relapse into
idolatry, beside the imminent danger of discouraging the rest of the IsraeHtes,
and so effecting by the wrath of God the utter extinction of the nation. Tet on
the condition to which reference has been made the petition was ultimately
granted. As they had achieved their desire it was rightly expected that they would
render some proportionate recompense. And in similar method our heavenly
Father deals with us to-day. We must be ready to cry with the Psalmist, " "What
shall I render tinto the Lord for all his benefits toward me ? " If more than
others we have received, of Us will more be required. Health and strength, wealth
and position, learning and influence — not one of these gifts but entails a corre-
sponding resporisibilily. If the conditions have not been stated in so many words,
yet they are easily discoverable.

2. The priority of duty to pleasv/re. Before these armed men could lawfully
enjoy their inheritance they must fulfil their engagement. We do not oppose duty
to pleasure, strictly speaking, for it is obvious that only when mindful of the former
can the latter be truly known. But the two may be distinguished, and it is clear that
there are cases in which selfish inclination would lead one way and obligation calls
us another. The rule to be adopted is plain. Listen to " I ought," and follow whither
it directs ; there will be a satisfaction gendered which will go far to repay us for any
sacrifice ; and then when the period of relaxation has really arrived our delight will
be embittered by no stings of reproachful conscience, but enhanced by the remem-
brance of duty discharged. Let this be noted and acted upon by the young, and
there will be fewer wasted Uves. Let Church members consult their obligations
before their convenience and there wiU be fewer vacancies crying out for occu-
pants.

3. The olligations of fraternal love. The dislike of Moses to the request of these
tribes was akin to the grief of a father who witnesses the separation of some mem-
bers of the family from the rest. The river Jordan was in itself but a small dividing
line, but it might be significant of a wide and deep estrangement. Evidently per-
ceiving the fear of Moses, the Eeubenites, &o., offered to prove by their conduct that
they were still at one with their brethren and intended so to remain. The offer
was approved of and estabUshed as a covenant between the whole nation and these
special tribes. It afl&rmed a participation in the common hopes and risks. The
New Testament speaks not less clearly of the relationship between all the children
of God. The members of the body, of Christ are bound to feel with and for one
another (1 Cor. xii. 25, 26). "Let brotherly love continue." So forcible was the
impulse of the first preaching of the gospel that it led the Christians of Jerusalem
to a commonalty of goods. It is required of the rich to help the poor, the strong
must assist in bearing the burdens of the weak, the settled in position and faith
must stretch out the hand to those who are still searching for a place of rest, and
those who have leisure must devote a portion at least to the succour of the busUy
employed. The Jewish Paul having obtained the privileges of Christianity could
wish himself to be " accursed for his brethren, his kinsmen according to the flesh."
We are selfish indeed if we pray not and labour not for the salvation of our friends
tin they become possessed hkewise of an eternal inheritance. Briefly note —

III. The batification of the covenant. The covenanters assented imme-
diately to the command of Joshua. They were ready to keep their word. No
excuses urged, no pleas of misunderstanding, no subtle equivocations, no attempts
to secure a remission of their engagement, but downright honest confirmation oi
their pledged promise. They did not desire their sin to find them out (Num.
xxxii. 23). The covenant had been really made with the Lord, and He would be
certain to punish its violation. God give us grace to imitate their example 1 Like
Jephthah, we have "opened our mouth to the Lord and cannct go back.'' We
have declared that our bodies shall be living saorifioes, that our mouths shall



ei. 1.16-18.3



•tffli hoot of ;rosauA.



Bhow forth the Bedeemer's praise, that as for us we ■will serve the Lord. Very
shame shotdd bind us to our word ; we must not, dare not, " keep back part of
the price." And love to God ud man drawi ns onward to our " reasonable
service." — A.



EXPOSITION.



CH4PTER I. 1ft— 18.



The people's answeb. — Ver. 16. — And
Uiey answered Joshua, saying^. We may
compare this joyful willingness with the
murmuringa of the people in the wilder-
ness, and their rebellion after the death
of those who led them into the promised
land (cf. Joshua xxiv. 31 with Judges ii.
10, 11, &o.). Obedience is easy when all
goes well with us, and when it makes no
demand upon our faith. The Israelites
murmured when the promise was as yet un-
fulfilled. They rebelled against God when
obedience entailed self-sacrifice. But now
all was hope and eagerness. So it is often
with the young Christian at the outset of
life's battle, before he has begun to reaUse
the exertion and self-denial that can alone
ensure him victory.

Yer. 17. — As we hearKened unto Hoses.
Calvin remarks that the Israelites did not
hearken unto Moses, but rephes that, com-



pared with the conduct of their fathers
whose bodies lay in the wilderness, the con-
duct of this generation was obedience itself.
It certainly appears as though for the last
two years of the wandering in the wilder-
ness there was far less rebeUion against
Moses than before ; and after the solemn
repetition of the precepts of the law to the
new generation which had arisen, given in the
Book of Deuteronomy, there seems to have
been no rebellion at all (see Num. zxvi. 63).
Ver. 18. — Whosoever he be that doth
rebel against thy commandment. A strik-
ing fulfilment of this promise appears in the
case of Achan, who was put to death by the
act of the whole congregation (see ch. vii.
25 ; and cf. Deut. zvii. 12). Only he
strong and of a good courage. The task of a
leader in Israel is easy when he is sustained
by the prayers of his people, and when
their exhortations are an echo of the worda
of God (see vers. 6, 9).



HOMILBTICS.

Vers. 16 — 18.— T/ce peo2jle's answer. This passage can only he interpreted of
Jesus, of whom Joshua was the type. Implicit obedience is no longer due to any
human leader, nor has been since Joshua's death. Even a St. Paul can say, " I
Bpeak as to wise men, judge ye what I say " (1 Cor. x. 15). And St. Peter nrgea
the clergy to remember that they are not " lords over God's heritage " (1 Pet. v. 8).
And this because we each " have access by one Spirit to the Father by the faith of
Jesus Christ " (Eph. ii. 18 ; iii. 12). We may remark —

I. Teat every Christian is bound bt a vow of obedience. Jesus is the Cap-
tain of our salvation. He leads us in the warfare against every kind of evil. To
disobey is to mutiny, and mutiny in every army is a capital crime. Yet here we
may remark on the forbearance of our Joshua. All his troops are more or less
gmlty of this crime. Yet (1) He pardons it, and (2) with His mutinous troops He
has achieved, and will achieve, many a glorious victory. But there is a limit to
His patience (see below). Though we sin often we must take heed to repent as
often, and strive to do better for the future. " If any man have not the Spirit of
Christ," at least in such a manner as to make him strive sedulously after obedience,
" he is none of his " (Eom. viii. 9). The best we can do is to ask Him to " renew
our win from day to day," that so, after each of our frequent falls, we may brace
ourselves up to a renewed obedience. And thus, by virtue of His merits, not of
our own, shall we be recognised m faithful soldiers of the true Joshua — Jesus
Christ.

JI. That the law is sxHiL " our sohoolmastbb to beino us to Christ."
We must still " hearken to Moses " before we can hear the voice of Christ. Still in
our childhood must we be subject to law, be under tutors and governors, have duties
prescribed for us, obey precepts " contained in ordinances," before we reach the
" glorious liberty of the children of God," before we find the law " written in our
hearts," and a power existing within us prompting us to a spontaneous obedienoe,



4N THE BOOK OF JOSHUA- [oh. i. 16—18.

We must all know the period of struggle, when, " after the inward man," we " de-
light in the law of God " (Bom. vii. 22, 23), but find another law in our members
at conflict with it. So must we learn to find the only deliverance from " the body
of this death," in Jesus Christ our Lord, just as to follow Joshua was the only
escape fi-om the wilderness. And if we live up to the law that is set before us, we
shall find through it a pathway to a better land, the land of promise (Gal. iii. 18).
For " the law is not against the promises of God, God forbid" (Gal. iiL 21). It
is " holy, and the commandment holy, just, and good " (Eom. vii. 12). But its
object was to show us " the exceeding sinfulness of sin," and the terrible reahty of
our bondage to it, that we might learn the infinite value of the reconciliation which
has been effected for us in the Person and work of Jesus Christ.

III. "The wages of sin is death." This is recognised as a fact by the fol-
lowers of Joshua. So the followers of Jesus' must acknowledge the fact that to sin
against Him, to refuse to obey His words, leads to destruction. And they must
separate ihemselves fi:om all that " walk disorderly " (2 Thess. iii. 6 ; 1 Tim. vi. 5;
2 Tim. iii. 5). For they only who do His commandments " have right to the tree
of life." All they that do otherwise are "without," shut out from the joys of
eternal life, and condemned to the " second death " (Bev. xxi. 8; xxii. 14, 15).



HOMILIES BY VAEIOUS AUTHOES.

Vers. 16 — 18. — Loyalty. A demand had been made that the " men of valnur*
of tliese tribes should leave their relatives and property in the fenced cities of their
inheritance, and head the advance of the Israelites into Canaan. A call to a
dangerous position, to bear, as it seemed, the brunt of the enemy's attack ; a sum-
mons to exercise self-denial in absence from home and possessions; the precept
issuing, too, from unaccustomed lips, those of a new general. These verses record a
courageous, generous response, which may well faraish matter for meditation and
imitation.

I. A DEOLAKATION OF OBEDIENCE.

1. A prompt assent. No time for thought and preparation asked for. Noreasont.
Invented for delay.

2. A hearty assent. It is expressed in three forms : a promise to do what is com-
manded, to go where sent, and to hearken when addressed. These phrases cover
all possible kinds of precepts.

8. Promise of unreserved oheSUenee. "All," "whithersoever," and "in all
things," thus blocking the smallest loophole of escape in each case. No picking
and choosing here of the mandates to which they will conform.

Such complete acquiescence as this can be required of us only with respect to
Him who is the Captain of our salvation. "With regard to other subalterns
of His, and to the national sovereign, tliere are occasions on which refusal and
resistance are justifiable. Consider the grounds on which we owe fealty to Jesus
Christ. He is our Lord as Creator, " by him were all things made," and as
Bedeemer, "that they which live should not henceforth live unto themselves," Ac.

n. A PRAYER OFFERED FOR THE LEADER. " Only the Lord thy God be M-iiii Ihee
as he was with Moses." 1. This petition recognised the fount of authority. The
■warriors readily complied with the demand of Joshua because they believed that he
■was appointed to occupy the place of Moses. Joshua was henceforth to receive and
ntter the directions of the Almighty, to be His -vdoegerent to the Israelites. And
on this foundation Jesus Christ often based His claims to be heard by the Jews,
■viz., that He was sent from God and spoke the words of God. He pointed to
His mighty works in e^vddence of the truth of His pretensions. Nicodemus declared,
" No man can do these miracles that thou doest except God be with him." The
Father openly signified His approval of the Son's mission, "This is my beloved
Son, hear ye him." The Jewish king was the " anointed of the Lord. " The
powers that be are ordained of God." Pastors under the Christian dispensation
ttre "over" men "in the Lord." " Remember them who have the rule over you,



OH. n. 1-12.]



THE BOOK OF .TOSHUA..



who have spoken unto you the word of God." " Ohey them that have the rule over
you, and submit yourselves, for they watch for your souls as they that miist give
account."

2. The prayer invokes the presenee of God as the leader's source ef strength.
By prayer we can commend to Divine grace " all that are in authority." How the
Apostle Paul reiterated his request that the readers of his epistles would earnestly
pray on his behalf! When Peter was miraculously released from prison he found
" many gathered together prajring." Thus may the people aid their minister, as
Aaron and Hur upheld Moses' hands. There were seasons when the commands
of the great legislator were received with murmimng, and when his right to rule
was called in question. These Beubenites had not " in all things " hearkened unto
Moses. Yet now they spontaneously avow that he had been supported by God.
The death of a celebrated man calms passion, removes prejudice, and purges the
vision.

III. A STERN RESOLUTION. To iuflict the punishment of death on any recalcitrant
offender. Presimiptuous refusal to hearken to the priest or judge was to be visited
with this severe penalty (Ueut. xvii. 12). This declaration by these tribes evinced
their firm determination to abide by the decrees of their new ruler. BebeUion is
treated as one of the worst crimes, inasmuch as whilst some illegal acts are only
indirectly subversive of government, this strikes a blow at the very seat of authority,
and endangers all order. Nor is it a matter of small moment whether men bow or
not to the rule of Christ. Peter quoted the prophecy of Moses in reference to
Christ and the terrible threat annexed, "Every soul which will not hear that
prophet shall be destroyed from among the people." Our Lord, in the parable of
the pounds, represents Himself as saying, " But those mine enemies . . . and slay
before me."

IV. Admonitort advice. In olden days servants were much freer in speaking
their mind to their masters, and soldiers to their generals. But Joshua's humility
in Ustening to this exliortation is worthy of being copied. The wisest may learn
from the ignorant, and the meanest of the flock may sometimes suitably address
their pastor. Nor need any of us be above accepting good counsel, from whatever
quarter it proceeds. There is no intimation of weakness, but only that these
toibes perceived the weighty enterprise in which Joshua was engaged, and the
necessity of his exhibiting a fearless demeanour. They sympathised with him, and
wished to inspirit him for his arduous, honourable work. They knew how much
commonly depends on the leader's courage, and how quickly his fear would affect
his subjects. It was advice in full accordance with their actions. They had
gone the right way to strengthen Joshua by their instant submission to His will.
They did not try to cheer him with words after having previously knocked the
breath out of him with their deeds. Speech and conduct were in harmony, and
lent each other force. Marvellous is the effect of an encouraging word 1 Is there
not some one whom we can thus send to his post with augmented zeal and hope?
Conclusion. "Whom are we serving? Under whose banner enlisted, and what
wages, what reward do we anticipate ? The trae Joshua, even Christ, demands,
invites, yea, entreats our faithful adherence. — A.



EXPOSITION.



CHAPTER n. 1-12.



RsHAB AND THE sptES. — Ver. 1. — And
Josliua the son of Nun sont. Bather, as
margin, had sent (see note on eh. i. 2).
It might have been at the very time when
the command was given to the Israelites,
for, according to a common Hebrew man-
ner of speech (see, for Instance, 1 Sam. svi
10), ibe three days (ver, 22) may include



the whole time spent by the spies in their
exploring expeililion. Out of Shittlm.
Literally, from the valley of acacias. It is
so called in full in Joel lii. 18. This place
(called Abel-Shittim in Num.- xxxiii. 49), in
which the Israelites had sojourned for some
time (see Num. xxv. 1 ; of. xxii. 1), seems to
have been "in the plains (nhlj/see note on
ch. iv. 13) of Moab, by Jordan, opposit*
Jericho " (Nnm. xxxiii. 48, 49, 50 j xum. U ;



m



Me Boog of JosfittA.



tea. tt. 1—11



of. Deut. i. 5). It was "the long belt ot
aoacia groves which mark with a line of
yerdure the upper terraces of the valley."
(Stanley, ' Sinai and Palestine,' p. 298).
The word Abel, or meadow, signifying the
long grass with its juicy moisture, points to
it as a refreshing place of soiourn and pas-
ture for flocks, after the weary wandering in
the wilderness. The acacia, not the spina
^gyptiaea of the ancients, the mimosa
Nilotica of Linneeua, but the aeacia Seyal, a
tree with a golden tuft of blossom, which is
still (Tristram, ' Land of Israel,' p. 624) to
be found on the spot, very hard dark wood,
of which much use was made in the taber-
nacle and its fittings (see Exod. zxv., xxvi.,
xxxvi., rxxvii., &c.). The name Abel was a
common one in Palestine, and is the same
as Abila, from whence comes Abilene (Luke
iii. 1). We may add that it has nowhere
been said that they were at Shittim. We
find this out from Num. xxv. 1. This un-
designed coincidence is beyond the power of
an inventor, and tar beyond the power of a
compiler who was not only untrustworthy,
but so clumsy that he made the most extra-
ordinary blunders in the management of his
matter (see note on next verse, and also on
eh. i. 11). Two men. Young men, as we are
told in ch. vi. 23, and therefore active,
fleet of foot as well as brave and prudent.
All these quaUties, as the subsequent narra-
tive shows, were urgently required. " Joshua
himself was full of God's Spirit, and had the
oracle of God ready for his direction. Tet
now he goes, not to the Propitiatorie for
consultation, but to the spyes. Except
where ordinarie meanes faUe us, it is no use
appealing to the immediate helpe of God ;
we may not seek to the posterne, but where
the common gate is shut. It was promised
Joshua that hee should leade Israel into the
promised land, yet hee knew it was unsafe to
presume. The condition of his provident
care was included in that assurance of suc-
cesse. Heaven is promised to us, but not to
our carelessnesse, infidelitie, disobedience "
(Bishop Hall). Secretly. Literally, dumbness
or craftiness (the noun being used adver-
bially), implying the silence and skill re-
quired for the task. He who knows how to
be silent possesses one at least of the ele-
ments of success. The necessity of silence
and secrecy may be inferred from ch. vi. 1.
Keil, however, following the Masoretic punc-
tuation, regards " secretly " as referring to
the IsraeUtes, and the spies as sent unknown
to the army, that no depressing report
might damp their courage. Jericho. " The
•ity of fragrance " (from ni"! to breathe, and
in the Hiphil, to smell a sweet odour), so
called from its situation in the midst of
palm trees, from which it was called " the



city of palm trees D'l.ionn fj} in Deut.
xxxiv. 3, 2 Ohron. xxviii. 15 ; cf. Judg. 1. 16.
The vast palm grove, of which relies are
even now occasionally washed up from the
Bed Sea, preserved by the salt in its acrid
waters, has now disappeared. We read of it
as still existing in the twelfth century, and
indeed traces of it were to be seen as late as
1838. A dirty and poverty-stricken village
called Biha, oi Eriha, is all that now marks
the site of all these glories of nature and
art, and the most careful researches have
until lately failed to discover any remains of
the ancient city. It is doubtful whether
the ruins observed by Tristram ('Land of
Israel,' p. 216) are not the ruins of some
later city, built in the neighbourhood.
Bartlett, p. 452, believes Biha to be the site
of the later Jericho of our Lord's day, but
Tristram would, vfith less probability, iden-
tify Biha with Gilgal. They both, however
place the site of ancient Jericho about a
mile and a half from Biha. Gonder thinks
its true position is at the fountain Ain-
es-Sultau. Lenormant, in his 'Manual
of Oriental History,' remarks on the skill
of Joshua as a military tactician. Whether
he followed the advice of his experienced
leader, or whether we- are to attribute
his success to special guidance from above,
he certainly displayed the quaUties of a
consummate general. "Jericho," says Dean
Stanley ( ' Sinai and Palestine,' p. 305),
"stands at the entrance of the main
passes from the valley of the Jordan into
the interior of Palestine, the one branching
off to the south-west towards Olivet, the
other to the north-west towards Michmash,
which commands the approach to Ai and
Bethel. It was thus the key of Palestine to
any invader from this quarter." He illus-
trates by Ckiavenna (or the key-city, from
its situation), in Italy. Lenormant remarks
that from an ordinary historical point of
view the strategy of Joshua is worth notice.
It was the practice ever followed by Napo-
leon, and, he adds, by Nelson also, to divide
his enemies, and crush them in detail. Had
Joshua advanced upon Palestine from the
south, each success, as it alarmed, would
have also united the various communities of
the land, under their separate kings, by the
sense of a common danger. Thus each on-
ward step would have increased his difficul-
ties, and exposed him, exhausted by coi*-
tinued efforts, to the assaults of fresh and
also more numerous enemies, in a country
which grew ever more easy to defend and
more perilous to attack. But by crossing
the Jordan and marching at once upon
Jericho, he was enabled, after the capture
of that city, to fall with his whole force
first upon the cities of the south, u4



«3H. h. 1-12.]



tfiE BOOK Of JosatJA.



then on those of the north. The political
condition of Palestine at that time (see
Introduction) did not permit of a resist-
ance by the whole force of the country
under a single leader. A hasty confederation
of the kings of the south, after the treaty
with Gibeon, was overthrown by the rapid
advance of Joshua and the battle of Beth-
horon. By this success he was free to
inarch wiUi his whole army northward,
against the confederation of tribes under
the leadership of the king of Hazor, whom
he overcame in the decisive battle of Herom.
There is no hint given in the Scripture that
in this strategy Joshua acted under the
special guidance of the Most High. The
probability is, that in this, as in all other of
God's purposes effected through the agency
of man, there is a mixture of the Divine
and human elements, and that man's in-
dividuality is selected and guided as an
instrument of God's purpose, which, in this
instance, was the chastisement of the
Canaanitish people, and the gift of the Holy
Land as a possession to the descendants of
Abraham. That Joshua was not indifferent
to human means is shown by this very
verse. Into a harlot's house. Many com-
mentators have striven to show that this
word simply means an innkeeper, an office
which, as Dr. Adam Clarke proves at length,
was often filled by a woman. It has
been derived from Vlf to nourish, a root also
found in the Syriao. The Chaldee para-
phast and many Jewish and Christian in-
terpreters have adopted this interpretation,
in order, as Bosenmiiller remarks, "to
absolve her from whom Christ had His origin
from the crime of prostitution." But St.
Matthew seems to imply the very opposite.
The genealogy there contained mentions, as
though of set purpose, all the blots on the
lineage of Christ as was fitting in setting
forth the origin of Him who came to forgive
sin. Only three women are there mentioned :
Tamar, who was guilty of incest ; Bahab, the
harlot; and Buth, the Moabitess. And
the LXX. render by iropvri. Calvin calls
the interpretation "innkeeper" a " pre-'
sumptuous wresting of Scripture." Heng-
stenberg ('Geschichte des Eeiches Gottes,'
p. 197) also rejects the interpretation " inn-
keeper," and maintains the right of the spies,
who, he says, were no doubt chosen by
Joshua for their good character, to enter a
wicked woman's house for a good purpose.
It does not appear that the spies entered
the house of Bahab with any evil intent,
but simply because to enter the house of a
woman of that kind — and women of that
kind must have been very numerous in the
licentious Phoenician cities — would have at-
tracted far leas attention th«n if they had



entered any other. Even there it did not
escape the notice of the king, who had been
thoroughly alarmed (ver. !/) by the successes
of Israel eastward of Jordan. Origen, in
his third homily on Joshua, remarks that,
" As the first Jesus sent his spies before him
and they were received into the harlot's
house, BO the second Jesus sent His fore-
runners, whom the publicans and harlots
gladly received." Named Eahal). Origen
(Horn. 3) sees in this name, which signifies
room (see Behoboth, Gen. xxvi.22), ihe type
of the Church of Christ which extends
throughout the world, and receives sinners.
And lodged there. Literally, and lay there,
perhaps with the idea of lying md, for
they did not (ver. 15) spend the night
there.

Ver. 4. — ^And the woman took the two
men. The majority of commentators are of
opinion that here, as in ver. 1, we must
render by the pluperfect. For, as Calvin
remarks, Bahab would hardly have dared to
lie so cooUy had she not previously taken
precautions to conceal her guests. And
therefore she must have told a twofold false-
hood. She must have discovered, or been
made acquainted with, their errand, and
therefore have " known whence they were,"
in addition to her assertion that she did not
know where they were now. And hid them.
The original is remarkable and very vivid.
And hid him, i.e., each one in a separate
place. Ko doubt the detail comes from an
eye-witness, so that if the Book of Joshua
be not a contemporary work, the writer must
have had access to some contemporary
document.

Ver. 5. — I wot not. Much has been said
about Bahab's falsehood which is little to
the point. The sacred historian simply nar-
rates the fact, and makes no comment what-
ever upon it. But the fact that Kahab
afterwards became the wife of Salmon, a
prince of the tribe of Jndah, as the genealogy
in St. Matthew informs us (though Knobel
denies this, asserting that between Joshua
and David there were more than three gene-
rations, forgetting that Boaz, when he mat-
ried Buth, was an old man, see Buth iii.
10), shows that neither her falsehood nor
her mode of life excited much disappro-
bation among the Jews. ' Nor need this sur-
prise us. There is no need, with Keil, to
repudiate energetically the assertion of Hauft
that the author of this Bookregarded Bahab's
deception as not only allowable, but praise-
worthy, any more than we need scruple to
confess that Jael's base treachery met with
the approval of Deborah and Barak. The
tone of feeliag in Jewish society in Bahab's
day must have differed enormously in many
respects from what obtains in our own tiin«,



THE BOOK OF JOSHUA.



[cH. n. 1 — 12.



in the light of the dispensation of the Spirit.
W'u may take, as an instance of what that tone
of feeling was, even befoie Israel had been
ooTrupted by their sojourn in Egypt, the nar-
rative in Gen. xxsviii. And we may be cure
that in a Phoenician city the tone was many
degrees lower still. Bahab, therefore, was
no doubt absolutely ignorant that there was
any sin, either in her mode of living or in
the lie she told to save the men's lives. She
aHed from a twofold motive, and her course,
ioth of thought and action, was a most sur-
prising instance of faith and insight, in one
brought up as she had been. She not only
followed an instinct of humanity, at a time
when human life was thought of little value,
in preserving the lives of the men who had
Bought shelter under her roof, but she could
discern in the wonderful successes of Israel
the hand of a higher power than that of the
gods whom she had been brought up to wor-
ship. In her subsec[uent conduct she be-
trayed an affection for her kindred somewhat
uncommon in persons situated similarly to
herself. And we may be sure, from the fact
that she was chosen to be a " mother in
Israel," that she forsook the sins of her
oountry and her education as soon as she
came within the range of a higher light (see
Eeb. zi 81 and James ii. 25). From what
has been said we may learn that, though
Bahab's faith was " as a grain of mustard
seed," her conduct showed that she possessed
it ; and in hers, as in every case, to walk by
the light she had was a sure prelude to the
possession of more. And as regards her de-
parture from truth here, it must be shown, be-
fore she can be blamed, that she had any idea
that truthfulness was a duty. Such a duty
does not appear to have been clearly recog-
nised until He who was Himself the truth
came among men. " However the guilt of
Bahab'sfalsehood may be extenuated, it seems
best to admit nothing which may tend to ex-
plain it away. We are sure that God discrimi-
nated between what was good in her conduct
And what was bad ; rewarding the former,
and pardoning the latter. Her views of the
Divine law must have been exceedingly dim
and contracted. A similar falsehood, told by
those who enjoy the light of revelation, how-
ever laudable the motive, would of course
deserve a much heavier censure " (Matthew
Henry). So also Calvin in loc, " Vitium
virtuti admistum non imputatur."

Yer. 6. — But she bad brought them up.
Literally, and she caused them to ascend;
but our version has very properly (see ver. 4)
given the preterite the pluperfect sense here.
"Two ftrangers, IsraeUtes, spies, have a
safe harbour provided them, even amongst
theii enemies, against the proclamation of a
king." " WlMre cannot the Qod ot heavea



either find or raise up friends to His own
causes and servants ? " (Bp. Hall.) To the
roof of the house. The flat roofs of Oriental,
and even of Greek and Italian houses, are
used for all kinds of purposes, especially for
drying com and other things for domestio
use (see 1 Sam. ix. 2.5, 26 ; 2 Sam. xi.
2 ; xvi. 22 ; 2 Kings xxiii. 12. Also Acts z.
9, where the roof is used as a place of retire-
ment and repose). Stalks of flax. Literally,
flax of the tree. The word translated flax
is used either of the raw material or of the
linen made from it. Here it must mean
flax as it came cut from the field ; that is,
as our version translates it, the stalks of flax
(XivoKoXafii/, LXX.), which prows in Egypt
to a height of three feet, and may be pre-
sumed to have attained a height not much
less at Jericho. The word "J^V which signi-
fies to lay in a row, and is used of the wood
on the altar in Gen. xxii. 9, and of the
shew-bread in Levit. xxiv. 6, confirms this
view. It is obvious that this would have
formed a most suflicieut hiding-place for the
fugitives. " Either faith or friendship ara
not tried but in extremities. To show coun-
tenance to the messengers of God while the
publifiue face of the State smiles upon them,
is but a courtesie of course ; but to hide our
own lives in theirs when they are persecuted
is an act which looks for a reward " (Bp,
Hall).

Ver. 7. — Unto the fords. There were
several of these fords. One near Jericho
(cf. Judges iii. 28 ; xii. 5, 6 ; 2 Sam. xviL
22, 24 ; xix. 16, 19, 39) ; one at Bethsean,
now Beisan, leading to Succoth (Judges
viii. 4 ; cf. 6«n. xxxii. 22 ; xxxiii. 17. See
Eobinson, ' Biblical Researches ' ii. 497 ;
Ritter, ' Geography of Palestine ') ; beside
others not mentioned in Scripture. A vivid
description of the crossing the Jordan at the
fords near Jericho is to be found in Tris-
tram's ' Land of Israel,' p. 520. The ford ia
almost certainly the one mentioned here,
since an hour or two's ride brought the party
to Shittim. These fords were easy to cross
save when the Jordan, as was now the case
' (oh. iii. 15), overflowed its banks. This
may have been the reason why the pursueri
did not cross the fords, but they pursued the
spies to the fords, hoping to find their retreat
cut oft. This is rendered more probable by
the fact (ver. 22) that tike pursuers appear to
have continued their search after leaving
the fords.

Ver. 8. — And before they were laid down,
i.e., to sleep on the roof, a common practice
in the East in summer.

Ver. 9.— Hath given. Bahab's faith U
shown by this expression. What God willed
she regarded as already done. To speak of
the future as of a past already fulfilled ia



OH. n. 1—18.]



THE BOOK OF JOSHUA.



the usual language of the Hebrew prophets.
Faint. Literally, melt ; of. Exod. xv. 15, 16,
which is thus shown to be not poetic license,
but sober fact. For we may take the future
in the passage just cited as a present, and
translate, " AH the inhabitants of Canaan
melt away ; fear and dread are falling upon
them " (cf. Deut. ii. 25 ; xi. 25).

Ver. 10.— For we have heard how the
Lord dried up the water of the Red Sea for
you. Bahab uses the word nv\\. "Whether
this n^me were known to her or not, she
knew what was signi£ed by it, the one only
self-existent God (since Din* is clearly de-
rived from n\T or mij to be), the Author of
all things, visible and invisible (see ver. 11).
The Red Sea. lirugsoh, in his ' History of
Egypt, denies that fJ-lD'D^ should be rendered
' Bed Sea,' and afiSrms that this error of
the LXX. intei-preters has been the source of
endless misapprehensions. tJ-ID is an Egyp-
tian word signifying flags or rushes, which
aljound not only in the Bed Sea, but iu the
marshes on the shores of the Mediterranean,
as, in fact, iu all low-lying lands. It is here,
according to Brugsch, in a treacherous and
woU-nigh impassable country, near that
Serbonian beg, "whore armies whole have
sunk " (Milton, ' Paradise Lost,' Book II.,
line 594), that we are to look for the vic-
torious passage of Moses, and the destruction
of Pharaoh and his host. The ^-ID or rushes
were to be found in the Nile, as Exod. ii.
8, 6 shows (of. Isa. xix. 6). So that ei-ID-Dl
by no means neoessarily implies the Bed Sea.
Tet on the other hand we may remember,
with the Edinburgh Eeviewer (July, 1879),
that the ooast-Une of Palestine and of the
delta of the Nile has undergone considerable
clianges daring the historic period, and that
the land has, during that period, largely en-
croached on the sea. Slhon and Og. As we
read in Num. ixi. and Deut. ii., iii. Whom
ye utterly destroyed. Rather, devoted to
utUr dettrueti4M (see ch. vi. 21). Bahab



seems to be aware that the extermination of
these nations was in fulfilment of a Divine
sentence.

Ver. 11. — Melt The word in the Hebrew
is a different one to that used in ver. 9, but
it has a precisely similar meaning. There
seems no reason why the destruction of
Sihon and Og should have inspired such
tenor into the hearts of the powerful Phoe-
nician tribes. But the miracle of the drying
up of the Bed Sea was an event of quite
another order, and eminently calculated to
produce such feelings. Nuthing but such
an occurrence could have explained Bahab 's
language, or the anxiety which the near
approach of the armies of Israel inspired
in those " cities, great and walled up to
heaven," with their inhabitants of giant-like
stature and strength. Courage. Literally,
spirit. The word n-IT seems to have been
used in the Hebrew in just the same senses
as our word spirit, and it signified wind also
(see 1 Kings x, 5). For the Lord your God,
he Is God. Literally, for Jeliovah your God.
This declaration, bearing in miud the cir-
cumstances of the person who uttered it, it
as remarkable as St. Peter's, " Thou art the
Christ, the Son of the living God." How
Bahab attained to this knowledge of God'«
name and attributes we do not know. It ia
certain, however, that under the circum-
stances her knowledge and spiritual insight
are as surprising as any recorded in Scrip-
ture, and are sufficient to explain the honour
in which her name has been held, both at
the time and ever since. "I see heere,"
says Bp. Hall, " not only a disciple of God,
but a prophetesse." Eeil argues that Bahab
regards God only as one of the gods, and
supposes that she had not entirely escaped
from polytheism. But this view does not
appear to be borne out by the form of hei
expressions. We should rather, in that case,
have expected to find " he is among the
gods," than He is God, which is the only
possible rendering of the Hebrew.



HOMILETICS.

Vers. 1 — 12. — Bahah and the spies. Three points demand our attention in tliia
narrative. First, the conduct of Joshua j secondly, of the spies ; and thirdly, of
Bahab.

I. Joshua s conduct. Here we may observe that^

1. He does not despise the use of means. He was under God's special protection.
God had promised (ch. i. 6) that " he would not fail him nor forsake him." He'
had seen miracles wrought in abundance, and was destined to receive other proofs
of God's extraordinary presence with him. Yet he does not rely on these, where
his own prudence and diligence are sufficient. We must learn a similar lesson for
ourselves — (a) in our external midertakings, (h) in our internal warfare. In both
" God helps those that help themselves." We must " work out our own salvation,"
k0M4W« it is " God that worketh in us," bjr ordinary as well as by eztraordmaiy



» THE BOOK OP JOSHUA. [oh. n. 1—12.

means. To pray to God for special help or direction, -without doing our hest to nse
the means placed within our reach, to exercise our reason, and to see His directing
hand in the external circumstances of our lives, is mere fatalism. To expect to be
freed from besetting sins, to triumph over temptations without effort on our own
part, to have victory without struggle, perfection without perseverance, is mere
selfishness and indolence.

2. ThB use of ordinary meams, where possible, is a la/w of OocHs Mngdom.
God might have written His gospel in the skies. He might have proclaimed
and might re-proclaim it in voices of thunder from heaven. He might make it an
irresistible influence from within. But He does not. He uses human means.
Jesus Christ, like His prototype, sent His disciples two and two to go before Him.
(Mark vi. 7 ; it is imphed in Matt. x. 1 ; Luke x. 1). Human influence has ever
since been the means of propagating Divine truth. And not only so, but to use
extraordinary means when ordinary would suffice was a suggestion of the devil,
peremptorily rejected twice by Jesus Christ (Matt. iv. 4, 7 ; Luke iv. 4, 12) ; and this,
because this world is God's world as well as the other : reason and prudence,
though subordinate in importance, yet are as much God's gifts as faith.

II. The conduct of the spies.

1. They preferred duty to reputation. The only house they could enter without
suspicion was a house whither, under ordinary circumstances, it would have been
impossible for them to go. So Christ's disciples must not fear the comments of the
evil-minded when duly calls upon them to incur suspicion. To give needless cause
for slander is a sin : to shrink from seeking the lost for fear of it is a greater.
Compare Boaz (Euth iii. 14) with the spies here, and both with Jesus Christ
(Luke vii. 37, 38). Ministers of rehgion, physicians, and the purest-minded
Christian women do not fear to visit the lowest haunts of vice for the temporal or
spiritual welfare of those who inhabit them. It is well that their garb should pro-
claim the fact that they are on an errand of mercy. All needful precautions should be
taken to preserve their reputation. But often they wDl have to put reputation and
bU in God's hands, when duty calls, and they may be sure that aU is safe with
Him.

2. They went unmwrmuri/ng on a tasJc of the utmost peril. So must God's
messengers now take their lives in their hands when they visit the sick, either to
serve their bodies or their souls. The missionary confronts a similar risk when he
carries to savage nations the good tidings of salvation by Christ. If He preserve
them alive, they thank Him for His goodness ; if not, the blood of such martyrs is
stiU the seed of the Church. Men do and dare aU for the sake of the temporal
reward of the Victoria Cross. The messengers of Jesus Christ ought not to be less
willing to risk aU that is worth having in this life for the Eternal Crown. How
rare is this spiritual gallantry, as we may call it 1 Yet it is rare only because
genuine faith is rare. We believe in rewards that we can see. The imfading
crown excites few longings, because it is of faith, not sight.

8. They did not recklessly expose themselves to damger. When Eahab bid them
conceal themselves, they did so. They willingly accepted her aid in letting them
down from the wall, and her advice in conceaUng themselves in the caves of the
moiintains. In so doing they did but anticipate the command, " When they
persecute you in one city, flee ye into another " (Matt. x. 23). Thus St. Peter con-
cealed his residence from the disciples (Acts xii. 17) ; St. Paul was let down in a basket
from the walls of Damascus (Acts ix. 25 ; 2 Cor. xi. 33) ; St. Cjfprian retired from
his see for awhile that he might still continue to guide it while his guidance was
needed. So now, to expose one's life unnecessarily is suicide, not sanctity.

III. Bahab's conduct.

1. Her faith. This is commended in Heb. xi. 81. It was manifested by her
conduct, as St. James teUs us in ch. ii. 25. For (a) she incurred danger by acting
as she did. This was a proof of the sincerity of her profession. For no one
wUlingly incurs danger for what he does not beheve. And (6) the reason for her
•cting as she did was faith in God. It might not have been a strong faith. It was
e«rtauily a faith which had not had many advantages. She could have known Iittl«



OH. n. 1—12.] THE BOOK OF JOSHUA. 81

about Jehovah ; but she recognised His hand in the drying up of the Bed Sea
and the diseomfiture of Sihon and Og. Then (c) she seems to have lived up to her
light. To be a harlot was no very grievous offence in the eyes of a people who
regarded that profession as consecrated to the service of the gods, as was the case
in Babylonia, Syria, Cyprus, Corinth, and a host of other places. Yet she was not
idle, as the stalks of flax imply, and perhaps, in spite of her impure life, the guilt
of which she had no means of reahsing, she might have been one of those (Prov.
zzzi. 13) who " seeketh wool and flax, and worketh wiUingly with her hands." And
so she was permitted to " feel after God and find him " as other sinners have been,
through His merits who cried, " Father, forgive them, for they know not what
they do."

2. Ser unselfishneaa. She receives the men, knowing the danger she was in.
She risks her life rather than give them up. She takes every care for their safety
by her prudence and the excellent advice she gives them. As the next section
shows, she had a regard, not merely for her own safety, but for that of her kindred.
And this is a proof that she had striven to a degree after better things. For it is
well known that nothing more deadens men and women to the gentler impulses of
our nature, nothing has a greater tendency to produce cruelty and callousness to
suffering, than the systematic indulgence of sensual passion.

8. Her falsehood. As the notes have shown, this was of course a sin, but in her
case a venial one. Even Christian divines have held it to be a debatable question
whether what Calvin calls a ■mendacium officiosum, a falsehood in the (supposed)
way of duty, were permissible or not. And though this casuistry is chiefly that of
Eoman Catholic divines, yet Protestants have doubted whether a Ue might not law-
fully be told with the intent of saving life. In Eahab's time the question had never
arisen. Heathen and even Jewish morality had hardly arrived at the notion that
the truth must in all cases be spoken. Sisera requested Jael, as a matter of course,
to do what Bahab did. Jonathan deceives his father to save David's life, and he
is not blamed for doing so (1 Sam. xi. 28, 29). David deceives Ahimeleoh the
priest (1 Sam. xxi. 2). Even EKsha appears not to have adhered to strict truth in
2 Kings vi. 19, and Gehazi is not punished so much for his he as for his accepting a
gift which his master had declined. Jeremiah, again, tells without hesitation the
imtruth Zedekiah asks him to tell (Jer. xxxviii. 24 — 27). How, then, should Bahab
have known that it was wrong of her to deceive the messengers of the king, in
order to save the spies alive ?

4. Her treachery to her own people. This, under ordinary circumstances, would
also have been a sin. But here the motive justifies the act. It was not the result of a
mere slavish fear of Israehte success. It was due to the fact that she recognised
the Israehtes as being under the protection of the true God, who would punish the
idolatry and impurity of the Canaanites. Besistance, she knew, was vain. Jehovah
had given them the land. There could be no harm in delivering her own Hfe, and
and the life of those dear to her, from the general slaughter. Besides, neither
as a probable consequence nor in actual fact did the escape of the spies, through
Bahab, affect the fate of Jericho. Not as a thing probable from her action, for tbo
report of the spies, though it might supply Joshua with valuable information, could
not bring about the fall of Jericho. Her conduct was not like that of Ephialtes at
ThermopylsB, or of Tarpeia at Eome. Nor did the report of the spies actually
bring about the fall of Jericho, for it was effected by supernatural means. In
conclusion, it may be remarked that Bahab was in a sense the " first fruits of the
Gentiles." She was justified by faith, not by works, in the sense in which St.
Paul uses the words. That is to say, her former life had not entitled her to the
favour of God, though her work in saving the spies was effectual as an evidence of
her faith. She was forgiven, saved, numbered among faithful Israel, and became
a " mother in Israel." And as a " woman that was a sinner," she was a type of
j;hose whom Jesus Christ came to save, who, " dead in trespasses and sins, wer«
^uicksned " by the grace and mercy of the true Joshua, our Lord Jesus Christ.



W THE BOOK OP JOSHUA. [ch. n. 1—11



HOMILIES BY VARIOUS AUTHORS.

Ver. 1. — Forethought. Let ub play a little with this word. It has more in it than
a good example for a military commander. And its side suggestions as to what ia
wise in all conflicts are many and valuable. Generalise the action of Joshua here,
and its gives you some lesson of prudence in all departments of life. Let us gather
a few of these.

I. Look before you leap. Always and everywhere do so. Many definitions
have indicated the difference between man and the lower animals. One says, man
is an animal that can strike a hght ; another, one which has language ; another,
one that can form abstract ideas. A very profound thinker recently taught us,
" Man is an animal that knows what's o'clock," i.e., that takes note of time. It ia
perhaps only an amplification of this last idea to add, man is an animal that
thinks of to-morrow. The vegetable, in its vocabulary of time, knows only the word
to-day ; the animal knows yesterday and to-day ; man alone lives in a yesterday,
to-day, and to-morrow. He belongs to to-morrow as much as to to-day: is a sort at
amphibious animal, living on the dry land of to-day and in the watery element of
to-morrow. From to-morrow springs hope, fear, rest, distress. Man never is — but
always to be blest. This instinct of anticipation is natural because it is necessary.
We cannot get on without " sending out spies." Unless we forecast what is coining
we cannot prepare for it, enjoy it, or secure it. If we advance without forecasting,
we find ourselves perplexed in simplest circmnstances ; helpless, though possessed
of abundant resources ; weak, though endued with force of character ; unready,
though competent and resolved. There are some who never seem taken at a dis-
advantage ; they have their wits about them ; have presence of mind to do the wise
thing, and presence of heart to do the right. Their difficulties kindle elation, and
always end in advantage. There are others who move like a worm cut in two,
their reasoning and acting powers always lagging behind themselves. An oppor-
tunity only agitates them ; a duty disturbs them ; a difficulty deters them from any
further advance. All their wise thoughts come in the shape of resolutions which are
not acted on, or regrets which are enfeebhng. The difference between these two
classes of men arises from this. The former send out spies, and are prepared ;
the latter take no trouble to forecast wisely — are always, therefore, taken by sur-
prise. See that you look out well. Christ did not forbid thinking, but anxious
thinking of to-morrow. Think what duties may come, and get ready, by prayer
and self-denial, the strength to do them. Think of opportunities, and get ready
the clearness of view which wiU let you embrace them. Think of temptations, and
by prayer protect yourself Happy is the man who can so wisely anticipate that
every duty, difficulty, danger, as it comes, finds him ready. Therefore, look before
you leap, and send out spies.

II. Do NOT SEND FORTH TOO MANY SPIES, NOR SENB THEM FORTH TOO FAR. Here

Joshiia sent two men to Jericho — say ten miles away. There ai-e some send all
their forces out to spy, like a general who reconnoitres in force and does nothing
else. They are always prospecting with aU their powers. Their whole energies
are given up to the guessing of the future. Reason, imagination, conscience, all
are engaged in anticipation. Sn busy are they with to-morrow that they have but
little strength left for to-day. Joshua did not reconnoitre in force, nor did he s«nd
out many to spy the land. He sends only two. Do not be always thinking on ■« hat
is before you ; it will become brooding, and when we brood our forecast is equally
erroneous and enervating; nor let your whole soul go out into the tomorrow.
To-day neuds the bulk of your powers. To-morrow cannot claim so much. And
doing to-day's work well, while not the whole, is yet nine-tenths of preparation
for the morrow. A Uttle thought, a Uttle care, a little preparation, is the lesson of
Joshua's two spies. And if we should not send forth too many, neither should we
despatch them too far. Joshua limits his scrutiny to the immediate struggle before
him. About to assail Jericho, he seeks all the information he can get on it So
ought we to put a limit to our prospects. The distant advantage should be excluded



OH. n. 1— M.] THE BOOK OF JOSHUA. «

from out dreams, and the remote danger from our apprehensions. What ia imme-
diately before him is a wise man's care. And to take each stage as it comes into
sight and provide for it is safety and wisdom alike. _ It is the golden mean
between the levity of indifference and the torture of anxiety. Not too many spies
must be sent out, nor too far afield.

III. Seb that touk spies ahe eit foh their task. It is not every soldier who
will make a scout; for his task there is needed endurance, resource, coolness,
dnring, quickness of perception and of purpose, in their highest form. I assume that
Joshua chose two fit men ; partly because he had seen the invasion of Canaan post-
poned for forty years through the unfitness of the spies then sent, and also
because the few glimpses we have of them show them to have been the right sort
of men. We can see that they had the agility of youth (ch. vi. 23) and the
daring of faith (ch. ii. 24), and doubtless they bad other qualities beside. See
that the spies you send out a/re fit for their work. Some people employ their
Wishes in this work, and these return with tale more flattering than true;
some their mere imagination, which takes in all that may, can, or will happen ;
some send forth their /ecw«, which return telling of countless lions in the way, and
BOLue their superstitions, which read auspices of good or omens of evil fortune
in the simplest and most meaningless experiences. They choose unfit spies. If
you are to send two, who shaU they be ? Of the first one there can be no
doubt — it must be faith, for faith has clearer eyesight than anything else. It
sees the invisible. It beholds Ood as well as man; sees His moral as well as
maierial laws at work ; sees the elements of hope which He brings with TTim into
every scene ; is the attribute of daring ; can always find or make a way out of
difBiculties. Let faith have the forecasting as its charge. And if faith should be
invariably one of the two spies, consecration should be the other. Spy out the
future, not simply to know it, but with desire to use it. And to that end scrutinise
the future with the eye of consecration, with the desire to see the opportunities of
doing good, of growing in grace, of honouring God, of blessing man. Happy the
man who chooses his spies well, and sees with trustful eye the help, and with loving
purpose the opportunities, which lie before him. Lastly —

IV. Send youk spies aceoss Jobdan befohb von youeself make the passage.
It is not by accident of poetic fancy merely that the Jordan, dividing the land of
sojourn from the land of rest, has been taken as an image of tiiat " river without a
bridge," across which is the better land. Of course like all analogies it is imperfect,
for while God's Israel finds rest in the heavenly Canaan, it finds no Canaanite to
dispute the enjoyment of it. Still it is a suggestive emblem of the rugged, forbiil-
ding boundary beyond which is our land of milk and honey. And if our wisdom
exercises itself in surveying every stage in advance and preparing for it, it certainly
wUl find a special reason for siuveying, and preparing for what is on the other side
of the great dividing line between him and eternity. Have you sent out your spies
there ? Do you know exactly the sort of experience which is before you ? CoulJ
you confidently pass over Jordan ? Through your Saviour is it the abundant
entrance that is waiting you ? Do not confine your thoughts to Shittim, however
sweet its shade of acacias may be ; but prepare for what is beyond, and face the
passage of the Jordan with the full knowledge and firm faith which would make
your rest in Canaan sure. — G.

Ver. 1. — A hrand, pluched from the fire. This strange and somewhat romantic
story of Eahab and the spies forms an mteresting episode in the Scripture narrative.
The special interest lies in the nature of the incidents and the character of the chief
actor. Nothing is told us as to any definite result from the visit of the spies affect-
ing the after siege and capture of the city, except so far as this, that they lean it
from Rahab the alarm of the iuhabitants at the approach of the Israelitish host, it
shows, however, that, confident as Joshua may have been that the Lord was figbtiijg
on his side, he did not abstain from taking all proper precautions to ensure safety and
success. God commonly works by the use of means and instruments, and they who
have most living faith in His protecting and delivering power will be most careful

JOSHUA. B



94 THE BOOK OF JOSHUA. [oh. n. 1— li

to be eo-workers with Hi-m in all pradent forethouglit and diligence. We may, per-
haps, best develop the moral teaching of this narrative by keeping the conduct of
Eahab most prominently in mind. Her honourable distinction is that, as far as wo
know, she alone in aU that dark, guilty land of Canaan was disposed to recognise the
divinity that guided the onward march of the Israelites, and to welcome them to
their destined inheritance. Certain moral difficulties have been felt by many ill
reference to the honour given to her name in Scripture. Her character and mode
of life has been felt to be a difficulty ; attempts have been made to show that
"harlot" may simply mean "iimkeeper." But this interpretation will not hold
good. Much of the point and worth of the narrative depends on our regarding her
as one of a class on whom Christ bestowed His pity ; " a woman that was a sinner."
Her treachery to her own people is condemned ; but this, despicable as under
ordinary circumstances it may be, is to be justified on the groimd of loyalty to the
God of Israel. It is a Christian principle that the claims of God are supreme over
all other claims, even those that spring out of the ties of nature and of nationahty.
Her falsehood is a difficulty. No need to attempt to justify this. A low moral
standard and the pressure of circumstances may palliate it, but cannot excuse. A
he must always be offensive to a God of trutii. No skilfiil casuistiy can make
this aspect of her conduct right. But she is commended in Scripture, not for her
treachery or falsehood, but for her faith (Heb. xL 31 ; James iL 25) — for the fact
that, hearing of the wonders wrought by Jehovah, she believed Him to be the only
true and hving God, and so was moved to escape from the corruption of her own
doomed city and cast in her lot with His people. The following lessons seem to be
suggested:

I. The signals of God's graok mat bb pound undeb veet unlikely condi-
tions. Here is a gleam of hght in the midst of gross heathen darkness ; a sus-
ceptibihty to Divine impressions where it might least have been expected. The report
of Israel's successes could scarcely of itself have produced it. In her that report
awakened faith and the desire for a purer life, but in her neighbours it only roused
the recklessness of despair. It moved her to seek deliverance : it made them only
the riper for their doom. Why this difference ? We trace here the secret working
of that Spirit from the Lord who prepares the souls of men for higher revelations
of truth. God directed the spies to her house because He had first put it into her
heart to receive them kindly. Thus within the vilest and the most degraded there
may be latent possibiUties of good that only need the outward incentive to call
them forth. God is often nearer to men, and they are nearer to " the kingdom,"
than we suppose. He who came " to seek and to save that which was lost " made
Himself the " friend of pubhcans and sinners," not only because they most
needed Him, but because He saw that they were most ready to welcome Him. TTis
■\vord awakened an echo in their hearts, when proud Pharisaic hearts were hope-
lessly closed against it. It discovered and quickened germs of better life in the
midst of corruption and death. It kindled hope in the region of despair. To the
self-satisfied rulers of the people He said, " The publicans and the harlots go into
the kingdom of God before you."

II. Repentance may transform a life op sin and shame into one of honoub
AND renown. Eahab's sin was forgiven as soon as her heart tm'ned to the Lord.
There is a place for her in the commonwealth of Israel. Her faith saved not only
herself, but her whole household (vers. 12, 13). She became the wife of Salmon,
mother of Boaz, and thus ancestress of David and of Christ (Matt. i. 6, 6). A
suggestive hint of the way in which the grace of God can " graft the wild olive tree
in among the natural branches," and make it abundantly fruitful to His praise.
It not only wipes out the reproach of the past, but developes from it a rich and
glorious future. Faculties that have been wasted in the service of sin become
effective instruments of righteousness. The history of the Church is fuU of
examples. As in the case of Saul of Tarsus, so in less conspicuous instances, God
has often entered the ranks of the enemy and brought forth from them living
trophies of His power, who have hAuoeforth served nobly the cause that ouce tiiejr
destroyed.



CH. n. 1—12.] THE BOOK OF JOSHUA. 8t

III. The reward of generous trustfulness. It is remarkable that tliig
Canaanite ■woman should have had such confidence in the sanctity of a promise
and oath (ver. 12). It is significant of eternal principles enshrined in the heart of
man, which the most degrading conditions cannot wholly obUterate. Note here, not
only a Di^dne Providence, hut a law of human natiu-e. There is trust on both sides.
The woman meets the spies with generous kindness, takes their life under her pro-
tection, and they in return keep sacred watch and guard over hers. It is a valu-
able lesson for all time. "With what measure ye meet," &c. ; "Blessed are the
merciful," &o. The trustfiil soul is trusted. Love begets love. " For a good man
some would even dare to die." Whatever noble quality you cherish and practically
exemplify has power to awaken something similar to it in others. It propagates
and multiplies itself, and that is its reward.

rv. In the DELrvERANOE or THIS Canaanite family from the destruction of
THE DOOMED CITY WE SEE A TYPE OF GOSPEL SALVATION. The Fathers, as usual, have
carried the principle to a fanciful extreme in their use of these incidents. But the
general features of the analogy are too plain to be overlooked. The rescue of
Eahab and her kindred is certainly dimly prophetic of the gathering of a redeemed
Church out of the Gentile world ; and in the " scarlet cord," the sign of the cove-
nant and the means of deliverance, we can scarcely help seeing a hint both of the
blood of the passover and the " blood of the cross." How blessed the security of
those who are under the protection of that sacred sign, that " true token I " In the
"day of wrath and revelation of the righteous judgment of God," with what joy
will they Uft up their heads, knowmg that their "redemption draweth nigh." — W.

Ver. 4. — The harlot Bahdb. A peculiar interest has always attached to this
woman's case. Of the doomed nations with whom Israel came into collision, she
is the first to be known, and the first to escape the doom ordained for them : an
early type of the calling of the Gentiles ; a whisper that the faith which was a
sacred secret for Israel would yet become the heritage of the world ; a study for
early theologians on the sovereign grace of God, which can call those farthest off
and make them vessels of His grace and mercy. While theologians learnt charity
and hope from her experience, the historian and the patriot looked back with hardly
less of interest to her, as to one whose simple service and womanly hospitality were
a national boon. At the moment when the difficulties and perils of their \mder-
taking were conspicuous, when the bravest people might have shrunk firom an
encounter with such foes, Eahab's greeting heartened them. Like the Midianite's
dream of" the cake of barley bread which heartened Gideon, so this woman's ac-
knowledgment of Israel's God, and prediction of then- auccess, was itself an inspira-
tion. "A cup of cold water" given in the name of Jehovah, her act refreshed a
nation. And so her name, cleared of the dishonour which had clung to it, was
enrolled amongst those of the worthies who had deserved well of Israel. And all
the thoughtful, whether their interest lay in creed or country, were glad to note
that " a great reward " was given her by the God under whose wings she had come
to trust. The deliverance of herself, of her family ; a noble marriage, a royal
progeny — these were dwelt upon by the devout of Israel, as examples of what all
might expect who lived for the service of the Lord. Let us consider her story.

I. The waking of the soul. There has been an attempt made to take off the
stigma which, to point the marvels of grace, all the centuries had attached to her.
One of the earliest versions of the Jewish Scriptures renders the word which
describes her calling — ^innkeeper. And one commentator (Adam Clarke) shows
that women were the tavern-keepers in Greece and Egypt in ancient days ; and
points out many items in the narrative which would comport with such a view.
We adhere more strictly to both letter and spirit of the narrative when we accept
the usual rendering, and seek for mitigation of her iU-repute in other less question-
able considerations. It is right to remember that amongst her own people, pro-
bably, there was no stigma in the name ; that she was probably a priestess of the
Phoenician Venus, like the priestesses of Bhowani, in India, to-day, consecrate to
the goddess; that she was hard-working, attached to her kindred, and »,ff>



36



THE BOOK OF JOSHUA. [ch. n. 1— li



parently treated with respect by her people. But applying euoh considerajiong
to modiff the revulsion which every pure mind feels at the name given her, we
still cannot avoid feeling that there is a vast gulf between Eahab as she had been,
and the Eahab that can say, " Jehovah, your God, He is God in heaven above mi
in earth beneath." A former faith — for the heathen have faith — had disappeared;
in stem and terrible questionings it had broken up and melted away ; a new God
had risen on her soul ; a deity of indulgence had sunk into the disregard of true
.repentance, and the Jewish deity of mercy and of duty had risen on her heart. For
ns to change one thought about our God for another involves often a painful and
protracted embarrassment ; but for one to change her goddess in spite of all the
centuries of tradition commending her — her acceptance by the people, and to be in
Jericho a solitary believer in Jehovah — such a change was not wrought easily or
lightly, and was not wrought out, one fancies, while she stUl pursued a course of
wrong. " The fountains of the great deep were broken up," and her soul weijt
through the experience of earthquake and fire, before the small stiU voice could
calm her into faith. This was a soul waiting. How it came about none can telL
The external influences that prepare for such changes may be roughly traced, but
the inward " moving" is too deep and subtle to be seen. Jericho lay on the route
of a caravan trade, which was even then carried on between Babylon and Egypt
(see Babylonish garment, ch. vii. 21). And so she had heard of all God's wonders
in Egypt, and of " the strong hand and mighty arm " with which He had brought
them out. The overthrow of the inhabitants of Bashan and the Amorites, the war-
like people — the remains of whose cities excite the marvel of all to-day — had
seemed too wonderful to be the result of unaided human strength or skill. And
these, likely enough, started the deeper thoughts. But they only occasioned, they-
did not produce them. There must have been a deeper work going on. Dubiety
had risen in her about the Godhead of Deity that sanctioned the life she led ; a sense
that hercountry's gods exerted no hallowing or elevating mfluence — that they sanc-
tioned aU vUe indulgences, but inspired no virtue; she had grown weary of
worldliness ; restless with the longing for a God pure and strong enough to trust.
The God of Israel — who alone among aU deities then worshipped, stood forth as the
God of help and duty— looked in her face, breathed on her heart, and she was His.
We must not miss the lessons of such a waking. We must despair of none. The
soul, like the body, may sometimes be easily killed, but sometimes it takes a great
deal of killing. And from sins, and vices, and unbeUef, which wound the soul and
apparently leave no chance of Hfe, ofttimes it will recover, and its health wiU come
again hke the health of a Uttle child. God can travel where no teacher comes, and
can enter where no truth is known, and can commend Himself to hearts that seem
incapable of appreciating His charms. And so here, without guide, teacher, or
companion, she rises to the hght of God. Have you waked thus to the greatness,
the nearness, and the claims of a redeeming God ? Observe secondly —

II. The action of faith. Here we have not quite so easy a theme; for the
mixture of good and evU which always marks human action is provokingly obvious
here. With clear faith falsehood is mingled ; with devotion to Israel, something
like treason to her people. And persons who can do addition, but cannot balance
accounts, are apt to reject her altogether. They forget that morality has its chron-
ology, and that the sanctity of truth dates from the Christian era. They forget,
too, what ought to be obvious, that the charge of not doing aU she can to save her
country hardly lies against a person who has the conviction tliather country camjot
be saved, and that her city is for its sins a very City of Destruction ; and that in
rewarding her, God rewards, not her lie, but her hospitahty, her couragp, her tftkiitg
the part of Israel, her confession of His name ; and that what we have here is not
nineteenth century Christianity, but incipient Israehtism. Considering these thipgs,
mark the action of faith in her case. When these considerations have their weight,
it is very striking how many of the characteristics of Christian laith are lound
here.

1. Her faith sees clea/rhj all that it is needful to see. She has the purged ey«
which discerns the great Unes on which God works, and the great lines on which



CB. n. 1—113 THE BOOK OP JOSHUA. fl

oyir safety and bliss are to be found. Fortune and probabilities fade from hei
view, and she sees all things depending on God, and all bliss depending on following

_ 2. H*r faith braves every danger in the Way of duty. Think you a weak M
timorous woman would have risked her hfe as she did ? The King was nearer than
the hosts of Israel : it were easy to have her falsehood discovered ; and if so she
dies._ But faith dares what nought else dares. An inward moral courage is its
oontuinal mark, and at the risk of life she makes her choice.

8. Her faith leads her to cast in her lot with the people of God, and seek to
share their fortune. An earthbom faith makes a person trim and endeavour to
stand neutral — to avoid the fate of Jericho without identifying one's self with the
fortunes of Israel. But she says in effect to the men, " Your people shall be my
people, and_ your God my God." And by hiding them, aiding their escape, counsel-
ling for their safety, entering into covenant with them, she chooses her part with
the people of God. To this she may be moved by fear more than by love. And
love is better than fear. But the fear of God is infinitely better than hstlessness,
and is the beginning of wisdom. Happy they who see with the clearness, who
venture with the courage, who choose with the piety of God's beheving people.
Shrink thou from no risk in following Christ. Choose thou the heritage of the
people of God : His grace. His pardon, His eternal love. Lastly, observe —

III. The KEWAED3 OP her faith. Faith has always an exceeding great reward.
It passes tremblingly along its anxious path to peace and rest. And so here.
Observe how, answering the workings of her heart, God brings nigh His help.
1. She has an open door set before her. Not casually, but by God's guidance, the
spies come for lodging to her house. 2. All needed wisdom is given where she baa
the win to use it. 3. She is kept safe from the men of Jericho by God. 4. WhUe
miraculous incidents in the destruction of Jericho leave her no room for thought of
having helped it, she is herself saved, with her father, mother, brethren, and all that
she had. 5. An honoured guest of Israel, she becomes the wife of the head of the
tribe of Judah, Salmon. Probably he was one of the two spies, Ephraim and Judah
being the leading tribes, and heads of the tribes being chosen for such work. 6.
Her child was Boax, one of the brightest and most honourable of Israel's saints ;
her daughter-in-law, Euth the Moabitess ; her grandchild's grandchild, David ;
and Jesus of Nazareth had her blood in His veins. How httle she had dreamt of
all that satisfaction, that gracious wealth, and sweet renown ! And so it ever is I
Cast in thy lot with the people of God. Like them, foUow Him, His conscience-
oracle, and there will be a growing benediction on your life, a various mercy —
pardon, peace, joy of His love, hope of His heaven— till, so exceeding and abundantly
above what you asked or thought. His mercy will come to you, that you will b«
" Kke them that dream ; " and when others say, " The Lord hath done great thmga
for us,' your heart will reply, " The Lord h&ih done great things for us, whereof
we are glad." — G.

Ver. 9. — Rahao's faith. Since the time when Moses despatched twelve spies to
inspect the land, the fame of the IsraeUtes had spread amongst the inhabitants of
Canaan. They were on their guard, and it was necessary to act with caution.
Joshua sent, therefore, only two men, and that " secretly." The few are sometimes
better than the many. Arriving at Jericho towards evening, they entered into
Bahab's house, there to spend the night. As Eahab is honourably mentioned in
the Epistle to the Hebrews as an example of " faith," and in the Epistle of James
as an iUustration of the " works " that result from faith, let us consider her faith so
far as it is worthy of imitation.

I. It was a faith that eeasoned. It based itself on facts. She mentioned
two striking events, the passage of the " sea of weeds," and the overthrow of the
two kings of the Amorites by the IsraeUtish nation. From these she argued that
the God of Israel must be mightier than the gods whom her country worshipped,
that He was " Lord in heaven and earth," and that He would procure for Hia
people the land of Canaan. Thus she took to heart the lessons of the past. Fzi^



te THE tOO£ OF JOSHUA. [oh. n. 1-12.

judice is strong. It could not have been an easy matter to renounce belief in her
own deities, and to acknowledge the supremacy of an enemy's Grod. If men consult
history they find therein ample evidence of a " power that maketh for righteous-
ness." And further, the hand of God can be seen as the power that upholdeth
righteousness. The history of the Jews is itself a witness to the truth and might of
God. The spread of Christianity cannot be accounted for except on the supposition
that it was " the work of God." What the keenest shafts of philosophical ridicule
and reasoning faUed to accomphsh, that the "religion of the fishermen" soon
achieved. It released men from the bondage of grossest idolatry and foulest sin.
We may reasonably demand that men should pay to the " God of the Christians "
that homage which is His due. We only ask ttiat they wiU allow facts of rehgion
to press upon them with their proper weight. The wicked may well feel downcast,
for the chaff shall be blown away before the wind of judgment. " Who is on the
Lord's side ? '

II. It was a faith that led to the adoption op peacticai, jeasuees.
{a) She hid the messengers. With the proverbial ingenuity of woman, she con-
cealed them behind the stalks of flax piled upon the roof. Possibly the Eastern law
of hospitahty had some influence upon her conduct, but the narrative shows that
Eahab was willing to vmdergo present risk for the sake of futwre preservation.
Had tile spies been detected in her house, death was sure. We do not excuse the
falsehoods she told, nor are they commended in Scripture. They were an outcome
of her degraded state, and an infirmity which was graciously overlooked by reason
of her faith. To have respect to a fiiture good is the duty of every man. The
obstacle in the path of many is that they cannot forego present enjoyment. Reli-
gion requires us to endure " as seeing Him who is invisible," to " look at the
things unseen." (5) She boimd the scarlet line in the window. Before letting the
men down by a cord, she demanded " a true token " that should assure her of
security in the day of assault. The spies gave her an oath pledging their life for
her safety, but coupling with the oath certain conditions to be fulfilled on her part.
Here again is Eahab a model of appropriate action. God binds Himself by a cove-
nant to forgive men if they respect the terms thereof. He confirmed His declara-
tion by an oath (Heb. vi. 17). But only those can be said to " beUeve " who actually
" flee for refuge to lay hold upon the hope set before them." The Israehtes were
required to sprinkle the blood upon the lintel of the door-post, and similarly must
the blood of Christ be sprinkled upon our consciences if we would be unharmed
when the destroying angel passes by. Our foreheads must be sealed (Eev. vii. 3),
but not with the mark of the beast (Eev. xx. 4). If the promises of God are to have
effect, we must observe the conditions. Herein many are found wanting. They
listen, hesitate, think, but there is no practical faith, no actual recognition of God's
love by accepting His gracious oilers. Let the "scarlet hue " be visible forthwith I
then in the sifting day our interests wiU be secure. Though the elements crash all
■round, for us there will be "perfect peace."

III. A faith that cared foe the welfare of feiends. Natural affection
had not been extinguished by her wretched life. Her trust in the God of Israel
brought into clearer Ught her love for her relations, and she desired their safety.
And how can Christians enjoy their salvation without being deeply concerned for
the state of those dear to them ? As Eahab implored protection for her Jcins-
folk, so will the followers of Christ commend to their Saviour's care those whom
they love. Eahab's was intercessory prayer. It is related of a dumb son of Croesus
that when he saw a soldier about to Inll his father, he burst forth into the utterance,
" What I will you kUl Croesus ? " Moreover, it was required of Eahab that when
the siege commenced she should gather her friends within the shelter of her own
dom,icile, otherwise they could not be recognised and saved. It is not sufficient
merely to plead with God on behalf of those we love ; He expects us to use all
possible efforts for their moral safety. It was impossible for Eahab to preserve tlie
whole city. Love dictated the enlargement of her sphere, prudence set reasonable
bounds to it. The inhabitants would doubtless have resented her action and advice,
■nd death would have ensued. There is no need for us to seek to justify all that



cfi. n. 12-25.] XHl lOOK OF JOSHUA. 89

Eahab did. We are only cono«med to Imitate her in so far as she is presented to
as as a model of faith. — A.

Eahab and^ the spies. The history of the escape of the Israehtish spies throngh
the assistance of Eahab the harlot, and the reward given her for her services, in the
sparing of her life when aU her townsfolk perished, is one which presents many
moral difficulties. To help the enemies of one's country is an act severely and
justly reprobated by all nations. That which is in itself evQ cannot be transformed
into good because it is done for a good cause ; otherwise we ought to give plenary in-
dulgence to the Society of Jesus. We must beware, then, of extolling the wrong thing
which Bahab did. But at the same time we must recognise that she was prompted
to it by a nobler motive than that of seeming her own safety. Faith in the true
God had taken rough possession of this ignorant soul. She had heard of the
miracles by which Israel had been brought out of Egypt and led safely through the
perils of the wUdemess. She says, " We have heard how the Lord dried up the
water of the Bed Sea for you when ye came out of Egypt, and what ye did unto
the two kings of the Amorites," &c. It is clear, then, that the Canaanites knew
enough to acknowledge with Bahab, that " the Lord the God of Israel was God in
heaven above and in the earth beneath ; " and therefore that they were sinning by
still cleaving to their false gods, whose worship was an abomination to the only
living and true God. It cannot be denied, therefore, that Eahab gave a proof of
faith in the choice which she made between her own people and the people of God.
It is this aspect of her conduct alone wjiioh is commended in the Epistle to the
Hebrews (oh. xL 81). We must be careiul, moreover, not to exaggerate what she
did. She did not betray the secret of her people, she simply preserved the lives of
the representatives of the naMon which she knows to be enrolled Under the banner
of the true God. This act of faith saved her, and even won for her the honour of a

Elace in the genealogy of Messiah (Matt. i. 6). We occupy a very different position
•om that of Eahab. No such conflict can arise in our case between duty to the
earthly and to the heavenly fatherland, because the weapons of our warfare are not
carnal but spiritual. Let it be ours to have the faith of Eahab in the victory of our
Divine Head; and let us hold fast this confidence, especially in view of the great
conflicts that are before us, between the Captain of our salvation and an unbeheving
world. Have we not as much to rest our faith upon — nay, far more than Eahab
had — in the great victories of the past? We are the soldiers of a General who said,
" Be of good cheer, I have overcome the world " (John xvi. 83). To be confident
td victory is to have abeady conquered.— E. oe F.

EXPOSITION.



CHAPTEE n. 12— SS.

The oath of the spies. — ^Ver. 12. —
Kindness. The original is perhaps a little
stronger, and involves usually tno idea of
mercy and pity. This, however, is not always
the case (see Gen. xxi. 23 ; 2 Sam. x. 2). " It
had been an ill nature in Bahab if sheehad
been content to be saved alone : that her love
might be a match to her faith, she covenants
for all her family, and so returns fife to those
of whom shee received it" (Bp. Hall). A
true token. Literally, a token of truth. The
eonstruction is that in which the latter
noun often stands in Hebrew for an adjec-
tive. Here, however, it would seem to be a
little more, a token of truth — a pledge, that
is, of sincerity. Eahab wanted some
gvLunaiiee that her life and the lives of her



Mndred would be saved. The bare word of
the spies would not suffice, for how could
she and her kindred be identified in the
confusion attending the sack of the city?
But if the spies would agree upon some sign
by which she could be recognised, it would
at once be a pledge that they intended to
keep their word, and a means of pro-
tection in the approaching downfall of the
city.

Ver. 14.— Our life for yours. Literally,
our souls (K'BJ, answering to the Greek Tpv^ri
— the principle of life in men and animals)
in the place of you to die ; i.e., may we die
if you are not preserved safe and sound. A
similar expression is used by Ignatius, ad
Eph. i., ad Polyc. 2, 6, &o. If ye utter not,
i.e., Bahab and her kiadred (Bosenmiiller).



45



THE BOOK 01* JOSHtJA.



[o8. It. 12—28.



Hany MSS., however, read"il t/wnt utterest
not."

Ver. 15. — Then she let them down. The
oonveraation which ia related afierwards, no
doubt occurred afterwards, as is proved by
the use of the perfect •Un'l'l'fn iu ver. 18.
There is no reason to suppose the window
by which she let them down to have been
so distant from the ground as to preclude
a conversation, and it is quite possible
that Eahab's house may have been in a
situation iu which such a conversation
could be carried on without interruption.
There are continental cities now surrounded
by walls, in which such a conversation
would involve no difficulty whatever,
especially if the house from which such a
eonversation was carried on happened to
stand a little apart from other houses. And
though the spies sent by Moses described
the walls of the Phoenician cities in hyper-
bohcal language, it is highly improbable
that their fortifications were stronger than
those of medifflval times. The little town of
Ahrweiler, in the valley of the Ahr, near
Eemagen, may serve as an instance in
point. It would once have been called a
strongly fortified town, but the walls are of
no great height, and the houses are built
upon them. The same may be seen at
Baoharach and Oberwesel, and other well-
known places where the fortifications have
not been modernised. With the escape of
the spies we may compare the escape of
St. Paul from Damascus, as recorded in
Acts ix. 25, and 2 Cor. xi. 32, 33.

Ver. 16. — Get you to the mountains. No
hint is given why the mountains were to be
BO safe a refuge. But a reference to the
geography of the district wUl supply the
reason. Any mountain district is usually
loss accessible and less thickly inhabited
than the plains. But within five miles of
Jericho lay the remarkable range called
Quarantania, or Kuruntul, which is literally
honeycombed with caves, so that a man
might be concealed for months in the im-
mediate neighbourhood of Jericho with a
very slight risk of discovery. It is obvious
how strongly this fact confirms the accuracy
of the narrative. An inventor would have
been certain in some way or other to draw
attention to a statement intended to give an
air of probabihty to his narrative. But
there is nothing of the kind here, and yet
the narrative displays a thorough acquaint-
ance with the geographical features of the
neighbourhood. Oanun Tristram (' Land
of Israel,' p. 207, sqq.) carefully explored
the caverns. On one face of the rock,
which is perpendicular, he found "some
thirty or forty habitable oaves," and on the
goathttn fsce« towards Jericho, he supposed



there were a good many more than this.
The scouts of the king of Jericho might be
excused a very diligent search, for we are
told that the " foot-hold was hazardous and
the height dizzy." From the days of the
spies tiU long after the Christian era, these
caves have been in existence. Thej have
been tenanted by Greek, Syrian, and even
Abyssinian monks, and Canon Tristram
found many Greek and Ethiopic inscriptions,
as well as figures of our Lord and the saints.
The Abyssinian Christiana make a yearly
pilgrimage there even now. The reason of
the reverence in which the place is held, is
the tradition (not, however, eight hundred
years old, see Hitter, iii. 37) that, as the
name Quarantania impUes, the forty days'
fast of our Lord took place there. As a
specimen of the mystical interpretations in
which the Fathers indulged, we find Origen
expounding the advice, " Get you to the
mountains," as follows: " Humilia et dejecta
refugite, qua excelsa sunt et sublimia,
prEedicate."

Ver. 17. — W© wUl be blameless. Per-
haps " we would be blameless," and there-
fore we make the conditions which follow.
Something must be supplied to fill up the
sense. The most ordinary rule would be
to translate " we are blameless," i.e., by
making these conditions. But the former
yields a better sense.

Ver. 18. — This line of scarlet thread.
Bather, this rope, from nip to twist. It is
described as made of sewing-thread (Din),
because no doubt it was formed of several
such threads twisted into a rope. The scarlet
CJE*), or rather crimson, was produced from
the dried bodies as well as the eggs of the
cochineal insect, called in Arabic, kermes
(whence our word crimson, and the German
karmesin). This line of scarlet thread is
regarded by the Fathers generally, and by
our own divines, as Bishop Hall and Bishop
Wordsworth, as symbolical of the blood of
Christ (see Clement of Eome, 'Epistle to
Corinthians ' 12 ; Justin Martyr, ' Dial.
Tryph.' Ill; Iren., 'Adv. Hser.,' iv. 37;
Orig. , ' Horn. 2 on Joshua.' " Ooocineum,
quod sanguinis formam gerebat." See also
Bp. Hall, ' Contemplations,' Bookviii. ; and
Levit. xiv. 4, 6, 42, 51).

Ver. 19. — His blood shall he upon his
head (cf. Levit. xx. 9). " If we will wander
out of the limits that God has set us, we
oast ourselves out of His protection." (Bp.
Hall).

Ver. 20. — And If thou utter this our
business. This was an obvious condition.
Bahab's betrayal of the spies could not
save Jericho, but it would destroy them, oi
»t least expose them to imminent daogei,



aa. a. 12--2S.]



THE BOOK OF JOSHtJA.



41



She would, therefore, by mentioning the.
matter, deprive herself of all title to protec-
tion.

Ver. 21. — And Bhe bound the scarlet cord
In the window. — Not necessarily at once,
bat when the time for the precaution arrived.

Ver. 23. — ^And passed over. The sacred
historian does not say how. But it is im-
probable (see ver. 7) that they forded the
tiver. They pi'obably swam across, as they



were no doubt unarmed (of. 1 Chron. xii. 15).
That befel them. Literally, " that fotmd
them."

Ver. 24. — For even all the Inhabitants of
the country do faint because of ua. " For
even" is literally "and also." As Eeil
remarks, this information concerning the
feelings of the Canaanites was the one great
thing they had been sent out to discover.



HOMILETICS.

Vers. 12 — 24. — Tht oath of the spies, and their return to Jo»hua, This pftssage
fiUggesta considerations of various kinds, historical, practical, and allegorical.

L Thb TEnsTWOETHiNEss OF THE SPIES. They had, no doubt, been specially
■elected by Joshua for this purpose, and they show themselves worthy of his choice.
(1) They are tcrupuloushf honest. They enter into an engagement with Bahab,
and that engagement is faithfully kept. They are anxious that the tenor of their
engagement should be thoroughly understood on both sides, so that there may be
no reproach east upon them for not observing conditions which it would be impos-
sible to fiiMl. And they are also (2) men of foresight. They do not give their
word rashly, without having considered to what they are pledging themselves.
They see beforehand how impossible it would be, in the confusion attending the
sack of the city, to ensure the safety of those in whose welfare Bahab is interested.
Thus they suggest the twofold precaution that Eahab's relatives should be collected
together m Eahab's house, and that Eahab's house should be plainly indicated by
the scarlet cord. And (8) they are grateful. They might have left matters as they
were, and taken no trouble to point out to Bahab the risk she was running, in the
absence of some definite agreement as to the way in which the promise should be
carried out. They might have excused themselves afterwards by saying that it was
not their business, but Eahab's, to secure the identification of herself and her
kindred. But they took every care and trouble possible to show their sense of the
obligation they were under to a stranger who had thus generously interested her-
self in their safety. Such are the men who ought to be singled out for special work
in God's Church, scrupulous, thoughtful, frank, generous, grateful men, who make
it theii* first care to deal with others as they would desire to be dealt with them-
Belves.

II. The soaklet coed a token op salvation throuoh Christ. For scarlet, or
rather crimson (see note), is the colour of blood. The scarlet cord had been the sal-
vation of the messengers. It was now to be the means of salvation to her Who had
received from them the assurance of deliverance from the wrath to come. Like the
blood upon the door-post, it was to be the sign which the destroying messengers of
God's vengeance were to respect and pass by. That scarlet cord alone could ensure
safety. And it could ensure the safety only of those who trusted in it alone. It
must be taken, therefore, as the type of salvation through the blood of Christ
alone.

III. Extra ecolesiam ntola saltjs. Like St. Paul's " Except these abide in th«
ship, ye cannot be saved " (Acts xivii. 31), so the spies here declare that to abide in
Eahab's house is a necessary condition of safety. The house here is a type of
the Church of Christ, not necessarily of external communion with any particular
branch of it, but of actual internal membership in the mystical body of Christ, of
which, ordinarily speaking. Baptism and the reception of the Sacrament of the
Lord's Supper are the outward tokens. " Holy Scripture," says the 18th Article
of the Chvu:oh of England, "doth set out to us only the name of Christ, whereby
men must be saved." And we must unite ourselves with Him by faith and
obedience. We must enter into the " House of God, which is the Church of the
living God. the pillar and ground of the tnith " (1 Tim. iii. 16). We must keep up



4S



THE BOOK OP JOSHUA.



[en. m. 1—6.



a " continual remembrance of the sacrifipe of the death of Christ." Our scarlet
cord must be bound prominently in the window. Those who wander reck-
lessly from the fold, who are carried about to " erroneous and strange doctrines,"
who follow their own wills instead of abiding by the covenant of salvation in
Christ, cannot expect the deUveranoe which comes only to those who confess Christ
openly before men, and declare plainly their union with those who fight under His
banner.

IV. The spies who faithfully dischaege their duty have their reward
IN bringing good tidings. We have seen what the conduct of the spies has been.
And now they return to reanimate their brethren. Their report is, that already
their enemies are disheartened and dispirited at the thought of the Great Kame
under the protection of which the Israelites fight. So does the faithful soldier of
Christ ever become a source of encouragement to his brethren. He who trusts in
the Lord, and goes steadfastly about His work, never fails to find the enemies of
the Lord " fainting because of" His soldiers. It is only the cowardly and distrust-
ful who find the " children of Anak," and "cities walled up to heaven" — that is,
insuperable difficulties and tasks beyond their powers. They who set themselves
in earnest to combat the enemies of God, and will neither make a compact with
them, nor be " afraid of their faces," are sure of victory. Sometimes the walls of
some fortress of sin wiU fall as if by miracle. Sometimes the enemy will only be
discomfited after the prolonged and exhausting efforts of a battle of Beth-horon.
But the servants of God on the eve of a new conflict with the powers of evil may
safely address their fellow-warriors in the words, " Truly the Lord hath delivered
into our hands all the land."



EXPOSITION.



CHAPTEE m. 1—6.



The command. — Ver. 1. — And Joshua
rose up early in the morning', i.e., after the
return of the spies, and most likely (see oh.
i. 10, 11) on the morning on whioh the an-
nouncement 'was made to the children of
Israel that they 'were to cross the Jordan.
" This newes is brought but over-mght,
Joshua is on his 'way by morning, and pre-
vents the sunne for haste. Delays, whether
in the business of God or our owne,
are hatefull and prejudicial!. Many a
one loses the land of promise by linger-
ing; if we neglect God's time, it is just
'with Him to crosse us in ours " (Bp.
Hall). And they removed from Shittlm.
LiteraBy, from the acacias (see note on oh.
ii. 1). To do this completely, and to be
quite ready for the crossing, would, as Eosen-
muHer thinks, require the greater part
of three days. But it adds that " they

lodged ()y) there before they passed over."
But this need be no difficulty. The great
mass of the people could easily leave the
acacia meadows on the higher ground, and
encamp on the brink of the Jordan, while
the remaining two days might be spent in
making the necessary arrangements for the
erossing. For we must remember (as KeU
observes) that, not only a body of armed
men, but their women and chilihren, and all
their possessions, had to be led safely across.



" Though they were not told how they should
pass the river, yet they went forward in faith,
having been told (oh. i. 11), that they should
pass it" (Matthew Henry).

Ver. 2. — The ofacers. LXX., ypafiixaTUi
(see ch. i. 10). This is evidently the history
of the fulfilment of the command there given
by Joshua. There he orders the officers to
pass through the host; here the command
is fulfilled. There is no reasonable doubt
that the spies had returned before the order
recorded in ch. i. 10 had been given. Many
commentators have raised objections to the
order of the narrative in this and in the fol-
lowing chapter ; and commentators like Hou-
bigant, Masius (who says, "Narrationis ordo
admodum perturbatus "), and Bishop Hors-
ley, have suggested a different order of the
verses. But Delitzsch has observed that the
narrative is drawn up in a threefold order.
First, the commencement of the crossing is
detailed, from vers. 7 — 17 of this chapter ;
then (ch. iv. 1 — 14), its further progress;
lastly (ch. iv. 15 — 24), its conclusion. And
in each separate paragraph we have (1)
God's command to Joshua; (2) Joshua's
command to the people ; and (3) their ful-
filment of bia command. Thus the Divine
command, the human leadership, and the
measures taken in obedience to that leader-
ship are kept in close connection throughout.
We need not suppose (he adds) that each
separate act was enjoined at the moment



ca. m. 1—6.]



T^ B99S Of fwmvk.



when the necessity for the injunction ar-
rived. Nor, we may add, is it necessary to
suppose that every iatimation given by God
to Joshua ia necessarily recorded in chrono-
logical order (see note on ch. ii. 1.) We are
only to understand by the order followed by
the sacred historian, that he desires to im-
press fully upon his readers how entirely
every step taken by Joshua was taken at the
express command of God, The idea of
Paulus, Bichhorn, Ewald, Kuobel, and others,
that this account is compiled from two or
more different documents, would not only
require ua to suppose great clumsiness in the
compiler, if their view of his work be true,
but is wholly unnecessary. The text in-
volves no contradictions ; only an amount
of repetition, which is an essential feature
of aU the early Hebrew historical narratives,
as is evident to the most casual observer,
and is a proof, not of compilation, but of the
antiquity of the document, and the sim-
plicity and absence of art of the writer.
Ewald has remarked that it ia characteristic
of the Hebrew historians to mention the tei
mination of the event as soon as possible,
and then to fill in their outline by the nar-
ration of intermediate circumstances (see
chs. i., iii., vi., vii. of the Book of Joshua).
As a specimen of the way in which contra-
dictions are manufactured, we may take
Knobel's assertion that the two statements
that the people came to Jordan, and that
there was a space of 2,000 cubits between
them and the piieats, are irreconcilable. As
though it were not possible that the 2,000
cubits were to be measured along the river,
ftnd that the priests were ordered to walk
along the bank until it was signified to them
that they had arrived at the place of crossing.
For we are plainly told that this distance
was to be preserved that the people might
" know the way which they must go "
(ver. 4).

Ver. 3. — ^And they commanded the people,
■aylng. These words aro interesting as
sliowing that all was orderly in the Israel-
itish camp. Everything was carried on ac-
cording to the strictest rules of military
discipline. The removal of the ark was to
be the signal for the advance of the whole
host. The ark of the covenant. We may
with advantage compare the religious use of
*he ark here and in ch. vi., with its super-
ititious use in 1 Sam. iv. 3, 4. We do not
read that when the Israelites were defeated
at Ai, Joshua took the ark with him im
a march to repair the disaster. Such a
misuse of the symbol of God's Presence
was only possible in days when faith had
grown cold. When the Israelites had need
of supernatural guidance, when they were
placed in oiroumstanoes where no use of



their own miaided powers could guide them,
tJun they must repair to the ark of God.
There they must seek counsel, this they
must set before them to guide their ways.
But to regard it as a charm which could
possibly atone for their want of faith and
their lack of obedience, was to profane it.
Such temptations as these Jesus Christ re-
sisted in the wilderness ; such temptations
Christians must resist now. We have no
right to seek for supernatural aids where
natural ones will suffice us — no right to in-
Toke the special intervention of God till we
have exb auated all the mean s He has placed
at our disposal. Above all, we have no right
to expect Him to save us from the conse-
quences of pur own sin and disobedience
except on His own condition, that we shall
truly repent. We may further remark that
the Pillar of the Cloud and the fire, like the
manna, had ceased, and even the ark of the
covenant only preceded the Israelites on
special occasions. The priests the Levltes.
This phrase has given rise to some discus-
sion. Some editions of the LXX., as well
as some Hebrew MSS., read, " the priests
and the Levites." The Chaldee and Syriac
versions have the same reading. The Vul-
gate — ^more correctly, asit would seem — ren-
ders " saoerdotes stitpis Leviticae," i.e., "the
priests who are of the tribe of Levi" (see
ch. viii. 33, Kum, iv. 18, and Deut. xxxi. 9).
Eeil's explanation that this expression must
be taken in opposition to non-Levitical and,
therefore, unlawful priests, seems hardly
satisfactory. It is not till much later — in
fact, tin the time of Jeroboam — that we hear
of unlawful priests. It is more probable
that it is intended to emphasise the position
of Levi as the sacerdotal tribe, the one tribe
which had no share in the operations of the
war. So Eabbi Solomon Jarchi explains it,
citing the B'reshith Babbah, which states
that the phrase is found in forty-five places
in the Bible, with the meaning that the
priests are of the tribe of Levi.

Ver. 4. — There shall be a space between
you and It. Perhaps in order that they
might keep it in view. This agrees best
with the remainder of the verse, " that ye
may know the way by which ye must go."
EeU remarks that, had the Israelites pressed
close on the heels of the priests who bore
the ark, this would have defeated the very
object with which the ark was carried before
the people, namely, to point them out the
way that they should go. But CorneUus 4
Lapide among the earlier conmientators and
Enobel among the moderns hold that it was
the sacredness of the arh which rendered it
necessary that there shciild be a space of
more than half a mile between it and the
Israelites. Jarchi says the space was '■sa



44



THE BOOK OF J0SHT3^



[cH. m. 1— &



honour Of God." We may learn hence that
irreverent familiarity with sacred things is
not the best way to obtain goidance in the
way in which God would hare us walk.
" What awfull respects doth God require to
be given unto the testimony of His presence f
Uzzah paid deare for touching it; the men
of Bethehemesh for looking into it. It is a
dangerous thing to bee too bold with the
ordinanoea of God" (Bp. Hall). "Neither
was it onely for reverence that the aike must
be wayted on afarre, but for convenience "
(Ibid.). " The work of ministers is to hold
forth the word of life, and to take care of the
administration of those ordinances which
are the tokens of God's presence and the
instruments of His power and grace, and
herein they must go before the people of
God in their way to heaven " (Matthew
B-enry in loc). (Cf. Num. iv. 19, 20 ; 1 Sam.
vi. 19 ; 2 Sam. vi. 6, 7 ; also Exod. xix. 21.)
The original here is more emphatic than the
translation. " Only there shall be a dis-
tance (LXX. fiaKpav ioTw) between you and
it." Te have not passed this way hereto-
fore. Literally, ye have not crossed since
yesterday, the third day. Paulus would
translate this " lately," and thus get rid of
the miracle, regarding it as an intimation
that they were crossing at one of the fords.
But they had not crossed the Jordan at all
before. Consequently the translation lately
is iuadmissible. And even if they had been
crossing Jordan by one of the fords, there
is, as we have seen, a vride difference be-
tween crossing at the ford in ordinary times
and crossing it when Jordan had overflowed
its banks. This is a fair sample of the criti-
cism which seeks to explain away miracles,
as well as finds discrepancies where there



Ver. 6. — Sanotuy yourselves. The Hith-
pahel, which is used here, is frequently used
of ceremonial purification, as in Ezod. xix.
22 ; 1 Chron. xv. 12, 14 ; 2 Chron. v. 11 ;
and especially 2 Sam. xi. i. It is also con-
nected with purification, but ironically, in
Isa. Ixvi. 17. To-morrow. These words
were uttered while all was in preparation.
We learn from ver. 7, though it is not ex-
pressly stated, that the actual crossing took
place the next day. We ought, probably, to
place this verse in a parenthesis, and to
translate "Joshua had said," because the
sanctification (see Exod. xix. 10, 14) in-
volved some definite period. Knobel, how-
ever, assumes, as usual, that there is at
least a faulty arrangement here. Wonders,

or rather, miracles, from N7D to separate,
distinguish. They were, therefore, acts dia.
tinguished from the ordinary course of God's
providence. We may observe that, while
among the Canaanites all was terror and
confusion, in the camp of Joshua all was
confidence and faith. " Either successe or
discomfiture begins ever at the heart. A
man's inward disposition doth more than
presage the event. If Satan see us once
faint, he gives himseUe the day. There ia
no way to safety, but that our hearts be the
last that shall yield " (Bp. Hall).

Ver. 6. — And Joshua spake. We return
now to the ordinary course of the narrative.
To the priests. This was because the occa-
sion was an extraordinaty one. On ordi-
nary occasions this was the duty of the
Eohathites (Num. iv. lf>). And went before
the people. The people were to " follow the
priests as far as they carried the ark, but no
further ; so we must follow our ministers only
as they foUow Christ " (Matthew Henry).



HOMILETICS.

Vers. 1 — 6. — The eommamd to cross Jordam. We have here a chapter repleto
with instruction, whether we take the words in their natural and literal or in theij
figurative and allegorical sense. The instruction is of a kind which it is difficult to
gather up into one point of view, so various and many-sided is it. It will be best,
therefore, to follow the events of the narrative seriatvm, and endeavour to notice the
various points which may be observed for instruction and exhortation, rather than
to gather up the whole into the materials for one or two separate discourses. We
may therefore observe —

I. That Joshua was an example of diligence and peomptitude. This is urged
upon us in matters (1) of this world ; (2) of the soul. The maxim (1) as
regards the affairs of this world, " Whatsoever thy hand findeth to do, do it with
thy might," has been exemplified in the history of God's servants in all ages. They
have not been wont to let the grass grow under their feet. " Not slothful in busi-
ness," is the precept of St. Paul, and he laboured energetically at his craft while he
preached the gospel When we have a work to do, it is our duty to do it, and not
to tftke our rest till it ii> done. Frocrastinatioii is not only foolish, it ia wrons.



CH, m. 1— e.] THE BOOK OP JOSHUA. «

Habita of industry, punctual attendance to duty, Imamess-Kke habits, as they are
called, are required of every Christian by his profession. And it is remarkable that
in no other saint of the Old Testament do we find that virtue so conspicuous as in
the great captain, who alone among them was privileged to bear the Saviour's
name. (2) This is also the case in the affairs of the soul. It is our duty to wait
until the will of God is made known. So Samuel waited (1 Sam. liii. ID), and
Saul for his unwise haste was censured. But when it is made known, there should
be no hesitation, no delay. By such hesitation Moses provoked God's wrath (Exod.
iv. 10 — 14). It is a question whether Gideon did well to prove the Lord re-
peatedly (Judges vi. 36 — 40). Balaam was involved in the most grievous sin by
not being content with God's decisive answer to his prayer (Num. xxii. 12).
Many a good man makes shipwreck of his work, and some of their faith also, by
hesitating to carry out a plain command of God, by waiting for some additional
manifestation of His pleasure, or some opportunity to do that for which an oppor-
tunity should be laade. The time of waiting in Joshua's case was over. The spies
had brought back their report ; the way was open ; the command clear. The very
next morning, and that early, the preparations were made for the decisive step
which committed Israel to the struggle which lay before them. So in the work
which God has set us. When the path of duty is dear, we axe bound to enter
upon it at once.

II. Observe the faith of the children of Iseabi. They implicitly obeyed
Joshua's command, though it seemed the very height of folly. Jordan was over-
flowed ; the ordinary fords were impassable ; there was no way through the river.
They had been told that " within three days they should cross Jordan, and there is
neither m.urmuiing nor disputing. So we ought to follow the directions of our
Joshua, even where success seems hopeless. It is want of faith alone which
hinders us from performing hke impossibilities now. The mountain of difficulty
will ever be removed by the purpose of faith. "When a duty Ues before us, we must
set about performing it as far as our human strength goes. What Hes beyond it,
we naust leave to God. And we shaU find that the same power which rolled back
the waves of the Jordan can arrest the overrunning flood of ungodhness, the
headlong stream of the opposition of evil men. Where no way appears to human
eyes, there can He make one when He pleases, " Whose way is in the sea, and
His path in the great waters."

III. The ark of the covenant must go before, i.e., the visible signs and sym-
bols of God's presence. The ark contained the law of God and the manna — that
is, God's Word, and His sacraments and ordinances. Over it was the mercy-seat,
the token of the presence of Christ, in whom sin and pardon meet. We can but
go in the path marked out for us by these. His Word is " a lantern to our feet,
and a hght unto our paths." His earthly life has been Uved as a pattern to us.
His presence is " with us always, even unto the end of the world," to animate and
to guide. The visible signs and tokens of His presence among us are to be
reverenced and kept in view, lest the "remembrance of Him," which He ordered to
be kept up, should perish from off the earth. By thus keeping Him ever in view,
in public as well as in private, in the visible sanctuary as well as in the sanctuary
of our own hearts, we shall pasS through the " waves and storms of this trouble-
some world," and attain to the eternal rest at last.

IV. There must be no undue familiarity with sacred THmoa. A space
is kept between the people and the ark. So between His perfect- example and our
imperfect obedience there is a gulf which cannot be passed over. We are ever
pressing forward in the direction of it ; we never thoroughly attain to it (Phil. iii.
13, 14). Again, we learn that reverence is the best means towards knowledge of
spiritual things. " Not to be wise above what is written" is good advice. The
mysteries of the kingdom of God are hidden from the " wise and prudent " in their
own estimation, and are "revealed unto babes" (cf. 1 Cor. ii,). This is true, both
in opinion and in action. Those who think that all the deepest questions that con-
cern humanity are to be settled by argument and logic, rather ttian by teachable-
ness, experience, and prayer, are Hkely to end with a very moderate jwquailitanoa



4» TBI SOOK OF JOSHUA. [oh. m. 1—C

with the " deep things of God." Those who look upon God'fl Word as a common
book, or Christ's Baoramenta as simple symbols, without any mystery about them,
even to the faithful worshipper, are likely to deprive themselves of a very necessary
help and guidance in their way through the world. Awe, and reverence, and a
sense of the mystery as well as the nearness of the Unseen, are among the most
necessary features of a life that seeks aright after the perfection of man'^ nature.

V. The ministers must lead the way. Without any undue sacerdotal preten-
sions, it may at least be said that if the ministers of Christ's Church be not the
guides and teachers of the people, we were better without them. Yet, as Matthew
Henry remarks, we are only to follow them when they follow Christ. Nor is there
any contradiction in this. It is our duty ever to " search the Scriptures, whether
these things are so." We are to "prove all things," to "hold fast" only "that
which is good." But it is the duty of those whose province it is to " rule the
Church of God" to be ever foremost in every good work. It is idle to preach if we
do not practice. It is useless to exhort men to foUow the right path, unless we
cm-selves go before them in the way. An ofi&cer cheers his men into action not
from behind, but from the front. So the officers of God's army should be in the
van of its progress. Therefore in all things which become the Christian, the
Oiristian minister must set the example. In zeal for his Master's cause, in
unwearied efforts to promote it, in purity of Ufe, in acts of love to the sick and
aged, to the young and tender, in kindness to aU, in public spirit moreover, and re-
gard for the general welfare, in honour, in truth, in prudence, in self-command, in
self-abnegation, the ordained servant of God should be in the fore-front of the
grand army. But the army must follow its leaders. It is not sufficient to lay down
a high ideal for our officers, and to consider that the part of the privates is to
criticise sharply and closely the actions of those who are set over them. Whatever
tlioy do, we must do also. Where they go, we must go too. We are all pledged
to the same work, and, taking our tone from those who are appointed to lead us, we
must lead a Hfe animated by the same spirit as theirs, the Spirit of the living God.

VI. A SPECIAL WORK REQUIRES A SPECIAL PREPARATION. Joshua bids the Israel-
ites " sanctify themselves " because God was about to " do wonders among" them.
So when we set about any work of more than ordinary importance, be it sacred or
be it secular, we are bound to prepare ourselves by prayer, by meditation, by recep-
tion of the Holy Communion, by a special study of God's Word, by a cessation,
as far as possible, of ordinary cares and engagements, for the task that awaits us.
Thus Jesus Christ spent the night before choosing His apostles in prayer to God.
Thus before His Passion He ■withdrew Himself for a while from the concourse of
men. Thus the apostles waited in silence at Jerusalem for the descent of the
Holy Spirit. Thus St. Paul spent three years in Arabia communing with God
before he entered on his life-long work. God's Spirit is ever near us, but at special
times He requires to be specially sought. And he who never permits himself a
moment's retirement from the ordinary business and amusements of life may well
doubt whether God's Spirit have realty a hold on his soul.

HOMILIES BT VAKIOUS AUTHORS.

Ver. 16. — The crisis of life. There is only one date in history transcending this
in importance — the date when, across a vaster Jordan, the dividing hne between
heaven and earth, God came in the person of a little babe to make a conquest of a
world of promise. The year of the founding of Eoine, the flight of Mohammed, the
invasion of the Saxons, the irruption of the Gauls into Italy, the Norman Con-
quest, the War of Independence in America, the French Eevolution — what
date can compare with this crossing of the Jordan by a people only a generation
free from slavery, ignorant of their own destiny, crossing with a hope of finding on
earthly home, but with no dream of the world-wide usefulness which would crown
their history ? Th« beginning of th« hiitory of Canaan I Invasions do not generally
contribute much to th« well-being of mankind, and frequently are as evan ascent in



m. m. 1— «.] THE BOOK OF JOSHUA. 47

their results as they are disastrous in their immediate miseries. Successive inva-
sions of the great monarchies of Persia and Babylon have left Ettle but a lesson on
the vanity of human gloiy. Successive invasions of India have left their traces
chiefly in those caste distinctions, each step of which teUs of a class lorded over by
a class above it on the strength of a conquest completely made and long enforced-,
But the invasion of Canaan hallowed a land, gave God an earthly throne, started
what was, with all its faults, a model commonwealth, and gave a home to a people
which, with aU its baoksUdings, was still " a kingdom of priests " to mankind. Con-
sider a few features of this great event. And first consider the illustration afforded
here of—

I. The crises of life. Our life is built up of acts, every one of them import-
ant. They, made by our character, react on our character and make it. And in
the sense that it contributes to an enduring result in character, no act is Uttle. But
there are times specially solemn in our life, when the roads which invite us diverge
at a large angle, and are such that each step we take on the one makes return to
the other more difficult. And if a man is made by his ordinary acts, much more is
he made by his crisis acts. If a nation's character is moulded by its acts, much
more by its crisis acts. Here there is a crisis reached in Israel's history very
analogous to the first great crisis, when they passed the Bed Sea. Shall they or
shall they not commit themselves to the struggle vri.th the seven nations of Canaan-
some witti what seemed impregnable fastnesses, some with chariots of iron, some
conspicuous for gigantic stature ? Jordan accentuates the question. To cross it is
to commit themselves to a course condemned by ten out of twelve of the spies sent
out forty years before, is to hazard everything on the chance of battle, is to have no
retreat, is to win or lose all things. It was a crisis on which their national future
hung. It needed crisis virtue. Let them hang back and their enthusiasm would
evaporate, their unity break up ; they would fall off into a number of nomadio
tribes, and probably degenerate into a people like the IshmaeUtes, without any oi
that consecutive progress and self-contained strength that constitutes a history.
Let them go forward, and to remotest ages and countries mankind is blessed by the
national history that takes a forward stride and reaches a stouter sohdity by their
new departure. Happily, they had crisis virtue ; at least, a sufficient amount of &ith
to let them venture — to make them obedient to faithful leaders, and united in their
purpose to obey the guidance of their God. And meeting the crisis, they accepted its
duty, with results of perpetual usefulness, and left us a testimony as to the solenmity
of all such junctures and the blessedness of meeting them aright. The kind of jtmc-
ture that comes to us you wiU recognise from your own experience. They vary in their
Mud, but all have this in common, that they summon a man to some higher duty,
some better Ufe, some bolder enterprise, and put before him " an open door ; " that to
dechne them is to degenerate into a poorer character and more sordid life, whUe to
accept them is to rise to' " newness of life." Their variety, indeed, is striking.
Sometimes it is a great mercy that comes to a man, meant to wake him to a Bens«
of the fatherUness of G-od, and to win him by the gentle constraints of gratitude to
filial duty ; to cure grumbling or to destroy despair. If he meets this crisis well,
he passes to a higher level of gentler, kinder, gracious thoughts and purposes ; and
» sense of debtorship to man and an overflowing gratitude to God are the abiding
results of the crisis of a great mercy. Sometimes the crisis is the revelation of a
duty. Some sudden turn in our experience devolves on us a duty hitherto dis-
charged by others ; or some new duty arisingfrom a fresh contingency. It may be
a duty of Christian mercy to some overtaken in calamity. It may be that a slum-
bering conscience or an indolent mind has been awaked to the discernment of God's
requirements. It maybe that with some growth of years or development of thought
and.feeling we see we owe some duty to our Saviour and our fellow-men hitherto
not due firom us or not knovm to us. This is a crisis not to be overlooked. Hitherto
there was comparative unimportance in the neglect of this duty. It was a " time
of ignorance God winked at." But to neglect it now, when it stands out eminent
and clear, would be to oast off the Divine Master, and to be guilty of unfaithfulness
to the Lord that bought us ; while to do this would strengthen th« bond that binds



is THE BOOK OF JOSHUA- [ch. m. 1—8.

you to God and man, would result in enlargement of heart, ennoblement of pur-
pose, strengthening of conscience, and enjoyment of peace. Sometinaea the orisis
IS a temptation, pressing on the spirit on every side, and by guile, clamour, terrors,
and allurements compelling its divergence from the path of duty. I need not
enumerate other kinds of crises. Let me only urge that, in whatever way the crisis
come, we meet it manfally. When you come to Jordan see that you cross over it.
God wiU not fail you if you do not fail yourself.

II. I ask you to observe, secondly, the creed fob a CHISIS. It is given us here :
one of those beautiful instances of faith in which noble hearts find at onoe their ex-
pression and their sustenance. Hero is one couched in a name of God. Here are two
significant titles, neither of them in common use previously : He calls God "the living
God," and " the God of the whole earth." Once only is the former of these names
found in Scripture before this use of it, and the other is not found in use xmtil long
after. They are, therefore, not traditional words a parrot might have used, but
great original words which register the truth Joshua had conquered for himself,
And if we would meet our crisis, when it comes, as nobly and grandly as Joshua, met
his, we must try and get his creed of two articles.

1. We must believe God is the living God, for all do not believe that ; not that
they would formulate the idea that on such a day God died, and has not been heard
of since. But the general feeling is, He is as good as dead. A distant God, with-
out living eye to mark our necessities, without living hand to help us, without a
living heart to feel for our distresses. And if Joshua had been of that creed there
would have probably been no passage of the Jordan, and no victory of Jericho, and
no conquest of the land. But by the ever-extending obedience or experiences of his
life he had learned this mighty secret — that God is alive, is here, gives their bias to
aU events, can hear a prayer, can save a soul, can cleave a passage through sea or
river.

2. And the second was like to it. He deemed God " the Lord of all the earth,"
No local deity, hke those heathen deities whose sovereignty was often as limited
as a German duchy ; no limited being ; but master of aU powers of nature, master
of all tribes of men, vnth the government upon His shoulder of all things ; able to
open a path where all passage seemed denied ; so that his and Israel's future would
not depend on their own wisdom, strength, or fortunes, but would depend supremely
on the favour of God. Aye, and that is the sort of creed which we all need for the
crises we have to face. God living and reigning ; earth ahve with His presence
and His work ; aU events dependent on His wih. Oh, let us catch from heroie souls
at least their creed. Their feith, which works such wonders, must be the true faith.
Ood la living. His heart is ahve with tenderness. He is not the great grave into
which aU things fall, but the great fount of life from which aU things live. So
ahve that He could become incarnate and take infinite trouble to redeem us. So
alive He is here to-day, ready to help us. If you suspect the creed of priests, here
is a layman, a soldier, a hero ; this is the first article of His creed. Have you that
creed ? If not, pray for a large enough heart to hold it. , And especially if you are
in any crisis of your life ; for if in any crisis of our Ufe we assume in our despair
that, so far as we are concerned, God is dead, or unable to control the elements of
nature, the fair results of all opportunity are lost because it passes unused. If you
have come to Jordan, cross over it ; and if you want strength to do it, find it in this
creed : God is the living God, and the Lord of all the earth. And observe lastly —

III. Crisis grace comes wherever there is crisis faith and obedience. It is a
strange story, in its oircumstantiaUty, that of the dividing of the Jordan. The
baring of the bed of the river, the water gathering for thirty mUes up by the sudden
arrestment of its flow into a lake Kke Loch Lomond in size and form, while below
the point of transit it flows away as if its career was ended. There is interest in aU
explanations that are suggested ; in that, for instance, which, .combining the de-
struction of the walls of Jericho with this dividing of the river, and both with the
numerous traces of volcanic action in the neighbourhood, and demonstrable changes
in the river bed, sees here the action of an earthquake, upheaving the bed, and thu»
fiw a day or »o making of all the deep valley of the Jordan above it a temporaory



OH. rn. 1—6.] THE BOOK OF JOSHUA, 4f

lake. But there is more importance in our marking the fact and its lessons than in
our being able to explain the mode. Does Joshua believe God to be the living
God? " According to his faith it is Him." And with all Divine energy of love He
comes nigh to help them that trust in Him, laws of nature and forces of nature
notwithstanding. Such faith never goes dishonoured ; and we ought to mark it for
our comfort in life. God is not dead ; He is Kving stiU, as fresh for working
miracles as when He divided Jordan, and as sure to open up our way, and to lend
supernatural aid to simple faith, as when Israel halted before Jordan. Our hope
must not be limited within the sphere of what is obviously possible according to
laws of nature. I should think God never in any miracle broke the usual laws, but
only employed unusual forces. And He does the impossible still — ^making weak-
ness strong, despair victorious ; healing the sick, saving the lost, giving victory and
success. The supernatural is not oontranatural, but blends kindly with nature ; and
whenever in the crises of our hfe there is the obedience which honours God and the
faith that trusts Him, there is specifically supernatural help and grace making the
grandest deliverance and achievements possible. Our hves might be perpetual
miracles, and every day behold the impossible achieved, and the insurmountable
surmounted with blessed ease. Is there some stern crisis on you now? Do not
faint. There is crisis grace for all who have faith enough to admit and act on it.
Ijet it in, and even though Jordan be at the flood you will pass over as ou di-y
land.— G.

Ver. 6. — Preparation for beJiolding displays of Divine power. With what long-
ing eyes must the Israelites have looked upon the river which they were soon to
cross. Hope had been deferred for years. The promised land, fertile and beautiful,
seemed to disappear from their sight, as did the fruit and water from the eager
hands and parched hps of Tantalus. Could it, then, be really true that on the
morrow the boundary-line would separate them from their inheritance no more ?
By the Jordan the Israelites were encamped, and the command of the text sounded
in their ears, " Sanctify yourselves." This was to be the people's preparation
FOH God's work amongst them. Probably the injunction respected rather the
heai'ts than the dress and bodies of the people. It invoked a seriousness of deport-
raent befitting the solemn ceremony of the coming day, an examination of tlieia-
selves, a recalling of the facts of their past history, a mourning over their nxunerous
transgressions, and a resolve henceforth to serve the Lord. We beheve that in
endeavouring to ascertain the reasons which dictated the advice of the text, we
shall be meditating on truths profitable to our own souls.

I. Sanctification would fit them to behold the manifested presence of God.
Emblem, ritual, and precept were unceasingly employed to remind the IsraeUtes of
the holiness of God. They were to observe the sanitary regulations, because " the
Lord thy God walketh in the midst of the camp." Before their ofi'erings could be
accepted they must purify themselves with ablutions. And, above aD, they were
excluded fi-om the tabernacle where God's dwelling was, and into the HoUest only
the high priest could enter once a year. Now every prodigy was the special
coming of Jehovah into the midst of Israel. Whilst really present in the unceasing
operations of nature, nevertheless it was on the occasion of the miraculous that God
Beemed to put aside the veil and to draw nigh in person. Hence the need that the
Israelites should be sanctified. HoUness consumes impurity as light destroys dark-
ness. The people must prepare themselves to stand in the glory of God's presence.
So was it required at the appearance of the Almighty on Sinai, and before the
wondrous shower of quails, and so afterwards for the battle of Ai ; otherwise would
" the Lord break forth upon them." Whilst we are not under the terrors of the
law, yet reverence beseemeth us in our approach to the " Father of our spirits."
We would not rush heedlessly to communion with Him, nor fall into levity wliile
upon our knees. With us, too, there are times when we must sanctify ourselves for
the special manifestation of the Divine. Sin amongst Christians is a chief obstacle
to the accomphshment of signs and wonders in the name of Jesus.

II. Sanctificatiosi would pkkpabe them to APpBEciATE the greatness of th»

JOSHUA, 9



60 THX SOOE OF JOKHUA. [oh. m. 1— S.

umxcLE. Ab -was the case with the " mighty works " of our Lord, these wonders ol
the Old Testament were not wrought simply to assist men in their straits and feeble-
ness, but to exert an ethical influence upon them, teaching the power and love of God.
Kow that the Israehtes were about to enter upon their mheritance, the time was a
fitting one for signal marks of Divine favour and might. But in order that the
miracle have due weight, previous reflection and expectation were essential. The
Israelites were as children whose curiosity must be aroused and excitement intensi-
fied by stimulating annunciations. Then, when the notable day dawned, attention
would be drawn to every detail, every occurrence, and the more vivid and lasting
would be the impressions produced. A miracle silently and suddenly performed
would fail of the results intended. Preparation befits our solemn engagements,
qualifying us the more quickly to hear the " still small voice," and to note the " way
of God " amongst men. It is well for the passions to be quieted, and the common
duties dismissed from the mind, as we near the sacred operations of God. Of what
abiding influence would the services of the Lord's day be capable, if it were possible
to spend the previous evening in preparing the mind to say, " Speak, Lord, for thy
servant heareth " 1 Fully to reap benefit firom witnessing a " sign," or from perusing
an account thereof, demands of us the same sanctification of heart.

III. Sanctification would afford evidence of faith in theie leader and in
God. What folly to trouble about purification unless they believed that the promise
would be fulfilled. The miracle was to be eminently a proof of the love of God. His
honour demanded that the people should show themselves to be in some degree
worthy of His favour. Jesus inquired of the applicants for reUef whether they had
faith in His abUity to heal them ; and we read of places where " he did not many
mighty works because of their unbehef." Unbelief is the great hindrance to the
progress of religion, both in the individual and in the world. We block the only
avenue by which heavenly blessings can come to us; we shut the gates, and wonder
why our city is not thronged with angelic visitants. Faith in preparation would
lead to augmented faith in the time of action. Soon was coming the hour of trial.
How would the people venture between the dangerous heaps of water? Here
would be reaped the advantage of previous thought. Faith grows by exercise. The
conquest of one dif&culty opens the way for subsequent victories. If the Church of
Christ is paralysed by secret disbelief of the efficacy of God's Word and Spirit to
convert men, how can she expect great awakenings ? " According to our faith " is
it unto us. And if there is not sufficient faith to lead to the making of the necessary
arrangements, where shall be the faith to enable us to rejoice in the evident
tokens of God's presence ? Let us " lift up h^ly hands without wrath and doubting."
— A.

Ver. 3. — At this decisive moment, when the people of Israel were about to enter
on the great conflict which was to secure the possession of the land of promise, the
command was given to gather themselves together around the ark of the covenant,
as their banner. This indicates the great central truth of the history of Israel.
The focus of its national life is the law of its God. It is for this it is to fight and
overcome, and not merely that it may gain possession of a rich country and develop
its material resources. In its fidehty to the ark of the covenant, Ues moreover the
secret of its success. This sacred memorial of its religious faith must be its great
rallying point in the day of battle. This is a principle apphoable to the people of
God in aU ages, and equally true of their individual or collective life.

I. For mankind at large, as for Israel, there are two aspects of all the great
phases of its history. One direct, temporal, tbkrbsteial, like the conquest of
A fruitful land for Israel ; the other higher, more comprehensive, more Divine —

THE fulfilment OP A DiVINE PURPOSE ENTERING INTO THE PLAN OF REDEMPTION.

Such was the double significance to the descendants of Abraham, of the conquest
of the land of promise, the land in which their rehgious destinies were to be ful-
filled, where the ark of the covenant was to find its resting-place, and to become
the centre of the theocracy. So is it in all our Uves. Everything that befals us in
our private aod domestic life hat a twofold bearing. It has an earthward aspect ;



OH. m. 1— «.j THE BOOK OF JOSHUA. M

and marriage, tlie birth of children, the acquisition or loss of property, affect
primarily our temporal estate. But these same results have also a heavenward side ;
they_ tell upon the higher life within, and help to work out our eternal destinies.
Their true intention is to develop our higher life, and to establish within us the
reign of righteousness, of which the ark of the covenant was the emblem to the
Israelites.

II. It is not enough that we believe in this realisation of our higher destiny
through the events of life ; we must ourselves dikectly aid in its fulfilment.
We must make this our first consideration, and rally roimd the ark of the covenant
in order to fight the battles of the Lord. This is our duty, as members, or, to speak
more_ truly, as soldiers of the Church. The same obHgation rests upon us in our
individual life. Through aU its varied phases it should be our aim to hold high
our sacred banner, and to conduct ourselves vaHantly under all circumstances as
the soldiers of Christ. Let us carry into all our life the thought of immortality.
Let us be ever watching, ever fighting, and let the ark of the covenant be that
around which centres all our pubUc and private life. — B de P.

Ver. 6. — GoWb wonders. " Sanctify yourselves, for to-morrow the Lord wiU do
wonders among you. These words admirably express the conditions of all blessing
for the people of God. Those conditions are at once Divine and human. The
Divine is the essential ; the human can only be reahsed through it.

I. God will do wondees. This is a true description of all God's works of
deliverance, and primarily of His great miracle of pardon. For, of all the mar-
vellous things which He does, the most amazing is that He should have pity upon
us, and should come back to us after we have forsaken Him. Grace is the crown-
ing miracle. Never discouraged, it is perpetually triumphing over aU obstacles,
breaking down all that opposes its designs, bidding the mountain to become a plain,
and magnifying itself in our infirmities. There are periods in the history of the
race, and in that of individuals, when this miracle of constant recurrence is made
yet more emphatic, as though to hasten on the purpose of eternal love. So was it
at the time of the conflict between Israel and the Canaanitish nations. So was
it at the birth of Christianity. So is it at the time of the beginning of the new
life in the individual soul. The firee and sovereign grace which does wonders is
thus the necessary, antecedent Divine condition.

II. The human condition is oleaely expressed in these words op Joshua.
" Sanctify you/raelves." We repeat, this condition cannot be fulfilled unless Divine
grace have renewed our heart, and given us strength to sanctify ourselves. But
our duty is none the less positive, imperative, sacred. God does not treat us
as passive, inert beings, but as ices agents made in His likeness. It behoves us,
then, to respond to His grace. Hence the necessity to sanctify ourselves, in order
that we may be partakers in the wonders He will work. This is all the more
necessary since God will not work these wonders without us, but, by us and with
us, caUing us to be fellow-workers with Him. Israel must prepare itself for victory
b^ sanctifying itself. To sanctify ourselves is to put away all that is alien to the
Divine life ; to consecrate ourselves unreservedly to God ; to give ourselves to Him ; to
bring Him our heart that He may fill it. It is to yield ourselves to Him as willing
instruments in His hand ; so that we are never better workers with Him than when
we allow Him to work in us. To let Him work, this is our best way of serving.
Do we desire that He should again " do wonders " in our age, in these days of final
conflict between the gospel and antichrist ? Let us, then, sanctify ourselves, like
the children of Israel on the eve of battle with the Canaanites, and so will be fuU
filled the twofold condition of aU spiritual blessing so well set forth by St. Paul in
the words : " Work out your own salvation with fear and trembling, for it is God
which worketh in you tp will and to do of his ^ood pleasure " (FM. ii. 12, 1S).«?
E. PB V,



THE BOOK OF JOSHUA.



[am. at. T— 17.



EXPOSITION.



CHAPTER in. 7—17.



The PiflSAOB of the Jobdak. — ^Ver. 7. —
TUs day will I begin to magnliy thee.
" Neque enim ante mysterinm baptismi exal-
tatnr Jesus, sed exaltatio ejus, et exaltatio
in conspectn populi, inde Bumit exordium "
(Orig., Horn. 4 on JoBhna. Cf. Matt. iii. 17 ;
Lake iii. 22).

Yer. 8. — ^And tbon Shalt command the
priests. We have not here the whole com-
mand. That is to be found in ver. 13. To
the hrUUi. nSR'll'. Literally, to the end,
i.e., the end or brink of the waters at the
eastern side. There they halted, and as
long as the ark remained there, the waters
of Jordan ceased to flow.

Ver. 10. — ^That the living God. Eather,

Eerhaps, that a living God, i.e., that you
ave not with you some idol of wood or
stone, or some deified hero, long since
passed out of your reach, but a living, work-
ing, ever-present God, who shows by His
acts that your faith in Him is not vain.
The phrase is a very common one as ap-
plied to God in the Old Testament. In the
New, Christ is frequently referred to as the
source of Ufe. Is among yoa The original
is stronger, in the midst of you. The Canaan-
ites. The descendants of Canaan, the son
of Ham (Gen. ix. 18). The word which
signifies " low " is by some supposed to sig-
nify the same as lowlanders, because the
Canaanites inhabited the less mountainous
portions of Palestine, by the sea (Num.
xiii. 29; Josh. v. 1), and by the side of Jor-
dan (Num. xiii. 29). According to Ewald,
their territory extended along the west
bank of the Jordan as far as the Mediter-
ranean Sea. Canaan has also been held to
signify bowed down, depressed (see Gen. ix. 25).
But St. Augustine, in his exposition of the
Epistle to the Bomans (sec. 18), says that
the country folk of the neighbourhood of
Carthage, a Phoanieian colony, as the name
Punie implies, called themselves Ganani,
■which they would hardly have done were
the name a badge of servitude. Whether we
•re to attach much importance to this state-
ment or not, it is certainly a remarkable
coincidence. The story told by Procopius
(' De Bello Vandalico,' ii. 10 ; see also Suidas,
t. V, \avaav) of two pillars of white stone
near Tangier, with the inscription in Phoeni-
cian, " We are those who fled from the face
of the robber Joshua, the son of Nun," is
obviously not to be depended upon. Even
if the inscription existed it was not likely to
be of ancient date. And as Kenrick re-
marks (' Phanicia,' p. 67), those who erected



the pillars were not likely (1) to npresent
themselves «s fugitives, and (2) to speak of
Joshua as the " son of Nun." He further re-
marks that, while the oldest genuine Phoeni-
cian inscription is not more than four
hundred years before Christ, this, if genuine,
must have been erected nearly a thousand
years earlier still ; and he further observes
on the impossibility of its having been deci-
phered by the scholars of Justinian's day.
The stoiy, no doubt, had its origin in the
Babbinical tradition, mentioned by Jarchi
in his Commentary, as well as by Kimchi,
that Joshua wrote three letters to the
Canaanites before invading Palestine: the
first inviting them to make peace ; the
second, on their refusal, proclaiming war;
the third, to those who feared the wrath
of Jehovah, warning them to depart to
Africa — advice which, Jarchi adds, was
actually taken by a great many. Concern-
ing these seven nations more will be found
in the Introduction (see also Gen. x. 15 — 18 ;
XV. 19—21 ; Exod. iii. 8, 17, &o.). That a
Hebrew signification is found for Phoeni-
cian words need not surprise ns. The
descendants of Ham, when " dwelling in the
tents of Shem," might have formed for
themselves a similar language. But that the
Aramaic, which was spoken throughout
Syria and Palestine, was closely similar to
the Hebrew, we have overwhelming evidence.
Not only is there clear proof that Abraham
and the Canaanites spoke the same language,
not only are all the ancient names of places
and persons of Hebrew origin, but even the
Carthaginian language is pronounced by
Jerome, a competent judge, to be cognate
to the Hebrew (see Hiivemick, Introduction,
sec. 21). The Hittite*. The Hittites
(Hebrew, Chittim) were out of all proportion
the piinoipal tribe in Palestine at this time,
as we have already seen (ch. i. 4). They
were the descendants of Heth or Chet (Gen.
X. 15), who dwelt in the neighbourhood of
Hebron in the days of Abraham (Gen. xxiii.
19 ; XXV. 9). At that time they do not
appear to nave attained the importance
which they afterwards reached (Gen. xii. 6 ;
xiii. 7; xxxiv. 30), though this is perhaps not
altogether a safe inference (cf. Judges i. 4,
6). For the mention of the Canaanites in
Gen. xii. 6 without the Perizzite might lead
to a similar inference with regard to the re-
lative importance of these two tribes, whereas
in the other two passages they appear on a
level. Be this as it may, we find the Hit-
tites occupying a prominent position in Ca-
naan at this time, not only in the Book of
Joshua, but on tlie Egyptian monumentf^



oa. m. T— 17.]



THE BOOK OF JOSHUA.



68



" Before the eiodus the Eheta h«d become
the terrible rivals of Egypt, and had mingled
their genealogy with that of the renowned
Pharaohs of the nineteeth dynasty " (Tom-
kins's ' Studies on the Times of Abraham,'
p. 89). It is worthy of remark, however,
that on the Egyptian monuments their
leaders are spoken of as chieftains (see note
on ch. ix. 3, and ' Becords of the Past,' ii.
67 — 78). In later times they had attained
to regal government (1 Eings z. 29 ; 2 Kings
vii. 6 ; 2 Chron. i. 17). It is, however, pos-
sible that the proud monarch of Egypt
would not admit the petty kings of the
Hittites to an equality with himself (see
also note on ch. 1. 4). Moses connects the
Chittim (Num. xziv. 24; Isa. xxiii. 1 ; Ezek.
xxvii. 6), or the inhabitants of Cyprus, with
the Hittites. Since these words were written
an able article appeared in The Times of Jan.
23rd, 1880, on the Hittite Empire. Carohe-
mish, on the Euphrates, and Eadesh, or the
Holy City, on the Orontes, appear to have
been the chief centres of the Hittite power.
They were "powerful enough to threaten
Assyria on the one hand and Egypt on the
other, and to carry the arts and culture of
the Euphrates to the Buxine and ^gean
seas." Professor P. W. Newman, finding
no mention of their existence in profane
histories, came to the usual conclusion of
his school, that where the Bible mentioned
persons or nations and profane history did
not, it was quite clear that such persons or
nations never existed. The cases of Sargon
and the Hittites may perhaps induce critics
of this school to be a little less hasty hence-
forth in dismissing the statements of Scrip-
ture. The site of ancient Carohemish has
lately been discovered on the western bank of
the Euphrates. The Hivltes, or rather Biv-
vites. The name of this tribe is not found
in the first enumeration of the nations of
Canaan (Gen. xv. 19 — 21), but we find the
name in the list of Canaan's descendants in
Gen. z. 17 and 1 Chron. i. 15. Shechem,
the prince of the city of that name, was a
Hivite (Gen. zxxiv. 2), though some copies
of the LXX. read Horite for Hivite without
authority. The Hivites then (Gen. zzziv.
10 — 21) seem, as afterwards in the case of the
Gibeonites, to have beea k peaceful, commer-
cial race. The character of the Shechemites
afterwards seems to have been unwarhke.
At least they were neither very spirited nor
successful in their military enterprises,
»s the narrative in Judges iz. shows. The
Voluptuous beauty of the place, testified to
by so many modem travellers, such as Bob-
inson, Vandevelde, Ac, falls in weU with
the character of the inhabitants. A colony
of Hivites leem to have dwelt in the north,
iB til* highlands beneath Mount Henuon,



a country to which the name of Mizpeh, rar
watch-tower, seems to have been given, no
doubt from its elevation. This must not,
however, be confounded with Mizpeh in the
land of Benjamin (see ch. xj. 3). In 2 Sam.
xxiv. 7 they appear to have been found in
the neighbourhood of Tyre, though this is
by no means clear. The derivation of the
word is uncertain. Ewald would explain it
"midlander;" Gesenius explains it by
" village," from njn to live, breathe. That

njO signifief^a town or village we may

learn from Num. xxxii. 41, Deut. iii. 14,
Josh. xiii. 30, Judges x. 4, 1 Kings iv. 13.
The mention of their ci^ so early as the
time of Jacob, the description given of their
character in that narrative, and the charac-
teristic astuteness of the Gibeonites as weU
as their unwarlike conduct, would lead ta
the conclusion that they dwelt in settled
habitations, not nomadic encampments, and
that they gained their living chiefly by com-
merce. We ought not to quit the subject
without the remark that all we learn from
Scripture concerning the Hivites is remark-
ably consistent, and bears testimony to the
scrupulous accuracy of the writers. The
Ferlzzites. The word Ferizzite signifies
countryman, as distinguished from the
dwellers in houses. Thus the word signifies
"nnwaUed," or "open," in Deut. iii. 6,
1 Sam. vi. 18, and in the Eeri of Esther ix.
19. Perhaps the reason of the omission of
their name in Gen. x. and 1 Chron. i. ma^
justify the supposition that they were of no
particular tribe, but were a collection of men
from every tribe engaged in agricultural pur-
suits. Eedslob (see art. in ' Dictionary of
the Bible ') suggests that the Hawoth (ch.
xiii. - 30) were pastoral, the Perazoth agri-
cultural villages. This is to a certain ex-
tent borne out by the fact that Hawoth sig-
nifies " living places," and Perazoth " places
spread out," as well as by the fact that tha
trans-Jordanic tribes were specially pastoral
in their habits. Passages such as 2 Sam.
V. 20, vi. 8, 1 Chron. xiv. 11, Isa. xxviii. 21
are cited as illustrative of this word, but erro-
neously, for in the Hebrew the letter is Tzade,
and not Zain, as here. Bitter regards the word
as analogous to Pharisee, from phareuh, to
separate, and regards them as nomad tribes.
But the authority of Ewald and Gesenius
must outweigh his. The Glrgashites. They
are not mentioned in Scripture, save in Josh,
xxiv. 11, Gen. zv. 21, Deut. vii. 1. They
were therefore no doubt a small tribe, in-
habiting, it has been supposed, the country
of Gergesa or G«rasa (as some editions read
in Matt. viii. 28) upon the lake of Genoe-
sareth. But this was on the other side ol
Joidwi, If therefore than ha vuj (



64



tttE BOOK OF JOSStJA.



[ea. m. ?— It,



tion between Gergesa or Gerasa and the
Girgashites, there must have been a small
settlement of them on the eastern side of
the lake of Gennesareth. TSie Amorltes.
These were the most powerful of the Cauaan-
itish peoples (see Amos ii. 9). They not
only inhabited the mountains (Num. xiii.
29; Josh. xi. 3), but crossed the Jordan and
wrested the country from Amon to Jabbok
out of the hands of the Moabites (Num.
X3d. 13, 24, 26), and dwelt there until dis-
possessed by Moses. In Gen. xiv. 9 we
find them west of Jordan, near Engedi,
on the shores of the Dead Sea. Thence
crossing Jordan they seem to have spread
eastward. They are found in the Shephelah,
on the borders of Dan (Judges i. 34), and
even in the mountain district near Ajalon.
But (ver. 35) they seem to have been driven
out of Judan, and to have occupied a small
portion of the Arabah south of the Dead
Sea (cf. Josh. xv. 3). Ewald, as well as
Gesenius, regards the word Amorite as
signifying highlander, and he quotes Isa.
xvii. 9, where Amir signifies the highest
part of anything, as of a tree. So the
Syriao Amori signifies a hero, and the
Arabic Emir signifies a mler. With this
we may compare the term Ameer of Afghan-
istan, no doubt derived from a similar root.
See also Isa. xvii. 6, and the Hithpahel of ^I^X
in Psa. xciv. 4, with the meaning to exalt
one's self. Shechem, though a Hivite settle-
ment, is spoken of by Jacob (Gen. xlviii. 22)
DS an Amorite city, and in ch. x. 6 the
sovereigns of Jerusalem and the neighbour
cities are spoken of as Amorite monarchs.
This would suggest that the words applied
to the inhabitants were to a great extent
convertible terms, just as we apply the term
Celt, Gael, Highlander indiscriminately to
the inhabitants of the north of Scotland,
Dutchman and Hollander to the inhabitants
of Holland, and as Scotus and Erigena were
both appUed to Irishmen up to the 10th
centmy. The Jebusltea were in possession
of the central highlands around Jerusalem,
their stronghold. They retained possession
of this until David dislodged them (2 Sam.
T. 6 — 8. See note on ch. x. 1).

Ver. 11.— The Lord of all the earth. As
He was about to prove Himself to be by the
mighty miracles He wrought to establish
the Israelites in their land and thus fulfil
His promise. The IsraeHtes needed to be
reminded of this to support them during
the crossing of the Jordan. The translation
of the LXX., though rejected by the
Masorites, who separate the words " cove-
nant " and " Lord," is admissible here, " the
covenant of the Lord of aU the earth." If
we foUow the Masoretio pimotuation, we
nnst supply the word "ark" again, and



translate " the ark of the covenant, the ark
of the Lord of the whole earth."

Ver. 12. — ^TaJte you twelve men. Joshua
commands the election of twelve men
previous to the passage of the Jordan, and
in pursuance of the command he had
already (ch. iv. 2 ; of. note on ver. 2)
received from God. The reason for which
they were to be chosen was probably not
communicated to the Israelites tiU after the
passage had taken place. Masius thinks
that it would make the narrative clearer,
" si proximum is versioulum sequeretur."
But see note on ch. iv. 1.

Ver. 13.— The lord, the Lord of all the
earth. The original is, Jehovah, the Lord
of all the earth. That the waters of Jordan
shall te cut off. The construction here
seems to have perplexed the LXX., Vulgate,
and English translators. The former have
given the sense, but have changed the con-
struction. The second have supposed imns;
to mean fail, and to refer to the waters below
the place of crossing. The third have inter-
polated the word " from. " The words " the
waters descending from above" are in ap-
position to, and explanatory of, the words
" the waters " above. If for " from " in our
version we substitute "namely," we shall
express the meaning of the original. The
Masorites point thus, dividing the verb from
what follows by Zakeph Katon. A heap
(cf. Psa. xxxiii. 7). The original is pictu-
resque, " and they shall stand, one heap."

Ver. 14. — Removed from their tents. The
word used for " removed " in this chapter
is the same as is used of Abraham's remov-
ing. It is appropriate to the nature of the
removal, for it signifies originally to pull up
stakes or tent-pins, and has reference, there-
fore, to the removal of a people who dwelt in
tents.

Ver. 15. — Brim. The water's edge is
meant here, as in ver. 8, where the same
word is translated brink (see note on ver.
17, and on ch, iv. 19). Jordan overfloweth
all his bajiks. Some commentators trans-
late here, jilleth all his banks (lirKt]povTO,
LXX.). But this rendering is contrary (1)
to the Hebrew, and (2) contrary to fact.
The literal rendering here is, "filleth Ker
(or upon) all its banks." In ch. iv. 18 we
read that Jordan goeth over all its banks.
And that the Jordan is not merely full, but
full to overflowing, at the harvest season, is
proved by the statements of many travellers.
Take, for instance, Canon Tristram (' Land
of Israel,' p. 223), who describes his visit to
the Jordan as occurring just after it had
been overflowing its banks, and the lower
level of the valley as filled with " a deep
slimy ooze." He adds that, by measun*



Bfi. la. 7—17.]



THE BOOK OF JOSHUA.



ment, the river was found to have heen
fourteen feet above the level at ■which he
found it, and it was then quite full. Bartlett
(' From Egypt to Palestine,' p. 451) remarks,
" We were fortunate enough to see it in the
state in which it is described in Joshua,
' overflowing all its banks ' — that is, the
whole line of its banks. The turbid stream
rushed along like a mill-race, and though
it had fallen from its greatest height, the
proper banks of the channel were invisible,
and indicated only by lines of oleanders and
other shrubs and trees." This was on the
22nd of March. This overflowing is caused
by the melting of the snows of Hermon,
which then rush down, fiU Lake Huleh and
its marshes, as well as Gennesareth, and
cause the " swelling of Jordan " (Jer. xii. 5 ;
xlix. 19 ; 1. 44), which drives the wild beasts
from their retreats on its banks (see also
1 Chron. xii. 15). Some travellers have
boldly asserted, in spite of this concurrent
testimony, that Jordan does not overflow
its banks at the time of harvest. But they
have mistaken the wheat for the barley
harvest, forgetting that in Palestine the
latter precedes the former by six or seven
weeks. By the time of wheat harvest Jor-
dan has returned to its normal condition,
and all traces of the inundation have passed
away (see Thomson, ' Land and the Book,'
pp. 618—621). The time of harvest, i.e.,
the barley harvest, which took place about
the 10th Nisan, or Abib, when the Israelites
crossed. The wheat harvest was about
Pentecost, or seven weeks later (Exod.
xxxiv. 22). An important argument for
the genuineness of the narrative (and much
the more important as its chief incident is
miraculous) is drawn from this passage by
Blunt in his ' Undesigned Coincidences.'
He remarks that in Exod. ix. 31, 33 the
barley and flax are said to have ripened
together. Therefore the time of the barley
and flax harvest would be identical. Ac-
cordingly we have Eahab, three days before
the event here recorded, in possession of the
as yet undried stalks of flax which had just
been cut. Nothing could be a more satis-
factory proof that the narrative we have
before us comes from persons who were
accurately and minutely informed concern-
ing the circumstances of which they tell us.

Ver. 16. — Stood and rose up upon a heap.

Literally, " stood — they rose up, one heap."
The narrative assumes a poetic form here
(cf. Exod. XV. 8, 9 ; Judges v. 27). Very-
far from the city Adam. The Masorites
have corrected the text here. The original
text has D'JSn for which the suggested Keri
is DTXD. Brit th« eoireetion is needleu.

T T ■■

It ii better to render, ■* they roM np, oa«



heap, very far off, at the city Adam." Th«
city Adam is nowhere else mentioned ia
Scripture. The LXX. appears to have read
*l'NO I'SP instead of D"JSD n'KQ, for it trana-

lates aipMpa aiboipSiQ. This reading of the
LXX. shows that the correction, though it
obscures the sense, is of great antiquity, and
that the site of Adam was then quite un-
known. Knobel would place it either just
south of the Jabbok, where the ford Damieh
now exists, or at Eduma, now Daumeh,
twelve German miles east of Neapohs. The
former is generally accepted now, and Con-
der (' Handbook,' p. 241) identifies it with
Admah (see Gen. xiv. 2), in the plain or
ciccar of Jordan. That is beside Zaretan.
Called Zarthan in the original (cf. 1 Kings
iv. 12 ; vii. 46), and Zeredatha, m 2 Chron.
iv. 17. Some read Zeredatha for Zererath
in Judgps vii. 22. Knobel supposes, and
not without some probability, that Zereda,
Jeroboam's birthplace, is the same as this.
It was in the plain of Jordan, not far from
Succoth, at the mouth of the Jabbok. The
LXX. here reads KapiaBiaptifi, i.e., either
Kiriathaim or Kirjath-jearim, but without
authority. Delitzsoh and Knobel suppose
the spot to be Kurn, or Kam (i.e., Iiorn)
Sartabeh, near the ford Damieh, where
the Jordan valley is at its narrowest, and
the rocks stretch forward so as almost to
meet. They fix on this spot, partly from the
Buitabihty of the situation for such an arrest-
ing of the waters, partly from its agreement
with the situation of Zarthan, as described in
the Scriptures. Vandevelde agrees with them.
There was an Adami and a Zartanatu higher
up the river near Bethshean, which some
have supposed to be meant (see ch. xix. 33 ;
1 Kings iv. 12), but these lay entirely out of
Joshua's line of march. The sea of the
plain. Bather the sea of the Hill? {9dKa<i-
aav 'Apajia, LXX.), or desert (so Deut. iii.
17 ; iv. 49 ; 2 Kings xiv. 25 ; see also Deut.
i. 1). The term is apphed by the Hebrews
and Arabs to any sterile region, and thence
to the sterile depression which borders on
the Jordan, extending fiom the lake of
Tiberias soiithward. The Arabs now apply
the term el ghor to the part between Tiberias
and the Dead Sea, and reserve the term
Arabah for the desert valley, or wady, which
extends thence to the Bed Sea. So Gesen.,
' Thesaurus,' b. v. ; and Eobinson, ' BibL
Ees. ' The word translated plain in Gen.
xiii. 10 is 133, a word of very different sig-
nification (see also ' Shephelah ' and ' Emek,'
ch. X. 40 ; xi. 2). The salt sea. This sea is
called the Deaa Sea from the immobility of
its waters, as well as from the apparent
absence of all life within them. " Some o*
our party," wya Canon Tristriuu," employed



THE BOOK OF JOSHUA.



[cH. in. ? — II,



themselves in searching, but without avail,
for life iu the Dead Sea." It lies at a level
of more than 1,300 feet below the level of
the Mediterranean. Its waters are thns
described by Dr. Thomson : " The water is
perfectly clear and transparent. The taate
is bitter and salt, far beyond that of the
ocean. It acts upon the tongue and mouth
like alum ; smarts in the eye like camphor ;
produces a burning, pricMng sensation."
The specific gravity of its waters is very
great, and bathers find a great difficulty in
swimming in it from the unusual buoyancy
of the water. This is caused by the very
large quantity of saline matter held in
solution from the salt hills in the neigh-
bourhoocl. One of them, Jebel Usdum, is
described by Canon Tristram as "a solid
mass of rook salt," and the water in its
vicinity as " syrup of chloride of sodium,"
that is to say, of common salt. So also
Bartlett, ' Egypt and Palestine,' p. 451.
The statement that no bird can fly across
its waters is a fable. The fullest account
of the various attempts — some of them
fatal — to explore the Dead Sea are to be
found in Bitter's ' Geography of Palestine,'
vol. iii. Canon Tristram explored the
western side thoroughly, while Mr. Mac-
gregor's canoe voyage, described in his 'Eob
Eoy on the Jordan,' gives a number of most
interesting details. In Bitter's work will
also be found some valuable observations on
the physical geography of the district, on
the geological formation of the basin of the
Dead Sea, together with two papers, one by
M. Terrell and the other by M. Lartet, on
the chemical composition of the Dead Sea
waters. Failed and were cut o£ liiterally,



were eompJeted, were cut off, i.e., were com-
pletely cut off, so that the supply of water
faUed, and the channel of the Jordan to
the southward, and. to the northward as far
as Zaretan, became dry ground (see also
Psa. oxiv. 3).

Ver. 17 — ^Ftan. The LXX does not
translate this. The Vulgate renders accmcJi.
The original, literally translated, means to
cause to stand upright. In the midst of
Jordan. That is, they stood surrounded by
water, but not in mid-stream, which would
be expressed by 3"li?3 as in ver. 10, where
our version has " among " (see note on
ch. iv. 9). So Drusius: "In medio Jor-
danis; i.e., intra Jordanem. Sic Tyrus
legitur sita in corde maris ; i.e., intra mare
nam non prooul abest a continente." Clean
0V2r. The word is the same as that trans-
lated " failed " in the last note. It means
completion — "till the people had entirely
finished crossing." Origen thus explains,
in his fourth homily on Joshua, the mystical
signification of this crossing the Jordan :
" Cum cateehumenorum aggregatus es
numero, et prasceptis Ecclesiastiois parere
ccepisti digressus es mare rubrum, et in
deserti stationibus positus, ad audiendam
Dei legem, et intuendum Mosei vultum per
gloriam Domini revelatum quotidie vacas.
Bi vero ad mysticum baptismi veneris
fontem, et consistente sacerdotaU et Levitico
ordine initiatus fueris venerandis illis mag-
nificisque saerameutis quss norunt illi quos
nosse fas est, banc etiam sacerdotum minis-
teriis Jordane digresso terram repromissionis
intratis, in qua te post Moysen suscipi
Jesus, et ipse tibi efficitur novi itinerii
dux."



HOMILETICS

Vers. 7 — 17. — The passage of Jordan.

1. The ministey of Joshua and Jesus began at Jordan. As vrith Joshua at
his crossing, so with Jesus at His baptism, God marked the moment of ihbii
coming to Jordan with a special favom-. For as the waters of the Eed Sea (1 Cor.
x._2), so the waters of Jordan are the type of Christian baptism. In connection
■with the wandering in the wildemess, the stream of Jordan is the type of death,
which admits us to the promised land. But in connection with the conflicts in
Canaan, to which it was the introduction, it is a type of the commencement of the
spiritual life. For in it we are dedicated to our Joshua — we begin to follow our
Leader. In it He was first "marked out to be the Son of God " (Matt. iii. 17) ;
and in it He shows to us the power of God in delivering us fi-om our wanderings in
the wildemess of evil, and translating us into the regions of His promii,es. In
baptism we enter into covenant with God, and receive His blessings and gifts, aa
well as declare our resolution to serve Him. Thus it is the turning-point of our lives
whenever we receive it. It places us in a new covenant-relation to God It
introduces us into new obligations, and entitles us to new blessings. It fn-i 69 tu)
th« right to olaim the aid of God in our conflict with evil ; in other words, u is fiis



cH. m. 7—17.] THE BOOK OF JOSHUA, Bf

starting-point of our sanotiflcation. And the work is all of God. He alone parta
the waters for us to cross from the world into His kingdom. Jordan is overflowed.
No passage is possible by human means ; that is, no works of our own can avail to
place us where we may hope to carry on a successful war against oiu" own and God's
enemies. " Not of works, lest any man should boast," but " by grace are ye saved
through faith, and even that {i.e., faith) not of yourselves, it is the gift of God." "Wa
attribute no magical power thus to the sacrament of baptism. It derives its sola
power from being the means appointed by Jesus Christ Himself whereby we enter
into covenant with Him.

II. It was no lon&ek the pillab ok oloud that guided them, but the abb
OF the covenant. That is, the mystery of the law was unveiled in the gospel.
Like the veil on the face of Moses (2 Cor. ui.), so this figure teaches us that what
was dark under the Mosaic dispensation should be made clear by Jesus Christ.
" For the law made nothing perfect, but the bringing in of a better hope did " (cf.
also Heb. xii. 18 — 24). The law guided through the wUdemess ; the gospel, into
the promised land. The law, which was enshrouded in darkness, led man only in
uncertain wanderings ; the gospel led them to favour and victory. God was with
them, no longer by cloudy tokens in the skies, but by the visible symbols of His
presence. And so the God who leads us now is no longer a God who hides Himself,
but God manifest iu the flesh ; God clothed in a visible form, that thus we might
see Him who is invisible. The htunanity of Jesua is at once the revelation oi
God, and the perfection of man. Following Him, though at a respectful dis-
tance, beholding Him, though not too nigh, we enter into the enjoyment of the
promise.

III. Jordan was chossed ai the time op its overflowing. Thus God mani-
fests His own glory and man's insufficiency. The miracle was the greater in that
it was performed at such a time. So God always deals with His people. The time
of trouble is the time when He manifests His power. It is then that He makes our
way most " plain before our face." Both Churches and iadividuals are apt in their
prosperity to say, " I shall never be removed." But in adversity they betake them-
selves in all humility to God, and He makes them a way through the deep waters.
" The swellings of Jordan " abate at His presence ; " the overflowings of ungodli-
ness " give ground at His word. When He speaks, sorrow and distress flee away
" far off," and they whose " treadings had wejl-nigh slipt," who were " grieved at
the wicked," or at the seeming tokens of God's wrath, find that He has made
" straight paths for their feet " where all had seemed disappointment and despair.

IV. Help and strength abe to be pound in the ordinances op religion.
When the priests' feet touched the brink of the Waters they fled away. And is it
not a spiritual fact that the consolations and helps of rehgion are to be found at the
hands of the ministers of religion ? How often did the exhortations of a Moses,
a Joshua, or Samuel revive the drooping spirits of God's people ? How often were
the first converts of the gospel "provoked unto love and good works " by the mouth
of a St. Peter or St. Paul I How many date their first serious impressions of Divine
things from an earnest sermon, or a few words of loving counsel spoken by a minister
of Christ I How many have felt kindled to love and devotion by the prayers
reverently offered up in the sanctuary, where the sacred fire spreads from soul to
soul tm it has enkindled the warmth of zeal in all present I How often has the
worshipper, either in the congregation or on the sick bed, been moved to tears and
stirred to the depths of his soul by the " blest memorials of a d3Tng Lord," con-
secrated and administered according to His word I It is one of the privileges of the
Christian ministry of the New Covenant, when faithfully carried on, as of the priests
at the command of the Jesus of the Old Covenant, that as their feet touch the
swelling waters of neglect, thoughtlessness, and indevoutness, they subside, they
flee far off, at least when, at the root of the individual life, there lies the spark —
even though almost quenched — of faith. Not that the ministers are to take credit
to themselves for this. They are but the organs of the Spirit of Christ. As Matthew
Henry remarks, " God could have divided the river without the priests, but they
ooiild not do without Him." But He is pleased to use human meana, and H«



m a?ai book o^ josatJA. tea. m. t-ii

blesses them. Though the " tiAasnre is in earthen vessels," yet the " excellency of
the power is of God."

V. The peiests stood firm. They -were " caused to stand upright," as the
Hebrew says ; that is, there was no faltering or wavering. Had they drawn back
after entering Jordan, had they shown signs of uncertainty, the waters would have
returned, or the people had never dared to cross. So great is the responsibility that
rests on God's ministers. The people look to them for guidance — for encourage-
ment. If they "faint by the way," if they falter in their work of contending for
the &ith, of promoting the spread of Christ's Gospel, if their trumpet gives an
uncertain sound, or if they retreat from their appointed task, the conflict with evil
stands stiU ; the pathway for God's Church to proceed to further conquests is not
opened. How many great works for the spread of Christ's Gospel, for the proclama-
tion of His truth, for the victory of His cause among men, have failed because the
" priests " have not " stood firm " ia the waters of Jordan ; because timidity, half-
heartedness, divided counsels, profitless controversies have obscured the witness
for God's truth I If " the kingdoms of this world " have not " become the kingdoms
of our God and of His Christ," if the number of Christ's elect is not yet fiUed up, if
the pathway to the final fulfilment of God's promises be not yet open, how much
of it is because His ministers have not yet learned to " stand firm in the midst of
Jordan"?

HOMILIES BY VAEIOUS AUTHORS.

Ver. 11. — The passage of the Jordan. The lessons of importance are not
exhausted in those already suggested in this passage of the Jordan. A deed so
great, so solemn, so vast in its results, has many sides, and many subordinate points
of interest. I gather up in this second homily a few of those points of interest and
instruction. And first observe —

I. The sion of God's pbesence with Israel is temporary, but the presence
ITSELF IS PERMANENT. This lessou arfscs at once firom the fact that the piUar of
cloud which hitherto had led them does not precede them now. To its guidance
hitherto they had marched, and under its shadow rested. And the sign of God's
presence had been a sweet assurance and a constant augury of success. Now it
disappears altogether from the history of Israel. They will cross Jordan imder the
guidance of the ark, and of that alone. God's presence remains with them, but the
sign of it is withdrawn. There were doubtless many who regarded such a loss as
an omen of sinister significance ; and many who, mixing devotion and superstition,
would deplore that when the great crisis of the enterprise was come, iJieir usual
assurance of God's presence failed them. But there were some that had looked not
to but through the sign, and bmlt their hopes on the living God. And they, Joshua
leading them, trusting in the love and faithfulness which they felt must be His
character, were ready to venture without their sign. And venturing, they found
God there, though the cloud of His presence had been withdrawn, and they got
a notable lesson in walking by faith rather than by sight. We need few lessons
more than this : That God's presence or absence is not to be concluded fi:om the
presence or absence of the sign of it. We are all Jewish enough to " require a sign."
We want some assurance of acceptance over and beyond what gospel words convey.
We want some " leading of Providence " in addition to the sense of duty before we
feel comfortable in starting on any course. Eaptures, mystic whisperings of God's
consolation, special experiences not granted to others — tiiese are apt in the regard
of all of us to assume too much importance. We are apt to make the same mistake
concerning these which some in Israel doubtless made concerning the pillar of
cloud and fire; namely, to imagine them a special crown, a testimony to our
unusual sanctity, instead of a gracious condescension to our weaknesses and to the
fears which mark our setting out on a pilgrimage. Just escaping fi-om slavery,
Israel needed signs ; now, maturer in experience and stronger in faith, the signs
are no longer needed. Probably in all cases it wiE be found that signs belong to
tbe earlier stage* of the experience either of the community or the individual



ek. m. 7-1?.] f fig fiOdl @f J#MIV1. M

When experience and faith are strong, th«y are withdrawn. Put not a dark con-
Btruction on any mere want of signs, for while the sign of the presence is temporary,
the presence itself is permanent with all God's people. Growing out of this a
Bscond lesson suggests itself, -viz. :

II. They are well led who ake akk led. Israel no longer had the pillar of
cloud and fire, but they had the ark of God, and, as the event proved, the ark
led them just as wisely as the pillar ; and in following it they found just the same
help of miraculous power. What was this ark of the covenant ? A wonderful
piece of sacred symboUsm. Over it — in fact, forming the hd of it — was what was
named the merey-seat, God's earthly throne. Within it were the ten command-
ments, written on two tables of stone. This combination of symbols of law and
mercy belonged to no religion but that of Israel. The gods of other nations
required but httle duty, and were hardly expected to show mercy. But the
symbolism of the ark and the whole Mosaic economy projected these thoughts
before the minds of Israel : The true God is a God of mercy. But at the same time
He insists on duty. The ark proclaimed TTim the God of mercy and of law ; of
gracious promise, of ennobling precept ; dehvering men by the grace He gave,
dignifying them by the duty He exacted. This was the God of Israel. And now, in
lieu of signs, the symbol of mercy and of duty was to lead the way. Not eagles,
symbols of victorious power, but tables of stone led them, and "marshalled them
the way that they were going." And their successful following of this lead suggests
that when any one marches to the lead of the ten commandments, or of the
promises of God, he is as well led and as grandly suscoured as when some cloudy
pillar moves before him. There is importance m this. Often our signs are with-
drawn; as with the community of Israel so vnth us, it is probably the case that
signs grow fewer and that special experiences grow more rare as character ma-
tures. Then comes a time, more or less clearly definite, when, instead of mysterious
movings felt to be Divine, the guidance of the Lord is given, through a testimony
of mercy a/nd of dmty. Before you goes the symbol of heavenly love and of
earthly duty. And you have to march, coldly as it may seem, to the lead of tables
of stone and verbal assurances only of God's care. Mm'min: not at this ; a hope
and a duty are guides sublime. The ark is just as good as the cloud. If you had
the choice of an enhghtened conscience or a special angel to be your guide, you
would do wisely to choose the conscience in preference to the angel. You may
mistake the reading of your signs — ^you rarely will your duty. Next to His
redeeming grace, the richest mercy He gives us is a " word behind us," or within us,
" Baying, this is the way, walk ye in it." And the grandest spirits of mankind — in
their pilgrimage firom victory to victory — have marched under the lead of nothing
grander than some ark, something that whispered hope and demanded duty. Thus
led, did Israel lose ? Nay, as before the cloudy pUlar the sea divided, so before
the sacred ark did Jordan. If you have something like what the ark embodied — a
promise and a precept — ask no more ; where the tables of the covenant lead you,
there follow. Few get more, and none get anything better, than these. God guides
through enlightenment of conscience, or Bible precept, or the devout example
which you instinctively perceive is a pattern to be followed. Seek not any sign;
God's presence will ever be with all those that keep. His precepts. If the ark of
God-; as replacing the pUlar of cloud, has such suggestions, observe thirdly —

III. God's hydeaulics are nevee faulty. In the West of England just now
there is considerable discussion about " docMsing " the river Avon, i.e., so throwing
a dam across the mouth that all the river up to Bristol would be converted into
one huge dock. And in the discussion the strength of such a dam, its cost, its
leakage, the right place for it, how to provide for the outlet of all water above a
certain level, are canvassed by all. Here we have the " dockising " for a day
or two of the river Jordan, a very much larger river than the Avon, one whose
very name suggests the swiftness of its current. And the dam that effects this great
collection of tiie waters is "the atk of God," set down in the midst of the Jordan
bed, with the priests grouped on either »id«. H«w would the phQosophers ol
Ut»t day criticise that dam, and express with assumed anxiety their fears that tha



|» THE BOOK OF JOSHUA. [ch. m. T— 17,

law of gravitation and the law that governs the flow of Uquidg would prove too
much for the legs of the priests, and even for the weight of the tables of stone.
But whatever fear might be entertained by the people before the ark entered Jordan,
and whatever misgivings by the priests when they were standing in its pebbly
bed, there was a power which operated from that ark which dammed the river as
no engineer could have done it. So that instead of reading of struggling with the
water, of multitudes carried down the stream, of hairbreadth escapes, of multitudes
left behind, all got safely across. And here, I think, we have a specimen of what
is everywhere to be seen ; the efficiency of spiritual barriers agavnat all assail-
ing forces. We see them on all hands ; we dread lest they be overborne by some
strong current bearing down against them. But lo I they stand against all force
that threatens them. God's truth is such a barrier. With error like a huge river
rushing down upon it, it seems as slender and insufficient as was the barrier of the
ark. Science is so arrogant and captious, chronology so sure, metaphysics so
disputatious, error so agreeable to the natural man, that it seems as if there could
be no standing. But the Jordan of all the phUosophiea and all the heresies
threaten in vain, and God's ark of truth is sufficient to withstand them. God's
grace in the heart is such a dam ; nothing seemingly more feeble, nothing really
more strong, against the swelling tides of inward corruption and outward tempta-
tion that assail the character. Sometimes prayer shields a distant boy, an erring
Mend, and protects them with a guard as really omnipotent as it appears feeble.
Judge not by the outward appearance. The clock is not about to go backward, nor
error usurp the place of truth. Don't tremble for the ark of God, as did Eh.
Whatever God wants guarded, it is omnipotent to guard. So that, amongst other
lessons, this sweet one comes to us that we are guarded better than we think. And
what seems God's weakness is mightier than the strongest strength which can come
against us. — G.

Vers. 14 — 17. — The division of the waters. The passage of Jordan, like that ol
the Bed Sea, marks a momentous crisis in the career of the chosen people. The events
are similar in their general character as Divine interpositions, but there are notable
points of difference. In the first case there was haste, confusion, and alarm ; the people
fled precipitately, the noise of the Egyptian host behind them, the mountains shutting
them in, the sea an object of terror before them ; they cried unto the Lord, in their
distress. Even Moses seems to have had his misgivings. " Wherefore criest thou unto
me ?" &c. (Exod. xiv. 15). But here, apparently, all is tranquillity and order. The
territory on which they stand has been subdued and is their possession, and they move
dehberately, under the direction of Joshua, down to the brink of the river, waiting
in cahn expectancy for the salvation of the Lord. In the former case, the region
beyond the sea was a dread mystery to them. It was a waste, howling wilderness,
towards which they could not look without sad forebodings. But here the hills, and
forests, and fertile plains of the land of promise are actually in sight, and though
they know that they are not destined to enter at once into peaceable possession of It,
the vision gives such stimulus to their faith that it is as if the inheritance were already
theirs. Let us look at this event — (1) as a revelation of God; (2) as a chapter in the
moral education of the people,

I. As A REVELATION OF GoD. The miraculous, supernatural character of the
event we take to be beyond all reasonable doubt. It is impossible to explain it on
mere natural grounds. The spies, like David's " mighty men " at a later period
(1 Chron. xii. 15), probably swam the flood. But, considering the condition of the
river at the time (ver. 16), it is incredible that so vast a host, with women and
children, should have passed over except by a miraculous division of the waters.
In the passage of the Bed Sea an intermediate agent was employed to bring about
the result. " The Lord caused the sea to go back by a strong east wind" (Exod.
siv. 21). But there is no indication of anything of this kind here. It is a direct
exercise of the wonder-working hand of God. In the one case a natural agent ia
used supematuraJly ; in the other nothing intervenes between the supernatural
cause wad the yisible effect. Not* —



6H. m. 7—17.] THE BOOK OF JOSHUA-



_ 1. God's eontrol ovei' aaturs. All miracle* ia the phygloal realm are an asser->
tioQ of tlte abgolute Bovereignty of God over the things He has made and the laws
Hs has ordained. The posBibility of miracles springs naturally from the fact of the
existence of a " living God," who is " Lord of all the earth." Whether any
particular miracle is credible must depend on the force of evidence, and in this
evidence the moral end to be answered plays an important part. But to deny its
possibility is to deny the Divine sovereignty. It is absurd to suppose that the
order of nature which God Himself has estabhshed limits His own freedom. The
power that created it must ever be Lord over it. Consider how this truth of the
supremacy of the living God is the basis of our faith in a oontroDing Providence
and in the eificacy of prayer. How the Divine will may work freely within the
hoimd) of natural order we know not. But once grasp the principle that the
forces and laws of nature are not fetters imposed on the freedom of Divine power,
but instruments by which that power may accomphsh the purposes of love as it
pleases, and you have no longer any difficulty in believing in a fatherly Providence
in which you can trust and to which you can appeal in time of need.

2. God's control over the nations. This iSiiracle is to the people a prophecy and
pledge of victory in their conflict with the Canaanites. *' Hereby ye shall know," &c.
(ver. 10). The power that rolled back the waters of the rushing river could roU
back the force of the barbarous tribes beyond it. The opening for the chosen
people of a pathway across the stream would be a doubtful benefit imless they
could take it as the pledge of the presence of that power with them afterwards.
Moreover, shall not He who planted the nations be able to uproot them ? Shall
not He who " determined for them the times before appointed and the bounds of
their habitation," &c., be able to change their boundaries as He pleases, and to
destroy them when they faU to fulfil the ends for which He gave them their local
habitation ? This is a veiy different thing from saying that the strong have license
to oppress and exterminate the weak. It may be perfectly trae that there is a
process ever going on among the peoples of the earth, by virtue of which those that
have risen higher in the scale of hiunanity thrust out the lower, a " survival of the
fittest." But this in no way overrides the law that the oppressor and the spoiler
must, sooner or later, suffer a righteous retribution. " Woe to thee that spoUest,"
&c. (Isa. xxxiii. 1). God may use one nation as the scourge of another, and the
avenger of His own abused authority. But let none think to move in this path
without a very distinct and definite Divine caE. " Vengeance is mine," &c. (Kom.
xii. 19). This violent seizure of the land of Canaan by the Israehtes can be
justified only on the ground of a direct Divine commission, and of that commission
the miraculous passage of Jordan was the seal and proof.

II. A CHAPTER IN THE MOEAI, EDUCATION OP THE PEOPLE. AN EDUCATION IN

FAITH, AND IN THE COURAGE THAT SPRINGS FROM FAITH. Their whole Career in
the wilderness had been marked by signal Divine interpositions. " The Lord alone
did l^ad them, and there was no strange God with them " (Deut. xxxii. 12). They
specially needed to have this impressed on them now, entering as they were on a new
stage in their national history, new situations, new responsibilities ; coming as an
organised commonwealth into contact with the corruptions of Phoenician idolatry.
This miracle was intended also to give them confidence in their leader : " This day
will I begin to magnify thee," &c. (ver. 7). And the calm strength of Joshua's faith
was fitted to inspire them with the same spirit.

Lessons suggested : (1) Life to most of us is a succession of trials of faith and
fortitude. " Ye have not passed this way before." We are contiaually entering on
new ground, new phases of experience, unknown difficulties and dangers. Our
only security is the consciousness of the Divine presence, the faith that lays hold on
the strength of God. (2) The inspiring effect of a noble example. " It does a wrestling
man good to be surrounded by tried wrestlers." He is most honoured of God who
has most power to awaken in his fellows faith in God. (3) The conditions of victory
in the last emergency of hfe. Though there may be nothing in Scripture teaching
to warrant it, it is not without reason that, in hymns and allegories, the Jordan is
regarded as a symbol of death. The dark river rolls between us and the land of



THl BOOK OF JOSHUA.



[oh. it. 1—24



promise; how shall we cross it in safety? "Tea, though I walk throngh tha
valley," Ac. (Psa. xxiii. 4). Let us hear the voice ojf the Captain of our salvation,
and we shall not be afraid. Th» ark of the covenant will open for us a sure pathway
through the deep. — W.



EXPOSITION.



OHA.PTEE IV. 1—24.



Tbh MEUoiiiAL. — Ver. 2. — ^Twelve Btone*.
The commemoration of events by the setting
up of huge stones was by no means peouUar
to the Jews, though it was often used by
them, as, for instance. Gen. xxviii. 18., ixxv.
14, 1 Sam. vii. 12. Almost every nation has
adopted it. The Egyptian obelisks, the
stones at Hamath, supposed to be of Hittite
origin, the dolmens and other megalithio
monuments of the Celts, the Logan or rock-
ing-stones, are cases in poiat. The Scan-
diaavians filled their country with them.
Our own StonehengS and the Avebury
stones are supposed by some to be, not
temples nor burial-places, but memorials of
some battle. The command here given to
Joshua was regarding what was to be done
by the twelve men, who (v. 4 ; cf . ch. iii. 12)
were already chosen. The form of the
command is merely another instance of the
common Hebrew practice of repetition.

Ver. 3. — Stood firm. Much discussion has
taken place about the proper rendering of
the word pSH which the LXX. translates
troi'/iowc, and the Vulgate dwrissimos. It
seems best to take it, as our version does,
as the infinitive absolute, and to translate as
in ch. iii. 17. But the punctuation of the
Masorites separates it from >VI3p. They
would apparently render " to set up."
Ver. 4. — Prepared. Literally, oppointed.
Ver. 6. — That this may be a sign unto
you. There was for many years a visible
memorial of the miracle. When your chil-
dren ask tlieir fathers In time to come
(cf . Exod. xii. 26 ; xiii. 14 ; Deut. vi. 20). The
passover, the law itself, as well as certain
outward and visible memorials, were to be
the guarantees to future ages of the truth of
the history related in the Books of Moses and
Joshua. The monument has disappeared,
but the observance of the passover and the
whole law by the Jews now, more than
3,000 years after the events related in these
books, is a perpetual standing witness of the
truth of the record. In Uke manner the
Christian passover, the sacrament of the
Lord's Supper, is appealed to by Christians
of every denomination as a proof of the
Bubstsmtial truth of the narrative of the
Gospels.

Ver. 9. — And Joshua set np twelv* stonei
ki th« midst Qf Jordaq. A grett de»l pf



ingenuity has been wasted over this passage.
Keunicott would read "from the midst,"
instead of " in the midst ;" but this purely
conjectural emendation is contrary to the
fact that these stones were to be set up where
the priests bearing the ark stood, while the
others were to be set up where the Israehtes
rested for the night. Again: it has been
asked why stones should be placed as a
memorial in the Jordan itself, where no man
could see them. The answer is a simple
one. They were not placed in the Jordan, but
at some distance from its banks. They were
placed where the priests stood, i.e. , at the
brink of the Jordan (" juxta ripam," jarchi),
which at that time had overflowed its banki
(ch. iii. 15). It is no reply to this to ob-
serve with the translator of Keil that the
stones would by this interpretation be left
high and dry for the greater part of the year,
for this would be the very reason why that
precise spot was fixed upon for a memorial.
Nor does the word ^Wa in the midst, con-
stitute any vaUd objection to this interpreta-
tion, for the same word is used in ch. iii, 17,
although two verses previously we are told
that the priests stood at the brink of the
swollen river with the soles of their feet just
dipped in the water (see note there). Thus
whfie the Vulgate translates " in medio Jor-
danis alveo," the LXX. renders more accu-
rately by iv aiiTif Ti^ 'lopSavy. Thus Bosen-
mliller's objection to the two monuments,
namely, that such monuments would never
be placed in a rapidly flowing stream like the
Jordan, vanishes ; while, as Poole suggests,
these stones might be heavier, and form
even a hiore enduring memorial than that of
the first restmg-plaoe of the Israehtes, con-
structed as it were of stones which were not
beyond the power of one man to carry.
After all, it may be asked whether it is
more probable that this passage is an in-
sertion from another, and an irreconcilable
account (Meyer, Ehobel), or that it is a later
gloss (Bosenmuller, Maurer, &c.), or that
two monuments of so mighty and memorable
a miracle should have been set up, one at
the place where the priests stood, and the
otherwhere the Israehtes rested after tins
wonderful interposition of God on their
behall So Hengstenberg 'Geschichte des
Belches Gottes,' p. 203. The Syriac version
only Bupports BoBanmiiller's view. The
LZX- and Vulgate rendar "twelv* othw



CH. IT. 1—24.3



THE BOOK OF JOSHUA.



M



Btonea." The supposition that the Bsusred
historian gives all the commands of Ood to
Joshua, and that therefore such parts of
the narrative as are not contained in these
commands are to be rejected, is refuted by a
comparison, for instance, of oh. iii. 7i 8,
with vers. 13, 17.

Ver. 10. — For. Bather, arid. This verse
does not give a reason for the last. The
prlesta which bare the aik stood. This
must have been a majestic sight. While
the people " hasted " to cross, either that
they might effect the passage during the
day, or, more probably, because they crossed
in feara'nd trembling, partly in spite of, and
partly because of, the miraculous inter-
position on their behalf, the priests beaming
the ark of God, the visible symbol of His
presence, stood solemnly still at the brink of
the river, nor did they stir until every one of
that mighty host had passed over. Then,
when all had safely crossed, the ark of God
was borne across the bed of the river, and as
soon as the soles of the priests touched the
highest point that the waters had reached
on the other side, they returned to their
place, and all was as it had been before.
Well might the Israelites erect a donble
memorial of a scene so wonderful as this 1
All that Moses commanded Joshua (Deut.
xxxi. 23). And the people hasted and
passed over. " Unde et ego arbitror, quia
nobis quoque venientibus ad baptismum
salutarem, et suscipientibus sacramenta
Verbi Dei, non otiose, neo segnitur res ge-
lenda est, sed festinandum est, et perurgen-
dum " (Orig., Horn. v.).

Ver. 12. — ^Armed (see ch. i. 14). Before
the children of Israel Not necessarily " in
front of," but "in the sight of," as in
Num. viii. 22. The Israelites were witnesses
of the fulfilment of the pledge given them
by their brethren. But the usual place of
these tribes was not with the vanguard. See
last verse, where the same words are trans-
lated " in the presence of."

Ver., 13. — Prepared for war. EwSon/oi,
LXX. Literally, disencumbered, like the
Latin expeditus. UnUke Num. xxxi. 6, the
Hebrew has the article here. The meaning
therefore may be " equipped men of the
host," i.e., the light -armed and active
among them. If we translate thus, it is
clear that all their armed men did not go
over Jordan. The impedimenta were leStt
behind, under a strong guard (see notes on
ch. i. 14). The plains of Jericho. Here
the LXX. and Theodotion have rtiv 'lepi'xtl
voKiv, Symmachus renders by doiKtiTOv, the
Vnlgate by eampestria. The original is
rnTl? Uterally, the deserts or uncultivated
UtntU (gee note on ob. iii. 16). They formed



a "low-lying plain about four hours' journey
in breadth," at that time largely covered
with palm trees and thorny acacias, but
apparently not cultivated. Since that time,
the palms having disappeared, the plain has
become " a very picture of fertility,"
" covered with luxuriant vegetation " (Bart-
lett, ' Prom Egypt to Palestine,' p. 453. See
also note on ch. iii. 16). The valley nar-
rows to a gorge at Jericho, through which
the Kelt, according to Bobinson the ancient
Cherith, flows, the source of aU the verdure
which once bloomed around the city. The
gorge of the Kelt Canon Tristram describes
as ' ' tremendous," but he believes the Cherith
to have been eastward of Jordan, following
Mr. Grove, who is here disposed to accept
the tradition of Ensebius and Jerome.

Ver. 14. — On that day the Lord magnified
Joshua. This was not, as Calvin remarks,
the chief aim of the miracle. But it was,
nevertheless, one important result of it.
Joshua was the appointed leader of the
Israelites, and be was under God's special
protection and guidance. But however
much God may overrule our human nature
to His own purposes. He never abrogates
the laws of its working. Confidence in a
leader, from a human point of view, is one
of the most essential requisites for success
in war. Therefore in the crossing of the
Jordan we find Joshua directing all the
operations, though the direction of afiaira
might have been put into other hands, that
of Eleazar the high priest, for instance.
But this was the public attestation of the
secret intimation God had given Joshua
(ch. i. 5) : " As I was with Moses, so wiU I
be with thee : I will not fail thee nor forsake
thee." From this point onward we see no
signs of hesitation on the part of the Israel-
ites ; nothing but the most unwavering
confidence in the Divine mission, as well
as in the extraordinary natural gifts, of their
leader.

Yer. 15. — And the Lord spake tmto
Joshua, saytog. Meyer and others, accord-
ing to the method of a certain school, regard
this as an extract from another document,
which is equivalent to saying that the Book
of Joshua is a compilation of the most
unintelligent kind, a conclusion which is
refuted by every line of the Book. A vivid
and picturesque narrative, such as we have
before us, could hardly have been brought
together by the Hbcral use of scissors and
paste, with utter disregard of the coherence
of the extracts. It is not denied that the
writer of the Book of Joshua may have
compiled his history from contemporary
documents (see Introduction). All &at is
affirmed is that in so doing he nsed his
materuUf with ordinaty common leiue. Af



THE BOOK OF JOSHUA.



[oB. IV. 1 — 24.



has been before remaiked, a marked feature
of early Hebrew composition was repeti-
tion; repetition with additional details to
add to the completeness of the narrative,
but designed principally to emphasise the
principal facta. Thus we are now told
that it was at the command of Joshua, on
God's express intimation, that the priests
left their post. And to mark more clearly
the historian's sense of the importance of
the miracle, it is added that, as soon as the
priests' feet had left the channel in which
the waters had flowed up to the moment
that they entered the waters of Jordan on
the other side, the waters which had been
out off returned, and flowed exactly where
they had done before. This additional fact,
supplementing as it does the briefer detail
in ch< iii. 17 and oh iv, 11, must be there-
fore regarded as a record of the solemn
conviction of the historian that in the events
he is narrating he recognised a special inter-
position of the hand of God (see vers. 23, Hi),
in which in like manner we find a repetition
in fuller detail of the command concerning
the stones, designed to mark more clearly
the sense the historian wishes his readers
to have of the direct interference of God in
what he has recorded,

Ver. 16. — The testimony. The word rwij?
though derived from the same root as ly
witness, would seem rather to have the
sense of precept, from the idea of repetition
contained in the root. Compare the well-
known Hebrew particle TW again. It must
refer to the two tables of the law which
(Heb. X. 4) were placed in the ark (see Deut.
X. 5, and comp. Bxod. xxv. 16, 21, 40,
Num. xvii. 10, where this is said to be the
testimony). Other things were placed in
the ark, such as the manna, Aaron's rod,
and these, no doubt, were for a witness to the
facts of the Mosaic record. The LXX. , how-
ever, consistently render this word by /lap-
■n'lpm, fiapTvpiov. The Vulgate here has
arcam fmderis.

Ver. 18.— When the priests . . . were
come up. There is a difierenoe of reading
here. The Masorites read as our version.
The Hebrew text implies that the waters
began to flow from the very moment that
the priests' feet left the ohanuel of the Jordan.
Were lifted up. The original is more vivid,
and marks the authentic sources from which
this history is derived. Were plucked, up, i.e.,
out of the soft adhesive mud in the channel
of the river. The construction of the
original is a conatructio prceqnans. They
dragged their feet out of the mud, and
planted them on dry ground.

Ver. 19.— On the tentft day of the first
sumfb. Tbifl statement, compared with



oh. V. 10, will bear close analysis, and refutes
the clumsy compiler theory. There was
just time between the tenth and fourteenth
day of the month for the events described in
the meantime. And the scrupulous obe-
dience to the law, the provisions of which,
we are expressly told, had been of necessity
neglected hitherto, is a fact closely in kesp-
ing with the character of Joshua, and the
whole spirit of the narrative, GUgaX The
Gilgal, according to the Masoritesi no doubt
from its being a circular encampment. Not
as yet, however, called by this name (see
ch. V. 9). It was " about five miles " (50
stadia, according to Josephus), "from the
river banks " (Stanley, ' Sinai and Palestine,'
p. 307). We gather from ch. v. 3 that it
was a rising ground, but it is impossible to
identify the spot, since there never existed
any town or village there. A spot is shown
by the mhabitants about two miles from
Jericho, which is held by them in great
reverence, but this is further from Jericho
than Josephus imagines it to be, for he
places it about a mile and a quarter from
Jericho. Tristram (' Land of Israel,' p. 216)
identifies Eiha (see note on ch. ii. 1) with
Gilgal, but Bartlett (p. 452) places it "a
mile east of Eiha," " some three miles or
more from the fords." It is hardly probable,
however, that the Israelites, in their then
unprepared condition (see next chapter, and
cf. Gen. xxxiv. 25), encamped so near the
city, even though they were conscious ol
Divine protection, as Josephas would have
us suppose. It has been denied by soma
that the Gilgal mentioned in ch. ix. 6, x. 6
is the same as this one (see notes there, as
well as the Masoretic translation above).
The reverence for sacred places, such as
Gilgal, degenerated in the course of time,
according to- a well-known law of humanity,
into superstition — a superstition severely
rebuked by the prophets (Hosea iv. 15 ; ix.
15 ; Amos iv. 4 ; v. 5). We may compare
the idolatrous worship of the brazen serpent
(2 Kings xviii.4). It is sometimes contended
by Roman Catholic commentators that no
approval of the conduct of Hezekiah is here
expressed ; but a comparison of this passage
with those above cited will show in which
direction the minds of inspired men tended.
Other places seem to have been similarly
regarded with superstitious reverence. Not
only do we find Bethel mentioned among
such places as we might well expect from
Jeroboaml's idolatrous worship there, but
Beersheba also seems to have become a seat
of this misdirected devotion (see Amos v. 6 ;
viii. 14)

Ver. 21.— When. Heb. "^S. The relativ*
pronoun heje i$ spmetimeB eq^uivalei)t tt



1—24]



THE BOOK OF JOSHUA.



U



" when," as in Deut. zi. 6 ; 1 Kings viii. 9.
Gesenius would translate " if that," and Keil
would render by quod.

Ver. 23. — For, The original here again
is I^S, with the meaning because.

Ver. 24. — The hand of the Lord, that It la
mighty. " Thus the river, though dumb,
was the best of heralds, proclaiming with a
loud voice that heaven and earth are subject
to the Lord God of Israel " (Calvin). That
ye might fear. The construction here is
unusual. Instead of the imperfect or in-
finitive with jyD? we have the perfect.
Therefore Ewald, Maurer, and Knobel (who
says that the second member of the sentence
ought to correspond with the first) have
altered the pointing in order to bring this
passage into conformity with the supposed
necessities of grammar. In so doing they
have robbed it of its pioturesqueness and its
meaning. For the object is clearly to show
the lasting nature of the fear, " that ye
might recognise now the hand of the Lord,
that ye might have a thorough and lasting
fear of his name." We may here remark
on the necessarily miraculous character of
the whole narrative of the crossing the
Jordan. It admits of no explaining away.
The account must either be accepted or
rejected en bloc. First we have the specific
declaration of Bahab in chap. ii. 10, that
Jehovah dried up the Bed Sea, and that this
proof of the peculiar protection of Israel by
the Most High had struck terror into the
hearts of the inhabitants of Canaan. Next
we have the fact that Jordan had overflowed
its banks. The dangerous nature of the
crossing, even at ordinary times, has been
mentioned already. Lives are frequently
lost in the attempt, as recent travellers with
one voice declare. At the time when the
waters were out such a crossing was prac-
tically impossible to a host like the host of
Israel. Nor can there be any mistake about
its being the, period of the overflowing of
Jordan, for the time of the crossing is men-
tioned. It was the time of harvest — that is,
of the barley harvest. This is confirmed by
the fact that the recently cut flax was now
lying on the roof of Eahab'g house, and by
the fact that the barley and flax ripened
together, a coincidence which we have
already mentioned in the note on chap. ii. 6.
Thf time is yet further defined. It was the
" tenth day of the first month." We learn,
moreover, from Levit. xxiii. 9 — 15 and Deut.
xvi. 6 that this was the time when the first-
fruits were offered, from which seven weeks
were reckoned to the beginning of wheat
harvest (Exod. xxxiv. 2). Moreover, the
passover was kept immediately afterwards
(chap. v. 10), on " the fourteenth d«y of the

JOSHUA



first month." Thus the date of the ciosa-
ing, which is accurately fixed by a variety ol
circumstances, is clearly proved to cone-
spond with the time of Jordan's overflow.
We next come to the measures taken to ae-
cure the crossing. There is hkewise no
mistake here. Not one single intimation is
given of an endeavour to break in any way
the force of the current, or to preserve the
Israelites, either men, women, or children,
from the imminent risk they ran of death
by drowning. Not only are no other expe-
dients resorted to, but no animals seem to
have been prepared to transport them over.
Nor, again, were any means used to elude
the vigilance of the inhabitants of Canaan.
Eeaders of Xenophon's ' Anabasis ' will not
fail to notice how often the passage of the
rivers was a matter of the utmost difficulty
to that expedition, and how fiercely attempts
at crossing were disputed by the half- savage
tribes of Asia Minor. How are we to ac-
count for the fact that no opposition v/as
offered to Joshua's passage by the highly-
civilised nations of Palestine? According
to the narrative before us it was effected in
the most leisurely and peaceful manner.
What other explanation is possible than that
offered in the text, that when the feet of
the priests bearing the ark touched the
waters, those waters were cut off by super-
natural power, and a way was miraculously
made for the people of God through the
midst of Jordan f The crossing was remark-
able enough, we are told, to have been com-
memorated by a double memorial (vers. 8, 9).
If it had taken place through an unusually
easy ford there would have been nothing
remarkable about it. Therefore it is clear
that the whole narrative of the crossing is
either absolute fable or strictly and historic-
ally accurate. Let us conclude by summing
up the several reasons which make the
former alternative inadmissible. The first
is the precision with which the date is fixed,
and the fact that the correctness of this date
is confirmed, as we have seen, by a variety
of corroborative evidence. The next is the
simplicity and artleesness of the narrative,
and its appeal to still-existing monuments
as confirmatory of the facts recorded. The
third is that no account of a battle at Jordan
is even hinted at by the Hebrew or any other
historian, a battle which must infallibly
have taken place had the Israelites at-
tempted to enter Palestine in any ordinary
manner ; for the supposiHon that the waters
of the ford at Jericho were unusually low at
this time is quite inadmissible for the rea-
sons given above ; nor can it be supposed
that the Israelites crossed the river by any
other ford without rejecting the whole his-
tory of the conquest. The last reason il



ee



THE BOOK. OF JOSHUA,



[CH. IT. 1—24.



the touch ol detail given in the word -IpplJ
which seems to mark the transition from the
■oft adhesive mud of the river to the firm-
ness of the dry land beyond (for the word
translated "dry land " in chap. iii. 17 only
means that it was land and not water.
Gesenins). Otu wituegg, in fact, can be



subjected to the aevetest oross-ezaminatiou
without shaking hii testimony. And we are
thus compelled to choose between accepting
the literal correctness of the narrative as it
stands, or crediting the author with a skill
in constructing a work of fiction which itself
scarcely falls short of the miraculous.



HOMILETICS.

Vera. 1 — 24:.— The memorial. From this chapter we learn several leBsons.

I. The duty of commemoeating, by a pious memorial, the good things God
HAS done foe ns. The memory of events under the law was ever kept up in this
way. The memorials of God's mercy we read of in the Old Testament are innu-
merable. There was circumcision, the memorial of God's covenant with Abraham ;
the stone set up at Bethel, the memorial of Jacob's vision. There was the passover,
the memorial of the deliverance from Egypt ; the manna and Aaron's rod in the ark;
the memorial of the miraculous feeding of the Israelites in the wUdemess ; and the
selection of the progeny of Aaron for the high-priesthood. Thus we have the me-
morial here mentioned of the passage of Jordan, and the memorial of the victory over
the Philistines ill 1 Sam. vii. 12. Kational deliverances also were commemorated by
annual feasts. Such was the feast of Purim, the establishment of which is recorded
in Esther ix. 20 — 82. Our Lord gives His sanction to the principle in the institu-
tion of the sacrament of Holy Communion, and the Christian Church has made it
her ovTU by the establishment of festivals Kke Easter, 'Wliitsuntide, Christmas, and
the like. The same principle is at work in the erection of memorial churches and
other means of commemorating great mercies, or the lives of good men. But the
principle is capable of extension. It seems a little ungrateful that we as a nation,
or even the members of our religious bodies, think so little of commemorating God's
signal mercies and deliverances by special days of thanksgiving. The observance
of such days as January 30th, May 29th, November 5th may have assumed too poli-
tical and party a character, but there are surely other days of national blessings
which, if observed as days of thanksgiving, would not be open to the same objec-
tions. At least we may go so far as this. Gratitude, in the Old Testament, was
testified by outward signs. Where those outward signs are wanting among our-
selves, it is to be feared that the gratitude is wanting also. The country ought to
be covered with memorials of national and local as well as individual mercies. Days
of recognition of such mercies to the empire, or particular parts of the empire,
should be more common than they are. Our unhappy divisions, or even the fear
of aggravating those divisions, should not vidthhold us from publicly recognising
what in our hearts we believe to be acts of God's gracious providence over us. A
stranger going through our country should have fi-equent occasion to ask, " What
mean these ? " and should repeatedly receive the answer, " These are the memo-
rials of the great things God £d for us in our &thers' days, and in the old time
before them."

II. These hehobulb tend to stie up a spirit of piett and gratitude. There
is no more frequent speech recorded in connection with memorials, whether build-
ings or festivals, than the supposition of an inquiry regarding their nature on the
part of the young, and of an answer on the part of parents explaining it. Now the
abstract facts of history make but a faint impression on the yoimg, while a noble build-
ing or a remarkable observance attracts their attention at once. It is an old heathen
proverb, " Segnius irritant animos demissa per aures quam quaa sunt oculis subjecta
fideUbus." It is surely a matter of Christian prudence to stir up as early as possible
in the minds of the yoimg an interest in the truths of religion, and of the history of their
country and Church. ."This is done, as regards Christian doctrine, by the increased
attention given to the commemoration of the chief events in the life of Christ at the
great Christian festivals. But much more might b« done. How much of our
deoreMinf respect for the Reformation may be traced to our neglect of some sort of



CH, IT. 1—21] THB BQOK OF JOSHU-i.



yearly commemoration of those who laid down their lives for it, is a question. How
much our very faint sense of the mercies of God to this country, and in particular
to the wonderful salvation God vouchsafed to us in the destruction of the Spanish
Armada, is due to the same cause, may also be a question. As regards the latter,
it is perhaps not too much to say that scarcely one educated Englishman out of ten,
and no uneducated one, has any idea from what vast perils we, as a nation, have
been dehvered by that one event. And in spite of the many signal mercies we have
received, and in spite of the great things God has wrought for us in granting us
the character we enjoy for fairness, uprightness, respect for liberty and law, and in
spite of the vast and extended dominion He has placed in our hands, our sense of
gratitude to God for these things seems diminishing daUy. We shall do well to
ask ourselves how much of it is due to a neglect of the principle laid down in this
chapter regarding the wisdom of memorials of past blessings which shall induce the
young to ask what they mean, and shall enable us, in reply to their question, to
incite them to " praise the Lord for his mercies, and declare the wonders that he
doeth for the children of men."

III. EvEEY TRIBE TOOK PART IN THE WOBK. The principle above contended for is
capable of misappUoation. The multiplication of party or sectarian memorials of
animosity and ill-feeling would be an evil, rather than a blessing. Even memorials
of the Reformers, or of so great a national deliverance such as that to which we
have just referred, might easily, as is the case in Ireland, be made occasions of
strife. But this applies rather to the abuse than the use of them. In modern days
of freedom of thought there could hardly exist a single anniversary the propriety
of which would be questioned by no one. To keep only such anniversaries as no
one objected to, would be to keep none at all. But care should be taken that
all memorials of this kind should be (1) so kept as not wantonly to insult the pre-
judices of others, and (2) should be confined to events in which the community as
a whol3 had a share. The victory of Israel over Benjamin was not commemo-
rated by a memorial, though it was doubtless a real national blessing. Only such
events as can be commemorated by taking " out of every tribe a man" are intended
by the foregoing remarks.

IV. We aee all equally bound to declare what God has done fob us. The
duty of erecting the memorial was not confined to the priests or Levites. So now,
it is not the clergy only who are to proclaim God's " noble acts." AU, in their
several spheres, are to make known the great things He has done, and to take part
in the publio commemorations of them. The Church does not consist of clergy
only, but of clergy and laity. So, too, the duties of a pubhc recognition of the
goodness of God are as incumbent on the laity as on the clergy. The laity are to
bear the stones on their shoulders, and to deposit them where the people rest for the
night. It is not well when they leave these duties to women and children, or to
those whose duty it is to bear the ark. The duties of worshipping God in the
sanctuary on other days beside Sunday, of promoting religious works and religious
societies, is often left to the clergy by those who have plenty of time, if they pre-
ferred to spend their leisure hours in work for the benefit of others rather than in
regarding their own comfort.

Other points in the narrative are worthy ol mention.

I. The people hasted and passed over. They hasted (1) because they feared
the waters might return and overflow them. So, even when we are experiencing a
deUverance by the mighty hand of God, ought we to be watchful and trembling
lest we be again overtaken by sin. Want of watchfulness in the hour of triumph
has been the occasion of many a fearful faU. Or they hasted (2) because they were
anxious to enter the promised land. Would that all Christians were as full of a
chastened eagerness to enter upon the conflict with evil, which they only can do
who are delivered from the power of Satan and of sin.' Would that they were aa
anxious to " forget" the days of sinful indulgence they have "left behind," and to
" reach forward " imto the time of victory and triumph, which to faith appears
clearly " before." Lukewarmnesa in the Christian oours« ig th» forerunner, not ol
Tictory, but of disgrace. Or (3) they luwteued that they might not try the patiense



m THE BOOK OF JOSHUA- [oh. nr. 1—24.

of God. He only works miracles when natural means are insufficient. If we ex-
pect Him to stay the waters of Jordan to suit our convenience, to preserve us from
temptation when we ought to have removed ourselves from its influence, to guard
us by His special providence from dangers from which ordinary care and watoh-
falness would have preserved us, we shall be mistaken. We ought not to keep the
priests standing in the Jordan one minute longer than is necessary.

II. The Israelites went over " prepared for war." Tliis was true, not only
of the two-and-a-half tribes, bat of the other tribes also. (1) The Christian must
be ready for a conflict His Master forewarned him that He came to send " not
peace, but a sword," upon the earth. We have to "fight the good fight of faith,"
to "wrestle against principalities, against powers, against the rulers of the dark-
ness of this world, against spiritual wickedness in high places." We do not enter
the land of promise to be idle. A conflict against evil awaits us, both within our
own hearts and in society around. A man who leads a life of inaction against evil
within or in society around him is a traitor to the cause. We should deceive him were
we to lead him to suppose that he should enjoy the milk and honey, the pleasinres
and consolations of religion, till he had undergone its pei-ils and its struggles first.
And (2) preparation for war iiwolves self-discipline. The word in the original
means " disenctmibered." The impediments to action were to be removed ; that
is, habits, social customs, business engagements, which fetter us in our conflict with
evU, must be given up. Even the ties of affection must not be suffered to hamper
us in the discharge of our duty. The most innocent amusements, if incompatible
with effectual action against God's enemies, must be cast aside. Like the runner in
the race, we must " lay aside every weight, and the sin which doth so easily beset
us." So, and so only, must we enter into the enjoyment of God's covenant, and fit
ourselves for the unspeakable blessings which God has prepared for those who are
"faithful unto death."



HOMILIES BY VABIOUS AUTHOKS.

Ver. 6. — " That this may be ... . stones.'' The child/ren's question. That
life is intended to be a school of instmction to us we see plainly from the many
directions given to the people of Israel. For they were under the immediate
government of God ; He blessed them with special favours, was ready also to re-
prove their faults, and omitted no method of inculcating the lessons which the
events of their lives were calculated to teach. Christians are " led by the Spirit of
God ;" their eyes should be open to see, and their ears uncovered to hear, the mean-
ing of providential dispensations. In the instructions conveyed by God through
Joshua, posterity was not forgotten. Provision was made for handing down to
following ages a record of God's deaKngs with His people. With that provision our
text is concerned.

I. The iNQtiiRT. " What mean ye Tsy these stones ? '

1. By what suggested f A representative from each tribe selected a large stone
from the bed of tlie river Jordan, and these twelve stones were set up in Gilgal,
where the people spent the first night after the crossing. The importance of erect-
ing this memorial is indicated by the number of times it is referred to in these
chapters (iii. 12 ; iv. 5 ; and iv. 20). A conspicuous heap of stones was the cus-
tomary method of directing attention to a particular scene of some remarkable
occurrence, and accordingly stones were also placed in the Jordan where the priests'
feet had stood. But the memorial at Gilgal would be more enduring, and could not
Jail to excite attention each time that the national assembly was held there, as was
frequently the case (See 1 Sam. xi. 15, and 2 Sam. xix. 16). It was contrary to the
law to erect a carved image, for fear of idolatrous practices, but rude stones served
the purpose. The " sensible " is more impressive than the abstract. Ignorant per-
sons and children who had not yet learned to read, to whom writing would be use-
less, could appreciate the significance of such a memorial.

2. By whom tuked f It is the qnestiou of children whose curiosity has been



oa. IV. 1—64.] THE BOOK OF JOSHUA. O

awakened. What child in Altorf but must have inquired respecting the Btatne of
William Tell, or in Lucerne about the lion sculptured by Thorwaldsen to com-
memorate the deaths of the Swiss guards ? Young people are not to be dis-
couraged, but stimulated to put questions for information. The test of a good
teacher is found in his ability to induce his pupils to make inquiries spontaneously.
And the lesson may be of use to older people, not to be ashamed to confess igno-
rance, but to ask for enUghtenment.

8. By whom answered,? The fathers are to make the reply, explaining the
intention of the " sign " to their interested ohilrlren. Parents are the proper
persons to satisfy the inquiries of their offspring. There is au implicit trust reposed
in their statements which is not bo readily accorded to strangers. The remarks of
Joshua illustrate the necessity of parents attending to the religious training of their
children. Can it be deemed sufficient merely to provide food and clothing for the
body, and secular learning for the mind, and to allow the moral and spiritual
faculties to be neglected ? " Godliness is the bent learning." Joshua knew that
the deepest impressions are often created in childhood. The clay is then easily
moulded ; the tree has not yet grown stubbornly crooked, and can be straightened ;
the white paper, if not quite a blank, has still much space left for godly teachings.
A sculptor once engraved his own name at the base of a statue, and covering this
with plaster, cut therein the Emperor's name and titles, knowing that as years
went on the plaster would vanish, and the first inscription become legible. So does
early piety become dimly observable sometimes in the rush of pleasure and the
turmoil of business, and then the storms of life sweep away the overlaying strata,
and the desires of childhood, the gospel learnt at a mother's knee, the prayer
offered to the God of his fathers, these stand out in all their vividness as in the
former days.

II. General lessons to be debived.

1. The wondrous worJca of God are for all time. Their impressivenesB and
utility are not intended to terminate with their immediate effects. They exemplify
His power, and teach all men reverence (ver. 24). Of no avail to plead absence,
the recital to us is sufficient to move our hearts. The demand for a repetition of
miracles in order to convince each generation in its turn is extrava,gant and unrea-
sonable. These works of God exhibit also His favour to His people, tpnd incite to
trust and love, if we can declare, " This God is our God for ever and ever."

2. The importance of studying Scripture history. Not that we would insist so
strongly on the distinction between "sacred" and "profane" history. For aU
history is sacred, aU events being under the control of the Almighty, and evincing
His moral administration of the world. Yet Scripture is authoritative, presents us
with inspired comments on character and actions, and in many places strips off the
the veil and affords us clear and certain glimpses of the movements of Deity. As
distinguished from mere declarations of the nature of God's attributes, history
shows us God in operation, and the picture is helpful to true and defiuite concep-
tion. It famishes us not merely vrlth a statement, but with an iUustratlTe proof.

3. Ood jxpecta men to 'propagate His fame

4. The use of a memorial. The stones were for a " sign" to excite inquiry and
to prevent past history from sinking into utter oblivion. Events the most illustrious
are easily forgotten. There is need of enshrining their remembrance in some per-
manent form. Bead the mournful tale of Israel's ungrateful want of recollection
in Psa. Ixrviii. Again and again " they forgat his works and • the wonders he
had showed them.'' "Writing has been the chief method of preserving the memory
of famous deeds. When resorted to in time it forbids suspicion of legendary
exaggerations, and there is not the temptation to relic-worship which " signs
foster. The Jevrish dispensation was emphatically the age of symbols, but the
gospel has dispensed with them almost altogether. Of the miracles of Christ there
are no gennine memorials, save the narratives of the Evangelists and the Christian
Church itsel£ What has been the effect upon ourselves of a perusal of the
Gospels ? Are they merely " idle tales," or have they revealed to us the love fd
Ood, and His willingness to receive His erring children ? — A.



W TIB BOOK OF JOSHUA. [cb- «▼• 1—24

Vers. 6 — 22. — Memoriah. The crossing the Jordan dry shod was the first miracle
which marked the entrance of the people of Israel into the land of Canaan. It was
God's purpose that this should be held in perpetual remembrance. Hence the
erection of the twelve stones in the bed of the river, to remind the twelve tribes of
that which the Almighty hand had wrought for them, in fulfilment of the promise
made to their fathers. The material monument would, however, be insuf&cient of
itself to preserve this memory. The story it commemorated must be told from
generation to generation. Joshua, as the representative of the people of Israel,
speaks thus to the twelve men chosen to carry the twelve stopes : " This shaU be a
sign among you, that when your children ask their fathers in time to come, saying.
What mean ye by these stones ? Then ye shall answer them, That the waters of
Jordan were cut off before the ark of the covenant of the Lord, when it passed over
Jordan " (vers. 6, 7). After the crossing of the river the same precept is repeated,
and now not only to the twelve representatives of the people, but to the entire
nation. " And Joshua spake unto the children of Israel, saying, Ye shall let your
children know, saying, Israel came over this Jordan on dry land." This narrative
shows us the way in which the memory of the Divine story of salvation should be
handed down.

I. There needs to be an indestetjctiblb monttmbnt of the facts of re-
demption, not liable, like a mere verbal tradition, to human additions and interpo-
lations. The twelve stones here represent this character of immutability, by which
the truth of God is preserved from misrepresentation. We ourselves have more
than one memorial graven by God's own hand in the rock for ever. We have a
Divine Book — the Holy Scripture — which has preserved for us the great and glorious
facts of revelation in their integrity and purity. We must never suffer this sacred
monument either to be altered or added to.

II. The twelve stones, commemorative of the passage of the Jordan, were placed

THERE BY THE HANDS OF THOSE WHO HAD THEMSELVES BEEN WITNESSES OF THE GREAT

MIRACLE. The twelve men who reared this monument marched at the head of
Israel when the waters of the river were driven back. So was it also with the
sacred writers of the Old Testament. So was it with the Apostles — the first
twelve representatives of the new people of God. Their testimony is at once
irrefragable and of primary authority, for those who reared the monument of
the Scriptures can say with St. John, " That which we have seen and heard
declare we unto you " (1 John i. 1). Our first duty, as those who are concerned for
the preservation of the truth of God, ia fidelity to this original and sacred testimony.
Let us carefiilly separate from it all which is merely fabulous — the creation of our
own imagination or reason.

III. It is NOT ENOUGH, HOWEVER, TO PRESERVE THE LETTER OP SCRIPTURB n»-

IMFAIRED, and to fence it round with our respect and veneration, as it would not
have been enough for the children of Israel to have simply guarded against de-
structive forces the twelve stones of commemoration. It was needful, fm-ther, that
the story of the great miracle should be repeated day by day, not only in the
solemnities of the altar, but also at the domestic hearth. No other priesthood can
be a substitute for the priesthood of every man in his own household. Let every
Christian father himself tell to his children the story of salvation, taking it from
the pure source of Holy Scripture ; and so let this history form part of that
spiritual heritage which is the best legacy to succeeding generations. Let the altar
of remembrance — the Book of God — be set up in the midst of the house ; thus wiU
the sacred tradition be handed down in all its purity. Let the story of salvation be
told by the lips of father and mother, famiUar to the child from its very cradle ; and
thus preserved in its purity, the gospel tradition will become an element of vital
power in the heart of the rising race. — ^£. db P,

Ver. 7. — Memorial stone. Look for a little atthis cairn or Dmidical circle,or what-
ever other shape the twelve stones combined produced. Our text reads as if two such
enclosures were raised : one by Joshua in the bed of Jordan, laved at least by its
waters ; and one in Gilgal, the rising ground about midway between Jordan and



OB. IT. 1— 24.J THE BOOK OF JOSHUA. tl

Jericho. The first erection made by Israel in the promised land was thia stone of
remembrance. It was not casually or carelessly done. God enjoined it before
they crossed, and men were told off to gather the stones fit for such a purpose during
the crossing over. The first religious act they did was this memorial act ; and the
first bit of Canaan which they took possession of was hallowed as a memorial site.
Is there anything analogous to this which we ought to do ? And would there be
any advantage in our doing it ? Let us see what this action would suggest as our
proper course.

I. We should all take special measures to eemembeb dub biercies. For
our own sakes memorial stones are not valueless. Our power of recollection is
slight, and innumerable things make their claims upon it. Our misfortunes ask
loudly to be remembered. The slights we receive, the injuries we endure, the dis-
appointments we meet .with are clamorous in their appeals to memory. While
mercies of God, kindness of man, tranquil delights and satisfactions ask to be
remembered with only a small still voice which is apt to be drowned in the vulgar
din of the other turbulent recollections, there are some memories, as John Foster
phrased it, only rows of hooks to hang grudges on. And when memory so weakly
yields to clamour, or so morbidly prefers the poorer subjects of remembrance, every
recollection is a depressing burden. We owe it to ourselves to remember all God's
benefits, for the recollection of them is green pastures and still waters when we are
weak. It is inspiration when we are depressed. It gives the joyous sense of being
loved. It purifi^ the soul by gratitude. It binds us by the sweetest of aU bonds
to God's service. It brightens the future by the radiance which is at once most
trustworthy and most sweet. It sends us on our way "thanking God and taking
courage." And a wholesome, gracious memory being of such value, we should take
pains to cherish it. We should dtA with it as with a garden, not permitting any-
thing to grow in it which intrudes itself; but we should constantly keep down the
weeds, and plant, tend, and cherish the flowers of fragrance and of beauty. Keep
your heart with all diligence, and especially this bit of it. And to this end special
actions, stones of memory, vows of service, gifts, meditations should all be em-
ployed. There is one great stone of memory which, in obedience to the Saviour,
the Church has raised. The rite of the Lord's Supper was meant to proclaim to
those ignorant of it, and to recall to those acquainted with it, the great deliverance
wrought on Calvary, and the infinite love which permits us to participate in it.
Use that memorial ; open your heart to its influence. The less in the mood a
Christian man is for partaking of that rite, the more does he need to do so. It was
ordained to jog the indolent memory and to warm the coldness of the heart. Use
this memorial, and make it bigger by adding your own contribution to its gracious
testimonies. Each tribe laid its stone on the memorial heap in Gilgal. Each man
should add his stone to the memorial everywhere and always rising to the greater
deliverance Christ works for us. If we should take special measures to remember
our mercies in general, so most of all should we do so to remember the infinite
mercy of redemption.

II. It is a duty to report to others as well, as to remember for ourselves,
THE mercies of God. These stones were a publication of God's deahngs to aU who
subsequently should pass by that way : set up " for the encouragement of pil-
grims," as Bunyan would say. Experience may belong to us individually, but the
lessons of that experience belong to all who need them. The children of Israel
must not " hide God's righteousness (i.e., mercy) within their hearts." They must
tell it to the generations following. The story may be told in various ways — in a
holiday like the passover, which they will keep ; m a song, hke Miriam's, which
will Hnger in people's lips and hearts; or in an outward memorial like these stones.
Only, Israel must tell its mercies. In a world languishing for want of a heavenly
hope Israel must not be silent. So the memorial is reared — each stone a tongue
telling of God's love and help. Wherever there has been mercy received, the
Saviour requires that that mercy should be recorded for the good of others. Ha
may, as a temporary precept say, " Tell no man," to those who would lose its les-
sons by proclaiming too eagerly their mercy. But if the prohibition of garrulous and



Tf THE BOOK OF JOSHUA. [oh. w, 1-M.

thon^htlesa tattle abont mercies suggests need of thought and carefuhtess, othei
precepts — as, " Go home and tell thy friends," " Show thj'self to the priesto," require-
ments of confession, the example of multitudes who have said, " Come, and I will
tell you what the Lord hath done for my soul," the instincts of honour and of grace
— «11 combine to lay on In'm who receives Divine mercy the duty of telling it. We
have all need to beware of a guilty secrecy which thinks it a mark of refinement
and modesty to be silent about its Saviour. Your neighbours are perishing, all
needing, some asking for, a Saviour. Will you be guiltless if you do not say, "Here
is a Saviour, Christ Jesus — He saved me " ? If He has led you across the Jordan
into the rest He promised you, set up your memorial, and join the rest of Israel in
testifying that Jesus Christ is a great Saviour. Membership in the Church of
Christ is the simplest form of testimony and is the duty of every saved man. For
the sake of others set up your memorial of God's mercies in GilgaL

III. Maxe toub mbmokial as endtieino as possible. They were to set up
twelve atonei : something that would endure, that could give testimony to many
generations. As a matter of fact they did reihain till, probably, some centtiries after
the destruction of Jerusalem.* And through all these generations that circle, or
cairn, or altar, whatever it was, remained, elevating and inspiring men by its blessed
memories. Let your testimony of Christ's salvation be an enduring one. Set up
not a memorial of clay, which rain may soften or heat might crumble, but of
stone. Keep your own memories of mercy keen and clear. Do not let them
crumble away ; and try to serve the generations that are to eome. Inheritors
should be transmitters of help. The testimony of those that have gone before us
has blessed ns ; let our testimony bless those that follow after us. Let ns not play
at testifying of the grace of God, bat make it seriously our work. There are men
who, giving tiiemselTes to the work, have blessed many generations. Let our
Saviour have from ns some enduring witness which shall carry to the genera-
tions after us the record of His love. And, lastly, this lesson should be noted —

IV, That the lessons of the memorial should specially reach our children.
In vers. 21 to the end it is assumed that the children will be the inquirers about
the memorial, and the parents the interpreters of it, and that thus, from father to
son, the story of God's grace shall be handed down, hallowing each generation. No
man can complain that there is no open door set before him, when a child full
of inquisitive simplicity faces him. And no one should despair of the future of a
land in which parents can engage the ear of chilflren with the story of their sacred
experience. Is there not too much reticence between parents and children on the
greatest of all themes ? If our hearts were more devout would it be impossible for
us, without undue detail, to charge our children with a sense of what we owe to our
Bedeemer ? Might they not early learn how poor and worthless our life would
have been without Him. Might they not learn something of answers to our
prayers, of the blessedness of heavenly hopes, of the safety of protecting grace, of the
consolations of God's love, of that " delivery from all our fears " of which the Psalmist
speaks ? " Te shall let your children know, saying, Israel came over this Jordan
on dry land." When we obey this precept in letter and spirit more heartily, prob-
ably we shall find our obedience will be rich in the results expected by the writer

Sver. 24). " The people of the earth will know the hand of the Lord, and Israel will
ear the Lord their God for ever." — G.

Ver. 14. — Orace for begirmeri. In one sense Joshua is not a beginner. For forty
years he has been at work for God. As spy, as general, as servant of Moses,
during all these years he has wrought in the work, and with the help of God. Yet
though eighty-five years of age, this crossing Jordan is his first act of leadership.
In the sovereignty of Israel he is a beginner, with a beginner's fears, difficulties,
burdens. And here we see a beautiful illustration of the fact — that with a beginner'a
oares comes a beginner's grace as well. A marvellous miracle stamps him as the
Itader Mat by God. The " divinity that doth hedge a king " in an unusual degree

* Bee Art. in Bmith'a IMotionary, ' GUgaL'



OB. IT. 1—84.] TSB BOOK OP JOSHtJA. W

invests him. And in his first enterprise he has such help as makes him secure of
the future allegiance of all the people. Many are, and more ouglit to be, beginners
in Qod'% ways. Consider the testimony of this incident as it affects them, aud
first observe —

I. Beginners need spbcial graob and help. Evidently Joshua did. If Mdses
Bhrank, how much more might he, from this perilous enterprise, when the efforts
of the people, after settlement, had no such stimulus as had been supplied by the
oppression of their masters ; when he was uncommended by the signs he carried of
his Divine commission ; when probably Eleazar would have been glad to have been
chief ruler ; when almost inevitably there would be critics who would oppose his
plans and dispute the wisdom of his orders I He had double work to do — to croaa
Jordan, and justify his own appointment. Nay, treble work to do — for his power
of helping Israel in the future depended largely on what he would now do. SufB-
oient unto that day was its own troubles ; but it had to carry the justification of the
past and the assurance of the future with it. Even so aU beginners find their work
especially arduous. "It is the first step that costs ; " the first step of the prodigal
returning to his father ; the leaving the nets to follow Christ ; the first act of service
to men. We are unaccustomed ; and that force of habit which stands us in such
good stead when we have had experience of well-doing now operates the other way.
AU obstacles are enlarged by nervous apprehensions. In subsequent acts we may
have society — the first act of right is apt to be profoundly solitary. Do not be
staggered at the difficulties of beginning well. Ail beginners have had the same
experience to contend with. But observe secondly —

II. Beginners have special gbaob to meet their special difficulties. At
with Paul's " thorn," pity to remove which was asked, grace to endure which was
granted ; so here God does not take awa/y the difficulty, hut gives grace to surmount
it. Over and above the usual grace He gives to all His saints, there is special grace
given to them. Has Moses a task imposed on him specially arduous ? Not one
difficulty is removed, but miraculous signs invest him with a sacred inviolable dignity,
and plagues of terrific power sanction his demands. Is Da\id indicated as fiiture
king by the whispered call of God ? In the challenge of Goliath and the pouring
of a "patriotic tide through his undaunted heart" — the suggested daring, and the
power to achieve what he dares to undertake — the beginning of his kingly service
is made possible. Does it come to Daniel as a duty to keep himself pure from
deflUng meats ? The beginning of his devotion is helped by a physical grace that
keeps him strong and well. The beginning of Peter's consecration is helped by the
miraculous draught of fishes. The beginning of the service of the seventy, by the
miraculous powers so freely imparted to them. And so always there is special grace
for those beginning. There is some fulness of gracious influence — clearness of light
— some strengthening companionship of man — some closer presence of God — invigo-
rating hopes — the energy which comes from the sacred calm of penitence — some
clearing of the way before us — some moving of the piUar of fire and cloud, or of
the Ark of God. And whenever any enterprise of Christian love is undertaken,
there is always some help of a special kind. Enlargement of spirit — some power
of prayer, or patience — some great strength of humility or steadfastness. As here,
80 always, special gi-ace attends the beginnings of all great courses. And this i9
no light thing, for in all the forms of Christian life and service, "Well begun is half
done." Aud the grace then given not merely makes the beginning possible, but all
the subsequent career. "They feared Joshua as they feared Moses, all the days of
his life." Always, the beginner gets special grace for the beginning of his work,
and sufficient to exert an infiaence on all that foUows after. If such is the case,
consider lastly —

III. What lessons are involved in it. There is this lesson first and foremost—
1. Shrink not from beginning the Christian Ufe. It is difficult — nay, to naked

human strength impossible. The beginning — the Jordan passage — will try you.
But beginners' diffioiilties are more than matched by beginners' grace. You may not
feel this grace : it may be " latent " grace, and not " sensible " gra«e ; but it will b«
there, omnipotent enough to carry yoa over every hindrance.



74 THE BOOK OF JOSHUA. fcm. nr. 1—24

2. Slirink not from undertaking any duty of service mtii which God charges you,
Do not be evilly modest, folding your pound in some napkin of seeming htmulity.
If it be the path of duty, let no obstacles deter ; they will only prove the occasion
for grander help from God than you ever dare to hope.

3. Have you just begun discipleship or service, and are you overwhelmed with
difficulty? " In your patience possess your soul," for even as a mother gives her
finger to the little child just beginning to walk, so to us, who are but children of a
larger growth, God lends His finger when we are beginning some great life task. — G.

Vers. 16 — 17. — Prophets and priests — the order of precedence. Here a layman
commands a priest. It was not a case of royal supremacy exactly, nor ^d he
govern them by virtue of his being the civil head of the community ; but because,
though layman (he was of the tribe of Ephraim), he was a prophet. " The Lord
spake to Joshua," and therefore Joshua could command even the priests of God.
We have here not a question of archseologioal interest merely. It is a live question
of to-day. Bome goes in for having an order of priests ; Protestantism for an order
of prophets — i.e., speakers forth of God's messages to man. They want a prescrip-
tive class, elevated above their fellows, "ordained to offer gifts and sacrifices to
God ;" wo want, not men ordained, but men inspired, who, fresh from the vision
of God and converse with Him, will be able to tell us what He is, and feels, and
wants. Are they or we following the more excellent way? Let the subordi-
nation of the priest to the prophet here help us to the answer. It may do so,
for observe —

I. The precedence here is the constant precedence. Aaron was older brother
and high priest. Moses was the prophet who " spake with God face to face." The
order of the names invariably is " Moses and Aaron : " prophet first, priest second.
In aU the subsequent centuries you find prophets foremost, priests subservient.
The greatest men of Israel — ^those who sustained their patriotism, kindled their devo-
tion, fed the flame of hope, those who led them in the path of duty, and were
the reformers of religion — were prophets, Elijah and Elisha, Isaiah, Daniel. Ezra
was the only priest who, without being a prophet, can be classed with them.
Jeremiah and Ezekiel were priests and prophets, but it is in the latter character
they rendered their grandest service. We must not depreciate the services of the
priesthood. Perhaps the tone of Dean Stanley's lecture on the Jewish Priesthood
(' Jewish Church,' vol. ii. 356) is too disparaging. They tended to keep aUve devo-
tion, to famiUarise men with the great idea of access to God, they guided men in
the ways of gratitude and trust. StiU the teachers, inspirers, leaders of souls were
the prophets ; and throughout all Old Testament history down to the time of the
Maccabees, it is the prophetic order that keeps alive piety in aU its grand activi-
ties. And if we had applied the same terms on the Christian dispensation it might
be shown that the greater of the two services has been that rendered by men of the
prophetic, rather than that rendered by men of the priestly, stamp. Athanasius,
Augustine, Tertullian, St. Bernard, Luther, Calvin, Knox, Wesley — those that can
speak out the heart and the will of God — have, according to a law of moral gravita-
tion, found a higher level than the most devoted and self-forgetful of ecclesiastics.
Anyhow, here the prophet commands, and the priest obeys. Observe secondly —

il. This order of precedence is the natural order. The rank of pnest is
high — an ambassador of man in the court of heaven. But the rank of prophet is
higher — an ambassador of God. The priest's grandest work is supplication ; the
prophet's is to mediate the promises, commands, requirements of God. For the
former office the requirements were low — a certain hneage, freedom from physical
defect, familiarity with ritual, rubric, and law. For the office of the prophet far
higher requirements were made — purity of heart, to see God ; the open ear, that
could hear His voice ; the heart of love, that could enter into His purposes ; the
courage which could confront men with the Divine behest. The priest coidd b«
made by man — ^the prophet only by God. The former had outward and visible
ordination ; the latter was ordained by the laying on of the unseen hand s of the great
Ood Himself. One reason why communities that have degenerated in faith are so



CH. IT. 1—24] THE BOOK OF JOgHUJL Tl

empliatio in their doctrines of holy orders is that the priest is easily made, hit
work easily done, his claims easily asserted and enforced. But to make men
prophets, or catch the inspiration of heaven, is not at all so easy. It takes a happy
concurrence of grace and nature, a " bridal of the earth and sky," to make hmi.
Naturally, therefore, because the prophet's is a higher taste demanding higher
powers, the prophet ranks before the priest. Lastly, observe as the conclusion of
the above —

III. Peophets aee the great want of this and every age. True priests are
invaluable : such as by their pity and their love are spontaneous, fervent intercessors
for their fellow-men. We should covet to be such : whether in or out of " orders,"
we may belong to " the Eoyal Priesthood," whose mark is not an olfieial garb, but
a compassionate heart. But the great want is prophets — not prophets of the
almanack sort, dealing with the curious questions of the future ; but prophets of
the Bible sort— pre-eminently engaged with " present truth " and present duty.
The great want of the age is not priests at the altar, but inspired men in all the
pulpits of the land — men who, walking with God, can bring to us the truth, the
consolations, the requirements of God, with the authority of those who have learned
from His lips what they address to our ears. Such men would speak " with autho-
rity " which all would recognise without needing demonstration of it. Their hps
would feed many. Their utterances would find or make a way into all hearts.
And reason approving, the heart accepting, the conscience endorsing, all their words,
the people of our land would become " obedient to the heavenly vision " and " walk
in the light of the Lord.'' Not after formal authority of the priest, bat after the
living inspiration of the prophet, let us all aspire. — G.

Vers. 19-^24. — Memorials. The passage of the Jordan has been called »
" priestly miracle," a natural event " turned into a miracle " by the historian for
the sake of exalting the priestly of&ce. We fail, however, to see that any such
special prominence has been given to the priestly element. It is the ark that is
the medium of the miracle-working power, the priests are but its servants and
attendants. The ark, as the symbol and throne of the Divine presence, is the
centre around which all the supernatural glory of the incident gathers. Indeed,
there is rather a notable subordination of the priestly element at this period of
Hebrew history. Joshua did not belong to the priestly order anymore tlian Moses
did. There was no sacerdotal rule. The twelve men who gathered these memorial
stones from the bed of the river were not priests, but men chosen by the tribes for
that particular work. The priestly functions were not those most brought into
prominence by these incidents. There is no sign of anything like undue homage
being paid to the priesthood at that period, and even as regards the reUgion of the
people it was, as Stanley says, " a part of the mechanism of that religion rather than
its animating spirit." The raising of these stones, then, to commemorate the
great event that had just taken place, was the act of the whole people through
their chosen representatives. Two piles of stones were raised : the one by direct
Divine command, at GUgal, where the Israelites rested for the night after the
passage, and where they observed their first passover in the land of Canaan ; the
other, apparently without Divine command, on the other side, at the spot where the
feet of the priests first touched the brink of the flooded river. The words of Joshua
present them in two lights before us : (1) As a memorial for the men of that genera-
tion, and (2) as a means of instruction for their children.

I. A MEMORIAL FOR THAT GENERATION. The wisdom of God is seen in the com-
mand to raise such a memorial. It meets that weakness in human nature by
which it comes to pass that the most sacred impressions are prone to die — the lapse
of time and the succeeding waves of circumstance obliterate them. Most Divine
institutions have rested on this principle. God " set his bow in the cloud " as •
sign and pledge of His faithfiilneES. The Sabbath was intended to quicken in men
the sense of their Divine relations and their longing for the " rest that remaineth."
The passover and other feasts were to be " for memorials ; " and when Christ said
to His disciples, " Do this in remembrance of me," He asserted the same nrinciplt.



n THE BOOK OP JOSHtJA- fo"- «▼• 1-^

rhe sign was to be a Btimulua to spiritual apprehension and a help to faith. The
history of the olden times is full of examples of the way in which men, as by a
natural instinct, have sought to create for themselves some permanent record of the
most momentous experiences of their life, by the names they gave to certain scenes,
or by the erection of altars, &o. (Abraham at Mount Moriah, " Jehovah Jireh,"
Gen, xxii. 19; Jacob at Bethel, Gen. xiviii. 18; Moses at Rephidim, Exod. xviL 14 ;
Samuel at Mizpeh, " Ebenezer," 1 Sam. vii. 12). All memorials of this kind have
their outlook towards the past and towards the future. They serve a double
purpose ; they keep alive precious memories and awaken buoyant hopes, they
excite gratitude and strengthen faith. We do well to set up such way-marks in the
pilgrimage of our life. Tlieir value lies not so much in the fact that they record
the extraordinary — that which happened once and is not likely to happen again —
but rather in the fact that they hnk the past with the future. They show us that
through all change something abides. Our nature is the same in its needs, dangers,
responsibilities ; God is the same in His loving regard for us and His power to
dehver. Every passing experience of His grace is a pledge that He will not fail us
in emergencies yet to come. Anything is good that deepens this impression,
provokes to thankfulness, and rebukes distrust. The darkest passages in our
history thus leave benedictions behind them, are transformed into occasions of
triumphant joy:

"Cut of our stony grie&
Bethels we raise."

n. A MEANS OP INSTEDCTION FOR THEIB CBiLDBEK. "When youT children shall
Ask their fathers,'' &o. A ghmpse here of the simplicity and sanctity of domestic
relations which was so important a feature of ancient Hebrew life. The authority
of the father over his children almost absolute and unlimited. Something terrible
in its despotism, if it had not been modified and softened by certain provisions
defining parental duty. Instruction in the saored traditions of the nation, its
memories and hopes— an obligation continually enforced (see Exod. xii. 26,27;
xiii. 14 ; Deut. vi. 7—20, et seq.).

1. The beauty and worth of a spirit of inquiry in children. It is natural
for the ohUd to ask questions. A boundless realm of mystery lies all around the
awakening mind, and an irresistible instinct moves it to inquire, " Why these
1hi"gs ? What mean ye by these services ?" The contact of mind with mind is
needful in order to development, and of whom should the children ask, but of " their
fathers, " for the solution of the problems that perplex them? The most notable
chapter, the only recorded chapter, in the early development of Jesus is that scene
in which we behold Him in the temple, " sitting in the midst of the doctors, both
hearing them and asking them questions."

2. The generous, sympathetic response this spirit of inquiry should meet with.
No tender sensibiUty of childhood is to be suppressed, least of all any that may
lead to the discovery of truth. The inquisitiveness of the child is a precious faculty
that demands to be rightly directed. The indifference of many parents to the
stirrings of the spirit of inquiry in their children arises firom selfish indolence, and
is a cruel wrong. No doubt children will often ask questions which the wisest cannot
answer, but at leastlet the difficulty be frankly confessed ; let the ground and reason
of it be defined in a way adapted to the young intelligence. The very disappoint-
ment then becomes a means of Divine instruction. The higher Interests of our
being — the laws of God's government, the revelations of His love, the workings of
His Providence and Spirit — let these especially be unfolded. WJiat nobler office can
any parent perform than to mediate between the mind of his child and the
mystery of the Unseen — to hft up the veil that hides God's glory, to explain and
justify His ways, to be the medium of His truth and Spirit to the young inquiring
toul?

8. The practical result at which all instruction should aim. " That ye might fear
the Lord your God for ever." The miracle, the memorial, the teaching, aU find
here their ultimate issue. AU subordinate purposes must lead on to this — tha



CH. V. 1—9.]



THE BOQK OF JOSHUA.



V



showing forth of God's glory, and the submission of His intelligent creatures to Him
in reverence and godly fear. "Let us hear the conclusion of the whole matter," &e.
(Eooles. xii 13) W.

Ver. 18. — The passage of Jordan the symhol of death. The passage of Jordan
as the neeessary way of entrance into the land of promise has always been regarded
as Bymboho of the death of the Christian. The same causes which allowed the
children of Israel to cross the stream without being buried in its waters, operate in
the case of the believing soul, to enable him also to pass through the deep wate?-
floods without being overflowed by them. These causes may be described ai
threefold.

I. The passage of the Jordan was effected at the time appointed by
God. It was in obedience to the command of God that Israel crossed the river, so
is it also with our death. It is determined by God. To Him belong the times and
seasons. Hence we can in aU confidence commit our way to Him and our spirit
into His hands.

II. God granted special aid to His people in this hour of trial. This He
promises to us also when we are called to pass through the deep waters. " When
thou passest through the waters I wiU be with thee." And David, fuU of this
confidence, exclaims, " Tea, though I walk through the valley of the shadow of
death, I will fear no evil, for tliou art with me " (Psa. xxiLL 4).

III. Israel sees at its head a guide chosen of God, who goes before it in
THIS DANGEROUS i-ASSAGE. We also have our Divine Joshua, who has passed
through the river of death before us ; that mighty Saviour, who " died for our sins
and rose again for our Justification " (1 Cor. i. 1). He will bring us safely to Him-
teli on that blessed shore, whither He is gone before. How heartening is the sweet
•ong of Yinet :

•* Quand le bruit des Acts, I'aspect et le rivage.
Nous diront, 6 Jonrdaui, nos travaux vont cesser ;
J^sus nous recevra triomphants et lasses
FrSs de ces compagnona d'exil et d'h^ritage,
Qui ne sont pas perdus, mais nous out devancfis."

•When the rush of Jordan's waters breaking on the shora
Tells the struggling, fainting pilgrim toil is nearly o'er ;
Jesus ready to receive him, brothers gone before.
Welcome him with songs of triumph, ' Home for evermore I"*

E. DB P.



EXPOSITION.



CHAPTER V. 1—9.



Thb oieoumcision. — Ver. 1.— WMch were
on the side of Jordan westward. A large
poition of the territory of the Amontes
had, as we have seen (oh. iii. 10), been
already conquered. The remaining tribes
on the other side Jordan were app. eheusive
of the same fate. For " on the side," the
original has " aorosa." Having hitherto
written of Israel aa on the eastern side of
Jordan, he continues the same expression
after he has narrated the crossing. But
writing as he did on the west side of Jor-
dan, and for readers the vast majority of
whom were on the west aide of Jordan, he
adds the expression "westward" (literally,
MMMrd) to prevent any possibility of mis-



take. Until we were passed over. The

Masorites, in the Keri, have corrected the
text (Chetliibh) into " uuth they were passed
over." Kennioott states that this reading is
confirmed by twenty-seven Hebrew MSS.,
which have probably adopted the reading
from the Masoretic correction. The LXX.
accepts the Chetliibh. The probability,
however, is that this is one of the many
instances of a conjectural emendation of a
difHoult passage, it not having been seen
that the historian was either quoting a
document contemporary with the events
described, or more probably using the word
to identify himself as an Israelite with the
acts of his fathers in past times. This ia
the opinion of Babbi David Kimchi. Knobel
refers to Psa. Ixvi. 6. See also ver. 6 o<



T»



TSB BOOK OF JOSHUA.



[oh. t. 1—9.



this chapter, and ch. zziv. 5, 6, 7 ; Jndg. zi.
17 ; of. 19. We must not, then, assume from
this passage that the Book of Joshua was
written by one who himself had a shore in
the events recorded, in the face of many
indications we have of a later origin (see eh.
iv. 9, &e.). A fuller discussion of this sub-
ject will be found in the introduction. Their
heart melted. Confirming what Bahab had
said (ch. ii. 11). Similar terror has often
been struck into the hearts of peoples, es-
pecially of peoples enervated by habits of
licentious indulgence, by the approach of
enemies who have successfully and rapidly
overcome obstacles deemed insurmountable.
Such an effect was produced in Persia by
Alexander's victories at the Granicus and
Issus. Such an effect, again, was produced
in Italy by the tidings of the approach of
Alario and Attila. If we may trust the
monk of St. GaU, a similar terror fell on
the degenerate Lombards at the approach
of Charles the Great, after his daring
passage of the Alps. In this case the
miraculous element was added, and the in-
habitants of Canaan, and of Jericho es-
pecially, remained for the time panic-
stricken, not daring to combine to strike
a blow against these daring invaders, who
in addition to their bravery seemed under
the special protection of Heaven. When
they had recovered from the consternation
into which the passage of the Jordan had
thrown them, the sense of an imminent
danger forced them at last to make an
effort at resistance (see ch. z.).

Ver._2. — At that time. Ver. 1 is intro-
duced in order to explain why Joshua ven-
tured upon the circumcision of the children
of Israel at so critical a period. Nothing
could more clearly evince the spirit of con-
fidence in Jehovah which animated not
only Joshua, but all the children of Israel.
We read of no murmurings, although it was
well known that the performance of the rite
of circumcision would unfit the Israelites
for active service for some days. We may
imagine, and even the silence of the sacred
historian may be deemed eloquent on the
point, that the marvellous passage of the
Jordan had inspired the Israelites with an
eager desire to renew their covenant with the
God who " had done so great things for them
already." And although, for religious rea-
sons, they remained inactive for four or five
days, a course of action from a military
point of view highly injudicious, yet such
was the terror &e passage of the Jordan
had struck into the hearts of the Phoeni-
cians that no attack on them was attempted,
and the inhabitanti of Jariche (eh. vi. 1)
remained tinder tb* piottctioa of thsii
•trong walls. Sharp Imlveg, or knives of



stone (niV ; cf. iV Eiod. iv. 25). The LXX.,

Vulgate, Syriao, and Arabic versions, aa
well as the margins of our Bibles, render
thus. On the other hand, several of the
Eabbis give the same translation as the text
of our version. The LXX. translator,
following no doubt an ancient tradition,
adds after ch. xxiv. 30, that these knives
were buried with Joshua (see note there).
The idea which has found great favour
lately of a " stone age," as anterior to an
" iron age," of the world, will hardly derive
support from this passage. That the use of
stone preceded the use of iron scarcely
admits of a doubt. But horn Gen. iv. 22
we learn that the use of iron had been
known hundreds of years before Joshua,
and yet we find him using stone knives.
And we may go further. In spite of the
advance of civilisation in our own day,
there are still millions of human beings
who have not advanced beyond the " stone
age." The idea, then, of an age in which
the universal use of iron has supplanted the
universal use of stone is an idea which facts
compel us to reject, while admitting that the
use of stone must have preceded the use of
iron in the infancy of the human race. In
these " knives of flint," Origen, Theodoret,
and others see an allusion to Christ, the
rock. The second time. For " circumcisa
again the children of Israel the second
time^" the literal translation is, "return
(31t5>) to circumcise," or, " return, circum-
cise " them the second time. This has per-
plexed the commentators and translators.
It has been assumed that the text involvei
the idea of a former general circumcision
of the people, and various are the expe-
dients which have been resorted to in order
to avoid the difficulty. Some copies of the
LXX. would read 3B> for a-IE* (or Dj^J for
DIB'I EosenmiiUer), and translate " sit
down " (i.e., halt), " and circumcise." The
Vulgate leaves out the word altogether. The
Syriao translates literally. The Arabia reads
"to-morrow" for "again." The Eabbi
Solomon Jarchi falls back on the expedient
of a general circumcision ordered by Moses
on the departure of the children of Israel
from Egypt, on account of their neglect of
that rite while they sojourned there, "Nam
jam antea magna multitudo simul erat cir-
cumcisa ilia nocte qua egrediebantur ex
.ffigypto." But this is rendered highly im-
probable by the fact that circumcision was
an Egyptian as well as a Hebrew custom,
and still more so by the improbability that
such an important circumstance should
have been passed over in silence. Knobel
r«gard« Abraham'* mroumoision with thai
of hii household m the first time (GeHi



CB. T. 1—9.}



THE BOOK OF JOSHUA.



xvii. 23). Perhaps the best explanation is
that the word 2'Xif, though it is rightly
translated "again" here, and in several
other places in Scripture, carries with it the
idea oiaretwm into a former condition (kehre
zui-Uck, Knohel). So Oen. zzvi. 18, xxx. 31,
Hos. ii. 11 (9, in our version). In 2 Eings i.
11, 13 we have the king's return to his former
purpose in the second and third mission to
Elijah. Thus here the word is used of the
bringing back the children of Israel to their
former state, that of a people who were in
the enjoyment of a visible sign and seal
(Bom. iv. 11) of their being God's covenant
people. The meaning therefore would seem
to be, "Bestore the children of Israel a
Becond time to the position they formerly
held, as visibly bound to me, and placed
under my protection, by the rite of circum-
cision." "The person must be in favour
ere the work can hope to prosper ; his pre-
decessor Moses had like to have been slain
for neglect of this sacrament, when he went
to call the people out of Egypt ; he justly
fears hia own safety, if now he omit it,
when they are brought into Canaan "
(Bp. HaU).

Ver. 3. — ^The hUl of tlie foresMns. The
name given to the bill where the circum-
eisiou took place.

Ver. 4. — After they came out from Egypt.
Bather " on their journey fromEgypt." See
next verse, where the same. words are trans-
lated " as they came out."

Ver. 5. — Sov all the people that came
out were drcumclsed. The Hebrew of this
passage (which runs literally thus — " Now
ciroumcised had they been, all the people
who were going forth") is sufficient to
refute the idea that there was a great cir-
cumcision of the people under Moses, on
■ocoimt of the neglect of the rite in Egypt.
For, before the exodus, Moses was not in a
position to perform any general act of this
kind, aa the history plainly shows, while
after it such a rite could not have taken
place, since the Hebrew Vn denotes a state
of things which was completed at the time
spoken of, and therefore must here be ren-
dered (as above) by the pluperfect. Them
they had not clxcmucised. Here again the
Hebrew is used of the perfected action, and
is therefore rightly rendered by our version,
giving the idea that the Israelites who were
bom in the wilderness had not been circum-
cised up to the point which om: history has
now reached. See also ver. 7i where the
same construction is found.

Ver. 6.— TiU all the people^ The Hebrew
here is 'p, not the usual word for people,
but that usually applied to the Gentiles
(equivalent to lOfoc, by which word it U



nraally rendered in the LXX.). It is applied
to the Israelites in ch. ui. 17 ; iv. 1 ; Isa.
i. 4 ; ix. 2 ; xxvi. 2. See also Exod. zzziii.
13. In the singular it means a people in
the more general sense, a nation, as dis-
tinguished from a people in whom one has
an interest. In the plural it always means
the Gentiles. D^ (LXX., Xooc), the word
usually applied to the people of God, is not
used here, because the people who " pro-
voked God in the wUdemess" had made
themselves in a sense a rejected people.
Delitzsch regards this (after Calvin) as a
sign that, for the time at least, the covenant
between God and Israel was aimulled, per-
manently in the case of those who were
condemned to die in the wilderness, tempo-
rarily only in their descendants, who were
formally reconciled to God, and restored
to their former covenant position by this
solemn performance of the covenant rite
of circumcision (see note on verse 2). So
also Hengstenberg, * Geschichte des Biaiches
Gottes,' p. 205. The difficulty about the
passover may be met by supposing that
those only who were circumcised — a con-
stantly decreasing number, of course — ^were
allowed to celebrate that feast. Enobel
would understand that In consequence of the
" unquiet, unsettled, uncomfortable life "
the Israelites led in the wilderness, they
could keep very few of the ordained feasts.
He continues : " the Elohist knows nothing
of any cessation." Nevertheless we read of
no passover being kept after the one re-
corded in Num. ix. 5, so that if " the Elo-
hist knows of no cessation," he knows as
little of any continued observance of the
feast. But there is no certainty on the
point. Considering the loose way in which

the word ?'3 is used in Scripture (see, for
instance. Gen. iv. 14), we need not press the
word to include all who were born after the
departure from Egypt, but only those who
were born after the rejection of the people
recorded in Num. xiv. 26, sqq. This rejec-
tion, be it remembered, did not include all
the Israelites who were bom in Egypt, but
only those who were over twenty years of
age (Num. xiv. 29). The view of Kura
(iii. 323, Clark's translation), that circum-
cision was suspended on account of the
continual movements of the Israelites, is
refuted by Delitzsch's remark that the
Israelites were not continually on the march,
but that they often encamped in one place
for a long period, a period far longer, in fact,
than the time in which they abode in Gilgal.
PeUtzsch asks why this circumcision did
not take place before, why it wai not per-
formed as soon as they crossed the brook
Zered. The answer is that, until the Ja*.



80



THE BOOK OF JOSHUA.



[CH. T. 1—9.



dan was crossed, they had not taken formal
possession of their own land. As soon as,
under the Divine protection, they had
crossed the Jordan, the long-delayed pro-
mise was fulfilled. God's covenant with
Abraham was accomplished, and now they,
in their turn, had to place themselves once
m.jre in the position of God's covenant
people, bound to serve Him with their whole
heart. For a fuller discussion of this ques-
tion see Keil's Commentary, and Hengsten-
berg in the passage cited above. We may
observe that God fulfils His part of the
coveuanf first, and then it is man's duty to
fulfil his. God, under the Christian dis-
pensation, first places us in the state of
salvation. Then it becomes our duty to
make that salvation sure by overcoming
God's enemies, by the help which He never
fails to afiord. Give us. This introduction
of the hrst person into the middle of the
sentence ia unexpected. Some MSS. and
editors read " to them " (see note on ver.
1, and Psa. Lxvi. 6, where there is a similar
change of person). A land that floweth with
milk and honey. This, says Eeil, " is a stand-
ing expression in the Pentateuch to express
the great fertility of the land of Canaan.
Milk and honey are produced by a land rich
in grass and flowers, which were both of them
plentiful in Canaan (see Isa. vii. 15, 22),
Milk, not only of cows, but of sheep and goata
also (DeUt. ixiii. 14), and eaten sometimes
sweet, at other times thick or curdled (nXDD),
was a leading article of food amongst the
ancient Hebrews, as it is in the present day
in most Eastern countries, and Palestine was
peculiarly fitted for the rearing of cattle.
Honey also, especially that of wild bees, was
found in large quantities (Judg. xiv. 8,sqq. ;
1 Sam. xiv. 26; Matt. iii. 4), and is still
found, notwithstanding its present desolate
condition." Some have thought E'DT to
mean the newly expressed juice of grapes,
■which, under the Arabic name of dibs, is
largely used at present in Palestine, and ia
even exported to other countries. But in
Deut. xxxii. 13, Ps. Ixxxi. 16, wild honey
is clearly meant, which is to this day depo-
sited by bees, in the clefts of the rock,
whence it often overflows and is received
into vessels placed beneath (see Prov. t. 3 ;
Cant. iv. 11 ; Jahn, ' Biblical Archseology ; '
and Smith's Dictionary of the Bible.)

Ver. 8. — ^TIU they were whole. Literally,
till they revived, as in Gen. xx. 7 ; 2 Kings
i. 2 ; vlii. 8. Objections have been raised
(see Eeil and Delitzsch in loe.) to the possi-
bility of this circumcision taking place in one
day. But it has been shown by oalonlation
that between one-third and one-fourth of
the people who remained had been eii-



oumcised already, and that therefore such
an operation as this could be performed
with the utmost ease in a very short time.
Xhe word ^p is nsed here again, since the
people were still Gentiles until the rite of
circumcision was performed.

Ver. 9. — The reproach of Egypt. Either
(1) the reproach which comes from the
Egyptians, or (2) the reproach of having
sojourned in Egypt. Keil incorrectly states
that " the genitive alwayg denotes the person
from whom the reproach comes " (see Isa.
liv. 4, "the reproach of thy widowhood,"
i.e., the reproach which is cast upon thee
for being a widow ; Ezekiel xxzvi. 30,
" reproach of famine," {.«., the reproach
which comes from being doomed to suffer
famine). It we accept (1) we must refer the
phrase to the reproach cast upon the Israel-
ites by the Egyptians, that all their vain-
glerious boasts were worthless, and that
they were never destiued to occupy the land
which they declared God had given to them.
Hengstenberg (' Geschiohte des Eeiches
Gottes," p. 207) regards it strangely as the
reproach the Egyptians cast upon them that
they were rejected of God. If (2) it must be
regarded as equivalent to the reproach that
they were a nation of slaves, a reproach that
was rolled away by the fact of their standing
as freemen on the soil which had been pru-
mised to their fathers. But Enobel supposes
(3) that it was their down-trodden miserable
condition in Egypt, a condition which was
only partially ameliorated during their wan-
derings in the wilderness, in the course of
which, accustomed to a settled existence,
thev must have had mnch to endure.
"With the arrival in Canaan," he adds,
" all this came to an end. All those who
had deserved punishment were dead, all the
uncircumcised were circumcised, reproach
and misery were put aside, and Israel, as
the worthy community of God, entered on a
new life." This interpretation, more precise
and clear than (2), best satisfies all the re-
quirements of the passage. Some have
regarded their uncircumcised state as the
" reproach of Egypt." But this, as Heng-
stenberg remarks, could hardly be, for none
but the Egyptian priests were circumcised.
Origen (Horn. 4, 'Lib. Jesu Nave') teaches the
following lesson from this passage : " Euimua
enim nos aliquando insipientes, increduU,
errantes, servientes desideriis et voluptati-
bus variis, in maUtiam, et invidia, odibiles,
odientes invicem. Non tibi videntur hjBO
opprobia esse, et opprobia Mgy fti ? Sed ex
quo Tenit Ghristus, et dedit nobis secnndam
clrcumcisionem per baptismum regenera-
tionis, et purgavit animas nostras, abjeoi-
mus hsBO omnia." And again, speakins ol
the spiritoal drcumcision Christians have



CH. T. 1—9.]



THE BOOK OF JOSHUA.



81



received, and the obligation to purity thus
imposed, he adds, " Jam tibi enim nou licet
templo Dei ati, nisi in sauctitate, neo
membra Ghristi ad iadignum dare negotium
... Si qnando te malsa ooncnpiscentise
pnlsat illecebra ... die non sum meus,
enituB enim sum pretio sanguinis Ghristi,
et membrum ipsius effectus sum." Theo-
doret remarks how the IsraeUtea who had
been oiroumoised perished in the wilder-
ness, while their uncircumcised children
were miraculously preserved and brought
over Jordan. Aremarkable commentary this
on the wordi, "Now circumcision yerily
profiteth it thon keep the law ; but if thou
be a breaker of the law thy circumcision is
made nnoircumoision" (Eom. ii. 25. Of.
1 Cor. Tii. 19). He also remarks that " we
may here learn how we, who have received
spiritual circumcision, thereby laid aside the
reproach of sin." Trusting by natme in the



spiritual Egypt, the house of bondage, w«
are slaves to sin and corruption. When we
enter into fellowship with Christ, the re-
pfoach of Egypt is rolled away, and we enjoy
" the glorious liberty of the ehUdreu of God '*
(see Eom. vi. 18 — 22 ; GaL v. 1 ; also John
viii. 32 — 36J. Gllgal It is quite possible,
since the word to roll is in Hebrew, as
indeed in EngUsh, spoken of a circular

motion and since pjpj is a wheel in

Hebrew, that the place, like Geliloth, i.e.,
circles (ch. zviii. 17), originally meant a
circle, and that the new signification was
attached to the name from this moment.
If Deut. zi. 30 be not a later insertion, the
place was known by the name before this
time. The root is found in the Aryan as
well as in the Semitic languages (as in tha
Greek KvXiio, eiXoi, and the Latin tolvo,
globut).



HOMILETICS.

Vers. 1 — 9. — The great renewal of the covenant. Matthew Henry reiy
,felicitously quotes here and combines the two passages (Cant. yiii. 5 and vi. 10),
" Who is thu that cometh up from the wildemess, leaning upon her beloved, who
looks forth as the moming, fair as the moon, clear as the sun, and terrible as an
army with banners ? " Terrible as an army in the eyes of her enemies (ver. 1) ;
fair as the moon, clear as the sun, when the reproach of Egypt is rolled away
(ver. 9).

I. ISKAEL 13 A TYPE OF THE ChTJECH OP GOD IN HEE WAKPAEE AOAIKST SIN.

When God's Church resolutely binds herself to the conflict with the powers of evil,
their heart mnst needs melt, neither is there spirit in them any more. " Then
Satan doth fear, his citadels fall," says the hymn. For the Church comes in the
strength of her Lord. The " strong man armed " must have his " armour, wherein
he trusted," taken from him, and the spoils of human souls which be has so
industriously acquired must be divided, because " the stronger than he " has come
upon him and bound him. Satan has no weapons for a hand-to-hand conflict with
the Body of Christ. His weapons are to corrupt, to deceive, to persuade to a spirit
of compromise with the world. So it has ever been that he has triumphed by
oormpting the Church of God. Whenever God's disciples have gone forth to battle
boldly and nnflinchingly against evil, they have been victorions. They first
bumbled impurity and licentiousness, as well as unbeUef. If they did not destroy
these enemies of the soul, they at least compelled them to hide their heads, to
shrink into comers, to admit nnwiUingly the superiority of purity and faith by
eeasing to parade sins of this kind openly before the world. Next came the conflict
■with brute violence, which was kept in awe by the sacred character of the ministen
of religion. Shameless and cynical effrontery in vice among those very ministers of
religion, when the Church became corrupt, was next put down, even in spite of the
weapons of force and J;emporal authority. So in later days a good cause has ever
been victorious against the most overwhelming odds, when it has been prosecuted
with perseverance and faith. Witness the abolition of slavery, first here, and next
in America, so that even the Portuguese themselves, once the most burdened
offenders in this respect, are now offering their co-operation with the English to put
it down. So, again, the voice of God's faithful ones has spoken, and men dare not
now stand up to take away one another's lives in this Christian land for a few
basty words, spoken without reflection. This may embolden us when we take np
our weapons of prayer and holy exhortation to denounce the sins titat yet
;08HUA. «



n TSB 500E OF JOMTUA. [oa. V. 1—9.

remain among us — ^the reproach of intemperance, the scandalous opium traffic by
which the revenue of India is largely supported, our commercial dishonesty, and all
the other reproaches of our age. Against these must the Church of Christ gird on
her armour, and never cease to wage a conflict, until the promised day shaU oome,
when " the earth shall be full of ttie knowledge of the glory of the Lord, as the
waters cover the sea." But one caution must be borne in mind. When we buckle on
our armour afresh to contend against our enemies, we must first cross our Jordan. We
must solemnly, that is, sever ourselves from the wayward and wandering past.
Like Daniel (chap, ix.), we must " speak, and pray, and confess oin: sin, and the sin
of oxu- people." And then we must solemnly renew our covenant, our broken
covenant, with God. Then may we advance without fear to the attack, and if
Jesus be our leader, tho battle may be long, but we cannot fail to have victory in
the end.

IL Israel is a type ot the iNDivrDUAi, sodl in the same warfare. Just
AS in the case of the Church, so in the case of the individual, must there be the
moment of conversion, the settled and deUberate resolve to break with the past, and
the passage, under the gmdance of the ark of the covenant, the law of God, and the
conscience, the sign of His presence in the heart, into the condition of fellowship
with God. Then must come the solemn renewal of the covenant, the circumcision
of the heart, the mortifying of the flesh, the cutting off even those innocent enjoy-
ments which have been found dangerous in times past, through the weakness of
the flesh. Then the feast by faith upon the flesh and blood of the true Paschal
Lamb, the making memorial of our dehverance through Him from a cruel bondage,
and then we must prepare for the assault. Nor need we fear defeat. Satan
trembles when he sees us determined. His heart melts within him as he sees us
advancing under the leadership of Jesus, the Captain of our salvation, and as long
as we are resolute in the strife, the victory is seciue. Tet it is not always won in
the same manner. Some sins fall like Jericho, by the might of prayer. Some,
like Ai, when evil has obtained a lodgment within, are only overcome after a
shameful humUiation, repaired by a firm determination to put away the secret
defilement. Others, like the rest- of the cities which Joshua destroyed, will only
Buccumb after a determined and persevering resistance. But the result is the same
in the end. " Ko weapon that is formed against thee shall prosper," if thou art
only steadfast in following wherever Jeeus leads. " Terrible as an army is die who
eometh up out of the wilderness, leaning on the arm of her beloved."

in. Worldly wisdom must bb laid aside when we have to battle with
■IK. Nothing could be more fooUsh, humanly speaking, than for Joshua to have
ordered a general circumcision of the children of Israel at this time. Simeon and
Levi (Gen. xxxiv. 25) had taken advantage of this moment to overcome the Bhe-
chemites. And, leaving God out of the question, if the inhabitants of the land had
descended upon the IsraeUtes at the moment of their helplessness, they would have
been sure of an easy victory. But these Israehtes were under the protection of
God. He could have worked another miracle to protect them from their enemies,
as easily as He had brought them over Jordan. But He worked no miracle this
time. He inspired terror into the minds of the inhabitants of Canaan, so that they
dare not attack them. They were quite safe under His protection, as long aa they
obeyed His voice. This should teach us —

1. Not to slight the means of grace. " Circumcision is nothing and uncircum-
cision is nothing, but the keeping of the commandments of God." And yet it is
•qually true that he who refused to be circumcised as God had commanded him,
" that soul " was to be " cut off from his people." So in these days, those who
"forsake the assembling of themselves together," who make light of Christian
baptism, who neglect the Lord's Supper, who treat with disdain the ordiaances set
np by lawful authority in the Church, who kick at authority and despise reproof,
■hall not be unpunished.

2. Not to combat sin with worldly weapon*. Snoh maxims as " honesty is th«
best policy," and other similar ones which put the practice of virtue upon grounds
•I success ia this life and worldly oonveuienoe, will always fail us at th« «htio«l



OK. T. 1-9.] THS BOOI Off ^QiKVA. W

moment. Let the temptation be only strong enough ; let it only be clearly more
to our advantage at the moment when we are assailed to yield than to resist, and
the " cunning bosom sin " (George Herbert) wiU " blow, away " all that " array "
of " fences" which worldly wisdom has set around our actions. Nothing but the
rooted conviction, " Thou God seest me ; " nothing but the question, " How can I
do this great wickedness and sin against God?" will be powerful enough to defeat
the assaults of sin in cases of secret overwhelming temptation. If that is not motive
strong enough, nothing will be. Had the IsraeUtes omitted to fence themselves
with the protection of God's covenant, their prudence would not have availed them
against the overwhelming numbers of their adversaries. But confidence that they
were in the keepiog of a higher power led them to consecrate themselves first to
God, and then to go out to battle against His enemies and theirs.

3. Noi to neglect our duty for fear of consequencea. No one could have been
nuder a greater temptation to do this than Joshua. By his obedience he was
placing himself and his people in a position of the most imminent penl. Yet we
hear of no hesitation. He does what he ought to do as a matter of coiurse. Faith
is weaker with the great mass of professing Christians than it was with Joshua.
Both in public and private affairs men continually plead the urgency of the case as
an excuse for a slight dereUction of duty. This is the case (a) in affairs of State.
And this is especially the case when the duty is what is (though erroneously) called
a religious duty. Thus in India, some years ago, our missionaries were discouraged
in their efforts, because it was supposed that British authority would be endangered
by their successes. The opium traffic, above referred to, is defended on the ground
of the evils to India which would result from a financial deficit. We sometimes
hear " British interests " put above duty. Yet without attempting to decide
whether this has been so in any given case, the broad general principle must be
laid down that no fear of consequences to our vast and most valuable power ought
to induce us, as a nation, to take one single step that cannot be defended on the
grounds of abstract justice. We may be certain that in the long run the most con-
scientious poKcy wUl be the most advantageous. Yet even if not, "let justice bo
done, though the heavens should fall." We find the same tendency at work (6) in
the affairs of the Chturch. Those who are in high office in the Church often display
over-timidity from the sense of the grave responsibility that action throws upon
them. Nor should such a sense of responsibihty be absent. Yet where duty is
clear there is no responsibility at all. Consequences in such a case should not be
weighed. They may sometimes — though not so often as is supposed^ — serve to
help in the decision where duty Ues. But they cannot be pleaded as an excuse for
neglecting duty. Lastly (c), we come to the case of private persons, and we find
the same tendency at work. The tradesman or professional man adopts the com-
mercial morality of his fellows, whether it be right or wrong, and says that he shall
be ruined if he does not. Let him take example by Joshua.

IV. The solemn eenewal op the covenant was a renewal op its responsi-
bilities AND BLESSINGS. The Covenant of circumcision had its spiritual mean-
ing, which Moses as well as St. Paul pointed. " Circumcise therefore the foreskin
of your heart."

1. It was a covenant of mortification. It implied the restraint of the lusts of
-the flesh by a painftd process. This is to be the Christian's daily work. In the
place of comfort, luxury, and ease, we are to be the disciples of Him who " had
not where to lay his head." The promptings of our lower nature are con-
stantly to be kept in check. Strict and severe moderation in all allowed comforts
is our duty. Even our leisure and our recreations must often be broken in upon
by the thought of the needs of those for whom Christ died, and for whom He would
have us live, " Christ suffered for us, leaving us an example that ye should foUow
his steps." The Christian life, therefore, is incompatible with self-indulgence.

2. It was a covenant of warfare. The covenant was solemnly renewed on the
entrance into the promised land. But it was understood that, before the blessing!
of that land could be enjoyed, every nation that inhabited it must be extirpated*
In like ouumer tho Christian is pledged to an unceasing wftr£ur« with sin.



84 THE BOOK OF JOSHUA. [oh. T. 1-*

S. The covenant, once broken, could he renewed when the IrraeHtet were willing
to renew it. And 80 it is with the Christian. He may cast himself out of the favour
of God by hia disobedience. But God yearns after him, and, as in the parable of the
prodigal son, sees him when "yet a great, way off," and runs to meet him. Only
there must be the willingness to endure the restraints of the covenant. The step to
reconciliation is circumcision. That is, we cannot be reconciled to God until we
have sincerely resolved to " mortify and kill all vices;" to Uve a hard and self-
denying Ufe ; to be watchful against the flesh and its tyranny, and to devote our-
selves heart and soul to the service of our Master, with all its grievous restraints
upon self-pleasing and self-interest.

4. The renewal of the covenant removed the reproach of Egypt. The Scrip-
tures of both the Old and New Testament are fuU of God's mercj to penitent sinners.
" Is Ephraim my dear son ? Is he a pleasant child ? For since I spake against
him I do earnestly remember him still " (Jer. xxii. 20). " Bring forth the best
robe, and put it on him : . . . for this my son was dead, and is ahve again ; he
was lost, and is found " (Luke xv. 22 — 24). The past is forgotten when the sinner
turns to God. " Their sins and iniquities will I remember no more." " Ye were
as sheep going astray, but are now returned unto the Shepherd and Bishop of your
souls " (1 Pet. ii. 25. See also 2 Cor. v. 17—21 ; Eph. ii. 1—6, &c.). We may
approach God in all confidence as our loving Father (Eph. ii. 18 ; iii. 12) ; not from
any trust in our own merits, bat because we are " accepted in the beloved"
(Eph. i. 6).

HOMILIES BY VARIOUS AUTHORS.

Vers. 6 — 11. — Circumcisiqa and the passover were the two sacraments of the old
covenant. The first set forth the truth that enrolment among the people of God
must be accompanied with the putting away of evil. The second represented the
past deliverance from the bondage of Egypt, and the future deliverance from all
the perils of the wUderness by entrance into Canaan, and the final possession of the
land of promise. On the eve of the decisive conflict, God commands His people
to make a solemn renewal of these two covenants. Israel must be afresh conse-
crated to Him by that coTenant of circumcision which symbohses holiness by the
criioifixion of the flesh, and by that passover feast, which is at once the symbol of
past and future deliverances. Thus also should the Christian gird himself for the
conflict of the spiritual hie. When he enUsts under the banner of his God, he
ought, as it were, to renew his baptismal vows, by what St. Peter calls " the
answer of a good conscience," thus dedicating himself to God in the renunciation of
all the defilements of sin, by that circumcision of the heart wliich was the deep
truth signified by the old fleshly rite. And further, by partaking of the Christian
passover feast, he should testify his entire trust in redeeming love by receiving this
most sacred pledge of love, and deriving from it the needed renewal of spuitual
strength. That which is true of the individual Christian is true also of the Church.
It requires to be constantly baptized afresh with the Spirit of God, and to receive
the pledges and seals of the grace of redemption, as a preparation for its spiritual
conflicts. There is one remarkable feature in the sacred narrative. It is said that
on the occasion of this first passover celebrated beyond the Jordan, the Israelites
" (lid eat of the old com of the land " (ch. v. 10, 11). Thus they not only had in this
feast a pledge of the promised deliverance, but an earnest of the good things to
COME. They not only had a fresh guarantee of the promise, but a beginning of its
fulfilment. The same thing is true of the Christian sacrament. While it ia an
essentially spiritual feast, it still gives in part that which it sets forth and symbolises.
Faith receives the Holy Spirit in baptism, and feeds upon the invisible Christ in
the Lord's Supper. Christ is to the soul " the living bread which came down from
heaven " (John vi. 31). Thus even before the Jordan is crossed, the Christian soul
eats of thu com of the land of promise. — E. de P.

Vws. 9, IQ,—Saeramental oomeoration of life, W« ncujr with advantage liugef



m. T. 1— «.] THE BOOK OP JOSHtJA. M

over the story of this chapter. It has lessons which ■will never die, and appeal*
which will never grow old. It is a testimony against a form of evil so common
and so dangerous that all branches of the Chm'ch of Christ suffer from it. H
bring* before us the question of the neglect of sacramenta, and the wisdom of
repairing that neglect. To bring the chief points before us, observe first —

I. We are pronb to neglect the saokaments of God. The neglect reported
here strikes us as very strange. With the great miracles in recolleotion which had
accompanied their leaving Egypt, it should, we feel, have been impossible for them
to have forgotten or disobeyed their God, But here we have the statement that
the entire nation had neglected the sacramental circumcision ; and the narrative
leaves some uncertainty as to whether there had not been some irregularity in the
observance of the passover as well. It is not easy to explain such neglect. Per-
haps the first sacrament was overshadowed by the law given at Sinai, the pre-
occupation with the new rites leading to the neglect of the old. The more so as,
excepting the precept imphed in the word, " No imcircmncised person shall eat
thereof^" there was no precept given at Sinai concerning this rite. Probably the
neglect of the one carried with it the neglect of the other. Possibly some sullen-
ness and dissatisfaction with the length of their desert wanderings intensified this
feeling. However that may be, here we have the fact that beneath the eyes of the
law-giver the people neglect the observance of one or both of these rites. It is
not, I think, that they are under any interdict, as some have imagined. There is
no trace of a prohibition to observe them. It seems to have been simple, sheer
neglect. If we feel it strange they should neglect these rites, we ought to feel it
stranger still that they find so many to-day who resemble them in doing »o. Like
Israel, we have sacraments. As they had one for the individual confession of be-
longing to God, we have the rite of Baptism ; as they had the social sacrament of
the Passover, we have that of the Lord's Supper. But everywhere, from soma
reason or other, we see both neglected. Both meant to be observed by those
who can make intelligently the avowals which they express, both are neglected.
Sometimes, through carelessness and misconception, baptism will be neglected ;
but sometimes, merely because it is irksome, or because it seems not essential to
salvation, or because it carries with it reproach for Christ, or involves responsi-
bility, persons are found neglecting the rite of baptism, which the Saviour meant
them to observe. And for much the same reasons the other, the social sacrament, is
neglected. Around every Christian Church there is a fringe composed of persons
ahve to the glory of the gospel who yet shrink firom the formal rites of covenant
with God. How much they lose by it, none can tell. The mental clearness ; the
Bafety that lies in a well-defined position ; the higher purpose ; the greater ease
with which the confession of Christ ia made and the denial of Christ avoided ; the
doser and firmer fellowship with God's saints, with all its quickening influences —
these are aU forfeited by the doll neglect of a blessed rite. And how much the
Church and the world lose by their lukewarmness, by their refusal of service, by
their unintentional but serious influence in abating the spirit of religious earnest-
ness I Of these they never think It is more agreeable to the indolence of their
natureg, or the timidity of their hearts, to abstain from all avowals ; and so, hke
Israel, they neglect the sacraments of God. Let those guilty of such action
remember that the sacraments are commandments which o.annot be neglected
without sin on the one hand and danger on the other. Secondly observe —

II. God permits us to repair our neglect and enter into covenant with
Hiu. It is a marvellous thing that we should be permitted to enter into covenant
with God ; that in rites in which all the promises made are made by Him, not by
ns, He should bind Himself to be our redeeming God ; that in the one sacrament
He should make offer of cleansing from aU guilt, and in the other of the bread of
immortal life. It is a matter more marveUotis still that to those who have neg-
lected those rites for stretches of years He yet extends .the permission to approach
them. But so it ia. Here is an iUustration of this wilhngness. He had httle hope
«f much honour or satisfaction from Israel. They would bo a rebellious and gain-
fujiiig paopl* through all their future. 'Set her* He allows them again to resoaat



8«



THE BOOK OF JOSHUA.



[CH. T. XO-li



their relation to Him, to "Ifty hold on his corenant." It is no slight mercy to tig
that God is willing stall to enter into an " everlasting covenant with us, ordered in
all things and sure." If now our neglect is regretted, let not despair prolong it.
Whatever falseness to conscience we have heen guilty of, He keeps the door open,
and gives us what we have no title to expect — the opportunity to repair neglect.
He lays it as a charge on all to ohserve these covenant rites, so that we cannot
without heing disohedient keep outside of a covenant relation to Him. Belong to
the Church of the redeemed. Let the name of God and of the city of God be
upon you. When God permits us to repair our neglect, let us do so. Thirdly
observe —

III. All BEdnmiNo akt new enteepbise should begin it with God. IsreM
has a great task before it. He will do well to lay hold on God's strength to help him.
The messenger of God's justice, he must himself be just. " They must be holy
who bear the vessels of the Lord." Exposed to great strain and great difficulty,
they act wisely to close with God, and gain Him on their side. In this we have
lessons for several classes. First, for the young, and those beginning life. When
life is yet all before you, and the struggle with your foes yet to come, join your
redeeming God in solemn covenant. Many a life would have been saved from
wreck had this been done. Save yours. You will be saved many a grief, and
come safe out of every danger, if in the beginning of your career before leaving
Gilgal you enter into sacramental covenant with your Saviour. Well begun is
halif done. And a good beginning of the better life secures its perfectest and
easiest development. The earliest is always the most convenient season for the
great religious decisions of life. (2) Those not young, but yet entering on some
new career, some new set of experiences or duties or dangers, will always act
wisely by consecrating the opening of a new career. Begin all things with God.
His wisdom wiU preserve from error, and His power from all danger. Hallow the
new undertaking, the enjoyment of the new mercy, the experience of the new
trial, by getting closer to God. Gorrvmence business life, commence married life,
commence yowr life in a strange land, hy special consecration. Let all ponder
these matters. Let those who have made, keep their sacramental vows, and those
who have neglected make them ; for while the Saviour is honoured by them and
rejoices in them, their blessings on ourselves surpass all our conceptions. — Q»



EXPOSITION.



CHAPTEB V. 10—13.



Thb PASSOVER AND THE CESSATION Ot THB

MANNA.— Ver. 10.— And kept tlie passover.
In reference to the question which has been
discussed above, whether the passover wag
kept after the rebellion at Eadesh-Bamea,
K«il notices, as a remarkable fact, that not
only no mention of a passover as having been
kept is found in the Pentateuch, after Num.
ix. 1, but there is not even any instance
given of the law of sacrifice having been
observed in the plains of Jericho ; see above,
eh. iv. 13, " Tides ergo quia nemo immun-
dns facit pascha, nemo incircumcisns sed
quicumque mundus fuerit et oircumcisus,
giout et apostolus interpretatur dicens ete-
nim pascha nostrum immolatus est Ohris-
tns. Itaque diem festum celebremns non
in fermento veteri, sed in azymig smceri-
tatig et veritatig " (Origan, Hen. 6, ea
JoghiuO. " Wh«n goldiers take the field,



they are apt to think themselves excused
from religious exercises (they have not time
nor thought to attend to them) ; yet Joshua
opens the campaign with one act of devo-
tion after another " (Matthew Henry).

Ver. li. — ^The old com. The produee of
the land ; litfirally, that which passes from
off it, from ^Dy to pass over. Whether new
or old we have no means of teBing. The
barley would be ripe (see note on ch. ii. 6),
but the wheat harvest had not yet taken
place. The morrow alter the sabbath. The
15th Nisan (see Num. xxxiii. 3). The
law of the wave sheaf (Levit. xxiii. 10, 11)
was intended to apply to com raised by the
Israelites on their own land, after Canaan
had been divided to them for an inheritance
^see Exod. xxiii. 16). And parched com ;
I.e., ears roasted at the fire, and the grain
afterwards rubbed out, a custom ttill in use
anjong the Arabs (see Levit. ii. 14 j 1 Stun.



OH. V. 10— H.]



THE BOOK OF JOSHUA.



xvii. 17 ; 2 Sam. xtu. 28, Ac. See also for
the precept here followed, Levit. xxiii. 14).
This verse therefore adds Bome confirmation
to the yiew that until their arriTal in Palee-
tine a foil observance of the precepts of the
law was impossible (see above, ver. 6).
Tar. 12.— Tb« manna ceaaed. It ceased



when the Israelites entered a cnltivated
region. The eastern portion of their in-
heritance, though well suited for pastoral
purposes (see ch. i. 12), was not a land oi
agricultural produce. Therefore the manna
did not cease until tht laiaelitei had orosied
the Joidan.



H0MILETIC3.

Vers. 10 — 12. — The passover and the cetsation ofma/nna.

I. The renewal of the covenant must be attended with the obsesyamos
OF ITS LAWS. When the Christian desires to retom and to serve God after a period
of disobedience and rebellion, he must prepare himself, by repentance and morti-
fication, to feed on the flesh of the slain Lamb of God in the sacrament which He
has ordained. Thus he makes a memorial of the death of Christ, throngh which
alone be has obtained pardon ; he feeds on the flesh and blood of the Son of God ;
he applies to himself all the blessings which come &om the Sacrifice of the Cross.
And he moreover calls men to witness, by thus joining his brethren in the solemn
celebration, of his intention to be henceforth an obedient servant of Christ. Thus
he sets his seal to the vow of obedience which he has just made, he invokes the
sympathy and assistance of his brethren in his recovery from the snare of Satan ;
he binds himself to them anew in his renewed participation with them in the new
life of the Spirit.

II. When the promised land is entekbd, all extraordinaet dispensations
OF God's providence cease. This is the case (1) in the history of the Chiistian
Church, (2) in that of the individuaL

1. In the history of the Church. Nothing is more remarkable than the way in
which all the miraculous gifts of God, healing, prophecy, the working of miracles,
ceased when Jesus Christ had ascended into heaven. Up to His coming the world
had been under tutors and governors, and the Father needed continually to inter-
vene with revelations and portents, and interferences vrith the ordinary course of
nature. After His coming these were gradually withdravTn. The Church passed
from the region of the extraordinary dispensations of God's providence to the
ordinary working of His laws. Before those laws were fully matured, there needed
perpetual interferences to compensate for their imperfection. His whole counsel
once made known in Christ, the laws of the spiritual, like those of the natural
world move on in their regular course.

S. In the history of the incUvidMol. When man is wandering in the wilderness,
an alien from the covenant of God, and out of His favour, he is not under the
ordinary dispensations of God's grace. He is kept alive, so far as he lives at all, by
unexpected manifestations of ffis mercy. Smitings of conscience, restraints of
circumstances, checks imposed in unexpected ways to the unrestrained indulgence
of his passions, prevent him from dying a miserable death in a land where no
bread or water is. But when he returns to the fold of God these extraordinary
manifestations are vouchsafed no longer. There are the ordinary supplies of grace
to be obtained in God's Church — the treasures of God's Holy Word, the answers to
daily publio and private prayer, the uplifting of the heart which follows on the
exercise of prayer and praise, the outpouring of Divine life which follows on the
devout reception of Holy Communion. And all these have their blessed results in
a steady growth in grace. The miraculous manna ceases. In its stead we eat of
the old com of the heavenly Canaan, in which we find ourselves placed by the
loving-kindness of the Lord.

III. The PASSOVER must not be eaten by the ttncircumcised. Hence we
learn that no one can spiritually feed on Christ who is harbouring unrepented sin.
Such an one is not fit to come te tke Christian Passover, the Sacrament of Holy
Communion. He may " carmaUy amd visibly preis the sacrament with his teethi



88 THE BOOK OF JOSHUA. [cm. t. 10-12.

yet is ha in nowise partaker of Christ." He who would feed on " Christ onr
Passover," who " has been sacrificed for us," must do so with the unleavened bread
of purity (fiXucpiveia) and truth. And finally, none can sit down at the marriage
■upper of the Lamb save he that hath on the wedding garment. Compare tba
cnles for the passover in Exod. xiL 43—49 ; and Num. ix. 10 — 14.



HOMILIES BY VAEIOUS AUTHORS.

Ver. 12. — TTie special and the customary. This verse is one of the proof? timt
the snpply of manna was miraculous, ceasing as it did at the exact moment wjjc i
it was no longer needed. Other proofs are, that a double portion fell each Friday,
and none on the Sabbath ; and that if kept longer than a day it became corrupt
and stank, except on the day of rest, when it remained pure and wholesome. Let
ns look at —

I. Manna, as a special provision for a special exigenct. 1. The exigency shows
us that even under the guidance of God there is no exenvptinn from trial. At first
aU had seemed easy and comfortable. Passing through the sea as on dry ground,
the Israelites soon beheld their late tyrants dead on the seashore. The bitter
•waters of Marah were sweetened and Elim furnished its wells and palm-trees for
their refreshment A month passed. The dough cakes were nearly finished, and
provisions began to fail. The murmuring of fear and discontent was heard. Those
whom the sea had not devoured (jiaked lest the hungry wUderness should destroy
them. Forgetting the tasks and bondage of Egypt, they remembered only its flesh-
pots, garUc, onions, and bread, and now they could wish rather to have died in
ravenous plenty than live in noble penury. The Almighty will thus prove His
people. He does not always conduct them by easy roads, for He values the disci-
pline of their spirits more than the external comfort of their bodies. Faith is to be
tested that it may come forth as " gold tried in the fire." 2. The provision assures
US that awder the leadership of Ood all real wamta will he supplied. The glory of
the Lord had appeared in the cloud. Quails — feathered fowl — were sent in the
evening, and in the morning, manna — bread from heaven. God would not suffer
His people to remain in absolute need. He would give them the " finest of the
wheat," and " honey out of the rock." They should have the bread of angels and
the meat of kings. Infinite wisdom and might sit on the throne, and these are
engaged for the believer's support The hght may flicker, it shall not be extin-
guished ; or if ordinary sources of rehef fail, other springs shall be discovered.
" Tour heavenly Father knoweth that ye have need of all these things." The gift by
God of His beloved Son to die for the world is the transcendent example of God's
benevolence. Christ is the true Manna, which satisfies the hunger of the soul.
Christianity, or the scheme of redemption, is the remedy which Eternal Love has
devised to meet the emergency of a sin-stricken world hastening to ruin.

II. The cessation op the miraculous supply teaches us — 1. Not to expect to
he furnished directly from Ood with what He enables ua to procure by our own
exertions. Apparently the inhabitants of the land had fled for refuge to Jericho
and the neighbouring towns, abandoning to the Israelites the harvest ripening in
the fields and the old stores housed in the granaries. The Almighty economises His
acts. Extraordinary occurrences are for extraordinary needs. We see in the life
of Christ that He would not perform wondrous works merely to gratify inordinate
curiosity or to satisfy the demands of unreasonable scepticism. The lesson of
leaUsing our responsibiUties is important. It will not do to indolently expect the
Divine providence and power to supply the lack of human effort. Prayer and work
must go together. Not only faith is necessary, but exertion, if the Divine purpose!
are to be accomplished. If on a specially appointed mission our Father may take
care of us as He does of the birds of the air, it is ordinarily our duty to " sow and
reap and gather into bams," but without anxiety or corroding care. 2. To be
tkanlrful/or a return to ordinwry ways wnd means. The laraehtes got tired nvK



CH. T. 18-15.] THE BOOK OF JOSHUA. 8»

of " angels' food ; " they loathed " this light bread," with all its sweetness. As at
present constituted, variety is pleasiug to men. Certainly man ia not yet fitted for
the splendours and eniployme,nt8 of the beatific state. Moses and Elijah spent
many days on the mount .with God, but probably a return to earthly scenes was
essential to their continued Ufe. When glorified, man may be able to live entiSrely
on the manna of heaven, the life hidden with Christ in God, In seasons of afiiiction
wondrous revelations are sometimes granted ; there is a support given which raises
the soul above the surrounding sorrow, causing it to exclaim, " It is good to be
here I " Deprived of the usual ordinances and channels of consolation, the Spirit
ministers of the things of God, illumines the sacred page, makes the promise of
Christ's presence a fulfilled resJity. Nevertheless, it rejoices the Christian to be
permitted to resume wonted occupations and to enjoy the customary privileges.
To revel for a time in the glorious scenery of the Alps does not diminish the satis-
faction with which we behold again the quiet beauty of our much-loved home. As
the ceremonies connected with the passover were renewed, the exchange of manna
for ordinary corn was at least fitting, if not absolutely necessary, 3. The duty of
Iceeping in rememhra/nce past displays of the might and compassion of Ood,
According to Exod. ivi. 32, a (golden) pot was to be filled with manna and deposited
in the ark as a memorial of grace and favour received in the wilderness. Naught
more treacherous than the memory. The picture of the past is a dissolving view
that fgrows fainter daily until it disappears from sight. To remember what the
Almighty has done is pleasing to Him and beneficial to ua. It rebukes ingratitude
and faithlessness. Hence the need of erecting our altars, whicfh shall call to mind
continually the blessings which have been bestowed.

III. The different form which God's interpositions assumed, varying aeoord-
Ing to the requirements of His people. The following verses narrate the appearance
of Jehovah to Joshua, and the instructions given respecting the siege of Jericho.
The stoppage of the manna nowise im ilied the withdrawal of the Divine presence.
The toils of the wilderness were left behind, the dangers of Palestine commenced
Help raust be afforded by different means. And the Christian life calls into promi-
nence certain principles at certain crises. To-day we want food, to-morrow weapons ;
to-day strength, to-morrow guidance ; now hope, then charity. We are variously
tested ; and manifold are the aids of the Divine Spirit ; thus a perfect character is
cultured. The text speaks to us of the everlasting rest into which we hope to
enter. It shall be a Sabbath in which we shall live on the principles which were
made ours during the working week, and it shall also be a Canaan where we shall
no longer need the food of the wUdemess. Faith, as trustful love, shaU survive for
ever, whilst faith, as beheving hope, shall vanish in glorious sight and full fruition.
What a Passover shall that be when the Supper of the Lamb is celebrated I The
intermediary dispensation shall terminate. " Then cometh the end, when he shall
have delivered up the kingdom to God, even the Father." Can we anticipate with
joy the renouncing of the hfe on earth for a life beyond the grave ? " He that
eateth me," said Christ, " shall live for ever." ** To him that overoometh will I
fpM» to eat of the hidden matma." — ^A.



EXPOSITION.



CHAPTEB V. 13—15.



Ver. 13. — Wlien Josliua was by Jerlcbo.
f he preposition 3, the principal meaning of
which is " in," signifies here " in the imme-
diate neighbourhood of," as in 1 Sam. xzix.
1 (where, however, the LXX. read " in En-
dor "), Ezek. X. 16. Perhaps Joshua had as-
eended some hill in the close vicinity of the
ei^ to MooQBoitra it alone, and here ha



received the directions which resulted in the
miraculous capture of the city (gee also Gen.

xiii. 18, where 'J7N3 cannot mean " in the
oaks," nor tn?ri3 "in Hebron*^. TheLXX.
translates the first by irapi rrjv Ipvv. The
Vulgate has " juxta " (cf. Gen. xiv, _ 13)
Origen is much hampered in his exposition
here by the translation " in." He asks how
Jerioho eon powibly be holy ground when i|



•6



THE BOOK OF JOSHUA.



[cH. V. 18—16.



la still in th« possesBion of the enemy; and
answers ingeniously that wherever the cap-
tain of the Lord's host is must needs be
holy ground). He lift up Ms eyes. Usually,
though not always (cf. Gen. xiii. 10), used
of an unexpected or marvellous sight (see
Gen. xvui. 2 ; xxii. 13 ; Num. xziv. 2 ; 1
Sam. vi. 18; 1 Chron. xzi. 16). A man.
This Divine or angelic vision came, as was
often the case, in human shape (cf. Gen.
xviii. 1,2; zix. 1, 2, 10 ; xxxii. 24 ; Judg.
xiii. 3, 6, 11 ; Daniel x. 16, 18 ; xii. 6, 7.
See note on next verse). With his sword
drawn In Ms band. As in Num. xxii. 31 ;
1 Chron. xxi. 16 (cf. Gen. iii. 24). And
Joshua went unto Mm and said. It ap-
pears from this, says Calvin, that Joshua
was alone, and was prepared to fight with
the apparition, if it appeared that he had
fallen in with an enemy. For at first, unex-
pected as the appearance was^ he recognised
nothing supernatural in it.

Ver. 14.— And he said. Nay. Many MS3.
which are followed by the LXX. and Syriao

versions, have 1? for K? here. The Chaldee

and Vulgate read K?, and the Masorites do
not reckon this among the 15 passages in

which 1? is read for 'vh (Keil). But when
Keil adds that a comparison of this passage
with oh. xxiv. 21 decides the point, he is
going too far, since ^^ often stands, like the
Greek on, before a quotation, in the place
of our inverted commas (see, for instance.
Gen. xxix. 33; Exod. iii. 12, Ac). The
various reading has no doubt arisen from
the ambiguity of the passage, for it appears
grammatically doubtful to which part of
Joshua's question the particle of negation
applies. Tet it is obvious enough practically
that it is in answer to the last portion of it.
But as captain of the Lord's host am I now
come. Literally, "for (or but) I, the captain
of the Lord't host, have now come." As
though he would say, " the struggle is now
imminent ; the conflict is all hut begun; and
now, at the critical moment when my help
is needed, I, the captain of the hosts of the
Lord, the leader of all that vast army of
unseen confederates, who are destined to
marshal the forces of nature, the elements
of supernatural terror and dismay, on the
side of the IsraeliteB, am come to help
yon." That the Lord's host must mean
the angels is clear from such passages as
Gen. xxxii. 2 ; 1 Kings xxii. 19 ; Psa. ciii.
20, 21; cxlviii 2; St. Luke u. 13 (cf.
3 Kings vi. 17). Hengstenberg, in his
'Christology,' illustrates by Matt. xxvi. 53.
Two opinions have been held by the early
Church concerning this manifestation. The
first regards it as the appearance of the Son
of God in a Tisibla form ; the second sup-



poses it to have been a created being — an
angel — through whom Jehovah was pleased
to manifest Himself. The former opinion
was general in the earhest ages of the
Church. The appearance of the Arian
heresy, however, brought this interpretation
into discredit. It was felt to be dangerous
to admit it, lest it should lead to the notion
that the Logos, however great and glorious
a being he might be, however superior to all
other created beings, was nevertheless re-
moved by an infinite interval from the Su-
preme God Himselt. The Jewish interpreters
diSer on the point, Maimonides and others
(see next note) do not regard the appearance
as a real one. The majority seem to have
supposed it to have been the Archangel
Miobael. We will proceed to examine the
scriptural and patristic evidence on the
subject. That appearances, beUeved to be
manifestations of God Himself in a visible
form, are recorded in Scripture, is u fact
which cannot be denied. Thus we have the

voice of God (Hlh; 7fp) walking in the gar-
den (Gen. iii. 8). Again, in ch. xv., though
first God appears to Abraham in a vision,
the nature of the manifestation would seem
to have changed in some respects afterwards,
for we read " he brought him forth abroad "
(yer. 5). Again, in ch. xviii., we find that
Jehovah "appeared" to Abraham as he
dwelt by the oaks of Mamre (ver. 1), and
the narrative would suggest that Jehova.h
Himself appeared, and two attendant angels.
This.is further corroborated by the fact that
Abraham remains in conference with Je-
hovah, while the two angels who arrived in
the evening at Sodom do not appear to have
been spoken of as Jehovah, or to have re-
ceived Divine honours from Lot. The
" man " who (Gen. xxxii. 24) wrestled with
Jacob is described afterwards (ver. 30) as
"God." The "angel of the Lord" who
(Exod. iii. 2) " appeared " unto Moses " in a
flame of fire, out of the midst of a bush," is
immediately afterwards described as Je-
hovah and Elohim (ver. 4), and, as in the
present passage, Moses is mstruoted to re-
move his shoe from his foot in consequence
of the holiness of the place in which so
great a Being appeared. And here we are
led to investigate the nature of that myste-
rious being who is described as " the angel
of the Lord," the " angel," or, as the word
is sometimes translated, "messenger of the
covenant." He appears to Hagar (Gen.
xvi. 7), and she immediately proceeds (ver.
13) to express her beUef that it is God whom
she has seen. The angel who appears to
Abraham at the sacrifice of Isaac (Gen. xxii.
11, 12, 18) speaks of Himself as God. The
voice of the angel, again, is regarded by Iieah



CH. T. IS — 16.]



THE BOOK OF JOSHUA.



and Bachel as the voice of God (Gen. xxxi.
11, 16), and He calls Himself so (ver. 13).
Jacob speaks of the angel as having "re-
deemed him from all evil " (Gen. xlviii. 16),
but here the term Goel, though it means a
lansomer, is not necessarily connected with
moral evil. After His appearance to Moses
in the bush He becomes the special guide of
the children of Israel. His divinity is again
asserted in Ezod. xiii. 21, for the Being
there spoken of as Jehovah is described in
oh. ziv. 19 as His angel. The solemn terms
in which the God of Israel refers to him in
Exod. xxiii. 20, 21 must not be passed over.
He is the " Angel of Jehovah." He is sent
to " keep " Israel " in the way." They were
to take heed and not rebel against Him (so
LXX.) ; for, adds Jehovah, " My name is ia
His inward parts " (not 13 but I3"1i?3 denot-
ing close and intimate union). Of. ver. 23
and Exod. xxxii. 34 ; xxxiii. 2. This angel
is called the Eace, or Faces, of the Lord
(Exod. xxxiii. 14 ; cf. Isa. Ixiii. 9), and is
thus specially identified with the revelation
of Him, like the term ekiiv in the New
Testament. The angel that withstood Ba-
laam assumes a tone of authority in har-
mony with this view (Num. xxii. 22 — 35).
Whether the angel at Bochim (Judg. ii. 1)
were a Divine or human messenger does not
appear from the narrative, and the word
is occasionally, as in Hag. i. 18, used of a
prophet. But the appearance to Gideon
and Manoah has a Divine character (Judg.
vi. 11 — 22; xiii. 8 — 22). And the special
reference to Jehovah, the angel of the cove-
nant, in Mai. iii. 1 seems to point in a
special manner to the Second Person in the
Blessed Trinity. This view, as has been
stated, is the view of the earlier Fathers,
nor does there seem any reasonable ground
for its rejection by those of later date. The
idea that the Logos, always the medium of
the Father's revelation and impartation of
Himself, in oreation as in redemption, fre-
quently took a visible form under the old
dispensation in order to communicate the
Divine will to mankind, does not in the
least militate against the doctrine of His
eonsubstantiality with the Father. On the
contrary, it rather emphasises the fact which
the New Testament teaches ns throughout,
that the Logos was ever the manifestation,
the e^tiyiiaig (John i.) of the Father, the
eternal medium whereby He communicates
Himself beyond Himself. This was in the
main the view of the earliest Fathers. They
might use an incautious expression now
•nd then, but they ever intended to be true
to the doctrine of the Consubstaatial Son
of the Father, who took a visible shape to
convey the Father's mind to man. Thus
Justin Martyr ('Dial oum Iryphone,' £6)



cites Gen. xviii. 1, 2 to prove that, as h«
says, "there is another God under (iirb) the
the Creator of all things, who is called an
angel because he announces {ayysXeiv) what-
ever the Creator of all things desires him to
announce." This being, he adds, " was
also God before the creation of the world."
He was another God than the Creator of
the world in number (apiBiiif), not in mind
iyvwfiy). And from the expression "the
Lord rained down fire and brimstone from
the Lord out of heaven " (Gen. xix. 24), he
deduces the belief that this Being was " Lord
from beside (vapa) the Lord who is in
heaven." He proceeds to cite the passages
from the Old Testament which have just
been mentioned, and to draw from them the
conclusion which has just been drawn, that
this Being was one who ministered (inrnpe-
TovvTo) to God who is above ; the word, the
Apx'l whom He begat before all creation (sec.
60, 61). Similarly Theophilus (' Ad Autoly-
oum,' ii. 22) says that the Word of God held
a colloquy with Adam in the person (or
representation, vpoawTrifi) of God. Ireneeus
(' Adv. Haer.,' iv. 7,4) speaks of the Being who
spake to Abraham at Mamre and Moses in
the bush as superior to all created angels,
and as, in fact, the Word of God; though
afterwards (oh. xx. 11) he modifies this
statement into a manifestation of "clari-
tatem et dispositiones patris," "secundum
dispositionum ejus causas sive efficaciam."
It is to be remembered that we unfortunately
chiefly possess Irenaeus in a very unsatis-
factory Latin dress. Similar passages may
be found in Clem., ' Alex. PtBd.,' i. 7 ; and
TertuUian, ' Adv. Prax. ,' 14. The latter says
that God was " invisible as the Father, but
visible as the Son," the latter being the
means whereby the former was revealed.
The passage from Clement is embodied and
improved upon in a passage in the 'Apostolic
Constitutions,' which presents the primitive
doctrine on this point in clearer language
than any othet. "To Him (Christ) did
Moses bear witness, and said, ' The Lord
received fire fi'om the Lord, and rained it
down.' Him did Jacob see as a man, and
said, ' I have seen God face to face, and my
Boul is preserved.' Him did Abraham en-
tertain, and acknowledge to be the Judge
and his Lord. Him did Moses see in the
bush. Him did Joshua the son of Nun see,
as captain of the Lord's host, for assistance
against Jericho" ('Apost. Const.,' v. 20).
One passage more will le cited on this point.
"Who else," says Origen, in his Homily on
this passage, "is the prince of the host of
the virtues of the Lord, save our Lord Jesug
Christ? " " Joshua would not have adored,"
he adds, "naless ha had recognised God."
The fact that the latar Fathers (St. Angw-



M



THB BOOK 01" JOSHtTA.



[oh. t. 1»-16,



tine, for Instance, and Theodoiet, Trho holds
that it was Michael the Archangel who ap-
peared to Josnaa) rejected this interpreta-
tion would not be sufficient to outweigh
primitive testimony at once so expUcit and
BO general, unless it were supported by the
■trongest arguments. The fact that it was
rejected rather from prudential motives, and
that such prudence was, in point of fact, en-
tirely unnecessary, robs the later interpre-
tation of much of its weight. Thus much
at least is certain, that we may adopt the
earlier one without fear of prejudicing there-
by the doctrine of the divinity of Christ.
Further information on this point will be
found in Hengstenberg^s ' Ohrlstology,' in
Liddon's ' Bampton Lectures ' (Leot. ii.), in
BuU ('Defens. Fid. Nicen.,' i. 1), and in
Keil's Commentaries upon the various pas-
sages of the Old Testament, cited above.
"He here appeared as a soldier, with His
Bword drawn in His hand. To Abraham in
his tent He appeared as a traveller ; to
Joshua in the field, as a man of war. Christ
will be to His people what their faith ex-
pects and desires " (Matthew Henry). And
JoBbua fell on his face. The apparition had
no doubt taken Joshua by surprise. He
believed himself to be alone, when suddenly
he found himself confronted by a warrior,
with his sword drawn. Uncertain, in those
days when Divine interposition was more
common than it is now, whether what he
saw was a proof that he was watched by
enemies, who had resolved to cut him off
by surprise, or whether God had vouchsafed
to appear to him, but evidently quite pre-
pared to expect the latter, he addresses a
question to the apparition, which of itself
implies at least a half-behef that what he
saw was something above nature. He needs
but the simple reply just recorded to lead
him to prostrate himself in simple faith be-
fore the Mighty One who now stood before
him, to be the defence and shield of His
people from all their adversaries. Maimo-
nides, in his ' Moreh Nevoehim,' and others
(as, for instance, Hengstenberg, ' Gesohichte
des Belches Gottes,' p. 209) have regarded
this as a vision seen by Joshua when he was
alone, plunged in deep meditation on the
difficult task before him. But without deny-
ing that many of the Divine interpositioiia



recorded in Scripture (as, for instance, that
in Gen. ixii. 1) took place through the inner
workings of the mind as the medium of
their action, yet here, as in Gen. zxxii. , and
most probably in Exod. iii., we have visible
appearances of God to men in deep anxiety
of heart, pondering " great matters " which
were " too high for them." Whether we
ohoose to accept or reject the historical nar-
rative as a whole, there can be no rational
ground for doubting that the Hebrew his-
torians wrote under the full persuasion that
they and their forefathers lived under a
dispensation of continual Divine interpo-
sitions, sometimes taking place by secret
inward intimations, sometimes through the
Urim and Thummim ; sometimes, at a
crisis in the history of the nation or of an
individual, by actual external appearances
of God in a visible form, and that we have
here an account of one of these. The pur-
port of the appearance is, however, obscured
by our present division of chapters. The
narrative proceeds without a break as far as
ch. vi. 5. Ch. vi. 1 is simply parenthetical
and explanatory. Thus we gather that
Joshua was meditating the plan of his fu-
ture campaign, and ddiberating on the best
mode of capturing the strong waUed city
close by which (ver. 13) he stood, when GcJ
appeared to him in the form of a wanior,
and solved all his doubts by commanding
him to prepare for a miraculous intervention
of His Providence, and in the place of war-
hke expedieiits to resort to a reUgious cere-
mony, which should be the external token
to all the surrounding nations that the in-
vading host was under the protection of the
Lord of heaven and earth ; a fact of which
they were more than half convinced hy the
supematmal passage of the Bed Sea and
the Joidan (see ch. ii. 10; vi. 1).

Ver. 15. — Loose thy shoe trom olT thy
feet. Cf. Exod. iii. 6. We have here a
clear proof (see also ch. Ti. 2) that He who
now spoke to Joshua was a Divine Person.
The loosing the shoe from the feet is re-
garded by Origen and other patristie com-
mentators as emblematic of the removal of
worldly engagements and pollutions from
the soul. Now Jericho was straitly shut



HOMILETICS.

Vers. 18 — ^vi. 21. — The vision and the com/mcmd. Three points demand our
ipeoial attention in this passage. First, the apparition to Joshua ; next, th«
eommand that was given him ; and, lastly, the resvdts of that command, the fall of
(be walls of Jericho, and the subsequent sack of the city. Eaob of these point!
jrieldg important lessong.



en. y. 18—16.] THE BOOK OF JOSHUA. M

I. He Who appeared was the Son op God. This seems the most probable
ceuclusion from the foregoing Bote?, as also from the fact that Divine worship was
paid to Him by His own command (of. Kev. xix. 10 ; xxii. 8, 9). The Son of God
was ever the hnk of cormnunication between God and the external world. By Him
God created it ; through Him He has been for ever pleased to deal with it ; He
revealed the final dispensation of God's will to it; He shah come again to judge it.
Under the patriarchs and the law He temporarily assmnes. a visible shape to com-
jnunicate God's purposes to man; under the gospel He eternally retains the visible
form of man to save the world. He was the Angel of the Old Covenant ; He is no
less the Angel or Messenger of the New. And by His Spirit He still reveals God's
will to man, though no longer by means of a visible form. And thus the con-
tinuity of God's deaUngs with man is preseir^ed. It is "one God who shall justify
the circumcision by faith, and the uncircumcision through faith ; " one God who
has adopted the same means throughout, yet with ever-increasing efficiency, to
bring man back to his obedience.

II. He appeared when Joshua had been careful to obey God's commands.
** To him that Ijath shall be given." Joshua had been careful to restore the broken
covenant between Israel and Jehovah, He had then ordered a general celebration
of the great Israehtish national festival. And having thus discharged his religions,
ho was now intent upon his worldly, duties, both of which he performed with an equal
devotion to God's commands. He was, doubtless, now either reconnoitring the
city, or lost in reflection how he should best capture it. Then appears the Captain
of the Lord's host, and gives him full directions for his task. So to the Christian
warrior against sin wiU the Son of God appear, and direct him in his task, when
he has duly sought the Lord in the appointed ordinances of rehgion, and is seriously
addressing himself to the task of battling with sin.

III. Joshua is surprised, but not dismayed, bt His appearance. He was
in the way of duty, and he had been bidden (ch. i. 6, 9) to " be of good courage."
Therefore he boldly questions the apparition, prepared to welcome him, if he proved
to be a friend, to do battle with him if he turned out to be an enemy. God's dis-
pensations often come to us in such doubtful guise that we are compelled to ques-
tion with them. But whereas men are generally apt to be terrified when " beneath
a frowning Providence" God " hides a smiling face," the boldness of Joshua should
be our example. " The Lord is on my side, I will not fear what man doeth unto me "
(Psa. cxviii. 6), should be the perpetual attitude of the Christian. Thus the true
JusljTia set His face as a flint to go up to Jerusalem (Mark x. 32 ; Luke ix. 51),
careless of the dangers that awaited Him there. So when opposition or distress
come upon us because of our religion, we should not fear. It is the Captain of
tliH Lord's host come to aid us in our assault on some stronghold of sin. If we
boldly go up to Him and question Him, He will tell us who He is.

IV. Joshua is commanded to do reverence to Him who appears to him.
The removal of the shoe from the foot, on entering a holy place, was in order that
nothing that defiled should be brought in (see Eev. xxi. 27). So when Jesus ap-
pears to us to give us instructions concerning any great struggle that is impending
over us, we must " lay aside every weight, and the sin which doth so easily beset
ns," and devote ourselves with single heart to the work that we have in hand. There
must be no secondary motives, no worldly ambitions, no desire of gain or applause,
cleaving to ns as we buckle to our task. What these bring in their train we see ii<
the case of Ai. In awe of the Divine Presence, and that we may duly receive th*
Divine commands, we must recognise the fact that we are on holy ground, and
thai God requires of us an absolute devotion to His wilL

HOMILIES BT VARIOUS AUTHORS.

Ven. 13 — IS. — TTie captain of the host. As Moses, on entering on Ub mis*
■ion, was favoured with a marvellous Divine manifestation (Exod. iii. 1 — 6), m
with Joshua, now that be is about to make his ^st onslau^fht on the stroQghol4« ot



94 T!MM B@OS OF JOSHUA. [oa. ▼. 18— IS.

the Oanaanites. The angel of the Lord appeared to Moses in a flame of fire; God
spoke to him from the midst of the bush that burned but was not consumed. The
supernatural radiance was the vehicle of the Divine Presence. God clothed Him-
self with light as with a garment. The vision and the voice were alike wonderfuL
The apparition in Joshua's case was of a different kind. It was the common sem-
blance of a man prepared for battle. There seems to have been nothing super-
natural in his aspect, and nothing in Joshua's question indicates that he was startled
or alarmed by what he saw, or that the Being who appeared before him was other
to his view than a veritable flesh-and-blood warrior who was come to take his place
on one side or the other of the conflict that was at hand. And yet as he gazed
more intently upon the warrior form he must have discovered something in it that
told him. it was no mere " man " — some majesty of mien or look, some grandeur
of the Spirit shining through the countenance. The form was that of a man, the
eyes were " as a flame of fire." And it was in the consciousness that he stood in
the immediate, though veiled, presence of Jehovah Himself, the Prince and Leader
of His own hosts, that Joshua " fell to his face on the earth and did worship." In
each of these cases th6 form of the manifestation was adapted to the oircnmstances
of the time and the speciality of the Divine purpose. Moses was taught that the
Ught of the Lord's presence should be with him and his people — a guide, a glory,
a defence — and that through whatever fiery ordeal they might pass they should
not be consumed. Joshua, whose heart might well quail and tremble at flie pros-
pect before him, was made to know that the Captain of a mightier host than his
was with him, the sword of whose strength was drawn and ready for the fight.
With such forces on his side victory mast everywhere attend his steps. This " Cap-
tain of the Lord's host" we beUeve to be none other than the Eternal Son of God,
whose function it has ever been to be the channel of commutiication from the in-
finite Father-Spirit — the " word " of His thought, the arm of His power— and whose
appearances in the olden time in human and angeUo forms were prophetic of Hi a
after manifestation in the flesh. This view makes the scene before us strikingly
suggestive of the relation in which He stands towards His redeemed Church in
its grand conflict with the evil powers of the world. Observe —

I. Christ's presence with His people. These miraculous manifestations give
a tone of great solemnity to the history of the olden times, and invest the leading
men of those times with an aspect of something like superhuman grandeur. But
we greatly err if we fail to Unk those times with our own and those men with our-
selves — ^if we look on these ancient records as relating to a condition of things alto-
gether exceptional and foreign to our own experience. The remote and occasional
miracle bears witness to the abiding, ever-present truth. God gave those signs and
wonders that we might know Him to be always near in the fulness of His love and
power. " The good wiLL of him that dwelt in the bush " is the perpetual inheritance
of the Church. The " Captain of the Lord's host " is ever going forth before His
armies, and it is by the sharpness of His sword and the strength of His right arm
they win all their victories. Distinguish between the miraculous form of the in-
cident and the truth enshrined in it. The one belonged to that particular age, and
was suited to its exigencies ; the other belongs to every age, and meets the permanent
necessities of all individual and social religious life. In the heightened spirituality
and richer grace of our Christian times we have the substance which those mystic
visions did but shadow forth. In place of starthng signs and symbols we have
Divine words of promise — appeals not to sense but to faith — awakening the inteUi-
genoe, kindling the heart; words of assurance to the individual behever, " If any
man love me," &c. (John xiv. 23); to the worshipping Church, " "Where two or three
are gathered together," &c. (Matt, zviii. 20) ; to all faithful heraldi of gospel truth,
" Lo, I am with you alway, even unto the end of the world " (Matt, xxviii. 20). No
need of miraculous manifestations if our faith can grasp the full meaning of gracious
words like these.

II The Lordship of Christ over the heavenly powers. " Captain of the
host of the Lord " — i.e., the angeho host. The profoundly interesting, and not
altogether profitless, question of l^a relation of the angeUo world to our humanity



OA. T. 18—16.] THE BOOK OP JOSHUA. N

is opened up to na here. Angelio ministry in human affairs is a fact to which Old
and New Testaments alike bear abundant witness. " Are they not all ministering
spirits?" &c. (Heb. L 14). Every age has had its "heirs of salvation," whose
mstory, if we knew all its secrets, would illustrate this truth. Here, too, the super-
natural wonders of the past inspire faith in the endiuring reality. Why not believe
that between us and the Infinite there is a glorious gradation of pure, personal
spirit-life linked in kindly interest and helpful service with our own ? The rela-
tion of Christ, however, to the angels is chiefly indicated. In what way these
earlier manifestations of the Son of God, and His after assumption of our nature,
may have affected the interests of their being, we know not. But their personal
subjection to Him is made evident. " When he bringeth in the first-begotten into
the world, he saith, And let aU the angels of God worship him " (Heb. i. 6). The
gospel and apostolic histories are fuU of proof of their subordination to his redeem-
ing purpose. He leads the heavenly host. — leads them in the great conflict with
the foes of God and man. If our eyes were opened, as were the eyes of EUsha's
servant, we should see that we are not so much alone as we sometimes suppose.
The angels that " ascend and descend upon the Son of man " are powers that He
sways by the impulse of His sovereign will and makes the instruments of Hia
almighty love. Shall our hearts yield to fear when we know that such forces as
these are fighting on our side ? Shall we hesitate to foUow the leading and obey
the behests of the great " Captain of salvation," who has such armies as these at
His command ?

III. The sanctity that belongs to scenes op special Divine manifbstation.
" Loose thy shoe," &c. The incarnation of Christ has consecrated all the earth and
made every part of it hallowed grotind. He has withdrawn again behind the veil,
only to come more near to us, to fill all places with the energy of His viewless
Spirit. But there are times when tlie veil seems to be uplifted ; states of con-
MHOUsnesB in which the Divine Presence is intensely real ; manifestations that

** Dissolve the soul in ecstasies.
And bring all heaven before our eyes.*'

Shall we tread with thoughtless or irreverent feet the spots hallowed even by the
memory of seasons such as these ? — W.

Vers. 13 — 15. — A solcUer'a interview with his captam. It adds much to the
general power of the Bible as an ethical handbook, that great part of its instruction
is conveyed in the pleasing form of history, poUtical and individual.

I. Joshua's anxiety. Gilgal, where the ceremonies related in preceding verses
were celebrated, was not far from Jericho, the great stronghold wMch protected the
eastern district of Palestine and which it was necessary for the IsraeUtes to capture
before they could advance into the country with safety. The opening words of the
13th verse imply that Joshua had gone out alone to view Jericho, to survey its
defences, and to form plans of assault. He was deeply concerned for the success of
the siege. It was his first conflict in the promised land, and the IsraeUtes were
inexperienced in attacking fortified cities. We can well beheve that this thoughtful
leader was deep in meditation, pondering over the past promise of God, and praying
that it might be fulfilled in his hour of need. Unworthy are those men of high
places in God's Church who are not concerned for the welfare of the Divine pur-
poses committed to their charge, who do not " watch as they that must give an
account." In some sphere or other we are all masters or captains ; let us endeavour
to realise the responsibility resting upon us. We are informed how Joshua's
onaAety wag relieved. " He lifted up his eyes and saw," &o. In the season of
exigency Jehovah (vi 2) appeared. He could not violate His word and leave His
servant alone. Here is comfort for the careworn and despairing. Said Jesus, " Lo,
I am with you always." Whilst we forget not to use diligently our talents and
resources, let our eyes be lifted fi:om the earth that we may see Him who stands by
u« fts He did by PaiU in the cell at Jerusalem, saying, " Be of good cheer " (Aqts



M THE BOOK OF JOSHUA. [oh. ▼. 18—15,

xxiii. 11). We go not to the -warfare at our own cost. Let ns foam to expect Sit
presence. We will think of the future, but not take over-aniious thought. Not
work but worry saps the strength. Let onr councils wait till Christ is present to
preside.

II. His courage. Not in vain had the admonition, " Be courageous," been
bestowed upon him. Nowise affrighted, Joshua went up to the man with the sword
and put the inquiry, " On whose side art thou come to fight ? " Ignorant of the
stranger's dignity, his warhke attitude did not daunt ova hero. He would know
the truth, even if unpleasant and at the hazard of his life. Truly many a trouble
■would have its gigantic dimensions lessened if we faced it stoutly and investigated
its nature. That new theory which wears such hostile aspect may after all confirm
the old position. Joshua hnew hut of two armies. And to our conflict with sin
there are but two sides. " He that is not with us is against us." It is well to put
the query to our acquaintance, " Art tliou for us ? " Notice also that Qod appears
in thu form best suited to His servant's need. He contended as an athlete with
Jacob that by wrestUng the patriarch's faith and knowledge might be increased.
To Moses, needing to be reminded of the indestructibility of the Church of God,
there was shown a burning bush unconsnmed. And now, to inspirit Joshua for the
campaign, God reveals Himself as a warrior armed and as the " Prince of the Lord's
host," Captain of the visible and invisible armies, the Israelites and the angels.
Analogous to these varied appearances are the titles of God, framed to assure His
people that He can " supply all their need." To the afSicted He is the " God of all
comfort," to the depressed the " God of hope." In our loneliness He is a Friend, in
orphanhood the Father of the fatherless, in the storm our refuge, amid the waves
our Eock, and in battle our Captain and Shield. Thankful may we be for the
chequered experience of life, if it reveals to ns the many-sidedness of our God, and
the satisfaction to be found in Him of every want.

III. His humility. The words and bearing of the speaker, even if they did not
•t once render Joshua conscious of His exalted character, were quite enough to
indicate the need of reverence. Accordingly he bowed and worshipped, and great
general though he was, exhibited his readiness to receive commands or advice
respecting the management of the siege. This is the spirit in which the approach
of Christ to the heart should be met. We must say with Saul, " What wilt thou
have me to do?" Men who cavil at every utterance of the Saviour are not likely
to be favoured with a full disclosure of His glorious person. If the heart has been
stirred by some appeal of Scripture or some reUgious argument, it is only right that
we should display a willingness to listen further and to follow the light whither it
may lead ns. A lowly attitude befits the proudest intellect in the presence of
messengers and messages from heaven. Let us, like Joshua, inquire, "What saith
my Lord unto his servant ? " Eumility prepa/red the way for the reception of a
command that clearly revealed a present Jehovah. Not to the disrespectful will
such a revelation be granted. Therefore to the doubting we say. Bow at the feet
of Clirist, and there shall come a mandate which by its own inherent authority shall
manifest His dignity and dismiss uncertainty. Often have the very absoluteness
of t)ie commands of Christ, and the very thoroughness of the claim He makes to
men's homage, assured them of His being the Son of God. Imposture and false-
hood stand not forth in such clear Ught, they would be instantly detected.

IV. His obedience. Promptly did Joshua loose the shoes from off his feet,
recalling, doubtless, the similar order issued to Moses in the desert. The presence
of Qod is true consecration. He is everywhere ; but where He manifests Himself,
there the place is holy. As the shoe partook of the defilement of the earth, it was
not fit to remain on holy ground. The New Testament does not diminish the awe
inspired by the majesty of the Most High, though it brings pre-eminently into view
His character of love. Not outward prostration, however, do we want so much as
tlie bowing of the heart and bending of the will. " Eend your hearts and not your
garments." Obedience was rewarded with directions and a promise. By instant
compliance with the behest, Joshua displayed a hearty acceptance of his Prince's
wiil, and a fitness to receive fmther proofs of Pivine favour. For th« gifts of God



OH. TI. 1—21.]



THE BOOK OP JOSHUA.



«r



are conditioned by the preparedness of the recipient. And if in answer to our
repeated prayers there has come a seemingly strange command, letns immediately
obey. No further revelation will be ours till we have thus shown our fitness to par-
ticipate in heavenly blessings. We shall find that in keeping the commandments we
acquire a true knowledge of God, and that therein is eternal life, *' if any man
win do his wUl, he shall know of the doctrine." — ^A.

Vers. 18 — 16. — TTie Oaptam of the CJmroh, At the very time when the battle
of Israel against the idolators of the land of Canaan was about to commence, Joshua
saw a mysterious wamor stand before him sword in hand. " Art thou for us or
for our enemies ? '' he cried. " I am come," is the answer, ai Captain of the Lord's
host.

I. This Divinb Captain has never left the army of the holt, though He
may not at all times have made Himself visible. He was with the Church when it
entered upon the conflict with the old world. Weak, insig Mf cant, without power,
and vsrithout prestige as it was, His sword of fire sufficed to l nsure it the victory.
It was He whom Luther saw in the dawn of the Beformatio morning, when he
sang: " The Son of God goes forth to war."

II. This Divine personage is the same with whom Jacob w estled all the night
at the Ford Jabbok. He begins by turning His sword again t - is own soldiers, and
plunges it deep into their hearts to destroy their pride and si D. Blessed wounding,
which makes them in the end more than conquerors, and Isn el es indeed. We must
not, then, marvel if, often in the early stages of its warfare, the Church is humbled,
foiled, for a time it might seem almost crushed. Neither iho Id we be surprised
if the Christian soul is made victorious only through suffering. Soon the Divine
Captain will take command of the host which He has disciplined, and will lead them
on to victory. This Captain is the very same whom St. John saw in vision with
a fla m ing sword in His mouth. He is the Word made flesh, the Kedeemer
(Hev. v.). He Himself was wounded before He triumphed. The ct u^neriog Head
of the Church is " Jesus, who was crucified."— B. bb P.



EXPOSITION.



OHAPTEB VI. 1—21.



The viotokt. — Vers. 1. — This verse (see
above) is parenthetical. It explains why
the captain of the Lord's host appeared
onto Joshua. The inhabitants of Jericho,
though in a state of the utmost alarm, were
nevertheless fully on their guard against the
children of Israel. The commencement of
hostilities imposed a great responsibility on
Joshua. Success at the outset was, humanly
speaking, indispensable. We may see what
defeat involved for him by his distress in
consequence of the check at Ai. The alter-
native was victory or annihilation, for the
IsraeUtes had no homes or fortresses to
which they could retire. Joshua was there-
fore encouraged by a visible proof that he
was under the protection of the Most High,
to be yet farther assured by the marvels
that were to follow. The use of the Pual
participle with its fullest intensive sense, to
strengthen the affirmation of the action by
the Eal, is a singular construction. Literally
rendered it is "shutting an closely shut
np," thus cludiag (1) the act of closing,

JOSH A.



and (21 the continuance of that sot, m/ya-
KKuaiiBvn) Kai Sj^poiiirt] (LXX,), "clausa at
que munita " fVulg.). So also the Chaldee
paraphrase. The remain er of the verse
strengthens stiU mota the assertion o^ *he
state of siege. The I&hk o* Jexisbo n^ch
was his alarm, regard d bis city es a
beleaguered one, from the mere presence of
Joshua and his host in its vicinity.

Ver. 2. — And the Lord said. This is no
new source of information for Joshua.
Jehovah is here obviously identical, as com-
mentators are generally agreed, with the
" Captain of the Lord's host " in the last
chapter (comp. Gen. xviii. 2, 13; Exod.
iii. 2, 4). Thus Shalt thou do slz days.
" Seven days together they walk this round ;
they made this therefore their Sabbath day's
journey ; and who knows whether the last
and longest walk, which brought victory to
Israel, were not on this day? Not long
before, an Israelite is stoned to death for
but gathering a few sticks that day ; now all
the host of Israel must walk about the wall*
of a large and populous city, and yet do
not violate the day. God's precept is the



THE BOOK OF JOSHUA.



[oh. yi. 1—21.



nileofthe]iisticeandh6imesBof onxactioBg "
(Bp. HaU).

Yer. 4. — ^And seTen priests shall beax
iMfore tbe ark. The Yulgate puts " on the
seventh day " in connection with this part
of the sentence ; Luther also translates thns.
The LXX., which Ualvin and our translators
and the majority of commentators follow,
regard this part of the sentence as stating
what was to be done on the six days, and
tightly so, as vers. 8 — 14 clearly show. That
the historian, as has been before remarked,
did not always give the full instructions
Joshua received is evident from this passage.
The priests are not said to have been in-
structed to sound the trumpet on the dz
days ; yet we learn from v. 13 that they
did so. It is rather implied than expressed
that the ark was also to be borne in pro-
cession ; but that this was done is evident
from ver. 8. Seven trumpets of rams'
aoms. There is no mention of rams'

horns in the original, which is nnS'It!'
OvSI'n trumpets of jubilee, i.e., of tri-
umph (hardly as Gesenius, "alarm trum-
pets," though not necessarily, with Dr.
Vaughan in his 'Heroes of Faith,' "the
emblems of festival, not of warfare "). The

word 7;;i1'> is derived from the same root as
the Latin is in the phrase lo Triumphs
(cf. Greek iii), and according to Gesenius our
word " yule " is also derived from this root.
The *1S1t^ as the next verse shows, was a
curved instrument, in shape like a ram's
horn, though not necessarily of that ma-
terial; whereas the il'^VVn was a straight
trumpet. Seven times. The importance of
the number seven as indicative of complete-
ness is here strongly indicated. Seven
priests were to cany seven trumpets for
seven days. The word for to swear, J)3C5'3
literally to be sevened, means to have one's
vow consecrated and confirmed by seven
sacrifices or seven witnesses (see Gen. zzi.
28, SO). The number seven, says Bithr in
his ' SymboUk des Alten Testament,' i., 187,
188, is the sign of the relation, union, com-
munion between God and the world, as
represented by the number three and four
respectively, just as twelve is in another
relation (see note on oh. xzi. 3). Its
meaning, according to Bahr, among the
heathen is somewhat different. There it
means the harmony of the universe, and is
signified by the seven stars, to which, and
neither more nor less, was the power of
influencing man's destiny ascribed. And
the priests shall blow with the trumpets.
"Fac tibi tribas duotiles, si sacerdos es,
iinmo, quia sacerdos es (gens enim regalis
eSeotufi ea et sacerdotium sanctum, de te



enim scriptum est), fao tibi tribas dnotilea
ex Scripturis Sanctis" (Orig., Hom. 7 on
Joshua).

Yer. 6.— When they ma&e a long blaat
with the ram's horn. Literally, a$ they
draw out with the hom of jubilee, i.e., blow
a prolonged blast (cf. Exod. six. 13). Here
the word need is hom of jubilee, but not
necessarily of ram's hom, as our version, any
more than the modem horn, though it takes
the place of the more primitive instrument
made of that material, must itself be a ram's
horn. So Bosenmfiller. The word pjj
in Hebrew is nsed in different senses, ajl,
however, growing out of the one original
sense. Thus it is used for a muiieal instru-
ment, for rays of light, for the projections
extending from the comers of the altar, and
in Isa. T. 1, for a mountain peak (like the
German Schreck^m, Gabelftom, Weiss-
hom). Origen compares the blast of the
trumpet at which the walls of Jericho fell,
to the sound of the last trumpet, which
shall finally destroy the kingdoms of sin.
When ye hear. The Eeri substitute here,
as in many other places, 3 for 3 but unneces-
sarily. The Keri means at the very moment
when, the Chethibh simply and less emphati-
cally, "when" (see ver. 15). Flat Literally,
underneath it, i.e., the walls were to give
way from their very foundations. Every
man straight before him. There was no
need to surround the city, nor to endeavour
to enter it through a " practicable breach."
The walls were to give way entirely, and
the warriors might advance at once, in the
order of battle, and from the place in which
they were at the moment when they raised
the shout of triumph (Wn^) for the in-
habitants of Jericho alone were evidently
no match for t^em in numbers (cf. chap. x.
S ; xi. 1 — 3), toough they might have hoped
to hold out some time under the protection
of their walls.

Yer. 7.— And he said. The text has they
said. Our translators follow the Masoretio
emendation. If we follow the original we
must suppose that the priests, or, as with
EeU and Enobel, the Shoterim (ch. i. 10),
conveyed Joshua's command to the troops.

Yer. 8. — ^He that is armed, or rather dis-
encumbered, i.e., prepared for battle (see ch.
iv. IB). Similarly, in the next verse, " the
armed men," i.e., the host in marching
order, as we say. Kimohi and Jarchi refer
this to the Beubenites and their brethren,
but without sufficient authority. Eeil thinks
that it was impossible that the unarmed
people would have gone with the procession
as "the rereward " (see note on v. 13), be-
cause no command to that effect is given ia
ver. 3. But as he has told ua in oh. iii.



CH. Tl. 1—21.]



THE BOOK OP JOSHUA-



W., and as we have jnst seen in vet. 4, the
command to JoBhna is not folly given. A
short abstract of it is given, and it is to be
filled up in detail from the Babsec[nent nar-
rative.

Ver. 10. — Ye shall not Bhont. No si^ of
triumph was to be raised ; bu*^ the Israelites,
their priests, and the ark of iheir covenant
were in solemn silence to encompass the
city day by day, until they were commanded
to raise the shout of victory. The people
of Jericho Imew only too well what this reli-
gious procession meant. As a military ma-
noeuvre (so Calvin) it was worse than useless,
it was ridiculous. It actually invited attack ;
nay, it afforded, if the interpretation in the
note on ver. 8 be correct, an admirable
opportunity for the slaughter of defenceless
women and children by a sudden sally from
the city. But the history of the Exodus
was not unknown to the king and people of
Jericho. The inspired law-giver, with his
miraculous powers, and his claim to direct
intercourse with the Most High, was a per-
sonage only too well known to them, and his
mission was only too sure a token of the
Divine sanction which rested on their pro-
ceedings. His supernatural qualifications
had evidently descended to his successor,
and now it was terribly clear that this awful
silent march, with the army equipped for
battle, but not attempting to engage in it,
the seven priests with their seven trumpets,
the visible symbol of the Presence of the
God of Israel, attended by the awe-struck
multitude awaiting the Divine pleasure, was
but the prelude to some new interposition
from on high, the mysterious foreshadowing
of some hitherto unheard-of calamity which
should befall the devoted city. There seems
in this narrative no choice between reject-
ing the whole as an absurd fable, or accept-
ing it as the record of a "notable miracle."
The account is minute in its detail. The
historian, if he be an historian, is distinctly
impressed with the idea that he is relating
a miracle. The obvious course for Joshua,
if he were not relying on supernatural aid,
was either to assault or to blockade the city.
To perambulate it for days in the expecta-
tion of some convulsion of nature such as,
we are told, frequently happened in that
volcanic region, would have been the ex-
treme of childish f oUy, and quite contrary to
that common sense and military skill with
which, as we have seen,' Joshua undoubtedly
was endowed. If he were possessed,seven days
beforehand, with a conviction that an earth-
quake were imminent, such a persuasion
would be of itself miraculous. Paulus' idea
of a mine having been sprung is still less
•ompatible with our narrative. Von Len-
^eihe, in his ' Canaan,' supposes that the



astonishing success of the Israelites grew
into a wonder in the hands of the narrator.
But this involves the entire falsehood, not
only of the command given to Joshua by
Jehovah, but of the seven days' perambula-
tion of Jericho, and the remaining incidents
of the siege, a theory not easily reconcilable
with the minute accuracy of detail displayed
throughout the narrative. The seven days'
circuit of Jericho must, therefore, either be
denied altogether, in spite of the numerous
evidences of genuineness which meet ue in
the narrative ; or, if explained, the only ex-
planation which is consistent with the fact
is, that Joshua had received an intimation
that he was not to expect to effect the re-
duction of the city by natural means, but
was to wait patiently for an interposition
from on high.

Ver. 13. — The rereward (see t. 9). Liter-
ally, t]ie gathering together and then the body
of troops which collects the stragglers, the
rear-guard, as in Num. x. 25 ; Isa. Mi. 12 ;
Iviii. 8. Calvin renders here by quis coge-
bat agmen. But the LXX. and Vulgate
render by o Xoiitbg ix\os and vulgus re-
liquum. So Luther, der Saufe. The
LXX., however, in ver. 9 translates the
same word by oiipayovvrtg, i.e., " qui ex-
tremum agmen dueunt, et quasi caudam
efficiunt" (EosenmilUer). The word is not
the same as that translated rereward in
1 Sam. xxix. 2, the only other place where
our Veision has "rereward," where there
can be no question of the rendering being
correct, since the literal meaning there is
the hindermost.

Ver. 16. — And It came to pass on the
seventh day. Why did God command this
long pause of suspense and expectation ?
Even to teach us that His ways are not as
our ways, and that we had far better leave
the issue in His hands, than by our impa-
tience to anticipate, and not unfrequently
frustrate, the course of His Providence. —
Calvin. There is a time to act and a time
to wait patiently. If we seek His guid-
ance by prayer, God will tell ua when to
do either. And when it is our duty not
to do anything ourselves, but to wait for
the deliverance which He never fails to
send in His own good time, let us be care-
ful to restrain ourselves, lest by our rash
intermeddling with His designs, we bring
disgrace and disaster upon ourselves and
His cause. Had the IsraeUtes disobeyed
His command, and instead of the solemn
procession round Jericho, ventured to attack
the city at once, it would have fared worse
with them than at Ai, or at the wilderness
of Paran (Num. xiv. 45). About the dawn-
ing. So the Chethibb. The Keri inbcti.



100



THE BOOK OF JOSHUA.



[oh. ti. 1 — ^21.



tnies 3 for 3, i.e., as Boon as it was dawn.
Literally, "as the dawn went up." After
tills manner. Literally, according to this
judgment, " siout dispositum erat " (Vulg.).
For a similar use of O^f^O see Gen. xl. 13,
and compare the proverb mos pro lege.

Ver. 16. — When the priests. There is no
" when " in the original, nor is it needed
(see Keil).

Ver. 17. — Accursed. Eather, devotea,
ivAGiiM LXX. The original meaning of
this word ia derived from Din to " shut
up." Hence it originally means *' a net."
With this we may compare the well-known
Eastern word harem, meaning the enclosed
apartments reserved for the women of the
family. Hence it comes to mean under a 6are,
devoted, generally to utter destruction under
the pressure of a vow to God, as in Num. xxi.
2, or in consequence of His command (see
Levit. xxvii. 29 ; Deut. xiii. 16 (Hebrew 16) ;
1 Kings XX. 43, " the man of my devoting,"
*pip, Ac). But in Levit. xxvii. 21 ; Num.
xviii. 14, the Din as devoted to the Lord,
became the property of the priest. This ban
was the most solemn and tremendous reli-
gious sentence, the absolute and final excom-
munication of the old law. The sin of Saul
(1 Sam. XV.) was the sparing of anything
whatever in the city which had been laid
under the ban — a ban which Saul had been
specially commanded to execute (1 Sam. xv.
3) according to the principles laid down in
Deut. xiii. When EeU, however, states
that the ban " could never be pronounced
upon things and property alone, but only
upon open idolaters, either with or without
their possessions," he appears to have over-
looked Levit. xxvii. 16 — 21, where a man
may devote irredeemably to God property of
his own (cf. ver. 28 of the same chapter). In
his subsequent work, however, Keil qualifies
this assertion by a consideration of this
very passage. Idolatrous worship was the
one thing which justified the Israelites in
laying one of their own cities under the ban
(see Deut. xiii. 12 — 18, above cited). But
(Dent. vii. 2} it had been pronounced



against the Canaanites. Property, how-
ever, save in the case of Jericho, seems to
have been exempted from the ban (see oh.
viii. 2). Bven at Jericho the silver and the
gold, the brass and the iron, were placed in
the treasury of the Lord (v. 19, 24). "Why,"
says Theodoret, "was the city thus devoted ?
It was devoted on the same principle which
offered the first fruits to God, since it was
the first fruits of their conquests." Because
she bid. See for the peculiar form of this
word as though it came from a quadriliteral

Ver. 18. — ^Accursed thlngr. Better, " thing
devoted," as this keeps up the idea of some-
thing solemnly set apart to God, to be dealt
with as He thmks fit. Lest ye maJce your-
selves accursed when ye take of the
accursed tbiag. Bather, with Eeil and
Bosenmiiller, lest ye devote the city to
destruction, and then take of what has been
thus devoted. And make the camp of Israel
a curse. Literally, and put the camp oj
Israel in the position of a thing devoted.
And trouble it (cf. oh. vii. 25, 26 ; also
Gen. xxxiv. 30).

Ver. 19. — Consecrated unto the Lord.
Lltertilly, as margin, hoUnens unto the Lord
(cf . Exod. xiviil. 36 ; xxxix. 30 ; Levit. xxvlL
14, 21 ; Jer. ii. 3). An expression used of
anything specially devoted to God.

Yer. 20. — So the people shouted when the
priests blew with the trumpets, and it came
to pass. Literally, and the people ihouted, and
they blew with the trumpets, and it came to pass
as soon as tlie people heard the sound of the
trumpet. The latter part of this sentence
is a more full and accurate repetition of
what is stated In the former. The shouting
and the blowing with the trumpets were
all but simultaneous, but the latter was in
reality the signal for the former — a signal
which was immediately and triumphantly re-
sponded to.

Ver. 21. — And they utterly destroyed all
that was in the city. For a discussion of
the difficulties arising from this fulfilment
of a stem decree, see Introduction.



HOMILETICS.

Vers. 1 — 21. — We come now to the command thai was laid on Joshua. And her»

we may observe three points.

I. Success was certain ip God's commands were obeyed. God does not say,
" I will give," but, " I ha-ve given " Jericho into thine hand. Not only has the fiat
gone forth, but the work is done, when the soldier of the Lord has made up his mind
to obey the Lord's commands. Thus, whatever be the work to which we set our
hands, be it pubUo or private, in the world or in our own hearts, so that it be for
God, and it is our duty to do it, we must regard onr snccess as asswed. MoaM



em. n. 1-Sl.] THE BOOK OP JOSHUA. 1«

hesitated aud argued about his fitness for the task laid upon him. Jeremiah shranlc
from facing the children of Israel with his message of wrath. But the apostles oi
Christ, when sent forth to conquer the world by no other means than the proclama-
tion of the truth, never stood appalled by the magnitude of the work, but were fiUed
with a sublime confidence that all should be as God had said. So when we go forth
to besiege some modem Jericho, let us hear beforehand the voice of God saying,
" See, I have given it into thine hand." We have only to ascertain clearly that the
duty is laid upon ns, that we are not laying a presumptuous hand upon a task which
is not meant for us. This done, we may go boldly forward on our way.

II. Thebk abb strongholds which will yield to pbayek alone. Jericho was
taken by no other means than by the seven days' procession. The rest of the cities
of Canaan were taken by storm in the ordinary way. But Jericho was the first of
them. Thus it often pleases God, when we enter fcrst upon our warfare, to remove
some temptation from ub in a striking and wonderful manner in answer to prayer.
This b to serve as an encouragement to us, as a proof both of His presence and of
His power. Many of God's saints can tell of such encouragements, merciftdly
vouchsafed to them when commencing the struggle against sin, that they might
know experimentally for themselves, and not by the report of others, that the Lord
was indeed the Almighty. When some work is going on for God in which it ia
impossible for us to join, we may aid it by our prayers. And those prayers may
prove mightier than the feeble efforts of those actually engaged in the work. When
those in whom we have an interest are wandering far from God, and it is not
our place to instruct or rebuke them, we may pray for them ; and many are the
souls which have been converted to God through the might of prayer aJone. So
when the Church of Christ suffers persecution from worldly men, she is not to use
worldly weapons in her defence. Let her be steadfast and diligent in her daily
offering of intercession and praise, and the walls of Jericho that frown above her
shall fall down fiat, and she shall divide its spoils.

III. Each has his appointed share in the attack on evil. Our attack is to
be an united and orderly one. No disorderly rout encompassed Jericho, each
" fighting for his own hand." There was a fixed order in the attack, in which each
had his proper share. The ark of God was carried by the priest ; that is, the
ministers of religion are to lead the way in public and private intercession for the
cause. They blow with the horns of jubilee ; that is, they sound the note of war against
the evil against which they are arrayed. They stir God's people up to the fight. And
when the time appointed has come that the assault has to be made, theirprayers, inter-
cessions, exhortations are redoubled ; the people respond to their efforts by raising
their voices unanimously in the same holy cause ; the bulwarks of the stronghold
of evU give way ; and Israel advances, every man straight before him, to raze it to
the ground.

The actual fulfilment of God's commands now demands our notice. We may
observe here : —

I. That God's people are bbcure from all danoeb when in the way of
duty. From a miUtary point of view, as has been already observed, these disposi-
tions were absurd. To compass the city in this manner was to invite attack. Yet
it was done because God commanded it, and no evil ensued. So a Christian is ever
safe, however much worldly wisdom may condemn him, if he be in the path of
duty. " No weapon that is formed against bim shall prosper." We must not mind
exposing ourselves to the scoffs and jeers of the profane, the grave remonstrances
of the worldly-minded, the prophecies of failure on the part of the timid and time-
serving. No matter how imprudent our action, according to the world's standard;
so long as it be right it will certainly prosper at last. All great movements for
good have been branded at the outset as enthusiastic folly. Yet faith and persever-
ance have succeeded in the end. The walls of many a spiritual Jericho have been
brought to the ground by a steady persistence in what was known to be right,
however unreasonable it may have seemed to nnbehevers.

II. We must not be "weary in well doing." For seven long days did th«
•trange procession encompass Jericho. Not the slightest effect was produced of uaj



lOa THE BOOK OF JOSHUA. [oh. in. 1—21.



kind till the prescribed task was accomplished. Bishop Hall, regarding the nuin-
ber seven as indicative of completeness, tells us that there are nmny of our infirmi-
ties which we must not expect to overcome till the end of our Uves. Not till then
wiU God vouchsafe us the measure of faith to overthrow them finally. Meanwhile
we must watch and pray and follow the ark and continue in our round of devotion,
until the time comes for God to visit us. We must not be depressedif no signs ol
progress appear, if, after having encompassed the city six days, and six times on the
seventh day, all appears as usuaL We must patiently wait God's time, and when
He announces the hour of triimiph, and not till then, we may rejoice that our
enemies are in our power.

III. God demands thb absolute suerbndeb of aix cabnal affections.
Jeiicho and all it contained was to be utterly destroyed. And so, as far as we ar«
concerned, must all the desires of this lower world be put down. No doubt it was
a great temptation to the Israelites (Achan's case proves that it was soj to see so great
a store of valuable things doomed to destruction. " To what purpose is this waste ? "
was a question which must have occurred to many there. So it is a sore temptation
to the Christian to see this world's goods within his reach and he forbidden to grasp
them. They were intended to be enjoyed, and why should he not enjoy them f
Youth seeks after the indulgences of the flesh, after recreations and amusements.
Manhood strives after the prizes of this world — power, wealth, honours, rewards.
They are innocent ia themselves ; why should we not possess them ? Because
they are devoted. This does not refer to pleasures and blessings God has put in
our hands. If He has blessed them we may safely use them. But pleasures, and
honours, and emoluments for their own sake, things which to grasp at would lead ua
fi-om the path of duty — these are the spoils of Jericho, devoted to God, which we
may not touch. Self-denial, simple discharge of duty from conscientious motives,
and the consequent absence of ambition or greed of gain, willingness to accept the
lowest place, disinclination to accept riches, honours, positions of influence, and
authority, unless to decline them would clearly be wrong — these are the character-
istics of the true servant of God. He makes a holocaust of all vain desires anl
Belfish motives, and is wiUing to give up the richest prizes earth can offer, tailess
God gives them to him.



HOMILIES BY VAEIOUS AUTHOES.

Ver. 8. — Siege of Jericho. — The Bed Sea ; a land where there was no water ;
want of food ; terrors of the spies ; the warlike people of Bashan ; Jordan impos-
sible ; a Jericho impregnable. Such are the successive strains made on the faith
and resolution of Israel. God's people go from strength to strength, but also from
difficulty to difficulty. Never is it the case that the difficulties are entirely done and
the prospects entirely bright. On their newest difficulty let us spend a Uttle time ;
for all of us have our Jerichos to face and to subdue. And I ask you to observe first,

I. The impossible task here set them. I doubt not the stoutest warriors so
estimated it. Kitto (Pictorial Bible on this chap.) describes, from his own expe-
rience of a siege, the confidence felt by all Asiatics when protected by walls, and
the despair with which they face them, even to-day, though in some degree
familiar with the use of artillery. Before that was invented a walled city was
deemed almost unreducible, except by starvation, by the desultory warriors ol
Syria. Here they could hardly, without themselves starving, starve them out.
They were unfamiliar with all the science of war. Had no tiieory of sapping or
breaching to aid them. To leave such a fortress in their rear would be to sabjeoi
themselves to attack from that side, while to carry it by assault was utterly beyond
their power. An impossible task is set them. And such are many of the tasks
assigned ua. Sometimes, indeed, there are easy duties assigned to our opening
powers. " The bruised reed is not broken " with a burden beyond its strength.
But our duties in this world are always on a scale which assumes we have omnipo-
tent help within our reach : Abraham's charge to leave ancestral home : that of



OH.YI. 1—21.] THE BOOK OP JOSHUA. lOt

Moses to invade Egypt and liberate Ood's people : that of David to earn a right
to the throne of Israel : that of Esther to save her people : that of the Apostles
to " heal the eick and cast out devils," and subsequently to " go and teach all
nations : " that of all the saints in all ages. BushneU has a sermon on " Duty not
measured by ability," his text being the command to feed the multitude — " Gfive ye
them to eat" — given to men with only five barley loaves and two small fisbes.
We have all tasks like the reduction of Jericho, utterly beyond our unaided
strength. To enter through the strait gate ; to keep the narrow way ; to over-
come in the conflict with principalities and powers in high places ; to be steadfast
unto death ; to secure, by our testimony, our efforts, our prayers, the salvation of
those who are perishing around us ; to hope against hope ; to gather meetness for
the inheritance of the saints in light — oh, what impossible tasks are these ? But
we " can do all things through Chmt, which strengtheneth us," and instead of being
dismayed at the impossibilities we should rather rejoice, for a precept of impot-
sibiK^ is a promise of onmipotent help. Shrink not from the Jericho you have
to assail. God will give it into your hand. Secondly observe—

II. The methods of faith. Prescribing their task. He prescribes the method
of it as well. They are to march round Jericho once a day for six days, and on the
seventh day seven times ; the people silent, the priests sounding the trumpets and
horns. Only once, when specially bidden, is Israel to shout. We read nothing of
mounds, battering rams, sUngers picking off the soldiers on the walls, nothing of
mines or ladders. The method was not one of war but one of feith. The very
trumpets are priestly trumpets, the sounds of which were calls to prayer and pro-
mises of help. So much they were to do, and nothing more. In subsequent
engagements they would have to fight ; in this God alone would work. And the
method prescribed is accordingly one virtually of prayer and waiting. " Stand
stiU and see the salvation of God : " a method in wUoh their faith is at once (1)
tried, (2) honoured, and so increased. In this respect how hke many methods which
Christ prescribed. In His miracles, for instance, you wUl observe that the faitit of
the recipient was invariably in some way or other tested, brought to hght, and
only then rewarded. " Go to the pool of Siloam and wash," seemed a precept as
unhkely to bring sight as marching round Jericho was to destroy its waUs. " Take
thy hook and take up the first that cometh up," was an unhkely way of paying
tribute. " Go show yourselves to the priests," He said to the ten lepers, and only
after they had started they were cleansed. TTih methods are always such as try
our faith first and then reward it. Here is a road to the conquest of Jericho which
the doubters in the camp thought would prove very long indeed. " Of what use
could it be to march round and round, always reconnoitring, and never doing
anything more?" How they would pomt to the growing confidence of the
besieged, who from theur walls could be seen mocking the futile display of strength I
But such was the method prescribed to test and eUeit their faith. As the multitude
fed by Christ were required to sit down on the grass,' to indicate thereby their faith
and expectation, so Israel was required to march round Jericho. And we some-
times are required to pursue methods of faith which seem Uttle Ukely to work
much result: to be meek where high spirit would seem more useful; to wait with
patience where fussy enterprise would seem more effective ; to meet error with
argument instead of repressing it by force ; to observe sacraments whose object
or philosophy we can hardly understand ; to obtain the things we desire by deserv-
mg rather than by greedily seekmg them. Do not murmur at the methods of
faith which are enjoined. In the case of Jericho the method was suocessftiL On
the seventh day, when the people shouted at Joshua's signal, the walls of Jericho
fell flat. " The earth shook and trembled : the foundations of heaven moved and
shook because he was wrath." And in an instant, without a stone protecting them,
without their people marshalled, without any array against their foes, Israel can
enter and destroy. The ways of the enemy seem short, but are long and fniitless.
God's ways seem hkely to be long, but are short and dhrect. Take His ways, and
however for a while your patience may be tried, the end, bringing all you hoped
for, will reward you for aU suspense and all delay.— G.



104 THE Book of Joshua. [oa. -n. i-tL

Ver. 20. — TTie taking of Jericho. The taking of Jericho is the first great \rietoTy
of the laraelitaa over the Oanaanites. It is a type of the victory of the people of
God over their adversaries. We learn from it the secret and the method of saoaesfl
In this conflict.

I. The first thing demanded of the people of Israel is a great act of faith.
It was no slight exercise of faith to helieve that the sounding of the sacred trompets
would suffice to overthrow those massive walls which rose hke impregu able ramparto
around the city. It was necessary that the besiegers should rise above all the
merely material aspects of the situation, and endure, as said the writer of the
Epistle to the Hebrews, "as seeing him who is invisible," and relying wholly on
His word (Heb. xi. 27).

II. This faith is not a mere feeling of trust ; it involves also a positive add
PERILOUS DEED. The Israelites are not to wait in inaction the working of a
miracle on their behalf; they have a direct command to obey. The ark is to be
triumphantly borne, sometimes to the stirring sound of trumpets, around the walls
of Jericho, from the top of which the enemy might take deadly aim at the besiegers.
Thus, for Israel to believe is to obey ; it is to act in spite of danger. This is the
faith of which it is said that it " overcomes the world " (1 John v. 4).

III. This faith finds a response in the might; grace of God. That grace
delights in sovereign manifestations. In the exercise of His absolute freedom,
God has often chosen " things that are not to bring to nought things that are,"
(1 Cor. i. 28), thus magnifying His grace by the very disproportion between the
results and the apparent means used to effect them. What power is there in the
sound of a trumpet to shake the solid foundation of a city wall ? Can its shrillest
blast make the massive granite tremble to its fall ? God will show that the power
is His alone ; that Israel's confidence must be in no arm of flesh, but in Him only.
Undoubtedly" He does often make use of those natural means which are of His own
appointment, and His grace is not in the ordinary course of things opposed to
nature. Religious life is not magic, but those grand manifestations of Divine
sovereignty which are called miracles bring us into immediate contact with the
sovereign power of God from which all blessed influences flow. Let us not forget,
moreover, that there is a distinction to be observed between what may be called
the creative period of the religion of redemption, and its subsequent stage of pre-
servation and development. The current of the new life must first hollow out its
channel, before it can pursue its even way between the banks of a defined course.
Hence with regard to miracles, there is a great difference between the age which
saw the first beginnings of Christianity, and our own day, which is an era Vl develop-
ment only.

rV. The fall of the walls of Jericho before the blast of the sacred trumpets is an
apt symbol of the triumph of spirit over material force. The sacred trumpets
accompanied the songs of Israel, its hymns of worship raised to the true God. It
was this glorious ira&i of the one living and true God which finally subdued the
Canaanitish nations. Men» agitat molem. Mind moves matter; it always
triumphs over material obstacles. Force can avail nothing against it, because it is
itself the power of God. Primitive Christianity saw the citadel of paganism fall
before it, AU-powerful Eome fell prostrate when the gospel trumpet sent forth its
sonorous voice into the midst of a down-trodden and decaj'ing world. Thus, also,
in a later age did the fortress of Bomish superstition crumble into ruin before
Luther's hymn, which embodies the whole spirit of the Eeformation. The hymn
on justification by faith was like Israel's trumpets to the Papal Jericho. " Beueve
only, and thou shalt sea the glory of God " (John zi. 20). — E. de P.

Ver. 20. — Strongholds. When the writer of the Epistle to the Hebrews says,
" By faith the walls of Jericho fell down after they had been compassed about
■even days " (Heb. xi. 80), he sets his seal to the supernatural character of this
event. Not by any kind of natural force — ^undermining, storming, or even earth-
quake — but by the faith that lays hold on the unseen power of God, was the effect
produced. It was a link in the chain of marvellous Divine manifestatioiiB hj which



CB. n. 1—21.] THB BOOK OF JOSHtJA. 101

those times were BignaUsed. The miraonlons element is inseparably interwoven
with the fabrio of the history. It can be denied here only by those who are pre-
pared to relegate the whole to the region of fable and romance. The fall of this
fortified city of Jericho had a peculiar meaning, and stood in important relation to
the evenia that followed. As the strongest fortress of Canaan, its conquest was the
key to the possession of the whole lan£ As pre-eminent, probably, in its wicked-
ness, its doom was a prophecy of the unmitigated judgments of God on the abomi-
nations of Phcenioian idolatry. The solemn procession of the ark, time after time,
around the city was a significant declaration of His sovereignty over it and aU
that it contained ; and when at last it fell, it was as the first-fruits of the harvest-
field, " accursed " — devoted — to show that the whole land was His. Thus were the
Israelites taught that an inheritance which they had not won for themselves by
their own skill and strength, but which had been given to them by the Lord (vers.
2, 16), must be held in unreserved allegiance to Him (Psa. xliv. 8). We see in this
event a typical representation of the Divine conquest of the powers of error and
evil in the world. It prefigures the assault of the kingdom of light upon the
kingdom of darkness, and sets forth, as in acted parable, the apostolic truth, " The
weapons of our warfare are not carnal, but mighty through God to the pulling
down of strongholds " (2 Cor. x. 4).

I. In Jericho itself we see a type op the sTRONaHOLcs of iniquitt in thb
WORLD. — The city was " ttroAtly shut up ; none went out and none came in "
(ver. 1). The combination of the passive and active forms here indicates how the
natural strength of the fortifications was supplemented by the resistive spirit of the
people. We are reminded of those conditions of the human soul in which it is
unpenetrable by the influence of Divine truth ; resolute in its nnbeUef, impenitence,
corrupt affection, evil habit ; closely shut against the powers that would bring into
It a new and nobler life. But the picture of the closed city suggests not so much
the resistance of the individual soul to redeeming influence, as that of the con-
spicuous forms of evil existing in the world — ^false systems of thought, corrupt
institutions, pernicious social usages ; strongholds of infideUty, vice, tyranny, super-
stition, idolatry. We are reminded how deeply rooted they are, how strong in the
radical tendencies of human nature and in the traditionary custom of ages. Like
Jericho, the veiy hot-bed of Canaanite pollution, in the midst of its glorious palm-
groves, so do these forms of evil stand as blots on the fair creation of God, and cast
their deadly shadow on the otherwise glad life of man. It is against these that the
kingdom of truth and righteousness wages an exterminating war, "casting down
imaginations and every high thing that exalteth itself against the knowledge of
God, and bringing into captivity every thought to the obedience of Christ"

II. The mode of the city's pall is suggestive op the relation existing
between the human instrument and the Divine power in this spiritual con-
flict. Note the apparent impotence of the means used in view of the end to be
answered. This silent procession of the ark and the armed host round and round
the walls, the silence broken only by the rude music of the priests' rams' horns —
what a solemn farce it must have seemed 1 We can imagine with what derision it
was greeted by the men of the city. If that is aU the power that can be brought
against them, they have little need for fear. The spiritual analogy is plain. To
men destitute of faith, incapable of discovering the resistless force that lies behind
them, the instruments of the kingdom of Christ seem very feeble. The workers of
iniquity, within their refuges of lies, bold in the strength of " blood and custom,"
langh at weapons such as these. " The preaching of the cross is to them that perish
foolishness " (1 Cor. i. 18). But outward appearances are a very false rule of
judgment. The sovereign power can work through meanest, simplest instruments.
Their efficacy is often in inverse ratio to their apparent feebleness. " We have the
treasure in earthen vessels, that the excellency of the power may be of God, and
not of us (2 Cor. iv. 7). " God hath chosen the foolish things of the world to con-
found the wise," &c. (1 Cor. i. 27—29).

III. The delay op the issue affords a lesson in the patience that waits om
Goo IN the path or obedience and service. The seven days' process, in additioa



lot THE BOOK OP JOSHUA. [ch. fi. I'- 21.

to its BymboHo meaning, was a trial of the faith and oonstanoy of the people. " By
faith the walls fell down," because it was confidence in the unseen Power that kept
both priests and warriors steadfast in their seemingly meaningless and profitless
round till the appointed time. AH great issues in the onward progress of the
kingdom of Christ — the fall of corrupt institutions, the doom of reigning iniquities
— have their appointed time. This appUes pre-eminently to the grand final issue :
" Of that day and hour knoweth no man." But in the fulness of the time the
glorious vision shall appear. The slowness of the process of destruction and resti-
tution is strange to ns. We cay, in our moments of impatience—

•' Oh, why these years of waiting here.
These ages of delay 7 "

But "he that believeth shall not make haste." He knows how to wait, " For tha
vision is yet for an appointed time," &c. (Hab. ii. 3, 4). Faith, on its watch-tower,
sees the grand procession of events moving on to the end of the days, when " the
Lord himself shall descend from heaven with a shout, with the voice of the arch-
angel and the trump of God," to lay the last stronghold of Satan in ruins, and
"create the. new heavens and the new earth wherein dweUeth righteousness"
(1 Thess. iv. 16 ; 2 Peter iii. 13).— W.

Ver. 20. — Dehiiioe trust, *' The wall fell down flat." A strong city besieged ;
yet no trenches opened, no batteries erected against it, no engiaes of assault em>
ployed. Armed men in two divisions, separated by the ark and priests who
precede it, compass the city once a day in silence, save for the sound of the horns
blown by the seven priests. After six days the marching commences early in the
morning, and the circuit is completed seven times, when the priests blow a long
peculiar blast, the whole host npraises a loud cry, and behold the wall of Jericho,
with its lofty battlements, totters and falls. The joyful soldiers, in perfect order,
rush triumphantly into the city, and put to the sword the dismayed inhabitants.
Many days have these inhabitants wondered at the strange method in which they
are besieged. Fearing the Israelites, they have remained behind the shelter of their
fortifications, and waited to receive their foes' attack, and lo 1 in a moment they are
laid bare to a merciless onslaught. History is instructive ; it contains lessons for
all ages. Let ns try and read some lessons written clearly on the prostrate walls
of Jericho.

L We are reminded of the insecueb defences on which many belt. All men
are not unmindful of the iUs of hfe to which they are exposed ; many distinctly
recognise the fact that the castle in which they dwell is, or soon may be, surrounded
by foes. But against these they have made preparation, and are confident of their
ability to resist the most impetuous attack. A store of wealth has been accumu-
lated to guard against poverty ; and to be the centre of a group of friends will
surely prove an adequate security against the invasion of loneliness or melancholy.
Alas 1 how unstable are the foundations on which rest the hopes of men. Succes-
sive losses reduce the mUhonaire to beggary ; and removals and deaths strip the
gayest man of the company in which he deUghted.

" After summer evermore succeeds
Barren vlnter, with his wrathful, nipping cold."

Lest a good man should be forgotten, we erect a tablet " in lasting memory," and
ere a year has elapsed a fire oonsmnes it to ashes.

II. Thb suddenness with which trusted defences ABE OAST DOWN. Often
there is little warning prior to the catastrophe, scarcely the rumbling that precedes
an earthquake. Feasting amid splendour, the handwriting is seen on the wall, while
the enemy is entering the city by the dry bed of the river. The head of a family
labouring to provide for its wants is stricken down by disease or accident, and tbi*
strong arm which kept the foe at bay is suddenly powerless.

in. TSE SEASON or the DESIBUOTION I> SOUETIMBS to B£ FOXTMD in the TfJMI



OH. n. 92—87.] THE BOOK OF JOSHUA. Ifll

THAT MEN WERE piGHTiNa AGAINST GoD. Hitherto wfl havB considered the general
lot without distinction of persons. AH are subject to a reverse of fortune ; " Thera
is one event to the righteous and to the wicked." Yet the author of this last clause
remarks, " Surely I know it shall be well with them that fear God ; but it shall not
be well with the wicked, neither shall he prolong his days, which are as a shadow,
because he feareth not God." The downfall of the seemingly impregnable fortifi-
cations of Jericho was due to the might of Jehovah fighting on behalf of His people.
It was a strife between true religion and idolatry. And to-day, whilst " all thing«
work together for good to them that love God," the troubles which beset the
ungodly may be intended as correctives or judgments. We cannot be oblivious of
modern instances where the thunderbolt of Divine wrath has fallen on guilty nations
and individuals. The hand of the Almighty can be as truly traced as in the sudden
overthrow of Sodom and Gomorrah. His day comes upon men " like a thief in
the night," and just when the wall of defence is most needed does it fall, leaving
the inhabitant a prey to terrible assault. If the vessel's unseaworthiness were
discovered in the harbour, what mattered it ? but to find it out on the tempestuous
ocean, this is misery indeed. Call to mind Voltaire's wretched lament upon his
deathbed, that popular applause could then do naught to help him : " I have swal-
lowed nothing but siaoke ; I have intoxicated myself with the incense that turned
my head." Happy may we count ourselves when God exerts His power, and shows
us the penetrable character of our security, while yet there is time to seek a remedy.
Did not Paul rejoice that the bright light from heaven revealed the darkness in
which he had been travelling, and that the " knowledge of Christ " completely over-
came bis old self-righteous ideas ? His boasted privileges and conformity to law
yielded at the first breath of the words of Christ, and Christianity, defied so arro-
gantly, reigned within his breast. Perhaps, O Christian, thou wast rating too
highly some of the pleasures of earth, refined though they were, and in mercy thou
hast been at a stroke deprived of them 1

IV. The IBEE.TEIEVABLE DESTRUCTION which God cfieots. The walls of Jericho
were not rebuilt, at least by the inhabitants ; and on the man who in after-years
presumptuously endeavoured to act in defiance of the threat of Joshua was seen
a terrible fulfilinent of prophecy. Tha temple of Jerusalem is another example of
lasting ruin. But in the spiritual realm it is no matter for regret that a curse rests
upon Sie reconstruction of a wicked security. The obstacle to the admission of tha
Saviour into the heart once surmounted should never again be buUt up. The hold
of the world once loosened should never be allowed to environ us again. Never
can the hour in which the utter defencelessness of the soul was realised be blotted
out of the book of memory ; and all the after-lessons which stem experience has
taught us are indelibly imprinted upon the mind. The uprooting of our affections
caused by the loss of a loved one ; the failure of Mendship in the time of exigency ;
the sickness that dismissed the shows of life and confronted us with the reaMties of
eternity : these events have burnt themselves into our very being, and are become
part of ourselves. To bring the matter to a practical issue, ask, 'Where do we place
our trust ? Is it not wisdom to choose as our refuge the unchanging God ; not to
trust any arm of flesh, but to rest in the mercy and love of the Eternal ? Not to
Btructures which human skill erects, but to tiie everlasting lulls will we look for
aid. " As the mountains are round about Jerusalem, so the Lord is round about
bis people." — A.



EXPOSITION.



OHAPTEB VI. 22—27.



BaBAB'S DELiniBANOlI. ThB CTTBga OH

Jebioho. — Yer, 22. — Had said. Hera we
have an instance of the use of the perfect as
a pluperfect. We can hardly suppose, as
Keil observes, that Joshua gave these orders



in the midst of the turmoil and confusion
attendant on the sack of the city (see above,
cb. i. 11 ; ii. 1). Go Into the harlot's housa
The preservation of Bahab's house must
have been a part of the miracle, since it was
upon the city wall (cf, Heb. xi. 30, 31).
Vei. 23.— Brouffht out Therefore tbs



m



THE BOOK OF JOSHUA.



[as. n. t%—3Bt



mediesTal legends concerning Babab'B house
must be clasBsd among superstitious fables.
Bahab and hei family and relations were
saved, but her house shared the destruction
which befel the rest of the city. Origen
oites in reference to the deliverance of
Bahab the harlot, 1 Cor. vl. 11, and Tit. iii.
8 (cf. also Eph. ii. 1—3 ; v. 8 ; Col. iii. 7).
Without the camp of Israel. Not in the
camp of Israel outside the city, as some
have rendered. The Hebrew distinctly
connects the word y-iriD with the camp.
They were as yet, as Gentiles, unclean
(of. Num. V. 2 ; xxxi. 19).

Ver. 25. — Unto this day. This may either
be interpreted of herself, or, according to a
common Hebrew idiom, of her family (of.
ch. xvii. 14 — 18; ixiv. 17). For a fnUer
discussion of the bearing of this passage on
the date of the Book of Joshua, see Intro-
dnotion. There is no mention of Bahab'i
marriage in the Old Testament. Lightfoot
(■Hebrew and Talmudical Kxercitations,*
Matt. i. 6) mentions a tradition that she
married Joshua I Dr. W. H. Mill, in his
treatise on the genealogies of oui Lord,
defends the tradition St. Matthew has
followed by showing that Salmon's agp at
the time gives immense probability to the
statement. Some (see the Bishop of Bath
and Wells' article m Smith's ' Dictionary
of the Bible ') suppose that Salmon was
one of the spies.

Ver. 26. — And Joshua adjured them.
Caused them to swear, i.e., bound them by
an oath, as the Hiphil implies here. This
was the strict meaning of " adjure " at' the
time our version was made (cf. Matt. xxvi.
63). But it had also the less definite mean-
ing which it now has, of solemnly warning
a person to do something or to leave it
undone (see 1 Kings xxii. 16 ; Mark v. 7 ;
Acts xix. 13). The object of this solemn
adjuration (see above) was to preserve
Jericho as a spot devoted to God for ever;
and for this reason a curse was pronounced
upon any one who should attempt to found
a city upon the devoted spot (cf. Deut. xiii.
16, " It shaU not be rebmlt."y This curse
actually fell on the reckless Hiel (1 Kings
xvi. 34 ; cf . Josephus, 'Antiq.,' T. i. 8) , and he
■aw the laying of its foundations marked



by the death of his eldest son, while th«
death of his youngest followed its comple-
tion. It does not seem that it was forbidden
to build habitations on the spot, for Jericho
is frequently mentioned in the New Testa-
ment, and the house of Zaccheaus (Lul:e
xix. 6) wag there. What seems to have
been forbidden was the erection of a fortified
city there (see Hengstenberg, 'Geschiohte
des Belches Gottes,' p. 214). The men-
tion of Jericho in ch. xviii. 21 does not
imply that it was an inhabited city, but
simply that the site of Jericho fell within
the border of the tribe of Benjamin. For
Jerusalem is also mentioned, and we know
that it did not become theirs until the time
of David. Whether the "city of palm-
trees " (Judges iii. 13) is Jericho, may be
questioned. But in 2 Sam. x. 6 and in
a Kings ii. 6 express mention is made of
Jericho, the last time as the site of the
■chool of the prophets. Some oommentatorg
have endeavoured to restrict the sense o£
the word DJ^ used here to the building of
fortifications. But this is unduly to re-
strict its meaning, for it is constantly used
also of houses and altars (see Gen. ii. 22 ;
viii. 20 ; 1 Kings viii. 27). But the men-
tion of gates clearly implies a fortified city.
Commentators cite as parallel instances the
curse of Agamemnon on Troy, of Croesus on
Sidene (so Grotius from Strabo, lib. 13 de
lUo), and of Scipio upon Carthage, and it
is observed that when Augustus rebuilt
Carthage he carefully avoided the old site.
In his first-born. 3 is often used of the
price paid for a thing, as in Gen. xxix. 18 ;
Isa. yii. 23. And In his youngest son.
The commentators have remarked on the
rhythmical parallelism here, and Keil and
others have supposed the passage to be an
extract from an old Hebrew song-book, such
as that of Jasher (ch. x. 13). But this
parallelism is not only a characteristic of
poetry, but of all solemn and impassioned
utterances in the language. (See, for
instance, 2 Sam. xviii. 82 ; 1 Kings xvii. 14;
xxi. 19). Masius, Mnnsterus, and others
interpret the passage that the eldest son died
when the foundation was laid ; aU the rest,
but the youngest, ia the interim; the
youngest when the gates were let np.



HOMILETICS.

Vers. 22 — il. — 1. The first lesson we learn from tliis portion of the narrative ii
aalmatwn by faith. Had Bahab not beUeved in Qod, she would not have saved
the spies ; and had she not saved the spies, she would not have been saved herself.
We have St. James's authority (ch. ii. 25) for citing this passage as an illostration
of the conueotion between faith and works.



en. Ti. 22—87.1 THE BOOK OF JOSHUA. 10»

I. WoBKS " DO SPRING NECESSARILY OUT OF A LIVELY FAITH." Had Bahab not
believed as she did, she would not have acted as she did. Her works were the
direct result of her belief. On the other hand, had she not acted as she did, she
would have proved that, whatever her profession to the spies might have been, she
did not really beheve what she pretended to beUeve about the power of Jehovah,
and the ultimate success of Israel Here we may discern a clue to the labyrinth ol
the controversy about the efficacy of faith and works respectively in the scheme
of salvation. For (a) a man who beheves is naturally inclined to act upon what he
behoves. If he believes that he is saved through Christ, he will act as if he were
saved through Christ. And (6) it becomes important to ask. From what is he
saved through Christ ? And the Scripture tells us that he is not saved merely from
the punishment of sin, but from sin itself. The scheme of salvation through Christ
involves a belief in a "full, perfect, and suflBcient sacrifice, oblation, and satisfac-
tion, for the sins of the whole world." But it also leads us on from that recon-
ciliation with God to the idea of an IndwelUng in Christ through His Spirit, which
shall enable us to "put off," to "slay," to "crucify" the "flesh" or "old man,"
and to rise up to a renewed life of sanctity and holiness. A man who believes this
must hegin to do it. He must, as a matter of course, gird himself up to a conflict
with all within him which is not subdued to God's will, as revealed in Christ. If
he does Tiot undertake this conflict, it is because he does not believe that he is
redeemed through Christ, and that that redemption leads on to sanctiflcation by
a necessary law, that of union with Christ Thus we learn (e) that all whose life
is avowedly and systematically inconsistent with their Christian profession, who do
not try to root out all evil and to practice all kinds of good, or who set up another
standard before them ia their actions than that set up in God's Word, are not real
believers in Christ, let their profession be what it may.

II. There is no salvation for those who do not manifest thbik faith by
THBIB WORKS. Had Rahab not shown her faith in God by delivering the spies
there could not have been any escape for her. Whatever her private beUef might
Lave been, she woidd have been involved in the general destruction that overtook
the whole city. And thus St. Paul and St. James alike insist upon the necessity of
t)ur Christian conduct being the manifestation of our inward behef. If it be asked
how our faith should be manifested, it may be repUed that there must be (a) an
abiding sense of God's goodness as displayed in the forgiveness of sins, and (b)
an earnest striving after likeness to Christ in every action of hfe. And this last
wiU stir us up to deeds of active loving-kindness like that of Eahab, who, as we
have seen forgot herself and the dangers that beset her in the anxious desire to
befriend first the messengers of God, and next those who were near and dear to
herself. If we do not these things we are none of Christ's, and, despite our loud
profession that we have always belonged to Him, He will have no other greeting
for us at the last than, " Depart from me, ye workers of iniquity."

III. Salvation is by Christ's blood alone. Had Eahab not hung the scarlet
cord in the window, she would have perished as surely, though she had saved the
Bpies, as if she had done nothing. So our good deeds avail nothing without faith
m God's mercy through Christ. They are but the deeds of the Pharisees, unless
coupled with tt>e deepest sense of our own unworthiness. We must own that when
we have done all, we are unprofitable servants. " Not of works, lest any man
Bhould boast" Thus no trace of self-satisfaction must mingle with our obedience,
or all will be worthless. This was the fatal mistake of the Pharisees, and this was
the reason of the anger of the Lord against them. The deepest humility, combined
with the most absolute reliance upon the atoning merits of the Saviour, are among
the first requisites of the regenerate life. This thought alone wUI preserve to the
greatest saint that indispensable grace of humihty which is the salt that prevents
his rehgiouB profession from corruption. This alone wiU maintain those relations
with the Author of our salvation which are necessary to keep His life present
within us. If we are numbered among God's saints, if we are raised to high place*
in Israel, if we are the means of salvatlou to others, it is all due to the scarlet cord
in tha window.



110 THE BOOK OF JOSHUA. [ch. vl 22—27.

S. A second lesson taught by this part of the narrative is that talvation worka
results in those who are aa/oed.

I. Eahab's faith was the cause of the salvation of others. Had she noi
believed in God, her relatives would have shared the fate of Jericho. So in all
other cases. Faith is an expansive principle. It is not content with doing good to its
possessor ; it stirs him up to benefit others. Jesus sent forth those who beUeved
in Him to "preach the gospel to every creature." And aU faithful Christians are
their successors. They must needs "show forth the praises of him who called
them out of darkness into his own marvellous hght." They must strive to benefit
others {a) by trying to proclaim the gospel to the heathen abroad, or the worse
than heathen at home ; (b) by intercessory prayer for all good works ; and (c) by
active works of love to all who are in any way within their reach.

II. Bahab, once saved, was exalted to great honour. She became a
"mother in Israel," and espoused one of its princes. She attained in ages far
remote the immortal honour of being mentioned as one of the progenitors of the
King of kings. Thus we learn (a) that the " cup of cold water " does not lose its
reward. Every kind action done for the love of God and Christ shall be repaid
a thousandfold. We are also taught (5) that no amount of previous sin shall be
weighed in the balance against us when we have truly repented. Bahab's sin was
thought no more of when she was saved from the slaughter of Jericho. And so
God's forgiveness is full and free, through Christ, when its condition, true repentance,
is attained. Though He may see fit to leave us to the discipline of the natural
eonsequences of our sin awhile, it is for our good. He does not cast our past sins
in our teeth when we have returned to Him. He wiU not listen to our request to
be as the least and lowest of His hired servants. He puts the best robe upon us,
and rings on our fingers, in token of His joy at our return. When our heart is
once more whole with Him, we are as truly His dear children as if we had never
left Him, and may sun ourselves as fearlessly as they in the light of His mercy.
Lastly (c), though we may not exactly go so far as to say " the greater the sinner,
the greater the saint," we may at least say that there is no reason why a great
sinner may not become a great saint. We ought not to be deterred by our past
sins, grievous and (but for God's mercy) unpardonable as they are, from pressing
forward to the utniost heights of holiness that are within our reach. We are
taught to forget those things that are behind, and reach forth unto the things that
are before. The records of God's Church are full of such histories. From Mary
Magdalene, and after her St. Augustine, to our own day the examples of men
steeped to the lips in sin, who have repented and advanced to great heights of
holiness, are before us to teach the sinner not to despair, but to trust in His loving-
kindness who hath raised " the poor out of the mire, that he may set him with the
princes, even with the princes of his people."

3. The third lesson this narrative contains is the exceeding sinfulness of sin.
Jericho was a sinful city, and therefore it was a devoted city. God had plainly
stated (Deut. ix. 6) that the Israelites were the ministers of His vengeance against
sin ; that for no virtue of their own, but for the appalling crimes which had called
down vengeance from on high upon the Phoenician nations, they had been selected
to drive them out Many interesting questions arise here, some regarding the idea
of God, some regarding the true nature of sin, indicated to us in this passage.

I. Is God unrighteous that taketh vengeance ? As this question is fully
discussed in the Introduction to this Book, a few hints will be all that is necessary
here. We may observe {a) that whatever difficulties attach to the command given
to Joshua, apply equally to every idea of God that we can form. He, the All-wise
and All-good, has at least permitted these chastisements upon men for their sin.
We might go further. We might say that He has enjoined them. God has
clearly made it a law of our humanity that nations wallowing in the indulgence of
sensual passion, permitting themselves to enjoy unchecked the pleasures of in-
justice, oppression, rapine, cruelty, have in the end been punished by being made
the victims of similar cruelty. The Almighty Disposer of events has allowed man
again and again to inflict cruelties as severe npon other nations, for their sins, as



CH. Ti. 83—87.] THE BOOK OP JOSHUA. lU

Joshua did npou the Oanaanites. Thns whatever objections (see Bntlet's 'Analogy'
here) may be raised to the poBsibiUty of Ood giving such a oommiBsion to £Qa
servant as that narrated in this Book, apply with equal force to the facts of history.
Either, therefore, there is no God at all, or He is not good, or He can, consistently
with truth and justice, incite man to exercise His vengeance upon those who have
sinned. We may farther observe (b) that physical suffering does not seem so
terrible a thing in God's eyes as it does in ours. Famines, wars, pestilences,
accidents, shipwrecks, with all their attendant horrors and miseries, have happened,
and will still continue to happen. And God seems not to heed. But is it not
because He sees the whole, while we see but a part of His doings ? Were this
the only world, we must come to the conclusion that God is not goodness, but
cruelty ; not justice, but the most gross and aggravated injustice. " If in this hfe
only we have hope in Christ, we are of all men most miserable." But granted that
there is another world, in which aU that goes amiss here wiU be set right, and these
difficulties disappear. The sorrows of this life will seem but a momentary pang as
we Uve through the ages of eternity. And in that good land we shall smile at the
doubts of God's perfections which have caused us such uneasiness here. Again (c) :
we may note that history now shows that the Hittites were once a great and
fiourismng people. Yet until lately they had been so entirely forgotten that their
very names were unknown. Why this complete obhteration, as it were, from the
map of humanity ? Why, but because they had sinned against the Lord, and He
must destroy them ? Israel was not the only instrument of His vengeance. Far
to the northward of the Holy Land, where their empire flourished on the banks of
the Orontes and in Asia Minor, He sent the Egyptians and Assyrians against them,
tiU their name was blotted out from among the nations of the earth. And so will
it be tiU time shall be no more. The nation which holds not God in remembrance
•hall be cut away from His hand.

II. Touch not the unclean thino. This lesson will be yet &rther enforced
in the next chapter. Yet here we may note that the Christian is to have no
dealings whatever with ungodliness and its treasures. The good things of this life,
save as things to be used for God, are to be steadfastly renounced. The desire of
possessing them is not to be a motive for action. They who serve God for filthy
lucre's sake are unsparingly condemned under the gospel. It is, of course, a difficult
task to decide how far innocent pleasures may be enjoyed, or rewards, honours,
wealth, accepted, when God seems to have put them in our way. All the cities
were not devoted to God, but Jericho only. Yet it may safely be said that in these
days of a widely-diffused profession of Christianity, the verdict of Christian society
on these points is too lenient a one. The love of money and of the good things of
this life is too freely admitted as a motive for action. The dehberate preference
of a life of poverty and self-denial is too often looked down upon wifli disdain,
though it is recommended to us by the example of Christ. Kay, it may even be
doubted how far St. Paul's rule of excommunication of the covetous man (1 Cor.
y. 11) is carried out by the Christian Church, even when money has been made or
honours attained by unfair means. The man who, as director of a public company,
gives his sanction, by carelessness or weakness, to acts which, as a private indi-
vidual, he would not have committed — the man who by bribery obtains a position
among the law-makers of this great empire — ^the man who amasses a vast fortune
by indirect means — ^is he courted or condemned by the collective Christian conscience
in these days ? It may be doubted whether, among all the advances we have
unquestionably made of late in Christian principle, the spirit of Achan, rather than
Joshua, does not predominate among us stUL

III. What God has promiseo will surely come to pass. The ungodly often
cry, " Tush, God hath forgotten ; he hideth his face and he wiU never see it."
But it comes to pass just the same. The wicked Hiel laughed Joshua's prophecy
to scorn. Yet it came true. And so do many thoughtless persons now laugh to
Bcorn the declarations of God's Word. They ridicule the idea of chastisement for
national sins ; they wiU not hear of days of humiliation for national misfortunes ;
they tell us all things are ordered by invariable law. But God punished nations ot



IM THE BOOK OF JOSHUA. [oh. vi. 22—27,

old for their sinB, and He does bo still. Nor does He act otherwise with individuals.
He has declared that sin brings punishment in its train ; but men sin wantonly, and
hope to escape its necessary consequences. But either in this world or the next
these consequences arrive. What G-od has said wUl surely come to pass. And
then man wishes in vain that he bad never offended Him. As in Hiel's case, so
now, God fn lfila to the very letter the predictions He has uttered. Let us be wise
in time, and so avoid the misfortunes which a presumptuous contempt of God'a
Word is sure to bring on us.



HOMILIES BT VAEIOUS AUTHORS.

Vers. 22 — ^24. — A city of destruction. If any city ever was such R " City of
Destruction " as Bunyan fancied, it was Jericho. Itself and aU within it were
devoted to destruction, only Bahab, like another Noah, ■with her family escaping.
It is an awfiil fact to contemplate the destruction of a whole city. No escape,
and little warning I Old and young, one day in possession of wealth, ease, comfort,
and the next day captured and destroyed. The judicial principles on which God
acts and on which He here commands the destruction of Jericho, are beyond ui,
but some of the lessons are clear and useful. Study these :

I, Theeb is a penalty fok sin. There is nothing wanton in God's ways.
Israel was God's chosen, and the nations of Canaan His rejected, because morally
the former, with aU its faults, infinitely surpassed the latter. You get glimpses of
the evil of the primitive races with their religions in the story of Baal-Peor; in the
vice and atrocity which perpetually mark every relapse of Israel into idolatry ; in
the nameless defilements of modern heathenism. Dr. Arnold, no narrow theo-
logian, defends the destruction of the Oanaanites as a great gain to the welfare of
humanity. It is these cruelties and abominations of heathenism which required
and explain the destruction of the Oanaanites. For God punishes sin. There is no
truth more undeniable, and none the knowledge of which is more widely spread. We
suffer for every fault we commit. As root and fruit, so wrong and wretchedness, go
together. However subtle the fault, God's providence operates in penalties still more
subtle. The eating of any forbidden fruit always has its two penalties — loss of power,
and loss of some sort of Eden. Sins of sinners have their penalties. And God's people
receive " double for all their sins " — a heavier stroke for the less excusable trans-
gression. It is not because God is wrathful that He punishes, but because He il
gracious. God is love, and therefore will not let us harm ourselves or other$.
His infinite love impels Him to " stamp out " evil by penalty. It is blasphemy to
thick God can sit stiU and see, with indifferent eye, the poison of sin working its
mischief in the world. For love is neither in God nor man a merely sentimental
thing. It is wise, it is strong, it is stern. " Love is inexorable," says one of our
greatest teachers (George Macdonald). So God's love makes Him " a consuming
fire." He pardons sin, when His grace working penitence has got it out of us,
but punishes it until we deplore and loathe it. The creed of Jericho was probably
a very free and easy one. But as God's facts do not accommodate themselves to
our creeds, it is better to adjust our creed to God's facts. Tour sins will not pass
unpunished. Blessed be God's name. He loves us too well for that. There will be
an «lement of correction in all penalty, until correction becomes impossible ; and
then, in mercy at once to ourselves and others, God steps in to prevent the further
accumulation of guilt by us, and the further infliction of mischief on others. The
oity of sin is a city of destruction, and your sin will receive the penalty due to it,
however secure you may feel in your power to evade it.

II. PENAIiTT IS OFTEN LONG DEFERRED, AND IS THEN SUDDENLY INFLICTED.

Jericho had, I suppose, stood long. The destruction of the cities of the plain had
not extended to it. It is possible that, alike from the calamities of war as well as
those of nature it had been free. And its prosperity and wealth, its abounding trade
■with East and West, suggested that there was really no reason to be afraid of God'i
)ndjm«»tii. Tet anddenly, Iik« a thunderbolt out of a clear sky, destruotiou fell on



OH. Tn. 1 — 8.]



THE BOOK OF JOSHUA.



lis



them. There is often delay in inflicting a punishment. God prolongs opportunity.
"This year also" He spares the barren fig tree, reluctant to destroywhat might
produce fruit. He is not willing that any should perish. He is " slow to anger."
His long-suffering is salvation. He lengthens " the days of tranquillity'" that we
may at last repent. But when all delay is abused, and the postponement of doom
only awakes presumption, at last the stroke comes," suddenly and without remedy."
The flood came suddenly, and so did the destniction of Sodom, so did that of
Jezebel and Nabal, and Belshazzar, and Herod, and Judas, and that of multitules
that cannot be numbered. Do not mistake postponement of penalty for pardon
of sin. Of all our unrepented sin that has not yet been smitten, the punishment
is only suspended. We cannot dig so deep but God wUl find us, nor strengthen
our defmoe so stoutly as to defy His power. Be wise and use the days of reprieve
for repentance. " Seek the Lord while he may be found," as we are here tauglit
there is a penalty for every sin, and that, long suspended, it yet at last falls sud-
denly. So observe also lastly —

III. They who would avoid destruction must become followers op the
God of Israel. Only one woman with her relatives seems to have done this.
We do not read of any persons fleeing from the city of doom, or making any pro-
vision for capitulation or escape. The enervation of luxury and immorality is on
them. They alternately sink in despair or are pufl!ed up in the confidence of their
walls. But one person, rising in repentance from the guilt of a long neglect, sees
the glory of God and chooses Him as her hope and Master. When she cannot
save the city with her, she saves herself, and, expecting the wonderful works of
God, enlists in His service. Bepent thou, and take Jesus Christ as thy Lord,
ending with serious change of thought and action aU the evil of your bfe. And
then the infinite love which weeps when it can only smite will parJuu the siu that
you forsake, and give you " a place amongst the children," and the great salvation
which you long to enjoy. — G.



EXPOSITION.



CHAPTEB Vn. 1—5.



The defeat betosb Ai. — Ver. 1. — Com-
mitted a trespass In the accursed tUng.

The word bvo, here used, signifies origin-
ally to cower, whence ^'UD a garment. Hence
it comes to mean to act deceitfully, or per-
haps to steal (of. the LXX. kvoutpiaavTO^ a
translation rendered remarkable by the fact
that it is the very word used by St. Luke in
regard to the transgression of Ananias and
Sapphira. But the LXX. is here rather a
paraphrase than a translation) . It is clearly
used here of some secret act. But in Levit.
T. 16 it is used of an unwitting trespass,
committed njJB'a, in error of fact, but not of
intention. Achan. Called Achar in 1 Chron.
ii. 7, no doubt from a reference to the results
of his conduct. He had " troubled Israel "
nyO), ver. 25, and the valley which wit-
nessed his punishment obtained the name
of Achor. The copies of the LXX. vary be-
tween the two forms, the Tatican Codex
having Achar ; the Alexandrian, Aohan.
Zabdi. Zimri in 1 Chron. ii. 6. Such
variations of reading are extremely common,
•nd are increased in oar version by the va-

JOBHUA.



rieties of English spelling adopted among
our translators (see Shemuel for Samuel in
1 Chron. vi. 33). The LXX. has Zamhri
here. Took of the accursed thing. Com-
mentators have largely discussed the ques-
tion how the sin of Aohan could be held to
extend to the whole people. But it seems
sufficient to reply by pointing out the organic
unity of the Israelitish nation. They were
then, as Christians are now, the Church of
the Uving God. And if one single member of
the community violated the laws which God
imposed on them, the whole body was liable
for his sin, until it had purged itself by a
pubUo act of restitution (see Deut. xxi. 1—8).
So St. Paul regards the Corinthian Church
as polluted by the presence of one single
offender, until he was publicly expelled from
its communion (see 1 Cor. v. 2, 6, 7). Tha
very words "body poUtio" applied to a
state imply the same idea — that of a con-
nection so intimate between the members
of a community that the act of one affects
the whole. And if this be admitted to be
the case in ordinary societies, how much
more so in the people of Uod, who were
tmder His special protection, and had been
specially set apart to His service ? In the
lustoiy of Achau, moreover, we r«ad tha



114



THE BOOK OF JOSHUA.



[oh, -vn. 1—6.



histoiy of leoiet sin, which, though unseen
by any earthly eye, does nevertheless pollute
the offender, and through bim the Church
of God, by lowering his general standard of
thought and action, enfeebling his moral
sense, checking the growth of his inner and
devotional life, untU, by a resolute act of
repentance and restitution towards God, the
sin is finally acknowledged and put away.
" A lewd man is a pernicious creature. That
he damnes his own soule is the least part of
his miscMefe; he commonly drawes .ven-
geance upon a thousand, either by the desert
of his sinne, or by the infection" (Bp.
Hall).

Ver. 2.— Al ♦y or *J/P| " the ruina" (of.
lim and Ije-abarim, the ruins or heaps of
Abarim, Num. xxxiii. 44, 45; and liip,
Josh. XV. 29. Probably it is the same as
D*-5J?n which wo find mentioned in conjunc-
tion with Bethel in ch. xviii. 22, 23. It
becomes V?V in Neh. zi. 31, and the feminine
form is found in Isa. x. 28. The latter,
from the mention of Michmash in the
route uf Sennacherib immediately after-
wards, is probably the same as Ai. Bobin-
son and Keil — the former very doubt-
fully — place it at Turmus Aya, an
eminence crowned with ruins above Deir
Duw^u. But Vandevelde contests this,
and places it at Tell-el-Hajar, i.e., the Tell
or heap of ruins; and G. Williams and
Capt. Wilson have independently fixed on
the same spot, though they call it et-Tel,
or " the heap," and suppose the " el-Hajar "
to have been added in answer to the ques-
tion, " what heap f " This situation seems
best to suit the requirements of the narra-
tive. For it is " on the southern brow of
the Wady-el-Mutyah " (Vandevelde), near
that " wild entanglement of hUl and vaUey
St the head of the Wady Harith," which
" climbs into the heart of the mountains of
Benjamin till it meets the central ridge of
the country at Bethel " (Stanley, ' Sinai and
Palestine,' p. 202). Its situation, unlike
that of Turmus Aya, is calculated to give
cover to an ambush of 6,000 men, and it
also answers to the oonditionB in its near-
ness to Michmash, from which Tormus Aya
is more than three hours' journey distant.
The Tell is "covered with heaps of ruins"
(Capt. Wilson, 'Palestine Exploration Fund
Quarterly Statement,' iv. p. 124). Conder,
however ('Handbook,' p. 264), identifies
Ai with Eaiyan, two miles from Bethel,
in the same Wady, but why, he gives
no hint. A fortress so situated was one
which Joshua could not leave in his
rear, and so its capture was a matter
5f necessity. By its position, if not from
lbs number of it« inhabitants, it was



necessarily a Tery strong one. Al is men-
tioned as early as Gen. xii. 8, and we find
that it was inhabited down to the Captivity,
for the " men of Bethel and Ai " are
mentioned (and, it may be observed, in close
proximity to those of Eama, Geba, and
Michmash — see Isa. x. 28 above cited) in Ezra
ii. 28. See also Neh. xi. 31, above cited.
The name Ai, or ruins, found so early,
implies that the aboriginal inhabitants
had built a city in that almost inaccessible
situation. Lieut Conder gives a very vivid
description of the site et-Tel in 'Pales-
tine Exploration Fund Quarterly Statement,'
April, 1874. There are, he says, "huge
mounds of broken stone and shingle ten feet
high. The town," he adds, "must have
been pounded smaJl, and the fury of its de-
struction is still evidenced by its complete-
ness." He continues : " The party for the
ambush, following the ancient causeway
from Bethel to Jordan (which we have re-
covered throughout its entire length) as far
as Michmash, would then easily ascend the
great wady west of Ai, and arrive within a
quarter of a mile of the city without having
ever come in sight of it. Here, hidden by
the knoll of Burjums and the high ground
near it, a force of almost any magnitude
might wait unsuspected. The main bod; in
the meanwhile, without diverging from the
road, would ascend the gently sloping valley
and appear before the town on the open
battle-field which stretches away to its east
and south. From the knoll the figure of
Joshua would be plainly visible to either
party, with his spear stretched against the
sky" (see ch. viii. 18). But the site still
eludes investigation. lient. Kitchener, Mr.
Birch, Mr. Guest, would place it at Kh-Haiy,
or the rock Eimmon. When those who have
visited the country are so divided in opinion,
nothing but silence remains for those who
have not. Beth-aven (cf. 1 Sam. xiv. 23).
This place has not yet been identified. It
was close by Ai, and not far from Bethel, ai
the transference of its name to Bethel by
Hosea (iv. 15 ; v. 8 j x. 5) shows. It could
not have been a place of any importance, or
the historian would not have found it neces-
sary to explain where it was. Hosea has
perhaps derived his knowledge of it from
this passage. Some writers have identified
it with Bethel. But this is obviously in-
correct, since the literal rendering of the
Hebrew here places Ai " in the immediate
proximity of Beth-aven, eastward of Bethel."
The LXX. omits all reference to Beth-aven.
But there are many various readings. Bethel
Formerly Luz (Gen. xxviii. 19 ; xxxv. 7 ;
Judg. i. 23). The last-cited passage seems
to prove that Bethel was not among th«
citisa taken during Joghua's campaign;



CH. vii. 1 — 6.]



THE BOOK 01" JOSHUA.



Ill



though this U extraordinary in the face of
the fact that the inhabitants of Lnz gave
their assistance to the men of Ai in the
battle (see ch. Tiii. 17, where, however, it
is remarkable that the LXX. omits all re-
ference to Bethel). We may observe that
there is no mention of the capture of Bethel,
or the destruction of the inhabitants,
and that this exactly agrees with Judg. i.
22 — 26. This is an undesigned coincidence
weU worthy of note. We may also remark
on the exact conformity between the situa-
tion of Betiiel as described here and in
Gen. xii. 8. The city to which the name
Bethel was attached was not the place of
Abraham's altar, as we learn from the
passage just cited, but was in its immediate
neighbourhood. The ruins which now
mark its site are of a later date than the
events recorded in Scripture. Its modem
nameisBeitin. Go up and view the country.
Bather, spy (or reconnoitre) ; literally, foot
the country. Joshua does not refuse to
avaU himself of human expedients because
he is under Divine guidance (see also
ch. ii.). The reasons for this reconnoitring
expedition are made clear enough by the
passage quoted from Lieut. Oonder's survey
above.

Yer. 3. — UaKe not aU the people to labour

thither ; or, weary not the people with the
journey thither, " Good successe lifts up



the heart with too much confidence " (Bp.
Hall).

Ver. 6. — ^Unto Shebaxlm. LXX., tal luc
amhpiil/av airovg, as though we had Dl")^?'
(or, as Masius suggests, DHUK'n) from "13^
to break in pieces. So the Syriao and
Chaldee versions. But this is quite out of
the question. The Israelites were not an-
nihilated, for they only lost about 36
men. Nor is Shebarim a proper name, as
the Vulgate renders it. It has the article,
and must be rendered either with Keil, the
stone-quarries (Uterally, the crushings or
breakings), or with Gesenins, the ruins,
which, however, is less probable, since Ai
(see above) has a sinular signification.
Munsterus mentions a view that it was so
called in consequence of the slaughter of
the Israelites. But this is very improbable.
In the going down. Ai stood in a strong
position on the mountains. The margin
" in Morad " is therefore not to be preferred.
It means, as the Israehtes and their antago-
nists descended from the gates. The hearts
of the people melted and became as water.
This was not cowardice, but awe. The
people had relied upon the strong hand of
the Lord, which had been so wonderfully
stretched out for them. From Joshua
downwards, every one felt that, for Bome
unknown reason, that support had been
withdrawn.



HOMILETICS.

Vers. 1 — 5, — The sin. One of the most valuable uses of the historical portions
of ths Old Testament is the valuable moral lessons tbry convey. " The Old Testa-
ment is not contrary. to the New." Both come from God, and the offences God
denoimces and punishes under the old dispensation -will be equally denounced and
punished by Him under the new. Let no sinner flatter himself that he mil escape
because his doctrine is sound, or because he belongs to an orthodox body of Chris-
tians, or because he feels assured of salvation. If he sins he will be pxmished.
And he sins when he does what Goi has forbidden under the law as well as imder
the gospel. To be a moral man will not save the soul ; but not to be a moral man
will assuredly ruin it. We should therefore take good heed to the lessons of
morality taught in the Old Testament.

I. The evil of over-confidbnck. Even the good Joshua errs sometimes. We
hear of no counsel being taken of God here, any more than when the Gibeonite
embassy arrived. The report of the spies is acted upon at once. The siege of Ai
seems to have been undertaken relying upon human means alone. But the
Israelites were to learn how entirely dependent they were upon Divine aid. We
need the lesson as much as they. In cases of difficulty we betake ourselves to God.
In ordinary affairs we trust to ourselves. Yet we need His aid as much in the one
as in the other. How many of our failures in the conflict vsdth ourselves, or with
the evil around us, are due to forgetting this truth ? Or we take scant pains about
what we think easy work. We. need not " weary " ourselves, we think, with that
And our scanty preparation ig inadequate to the task, since we are compassed witii
infirmity.



11«



THE BOOK OF JOSHUA, [oh. vn. 1—5.



II. The exobedino sinfulness of sin. It was ruin to the Israelites' campaign.
It brought disgrace, not only to the sinner, hut to the cause. So now, (1) the sin
of the individual falls on the community. Beligion suffers severely for the short-
comings of its professors. Every religious commuuity is cruelly injured by llio
faults of its members. Even the great conflict against evil itself has failed of com-
plete success as yet, solely from the sins of those who have been carrjdng it on.
The defeats of the army of the Lord in the great struggle against Satan are to be
explained on the same principle as the defeat before Ai. There needs a humilia-
tion, an awakening, a casting-out of the offending member, before any new succi i a
can be achieved. And (2) the conflict against sin within is subject to the same
laws. We cannot subdue our evil passions, or tempers, or habits. It is because
there is some hidden sin indulged secretly, which mars all our efforts. _ We have
some Achan within, some master passion which hugs a secret unlawful indulgence
to itself, perhaps unperoeived even by ourselves. Our defeats ought to teach us to
institute the inquiry, bring the offender to hght, and cast him out without mercy.

III. The damgee op disobedience and covetousness. God had given no reasorei
for His command about Jericho and its spoils. It is true that they were obvious
enough to an inquiring mind. But some minds wiU not inquire, except to fi Lid
reasons for disobedience. Of such a disposition was Achan. Why should such a
command be given ? " To what purpose is this waste ? " What is the good of it
all ? And the promptings of self-interest are sufficient to outweigh the obvious
reason that this solemn ban upon Jericho and all that was therein was to impress
upon the minds of the Israelites the awful and irrevocable nature of the sentence God
had pronounced against the inhabitants of the land. Such abstract considerations
had little weight besides the concrete fact of a wedge of gold and a Babylonish
garment. The welfare of society, the necessity to its well-being of God's moral
laws, are cobwebs easily brushed aside when interest or passion impel us to break
those laws. We look at the temptation and look again. We let the idea gain
possession of our minds. "Where is the harm?'' we cry, and then we commit the
Bin, and involve ourselves in its terrible, and even upon repentance, to a certain
extent, irremediable consequences. Though our Joshua has redeemed us from the
extremest penalty of His outraged law, yet must He bring us to detection and
shame, and consequent punishment. " The valley of Aohor " may be given us
" for a door of hope," but the anguish must come before the peace, to which, by
His mercy, it is destined to lead. One lesson from Achan's sin is that no one can
disobey God's laws and come off scathless. Not for nought does He say, " Thou
shalt not do this thing." He who in wilful folly transgresses His commands must
bear his burden, whosoever he be.

IV. The deceitfdlness op sin. It seemed a hght thing to Achan when he did it.
"I did but taste a httle honey" — a httle of the sweetness of forbidden pleasure —
" and lo, I must die." So almost all sin seems hght when committed. A httle
deceit or lying, a httle indulgence in impure imaginations or actions, a httle com-
phance with the custems of an evil world, a little yielding to the promptings of
anger or avarice, t.'eem shght matters when they occur. But they often bring
serious consequences in their train. Repeated acts become habits, and habits are
not easily broken off. We are their captives before we are aware, and then wt
wish, and wish in vain, that we had never made ourselves their slave.

" 'Twa» but one httle sin
We saw at morning enter in,
And le I at eventide the world is drowned."

Kbblb, ' Chrutum Year,' Seftuagetima SwuSaf.



ca. vn. i-6.] THE BOOK OP JOSHUA. lit



HOMILIES BY VARIOUS AUTHOBS.

Ver. l.—Svn committed. By the narrative before ua we are reminded of MTeral

oharaoteri alios of sin.

I. It disobeys a commandment. Only two precepts had been issued at the
sacking of Jericho, one to spare Kahab and her family, another to " keep fronx tlie
accursed thing," and the latter precept was broken. The command was distinct,
nnmistakable ; no difficulty in comprehepding its import. Scripture defines sin as
the " transgression of the law." " By the law is the knowledge of sin." A prohibition
tests man's obedience perhaps even more than an injunction to perform some positive
act. The tempter easily lays hold of it, keeps it before the eye, irritates man's self-
will, and insinuates doubts respecting the reason of the prohibition. Christ endorsed
the moral law of the old dispensation — nay, made it even more stringent ; but He
altered the principle of obedience, or, better still, increased the power of the motives
to oomphance. When we sin we still transgress a law, and sins of wilful commission
are, in number, out of aU proportion to sins of ignorance.

II. SiN IS OFTEN THE EFFECT OF COVETOUS DESIRES. — Achan saw, coveted, and
took (ver. 21). The seeing was innocent ; the dwelling on the object of sight with
desire was sinful. " Coveted " is the same word as used in Gen. iii. 6. " Saw
... a tree to be desired." " "When lust (desire) hath conceived it bringeth forth
sin." The outward object has no power to make us fall except as it corresponds to
an inward affection. If the object be gazed upon long, the affection may be
inordinately excited, and desire produce sinful action. Hence the counsel of the
wise man regarding " the path of the wicked : " " Avoid it, pass not by it, turn from
it, and pass away." It is not mixing in the world to perform our duties that is
reprobated, nor even that amount of care which shall secure us an honourable
position therein ; but such an intent fixing of the eye upon riches, honour, pleasure,
as denotes a love of the world and the things that are m it. Our affection must be
set on things above as the best preservation against the influence of unholy passions;
for where the heart is occupied, there evil finds it hard to effect a lodgment.

III. Sin robs God. — All the metals were to be brought to the treasury, to be
dedicated to the use of Jehovah (ch. vi. 19). But Achan wished to appropriate a
portion to his own ends, thus taking what belonged to God. He set up self in
opposition to his God. Sin deprives God not only of gold, but of honour, love,
obedience, and the use of those talents committed to men, that they may be faith-
ful servants and stewards, not sordid proprietors. From the sinner's heart ascends
no sweet incense of faith aod love ; in the household of the worlding there is no
family altar with its gratefol offering of prayer and praise ; the body of the
unbeliever, instead of being a temple of God, is part of the kingdom of darkness.

IV. Sin IMPLIES a delight in what God abominates. The possessions of the
Canaanites were placed under the ban; they were denominated "the accursed
thing." The Babylonish garment was to have been burnt, and the silver and gold
could only be redeemed from the curse by being set apart for sacred uses. The
very fact that the Almighty had condemned the property should have been
Bufi&cient to deter any one from seeking to seize it. And so with us ; regard for our
Father in heaven ought at once to make us shun what He has declared hateful, and
look upon it with aversion ; and belief in His unerring discernment should cause us
readily to acquiesce in His judgment, even if at first sight the places and practices
condemned do not appear hideous or sLnfol. The grievous nature of sin is evinced
in its betrayal of a hankering after what the laws of God denounce, and conse-
quently its revelation of a character differing fi:om that of God, loving what is
nnlovely in His sight.

V. Sin in God's people is a violation of a covenant. Achan had transgressed
the " covenant" (vers. 11 and 15), or, as it is expressed in ver. 1, had " committed
a trespass " — i.e., a breach of trust — had acted faithlessly. Jericho, as the first city
taken, was to be made an example of, and therefore none of the spoil was to
accrue to th« Israelites, but the plunder of other cities was to be allowed to enrich



118 THE BOOK OF JOSHUA.. [ch. to. i^S.



them. Yet Achan disregarded the TmderBtood agreement. Nor must it be forgotten
that Israel stood in a peculiar relationship to the Almi ghty, who promised to bless
them if they adhered to the terms of the covenant, which required them to be very
obedient unto every commandment which the Lord should give by the mouth of
Hia accredited messengers. A similar covenant is re-affirmed under the gospel
dispensation, only it is pre-eminently a covenant of grace, not of works. Jesus
died that they who lived should henceforth Uve unto Him who died for them.
" Seek ye first the kingdom of God, and all other things shall be added unto you,"
was the stipulation of the great Teacher. To " sin wilfully " is to count the blood
of the covenant wherewith we are sanctified an unholy thing (Heb. x. 29). Jesus is
the Mediator of a " new covenant." The same epistle concludes with a prayer that
the God who, in virtue of the blood of the everlasting covenant, raised Christ from
the dead, may perfect His people in every good work, that thus on both sides the
" conditions" may be observed.

VI. Secrecy is the usual accompaniment op sin. Achan did not wear the
" garment" or exhibit the " gold," but hid his plunder " in the earth in the midst
of his tent " (ver. 21). The attempt to cloak sin may arise either from a feehng of
shame, or from the fear of detection and punishment. This last is a baser motive
than the first. Shame is an evidence that the man is not whoUy bad, that the
voice of conscience has not been totally silenced. That after the Fall our first
parents did not set their faces like a flint was a testimony that evil had not acquired
complete mastery over them. Oh that men visited with these compunctions of
conscience would attend to the self-attesting nature of sin I We may rejoice in the
endeavour to conceal crimes, so far as it indicates that society is not yet so corrupt
as unblushingly to acknowledge sin as such. Since God mentions the " dissem-
bling" of Achan as aggravating his offence, it is probable that he was afraid of the
vengeance which discovery would bring upon his head. Already sin was inflicting
its punishment. There could not be open, unrestrained finiition of ill-gotten gains.
Bejoioing naturally demands the presence of others to share our joy, and by parti-
cipation to increase the common stock ; but there can be no such gathering to greet
the result of sins, for they —

" The cloak of night being plucked from off their backs.
Stand bare and naked, trembling at themselves."

Conclusion. Thankfulness for a Saviour, bom to " save his people from their
sins," the Light of the world revealing our natural dark, degraded condition, but
bringing to us, if we will bask in His rays, knowledge, purity, and happiness.
" God be merciful to me a sinner," the prelude to " They shall walk with me in
white, for they are worthy." — A.

Ver. 1. — The way of the transgressor. In order to understand Achan's sin, we
must bear in mind the absolute nature of the decree that everything belonging to
Jericho should be devoted to the Lord — all hving beings slain, and destructible
materials consumed as a sacrifice to His offended Majesty ; all indestructible ma-
terials — silver and gold, vessels of iron and brass — consecrated to the service of the
sanctuary. The sin was, therefore, something more than an act of disobedience.
It was a violation of the Divine covenant. It was sacrilege, a robbery of God, an
impious seizure, for base, selfish purposes, of that which belonged to Him. And the
secrecy with which the sin was committed was a defiance of the Divine Omni-
science. Trifling as the offence "may seem on a mere superficial view of it, it thus
contained the essential elements of aU transgression. The penalty was terrible ;
but the moral exigencies of the time demanded it. The sovereignty God was assert-
ing so solemnly over the Canaanites could suffer no dishonour among His own people.
" Judgment must begin at the house of God." The point of interest in this pas-
sage is the view it gives of the connection between Achan and all Israel in this
transgression ; it speaks of his deed as the deed of the whole nation, and one that
brought down on it the anger of the Lord. Consider (1) the relation of Achao and
his in to the people ; (2) the relation of the people to Achan's sin.



CH. vn. 1—6.] THl BOOK OF JOSHUA. 11»

I. Note the nrPLUENCE the sin op one man may have on the life and
DESTINY OF MANY OTHERS. Nothing is said about the effect of Achan'a trespass on
his family, except that it involved tiiem with himself in the same miserable end.
We are not told whether he had any associates in crime. Probably he had. Men
are seldom able to keep dark secrets like this looked up long in their own bosoms.
But however this may be, we cannot well confine our thoughts to the mere par-
ticipation in punishment. We are reminded of those bearings of human conduct
which are at work long before the final issues stand revealed — the near, as well as
remote, effects of wrong-doing. Men cannot sin alone anymore than "perish"
alone (ch. ixii. 20). Consider that great law of moral action and reaction that
underlies all the superficial forms of social life, and which is to it very much what
the laws of chemical affinity or of attraction and gravitation are to nature. By this
men are held together, linked one with another, cemented into one living and
organic whole. By virtue of this we are continually giving and receiving impulses.
And it is as impossible that we should act without producing effects on others, as
that the smooth surface of a lake should be broken and there be no imdulations
spreading to the banks. This influence wiU be for good or ill according to a man's
personal character. Our words and deeds, charged with the moral quality of our
own inner life , tend thus inevitably to awaken something like them in others.
Every good man diffuses a moral influence that assimilates all around him to his
own goodness. Every bad man stands in the midst of hiunan society the moral
image of the deadly upas tree, blighting and withering every fair thing that comes
within its shadow. "Ephraim is joined to idols: let him alone 1" Go not near
him. For your own sake " let him alone 1 " So with every single act of trans-
gression. We may not be able to trace its moral issues ; only know that it adds to the
ever-accumulating sum of the world's evil. So far as its power reaches it is another
contribution to the building up of Satan's kingdom among men, another blow struck
at the kingdom of truth and righteousness. Moreover, sin cannot always be hid,
though men seek the darkness for the doing of their dark deeds — though the me-
morials of their guilt be carefully concealed, hke the " costly garment," &c., of
Achan beneath the ground — yet God's eye " seeth in secret," and He will sooner or
later " reward it openly." " For nothing is secret that shall not be made mani-
fest," &c. (Luke viii. 17). " Be sure yoin* sin will find you out" (Num. xxxii. 23).
And as its influence spreads far beyond the place of its birth, so its penalty will fall
on the innocent as weU as the guilty. All this may seem out of harmony with the
present dispensation of grace. But not so. Christianity does not alter the funda-
mental laws of moral government. These considerations clothe the sinner with
guilt independently of the intrinsic quality of his deed. They deepen the shadow
that rests on the path of the transgressor.

II. The eblation of the people to Achan's sin. The crime of this one man
is imputed to all Israel on the principle of the organic unity of the nation. As the
body is said to be diseased or wounded, though the malady may lie only in one
of its members, so his trespass destroyed the moral integrity of the whole nation.
We are reminded of certain ways in which a communiiy may be implicated in a
wrong actually done by only one of its members. (1) When the sin does but give
definite expression to a spirit prevailing more or less through aU. Distinct forms
of practical evil often bring to light principles that are secretly leavening a whole
society. It is very possible that Achan's solitary trespass was indicative of a spirit
of insubordination, or of selfish greed among the people, that would have utterly
subverted the Divine purpose if it had not been thus sternly rebuked at the begin-
ning. Upon this principle of fellowship of spirit Christ said that " all the righteoua
blood shed on the earth " should come on that generation (Matt. xxui. 35) ; and
Peter charged the multitude on the day of Pentecost with having slain " the Holy
One and the Just," though many of them can have had no actual part in the trans-
gression (Acts ii. 23; iii. 14, 15). (2) When the many connive at that sin, or share
the profit of it. Men sin by proxy, and thus think to secure the end without in-
volving themselves in the wrongful means that lead to it. But to consent to reap
any part of th» profit of an iniquitous trausactiou — to place yonrself wHlinglj' in



120 THE BOOK OF JOSHUA. [oh. vil 1—5.

my sort of connection with it— is to share its guilt. Indeed, the moral sense of
mankind declares that there is a special criminality, an added element of baseness
and meanness, belonging to him who has such indirect interest in the wroug-doing
of others. The question of so-called " national sins " arifies here. A national sin is
one coimnitted in the name of a nation by its representatives, or on which the State
Bets the stamp of its authority and license. If Achan's sin had been connived at
by Joshua and the elders it would have been a national sin. (8) When those who
are aggrieved by the sin fail to bear faithful witness against it. The guilt of this
" trespass " rested on all Israel untU, by pnbUo condemnation, it was vriped out
(2 Cor. vii. 11).— W.

Ver. 1, — The accursed thing. Immediately after the taking of Jericho, Israel
found itself suddenly arrested in its career of conquest. Its advanced guard re-
ceived a humiliating repulse from the inhabitants of the small town of Ai. Joshua
was driven ahnost to despair by this defeat, because it seemed to doona the army of
Israel to feebleness and failure, by the withdrawal of the presence and power of
God. It seemed as if the heavens were closed against him, and he could no more
reckon upon that invincible Divine aid which had been hitherto the strength of his
arms. He rent hie garments and called upon God, and the answer came, " Israel
hath sinned ... for they have taken of the accursed thing." This trangression of
the covenant was the cause of their defeat, and this alone. And in our own day it
is " the accursed thing " which is still the sole obstacle to the victories of the people
of God, and to His blessing resting upon them. Let us look at this sin in its cause,
in its effects, and in its reparation.

I. The cause of this sin is covetousness born of the selfishness which leads to
Tebelhon. The unhappy Achan could not resist the desire to secure for himself a
share of the booty. He sought his own selfish ends in the cause of God. That
cause requires to be served with complete self-devotion, and with an eye to God
alone. Achan thought first of satisfying his own avarice. A holy war must be
waged holily. From the moment when the base passion of selfishness creeps in, it
ceases to be a holy war. It is then even worse than any other war, for God wiU
not suffer His name to be profaned. Whenever the so-caUed defenders of the
Church have sought their own glory, when they have aimed at securing power or
fortune for tliemselves, they have paved the way for defeat. This is equally true of
individuals. To make use of the cause of God for one's own ends is not only to
dishonour, but fatally to compromise it ; for it is then no longer the cause of God,
but the cause of the devil.

II. The effect of intermeddling with the accursed thing is to lose the help
OF GoD, and to bring down His anger. The heavenly Father is no blind and un-
just parent, who has favourites whose transgressions He winks at. He chastises
those whom He loves, and because He loves them ; He does not allow them to
harden their hearts in rebelUon against Him. Hence He makes them feel the
Father's chastening rod (Heb. xii. 16). It is not tolerable, moreover, that the cause
of God should be confounded with that of ambition and self-seeking, or that His
name should be used as a cloak for covetousness. Therefore, as soon as Israel vio-
lates the covenant of God, it is visited with condign punishment. The victory of
the rebel who makes use of the name of God would be, for that very reason, worse
than his defeat. Defeat wUl show that the honour of God cannot be sullied by the
sins of His people, for He repudiates them. We must not be surprised at finding
that in every age God has made His people pass through the sHarpest ordeal of
chastisement. The heaviest of all chastisements is the interruption of communica-
tion with God. The heavens are pitiless iron and brass so long as the accursed
thing is tampered with. The sin forms a wall between God and the soul, which
there is no passing through.

III. The reparation op this evil implies two successive acts. 1. Its con-
fession. Achan must acknowledge his sin before all the people. 2. The utter
putting away of the accursed thing. Under the stem discipline of the old cove-
nant) ^e gmlty man perished with his unlawful prey. Under the new covenant,



CB. vn. «— 16.]



THE BOOK OP JOSStTA.



15!



the justice ol woa is satisfied with that inward deatli which is called mortifloation,
and which ought to be a true sacrifice of self. It is equally true now, however, that
mere confession is not enough ; that the idol must be consumed in the sacrificial fire.
Any one who keeps in his possession the accursed thing, places himself under con-
demnation from which there is no escape. It does not signify whether the for-
bidden thing be materially of much or httle value. It might have been thought
that the theft of a single garment and of two hundred shekels of silver was of small
account amidst all the rich booty of Jericho. It is the act itself which God condemns.
The smallest forbidden thing retained is enough to shut up the heavens, and to draw
down upon our Church, our home, and ourselves the severe judgment of God till
it has been confessed and put away. — E. os P.



EXPOSITION.



CHAPTEB Vir. 6-15.



loSHTA'S PEATEE AND God's ANSWEB. —

Yer. 6. —And Joshua rent Ills clothes. A
token ofgiief usual among the Jews (see
Gen. xxxvii. 29, 34; xliv. 13, <feo. Knobel
cites Leyit. zxi. 10) ; and though Joshua
was not the high priest, yet from his
peculiar position he might be expected to
adopt somewhat of the high priesVa de-
meanour, and at least not to display this
outward sign of grief without the strongest
reason. The words " before the ark " are
omitted in the LXX. And put dust on
their heads. A sign of stUl more abject
humiliation. The head, the noblest part of
man, was thus placed beneath the dust of
the ground from whence he was taken
(see 1 Sam. iv. 12 ; 2 Sam. i. 2 ; xiii. 19 ;
XV. 82 ; 1 Kings xx. 38 ; Job ii. 12 ; Lam. ii.
10). It was a common custom among the
Greeks. (See Luoian, De Luotu, 12). Homer
mentions the custom (Iliad, xviii). Pope's
translation runs thus : —

" Oast on the ground', with faiious hands he ipreod
The scorching ashes o'er his graceful head.
His purple ganuents and his golden hairs,
Those he deforms with dust, and these he tears.**
Lines 26—80.

Ver. 7. — Wherefore hast thou at all
brought. The LXX. seems in some way
to have read 133? for "Qil ; they translate
" why did thy servant cross ? " But their ren-
dering is a clear grammatical blunder, for
the Masorites remark that the H is to be pre-
served. Would to God we had been con-
tent. Calvin makes some severe remarks
on Joshua's folly and want of faith under
this reverse. But it may be paralleled by
the conduct of most Christians in adversity.
How few are Inhere who can bear even
temporal calamity calmly and patiently,
even though they have abundant reason to
know that temporal afSiction is not only no
sign of the displeasure of God, but the
•wveisel And when, through allowing secret



sin to lurk within the soul, the Christian is
overcome and brought to shame by his
spiritual enemies, how much more seldom
it is that he has the courage to gird up the
loins of his soul and renew the conflict, in
full confidence that victory will be his in
the end 1 How much more frequently does
he despair of victory, wish he bad never
undertaken the Christian profession, give
up his behef in the protecting care and
guidance of God, and desist, at least for a
time, from the good fight of faith, to his
own serious injury and to the detriment of
God's Church 1 "It is not," adds Calvin,
" a new thing for pious minds, when they
aspire to seek God with holy zeal, to obscure
the light of faith by the vehemence and
impetuosity of their affections. And in
this way all prayers would be rendered
valueless, did not the Lord in His boundless
indulgence pardon them, and, wiping away
all their stains, receive them as if they were
pure. And yet while in thus freely ex-
postulating they cast all their care upon
God, this blunt simplicity, though it needs
pardon, is yet far more acceptable than the
feigned modesty and sell-restraint of the
hypocrites."

Ver. 8. — What shall I say 7 To encourage
the people who will be downcast by this
defeat, while their enemies WU gather
courage.

Ver 9. — For the Canaanltea and all the
Inhabitants of the land shall hear of it.
The invariable argument of Moses (Exod.
xxxii. 12 ; Num. xiv. 13 — 16 ; Deut. ix. 28 ;
xxxii. 26, 27). The disgrace which the sin
of man brings upon the cause of the Lord
is a real and very terrible thing (cf. 2
Sam. xii. 14; Ezek. xxxvi. 23).

Ver. 10. — Get thee up. Not puerile
lamentation, but action, is ever the duty of
the soldier of the Lord. If defeat assails
either the individual or the cause, there ii
a reason for it, and this must be promptly
searobed oat, and with God's aid be dis



199



THE BOOK OF JOSHUA.



[OH. VII. 6—15.



covered. The sin or error once found out
and pat away, the oombat may be renewed
and bronght to a successful issue.

Ver. 11. — Israel hath sinned. A simple
but satisfactory explanation. It is not (rod
who changes. It is we who frustrate Hia
counsels of love and protection against our
enemies. We have here another assertion
of the principle that if one member suffer
all the members suffer with it. Achan's
sin was the sin of all Israel. So the sin of
one man is still the sin of the whole Church.
And have also stolen. The accusation is
cumulative. Israel, which was all involved
la the sin of one among their number, had
(1) broken a solemn vow; (2) had stolen
what was not theirs ; (3) had acted deceit-
fully ©'nS) ; and (4) had appropriated to
themselves what belonged to God, which,
as Keil remarks, was the last and gravest
feature of their crime. This is strongly
brought out by the fivefold repetition of
Q| in the original.

Ver. 12.— Therefore. This plain state-
ment disposes of the idea that the repulse
before Ai was simply the result of Joshua's
rashness in sending so small a body of
troops. The vivid narrative of the detection
of Achan, obviously taken from contem-
porary records, precedes the account of the
final capture of the city, although Joshua,
who, as we have seen, does not neglect to
employ human means, resolves to take
greater precautions before making a second
attack. Not a hint is dropped that the
former number of men was insufficient, or
that Joshoa had been misled by the 'in-
formation brought by the reconnoitring
party. In the mind of the historian the
defect is entirely owing to the existence of
secret sin In the Israelitish camp. Except
ye destroy the accursed from among.
Dr. Maclear, in the 'Cambridge Bible for
Schools,' calls attention to the fact that
1 Cor. r. 13 is a quotation from the LXX.
here, substituting, bowever, riv jrovifpiv for
TO ivaBe/ia,

Ver. 13.— Sanctify the people. See note
on ch. iii. 6. Thou canst not stand before
thine enemies. Observe the singular number
here, intensifying the testimony of the whole
history to the fact that Israel was one body
before the Lord. And observe, moreover,
how the existence of secret sin, even though
unknown to and undetected by him in
whom it lurks, has power to enfeeble the
soul in its conflict with its enemies. Hence
we leam the duties of watchfulness and
careful examination ot the soul by the light
of God'i Word.



Ver, 14. — Taketh, t.«., by lot, as In 1 Sam,
xiv. 42 (-llp^Sn make it fall ; cf, 1 Sam. x. 20)
(cf. Jonah i. 7 ; also Prov. xviii. 18). Accord-
ing to the families. The gradual centering
of the suspicion upon the offender is one of
the most striking features of the history.
The genealogies of the children of Israel
were very strictly kept, as the Books of
Chronicles, Ezra, and Nehemiah show.
Achan's name is oarefuUy given in the
genealogy of Jadah in 1 Chron. ii. 7.
The subdivision of the tribes into families
(or clam, Keil) and households (or, as
we should perhaps Bay, families) was
for convenience of enumeration, military
organisation, and perhaps of assess-
ment. Oehler, ' Theologie des Alten Tes-
taments,' Sec. 101, takes the same view
as KeiL The tribes, he says, were divided
into mnS^p or D'|J^X i.e., Geschlechter
(LXX. Stjuoi, for which the best English
equivalent is clans, as above); these into
families or houses (D'^S), or fathers' houses
(nU^$ T]^) ; and these again into single
headjs of a house (D'^DJ). The principle, he
adds of a Mosaic family, is as follows : Every
" family " forms a distinct whole, which as
fax as possible must be maintained in its
integrity. Each tribe, says Jahn ('Hebrew
Conmionwealth,' Book II.), acknowledged a
prince (N*ti'5) ^ i's ruler. As its numbers
increased, there arose a subdivision of the
tribe into collections of families. Such a
collection was called a house of fathers, a
niJSCtp or dan, or a thousand. But this
explanation is not so satisfactory as that
given above. Eurz remarks on the important
part family life played among the Hebrews,
with whom, in consequence of their descent
from Abraham, and the importance they
attached to it, the nation was developed out
of the family. See Introduction.

Ver.16. He that is taken with theaceorsed
thing; or; according to Keil, "he on whom
the ban falls. " He and all that he hath (cf.
ver. 24). The opinion that Achan's family
had in some way become participators in his
sin would seem preferable to the idea that his
sill had involved them in the ban (see Deut.
xxiv. 16, which quaUfies Levit. xxvi. 39 ; so
Hengstenberg, ' History,' p. 218). The de-
struction of their possessions is due to the fact
that all the family had come under the ban.

Folly n^55 used of the heart as well as the
head (of. Gen. xxxiv. 7: Deut. xxii. 21;
Judg. xix. 23, 24, xx. 6 ; 2 Sam. xiii. 12 ;
Psa. XIV. 1). The LXX. render by avojitiiia,
and the Vulgate by nefas, but Theodotiou
renders by dppoavvij.



ca. vn. 8—15.] THB lOOK 0F J«WUjL. 198



HOMILBTICS.

Vers. 6 — 15. — The Tvu/miUation.

I. The bitteeness of repentance.

1. The sting of Bin is sharper than its pleasure. The nneasiness which followed
on Aehan's transgression far outweighed any pleasure he could have derived from
it. For, first, the possession of his treasure was itself a trouble. He had to hide it
in his tent, and to watch carefully lest any one should discover it. Next, he brought
death upon thirty-six of his innocent feUow-oountrymen. Lastly, he brought the
keenest distress and humiUation upon Joshua and the whole congregation. So it
always is. The sting which follows on our first deliberate disobedience of God's
commands is always far keener than the pleasure that disobedience gave us. The
fear of detection, the oppression of a guilty secret, far outweighs any happiness
sinfol indulgence can give. And the distress which our misdeeds are apt to bring
on those who are bound to us by the nearest and dearest of ties is frequently
altogether out of proportion to the momentary satisfaction we have derived from
our wrong- doing.

2. The reaction that follow* on sin is often fatal to foAth. Thus Joshua's
courage gave way. He reproached God, he made sure of defeat and destruction, ha
wished he had never crossed Jordan. So are we often weakened in our warfare
against God's enemies by the discouragements and disasters the sins of Christiana
(perhaps unknown to ourselves) have brought on us. So in our own hearts, after
some great failure, the consequence of hidden evil vnthin us which we have not
been careful to detect, we are overwhelmed with sorrow and confusion, we think
it useless to strive, we are tempted to abandon our Christian profession, we wish
we had never undertaken its responsibilities, we cry, " Would God we had been
content and dwelt on the other side Jordan I "

II. The reproach op sin. Aehan's sin brought not only sorrow, but disgrace,
after it. " The Canaanites and all the inhabitants of the land shall hear of it."
Consequences flow from sin which we had never thought of when we committed it.
Our relatives and friends have to suffer for our misdeeds. Our order in society
must bear the burden of our misconduct. The cause of Christ must be beaten back
because we have abandoned it. There is a never-faUing connection between sin and
shame. If we do not feel it for our ourselves, others must feel it for us.

III. The prompt measures necessary to avert its consequences. Thia
may be regarded as affecting religious bodies or individuals. (1) Excommunica-
tion has fallen into disfavour, and indeed it has been shamefully abused. And yet
the expulsion of the offender, at least until he gave unequivocal proofs of repentance,
was one of the first principles of the Christian Church (see 1 Cor. v.). And so now,
no society owning the name of Christ ought to tolerate within its borders any
person whose life is a scandal to the religion he professes. " With such an one no
not to eat " is a Scripture maxim. And observe the holy eagerness Joshua dis-
played in the matter. There was no delay. He rose up early in the morning.
God left him no doubt about the course he ought to pursue. And the evil was at
once and for ever put away. It were " much to be wished " that the " godly
discipline " of the early ages of the Church were restored. Calvin and many other
of the Beformers laboured hard to restore it ; but they too often lacked judgment and
mercy. Yet it were well could the congregation of the Christian faithful resolve to
"put away from" them adultery, fornication, dmnkenness, dishonesty, open and
notorious covetousness or profaneness, and to refuse to live in friendship or intimacy
with those who thus bring disgrace on the Christian name. (2) Our dealings with
ourselves should be on the same principle. There should be no delay in oui
repentance, no dallying with sin. As soon as we are conscious of its evil presence,
we should do our best to cast it out. If it be not cast out at once it wUl be our
ruin. We- must " rise up early in the morning," examine our actions one by one,
bring our dispositions and habits to be tested by the unerring judgment of God,
and that one which He pronounces to be guilty must be condemned and sacrificed



124 THE BOOK OF JOSHUA. [ca. to. 6—15.

to His just vengeance. And we may remark, moreover, how often em lurks within
US, imsuspected even by ourselves. We go out to battle like the children of Israel,
against God's enemies, unconscious that there is a traitor within the camp. When
we meet with disgrace and disaster in a conflict in which God is pledged to aid us,
we may bo sure that the fatilt is within ourselves. We ought at once to betake
ourselves to self-examination, to detect the bidden evil, and when found we ou^ht
at once to put it away.

HOMILIES BY VAEIOUS AUTH0E8.

Ver. 14. — Sin discovered. This leads us to remark that —

I. EvEKY SIN IS KNOWN TO GoD. Joshua was ignorant that Achan had secreted
spoil, but the searching glances of God reached farther than the most watchful
oversight of the leader. As afterwards, when the disciples did not suspect the
character and intents of Judas, the Lord discerned the sinister purposes of his heart.
The omniscience and omnipresence of the Almighty have been strangely disregarded
even by His own servants. Witness the cm-ious flight of Jonah, as if he could
really " flee from the presence of the Lord." " I know thy works " is the heading
to the practical address in nearly each of the seven letters to the Chmrches of Asia.
"Thou God seest me."

II. Sin kevealed by fatlure in an nNDEETAKiNa, The overthrow of Jericho
inspired the Israelites with such confidence that they disdained to employ all their
forces in assaulting Ai. To their surprise, their attack was repulsed with loss. The
greater the previous secimty, the more intense the subsequent alarm. They were
unconscious of the presence of a traitor in the camp. The theft of Achan was a
stronger opponent than the men of the city. Sin destroys our power. As one has
quaintly observed, " In running a race, an inward pain hinders more than if a dozen
men jostled you." When men have taken cold, they immediately reflect where
they could have been exposed to draught, and non-success in any enterprise causes
us to inquire. What have we done amiss ? Trouble leads us to scrutinise our past
life, conscience accuses of sins which have deserved, if they have not actually
drawn upon us, this proof of Divine displeasure. Self-examination is healthful [f
not carried to excessive lengths; it may produce " carefulness, clearing of ourselves,"
&c. (2 Cor. vii. 11). The effect of sin ia not confined to the particular guilty
memher. Sin taints the community, or often involves it in its suffering. As a drop
of ink discolours a whole glass of water, so thousands of innocent persons may be
affected by the neighbourhood of one sinner. This concerns us individually, for if
one Mmb offends, the body is defiled; and collectively, a,s members of Churches, and
as belonging to a nation.

III. The offence made known im answer to prater. Deep was Joshua's
solicitude. With the elders of Israel he rent his clothes and fell prostrate before the
ark all day. To a lover of God, the beUef that His favour is withdrawn is the most
overwhelming sorrow. Kor is the grief merely selfish in its origin. Joshua
lamented the dishonour which would be affixed to the glorious name of Jehovah
when the news of Israel's defeat was bruited abroad. Prayer is the believer's un-
failiag resource. Eeceiving any woful tidings, he " spreads the letter," like Hezekiah,
before the Lord. He ventures to plead, to expostulate, to argue. And the answer
surely arrives though it appear long to tarry. In this narrative we find Joshua
reproved for imagining that God would arbitrarily desert His people. He might
have known that something was wrong in the conduct of the nation, and his
inquiry should have been. Wherein have we offended ? We must not at once
rush to the conclusion that the events which befal us are " judgments," for when
we think God's smile is absent, it may be that the clouds of our mai-shy land intei--
rupt the heavenly rays. Nevertheless the advice of the preceding paragraph
holds good, and the rebuke administered to Joshua may be often seasonably
applied to ourselves.

lY. Thi offender manifested. The drawing of a lot was the means resort*4



OH. vu. 16—26.]



THE BOOK OP JOSHUA.



Mf



to on all important occasions for appointment to positions of honomr or shame.
Picture the gradual contraction of the oircle of fire till it enwrapped only "the
trouhler of Israel," and he stood before all the people as the cause of a national
disgrace. The slow and stately discovery, as well as the proceedings of the day
before, afforded time to the criminal to reveal himself, if he would. What must
have been his feelings as he saw detection drawing nearer and nearer till it pointed
its finger to his breast, saying, "Thou art the maul " The method of manifestation
also afforded time for the spectators to he thoroughly a/roused, so that they might
appreciate more deeply the awfulness of the sin committed, and be ready with one
shout to inflict the penalty due thereto. God may advance slowly, but His step is
sure. Delay is no presumption of final impunity.

V. We see lastly, the folly of sin. Achan " wrought foUy in Israel " (ver. 15).
The word means stupidity — as Abigail uncomphmentanly remarked of her husband,
" Nabal is his name and foUy is with him." Sin is certain of detection. Known
to the Almighty, He often brings it into the light of day here, and will surely
manifest it hereafter. Sin imperils real, enduring bliss for the sake of transitory
gratifications. A little pleasure, and severest pain ; for brief fame, lasting infamy;
for temporary wealth, eternal loss. — A.



EXPOSITION.



CHAPTEB Vn. 16—26.



The disgoveby of Achan's sin. — Ver.
16. — The family of Judali. The expression
npDK'D is remarkable. Many commentators
would read nn^K'P, not without some MSS.
authority, Keil objects that the Chaldee and
Syriac have the singular. But the LXX. has
Kcird Sriiiovt, and the Vulgate JMa;to/amiJia».
On the whole it seems more probable that ai
nns^P occurs twice in this passage, it has
been bo pointed where the same letters occur
for the third time, than that, with Foole, it
means tribe (so also Gesenius and Winer) ;
or that, as others snggesi, it is used for
omnes or tingulas gentes. Bee, however,
Judg. xiii. 2, where it is unquestionably
used in the sense of tribe.

Ver. 19. — My son. This is no mere hypo-
critical affectation of tenderness. Joshua
feels for the criminal, even though he is
forced to put him to death. So in our own
day the spectacle is not uncommon of a
judge melted to tears as he passes sentence
of death on the murderer. The expression
acems almost to imply a belief that, though
Achan must undergo the extremest penalty
of the law in this world, Joshua entertained
a hope that he might be forgiven in the
next. It certainly proves that, stem as the
law of Moses was, it was felt, at least in those
early days, to be rather against the sin than
the sinner that its severity was directed.
In commenting upon the severity of the
Mosaic covenant, whether towards offenders
against its provisions or against the Ca-
naanites, we must remember Bishop Butler's
caution, that in thU world we see but a



very small portion of the whole oountel of
God. Give glory to the Lord God of
Israel, and make confession unto Htm.
Literaily, offer (or impute) glory to the Lord
God of Itrael, and give confession (or praise)
unto Him (of. John ix. 24). The meauiog
is to give honour to God as the aU-secing
God, the revealer of secrets, by an open con-
fession before men of what is already known
to Him. It may have been a common
formula of adjuration, though Masius thinks
otherwise.

Ver. 21.— A goodly Batylonlsh garment.
Literally, " a mantle of Shinar, one goodly
one." Babylon was in the " land of Sliinar "
(see Gen. xi. 2 ; xiv. 1 ; Isa. xi. 11 ; Zech.
v. 11). The npiK derived from ms great.
glorious, was an ample cloak, sometimes of
hair or fur (Gen. xxv. 25 ; cf . 1 Kings xix.
13, 19 J 2 Kings ii. 13, 14 ; Jonah iii. 6, &c.).
The Babylonish mantle was famed for its
beauty (jroociXj;, LXX.), and was, no doubt,
worked artistically with figures of men and
animals. " Of all Asiatic nations, the Baby-
lonians were the most noted for the weaving
of cloth of divers colours. Into these stuffs
gold threads were introduced into the woof
of many hues. Amongst those who traded
in ' blue«lothes and embroidered work ' with
Tyre were the merchants of Asshur, or
Assyria ; and that the garments of Babylon
were brought into Syria and greatly esteemed
at a very early period, we learn from their
being classed amongst the most precious
articles of spoil, even with gold, in the time
of Joshua" (Layard, 'Nineveh,' II. 413).
From this, among other passages, we may
infer the early date of the Book of Joshua. It



1S6



TJtE BOOK OF JOSHUA.



[oh. vn. 18—26,



tnarka an early stage of civilisation when
kn embioidered garment can be considered
as in any degree equivalent to gold. The
Israelites, it must be remembered, were not
onaccustomed in Kgypt to the highest
degree of civilisation then known. " Nam
Fersamm, finitimarumque gentium luxum
eo Be osteutare Bolere vel ex eo constat quod
captisab Alexandre Magno Susis Ulicinveuta
fuerit 10 miUia pondo, sive talenta purpura
Hermionicse, teste Plutaroho in Alexandre "
(Corn. aLapide). A wedge of gold. Literally,
" a tongue of gold." Some derive our word
ingot from the French lingot, or little
tongue. But others derive it with greater
probability from the Dutch ingieten, the
same as the German eingiessen, to pour in.
" Si ergo invenias apud philosophos perversa
dogmata luculenti sermonis assertionibus
decorata, ista est lingua aurea. Sed vide,
ne te decipiat fulgor operis, ne te rapiat ser-
monis aurei pulchritudo : memento, quia
Jesus anathema jussit esse omni aurum
quod in Jericho fuerit inventum. Si poetam
legeris modulatis versibus et prsefulgido
carmine Decs Deasque texentem, ne delec-
teris eloquentisB suavitate. Lingua aurea
ett : si earn sustuleritis, et posueris in taber-
naoulo tuo: polluia omnem ecclesiam Do-
mini " (Orig., Hom. 7 on Joshua).

Ver. 23. — Laid them out before the Lord.
This shows the directly religious nature of
the proceeding. God had directed the lot,
the ofiender was discovered, and now the
devoted things are solemnly laid out one by
one (for so the Hebrew seems to imply,
though in 2 Sam. xv. 24 it has the sense of
planting firmly, as molten matter hardens
and becomes fixed) before Him whose they
are, as a confession of sin, and also as an
kct of restitution.
Ver. 24.— Took Achan, the eon of Zerah.



Great-grandson in reality (see ver. 1 ; of.
1 Eings zv. 2, 10). And his sons and hla
daughters (see note, ver. IS). Brought
them. Hebrew, " brought them up." The
vaUey of Aehor was above Jericho, whether
higher up the valley or on higher ground is
not known. The valley of Achor (see ch.
XV. 7 ; Isa. Ixv. 10 ; Hos. ii. 15). AcJwr
means trouble (see note on ch. vi. 18).

Ver. 25.— Stoned Mm with stones. The
word here is not the same as in the last part
of the verse. It has been suggested that the
former word signifies to stone a living per-
son, the second to heap up stones upon a
dead one ; and this derives confirmation
from the fact that the former word has the
signification of piling up, while the latter
rather gives the idea of the weight of the
pile. Some have gathered from the use of
the singular here, that Achan only was
stoned ; but the use of the plural immediately
afterwards implies the contrary, unless, with
Knobel, we have recourse to the suggestion
that " them " is a "mistake of the Deuter-
onomist " for " him." It is of course
possible that his family were only taken
there to witness the solemn judgment upon
their father. But the use of the singular
and plmal in Hebrew is frequently very in-
definite (see Judg. xi. 17, 19; Psa. Ixvi. 6.
See note above, on ch. vi. 25).

Ver. 26. — And the Lord turned from the
beat of His anger. There is no contradic-
tion between this and such passages as
1 Sam. XV. 29 ; James i 17. It is not God,
but we who turn. Our confession and
restitution, by uniting our will with His, of
necessity turn His wrath away. Tet of
course it is through^ Jesus Christ alone that
such confession and restitution is possible,
and they are accepted simply because by
faith they are united with His.



HOMILETIOS.

Vera. 16 — 26. — The detection. Objections have been raised to the morality of
tn9 whole narrative. We will deal fixst f Itb this Bubjeot, and then turn to the
religious and moral questions involved.

I. Why did God not eevbal the OFFBNDiB when He revealed the offence ?
The answer is, that He might still farther display the hardness of Aohan's heart.
He did not at once come forward and confess his crime. He not only had offended
against God's laws, but he persisted in his offence. His was not a tender con-
Boience, sensitive to the least reproach. He saw what disaster he had brought
upon Israel, yet he clung to his ul-gotten gains as long as he could. He was not
driven, either by remorse for the injury he had done his brethren, or by the clear
evidence that God had found him out, to confession and restitution. He concealed
his guilt till concealment was no longer possible, and thus added as much as he
could to his guilt. So do men in these days hug their sins to their bosom as long
as they are not found out. They cry, " Tush, God hath forgotten. He hideth His
feoe and He will nevtr see it;" thus adding all posslMe aggravation to their gailt.



OH. Tu. 16—26.] THE BOOK OP JOSHUA. 127

II. The justice oi' Joshua is worthy of remark. Even Achan's confession was
not regarded as final. The wedge of gold, the garment, and the silver were brought
and solemnly laid out before God and the congregation as proof of his guilt. Not
tiU then was judgment pronounced. We have here a warning against hasty and
uncharitable judgments. No man can justly be visited with censure or punishment
until his guUt be fully proved.

III. We should next observe the nature of Achan's sin. 1. It was tacri-
lege, the most presumptuous of all sins. The tendency of modem thought is
to ignore such sins. To steal what is devoted to God's service is not worse than to
steal anything else. To break an oath is not worse than to break one's word. Do
not such reasonings ignore the personality of God ? And do not religious people
very often unthinkingly surrender a fundamental article of their faith when they
yield to such reasoning ? If ttere be indeed a God — if He be nothing but the em-
bodiment of the principle of humanity, as we are now taught, does it not add the
most awful of all insolence to the sin in itself when we rob Him, or he to Him? All
sins are, it is true, a denial of His being ; but that .denial assumes a more naked and
a bolder form when the offence is directed against Him. For then all disguises
of self-interest are swept away, and the offender says dehberately in his heart,
" There is no God." Let us take heed, therefore, how we " rob God," whether "in
tithes and offerings," or in any other way. 2. The sacrilege was committed just
when sacrilege was most inexcusable. The hand of God had been clearly visible in
the capture of Jericho. The dedication of the spoil to Him was an acknowledg-
ment of His awful power. Not long before God had dried up the waters of Jordan
before His people. They had but just renewed their covenant with Him by a
general circumcision of the people, and had sanctified that renewal by partaking of
the passover. And God foreknew that Achan would persist in his sin, in dis-
believing in the Almighty power of God untU his offeiwe was brought home beyond
the possibiHty of mistake to his own door.

The lessons we learn from this event are four.

I. The awbulness of the sentence against sin. " The soul that sinneth it
shall die." " The wages of sin is death." All unrepented sin is leading us up to
this end. Achan is the type of impenitent sinners. He persists in his sin tiU the
great moment of imveiling comes, as sinners persist in their sin until they are
brought to the bar of God's judgment. Then is it too late to cry for mercy, when
It is the time of judgment. We must learn to confess and forsake our sin in
time.

II. The obetaintt op detection. The heavens did not shake, nor the earth
tremble, when Achan committed his sin. No hghtning descended from above upon
his head. No sign appeared in the earth or sky to betray him. The sun rose and
set as usuaL Nothing disturbed the ordinary routine of the camp until the reverse
at Ai. Yet God saw all and meant to bring it to light in His own good time.
Achan fancied himself undiscovered, but he was mistaken. And so are they
mistaken who fancy that God does not see their secret sins. They may go on for
years imdiscovered, but God knows all, and can, and often does, in the most un-
expected way bring all to light. If not before, yet on that day when the secrets of
aU hearts shall be revealed, shall the sin which the sinner has hugged so closely to
his bosom be displayed in its native hideousness before God, angels, and men.

III. The necessity op confession and restitution. Kepentance which does
not involve these is no repentance at all. To repent of sin is to forsake it ; but
forsaking sin is impossible without confession and restitution. Confession, that is,
to the person whom we have offended. If we have sinned against God, we
must confess ovii sin to Him. If we have done wrong to man, we must acknow-
ledge the wrong we have done to him who has suffered by it. Bestitution, again,
is a sore trial to the offender ; he would fain persuade himself that it is unnecessary.
But unless we restore our ill-gotten gains we are persisting iu the very sin w«
profess to have renounced. We cannot really hate and desire to break off any
sinful habits, while we retain as our own that which those sinful habits have gained
for no. Aohau was compelled (1) to acknowledge the sin he had committed, and (3)



1S8 THE BOOK OP JOSHUA- [oa. Tn. Ift-Ml



to acquiesce in the restoration of what he had stolen. And those who,_m our days,
hope that they may be held blameless because they confess to God, which means to
themselves, sms the shame of which they ought to endure, and the profit of which
they are bound to restore, will certainly undergo the punishment which Aohan,
even when confessing and restoring, did not escape. The duty of confession to the
person offended is incumbent on those who have slandered, or insulted, or wounded
the feelings of another. That of restitution is due from those who have
vn:onged God or man, either by withholding from the former what was due to Him,
or by taking undue advantage of the ignorance or necessity of the latter. Those
who defraud the widow and the fatherless, or " oppress the hireling in his wages,"
or drive a corrupt or tmjust bargain, who use "the bag of deceitful weights," must
either disgorge their iQ-gotten gains, or suffer the vengeance of a just God. So the
Scriptures tell us throughout.

IV. The geavity of sin depends on its omcnMSTANCES. The taking of a piece
of gold or silver and a garment is not in itself an offence that deserves death, nor
was it ever so regarded under the law. What constituted the gravity of Achan's
offence we have already seen. We may gather hence that in estimating sin, the
position of the offender, his opportunities of enlightenment, the nature and strength
of the temptation, his means of resisting it, must be taken into account A sin is
infinitely worse when committed by a man who has made a high profession of
rehgion, and must have known the gravity of the offence when committing it A
sin is infinitely worse when an utter indifference to the existence of God or His
justice is ostentatiously shown. It may possibly be that one weak in faith and holy
resolution, and exposed to overwhelming temptation, may plead the intensity of the
temptation, as well as his own ignorance and inexperience, as some palliation of
his error. " The publicans and the harlots go into the kingdom of God before you,''
said our Lord to the scribes and Pharisees. And so the siu-stained multitudes in
our large cities may be nearer to God than many decent professors of religion who
combine with their comfort and decency the col<lest and most cynical selfishness.



HOMILIES BY VARIOUS AUTHORS.

Yer. 19. — Sin eonfesaed. A notable scene. The people of Israel assembled in
solenm conclave. In silent excitement the national offender has been detected, and
waits to hear his doom from the hps of the great commander. Whilst every eye is
bent upon Achan, Joshua addresses him in the language of the text. Note how guilty
Joshua speaks, grieving over the offence rather fiian severely censuring it, calling
the criminal " my son," and inviting a full disclosure from his own hps. Out of
his own mouth was Achan to be oondenmed. Yet not with delight did Joshua
await the confession. His fatherly heart was sorely pained at such a revelation of
iniquity in his erring child.

I. Confession is due to the honour op God. All sin is committed against
God, inflicts a wrong upon His Divine Majesty. To acknowledge this is the least
reparation the sinner can make, is a sign of a right disposition, indicates that the
basis of God's government remains firm within the sinner's bosom, though trans-
gression had clouded it for a time. Confession magnifies the broken law and
makes it honourable. Its omission from the Pharisee's prayer was a fatal defect ;
whilst the pubUcan went down "justified" because of his proper attitude with
reference to a holy God, The penitence of the thief upon the cross was evinced by
his utterance, " We indeed justly, for we receive the due reward of our deeds." To
confess is, in truth, to " give gloiy unto God," and hence is required, though not
for His information, yet as essential to His character and law.

II. Confession relieves the bukdenbd breast. One of the clearest proofs
that man was designed for companionship is to be seen in the tendency of any
sti ong emotion to create an eager desire to communicate the same feeling unto
others. In our joys we long for the congratulations of our friends, and wo seek
their sympathy in om* sorrows. And though the consciousness of sin is naturally



OH. vn. Ift-ae.] THE BOOK OF JOSHUA. ISt

Bocompanisd at first by an endeavour to screen it from the gaze of our fellows, yet
very soon the desire for secrecy is overcome by the more potent wish to speak ol
the deed which lies so heavily upon the conscience. Otherwise, as with the
Spartan boy who, in hiding a fox under his tunic, allowed it to devour his very
entrails, we shall discover that our concealment of sin can only end in the destruc-
tion of our being. And if it be thus helpful to discbarge our woes and our folhea
into the ear of a fellow- creature, how much greater must be our satisfaction when
we have poured our tale into the audience of oui' heavenly Father. Men may
view us with loathing, and shrink from future contact with us ; they may fail even
to make allowance for the strength of the temptation and the difficulties under
which we laboured ; but our Father is acciuainted with all the circumstances, loves
UB as His children, and, whilst pained at our backsHding, is glad to witness our
contrition. In Achan's confession there are several features worthy of imitation.

1. It was a full confession. There was no more dissembling, but an open
declaration of all he had done. No attempt to extenuate his guilt ; he laid it bare
in all its enormity. The antithesis to confession is covering our sins, which may
take place in various ways. We may try to justify them as necessary or excusable,
BB Saul did when he spared Agag. We may show that the matter was compara-
tively trifling and unimportant, as when we give names that soften vices and lessen
our apprehension of them. Or we may charge other persons or things with the
responsibiUty, shifting the blame from ourselves, pleading the requirements of
business, the rules of society, the expeotationB of our friends, and the Bohcitations
received, as when Adam replied, " The woman thou gavest, she gave me of the
tree."

2. It acJcnowledged that the chief injwry had been committed agavnet God. " I
have sinned against the Lord God of Israel." He had displayed a spirit of in-
gratitude and disobedience, and though he had brought evil upon the nation, and
deserved their reprobation, he knew that it was the Almighty whom his conduct
had especially wronged. So David cried, "Against thee, thee only have I sinned."
JesusChrist joined together the two branches of the moral law ; but there are many
who seem to think that if they fulfil their duty to their neighbom', their duty to God
matters not. They say, " I have never done harm to any, have always paid my
debts, been truthful and honest, charitable and upright ; what sin, then, have I
been guilty of ? " We might in answer deny the accuracy of their statements, since
due regard to others can hardly be observed apart from regard to God ; but it is
better, perhaps, to insist upon the obUgation resting upon every man to " love the
Lord with all his might," and to point out the numerous instances in which the
worship and ordinances of God have been uncarod for at the same time that selfish
pleasures have been indulged in to the fuU. AVlien the prodigal comes to himself,
he does not merely resolve to reform, and that in future he will not join in the
rioting of the world, but wUl Uve soberly before men ; his one thought is to return
to his Father and to confess, " Father, I have sinned against heaven and before
thee."

8. It was a confession to the people, since they had suffered through his mis-
conduct. Achan's avowal was made in tlie face of Israel, and was followed by
punishment according to the law. " Confess your faults one to another."

Conclusion. The day approaches when " God shall bring every work into judg-
ment, with every secret thing, whether it be good or whether it be evU." — A.

Ver. 21. — A sin of greed. Here we have much profitable study. Some sins are
peculiar to certain ages or countries. But greed is foimd in all lands and times. It
specially thrives in periods of wealth and of prosperity. It creeps in where faults
of ugUer aspect are denied admission. It flourishes wherever the power of
religion has_ decayed while its profession continues. Here is an instance of its
action in all its meanness, disclosore, misohief, and retribution. Consider it.

I. Mark Achan's fault. There was this feature peculiar in the oaptnre of
Jericho— that man had no hand m it It was God's work thioughout. No risk,
no loss wag entailed on Israel. The earthquake of God— if such was the mode of

JOSHUA, -



180 TSS BOQE OF JOSSUA^ [oh. Tn. 1ft— 2A,

its destruction — threw the walls down flat. The capture, God's work ; the spoU
was, in a special sense, God's spoU. The first-fruits of their booty ; He required the
entire consecration of all the gold and silver to His service. In all their subsequent
operations of war the spoil they take will be their own. In this God claims alL
In such a prescription latere was nothing that was unreasonable, but much that was
divinely wise. Israel as a whole obeyed the Divine command, doubtless helped
thereto by the solemnity which the presence and miracles of God imparted to their
task. The destruction — ^righteously ordained — ^was carried out as God ordered.
The whole of the wealth that was indestructible was reserved for God. But Achan
is tempted. He suddenly lights on one hundred ounces of silver and twenty-five
ounces of gold — a large sum in those days — probably more in purchasing power
than a thousand pounds to-day. To see is to covet intensely, and to find a score ot
reasons rising within him for disobedience. " To take it hurts no one." " Nobody
need know anything about it." " The sanctuary is quite rich enough." " There
will be plenty left untouched by his more scrupiious neighbours." " It will stock
a farm and bmld a house." So the vivid imagination of greed discovers a multitude
of reasons for taking the spoil. And, somehow, the suddenness of the opportunity
and the impulse stuns all his better nature and makes it speechless. There is no
voice to remind him that he will despise himself, or that he imperils his nation. It
is nothing to him that within an hour, and just at hand, God's omnipotence had
been working a miracle. Under the very shadow of the Almighty he dares to sin.
And every thought but that of his material advantage banished from his mind, he
takes the forbidden treasure, and, concealing it in his clothes, hurries with it to his
tent, and, with or without the connivance of his family — ^more probably the former-
buries it in the earth. It is these sudden temptations that test a man. A good
habit is the only protection from a had impulse. Had he been habitually honour-
able, he would not so have sinned. But he was one of those who hke to be deemed
smart and clever, and who often imagine that self-preservation is " the fulfilling of
all law." Did he enjoy his loot that night ? Probably with some faintest mis-
giving he enjoyed it greatly, and his wife and family and himself made out a most
plausible case of self-justification, and built pleasant castles in the air out }f their
treasures. But —

II. Mark how Aohan's sin finds him out. No sin is ever entirely concealed.
Every virtue puts its seal upon the brow, and every fault its mark. When conceal-
ment is perfect, the man is still embarrassed — pre-occupied. His taste, and with his
taste his look, degenerates. Something of restlessness makes at least his spirit a
" fugitive and a vagabond in the earth." His eye is on fence, and he alternates
between a glance which, in its curiosity to know whether you suspect him, glares on
you, and the averted look which shuns your eye altogether. So every fault, how-
ever secret, gives some tokens of something being wrong — so much so, that the
special form of wrong can often be detected in the mere look. And in addition,
how strikingly is it the case that often just one precaution has been left untaken
that brings the truth to light. God is Kghi, and is always illuminating by His
providence our hidden deeds of darkness ; sometimes by methods more, and some-
times by methods less miraculous, God does this. In this instance how swift,
terrible, and certain is the discovery I The nnexpected, needless failure of the
attack on Ai, where success was easy, suggests something wrong. In answer to
Joshua's prayer, God's oracle reveals it. The culprit is not named, but, using the
lot probably, the tribe to which he belongs, then his division of the tribe, then his
family, then himself, are successively indicated; and he who but a day or two
before felt so secure in the absolute secrecy of his crime, stands revealed to all the
people in all the meanness of his greed I Tour sin and my sin wiU find us out.
It is better for us to find it out, to own and end it. Plume not yourself on craft
or subtlety. For God's light wjll disclose whatever God's eye discerns. If you do
not wish a wrong thing to be known, k««p it undone. All sin finds ont the doei
of it.

III. Mark thk bebults of his wsons. How different from what they dreamedl
There was no comfort ; no farm, no eastle ever came of it — only ahiune, disappoint



CH. TIL 16—26.] THE BOOK OF JOSHUA. 181

ment, death. Mark specifically its mischiefs. 1. Israel was damaged. In the two
attacks on Ai rendered necessary by this sin, many lives were lost needlessly. The
heart of the people was discouraged, and the success of their enterprise imperilled.
2. Then there ia the probable cormption of the man's family, the digging and
biding beiag hardly possible without lieir knowledge. It is an awful penalty of »
parent's sin that it tends so directly and strongly to corrupt the children. Let us
gee that those whom God has given ns be not harmed by what they see in us.
8. It involves all his family in the penalty of death. The law of Moses was expUcit
that the child should not be put to death for the father's sin. But here — whether
because the family had been partakers of his crime, or because that crime was one
of terrible presumptuousness — the family share his fate. Whatever the reason, it
remiads us of the foct that God "visits the iniquity of the fathers upon the children
to the third and fourth generation of those that hate him, and shows mercy nnto
thousands [of generations] of them that love him and keep his commandments."
Here the parent's fault involves the family in ruin. Such is too often the case.
Let ns guard against the possibUily of it. 4. It costs him his own life : he is
stoned to death. Late repentance perhaps letting bim make a fairer start in the
other world, but not availing to prolong his existence here. How dearly he paid
for his silver and his gold I How commonly men do this ; how mnoh they part
with to get what sometimes only hurts them when they gain it I Let not greed be
our ruin. Be generous in self-protection, if from no higher motive. Only goodness
is wisdom, and they consult worst for their own advantage that seek to further it
with craft or with impiety. — G.

Yer. 26. — Sin punished. I, A tebbible punishment. Achan ia stoned to death,
and his goods are then burnt with fire. He lost not only that which he had stolen,
but even his own property, and above aU his life. Such is the sinner's mis-
reckoning 1

1. The Icmt of God have their ecmctiont annexed. Sin is followed by its pecu-
liar immediate efiects, which are a punishment in themselves, and there are besides
the retribution awards of the Legislator. Aohan must have felt a gnawing and a
fire within him as soon as the enl deed was done ; but this was only preliminary
to the pain of detection and subsequent penalty of stoning. It is not well with the
wicked even in this world, and we cannot forget the hints of tiie Bible respecting
■tripes to be inflicted in the world to come.

2. Thia nwrrative ia intended to impreaa ua with a deep sense of the evil of ain.
God speaks to us solemnly respecting the deserts of sin. So swift a retribution
could not but act as a warning to the IsraeUtes, and the record of it may serve the
same purpose with respect to ourselves. If Jehovah seemed stem for a season, He
dealt in real kindness with the people, for surely it was expedient for one family
to die, rather than that the whole nation should be disobe^ent and suffer extinc-
tion.

8. Seldom doea the avnmer suffer alone. Achan's family lost their lives also.
Perhaps they had connived at his theft. " By one man sin entered into the world,
and death by sin, and so death passed upon aU men." If we are reckless of our
own interests, let us not cruelly blight the prospects of others.

II. The side of the Divine chabaoteb here revealed. He is shown to be
a jealous God, hating sin, and taking vengeance upon those who disregard His
precepts. |' The fierceness of God's anger " may not be such a pleasant object of
contemplation as the exceeding riches of the love of God, but it is good for us to
think of it in connection with evil, and is part of our notion of a perfect character.
The meek and lowly Jesus could kindle into holy indignation at the sight of the
hypocrisy and oppression of the scribes and Pharisees, and a cloud of brightness
that has no element of fire is not the representation given in Scripture of the
appearance of God. Daniel saw " a fiery stream, which issued and came forth
from bsfore" the Ancient of days.

IIL Tmi coMFOBTiNa aspects op our theme. 1. We are not informed of
Aeh«mt final destvny, and this thought may alleviate the difficulty which boom



m



THE BOOK OP JOSHUA.



[am. TUL 1 — M.



mindB feel. Tempted as we are to disbelieve the genuiuenen of foroed eonfeaaiona
ftnd late repentance, it may be that Aohan was sincere, and God chastised the
flesh that the spirit might be saved. Etis death was necessary for example's sake,
and the burning of the bodies and the heaping them with stones all indicated the
horrid nature of sin which, like » leprosy, firets inward till all be consumed. But
the offender himself may have been saved " so as by fire ; " and eternal life was

Sorobased at the expense of temporal death. God grant, however, that we may
ve the life, and so die the death, of the righteous.

2. The gospel offers of mercy stand out in striking contrast to the severity of the
ancient dispensation. " If we confess onr sins, he is faithful and just to forgive ui
oar uiu, and to cleanse us from all unrighteousness." — A.



EXPOSITION.



CHAPTBB Vra. 1—29.



Tbi oaptubb o* Ai. — Yer. 1. — Fear not
Joahoa was downcast at bis tormei failure,
and well he might. "Treacherous Israel-
ites are to be dreifuled more than malicious
Oanaanites" (Matthew Henry). Take all
tbe people of war wltb thee. Not, as has
been before stated, because 8,000 men were
too few to take the city, for the capture of
Jericho was a far greater marvel than that
of Ai with this number of men. The true
reason is indicated by Calvin, and is indeed
suggested by the words " fear not, neither
be thou dismayed." It was to reassure the
people, whose hearts had " melted and be-
come as water." Sometimes God calls upon
His people for a display of faith, as when
He led them through the Jordan, or com-
manded them to compass Jericho seven days.
But in days of despondency He compassion-
ates their weakness and permits them to
rely upon viBible means of support (see
also below, ver. 3). Matthew Henry thinks
that a tacit rebuke is here administered to
Joshua for sending so few men to Ai on the
former occasion. He ought to have per-
mitted all to have sliared the toil and glory.
I bave given tato thy hand. The work, let
man do his best, is God's after aU. The
king:. For the politioal condition of Pales-
tine before the Israelitish invasion see In-
troduction. And his land. As in the case
of the early Germanic peoples, there was a
certain portion of their land in the neigbour-
hood attached to each oii^ which was used
for agricultural purposes (see Introduction ;
also ch. xiu. 28, xiv. 4).

Ver. 2. — Only the spoil thereof AI was
not solemnly devoted, like Jericho, though
(see Deut. ix. 16, 17) the Canaanitish
people were. Behind it. Joshua was ad-
vancing from the south-east. The ambush
(SIK literally, " a lier in wait," here a band
»t Hers in wait, the word itself originally
Uffpitjin^ U> plait, weave, hwce to design)



was therefore (vw. M) on the opporite, or
west side of the city. The question wluoh
has been raised whether Ood could rightly
command a stratagem seems scarcely to re-
quire discussion.

Ver. 8.— Thirty thousand. In ver. 13
we read 6,000, and this must be the true
reading. Thirty thousand men could hardly
have been posted, without detection, in the
ravines around Ai, whereas we are informed
by travellers that there would have been no
difficulty UI concealing 6,000 men there.
Bee, however, the passage cited from Lieut.
Conder's Beport in the note on chap. vii. 2.
The contused condition of the numbers in
the present text of the Old Testament is a
well-known fact, and it is proved by the
great discrepancies in this respect between
the Books of Chronicles and those of
Samuel and Kings. Some have thought
{e^g^^ Hiivernick, ' Introduction to the Old
Testament,' II. i. 16) that two bands were
laid in ambush, one on the north-west and
the other on the south-west. This is a pos-
sible, though not probable, solution of tbe
difficulty (see below). Then we must sup-
pose that the city was nearly surrounded,
Joshua and the main body on the south-
east, the larger detachment on the north
(ver. 13), and* the smaller ambush on
the west (see note on ver. 13). Keil, in
his earlier editions, supposed that Joshua
assaulted Ai with 80,000 men, out of whom
he chose 6,000 as an ambush. So also
Hengsteuberg's *Gescbichte des Beiches
Gottes,' p. 219. But this only introduces
a third contradiction, for we are told both
in vers. 1 and 3 that Joshua took with him
" all the men of war." Keil has, however,
abandoned that supposition, which is con-
trary to all the ancient versions, including
the present text of the LXX. The Bishop
of Lincoln suggests that 6,000 men may
have been detached to reinforce the former
detachment of 30,000. But to say nothing
of the improbability ol an ambush of



ca. vin. 1—89.]



THE BOOK OP JOSHUA,



IM



35,000 men remaining nndeteoted (and
they were specially instructed — see next
verse — not to station themselves far from
the city), we have the plain statement in
ver. UnnilN OiytH Db»J "he stationed (or
had ttatioiied) them as an ambush."

Ver. 6.— We wUl flee hefore them. A
common expedient of a sagacious general
when contending with undisciplined troops
is a strong position. Many instances will
occur to the student of history, and among
others the celebrated feigned flight of
William the Oonqueror at Hastings. St.
Augustine doubts whether this stratagem
were lawful. Cajetan and the Jesuit oom-
mentatora reply that it wag so " quia men-
dacium non tam facile oommittitur factis,
quam verbis " (Cornelius A, Lapide).

Ver. 6.— For they wlU come. Literally,
"and they will come." We have drawn.
Literally, eamtd to pluck away (see note
on ch. iv. 18). Luther translates well by
reissen, and the LSX. by dTroairdffujfiev,

Ver. 8. — According to the conuuand-
uent of the Lord. The LXX. seems to have
read nj[l "IJ'IJ according to this word.

Ver. 9. — Between Bethel and Al (see
above, oh. vii. 3).

Ver. 10. — And numbered the people.
Or reviewed, or mustered. The word is
frequently translated viaited in Scripture.
It then came to mean a visit for the sake of
inspection. The elders of Israel. Joshua's
council, alike of war and of peace. Before
the people. Literally, in their sight (rard
wpSaaivov, LXX.), i.e., at their head.

Ver. 11.— And all the people, even the
people of war that were with Mm Liter-
ally, all the people, the war that were
with Mm, Probably the word t^a has
been omitted by an early copyist, imply-
ing, no doubt, that the non-warlike portion
of the community had been left under a
guard at Jericho (see also ver. 1). On the
north side. Joshua made a detour, and en-
camped on a hill on the other side of the
wady. Now there was a valley. Literally,
and the valley was. This valley, the Wady
Mutyah (see Bobinson II. see. 10, and note
on ver. 2, oh. vii.), is a remarkable feature
of the country round AL Our version missei
this sign of personal acquaintance with the
locality on the part of the historian.

Ver. 12.— And he took about five tbon-
■and men (see above, ver. 3). We must
translate had taken. The repetition is
quite in the manner of the Hebrew writers.
This passage is of course, according to the
Jehovist and Elohist theory, " quite irrecon-
cilable " with the rest of the narrative. So
we are told that this is a Jehovistio interpo-
Waa (Euobel). Of the dtj. The Maso-



riteg and LXX. prefer the reading Ai {i.e^
*K for TV), in the margin of our Bibles, to
that in the text, which is followed by the
Vulgate and Luther.

Ver. 13.— And when they had get. This
may mean the leaders of the detachment of
30,000. Joshua does not appear to have
been with them, for he is not mentioned till
the latter part of the verse (see note on
ver. 3). Joshua went that night. Having
made all his dispositions, he descended in
the evening from his vantage-ground on the
hill into the plain, so as to invite attack in
the morning, a stratagem which (see next
verse) was completely successful, Some
MSS., however, have tjjl "and he rested,"
for T)J?J " and he went," here. The valley:
The word here is pD^ not "<} as in ver. IL
Therefore the narrow waterless ravine in
which the troops in ambush were to lie hid
is not meant here, but a wider valley. A con-
sideration of this fact might do something
to settle the much-disputed question of the
situation of Ai. The pD^ though deep, a«
the name implies, was a valley large enough
for cultivation or luxuriant vegetation (Job
xxxix. 10 ; Fsa. Ixv. 14 ; Cant. ii. 1). Sven a
battle might be fought there (Job xxxix. 21).
Such a valley as that of Chamonix or Lauter-
briinnen would answer to the description,
and so would the passes of Glencoe and
E^illiecranMe.

Ver. 14.— When the king of Al saw It
The particle p here employed signifies imme-
diate action. At a time appointed. Or, at
the signal. Keil, following Luther, would
prefer at the place appointed, which geemg
to a^pree best with what follows. Some
copies of the LXX. have In- eiOtUtf. Before
the plain. Literally, before, or in tight of;
i.e., in the direction of the ArabaJt (see
above, ch. iii. 16).

Ver. IS.— Made as though they were
beaten. "Joshua conquered by yielding.
So our Lord Jesus Christ, when Be bpwed
His head and gave up the ghost, seemed at
if death had triumphed over Him ; but in
His resurrection He raUied again, and gave
the powers of darkness a total defeat "
(Matthew Heniy). By the way of the wilder-
ness. North-westward, in the direction of
the wilderness of Bethel (ch. xvL 1)

Ver. le.'— Were called together. So the
Masorites. Perhaps it would bebetterto trans-
late, raised a cry (' ' at illi vooiferantes. " Vul-
gate. "DaschriedagganzeVolk." Luther).
This gives us the scene in all its picturesque
detail. We hear the exultant shont of the
men of Ai, as they thought the vioto^ won.
The LXX. appear to have read p^t) lot PSl
for they translate tvurxuvt. The «ltj. The



IM



tut BOOK OF JOSStJA.



[oB. tm. 1—8



Masorites correct here again into "Al."
Bnt the LXX. and Vulgate render m the
English translation.

Ver. 17. — Or Bethel These words are
not in the T.yx., and they may possibly have
heen a marguial gloss, for the intervention
of the people of Bethel in this battle is very
nuintelligible. See note on eh. vii. 2. On
the other hand, it is quite possible that the
difficulty involved in their retention may
have caused their omission from the LXX.,
and it may perhaps be thought possible that,
on the capture of Ai, the BetheUtes returned
■mth all speed to their city, and that Joshua
postponed its capture in consequence of the
formidable confederacy (ch. ix. 1, 2), which
his snocess had called into existence, or,
perhaps, by a desire to signalise at once the
victory at Ai by the ceremony (vers. 30 — 35)
at Gerizim. We read in ch. xii. 16 that
Bethel was taken. In Judg. i. 22 we read
that it was not (see note on ch. xii. 16).

Ver. 18. — ^The spear. ITTD, a kind of long
and slender lance, probably, like those of our
lancers, with a flag attached. It is thus de-
scribed by Eimchi. Jahn, in his ' Archteo-
logia Biblica,' takes this view (sec. 276). But
the Vulgate here, followed apparently by
Grotius and Masius, suppose it to be a shield,
though the LXX. render by yaiaoq. In 1
Sam. xvii. 6 the LXX. render Dy aairit, and
our version by target. It is to be distin-
guished from the Ughter n^^H or flexible
javelin (see, for instance, 1 Sam. xiii. 22,
xviii. 10, which was thrown at the adversary,
whereas the \VT'^ was used to transfix him
in close combat.

Ver. 20. — And they had no power. Lite-
rally, no hands. Our version here foUowg
the Arabic, Syriao, and Chaldee versions.
The LXX. and Vulgate render no direction
in which to fly. But in this case Dil? would

V T

seem preferable to D^^. The Vulgate trans-
lates the la«t clause of the verse, " FrEeser-
tim cum hi, qui gimulaverint fugam . . .
fortissime restitissent." They could not flee
back to the city, for it was in flames. They
could not advance northward, because the
Israelites had faced about and were coming
to meet them. To flee in any other direc-
tion would be to cut off the last hope of
■aving the oitj. For 1J in the sense of $ide
«r 4i w iW — .howwer.ieeExod. ii. 6; Daat. U.



87, and especially the dual, as here, in Gen.
xxxiv. 21 ; Isa. xxxiii. 21.

Ver. 22. — So tliat they let none of them
remain or escape. Literally, wntil there
remained to them neither remainder nor fugi-
tive.

Ver. 24.— In the wilderness. The LXX.
must have read TJ1D3 in the going down, or
descent. Returned unto Al and smote It.
According to God's command, the defence-
less inhabitants must share the fate of the
army (see Deut. xx. 17).

Ver. 25.— All the men of Al Clearly all
the population, as the context shows.

Ver. 26.— Utterly destroyed. Hebrew,
Dn.ljrj (see note on ch. vi. 17).

Ver. 27. — Only the cattle (see ver. 2).

Ver. 28. — ^And Joshua burnt Al He con-
tinned the work of destruction which the
ambush had begun, until the city was en-
tirely destroyed. The word in ver. 19 (nV)
has rather the sense of kindling a fire ; the
word here (^12'), more the sense of destruc-
tion by fire. A heap for ever. D^WPtJ a
heap of eternity ; i.e., a heap for ever, at
least up to the time of our writer. Bnt the Ai
mentioned in Ezra ii.'28 may have been a
city buUt, not on precisely the same spot, but
near enough to it to take its name. And if
Ai signifies ruins, and Dean Stanley be right
in regarding it as referring to rains in the
days of the Philistines, the name would be
particularly suitable to this particular city.
Travellers have identified the place with
Tel-el.Hajar, immediately to the south of
the Wady Mutyah. But see note on ch. vii.
3 for Bobinson's conclusion, which is con-
firmed by Canon Tristram, from the baUef
that Tel-el-Hajar does not answer to the
description of Ai in the Scripture narrative.
Hanged on a tree. laterally, " on tTie tree."
Perhaps after his death. But see Gen. xl.
22; Deut. xxi. 22. Vntll eventide. We
find here a remarkable coincidence with the
precept in Deut. xxi. 23. The fact that no
notice is here taken of that passage is con-
clusive against its having been inserted with
a view to that precept in later times, and
this affords a strong presumption against
the Elohist and Jehovist theory. Heap.

Here 7j, an expression usually applied to a
heap of stones, a cairn, though not alway*
in precisely this sense (see Jer. ix. 10).



OK. tm. 1— M.] THB BOOK OF JOSHUA. lU



H0MILBTIC8.

Vers. 1 — 29. — Benewed effort after di»a*ter. The Christian warfare, whether
from an individual or from a general point of view, is no record of invariable
Bueoess. The career of each Christian, as of the Christian Church, is a chequered
course. It has its periods of triumph and its moments of disaster. We learn here
many valuable lessons as to our conduct under adverse circumstances.

I. Wb are not to indulge despondency. (1) In consequence of evil allowed
to lm:k within you, you have had a grievous fall. Your duty is plain : to examine
carefully into yourself, with God's help, to detect the hidden evil, and to cast it
out. This done, your next duty is to renew the strife. He who is cast down by
failure so much as to give up all effort, is lost. The only way to inherit the land
of promise is to continue the strife ceaselessly until every one of God's enemies bo
destroyed. To Joshua, a catastrophe Uke that of Ai only occurs once. In the case
of most ordinary Christians it occurs many times. But the same course is necessary,
how many times soever it befalls us. Stone Achan with stones till he die ; then
" Fear not, neither be dismayed :" " Arise, go up to Ai ; see, I have given it into thy
hand." (2) The history of the Church is the same as that of the individuaL Its
conflict is more prolonged, more mysterious, and more complete. Therefore it has
many Achans, its failures like those of Ai are more ntunerous, and its need of such
encouragement as is here given far greater. Whatever the strife may be, its
failures are due to the sins, sometimes unsuspected and undetected, though open,
of the Achans of the flock. Many a generation of Christians has failed in their strife
against evil, because they have not sought enlightenment from God, and so have
called good evil and evil good, have put darkness for light, and light for darkness.
After a failure they have not oast lots for the offender, and often they have given
up the fight. But the fight must never be given up. Whatever is recognised as
not of God must be contended against to the last. If success seems to have deserted
ns, let us look out for our Achan ; try and find out the reasons for our failure.
Somewhere or other, if we are sincere in the search, we shall find the hidden evil
that paralyses our efforts. Our first task must be to cast it out ; our next to renew
the conflict with greater energy and more precautions. No amount of failure ought
to daunt us. If stiU success does not crown our efforts, let us seek for new Achans,
and immolate them to the justice of God. But our duty is still to persevere, still to
arise up against Ai, and never to cease our efforts until it, and the king thereof, and
aU the souls that are therein, are involved in one common ruin.

II. We must GrvE honour where honour is due. Some successes are entirely
God's doing. Man may not claim credit or in any way seek profit by them. Othera
are due to man's individual energy and courage — God, of course, working with him,
and prospering his efforts. For these he may lawfully enjoy the credit, and be
" held in reputation," provided, he is careful' " not to think more highly of himself
than he ought to think, but to think soberly, as God has dealt to every man the
measure of faith." So the spoil of Jericho, which God put into the hands of the
Israelites, was devoted to Him. Achan, in seizing it for himself, was robbing God
of His right. But the spoil of Ai, which God permitted the Israelites to take by
their own exertions, was given into their hands. " God is not unrighteous that he
should forget your works and labours of love." He or she has a right to b«
•' beloved " who has " laboured much in the Lord."

III. Tet man mat not claim undue credit for what he has done. Nothing
can be done without God's help. Our greatest successes are the result of talents
entrusted us by God. "What hast thou that thou hast not received?" asks the
apostle. Therefore " Not unto ns, but unto God's name be the praise." The
greatest saint must therefore preserve the grace of humility. While he joyfully
employs the influence and authority his faith and patience have won for mm in
God's cause, he must never forget who it was that enabled him to do what he baa
done ; that if he has been " working out," sither his " own salvation," or any blessed
works for th« salTation of others, it wai through God who was workLag in hini ,



lg« THE BOOK OF JOSHUA. [oh. thi. 1— M.



Joshua eonld not take Ai, had not Ood given it into his hand. Therefore whateTer
we have done, we are still unprofitable servants. We have done no more than our
duty. " Let US not be high-minded, but fear."

IV. We must assail oue enemies indirectly as well as directlt. Joshua
employs stratagem as well as force against Ai. It is to be feared that Christian
Churohes need no exhortations to this course. Many have been the stratagems and
devices of various religious bodies to gain their' ends, which have brought not
success but disgrace upon the cause. Yet we may remember that it is not therefore
necessary to rush to the opposite extreme, and imagine that nothing but violent
denunciation and open force are the methods to be employed. There is a wisdom
of the serpent which may be lawfully employed in God's cause. The man who is
not won by argument may be won by persuasion. The mind that is repelled by
vigorous denunciation may be open to satire or raillery. We may frequently gain
over antagonists by appearing to yield to them. Sometimes it is even the best way
to remove an abuse by allowing it to have full course, and work out its own evu
results, and then turning round and pointing out its true character. But strata-
gems of the character of pious frauds, stratagems which do violence to the Chris-
tian's character for truth and honesty, dehberate concealment of aims which should
be avowed, compromises with error for the ultimate advantage of truth — these are
predestined to faU. If they gain their immediate object, they will most certainly in
the end be detrimental to God's cause.



HOMILIES BY VAEI0U8 AUTHOES.

Vers. 1, 2. — Go^s people victorious. Frequently does Scripture desciibe th«
Christian Ufe as a warfare. We are to war against the evU in ourselves and around
us. In the management of our forces for the conflict we may derive comfort and
rules of action from the narrative before us. It was not unintentionally recorded.
It shows how God fulfils His word, going forth with His people conquering and to
conquer ; His presence makes the feeble strong, and lends wisdom to the simple.

I. The preparations for the battle.

1. The putting away of known sin ma/y lead us to expect the fa/vowr of God.
Whilst Achan's theft defiled the Israelites there was no hope of vnnning the fight.
The soldiers of the cross must not entangle themselves with the affairs of this hfe
(2 Tim. ii. 4). Those must be clean who are to bear the vessels of the Lord. Sin
purged, the light of God's countenance again shone upon His people, and Hia
encouragement — "Fear not" — soimded in their ears. We need be afraid only
when doing wrong. Without God we are "without hope," helpless and undone;
but when He is our light and salvation whom shall we fear ? Advance to the strife
courageously 1

2. All ov/r strength must he brought to hear upon the contest. So confident had
the Israehtes been that they deemed 8,000 men sufficient to capture the place.
This time no fooUsh security must be displayed ; a second defeat would be disas-
trous, " AU " the people must attack Ai ; that is to say, a fully representative force,
in contrast with the few who previously made the assault. The help of the
Almighty does not release us from the necessity of " bestirring " ourselves (see
2 Sam. v. 24). And what we do we must do with our might. He who is always
reserving his power for some future occasion wiU grow feeble, and when he at length
essays a strenuous effort will discover his weakness. Nor must we underrate the
strength of the enemy. " We wrestle against principaJitiea, powers, rulers, spiritual
wickedness in high places ; " wherefore let us take to ourselves " the whole armour
of God."

8. Prudence an ingredient in the Chnsiian warfare. A detachment was ap-
pointed to lie in ambush. (Several reasons render it probable that yers. 9 and 12 refer
to the same ambuscade, composed of 5,000 men ; the larger number in ver. 8 being
k copyist's error. The same position is assigned in each case ; in tlie account of
th« battle only one party of men ambushed is mentioned; and 80,000 would be to«



ciL tm. 1— i».3 TfiE Boot 0& JOSfitJA. ISd

large a force to remain concealed near the city, even in a valley.) The. lawfulness
of stratagem in war cannot be disputed, nor does the Bible know anything of that
excessive refinement which will hide nothing but requires the blunt truth to be
always stated. See 1 Sam. xvi. 2, where the adoption of a fair pretext to prevent
bloodshed is sanctioned — yea, proposed — by the Lord. There must be no falsehood
or deception practised ; but it is allowable to be " wise as serpents," and to try to
win men to the truth by innocent devices. Christian tactics are permissible without
pleading the goodness of the end as sanctifying the m.eans employed. Our Captain
demands the use of our discretion as well as of our valour.

II. The battle itself.

1. Tempora/ry success blinds the worlcers of evil. Joshua well knew that the
enemy would exultingly exclaim, " They flee before us as at the first," and rush to
their doom. Misplaced assurance is the bane of God's enemies. For a season they
may flourish and swell with hope and pride, but consider their end I " How are
they brought into desolation as in a moment I " What terms can set forth the
delusion of those who fight against God ?

2. Fidelity to commamdment ensures the Christian's triumph. The emphatic
assertion, " See, I have commanded you," reminded the troops of their duty, and
of obedience as essential to success. AU orders were faithfully executed and victory
crowned their arms. If we pretend to greater wisdom than our Captain, or think
fragmentary adherence to precept will suf&ce, the battle may be the Lord's, but it
win not be ours. Constant study of our war manual and a resolute determination
to observe its instructions can alone secure us the victory. Our ears must be
attentive to the notes of the clarion, and whither we are sent we must go. Bom.
xiii. 11 — 13 and Eph. vi. 10 — 18 must be pondered and put into practice.

8. Diversity of position not incompatible with umon. In the occupation by the
two forces of Israel of separate posts an illustration is afforded of a truth sometimes
overlooked. 'I'here are different regiments in the Christian army, and to a soldier
in the ranks it may appear as if there was a want of connection with any other
division. But there is real working unanimity perceptible to the chief, and when
the signal is given the enemy shall be attacked on many sides. The end desired is
one and the same, the extermination of the empire of evil.

4. No reason for discourat/ement if at first the battle goes aga/inst us. It may
be part of the plan that the enemy should be demented by success prior to his over-
throw. However distressed, we may, like David, encourage ourselves in the Lord
our God.

III. The destruction of the enemy.

1. Prophetic of the final overthrow of Satan and his host. Jesus, "the Son of
God, was manifested that he might destroy the works of the devil." " Death, the
last enemy, is being destroyed."

2. Indicative of the Divine hatred of sin. The men and women of Ai were
slain and their city set on fire ; their king hanged, and a heap of stones his
sepulchre. Thus would the Divine wrath extirpate idolatrous abominations. All
His judgments were not purifying, this sentence was penal. What a warning to
the Israehtes I Dull consciences must be aroused by flashes of fire. Granite hearts
must have the inscription cut with toil and pains. Inattentive or forgetful scholars
must have the teaching imprinted on their minds by irresistible examples. The
preceding chapter proves how needful to Israel was the ocular demonstration of the
hatefulness of sin.

Conclusion. " Who is on the Lord's side ? " If this is our position, secure and
bUssfol, diligent and courageous we may be. May we " endure hardness as good
soldiers." But if numbered amongst those hostile to God, what terms can describe
the dread future that awaits us, unless we repent betimes and seek forgiveness, and
receive change of heart and state through Jesus Christ ? — ^A.

Ver. 19. — On trying again. A Jewish proverb says there are three men who
get no pity — an unsecured creditor, a henpecked husband, and a man that doe*
mi try agwin. This faculty of trying again is one of the-qualities of noble natureg.



iM THB BOOK OF JOSHUA. [«. Tin. l-2a

Napoleon at once blamed and praised the English for never knowing trhen they
were beaten. Here Joshua exhibits the same kind of quahty. He gathers from
his defeat humility, puiity, prudence, but never thinks of gathering from it despair.
If they have been defeated before this once, they must try again with purer hands and
in stronger force. And, trying again thus, they succeed grandly. Let me say a
Httle on " trying again." In Qie spiritual as in the carnal warfare — indeed, in aU
parts of our manifold life — ^we need to learn this lesson. I therefore ask you to
consider one or two reasons why we should always try again.

I. Because no FAILUKE is ALTOaBTHER LOSS, AND ESPECIALLY NO FATLUBE OF FIRST

EFFORTS. If you ask why a first effort is so often a failure, you will find one great
reason is, that in it we are trying to learn too many thiags at once. If it is a first
effort to make a toy for a child, how many things are to be learned while making it ; the
qualities of the material with which we work, the use of our tools, an eye for form
and size, the way to combine effectively the various parts. Now, if in the making
of it we had only to learn one thing instead of four, we might manage ; but to learn
simultaneously aU of them is beyond our power, and so we fail. But the failiu'e
does not mean total loss of time and material ; for though we have not learned all
we need in order to effect our object, we may have learned half, and learning the
other half the second trial we then succeed. So here; there were some things
Joshua and Israel had to learn : e.g., not to despise an enemy ; to conquer brave
foes as well as timorous ones ; not to act on the suggestion even of the wisest cap-
tains without first inquiring of God ; that victory without purity was impossible.
Here, elate with their success at Jericho, Joshua does not ask the counsel of God,
which would have forbidden movement till the stain of Achan was removed, and
sends only a " few thousands " to perform a task for which a much stronger force
was requisite. And God mercifully lets him make a failure on a scale easily re-
trieved, and so prevents a failure through similar mistakes, which, from its magni-
tude might have been irretrievable. In almost every case of failure, the great cause
of it is that there were some things the learning of which was essential but had not
been attained. We had not tiie measure of the obstacles to be overcome — a know-
ledge of our own weakness, an acquaintance with the methods by which the result
desired could be alone effected. And the art of hfe consists very much simply in
turning such failures to good account. It is all but impossible to avoid making
them. A child cannot learn to walk without some falls ; and we are but children
of a larger growth, who learn through improving our failures. And the wisest man
is not he who makes fewest failures, but he who turns the failures that he makes
to best account, addresses himself to learn their lessons. A failure is a school-
master, who can teach the art of suoceeding better than any one else can do it. Do not
yield, then, because you fidl once, or even many times. FaiVwres are never entirely
losses. Secondly, observe —

II. Those who usk well tebib failures find them followed bt grand
BUC0E83. Joshua, learning from the first failure to haUow the people, to consult
God, to take His way, to send a larger force, when he tried again took Ai without
the shghtest difficulty. Moses failed on his first attempt to raise Israel against their
oppressors. He was going to do it in the strength of his youthful enthusiasm, and
expected to find they would hail him as a judge and a deliverer. He failed, was
rejected of Israel, and had to become a fugitive from Pharaoh. But in his second
effort, going at God's command, in His way and with His backing, he succeeded
in the grand emancipation. Israel failed in its first attempt to enter the promised
land through their fear and faithlessness ; repairing these faults, their second was
BuccessfoL The disciples failed to cast out the devil from the child ; learning the
need of deeper sympathy (prayer and fasting), their next efforts were crowned with
complete success. Mark broke down in his first missionary effort, leaving Paul and
Silas to pursue it alone. But prayer and gracious shame so retrieved the failure that
he was Paul's truest comrade in the pains and dangers of his last imprisonment. Peter
failed in his first effort to confess his Master among his foes ; but learning lowliness
3Jid |n«yer from failure, be lived to retrieve it grandly. It is so in all departments of
life. Alfred the Great and Bn^oe, for instance, both learned the art of victory from



es. 'mt 8^-^.]



mti SOOK OV 3Q»WSL



Itt



the experience of defeat. Great inventors hare rarely hit on their great secrets the
first time they have attempted to achieve their purpose. The story of almost all
great inventions has heea failure well improved. The first efforts of poets do not
a|lw8ys give the promise of their later powers. So is it in all directions of Christian
Ufe. If in your effort to confess Christ you fail, try again, and success -will come
•with the greater earnestness and humiUty of your second effort. If you make a
resolution and break it, try again with more of prayer, and the second effort will
succeed. If you make some effort to do good, but your " 'prentice hand" bungles,
and shame covers you, the next effort you make on a smtdler scale, perhaps more
wisely, modestly, and earnestly, wiU be a blessed success. And if it is not one but
many efforts have failed, and lijfe itself seems one long mishap and nnsuccessfol
effort still, do not despair.

" Deem not the irrevocable past
As wholly wasted, wholly vain;
For, rising on its wrecks, at last
To nobler greatness we attain."

Longfellow's ' Ladder of St. Augustln**
Therefore let us always "try again." — O.

Vers. 30 — 35. — The frmts of victory. "Then Jcshna built an altar unto the Lord.
. . . And he wrote there upon the stones a copy of the law of Moses. . . . And ha
read all the words of the law." There is always danger in the moment after vic-
tory. We remember how Hannibal lost, amid the enervating luxuries of Capua,
the fruit of the battle of Cannee. The most seductive Capua to the people of God
is spiritual pride, which seeks to take to itself the glory which belongs to God alone.
Woe to those who sleep upon the laurels of spiritual success, or who are intoxicated
with self-complacency. " Let him that thinketh he standeth, take heed lest he fall
(1 Cor. X. 12). Joshua shows us by his example how the people of God should con-
duct themselves after a victory.

I. He aivES all the olory to God. He builds an altar to offer thereon a sacri-
fice of thanksgiving. Let us do the same, and render, as he did, all glory to God.

II. He summoned the people to a set stkioteb obedience to the Divinb
LAW by placing it afresh before their eyes. He knows well that never are men more
prone to forget the sacred obligation of obedience than in the hour of religious suc-
cess. Without obedience sacrifice is but external and vain. The true sacrifice ig
that of the will. Let every new blessing, every fresh victory only bring our mind
and heart into more complete subjection to the will of God t



EXPOSITION.



CHAPTER Vm. 80—35.



The COPT ov the law. — Ver. 30. — ^Then
Joshua built an altar unto the Lord God of
Israel In Mount EbaL This passage has been
pronounced to be an interpolation by Meyer,
De Wette, Maurer, EosenmuUer, Knobel,
and others. The LXX. does not introduce
it here, but after oh. ix 2. For other
authorities see below. It is very easy to
see why its genuineness has been disputed.
The Book of Joshua has many marks of
having been written not so very long after
the events described in it. But it has been
a favourite opinion with the school which
disputes the authenticity of the beoks af
the Bible, that Deuteronomy was a late
NTiirion by Eir« of the law of Hoses, though



this (see Introdnotion) has lately been dis-
carded for another hypothesis. But we
have, if the present passage be genuine, a
distinct proof that the Book of Joshua was
written after the Book of Deuteronomy.
Deuteronomy is here quoted as the " book
of the law of Moses " (cf. Deut. xxxi. 9 24,
26). The grounds on which the genuine-
ness of the passage has been denied are
these : First, the passage begins with f^
followed by an imperfect, or future, as does
the interpolated passage in Deut. iv. 41 — 13.
This is Maurer's theory. But in this caw
we mnst reject every passage which begin*
thii, Bsi certainly we should do so <«
greondi whieh, to say the least, are very
slander. Next, we are told that Joshua



140



THE BOOK OP JOSHUA.



[oh. tm. 80—85.



eordd not have ventured to tmst himself io
far in the heart of a hostile country. But
why notr Oerizim was not more than
twenty miles from Ai. The Canaanites,
we are told, were panic-stricken at Joshua's
success. The Gibeonites were not disposed
to offer any hindrance to his progress ; on
the contrary, they hastened to form an
aUiance with him. And these solemn
reUgiouB rites, performed by a people so
clearly nnder the protection of the Most
High, were more likely to increase than
lessen the awe felt by the surrounding
tribes. The only difficulty in that the
women and children (v. 35) are expressly
said to have gone thither also, and it seems
improbable that they, whom we have sup-
posed to have been left under a guard at
Gilgal, ihould have been brought so far
whUe the country was as yet unsubdued.
And the difficulty is increased by finding
Joshua again at Gilgal in ch. ix. 6. But
there is the hypothesis that this was another
Gilgal to fall back upon, and this (see note
on the passage just mentioned) is an ex-
tremely probable one. The suggestion of
many commentators, that the passage has
been transposed, is of course possible. We
can only leave the difficulty unsolved, as
one which a fuUer knowledge of the facts,
could we obtain it, would clear up at once.
But we may be sure that if the passage were
an interpolation, some explanation would
have been given of the circumstances which
seem to us so perplexing. And on the
otter hand we must remember that, as has
been already contended, the notion that the
whole camp of Israel performed this journey
at a time when stupefaction had seized
upon the Canaauitish tribes, though in-
volving some amount of impossibility, is by
no means impossible. (See also note on ver.
33). A number of extraordinary inter-
pretations of this passage bmve been given.
A favourite Babbinical interpretation (see
note on next verse) was that this altar was
erected on the very day OB which the
Israelites crossed the Jordan. This was of
course a physical impossibility. Josephus,
on the contrary, supposes that five years
elapsed before its erection, while Babbi
Israel, in the Jerusalem Talmud, thinks
that it was deferred until after the expiration
of fourteen years, and after the land had
been divided. So Masius in Zoc. In Mount
EbaX Between it and Oerizim stood the
city of Sheohem, or Sychai, as it is called
in St. John iv. Gerizim was close to this
eity, as Jndg. ix. 6, 7 and 8t. John iv. 20
teitify, as well as Dent. xi. 30, compared
with Gten. zii. 6. Dr. Maclear, in the
* Cambridge Bible for Schools,' suggests that
the laracddtet took thi« opportunity of



interring the bones of Joseph (Gen, 1. 25,
26) in the piece of ground which Jacob
bought of the sons of Hamor (Gen. xxxiii.
19). (See Exod. xiii. 19).

Ver. 81. — As Moses the ieryant of the
Lord commanded (see Exod. xz. 25 ; Deut.
xxvii. 4, 6). Here, and in ver. 33, we
find the writer making an extract from the
Book of Deuteronomy. As has been before
said, the natural explanation is that the
Book of Joshua was written after the Book
of Deuteronomy, and that the Book of
Deuteronomy wai written by Moses, or how
could Joshua have carried out instructions
which had never been given ? The Elohist,
Jehovist, and Deuteronomist theory sup-
poses the compiler of the Book of Joshua
to have done his work in so perfunctory a
fashion, that it is quite possible for critics
living at a distance of three thousand years
and more to detect the various fragments of
which his mosaic is constructed. He is bo
void of common sense as to have inserted
this narrative in a place so obviously un-
suitable that it involves a palpable contra-
diction to probabUity and common sense,
and this when he could have placed it in a
dozen other parts of the book where no
such improbability would be involved. Yet,
in spite of the incredible carelessness with
which he put his materials together, we are
required to believe that " the Deuterono-
mist " had the foresight to insert the fulfil-
ment of the command of Moses which he
had invented in Deut. xi. 26 — 30,xxvii. 1—26 ;
end that in so doing he abbreviated the
narrative so as to leave out many details of
his own invention. Now, under the sup-
position of a later fabrication of supple-
mentary observances to be imposed upon
the children of Israel, it is hardly probable
that the account of the plaster with which
the stones were to be plastered, and the
enumeration of the tribes and the curses,
would be omitted, since by the hypothesis
the object of the Deuteronomist was to'
secure implicit obedience to the sacerdotal
enactments he was inventing. But on the
hypothesis of the genuineness of both writ-
ings everything fits in naturally enough.
An altar of whole stones, over which no
man hath lift up any iron. As though to
intimate (see Exod. xx. 25) that all should
be natural and spontaneous in the worship
of God, and that as little of human devising
should be introduced as possible. The altar
must be raised by man, but the principles
of the worship must not be devised by Mm.
This interpretation, however, is rejected by
Calvin, who thinks that all tiiat was meant
was to preclude the perpetual existence of
the altar (though how Uie substitution of
whole for hewn stone'k could effect this la



OH. vin. 80 — M.]



THE BOOK OF JOSHUA.



141



not apparent) ; and Kefl and Bahr (' Sym-
bolik,' i. pp. 487, 488\,who think that the altar
ought (Exod. XI. 24) properly to be of earth,
since sacrifice is rendered necessary by
man's earthly or carnal nature, and that
unhewn stone is the only Bubstitute for
earth which is allowed. But surely man's
handiwork is the offspring of his unre-
generate nature, and therefore may, from
this point of view, be rightly employed in
sacrifice. Hengstenberg ('Oeschiohte des
Belches Oottes,' p. 223) thinks that the
reason of the command was that, since only
one place of worship was permitted for all
Israel, an altar had sometimes to be hastily
thrown up. But when we consider the
symbolic character of the Mosaic worship,
we are compelled to reject this interpreta-
tion as unsatisfactory. Benjamin of Tudela
(see Drusius in loc.) appears to have sup-
posed that these stones were those which
had been taken out of Jordan. Masiufi
devotes considerable space to the refutation
of this opinion (see also note on last
Terse). And they offered thereon. Belitzsoh
remarks on the inversion of the order here,
M compared with Deut. xxvii. But this is
obviously the true order. The worship
would naturally precede the ceremony
rather than foUow it.

Ver, 32.— And he wrote there upon the
stones; i.e., upon the plaster, as we read
in Deut. xxvii. 2, 4. " The wall destined
to receive the picture," and it was just
the same with inscriptions — ^was covered
with a coating of Ume and gypsum plaster.
The outline was then sketched with red
chalk, and afterwards corrected and filled
in with black (Kenriok's ' Egypt,' i., p.
271). Thomson (' Land and the Book,' p.
iil) says that he has seen writings
in plaster which eould not have been
less than two thousand years old. This
passage shows that our author had Deut.
zxviii. 2, 8 in his mind. The stones
of the altar, which alone have been men-
tioned, are clearly not meant here, but the
erection of plastered stone on which the law
was to be written. A copy Of the law of
Mosea, "Deuteronomium legis," Viilgate.
So aJso IjXX. Not the whole law, nor yet
the Book of Deuteronomy, for time would not

permit, but the decalogue, as the word njE'O
duplicate, from whence the word Mishna
comes, signifies. It is to be observed that
the word is definite, the copy, not a copy,
of the law. This (Deut. v. 22) was what
was written on the two tables of stone,
which (Exod. xxiv. 12, xxxi. 18) God gave
to Moses. Tet it is possible that, as some
commRntators suggest, and as ver. 34 may
he held p> imply, what is meuit is the



curses and blessings mentioned In Deut-
xxvii. and xzviii. The formal setting up ol
this memorial was intended to remind tha
Israelites, by a perpetual standing witness, of
the conditions on which they held the land
of Oanaan. And it is to be observed that
the moral, rather than the positive, precepts
ol the law were thus solemnly enjoined on
them, since neglect of the moral law of Ood
is the invariable source of national degrada-
tion and decay. Which be wrote. Namely,
Joshua.

Ver. 83. — And an Israel (see eh. xxiii.
S; xxiv. I, 9). The word 73 is used very
loosely in Hebrew (see Gen. iv. 14). We
need not, therefore, assume as a matter of
oonrse that the whole people, men, women,
and children, were taken up to Shechem to
behold this ceremony. It is quite possible
that during all Joshua's marches and cam-
paigns a large number of the people re-
mained under guard at Gilgal (see ch. ix.
6), which remained the head-qnarters of the
Israelites until the country was subdued.
All that is here meant is that a very great
number of the people were gathered together,
and that every tribe, every age, and each sex
were largely represented at this important
ceremony. And officers. Shoterim (see
ch. i. 10). Half of them. Origan's explana-
tion of the spiritual meaning of this passage
is noteworthy, even though somewhat far-
fetched. He regards those of the tribes
who stood on Mount Geri7,im to bless, aa
the type of those who are led, not by fear of
God's threatenings, but by a longing for
God's promises and blessings ; those who
stood on Mount Ebal to curse, as the type of
those who are driven by the fear of punish-
ment to obey the will of God, and these
finally attain salvation. The former, he
adds, are the more noble of the two ; but
Jesus, who reads the hearts, gives each
their proper station, and places some on
Mount Ebal to curse, not that they them-
selves may receive the curse, but, by regard-
ing the curse pronounced on sinners, may
learn thereby how to escape it. Over

against. 7?D*7^ rather, " in the direction
of." The command in Deut. zxviL 12 is
that they shall stand upon the two moun-
tains. No doubt certain representatives ol
the tribes stood on the mountaia, and the
rest of the people at the foot of the moun.
tain, on either side of the valley, "crowding
the slopes," as Canon Tristram says. The
valley is narrow here, and the voice in
mountainous regions, where the air is rarer,
carries far. Under special circumBtancea,
such as frosty weather, the voices of men
crying their wares have been distinctly heard
aeroM the Hombei in our own country.



141



BOOK OF JOSHUA.



[oh. vm. 80— M.



And in mountain passes, as any one who
has travelled in them may easily ascertain,
eonTBrsations may be canied on from
opposite sides of a yalley or ravine without
the slightest difficulty. In this partioular
place Canon Tristram tell us ("Landof Israel,'
pp. 149, 150) that when on Mount Gerizim
he heard every word uttered by a man who
was then driving his ass down Mount Ebal,
and that afterwards two of his party recited
the commandments antiphonally boux the
two sides of the valley without the least
difficulty.



Yer. S4.— AH the words of the lav, tba
blessings and the curses. The form of
this expression, combined with the words of
the next verse, seems to include not only
the special curses in Cent, xxvii., but eh.
zxviii. at least, and possibly chs. xxix, and
XXX. as well.

Ver. 35. — That were conversant with
tbem. Literally, who were going in the
midst of them ; i.e., the strangers who had
attached themselves to them, either at their
departure from Egypt, or since their con-
quest of Eastern Palestine.



HOMILETIOS.

Vers. 80—85. — The tetting up the law. The provision for the cltie observanoe
of God's law vp-as one of the most remarkable features of the invasion of Canaan
by Joshua. Twice was the command given in Deuteronomy by Moses (Deut. xi.
29, 36, and xxvii. 2 — 13), and the spot fixed on beforehand, no doubt because of
its central, position in PaJestine. We have already observed, in the notes on ch. v.,
on the scrupulous care to ftdfil the provisions of the law with which the invasion
of Canaan was commenced. The present is an event of the same character.
Joshua forbears to press farther bis warlike operations in the land, nntil he has
pushed his way to the central point, and anticipated the conquest he is about to
make by setting up there the law which was to be observed in it, when it had
become the possession of the Israelites. The following considerations suggest
themselves :

I. Joshua's faith. As in the case of the circumcision, so here, obedience is
Buperlor to all earthly considerationB. From a worldly point of view this march
from Ai to Gerizim while the nations of Canaan are still unsubdued was a
hazardous and foolish act. Modem philosophers would deride it ; modem public
opinion would condemn it. But it is jnst here that modem opinion requires cor-
rection by God's Word. When a thinker of the present day, not usually regarded
as superstitious or fanatical, tells us we have " forgotten God,'' it may be worth
while to ask whether He is still a factor in the problem of life with statesmen,
generals, and politicians. No doubt there is a superstitious way of carrying out the
principle here indicated. So there was, as has abready been pointed out, among the
Israelites, when they took the ark to battle with them, fancying it could act as a
talisman which could secure them from the consequences of their own sins. Tet
we may venture to commend the scrupulous regard for God's commands shown by
the Ckristian Indians in North America, who were willing volimtarily to forego the
large take of fish — and they got their living by fishing — which offered itself to them
on the Lord's day, rather than the conduct of the clergyman, who, seeing a glint
of sunshine on a wet summer's day while he was preaching, led his flock into the
harvest-field, though it was Sunday, because, as he said, it was wrong to allow
God's good gifts to be wasted. There may be much to be said on both sides.
Yet it were well at least to allow that faith is superior to sight, and obedience to
expediency. We may be assured that in all cases a strict obedience to God's pre-
cepts, and a sublime disregard of consequences when duty is involved, is the only
path a sincere Christian can possibly follow. This is true whether (1) national, (2)
commercial, or (8) private interests are involved. The nation which deliberately
adopts a wrong policy, or refuses to carry out a right one, because it is its interest
to do so, wUl most assuredly reap its reward. The conunercial transaction which
in its efforts after profit neglects the plain command of God shall in the end bring
more harm than good. The man who habitually sets aside God's commands for his
own private ends shall " reap hia reward, whosoever he be."

II. ClBOUMOISION VZBIIiT PBOFITETK IF THOU KXKP TMI ia.V. JoahlU hWt



CH. Yiu. 80-8(e.J THB BOOK OV JOSHUA. 14S

plainly BhowB the children of Israel that the formal renewal of the covenant which
was made as soon as Jordan was crossed was of no avail in God's sight, unless the
law were set tip as the necessary consequence of that covenant. So we learn that
it is of no use for us to be God's covenant people unless we have the law written in
our hearts. For one of the first conditions of that covenant is that God shall give
us His Spirit. Woe be to us if we grieve or quench Him. He gives us power to
fulfil the law of God. To neglect to carry out that law is to resist Him and fight
against Him. This entails upon us the same* consequences as it did to Israel, first
in the wUdemess, and afterwards in Canaan — rejection from the high privileges they
had inherited. After oiu: admission into covenant with God there must be (1) th»
engraving the law in our hearts by the study of its precepts, and (2) the earnest
endeavour to walk after the law thus set up in our midst.

III. The law was read. This public reading of the law was a feature of Jewish
pubUo solemnities when their faiUi had waxed cold, and it needed revival (see 2
Kings ixiii. 2, 3 ; 2 Chron. xxxiv. 30, 31 ; Neh. viiL 1 — 8). It does not appear to
have formed part of the ceremonies either of David or Solomon, or even of
Hezekiah. Perhaps it would have been better if it had, although these ceremonies
were pious and edifying. So we cannot agree vrith those who would remove from
the Church of England Service that continual recitation of the Ten Commandments
which was added to the Communion Service at the Beformation. We cannot tell
how much this reading of the law has tended to keep aUve in the nation an abhor-
rence of certain sins, has preserved among us a regard for God's holy day, for
domestic purity and order, for honesty and truthfulness, which some other nations
have lost. So the daily and weekly reading of the Scriptures, as a whole, is a
feature of the Church system which we would not willingly see surrendered. And
be who neglects the private reading of the law must expect the life of his soul to be
deadened thereby.

lY. The law has curses as well as blessinqs. The sterner features of God's
law are kept out of sight by many in these days. They talk of a God of love, but
they forget that a God of love must, as such, punish sin, and therefore sinners, as
long as they cling to their sin. It would be no love to leave sin unpunished, for
that were to encourage men to commit it. And as sin, by its very nature, is the
parent of misery, the God who does not punish sin is rather a God of hate than a
God of love. No preaching of the blessings of the gospel is of any avail which sys-
tematically conceals the terrors of the gospel ; which teies to exalt the love of God
in Christ while studiously ignoring the vengeance which is pronounced against them
who " obey not the gospel of our Lord Jesus Christ." No reading of the law is of
any avail, except Ebal be read from as well as Gerizim. Joshua read "all the
words of the law, the blessings and the cursings, according to all that is written in
the book of the law." So must the Christian minister rehearse feithfully to his flock
aU that is written in the book of the law of Christ.

V. The ark- op God was in the midst. That is, the reading of the law was no
mere formal recitation. There was the altar, the offerings, and the sacrifices. It
was a religious celebration. God's presence was recognised. The devotion of the
heart was required. The whole celebration would have been a pretence bad it not
been carried on as in God's sight. So now, when God's Word is read in the con-
gregation, it should not be a mere form. There should be the ardent desire to
profit by it, the solemn reverence for the spoken word of the Most High. And
when studied in private, it should not be a cold, critical, merely intellectual study.
The warmth of devotion should be kindled. The reading should be distinctly a
rehgioua act. The presence of God, alike in the word He has given, and the heart
He has renewed, should be recognised, and a mutual glow be derived from the
contact. And this glow should be ftirther inflamed by the simultaneous sacrifio* oi
the thoughts aad intentions of the heart to QocU



144 THE BOOK OF JOSHUA. [oh. Tm. 80— »5.



HOMILIES BY VABIOTJS AUTH0E8.

Vew. 80 — 86. — The altar on Ehal, and the reading and recording of the law.
We come on this scene uuexpectedly. War, with its stratagems, its carnage, ita
inrersion of ancient order, was fiUing our mind. But suddenly, instead of the
camp, there is the religious assembly ; sacrifice instead of slaughter ; instead of the
destruotion of heathen cities, the erection of monumental inscriptions of the law.
The mustering of the whole people to learn and accept afresh God'e great law. It
was not a casual gathering, but one prescribed by Moses in 27th chapter of
Deuteronomy ; what tribes have to stand on the slopes of Gerizim, to respond to aU
the benedictions of the law, and what tribes are to stand on Ebal to respond to its
cnrses, are all detailed. The ark in the valley between ; an altar reared on one of
the heights ; the law, solemnly read, and greeted with the responses not of a
congregation, but of a gathered nation ; covenant sacrifices offered; the inscription
on memorial stones of the leading precepts of the law — these all constitute a scene
of utmost impressiveness. A nation accepting a solemn league and covenant,
hallowing their conquest, taking formal possession of the country for their God, in
the heart of the land hallowing a mountain for His throne — this is not an every-
day occurrence, but one full of moral meaning. Consider some of its lessons.

L Saobed rests should be mixed with all woeldlt woek. Not many
would have gathered a nation at such a time for such a work. At most only the
conquest of the middle of the land had been achieved. The kings of the south and
the north were forming their leagues to crush the terrible invaders. A saint less
heroic or a hero less saintly would have postponed all such solemn assemblies till
the conquest was complete. But Joshua "sets the Lord alway before him ; '' and
a* the very outset he seeks to hallow their fighting and their victories. As in GUgal,
he tarried to observe the sacraments of the law, so here in Shechem he tarries to
build an altar and rehearse the law. That time is not lost which we spend in calm
communion with God. And in the degree in, which, like the occupations of these
invaders, our daily work is absorbing and worldly, in that degree it is well to arrest
our activities, and turn ear and eye and heart to God. In Israel's case, such a halt
would tend to prevent the coarsening of their feelings in their bloody work ; would
put them in the position of executors of God's judgment ; would help to make them
abhor the sins of those they extirpated ; would suggest that " they should be holy who
carried the " sword " of God." Our dafly tasks are not so absorbing nor bo rough
as theirs ; but, like Israel, it will always be well that we should take time or make
time to keep in GUgal the ordinances, and take time or make it to learn in Shechem
the law of God. " Prayer and meals stop no man's work." Israel went from
Shechem with more unity, feith, and gravity — that is, with all its elements of strength
invigorated. Keep your Sabbaths well. Have a sacred closet and enter it. Take
time regularly to get calm and to listen to the voice of God. Joshua mixes sacred rest
with worldly activity.

II. Observe secondly : With new possessions, their responsibilities should
BE EECOONisED. Is the Centre of the land won, it is not theirs to do with as they
like. There_ is a law whose blessings they should aspire to, whose curse they should
avoid. Their new possessions are not theirs to do with what they like. Masters of
the Canaanites, they_ are only servants before God. With all possession of
wealth, and all consciousness of strength, there is apt to rise a certain degree of
wilfulness and self-assertion. Men think that wealth is a sort of holy orders, giving
a power of absolution from every unpleasant duty. It is well whenever we have
attained what we desired, or come into the enjoyment of any sort of wealth, that we
should take the position of servants, and listen to God's law. Otherwise the
mercies that should bind us closer to our God separate us from Him, and blessings
which should leave us more free for gracious work secularise all our moods and
motives. " The desire accomplished is sweet to the soul," but it is only helpful
when in Shechem we listen to God's law. How much wiser would some have been
if gaining wealth, or power, or whatever their hearts' desire, they bad hallowed



«■. Tm. 80— «S.] THE BOOK OF JOSHUA. M

some gpot like Sheohem and distinotly realifled their duiy in eonneotion with it— tha
blessings of discharging it, the onrses of neglecting it; and then low at Qod'i
altar had hallowed all. Our own is not ours to do with as we please. Property hu
duties as well as rights, and all mercies should be hallowed by cherishing a lively
sense of the responsibilities attendant on them. Have you gained a footing in any
Canaan of your hopes ? Build your altar and listen to God's law.

III. Observe: Josbua'b fiest BuiLDiNa is an altab, not a fortress. Tou
would not have been surprised to find him taking Shechemand fortifying it, raising
thus a central fortress in the land. But he builds not a fortress, but an altax; ana
raises not the storied monument of his victories, but a register of God's law. It is
a striking and oharaoteristio thing, this altar-rearing in such cironmstances. And
yet the tdtar, by its inspiration, contributes more to the power of the people than
any fortress could by its security. The toul is the teat of power, in the individiud,
the army, the nation ; and Joshua takes the directest means to increase and
perpetuate the nation's strength when he buUds an altar, and links at once the old
land and the new people to God. No people will lack country, safety, freedom, that
rears altars to the Uving God. Let rehgion die out in any people and hberty will
not very long survive. What we want for strength and joy m life is some great
interest, a grave duty, a sublime hope. When Joshua raised wis altar, and thereby
quickened the religious Ufe of the people, he was doing far more than if he had
raised walls or gathered chariots. God is a nation's only fortress. To have TTitw in
ns is to be secure.

lY. Lastly observe : Thb wise man seeks to make BELiaiON intelliqeni. The
priestly instinct would have been satisfied with the sacraments of Gilgal ; but
Joshua adds instruction at Shechem. All the people, the aged, the children,
warriors, and women, the true Israelite and the hangers-on, have the entire law
read to them ; and to increase the intelligent knowledge of God's will, the law is
painted Uke frescoes on tablets raised on the mountain. God wants intelligent
service. Ignorance is the mother of superstition, not of devotion. " God is a spirit,
and they that worship him must worship him not only in spirit " — that is — in
sincerity; but in truth — that is, with intelligence, understanding Him — giving Him
the sort of homage which is His due. To my judgment, there is a savour of sound
Protestanism in this gathering at Shechem. The people taught, the law imparted
to alL This is a sort of prelude of the reign of the open Bible — a rehgion addressed
to the minds and hearts and consciences of men. All true religion has its Shechem
as well as its Gilgal, its teachings of truth and duty as well as its observance of
the sacraments. We should all seek light ; reverent, but still self-respectfol ; too
serious to " make beheve," too truthfol to shut our eyes. The higher our reason,
the heartier wiU be our religion. Joshua taught the people the law, and when
printing was impossible, published it on the frescoes of Gerizim. We only do well
when we do our best to make " all the congregation of Israel, with the women and
the little ones, and the strangers that are conversant among them," familiar with the
law and the gospel of the grace of God. — G.

Vers. 80—35. — Sacrifice and lam. This religions solemnity^ is a fulfiment of
the command given by Moses in Deut xxvii. It is expressive of the fidelity
of Joshua to the sacred traditions of the past, and his loyalty to the Divine order
and the Divine authority. The time is appropriate for such pubUc homage to
be paid to the God of Israel. It is the " right hand of the Lord " that has done
so valiantly in the recent victories ; to Him be all the glory. The land has
been taken possession of in His name ; let it be consecrated henceforth to Him
by this solemn act of worship. The solemnity consists of two parts — (1) the build-
ing of an altar and offering of sacrifice, (2) the inscription and proclamation of the
law.

I. Sacrifice. This was at once an acknowledgment of the sovereignty of
God, and a renewal of the covenant by which the people and their inheritance wer*
devoted to Him. There were two kinds of sacrifice, "burnt offerings " and " peace
offerings." It is doubtM how £u: the distinction between these can, in this oaa«,b«

JOSHUA. J,



14t THE BOOK OF JOSHUA. [oh. tih. 80—85.



clearly defined. Bat we at least discern in them a double element, (1) eucharistio,
(2) propitiatory. . , , ,. ^a. r

1, Eucharistio. There was thanksgiving for viotones and dehyerances thTiis mr
vouchsafed. Well might the hearts of the people rise to God with the smoke of
their sacrifices, after such proofe as He had given them of His &vour. Every
fresh manifestation of Divine goodness demands a fresh ascription of praise ; the
providence that " redeems our Ufe from destruction and crowns us with loving-
kindness" calls for daily acknowledgment. Gratitude is a perpetual obligation,
because God's love is ever assuming some new phase of benediction. Let every
stage in our career, every vantage-ground gained, every difficulty surmounted,
every peril passed, every victory won, be signalised by some new expression of
personal devotion. To the devout spirit life will be a continual thank-offering,
• ceaseless hymn of praise.

" If on our daily course onr mind
Be set to hallow all we find,
New treasure still of countless price
God win provide for saorifioe."

2. Propitiatory. These oft-repeated sacrifices kept the grand truth of atonement
by expiation continually before the mihds of the people. We need to keep it con-
tinuaUy before our minds, inasmuch as wq Uve by ttie mercy of God through the
seK-immolation of a sinless victim. 'Eyexy revelation of God is fitted to awaken
the sense of our own sinfulness, and so prompts a constant reference, in penitence
and Mth, to the " Great Propitiation." Daily Ufe should be a perpetual presentation
in spirit before the mercy-seat of the sacrifice of Him by whom we " receive the
atonement." But such trust in the sacrifice of Christ is of no avail unless coupled
with a personal surrender that draws its inspiration from His. The " burnt
offering " and the " peace offering " must go together. " Ye are not your own, for
ye are bought vfith a price : therefore," &c. (1 Cor. vi. 19, 20).

II. The proclamation op the law. There was a peculiar fitness in this,
inasmuch as the people had now gained a firm footing in the land which was to be
the scene of their organised national life. They are made to imderstand the funda-
mental moral conditions of that life. Observe —

1. The supremacy of the law of Ood over all hu/mam, law. The conmionwealth
of Israel was emphatically a theocracy. But every commonwealth is a theocracy
in the sense that harmony with the Divine vriU is the secret of its order and
prosperity. As righteousness alone " exalteth a nation," so the public assertion
and vindication of God's law is essential to the well-being of any land and people.
Human law has enduring authority in proportion as it accords with the Divine
(Prov. viii. 15, 16).

2. The breadth of the law of God as embracing all relations of life, all classei
a/nd conditions of men. " The whole congregation of Israel " heard the law, with the
" elders, officers, and judges," the " women, Uttle ones, and strangers." All social
relations, all official functions, all periods and conditions of life are amenable to
this supreme authority, this impartial Judge.

8. The weal or woe of every man depends on his relation to the law of Ood.
Here hes the alternative of blessing or cursing, life or death (Deut. xxx. 19),
'What was read may have been only that summary of the law contained in Deut.
xxvii. and xxviii. But of the whole law, in its essential principles, this is true :
moral and practical harmony with it is the condition of blessedness.

4. M*n are brought into their true relation to the Uuw only by the gospel of
Christ. " Christ is the end of the law for righteousness," &o. (Eom. x. 4). Faith
in Him disarms the law of its terrors. " Chnst hath redeemed us from the curse
of the law," &o. (Gal. iii. 13). In Him the blessing overcomes the curse, the
Toice of Gerizim prevails over that of Ebal, " mercy rejoiceth against judgment.'
Christ engraves the law not on tables of stone, but on the living hearts of men
(Jer. xxxi 81, 84; Heb. viii 10, 12). In Him the law is not, as in Moses, literal,
local, adapted to special ciroumstajioes and the moral needa of a particular people,



OH. IX. 1—87.]



THE BOOK OF JOSHUA.



l€f



but spiritual and tmiversal. Not that Christianity has less to do in shaping the
relative duties of human life, or enters less minutely into its details, but rather has
80 much to do with everything that, like the aU-pervading atmosphere and the
gladdened sunshine, it is the very vital air of every social problem, and the guiding
light in the determination of every question between man and man. — W.



EXPOSITION.



OHAPTEB K. 1—27.



Thb Gibeohites. — Ver. 1. — And It came
to pass, when all the kings. According to
the explanation given above (ch. vi. 5, 15)
of the particle 3 with the infinitive, this
must mean immediately. We must there-
fore suppose that the distance at which they
lived from the scene of the events had pre-
vented them from comprehending their
astounding character so clearly as those
who lived in the immediate neighbourhood
(see ch. ii. 11 ; v. 1 ; vi. 1). The Idngs (see
Introduction). Inthe hUls. "The land is
classified under three heads : the hills (or
mountain district), the plain, and the sea
coast over against Lebanon " (KeU). The
hUls are not the Lebanon and Anti-Lebanon
range, the operations against wbioh are
detailed in ch. xi., but the mountains of
Kphraim and Judah. The word translated
" vaUeys" here is neither n3"Tl? nor "133 (see

above note on oh. iii. 16), but n?EtJ' or low
country, i.e., the great plain from .Joppa, or
Carmel, to Gaza. The f\'\r\ or sea coast
probably refers to the coast between Tyre
and Joppa. The Hlttlte. The Qirgashites
are the only tribe omitted here from the Ust
in ch. iii. 10.

Ver. 2. — With one accord. One mouth,
according to the Hebrew, referring not merely
to their opinions, but to the expression of
them. "O that Israel would learn this
of Ganaanites, to sacrifice private interests
to the public welfare, and to lay aside all
animosities among themselves, that they
may cordially unite against the common
enemies of God's kmgdom" (Matthew
Henry).

Ver. 3. — ^The Inhabitants of Gibeon. That
is, of a confederation of cities (see ver. 17),
of which Gibeon was the head. Gibeon wag
a city of some importance (oh. x. 2). Though
it was for size and importance " as one of
the royal cities," we hear nothing of a king
there. Hengstenberg, in his history, de-
scribes it (p. 227) as " eine freie Stadt," with
daughter cities dependent on it. In fact,
the Phtenician cities (see Introduction) seem
to have had as great a variety of constitu-
tion as those of ancient Greece. Its inhajbit-
auts were Hivites (ver. 7, and ch. xi. 19).
Its name (compare Glbeab and n^3 j a hill)



signifies hill-city, Uke the termination
dunum in Latin, as Lugdunum, or Lyons;
dune in Anglo-Saxon, as Ethandune. Com-
pare ajso Dunkirk. Bobinson, in his ' Biblical
Besearches,' ii. 135 — 9, identifies it with el-
Jib, a village on an eminence in the midst
of a fertile plain, where the remains of large
buildings may stiU be seen. (So Vaudevelde
and Conder.) " Onely the Hivites are wiser
than their fellowes, and will rather yeeld and
hve. Their intelligence was not diverse
from the rest ; aU had equally heard of the
miraculous conduct and successe of Israel ;
but their resolution was diverse. As Bahab
saved her family in the midst of Jericho, so
these foure cities preserved themselves in
the midst of Canaan ; and both of them by
beleeving what God would do. The efficacie
of God's marvellous works is not in the acts
themselves, but in our apprehension " (Bp.
Hall).

Ver. 4. — They did worK wlllly. Bather,
and they worked — they also — with craft. The
reference, no doubt, is to the confederacy of
the other kings. The Gibeonites also acted
upon what they had heard, but they pre-
ferred an accommodation to war. So Calvin
and Bosenmiiller ; also Drusius. And they
felt that they could only effect their pui^ose
by craft. Other explanations are given,
such as that a reference is made to Joshua's
stratagem at Ai. KeU rejects both, and
proposes an explanation of his own, which
is unintelligible. Origen's interpretation
here is interesting as a specimen of the
theology of the third century. He regards
the Gibeonites as tha type of men who,
though they are enrolled in the Church as
beUevers and have faith in God, and ac-
quiesce in aU the Divine precepts, and are
ready enough to take part in all the external
duties of religion, are yet involved in vices
and foulnesses, like the Gibeonites in theiz
old garments and clouted shoes. They dis-
play no signs of improvement or alteration,
yet Jesus our Lord concedes to them salva-
tion, even though that salvation does not
escape a certain stigma of disgrace. That
there may be some persons in a condition
somewhat resembling this described by
Origen may be admitted, but it is difficult
to see bow any one in a state of salvation
can display no signs of improvement what-



146



THE BOOK OF JOSHUA.



, 1—27.



•rer. There are many who do not improve
aa they might, whom we should yet hesitate
to pronounce altogether reprobate from
God; But Borely the entire absence of all
improvement is a manifest sign of reproba-
tion. This passage is one of many among
the voluminous works of Origen in which
that holy and learned man has not suf-
ficiently weighed what he was saying (see
below, ver. 23). Made as U they bad been
ambassadors. " Bent an embassy " (Luther).
If we take this reading, we must suppose,
with Grotius and others, the word to be the
Hithpahel of 'V'i to go, to revolve. Biit the
form is rare, and the word is elsewhere un-
known, at least in Hebrew, though an Arabic
form of it is found. It is therefore better to
read ITDV! "they prepared themselves pro-
visions." This is the reading of the LXX.,
the Vulgate, the Ghaldee, the Syriao, and of
most modem editors. It is rendered still
more probable by the occurrence of the same
word in ver. 12. Old sacks. Bather, worn
mit, and so throughout the passage. The
usual mode of conveyance still in the East
is in sackcloth bags on the backs of horses,
mules, camels, and asses. Such bags are
apt to meet with rough usage in a long
journey. Wine bottles. Bather, wine $kitis,
the wine then being kept In skins, not in
vessels of glass. This explains how they
could be burst open (CJ^uap) and tied up.
These sking were hung np frequently in the
smoke (Psa. oxix. 83), which gave them a
shrivelled appearance. The first bottles
were made of such skins, as Herodotus tells
us. The Egyptian monuments confirm his
statements, displaying as they do skins ol
animals so used, with the legs or the neck
forming what we still term the " neck " ol
the bottle (of. Homer, Qiad, iv. 247, in^
iv alyH(p). Similar bottles are depicted on the
walls of Herculaneum and Pompeii, and the
like may be seen still in Italian villages.
They were pitched over at the seams to
prevent leakage (cf. Job zxxii. 19 ; Matt. iz.
17; Mark ii. 22 ; Luke v. 37, 38. See also
Kitto's ' Cyclopedia of Biblical Literature ').
Bound up. The usual mode of mending in
the East, except when a patch is inserted,
is to tie or sew up the hole.

Ver. 5. — Shoes. Literally, things tied on;
i.e., sandals, attached with straps to the sole
ofthefoot. Clouted, i.e., patched. Theinten-
eive Pual suggests that they were very much
patched. The participle Kal is translated
" spotted " in Gen. xxx. 32, 33, 35. Mouldy.
D*ipJ literally, marked with points, i.e.,V[al-
dewed. Provision Dy$. "Proprie vena-
tionem" (Vatablns). " Panis enim muoidus
punctis respersus est albis vlridibus et
nigris "(Babbi David, initio iioilicum). So



the LXX., Theodotion, and Lnther. This
gives a better sense and more according to
the dtaivation than the interpretation crumbs
of bread, given by Gesenius and Eeil, after
Aquila, Symmachns, and the Vulgate, which
has " infrustra comminuti." The cracknels
(the same word in Hebrew as here) in 1
Kings xiv. 3 were probably biscuits marked
with points by a sharp-pointed instrument,
in the same way as the Jewish passover
cakes are at the present day.

Ver. 6. — To the camp at Cllgal Many
commentators, among whom we may number
VandBvelde and the recent Palestine Explo-
ration Expedition, suppose that the Gilgal
mentioned here is another Gilgal, and cer-
tainly the supposition derives great force
from the fact that there is a place the
modem name of which is Jiljilia, situated
near the oaks of Moreh, whose situation
would be far more central, and would fall in
better with the rest of the history (see notes
on ch. viii. 30), than the original Gilgal.
That such a second Gilgal is known to Jewish
history would appear from Dent. xi. 30,
where its situation is clearly pointed out
as that of the modern Jiljilia, near the
oaks of Moreh, and near the Arabah (cTiam-
paign. Authorised Version), which runs
in that direction. Jiljulieh, in the plain
of Sharon, is supposed by Vandevelde and
the Palestine explorers (see ' Quarterly
Statement,' Jan., 1879) to be a third Gil-
gal, and Jerome, in his ' Onomasticon,' has
identified it (see note on ch. zii. 23).
The Gilgal in 1 Sam. xiii. i — 12 seems
to require a central position like that ol
Jiljilia, rather than a place near the fords of
Jordan. As Ewald reminds ns, the earher
Gilgal lay out of the road from Jericho to
Bethel (see also 2 Kings ii. 1 — 6). The only
argument against such a second Gilgal is
the improbability of a removal of the camp
without any mention of such removal by
thehistoriem (see Hengstenberg, ■ Geschichta
des Belches Gottes,' p. 207), and the im-
probability of there having been a second
Gilgal SkS the place of encampment of the
Israelites. It is possible, however, that the
second great place of encampment received
ths memorable name of the first, from the
keen sense that the Israelitish encampment
was the abode of a people from which the
" reproach of Egypt " was for ever rolled
away. Another explanation is suggested by
a comparison of oh. xv. 7 with oh. xvui. 17
(see note on the former passage). The
second Crilgal, if it really existed, was well
suited for its purpose. " It was in the
centre of the country, situated upon a steep
hill, with a good table land at the top, and
commanded a most extensive prospswt ol
the large plain in the west, and dbo to



<m. Tx. 1—87.]



THE BOOK OP JOSHUA.



149



wards the north and east " (Keil) — precisely
the place which an able general would be
likely to select. Though " in a high posi-
tion" (Vandevelde), it was "lower than
Gibeon," and was " an hour west of Sinjil
on the Jerusalem-Shechem road." Its situa-
tion enabled Joshua to strike a decisive
blow without delay (oh. x. 7, 9). It is clear
that this suggestion entirely obviates the
difficulty of the concluding verses of oh.
viu. And as the name imphes a circular
form as well as motion, and early camps
were usually circular, it may have been the
ordinary name for an encampment among
the Hebrews.

Ver. 7. — ^And the men of Israel said. The
Keri here has the singular niimber instead
of the Chethibh plural, in consequence of
Israel speaking of itself coEectively in the
word *3"li?3 and of the singular B^'SJ. But
this last" with a plural verb, as a noun of
multitude, occurs in the historical books in
places too numerous to mention. See, for
instance, 1 Sam. xiv. 22, just as DV iu many
passages, e.g., 2 Sam, zviii. 7, is the
nominative to a plural verb. The Hlvites
(see note on ver. 3). Peradventure ye dwell
among us, and how can we make a league
with you 7 This was strictly forbidden in
Exod. xxiii. 32 ; xxxiv. 12 ; Deut. vii. 2, in
reference to neighbouring nations, on ac-
count of the polluting influence their ex-
ample had exercised (Num. xxv. 1 — 3), and
was sure to exercise, as the subsequent
history of the Israelites from Judg. ii. on-
wards, proves.

Ter 8.— We are thy servants. This does
not mean altogether, as ver. 9 shows, that
the Gibeonites intended by this embassy to
reduce themselves to servitude. Their ob-
ject, as Grotius remarks, was rather to form
an ailiance on terms of something like
equality. The phrase was one common in
the East as a token of respect {e.g., Gen.
xxxii. 4, 18 ; 1. 18 ; 2 Kings x. 5 ; xvi. 7).
But no doubt the Gibeonites (see ver. 11)
expected to have a tribute laid on them.
And they would willingly accept such an
impost, for, as Bwald remarks ( ' History of
Israel,' iv. 3), their object was " to secure
the peace which a mMKantile inland city
especially requires " (see also note on oh. iii.
10). From whence come ye 7 Joshua uses
the imperfect, not the perfect, tense here.
Commentators are divided about its mean-
ing. Some suppose that the perfect, " from
whence have ye come ? " is more direct and
abrupt than " from whence may you have
oomef" or, "from whence were you com-
ing ? ^ and certainly an indirect question is
in most languages considered more respect-
lol than • unot one (see Qen, zlii 7). But



perhaps with Bwald we may regard U
simply as implying that their mission wai
stiU in progress.

Ver. 9. — ^And they said unto him. " 1
commend their wisdom in seeking peace i
I do not commend their falsehood in the
manner of seeking it. 'Who can looke for
any better in pagans?" (Bp. Hall.) It is
worthy of the craft of the Gibeonites that
they evade the first question, and as it is of
vital importance to the success of their
mission, they throw their whole force upon
the second. The course of conduct en-
joined on Joshua had reached the ears of
the Canaanitish peoples, as we learn from
ver. 24. They also take good care to say
nothing of the more recent successes of the
Israelites. With consummate astuteness
they confine themselves to the successes
"beyond Jordan." No wonder such mas-
tery of the arts of deceit should have im-
posed on the Israehtes. But inasmuch as
the historian lacked the stimulus of that
" necessity " which is proverbially " the
mother of invention," we must recognise
here a sign of the genuineness of the narra-
tive.

Ver. 10. — Slhon, Mng of Heshhon, and
Og, the king of Bashan (see Num. xzi.
21, 36). Ashtaroth (see ch. zii. 4 ; xiii.
31 ; also Deut. i. 4). In Num. xxi. Edrei
only is mentioned. This is not the Ash-
taroth-Kamaim of Gen. jdv. 6, which is so
called from the worship of the horned
Astarte, or crescent (see below), to distin-
guish it from this Ashtaroth. The two
cities were close together. Ensebius and
Jerome state that they were only nine miles
apart. The site of this city has been iden-
tified with Tel Ashtereh, in a wide plain on
the east of Jordan. It appears as Astaratn
in the Eamak list of cities captured by
Thothmes HI. The name has been identi-
fied with the Assyrian Ithtar, the Persian,
Greek, and Latin aster and onr star. So
Geseuius, ' Thesaurus,' ». v. Whence Lncian
seems to have been wrong in his idea that
the worship of Astarte, like that of Artemia
at Ephesus, was that of the moon. Bat
Eawlinson, in his ' Ancient Monarchies, '
decides against tins identification. The
last mention of this city ia Jewish history
is in the bold and successful expedition of
Judas Maccabasus into Gilead, in which ha
penetrated as far as this city (called Ear-
naim), and brought the Jews residing there
and in the neighbourhood to Jerusalem
(1 Maoo. vi.). Kuenen, in his ' History ol
the BeUgion of Israel,' makes a distinctiaa
between the worship of Ashtaroth and of
Asherah. The former he regards as the
worship of the moon, and a pure worship ;
the latter of Venus, wad an impuM on*,



m



THE BOOK OF JOSHUA.



[em. tx. 1—27.



Bnt thongb Asherah and Ashtaroth, or ABh-
toreth, are undoubtedly distinct, yet both
worsMpa may have been impure, as the
TiTOiship of Artemis of the Ephesians (the
IHana Multimamma, or the image of fecun-
dity) unquestionably was. " It is probable,"
Bays Mr. G. Smith, " that the &st inten-
tion in the mythology was only to represent
love as heaven-born, but in time a more
sensual view jrevailed, and the worship of
Ishtar became one of the darkest features
in Babylonian mythology." The Babylonian
Mylitta, or Venus, was worshipped under a
crescent form, as Babylonian sculptures
prove. A Syrian altar with the crescent on
it is now in the FitzwiUiam Museum at Cam-
bridge. It has a female figure on one side,
with the crescent, and a male figure — of Baal,
no doubt — on the other. Another is men-
tioned in a late able article in the Times,
as having been found in Carohemish, the
Hittite capital. The Chaldsean astronomers
had, no doubt, discovered the use of tele-
scopes (though in the translucent siy of
ChaldsBa perhaps the crescent Venus might
be seen without them), for we find Saturn
represented on their monuments with a ring
(see Proctor, ' Saturn and his System,' p. 197).
Consequently the worship of the crescent Ve-
nusinvolvesno anachronism. Asherah, often
wrongly translated "grove" in our version
(see Judg. vi. 25), is probably the goddess
Fortune, derived from "IB't?, happiness. Ash-
taroth la spelt, not with Aieph.butvrith Ain.

Ver. 11. — Our elders. Gibeon and its
aUied cities did not possess a regal govern-
ment (see note on ver. 3).

Ver. 14. — And the men took of their
vlctnalB. Most commentators prefer this
rendering to that of the margin, " and they
received the men because of their victuals."
The natural explanation — though several
others are given, for which see EeU in loc. —
would aeem to be that the Israelites relied
on the evidence of their senses, instead of
upon the counsel of God. They could spe
the condition of the garments, sacks, and
wine-skinB of the Gibeonites. They tasted
of their victuals to convince themselvesi of
the truth of those statements of which the
sight was insufficient to take cognisance.
And asked not counsel at the mouth of the
Lord. Even in the most obvious matter it
is well not to trust too implicitly to our own
judgment. Nothing could seem more clear
or satisfactory than the account given of
themselves by the Gibeonites — nothing more
easy for the unassisted intellect to decide.
And yet Joshua and the congregation were
deceived. It is perhaps too much to say, with
some commentators — Maurer, for instance —
that Joshua disobeyed a plain command in



acting thus. The passage in which Joshua
is instructed to " stand up before Eleazar
the priest, who shall ask counsel for him at
the judgment of Urim before the Lord
(Num. zxvii. 18 — 23), does not require him
to do 80 in all cases. But it was clearly
" an act of gross carelessness " (Calvin).
And the inference may safely be drawn that
in no case whatever is it wise to trust to
ourselves. However obvious our course may
be, we shall do well to take ooiusel with
God by prayer.

Ter. 15.— The princes or the congrega-
tion. Literally, the exalted ones, ''N''B'J of
the congregation, "Die obersten Her ge-
meine " (Luther) ; that is, the heads of the
various tribes (see Num. i. 44 ; and note
on ch. vii. 14).

Ver. 17. — On the third day. After the
trick was discovered. Keil remarks that we
need not suppose that the three days were
consumed on the march. Not only did
Joshua, when celerity was necessary, per-
form the journey in a single night, but the
whole distance was not more than eighteen
or twenty miles, if we accept the hypothesis
of a second Gilgal. Now their dtlea were.
Beeroth still exists, we are told, as el-Bireh
(Bobinson iL 132. So also Vandevelde
and Conder). Jerome identified it with a
place only seven mUes from Jtrusalem,
which is an obvious error. It contains
nearly 700 inhabitants, and is only about
twenty minutes' walk from el-Jib, or Gibeon.
Kiijath-jearim (the name means the city of
forests) ia well known in the history of
Israel {e.g., Judg. xviii. 12). But it is
chiefly remarkable for the twenty years*
sojourn of the ark there (1 Sam. vii. 2). It
was also known by the name of Baalah,
Kirjath-Baal (ch. xv. 9, 60 ; 2 Sam. vi. 2).
The Hivites seem to have been removed
thence (probably to Gibeon), for there is no
trace of any non-Jewish element in the
population in the accoimt of the reception
of the ark among them (see 1 Sam. vi.). It
is called Baale of Judali in 2 Sam. vi. 2
(cf. ch. xviii. 15). The Jewish population
seems to be due to one of the posterity of
Caleb (see 1 Chron. ii. 50 — 53). Modern
explorers, with the exception of Lieut.
Conder, have identified Kirjath-jearim with
Kuriet-el-Enab, "the city of the grape,"
about four miles from d-Jib, or Gibeon.
This is the opinion of Eobinson and Van-
develde. Snppoaing it to be near Beth-
she Mesh, on the authority of Josephus,
Lieut. Conder places it at 'Arma, west of
Bethlehem, and identifies the waters of
Nephtoah with a fountain nearly due south
of the valley of giants or Bephaim (set
ch. zv. 9). But this is too far from QibMOt



«R. tx. 1-^S7.]



THB BOOK 07 JOSHUA:



in



He identifies Knriet-el-Enab with Cijath
in oh. zvlii. 28, and regardB this as one
of the cities of Benjamin within the
bolder. But this Eirjath miiy be £irjath-
jearim, and may as reasonably, standing
on the border, be accounted to belong to
both tribes, as Zorah, Eshtaol (mentioned
in the boundaries of Judah and Dan),
Beth-arabah, possibly Gibeah or Gibeath
(belonging to Judah and Benjamin), and
even Jerusalem itself (see ch. zt. 53).
The identification of Eirjath-jearim with
Kuriet-el-Enab, of the waters of Nephtoah
with Ain Lifta, giving a line running north-
westward from the valley of Bephaim, seems
more probable as the border of Judah and
Benjamin, and the word " compassed," or
lather deflected, adds probability to this
interpretation (see ch. xv. 9, 10, and notes).
Yer. 18. — And the children of Israel
amote them not There is great difference
of opinion among the commentators as to
whether this oath were binding on the
IsraeUtes or not. This difierence is to be
found among Boman Catholics as well as
Protestants, and Cornelius i, Lapide gives
the ingenious and subtle arguments used on
both sides by the Jesuit commentators.
Many contend that as it was obtained by
fraud, and especially by a representation
that the Gibeonites did not belong to the
tribes which Joshua was specially com-
manded to destroy (see Dent. zx. 10 — 18,
with which compare the passages cited
in note on ver. 7), it was null and void,
ab initio. But the Israelites had sworn
by the sacred name of Jehovah to spare
the Gibeonites. It would have been to
degrade that sacred name, and possibly
(ver. 20) to bring trouble on themselves,
to break that oath under any pretence
whatever. If they had been deceived the
fault was their own. The Jehovah by
whom they swore had provided them with
a ready mode of detecting such deceit,
had they chosen to nse it. Calvin, though
he thinks the princes of the congregation
were unnecessarily scrupulous, remarks on
the (superiority of IsraeUtish to Boman
morale. It would have been easy enough
for the congregation to argue, as the Bomans
did after the disaster at the Caudine Forks,
that the agreement was of no eSect, be-
cause it was not made with the whole people.
Cicero, however, had no sympathy with such
morality. He writes ('De Officiis,' i. 13),
"Atque etiam si quid singuli temporibus
adduoti, hosti promlserunt, est in eo ipso
fidei conservanda." And not a few in-
etanoes of similar perfidy since the promul-
gation of Christianity may lead us to the
conclusion that the ezample of Israel iinder
Joshua i« not yet supeiflnon*. A.8 instances



of inch perfidy, we may adduce the battle of
Yoma, in 1444, in which Ladislaus, king ot
Hungary, was induced by the ezhortationi
of Cardinal JuUan to bresJi the truce he had
entered into with Amurath, sultan of the
Turks. It is said in this case that Amu-
rath, in his distress, invoked Jesus Christ
to punish the perfidy cf His disciples. Be
that as it may, a signal defeat fitly rewarded
their disregard of truth. Later instances
may be drawn from the conflict between
Spain and the Netherlands in the latter
part of the sixteenth century, in which
the Spaniards frequently and wantonly, in
the supposed interests of religion, violated
the articles of capitulation formally entered
into vrith the insurgents. These breakers
of their plighted word also found that
" wrath was upon them ; " that God would
not prosper the arms of those who, pro-
fessedly for Bis saie, were false to their
solemn obligations. Both the princes, in
the narrative before us, in withstanding the
wrath of the congregation, and the congre-
gation in yielding to their representations,
present a spectacle of moral principle which
few nations have surpassed. Cornelius ik
Lapide, after giving the opinions of others,
as we have seen, and remarking on the
opinion here followed as " probabilior,"
sums up in the following noble and manly
words : " Discs hie quam sancte fides, prse-
sertim jurata, sit servanda hosti, etiam
impio et infideU. Fide enim sublata, ever-
titur omnis hominum contractus et societas,
quffi fidei quasi basi innititur, ut homines
jam non homines, sed leones, tygrides, et
fersB esse videantur." Would that his
Church had always acted upon these inas-
sailable principles of justice and morality I
In after years a terrible famine visited the
Israelites as a chastisement for the infringe*
ment of this agreement (see 2 Sam. zzi. 1-9).
Murmured. Literally, were stubborn,

Ver. 20. — ^Lest wrath he upon us. The
original is not quite so strong : " and wrath
will not be upon ns (kqi ovk iarca xaff tiniiv
6pyri, LXX.).

Ver. 21. — Said unto them, i.e., to the
Israelites. But let them he. Bather, and
they were, with EosenmiiEer and Keil. See
Keil in loc. for the force of the Yau couver-
sive. The LXX. and Vulgate render as our
version. Hewers of wood and drawers of
water. Some amoimt of casuistry has been
displayed upon this passage. But the fair-
ness of the proceeding seems clear enough.
The Gibeonites had escaped death by a
fraud. For that fraud they deserved punish-
ment. Their lives were spared by virtue of
a solemn oath. But equaUty of idghts had
never been promised them. They might
think themselves well off if they ewaped



in



THE BOOK OP JOSHUA.



[oh. b. 1—tt.



degtrnction, even though they might be con-
demned permanently to occupy a servile
condition. They appear to have asBisted at
the tabernacle worship, since they were
condemned to serve, not individual Israel-
ites, but the congregation. Such was the
office of the D*VO? (Nethinim, {.e.,the given
or devoted) in the later history of Judah
(see 1 Chron. ix. 2 ; Ezra ii. 43—54, 58, 70;
and viii. 20. See also Drusius and Masius
in U>e.). The latter discusses the question
whether the Nethinim were really the
Gibeonites, or whether David, as stated in
Ezra viii. 20, instituted a new order of
persons to take their place. If the latter
were the case, then we have a proof that the
Book of Joshua was written anterior to the
time of David. It seems quite possible that
Saul (2 Sam. zxi. 6) had all but exterminated
the Gibeonites, and that David was com-
pelled to institute a new order in their
stead. If this suggestion be correct, and it is
far from improbable, we have here an unde-
signed coincidence strongly supporting the
credit of the narrative, in theplace of Knobel's
insinuation, contained in the words, that
" the Elohist in Saul's time gives no hint of
this, although he took the greatest interest
in the persons engaged in God's service."
As the princes had promised them. These
words aa they stand are unintelligible. No
such promise had been given. The literal
rendering is " as th& princes " (see note on
ver. 15) " said to them," by the mouth of
Joshua, as recorded in ver. 23. The Syriac
Version supplies some words here to make
up for a supposed deficiency in the text.
But this is not necessary. The repetition
in vers. 23 and 27 is quite in the manner of
the historian. Nor are the words " as the
princes said to them" explicable on the
supposition that the words after, " let them
live," are the words of the princes (see
note above).

Ver. 23. — ^There shall none of you te
freed from being bondmen. Literally, as
margin, there shall not be cut off from you a
»ervant, as in 2 Sam. iii. 29, and 1 Kings ii. 4.
The sense is, " you shall not cease to- be ser-
vants." The term "bondmen" is some-
what too strong. The l^y was usually a

bondman among the Hebrews, but not
always (see 1 Sam. xxix. 8 ; 1 Kings xi. 26,
&c.). But the Gibeonites were to be em-



ployed for ever in servile work. Hewing of
wood and drawing of water was a task fre-
quently imposed on the strangers (probably
captives) dwelling among the Israelites, as
we learn from Dent. xxix. 11. We are not
directly told that, as Keil and others have
stated, the " lowest of the people " had to
perform this office. It is, however, implied
that the stranger who performed it occupied
the lowest social station in the community.
" Si qui tales sunt in nobis, quorum fides
tantummodo habet ut ad Ecclesiam veniant,
et inolinent caput suum sacerdotibns, offioia
exhibeant, servos Dei honorent, ad oma-
tum quoque altaris vel Ecclesi» aliquid
oonferant, non tamen adhibeant stadium ut
etiam mores sues excolant, actus emendent,
vitia deponant, castitatem colant, iraonn-
diam mitigent, avaritiam reprimant, rapaci-
tatem refrenant, maleloqnia et stultiloqnia,
vel sourrilitatem et obtr^tationum venena
ex ore buo non adimant, soiant sibi, qui
tales sunt, qui emendare se nolnnt, sed in
his usque in senectutem ultimam perseve-
rant, partem sortemque at Jesu Domino
cum Gabaonitis esse tribuendam " (Orig.,
Hom. 10 on Joshua).

Ver. 24. — ^The Lord thy God commanded
(see Exod. xxiii. 32 ; Deut. vii. 1, 2). The
prophecies ol Moses during their sojourn in
" the plains of Jordan by Jericho " (see
Num. xxii. tqq.). We were sore afraid.
Prophesied in Exod. xv. 14.

Ver. 26. — ^That they slew them not. See
ver. 18, which attributes the preservation of
the Gibeonites to the action of the heads of
tribes. Perhaps this should be rendered,
and they slew them not,

Ver. 27. — And for the altar (see note
on ver. 21). In the place which he should
choose. This phrase, and especially the
use of the imperfect tense, implies that
Solomon's temple was not yet built. The
ark of God, and the tabernacle which con-
tained it, had several resting-places before
its final deposition in the temple (see note
on oh. xxiv. 1). And the grammatical con-
struction just referred to also implies that
there was more than one place. It is also
clear, from the language of 2 Sam. xxi. 1 — C,
that this narrative was already in existence
when that chapter was penned. It is equally
dear that the author of this passage knew
nothing of that (see Introduction).



HOMILETICS.

Vers. 1—27. — OoWs people off their guard. This chapter contains the record of
• venial sin ; an act, that is, which was rather one of thoughtlessness than of delibe-
rate intention to offend. It is one thing to forget for a moment God's superictending
proTid«ao«, aai to act without ooiuialtmg Him. It is quite another to Mt aystem*



oa. IX. 1—27.] THE BOOK OF JOSHUA. IM

atioally as if there ■were no God. Thus we read of no very Berious results flowing
from this inadvertence. God is " not extreme to mark what is done amiss," and
distinguishes between human infirmity and hnman depravity.

I. "ThB OHILDBBN of this WOBLD abb WISKB in IHEIB OENXBATION THAN THE

OHILDBEN OF LIGHT." The Canaauitish kings see the necessity of union. They
act with one accord. It is strange that God's people should find it more difficult
to unite than others. It is, however, hut an illustration of the old adage, " Corruptio
optimi pessima." It is ceal for the truth, which, when carried to »n extreme,
becomeR bigotry, and leads to dissension. Thus the Jews at the siege of Jerusalem
were divided among themselves when Titus and his legions were at the gates. So
now Christians are quarrelling among themselves when infidelity is abroad, and
threatening the very foundations of the Christian faith. We are wrangling about
non-essentials as though they were essentials, and men thus come to think that
there can be no truth at all among those who seem unable to agree on a single
point. We strive for pre-eminence, social, political, numerical, and while we strive,
the enemy of souls comes and carries off too many of the prizes for which we are
contending. We are united upon the fundamentals of the Christian faith, yet we
fail to see it ourselves, so eagerly do we contend for the objects of our unchastened
desires. The heathen rebuke us, for they could act unitedly in a moment of danger
for a common cause. The very devils shame us, for they combine to thwart, were
it possible, the counsels of the Most High. It is only Christians who can carry on
their intestine conflicts when the foe is thundering at the doors. Could we but
learn (1) what are the fundamentals of the Christian faith, and (2) that whatever
lies outside these is legitimate matter for argument and amicable controversy, but
not for strife and disunion, we should no longer have to deplore souls lost to Christ
for this cause, and it alone.

II. Wb onOHT TO EEFEB Aiil OUB ACTIONS TO GoD. Joshua and the princes in
this narrative made a distinction which many of us make, and which is not
warranted by the Word of God ; the distinction, that is, between matters of import-
ance, which we should never think of decidiaig without prayer, and comparatively
unimportant matters, in which the exercise of our own judgment is sufficient. But
the truth is, that no matter is unimportant. Everything, strictly speaking, should
be the subject of prayer; not necessarily of formal and prolonged prayer, but of a
momentary ejaculation to God for help. This may be thought impossible, but it
is in truth the secret of Christian pedection. " Pray without ceasing," says the
Apostle, and he only has the true key to Christian progress who has acquired the
habit of continual approach to God in prayer. Prayer should be the golden thread
which binds together our whole life, consecrating every act and thought of it
silently and secretly to God's service. This habit is only gained by perseverance,
•nd it must itself be sought with prayer ; but only he who has attained it can be
truly said to " walk with God."

III. A FBomsB IS SACRED, AND MUST BE KEPT AT ALL EiSES. There may, of
course, be exceptional cases in which a promise may not be kept. If we have
promised to do what is wrong, it were clearly worse to keep our promise than to
break it. But then it must be clear that it would be moraUy wrong to keep our
promise, Israelite casuistry here decides that a positive command of God — one,
that is, which is not grounded upon a moral necessity — ^is outweighed by the obliga-
tion to keep an oath. God had commanded them to make no covenant with the
people of the land, and they had unwittingly bound themselves by an oath to break
that command. It was a nice point for the moralist. There was no moral necessity
to put men to death. The command to exterminate the Canaanites was imposed
upon them as the ministers of God's vengeance. But the duty of keeping an oath
•was of universal obligation. To absolve one's self from it would be to set one's self free
from the elementary principles of morality» Thus the duty of keeping one's word
is important enough to outweigh even a command of God, where that command is
not of primary necessity. It would be wrong, for instance, to commit a murder,
or a theft, because we had promised to do so. But if we had wrongly promised to
nej^leot aom« oua of tlM external duties of religion, it would seem that we were



IM THE BOOK OF JOSHUA. [<m. tM. 1— ST.



botmd to keep our promise, unless it were clear that God'a cause would snffer
thereby. It is, however, difficult to find any precept of God's law under the Chris*
tian dispensation which we may venture to neglect ; because the ceremonial law ifl
abrogated, and there is no precept of Divine obligation left which does not involve
the weightier matters of tiie law. Two considerations may be drawn from this
history.

1. Be very careful how you promiae. Joshua and the Israelites promised lightly,
knd found to their regret that they ought not to have promised at all. Many
young Christians entangle themselves as lightly in engagements which they find
Bhould never have been made, and thus involve themselves in troubles and difficul-
ties firom which Christian prudence would have kept them free.

2. Keep your promise, when made, unless, as has been said, to keep it would be ft
an. The difficulties in which it involves you are sent by God to make you more
careful for the future. They wiU not overwhelm yon if you have faith in God.
But it were better to suffer some anxiety and annoyance than lose your hold on truth.
Inconvenience is no sufficient reason for breaking one's word, though it may be for
not giving it. It is as true, as a rule, of promises made to man, as of vows made
to God ; " better is it that thou shouldest not vow, than that thou shonldest tow,
and not pay."

HOMILIES BY VARIOUS AUTHORS.

Ver. 14. — TJie Israelites outwitted. A story that bears on its face the evidences
of authenticity. A wilinesB displayed quite in keeping with our notions of Oriental
dupUcity. Has lessons appropriate to modem days. Whilst some incidents of this
book enjoin courage, this induces discretion, and thus are we preserved from a
one-sided development of our spiritual life. No study more instructive than that
of history, and no history more suggestively written than that of the Israelites.

1. The stratagem op the Gibeonites shows us — 1. The different courses
adopted by different men in respect of the same dangers. The overthrow of
Jericho and the destruction of Ai struck terror into the hearts of the neighbouring
inhabitants of Palestine. Would not their turn come next? How should they
deal with the difficulty that threatened them ? The only safety seemed to lie in
united opposition. So reasoned many of the kings, and they organised their
forces for battle. But the Gibeonites determined to act otherwise. To contract
a treaty with the foe would be a greater safeguard than to encounter him io war.
This they accordingly endeavoured to secure in the subtle manner which this
chapter records. This variety of sentiment is being constantly exhibited in the
plans men pursue regarding the "terrors of the Lord " or the assaults of conscience.
Conviction of sin and of the retribution to which it exposes the sinner does not
always incline him to sue for mercy. Some brave the attack, and with incredible
folly fight against God. Though others have been overcome, they hope to be suc-
cessfoL The fall of other cities does not deter them from vain enterprises. Some,
like the Gibeonites, are teachable, and if we cannot commend the deception they
practised, we can at least exhort that the impossibUity of staying the spread of
God's kingdom be practically recognised. " Be ye reconciled unto God."

2. The pa/vns taken to preserve life. Self-preservation is accounted one of the
ttrongest instincts of our nature. These Gibeonites spared no trouble in order to gain
their end. And yet how often are the things relative to eternal life utterly
neglected !

8. The desire often entertained hy the world to enter into an allia/nce with the
Church. Simon Magus could desire the gift of the Holy Ghost for his own selfidi
purposes. It suits the plans of many to be considered religious ; they assume the
garb of piety to carry on their nefarious work unmolested. The Church of Christ
is bound to exercise discipline, but prevention is better than excommunication.
Guard against th« intrusion »i ungodly m«n. Seek the direction of God, who will
keep Bis Ohnrob pure. The Gibeonitei said nothing about adopting in heurt the



«tt. ^ 1-S7.] Tfia B00£ Ot JOSMTA. IM

religion of tlie Israelites, about renouncing idolatry and serving the true God ; they
only wanted the advantages which would accrue from making a league witii the
IsraeUtes. If we would shars the advantages we must become God's people in
heart and hfe.

4. The suoeeia of craft. Mental is sometimes more powerful than physical force
in overcoming a diffiovdty. The Midianites were able to seduce the Israelites into
sin though they could not injure them in open battle. There is undoubtedly a legiti-
mate use of craft ; according to the Apostle's declarations, " I have caught you with
guUe," " becoming aU things to aU men." There must be, however, nothing
inherently wrong in our procedure, no tampering with truth, as in the case of the
Gibeonites. For we proceed to remark —

5. Deceit is certain of ultimate detection. Hypocrisy must ere long have its
veil removed. Show will not always be taken for reality. God knows the actual
state of the heart and often makes it manifest to others. Soon did Israel discover
the trick which had been practised on them. Our subject contains a warning to
mere professors of godUness. Privileges secured by appearance of conformity are
only temporary.

IL The mistake of the Israelites teaches us — 1. That (he tenses easily
lead us astray. The mouldy bread, the damaged bottles, the clouted shoes
seemed plain proof of the truth of the strangers' words. Many persons think all
their doubts would vanish if they once saw an angel or heard- the voice of the
Almighty; but the irrefragable testimony might be a delusion just as much as the
convincing sights beheld by the Israehtes. The things touched and viewed are
what they are ; the error is in the conclusions drawn from them. The bread
was mouldy, but it did not warrant the belief that it had become so by a long
journey. We must be careful in our reasonings. Earthquakes and pestilences do
not necessarily prove God's anger, nor do they furnish testimony against the
perfections of His character as a God of lave. Prosperity is not conclusive evidence
of God's favour or man's desert, nor adversity of man's ill-desert and his Maker's
displeasure. In various directions the caution may be employed.

2. The weakness of hwman wisdom. All appeared so natural that the Israelites
forbore to consult the Lord. Was not their path clearly indicated ? They soon
repented of their haste and simphcity. And has no similar error befallen us, the
way seeming so evident that we have rushed into it without due deUberation and
prayer ? God expects us to use the sagacity He has bestowed upon us, but not to
rely upon it wholly. It must form only one element in the judgment reached.
" O Lord, I know that the way of man is not in himself; it is not in man that
walketh to direct his steps." We are so biassed, so influenced by inclination, have
such perverse feelings, that we are not fit to be guides to ourselves. Experience
attests this fact. Scripture often asserts it, reason corroborates it, and history proves
it. The pride of the Israelites was probably flattered by the notion of their &me
having extended to such a distant nation.

8. The importance of seeking the cotmsel of the Almighty. There is the reflex
influence of prayer, purifying the desires, calming the passions, revealing the
mischievous nature of much that seemed desirable, and leading to a clearer
perception of principles. It cleanses " the thoughts of the heart." There is the
answer granted to prayer. The mind is divinely directed, the Spirit of God fastens
the eyes on particular passages of Scripture, and upon certain indications of
Providence in external circumstances. To God, nothing that concerns His children
is of trivial import ; we may submit to Him matters great or smalL " Commit thy
way unto the Lord." — A.

Vers. 18, 19. — An oath observed. Becapitulate the chief circumstances : Th«
embassage from Gibeon. Described in chap. x. as "a great city," and "all the
men thereof mighty." Not because they were inferior to the other inhabitants of
the land did they seek to make a compromise with Israel The surprise of the
Israelites on discovering the nsamesa ef Cribeon. " Tk«ie« clil shoes bad easily
held to cany them back to their home."



1(9 THE BOOK OF JOSHUA. [oh. a. 1—27.



1. Thb anger and wish op the people arose from — 1. Their mortification
»t being outwitted. Pride had been honoured by the arrival of such an appa-
rently distant deputation. The evidences were incontestable. AH the stronger
would be the consequent revulsion when the trickery was discovered. Each man
thinks himself as wise as his neighbour, and cannot endure to be triumphed over
in any transaction. If we did not rate oorselves so highly, we should not be
troubled with such pangs of shame.

2. The natural hatred of deception. One of the proofs of the existence of a
moral sense, and therefore of the moral constitution and government of the world,
is found in the condemnation universally pronounced upon underhanded dealing.
Commerce and intercourse must cease where no bond of good faith is observed.
The Gibeonites perjured themselves by words and deeds. The fiercest reproofs of
our Lord were administered to the hypooritioal scribes and Pharisees. He called
tliem "whited sepulchres;" they "made clean the outside of the cup and platter,
but within were fuU of extortion and excess."

8. A mingled remembrance of God's commandment and their own desi/re for
plunder. The craft of the GKbeonites could not fail to make them regarded as
enemies of God; and if this wholesome sentiment was sometimes feeble in
operation, it was certainly strengthened on this occasion by the sight of the rich
booty which the Israelites would have enjoyed but for the league entered into
under such false pretences. Moral indignation is vastly swelled by a sense of
personal injury. Interest quickens resentment and action. Not so with the Al-
mighty. Raised far above all our petty interests. His wrath against sin is pure, a
bright flame that has no base admixture to sully its awfal grandeur.

II. The deteemination of the pkinces. 1. Regarded the sacrednest of their
word. Like Jephthah, they had given their word, and could not go back. They
were prepared to face the opposition of the populace. In this they showed
themselves worthy of their position as heads of the people. On all leaders a
great responsibUity rests ; it is sometimes necessary to check as well as to urge
forward their followers. They must be ready to resist the clamours of the mslti-
tude. To think weightily of a spoken word, a promise, is an all-important matter.
Words are in the truest sense deeds. " By thy words thou shalt be justified, and
by thy words thou shalt be condemned." Language is not meant to conceal but
to express our thoughts, and a spoken should be as binding as a written speech.
Here should Christians be well to the front. In business their every utterance
should be capable of being trusted, and they should risk much rather than
excuse themselves from the performance of their contracts.

2. Respected the irvuiolableness of an oath. When Jesus Christ prohibited all
swearing, He did but, in the paradoxical method of statement He adopted, interdict
all useless, vain, needless interlarding of conversation and business and legal
declarations with the introduction of holy names and things. He Himself used
the most solemn formulas in His pubhc teaching and before the high priest ; the
apostles invoked the witness of God to the truth of their statements ; and the Lord
God is said to have " sworn with an oath." An oath is therefore permissible, but
ought not to be Ughtly taken ; it implies solemnity and deUberation. Only, therefore,
tmder exceptional circumstances can it be considered right to break an oath.
Doubtless a promise made upon the strength of the promisee's false statements is
not always obligatory, but the case cannot be generally determined. Few will
doubt that in the instance before ns the princes acted wisely. They attributed
Bpeoial importance to the fact that they " had sworn unto them by the Lord God
of Israel," and they looked to the evil effects that would be produced if the name
of Israel's God should be dishonoured. It was their own fkult, their heedless
hurry, that they had committed themselves to the rash oath. Note, too, that the
n«urrative, by not condemning the resolve of the princes, seem to sanction it. And
In after years the Israelites incurred the grievous displeasure of the Almighty,
because Saul had, in his mad zeal, sought to slay the Gibeonites in contravention
of thi« agreement (2 Sam. xxi. 1 — 11). In the result these Hivites gained their Ufe,
kut wer* redooed to servitade. The curse prouoonoed npou Canaan (G«n. ix. 86)



OH. n. 1— ar.J THE BOOK OF JOSHUA. Iff

was fulfilled; these men were "onrsed" (ver. 23), and became a "aervant of
gervants " unto the Israehtes.

This incident reminds us of —

Thb safety of reliance upok thb Woed or God. " He is not a man that
he shonld lie." He cannot contradict Himself. If He does seem to " repent," it
is because His promise was conditional ; and if we seek His favour and do His
■will, His "repenting" will be only for our good, it will mean the removal of
some threatened punishment. On the other hand, if we observe not the terms
of the covenant, we cannot complain if God withdraws His promised blessings.
God has confirmed His word to His people with an oath. " The Lord hath sworn,
and will not repent." This indicates that what is said is irrevocable. Note the
argument in Heb. vi. 17 — 19, and the roek-grasping anchor which makes stable the
Christian's hope among all the waves and winds of life's stormiest sea. He is
acquainted with all the oiroumstances of the case ; He cannot be deceived. To
Him the dateless past and the endless future are an ever-present now. He bids ns
receive in Christ life for evermore. Who would not build on this nnshakabl*
foundation, the " word and oath " of the living God ? — ^A.

Vers. 15 — 23. — The Oiheonitet. The manner in which Joshua dealt with the
Gibeonites shows how inflexible is the respect God requires for truth. That respect
is exemplified in two ways in this narrative. First, in the fulfilment of the oath
made to the Gibeonites, that their lives should be saved ; and second, in the punish-
ment with which they are visited for their falsehood. They deceived Joshua by
their miserable subterfuge of mouldy bread and way-worn garments, and thus

Eassed themselves off as the inhabitants of some distant region instead of a neigh-
ouring city. Therefore, while their lives were spared, they were reduced to a state
of slavery (ver. 23).

I. NOTHINO IS MORE HATEFUL TO THE HOLY GOD THAN A LIB. He 18 ill His

very essence light (1 John i. 5). Falsehood and cunning pervert all the relation-
ships of life. Lying breaks the social bond, since a man's word is the only medium
of moral exchange between men ; and when mutual confidence is lost, the founda-
tions of the social edifice ore undermined. Therefore St. Paul feays, " Lie not one
to another ... for ye are members one of another." In the direct education which
God gave to His people Israel, He has given unmistakable demonstration of Hia
horror of all deceit. Hence the punishment of the Gibeonites.

II. The PUNISHMENT which these unhappy men brought upon thenaselves rested
not only upon them as individuals, but upon their whole nation. God thus showed
that evil is not transformed into good by being made to subserve a pubUo cause.
There are not two codes of morahty — one for private and another for national
life. Pohtics ought to be as scrupulously governed by the law of God as the life of
the individual. Although since the abolition of the theocracy, the sphere of re-
ligion and of the civil power ought to be kept altogether distinct, it is no less in-
cumbent on the State to adhere to the plain principles of morality. In spite of all
that may seem to argue the contrary, every violation of these principles brings its
own punishment. History is in its essence one long judgment of God.

III. By not allowing the Israehtes to break their oath to the Gibeonites, even
though they had been deceived by them, God teaches us that wrong done by

OUR neighbour does not at all VINDICATE US IN BEING GUILTY OF A LIKE WRONG.

One sin never justifies another. We are to " overcome evil with good," and it is
this which distinguishes the people of God from all other people. It is by not being
conformed to this world we ^umph over it. If the people of God were to act in
the same way as the Canaanites, there would be no reason for giving them the
ascendancy. When the Church becomes worldly it falls under the condemnation
of the world. Let us be, then, everywhere and always men the rule of whose life
is the law of God. The only retahation we must ever allow ourselves is rendering
good for evU. " Be not overcome of evil," says Bt. Paul, " but overcome evil with
good " (Bom. xii. 21).— E. db P.



U8 THB BOOK OF JOSHUA. [oh. a. 1—17.

Vers. 3, 4. — A stolen treaty. The Ganaanite kinga are at last roused to united
action against Joshua and the host of Israel But their confederation is not
complete. The inhabitants of Gibeon, on the principle that " discretion is the
better part of valour," endeavour, in something like selfish treachery to the common
cause, to make peace with the invaders. A suggestive example of the spirit that
animates the corrupt social hfe of the world. When men are bent on saving them-
selves they care little for the ties that bind them to others. Self-interest is a very
iasecure bond of social unity. It was natural, however, that these men should seek
to save themselves, and their suit for a treaty of peace would have had no wrong
in it but that it took the form of deceit.

I. Thk STBATAaEii. It was cleverly devised and skilfully carried out. It was
both an acted and a spoken he. Their profession of reverent submission to the God
of Israel (" Because of the name of the Lord thy God," ver. 9) was a hollow pre-
tence. Their whole behaviour forbids our attributing to them the honesty of pur-
pose that Bahab manifested. Base, slavish fear was their real motive (ver. 24).
Observe (1) how one sin leads on to another, perhaps a greater. The path of
transgression is a downward way. Every fraud needs a folsehood to cover it.
When men have once placed themselves in a false position they know not in what
meanness and shame it may involve them. (2) If half the ingenuity men show in
the pTirsuit of their own carnal ends were spent in the service of truth and righteous-
ness, how much better and happier the world would be. The followers of Christ
may learn many a lesson in this respect from the facts of secular life around them,
and even from their adversaries. " The children of this world are wiser in their
generation than the children of light " (Luke xvi. 8).

II. Its success. They gained their end so far as this — that their Uves were
spared, secured to them by a treaty and a solemn oath (ver. 16). They gained it
through the too easy creduhty of Joshua and the princes, who supposed that things
were as they seemed to be, and through the unaccountable omission of Joshua to
" ask counsel of the Lord " (ver. 14). (1) Trickery often seems to prosper in this
world. It trades upon the generous trustfulness of men. But its success is short-
Uved. It carries with it its own condemnation. Better always be the deceived
than the deceiver. (2) We must expect to fall into practical error when we fail to
seek Divine direction. The wisest and best need something higher than their own

1'adgment to guide them in the serious businesses of hfe. "In all thy ways aoknow-
edge him, and he will direct thy steps " (Prov. iii. 6).

III. Its penalty. They saved their lives at the cost of liberty and honour
(ver. 21). The servile condition to which they were reduced fulfilled the curse
pronounced by Noah on the children of Ham (Gen. ix. 25). Joshua and the princes
did right in regarding their oath as sacred and blading, even though it had been
won by deceit. The people would have had them violate it. " All the congrega-
tion murmured against the princes." Popular impulses may as a rvQe be trusted ;
but are sometimes very bhnd and false. Vox populi not always Vox Dei. Happy
the people whose rulers are able wisely to curb their impetuosity and present before
them an example of inflexible rectitud-e. If the oath of Joshua and the princes had
pledged them to a thing essentially wrong, they might have used the fact that they
were beguiled into it by fraud as an argument for disregarding it ; but not so seeing
that, while it bound them to nothing absolutely unlawful, they were involved in it
by their own neglect. That God approved of its observance is seen in the fact that,
when the Ganaanite kings sought to inflict vengeance on Gideon for the clandes-
tine treaty, He gave Joshua a signal victory over them (ch. x. 8 — 12) ; and also
in the fact that the curse of blood-guiltiness came upon the land in after days be-
cause Sard broke this covenant with the Gibeonites and slew some of them (2 Sam.
xxi. 1, 2). These men, however, must pay the penalty of their deceit. The de-
cision of Joshua respecting them is of the nature of a just and prudent compromise.
It avoids the dishonour that would be done to the name of God by the violation of
the oath; but saves Israel from the disgrace of a dangerous aUiance with the
Canaanites by reducing them to a state of absolute subjection. Learn (1) the aano-
tity of an oath. A tighteoiu mah is one who " swearetb to bis own hurt, and



OH. VL. 1— «7.] THE BOOK OP JOSHUA. IM

changetih not"(P8a. xv. 4). He who " reverences hia oonscienoe as his king'' will
never treat lightly any verbal pledges he may have given, or endeavour sophisticaUy
to rid himself of their responsibility. His " word will be as good as his bond.
However false others may be, let him at least be true. (2) The need of a spirit o{
wisdom to determine aright the practical problems of life. The path of duty is
often the resultant of different moral forces. The most difBcult points of casuistry
are those at which impulses equally good (fear of God, self-respect, humanity, ftc.)
seem to be at variance. Let every right motive have due weight. " Of two evils
choose the least." (8) How men sometimes disqualify themselves for any high and
noble position in the Church of God by their former infatuation in the service of
sin. These Gibeonites are dehyered from destruction, but their perpetual servitude
is a perpetual disgrace. So do saved men often bear with them, as long as life
lasts (in moral disability, or social distrust, &c.), the marks of what they once have
been. They may well be thankful when their past transgressions, for Christ's sake,
are forgiven, and they are permitted to take any place in TTia kingdom, even " as
slaves beneath the throne " — " hewers of wood and drawers of water imto all the
congregation." — ^W.

Vers. 8-^27. — The submission of the Qiheoniies. According to the explicit law
of Moses (in Deut. xi. 10 — 18), there were three courses which Israel might pursue
towards the cities they besieged: 1. In the event of a city reAising to capitulate,
they were, after taking it, to destroy aU the males who survived, but take the women
and the Uttle ones and the spoU, and divide the same. This first course, however,
was only to be pursued to such cities as were outside the boimdaries of the promised
land. 2. In the event of cities within these hoimda/ries refusing to capitulate,
then, on taking thenn, they were to slay aU the inhabitants of either sex, lest they
should " teach them to do after their abominations." 8. But, thirdly, in the event
of any city, within or without these boundaries, submitting to them without resist-
ance, then they were to make the people " tributaries to them ; " but no life was to
be taken. From ch. xi. 19, 20, it is obvious that every city had the opportunity
of capitulating, and would have saved its inhabitants from extermination by doing
BO ; but that the thought of capitulation did not enter the hearts of any community,
but that of Gibeon only. These remarks seem necessary to enable us to understand
aright the exact position of affairs. They suggest: 1. That the submission of Gibeon
was a right thing wrongly done. 2. That the wrong part of their action — ^the lie —
was needless, as they would have been saved without it ; and fruitless, as they
would have had probably a better lot had there been no attempt to mislead. 3.
That, accordingly, we have not here the example of a profitable He (a thing that hag
never been seen since the fall), but only the example of wisdom in yielding to the in-
evitable, and seeking peace with the earthly representatives of God. Thus under-
stood we may gather from their action two or three lessons worth our consideration.

I. Avoid doino good things in a bad wat. This is a common fJEiult. Often
all the grace of kindly acts is lost by an ungracious way of doing them. We give —
perhaps avowing reluctance to do so. We confess mistakes — but exhibit a churlish
regret, not for the mistake, but for the necessity of acknowledging it. We take
good advice — ^but suUenly. We act on s good impulse — ^but slowly. We yield our
hearts to God — but only with much misgiving, and after long delay. We do the
right and just part, but only after earnestly trying to avoid doing it. So these
Gibeonites rightly submit, but make the submission, which is right, in a vnrong
way, using falsehood and pretence, taking away from Israel the grace of generosity
and the friendly spirit that would have moderated their lordship over them.
Do not so blame them as to forget that every fault is a mirror, looking into which
each may see some likeness of his own imperfection. You and I are like the
Gibeonites in this, that always some bit of evU creeps into and mixes with the good.
Such mixtures, in God's mercy, may not be fatal to our wel&re, but they will
always mitigate it. In this case a less abject and menial form of servitude would
have been &e result of their submission if they had possessed the courage of their
wisdom. Do your good things in a good way.



100 THE BOOK OF JOSHUA. [<w. a. 1— *7.

n. PboMPT ACOEPTANOE of *HB INEVITABLK IB ONE OF THK BIOHEBT PASTS OF

WISDOM. The other cities of Canaan were not more brave, they were only more
foolish than Gibson, They lacked the imagination of faith which could realise the
fate awaiting them. They drSamed of safety without taking measures to secure
it. They believed in that " chapter of accidents which is the Bible of the fool."
Like Bome Oriental goyemments which we have seen, they stared destruction in
the face, and did nothing to ensure success in averting it. Wisdom averts the
preventible, but sets itself to work at once to accept the inevitable. And Gibeon
deserves credit for its clear perception of its danger, and its sagacity in trying to
make the best of what could not be avoided. Perhaps, being more republican than
any of the other nationalities, we have here an instance of the superior wisdom
of the popular instinct to that of the rulers'. Without dwellmg, however, on the
source of their wisdom, we may with advantage follow its example. One of the
chiefest parts of the art of hfe is frankly, promptly accepting the inevitable. What-
ever the pressure that you cannot avoid, proceed at once to make the best of it. If
it be poverty, do not with desperate ventures attempt to win back wealth, but with
contentment and industry set yourself to make the best of it. If disease affects
you from which you cannot free yourself, come to terms with it. Send your
ambassadors and make a covenant with it. And accepting the situation in which
you find yourself, address yourself to gather the " sweet uses of adversity," and you
win find weakness a great teacher and not without its compensations. If you
have done wrong, and to humble yourself is a necessity of honour, do so like Gibeon,
at once. If submission to your redeeming God has become a necessity of your
case, do not, like the other cities of Israel, dream and defy, and then fall before the
destroyer ; but with timely overtures seek Him while He is near. Thus in all
relations of life accept frankly the inevitable. Agree with thine adversary quickly,
and with the force you cannot resist make such terms as will allow you to enjoy a
less dignity, but yet some degree of happiness.

III. God crowns with His reward aix good, however mixed with evil.
In the action of the Gibeonites there is the good of a rudimentary faith, there is the
evil of deceit. It is to be observed that, while the evil is punished, the good is not
ignored. God does not require the retractation of the oath ; and when, centuries later,
Israel breaks the oath, He shows His disapproval of their course. God sanctions
their being spared, and thus approves the good that is mixed with eviL Happily
for us, God is still the same. Perfect motive He never fijids, and unmixed good He
never looks on. But, in His infinite compassion, whatever of good there is in our
action receives a rich reward. His love holds as keen a scrutiny as His justice, aikd
wherever in the action of men the slightest good appears, then He rewards it.

rV. Whatever opposes God's cause will either be made subservient to
IT, OR BE destroyed. The fate of Ai or Gibeon, destruction or service, are the only
alternatives of Canaan. It is a great pity when the foe declines to become a friend,
and when those outside lack the aspiration to be reconciled thoroughly. For
unreconciled they must serve, or disappear. Philosophies that oppose the gospel will
turn round and speed on the triumph of truth, or they will melt away hke a cloud
before the warmth of dawn. PoUoies that seem adverse to the prosperity of the
Church wiU prove productive of advantage to it, or be swept into oblivion. No
weapon formed against the Church of God ever prospers. Be not on the wrong
side. However strong you may appear, if you do not side heartily with the cause
of God, you will be made its reluctant servants, or its extinguished foes.— G.

ypr- 14.— rA« oracle negleottd. Between Joshua and Eleazer, the ruler and
VoB high priest, a noble heritage was divided. The one has the obedience of Israel,
the other the secrets of God. They have at their command respectively human
power and Divine wisdom. According to Num. ixvii. 21, Joshua was taught to
expect to find a heavenly oracle in the Urim and the Thummim of the priest ;
and oonstantiy the promised oracle was given. In this case, however, it was not
sought. Joshua and the rest were flattered with the story of their fame, ajid too
readily assumed the insignificance of the occasion. Otherwise, had they asked they



OH. IX. 1—27.] THE BOOK OF JOSHUA. 1«1

wotild have received counsel, and have been set on the track of discovering the
fraud. It probably did not materially matter to Israel then. The chief loss to that
generation was the booty they ■would in that case have divided, and the private
advantage of so many slaves ^vided amongst the families, instead of having a ser-
vile tribe allotted to the ministry of the tabernacle. Still the historian notes the
neglected oracle as if Joshua had learned here a lesson of carrying even things that
seemed httle to his God. The occasion gives two or three lessons worth learning,

I. There is an oracle which will wisely guide all who fear God. God
has never been at a loss to guide the willing steps of men ; but to the heart that
has sought He has always given guidance. In various ways He has led men.
Abraham through a whispering of His great name ; Jacob and Joseph through
dreams ; Moses through voice and vision and miracle alike ; Joshua through some
gleaming of the high priest's breastplate ; Gideon through the angel ; Samuel
through a raised state of every faculty ; the prophets by the breathings of great
thoughts and feelings ; Jonah's sailors by the lot ; the wise men from the East by
a star ; the Ethiopian by a page of prophecy. He seems to accommodate all and
give them their guidance where they expect to find it. God stOl " fulfils Himself'
Hj many ways, The African rain-maker rebuked Livingstone, by declaring his
methods of getting rain were really prayers which the good God was in the habit
of granting. The Moravians, who expect Divine guidance through the casting of
the lot, doubtless find it there, though no one else would get it. Sometimes through
the providential barring of dangerous paths ; sometimes through a restraint like
that which Paul described in the words " the spirit suffered us not ; " sometimes
through inward impulse of a cogent kind, a being " bound in the spirit to go " in a
certain direction ; sometimes by the mere commendation of certain courses to ouj
taste, our judgment, or our conscience. God still gives guidance to all who ask it.

" No symbol visible

We of Thy presence find.
But aU who would obey Thy will
Shall know their Father's mind."

Pray for light, and in some way it wiU reach you. There is a living oraole for
all who wish to walk according to the wiQ of God.

II. True wisdom commits small things as well as great to God's caeb.
A child tells aU to the parent that it trusts ; the least discomfiture — the greatest
distress. And when we have the child-like heart we commit aU to God, feeling that
the least is not too little for His great love. The abUity is developed of rising on
every occasion in thought to Him, tiU the mood becomes so confiding, so expectant,
that it forms a " prayer without ceasing." And this habit of committing aU be-
comes fortified by the wisdom which observes how often the issues of things are to
be in the inverse ratio of their seeming importance : vast consequences flowing
from what seem most trivial events, and events that seem of a stupendous charaotor
leaving no trace of influence on after history. So, Uttle things as well as great are
lifted by the devout heart to the Divine ear. Joshua here thought recourse to the
oracle needless because the matter seemed unimportant. But it had more import-
ance than he knew. Strcmgely enough, this compact with Oibeon fixes the resting-
place of the arh for centuries, right down to the time of Dcwid. For Kiijath-
jearijcn was one of the cities of Gibeon, and it was probably the residence there of
the Gibeonites that determined the resting there of the ark. This, in its turn, threw
the centre of the national life to the southward, helped the supremacy of Judah,
the choice of Jerusalem as capital, the subordination of Ephraim and Samaria. li
Joshua bad seen all that hung on his decision, he would not because of the seeming
insignificance of the matter have neglected the oracle. Take God into thy counsel
in edl matters, less and larger. Commit the little acts to His decison, surrender the
little things which self-will would decide. " Faithful in least, faithftil in much ; "
and, even bo, devout in least, devout in much. Christ raised the dead, and then
said, " Give her something to eat ; " the omnipotent miracle, the homely kindness,

JOSHUA. M



i«a



THE BOOK OF JOSHUA,



[cH. X. 1—43.



being equally eharacteristio of Him. Walk with God always. In least things
consult His oracle.

m. All make mistakes, but God's saints profit bt them. This is the
second mistake of the same kind which Joshua has made siuce crossing Jordan.
Not consulting the oracle, he sends too few men against Ai. Not consulting the
oracle, he makes this covenant with Giheon. But our text recording the mistake
shows how it was discovered, and the repetition of it avoided. There is no mistake
which is absolute mischief, it will always give us at least a lesson. Blessed are
they who can turn all their faults into schoolmasters. For though such school-
masters use the lash, they give good teaching, being skilled to teach humility,
watchfulness, dependence on God. Turn yom* faults to good account, and every
act of foUy into a spring of wisdom. Lastly, observe, that not only did Joshua
turn the fault to account, but —

IV. God makes the best of a good man's mistakes. After all, the alliance
with Gibeon gave them entrance into a position of importance, became the occasion
of the great victory of Beth-horon, and has no traceable results of mischief. Thus it
ever is. God makes the best of us and of owr work. When the heart is right our
every failing is turned to good account. Be not too nervous about the results of
our actions. For when the purpose is honest and devout —



♦'Our indiscretions ofttimes serve us well.
There's a Divinity that shapes our ends,
Bough-hew them as we will."



a.



EXPOSITION.



CHAPTER X. 1—43.



ThK BATTI.E 07 BsTH-HOBON, AND THE SUB-

jnoATiON OF Southern Palestine. — Ver. 1. —
Adonl-zedec (cf. Melchizedek in Gen. ziv.
18). The name given to the king of Jerusa-
lem was good enough, and no doubt was a
gnrvival of earlier and purer times. In the
days of Melchizedek the name corresponded
to the character. Jerusalem. Hebrew, Jeru-
shalaim, with the usual dual termination.
It has been generally supposed to be the same
with Salem, or rather Shalem, the city of
which Melchizedek was king, and this is sup-
ported by the fact that the name of Salem is
given to Jerusalem in Psa. Ixxvi. 2. But it is
by no means certain that this is the case.
The first to dispute the identity of the two
places was St. Jerome, who declares that the
Salem of Melchizedek was eight miles from
Soythopolis, and that the ruins of the palace
of Melchizedek could stUl be seen there (see
also Qea. xxxiii. 18). The term Salem, as
indicative of the security and strength of
Jemsalem, might not unnaturally be ap-
plied to it by the Psalmist ; while, on the
other hand, the dual form of Jerusalem
seems difficult to account for on the theory
of the identity of Jerusalem and Salem.
This dual form has been a difficulty to
critics ; and Mr. Grove, in the * Dictionary
of the Bible,' conjectures that it may have
arisen from an attempt to twist the archaic
PhoBoioian form into agreement with the



more modem Hebrew idiom, just as the
Greeks afterwards twisted the name into
Hierosolyma, or the holy Solyma. But a
simpler explanation may be found in the fact
that Jerusalem, like many other cities, con-
sisted of two parts, the upper and the lower
town (cf . Judg. i. 8 with ver. 1, 7 and 21, and
2 Sam. V. 6—8), while in earlier times the
upper or lower town alone existed. Phual
names of cities were not imcommon in later
ages, as Athene and Thebss. The name
has been variously derived. Some have
thought that as it is also called Jebus (ch.
xviii. 28 ; Judg. xix. 10), from its being the
chief city of the Jebusites, it was originally
Jebus-salem, and hence by a corruption
Jerusalem. But this derivation has now
been abandoned, and opinions differ as to

whether it is derived from {J'-ll* and D?^ sig-
nifying " peaceful inheritance " (Ewald,
Keil), or from n^ and CQ^ "peaceful
settlement " (Gesenius, Lee). Gesenins ob-
jects to the former derivation that it would
require dagesh in the ty. The fathers and
medisvaj divines, misled by Origen, trans-
late it " vision of peace." This translation
is alluded to in the well-known hymns Urbs
beata Sion and qiianta qualia. Origen
supposed it to come from nsi. Another
difficult question is when the name wag
given, for there can be little doubt that the
Book of Joshua was written b^ore tii« timi



OT. 1. 1—48.]



THE BOOK OF JOSHUA.



IM



of David. It is possible that the name may
have been given by the Jebusites themselves,
in consequence of their secure possession of
it, notwithstanding the subjugation of the
surrounding country by the Israelites. And
when David had seized upon it and made it
his capital, he would not be likely to change
so suitable a name. For the Jebusites,
evidently by their invariable position last
among the nations of Canaan, the most
insignificant among them, were enabled to
defy the IsraeUte power long after their
more powerful neighbours had succumbed,
and David no doubt chose the situation of
Jerusalem for his capital not only because,
unlike Hebron, it enabled him to dweU
among his own people without cutting him-
self oft from intercourse with the other
tribes of Israel ; but because, as a mountain
fastness remote from the plains of Esdraelon
and the Orontes, which were the great high-
ways of the Egyptian and Assyrian kings
on their military expeditions, it would enable
him to consolidate his power, and to secure
that empire which became his from the force
of his genius and the favour of God. We
may remark upon the antecedent probability
of the fact that the king of a place situated
as Jerusalem is should stand at the head of
this league.

Ver. 2. — That they feared greatly.
Joshua had certainly obtained an excellent
strategic position in the heart -of the
country; but it was not this which appa-
rently most alarmed the kings who consti-
tuted the confederacy, though they did not
fail to observe that, as the words " and were
among them" show. It was the weight
and importance of Gibeon itself, and the
fact that its inhabitants were now enlisted,
not on the side of the Canaauites, but against
them. As one of the royal cities. Observe
the minute accuracy of the historian. No
king is mentioned in the narrative in ch. ix.
We now earn indirectly that they had none.
The Vulgate misses the point of the his-
torian by leaving out " as " altogether.

Ver. 3. — Hoham king of Hebrbn. It was
a powerful confederacy which the Phceni-
ciau tribes in their desperation formed
against Joshua. At its head stood the king
of Jerusalem, which, from its central situa-
tion and its almost impregnable position
(see notes on ch. xv. 63), might naturally
stand at the head of such a league. Next
came Hebron, which, from its importance
from an early period (Gen. xxiii. 2 ; xxxv.
27), and the gigantic stature of its inhabit-
ants (Num. xiii. 33; Deut. i. 28; ii. 10,
11; ix. 2), as well as its daughter cities
(ver. 37), would prove a formidable addition
to the strength of the confederates. Colos-
sal blocks of stone, testifying to the presence



there of the primeval races of Palestine, art
Etui to be found in the neighbourhood.
Hebron stands in "the hill countnr of
Judsea." Its situation has been mncu ad-
mired, standing as it does nearly 3,000 feet
above the level of the Mediterranean, and
commanding the most extensive views of
the Holy Land. This is one of the most in-
teresting in its reminiscences of all the
cities in Palestine. Here Abraham pitched
his tent, near the " oak of Mamre." Here
was the burying-place of Abraham and
Sarah, which has been kept in memory by
an unwavering tradition even to this very
day ; and, sacred ground though it be to
the Mohammedans, was opened to the
Prince of Wales and his companions in 1862.
This was the inheritance of Caleb, and here,
where the affections of every Israelite would
most closely centre, David fixed his capital
until compelled to change it by reasons to
which we have already referred. Hebron
seems to have been successively occupied by
various members of the Phcenician confede-
ration. It was first founded, we learn,
seven years before Zoan in Egypt (Num.
xiii. 22). When we first hear of it, it is in
the possession of Mamre the Amorite (Gen.
xiii. 18 ; xiv. 13). In Gen. xxiii. it hasclearly
passed into the possession of the Hittites,
and the mention of the children of Heth is
too express for us to suppose that the term
Hittite is used generally for the inhabitants
of the land. At a much later period the
Canaanites, or lowlanders, had, strangely
enough, obtained possession (Judges i. 10),
and here again the accurate acquaintance of
the historian with the names of the tribes
(see Judg. i. 4, 21, 26, 35) forbids us to sup-
pose that he is speaking loosely. Piram
Mng of Jarmuth. Jarmuth is mentioned
in ch. XV. 35, and in Neb. xi. 29. It has
been identified with Yarmuk (see Eobinson,
n. sec. 11, with whom Vandevelde and
Conder agree), where there are the remains
of very ancient walls and cisterns. Of its
size and importance in the time of Joshua
we know nothing. Japhla king of Lachlsta.
Like Jarmuth, Lachish was in the Shephe-
lah, or lowlands, of Judah, and we frequently
hear of it in the later history of the Jews,
as in 2 Kings xiv. 19 ; xviiL 14, 17 ; xix. 8 ;
also 2 Chron. xi. 9. It has been identified
by Von Eaumer and Vandevelde, whom
Keil follows, with Um Lakis, though Eobin-
son (' Biblical Besearches ' II. 388) denies
this on the authority of Eusebius and
Jerome ; " but not on any reasonable
grounds" (Vandevelde). This is the mora
clear in that Bobinson rejects the authority
of the Onomasticon in the case of Eglon.
Um Lakis is only an hour and a quarter'*
journey from Ajl^, or Eglon, and ibis nar-



164



THE BOOK OF JOSHUA.



[cH. z. 1—48.



irative (vers. 31 — 36) Bhows that Eglon
was on the way from Laohish to Hebrori.
Oonrlpr, in his ' Handbook ' and in ' Pal.
Exploration Fund Quart. Paper," Jan., 1878,
p. 20, suggests Tell el Hesy, a name which
he thinks may "be a corruption of La-
chish." This is a great mound on the main
road from EleutheropoUs to Gaza. It is a
strong argument for Um Lakis that there
are an immense number of instances where
the places retain their ancient names. The
strongest argument for Tell el Hesy is that
Lachiah was efidently a place of some
strength. Joshua, we read (ver. 32), " en-
camped against it " (this is said only of La-
ohish and Eglon), and " took it on the
second day," and it successfully resisted
the king of Assyria. Now Tell el Hesy was
a *' great mound " (Conder) ; but Um
Lakis is described by Vandevelde as situ-
ated on " a low mound." Deblr Mng of
Eglon. This, the modern AjlSn, according
to the best authorities, was on the road
from EleutheropoUs to Gaza, not far from
Lachish, Euins are to be found there ; but
we have no means of ascertaining the si.'e
and importance of the town in the time of
Joshua. The LXX., here and elsewhere in
this chapter, render by 'OSoWdn. In ch.
xii. 11 they read 'ByXwi/. There is consider-
able similarity between Gimel and Daleth,
Mem and Nun in the ancient Hebrew cha-
racter. From this a various reading no
doubt resulted.

Ver. 4. — Come up unto me. Most of
these kings were in the lowlands. Hence
the expression " Come up" is accurate in
the mouth of the king of Jerusalem, and
strengthens the claim of the narrative to be
regarded as authentic. That we may smite
Gibeon. Or, and %oe will smite Gibjon. The
conjunction \ often, but not always, signifies
the pui-pose with which a thing is done. Here
there is nothing to guide us in the decision
whether the passage indicates the purpose or
the result. It is in keeping with the whole
history, and is one of the life-hke touches
with which it abounds, that the king of
Jerusalem does not dare to suggest an attack
upon Joshua. He can only venture upon
assailing Gibeon, standing in less fear of it
than of the divinely-protected invaders, and
hoping at least by this measme to deprive
Joshua of formidable aUiea. " Cum anima
humana Verbo Dei se sooiaverit, dubitare
non debet, statim se inimicos habi(,uram, et
eos, quos ante habuerit amicos, in adversa-
rios vertendoa " (Grig., Horn. 2 on Joshua.
See also Ecclus. ii. 1 ; 2 Tim. iii. 12). " As
Satan, so wicked men, cannot abide to lose
any of their communitie. If a convert come
home, the angels welcome him with songs,
the Devils follow him with upiore and f urie,



his old Partners with Bcome and oblonuie"
(Bp. HaU).

Ver. 6. — To Gllgal. See note on ch. ix. 6,
That dwell In the mountains. Anothei
life-like touch. The details of the confede-
racy were not f uUy known to the Gibeonites.
There had not been time for that. It wag
only known that the storm was to break on
them from the mormtaiu region, Jerusalem
(ver. 4) being the head-quarters of the expe-
dition. As a matter of fact, the kings who
formed the confederacy principally inhabited
the lowlands, as we have seen. No one
could have hit upon this apparent contra-
diction yet real agreement but one whose
narrative was compUcd from authentic
sources.

Ver. 7. — Joshua ascended. Eeil insists
upon the military sense here, as against the
literal one, " went up." He believes in the
second Gilgal, which was on higher ground
than the first (see ch. ix. 6), where, however,
we learn that the second Gilgal was not so
elevated as Gibeon. And all the mighty
men of valour. A selection of the bravest
troops seems to be implied here, by the
copulative particle. Cf. Gen. iii. 16, " Thy
pain and (especially in the time of) thy
pregnancy."

Ver. 8. — Fear not. The key-note of
Joshua's career, as of the career of eveiy
soldier of God (see ch. i. 9 ; xi. 6).

Ver. 9.^Suddenly. By a night march,
60 that he might surprise the confederates
at the dawn of day. One of Joshua's chief
characteristics as a general was celerity
(see ch. xi. 7). Masius praises Joshua for
his prudence and diligence, and adds, " Qua
arte Julium Ca^sarem tot victoriis clarum
fuisse ne ipse quidem diesimulavit" And
went up. There is no " and " in the
original. It runs thus : " All the night he
went (or had gone) up from Gilgal."

Ver. 10. — Disoomflted. The original
meaning of the word is to disturb, put in
motion. Hence, as here, to throw ints con-
fusion, put to rout. Going up to Beth-horon.
Beth-boron, or the house of the hollow,
consisted of two towns. The one is now
called Beit Ur el Foka, or Upper Beit Ur,
the other Beit Ur el Taohta, or Lower Beit
Ur. To the former led a difficult pass from
Gibeon, called the asoent (ilpj^D) to Beth-
horon. From the former to the latter ran a
path so rooky and rugged that steps have
been made in the rook to facilitate the
descent. This is the " going down " (T]1D)
to Beth-horon, mentioned iu the next verse.
So Maccabees iii. 16-24. (Of. Bobinson,
vol. iii. sec. 9). Speaking ol the view from
Beth-horon, he says, " The prospect included
the hill country and the plain ai ihr as the



«*. *. i-48.i



THE BOOK OF JOBHUA.



161



eye conld reach. , . . TJpon the side of the
long hill that skirts the valley on the south,
we could perceive a small village on the
W.S.W. called Taio." To Azekah. See ch.
XV. 8S; cf. 1 Sam. zvii. 1. This place is
known to after Jewish history, having been
fortified by Eehoboam (2 Clu'on. xi. 9), be-
sieged by Nebuchadnezzar (Jer. xxxiv. 7),
which shows it to have been a place of some
importance. It continued to be inhabited
after the captivity (Neh. xi. 30), and has
been identified by Vandevelde with Ahbek,
a place standing upon a mountain. He
supposes it to have been identical with
the Aphek in Judah (1 Samuel iv. 1).
But this would be better identified with
Aphekah (oh. xv. 53). Lieut. Conder
{'Palest. Expl. Quart. Paper,' Oct., 1875)
identifies it with a place called Deir el
Aashek, eight miles north of Shoohoh.
But apparently in the ' Handbook ' he has
abandoned this idea, though he makes no
reference to this passage. And unto Mak-
kedah. One of Qie lowland cities of Judah
(see oh. xv. 41). Vandevelde identifies it
with Summeil, a place where there are the
ruins of a very ancient city (see ver. 28),
built of large uncemented stones, a sign of
great antiquity, and a large cave, such as
that described in ver. 16. SeeKobinson, vol.
ii. p. 868, who gives not a hint, however,
that it is to be identified with Makkedah,
nor does he mention a cave. Lieut. Conder
('Palest. Expl. Quart. Paper,' July, 1875)
identifies it vrith the present El Moghar
(The Caves), twenty-five miles from Gibeon
along the valley of Ajalon, where several
caves are found, the only ones, apparently,
in the district, Summeil is a very long
distance from Gibeon, and if we are to
identify this with Makkedah, which there
appears no ground for doing, supernatural
assistance would have been required in more
than one way for so protracted a pursuit
during the same day.

Ver. 11.— Great stones from heaven.
Calmet has taken great trouble to collect
evidence for showers of actual stones from
heaven upon the enemies of Israel. But
the next sentence of the verse states that
they were feiiistones, TJ3 *i3X. And even
if there were not sufficient evidence of the
fall of hailstones large enough to do great
destruction to man and beast, we might fall
back upon the theory that this was a miracu-
lous hailstorm, since the whole history
teems with miraculous intervention. But
in point of fact this is unnecessary. We
need not go further back than the famous
storm of August 2nd, 1879, for an account
lif hailstones of enormous size falling within
fifty miles of London. And in tropical
tUmatea still more destructive storms are of



no infrequent occurrence. Every treatise
on physical geography teems with instances.
Masius refers to the well-known story of the
relief afforded by a sudden shower to Marcus
Aurelius and his army, which he follows
Eusebius in thinking attributable to Chris-
tian prayers, but which the emperor, in a
medal struck on the occasion, attributed to
Jupiter Pluvius (see Neander, ' Hist, of
Christian Church,' vol. i.). He also cites
the verses of Claudian on a similar victory
of Theodosius :'

" nimium dilecte Deo, tibi militat sthei
Efc conjurati veniunt ad prrelia venti."

They were more which died with hail-
stones. A conclusive proof, both to the
Israelites and their antagonists, that the
victory was owing rather to the favour of
God than to the power of man, and suggest-
ing the exclamation of the Psalmist, " Not
unto us, Lord, not unto us, but to Thy
Name give gloiy" (Psa. cxv. 1). See also
Deut. ix. i, 5. It is, perhaps, worth while
to remark that the printers have modern-
ized this passage. For more the original
edition has 7noe ; cf. Shakspeare's ' Lover's
Complaint,' line 47 — " Found yet mo letters
sadly penned in blood." "Faith and troth
they would no mo " (Greene, ' Shepherd's
Ode ').

Ver. 12.— Then, tN. See eh. viiL 80.
The period is here more strictly defined by
the addition of the words, ' ' on the day when
the Lord delivered up the Amorites before
the children of Israel." Spake Jo.^hua to
the Lord. The preposition ? (Uterally,
" to ") used here, has a variety of meanings
in Hebrew. It is employed in such a phrase
as " a Psahn of David " (literally, " to
David "), but the sense requires " by." So
in Esa. rii. 9 (8 in our version) ; Isa. xxii. 6,
&c. It has the sense "on account of"
in Gen. iv. 23 (where it is rendered " to "
in our version) ; but the sense requires
"in return for," " on account of." So
also in Joshua ix. 9, where our version
renders " because of." In the latter part
of this verse it signifies "before" (see
note there). In a passage so much disputed
as this it is necessary to remember the in-
definiteness of the original. Though the
rendering, " to the Lord," is the natural
and obvious one, the other meanings cannot
be excluded. The more probable rendering
is that in the text. Yet, as no address to
God is afterwards recorded, the meaning
may be " by," i.e., by the inspiration of, or
" because of," i.e., on account of the great
success God had vouchsafed to him, and
which he earnestly desired to complete ; or
" before," as though Joshua spoki with e



i^



THE BOOK OP JOSaUA.



[OB. X. 1 — 18.



eonsciotisnesB of God's immediate presence
and help. For a full disoussion of this re-
markable passage the reader is referred to
the Introduction. In the sight of Israel.

'5'3??, "before the eyes of." This brings
the scene vividly before our eyes : the storm
rolling away over the mountains, the enemy
In full retreat and wild confusion, the sun
bursting forth from behind the clouds, and
the leader of the Israelites, in the sight of
all his troops, perhaps on the crest of the
eminence on which Gibeon stands, or per-
haps at Upper Beth-horon (see note on ver.
10), uttering his sublime apostrophe to the
" two great lights " which God had given to
mankind, not to withdraw their presence
until the Lord had "avenged him of his
adversaries." The battle had been short,
but decisive. The Israelites had no doubt
(ver. 9) fallen upon the enemy unawares at
the dawn of day as they were preparing for
the attack on Gibeon. A few hours had
sufficed to put them to the rout, but the
utmost expedition would be necessary to
complete their destruction before the dark-
ness set in. Hence the ejaculation of the
Jewish commander as the difficulty of the
task he had imposed upon himself, namely,
of utterly annihilating that vast host before
light failed, flashed upon him. Sun, stand
thou still. The poetic form of this passage
is clear to every one who has the smallest
acquaintance with the laws of Hebrew
poetry. For the Book of Jasher, from
which it is apparently a quotation (see Intro-
duction, Sec. 2). Stand thou still. This
is not the literal rendering of the original.
In no other passage has the verb DDp this

sense. The sense " stand still " here would
seem to be an inference from ver. 14. The
literal rendering is, "be dumb." Hence
in Exod. xv. 16, and in Lam. ii. 10, it signi-
fies to be dumb with amazement or terror.
In 1 Sam. xiv. 9 It seems to mean, "stay
your advance" ("tarry," Authorised Ver-
sion), and the word rendered " stand stiU "
in the last part of the verse is HDJ?- See
also Psa. iv. 6 (Heb.), where it is rendered
" be still," i.e., " be silent ; " and Job xxx.
27, and Lam. ii. 18. The word must not
therefore be pressed to mean that the sun's
course was completely arrested in the
heavens. All that can be assumed is that
it did not set until the people were avenged
of their enemies. The passage is evidently
part of a triumphal song, like that recorded
in Judges v., where in ver. 20 there is a very
similar thought, which no one ever thinks
of interpreting literally. Upon Gibeon.
Beth-horon was north-west of Gibeon. The
meaning o£ the phrase would perhaps be,
" Sun, I'est thou {i.e. , cease not to shine)



in (or upon) Gibeon.'' In the valley of AJa-
Ion. The valley of the deer, according to the
Hebrew. The word for valley is Emek hera
(LXX. (pccfiay^. See note on oh. viii. 13.
Ajalon became afterwards a Levitical city
(see ch. xxi. 24), and was in the inheritance
of Dan (ch. xix. 42). See also 1 Sam. xiv.
31. It has been identified with the modern
YSlo (so Eobinson, Vandevelde, and Gen-
der), and was therefore four hours' journey
westward from Gibeon. It was possibly near
the time of full moon, and Joshua called for
the light of the moon to help him when the
sun had set. The very fact of his having eaUed
upon the moon to come to his assistance is
an argument against the literal interpreta-
tion of the passage. The moon could have
been no help to him as long as the sun was
in the heavens. It is^ thought by some that
the moon must have been already in the
heavens, or why should Joshua have ad-
dressed herf This may have been the
case, and he might thus have adjured the
moon to give him her help after the sun had
gone down, by which time he would have
arrived at Ajalon, a supposition which is
quite consistent with probability.

Ver. 13. — The moon stayed. The word
1D17, which does mean to stand still, is used
here. See also Habak. iii. 11. But if we
are to apply it to the moon and not to the
light of the moon, where would be the use
of the moon's standing still in the valley of
Ajalon, when she would be low down in the
sky westward, and incapable of rendering
Joshua any help ? If we regard the light of
the moon as meant, there is no phrase more
common in poetry and poetic prose than to
speak of moonbeams " resting " upon an
object. The people. The word here is
*p. See note on ch. v. 6. The Book of

Jasher. See Introduction, Note vi. And tha
sun stood still. Here the word ID^ is uted
of the sun. But, as before, it refers natur-
ally enough to the sun's light. The declin-
ing sun continued to shine upon Gibeon,
and in the neighbourhood, upon the descent
from Beth-hoion the Upper, and on the
whole region throughout which the fugitive
Canaanites were scattered.' We need not
suppose that all the discomfited host fled in
one direction, and possibly in the neighbour-
hood of Gibeon itself there remained quite
enough of the scattered portions of the host
to need urgently the sun's light to complete
their destruction. The midst The Hebrew
here is not the usual word for midst. It
signifies literally, the half. About a whole
day. Literally, as a perfect day. Tha
LXX. renders oi TrpoatiroptvtTo dg SvajtaQ dt
reXoQ ri/upac /uag, and the Vulgate, " Non fes-
tinavit oocumbere spatio unius dieL" What



CH. X. 1—43.]



THE BOOK OF JOSHUA.



167



is tbe pieoiBe meaning of this passage it is
difficult to say. The language is very ob-
scure. It has been usually interpreted to
mean that the sun remained in the heayens
twelve hours longer than usual. But this,
though the most natural, is by no means the
only interpretation of the passage. The
words, "did not hasten to go down as a
perfect day," cannot be proved to have this
meaning. In fact, it is difficult to fix a
precise meaning on them. They belong
rather to the domain of poetry than history,
and their language is that of hyperbole
rather than of exact narration of facts.
Consequently, we are not entitled to build
eonclusions upon them, or draw arguments
from them. It seems tolerably clear that
twelve additional hours could hardly have
been required by the Israelites for the com-
plete extermination of their enemies.

Ver. 14. — There was no day llie that
before it or after it. Cf. for this expression
2 Kings xviii 5 ; xxiiL 22, 25.

Ver. 15. — And Joshua returned. The
historian had at first Intended to complete
his narrative of these transactions here.
But he seems to have altered his intention,
and added the execution of the five kings
and the subjugation of the remaining cities
of southern Palestine which had adhered to
the league, as well as their immediate neigh-
bours. He then (ver. 43) repeats what he
had subjoined here. It is not contended
(see Introduction) that the Book of Joshua
could not have been compiled from accounts
previously existing, though a different view
has been taken in this commentary. But
what is denied is (1) that this was an unin-
telligent or perfunctory compilation, and (2)
that we can at this distance of time, by the
simple evidence of style, disintegrate and
separate into contradictory fragments the
various portions of earUer histories, which we
find here digested into a whole. Some copies
of the LXX. leave the verse out altogether.
Ver. 16.— In a cave. " In the cave " ac-
cording to the Masoretic pointing. So the
LXX., TO airr]\mov. Dr. Maclear remarks
on the number of caves in Palestine (see
Gen. xix. 30 ; Judg. xx. 47), as well as the
well-known caves of AduUam and Engedi
(1 Sam. xxii. 1, xxiv. 3), and the cave in
which a hundred prophets were concealed
by Obadiah (1 Eings xviii. 4). Also see
note on ch. ii. 22. But Lieut. Conder
believes that in this particular neighbour-
hood there were few caves.- See note on
Makkedah above, ver. 10. For " these five
kings" the original has simply "five kings."
The order of the narrative is somewhat
interrupted by the introduction of Joshua's
■djuration, and the aocoont of the flight of
the five kings. Compare ver. 11 with ver. 20.



Ver. 19. — And stay ye not. The original
is stronger, and as for you, stand not still.
The active general was not to be diverted
from his purpose of annihilating the enemy
by the important news that the heads of
the confederacy were in Lis hands. He
takes immediate measures to secure their
persons, but for the present throws his
whole strength, as well as that of his army,
LDto the task of following up the advantage
he has gained. And smite the hindmost
of them. Literally, " and taM them," a
verb denominative from 33T, tail. Tha
LXX. renders KaraXaPere rfiv obpayiav. The
word is of rare occurrence in the Hebrew,
but its obvious meaning is as the text.
Comp, also the Vulgate, extremos quosqut
fugientiwm ctedite.

Ver. 20. — Until they were consumed. An
expression not necessarily involving the
destruction of every individual, but tha
entire annihilation of them as an army. A
few scattered fugitives only remained, who
sought the protection of the fortified towns.
" Si ea qua per Moysen de tabemacnlo vel
sacrifioiis, et omni iUo cultu adumbrabantur,
typus et umbra diountur esse coelestium,
sine dubio et bella quae per Jesum geruntur,
et regum et hostium strages, coelestium
rerum umbra et typus esse diceuda sunt,
eorum duntaxat beUorum quae Dominui
noster Jesus cum suo exercitu et magistra-
tibus id est credentium popuhs atque
eorum duoibus contra diabolum et ejus
angelos prroliatur " (Orig., Hom. 12 on
Joshua). Fenced cities. These were (1)
walled, (2) crowned with battlements (ni3|)),
and (3) defended by towers. See for further
information the article in Smith's ' Diction-
ary of the Bible.'

Ver. 21. — Makkedah. Because Joshua,
in his resolute pursuit of the enemy, had
not forgotten the important intelligence re-
ported to him concerning the kings. Most
Ukely the pursuit lasted one or two days.
After the return to Makkedah the execution
of the kings was carried out with much cere-
mony (ver. 24), and their bodies hung up
before all Israel, not so much as a memorial
of the victory, as to impress upon the Israel-
ites the duty of exterminating their enemies,
a duty which the after history of the twelve
tribes shows them to have been very prone to
forget. None moved his ton^e against
any of the chndrenof Israel. Literally,
Me did not sharpen against the children of
Israel, against a man, his tongue. The
Hebrew construction here is somewhat un-
usual. Houbigant and Maurer suppose that

P is a mistake of the copyist, and that ^ifji

is the subject of the sentence. They would
translate as the LXX., " no man mntteMl



i<n



THE BOOK OF JOSHUA.



[oh. X. 1—43,



with hig tongne against the children of
Israel." But Keil and Eosenmiiller prefer
a rendering agreeing with that of the Autho-
rised Version, none moved (or sharpened) his
tongue against the children of Israel, not
against a single man of them. And this is a
far more forcible way of expressing the awe
in which they were held. A still stronger
expression is to be found in Exod. xi. 7 ;
of. Judith 'i. 19.

Ver. 23.— The king of Jerusalem. The
names of the kings are mentioned to em-
phasise the significance of the action re-
corded in the next verse. The LXX. has
'OdoWafx again here.

Ver. 24 Which went with him. There is

a very unusual Hebrew phrase here. Not only
is the article used instead of the relative
pronoun IK'S which occasionally occurs, as in
1 Chron. xxix. 17, but the form of the verb
IB Arabic. None of the commentators give
a satisfactory explanation of this fact, and
perhaps the suggestion of Houbigant is to

be adopted, that the K which follows -ID/n
has been accidentally doubled by the tran-
BOliber. Kennicott thinks that some Arabic
transcriber has inadvertently given the verb
an Arabic form, which is very improbable.
Keil thinks that it is a sort of intermediate
step between the more ancient termination
J1 and the more modem one in -1. But if
BO, it is strange that we should only meet
with it twice in Holy Scripture. Havernick
(Introduction, § 22 B) regards it as an
archaic form. Put your feet on the necks
of these kings. Tlus was a most common
Oriental practice, as the Assyrian and
Egyptian monuments prove. Calvin ex-
plains the otherwise " boundless arrogance "
of the act by the Divine command. But, as
Keil remarks, it was a " symbolical act,
intended to inspirit the people." See also
Psa. ex. 1 ; 1 Cor. xv. 25. The fact that this
was done, not by Joshua, but by the captains
rt'VI? icom nyj5 to cut off), i.e., the inferior
officers of the Israelitish army, makes a
wide distinction between this and the usual
arrogance of Oriental conquerors, and marks
the very great moral superiority of Joshua
over any other leader known to history
either in his own time or in subsequent ages.
For whereas the act was usually an act of
arrogant triumph on the part of the leader
himself, here the leader modestly disclaims
any such superiority, and calls upon his
(ubordinates to assume it, as a sign that
the Israelitish people, whose representatives
they were, should triumph over all their
enemies. The next verse explains the
reason of the injunction. To the kings
themselves no insolence was displayed, for



it was but the well-known and perfectly
understood symbol of their undeniable con.
ditiou of subjection at that moment. But,
of course, we are not to look for that gentle-
ness and humanity in so far distant an age,
which would at the present day be shown by
a Christian general, or even for the modera-
tion and clemency displayed in the hour of
victory by an Alexander, a Scipio, a Caesar,
trained under the maxims of Latin and
Greek philosophy. See a fuller discussion
of the subject in the Introduction. Origen
remarks here, "Atque ntinam Domiuus
meus Jesus filius Dei mihi istud concedat,
et jubeat me pedibus meis conculcare
spiritum fomicationis, et calcare super
cervices spiritus iracundia et furoris, cal-
care avariti» dsmonem, calcare jactantiam,
conterere pedibus superbise spiritum."

Ver. 25. — Fear not, nor be dismayed.
As Keil remarks, these are the very words
which God used to Joshua when He bade
him enter upon his great task. See ch. i. 9.
So now may the experience of one Christian
in the warfare against the powers of evil be
imparted as encouragement to another. Ye
fight. The word " ye " is emphatic. Perhaps
Joshua would convey the idea that the
Israelites were not to attribute their success
to their leader, or to any Divine favour
resting upon him as an individual, but to
believe that, as long as they served God
faithfully. His presence would be as much
with them as it was at that particular time
and under that particular leader.

Ver. 26. — And hanged them. This was
also a symbohcal act, intended to encourage
Israel in their warfare. All that day, until
its close, were the bodies of the five kings
visible to the whole host, to remind them
of the signal victory God had vouchsafed
them. The same thing had been done at
Ai. See ch. viii. 29.

Ver. 27. — At the time of the going down
of the sun. See Deut. xxi. 23. Joshua set
the example to the Israehtes of a strict
observance of the law. And we may obperve
that this law is only to be found in Deu-
teronomy. On the " Deuteronomist " theory
we have to suppose that the Deuteronomist,
with a lynx eye to the chance of recom-
mending the provisions which he had in-
vented, and to the importance of represent-
ing Joshua as a strict observer of them,
inserted this piece of detail with an obvious
purpose. It is a wonder that this should be
ahuoBt the only " Deuteronomist " precept
thus emphasised. We find it noticed above
(ch. vUi. 29), and in both cases the obviouf
explanation is that this sign of triumph
made a great impression on those who
witnessed it, and tiiat it was carried out in
strict fulfilment of enactments already exist-



dfi. X. I— 43.J



THE BOOK OF JOSHUA.



IM



ing. On the other hand, as we have seen,
there is no attempt in ch. viii. 30 — 35 to
emphasise thns the obedience to the com-
mand in Deut. xxvii. 2 — 8. It is from
minute details of this kind, which escape
the superficial observer, that the authen-
ticity of the Book of Deuteronomy is estab-
lished, until this very day. The form of
the expression here is singularly diSerent
from the expression found elsewhere when
the meaning suggested by the Authorized
Version is to be conveyed. But for the word
1^ we should translate "on the self -same
day," as in Gen. vii. 13, &a. T^ may be a
slip of the pen for ?y which is seldom, if
ever, used of time {only, if at all, in Psa.
xlviii. 15, and Prov. xxv. 11), though the
idiom is found in Arabic, in Greek (as in
iv' jj/iori), in German (as in auf den Tag.)
and in English, " on that day ; " or we may,
with Keil, refer back to ver. 18, and trans,
late "they cast them into the cave where
they had been hid, and where they had
placed great stones unto that Very day."
For there may have been an interval of
several days between the confinement of
the kings in the cave and their death at the
hands of Joshua. See note on ver. 21.

Yer. 28. — And that day, i.e., the day of
the battle of Beth-horon. Not only did
Joshua smite his enemies "unto Mak-
kedah," but the incarceration of the kings
in a cave at Makkedah showed that in the
headlong flight of the enemy, Makkedah,
which though not mentioned by name
among the cities of the confederation, was
no doubt, to a certain extent, implicated in
it. It is worthy of remark that while
Libnah, Debir, and Makkedah are mentioned
among the cities destroyed in this campaign,
though they are not named among the cities
of the league, Jarmuth, on the contrary,
though it is one of the cities named, does
not appear to have been taken with the
rest. With the edge of the sword. Literally,
" to the mouth of the sword," from its
devouring character. All the souls. All
the human beings. The ban under which
everything in Jericho was laid did not
apply to the other cities, though (see note
on ch. viii.''.26) all the inhabitants, without
distinction, were to be exterminated,

Ver. 29. — All Israel. The expression is
not to be pressed in a Uteral sense. " All
Isiael" is simply equivalent to "all his
disposable troops." Libnah. This belonged
to the lowlands of Palestine, See note on
ch. ix. 1 ; also ch. xv. 42. It became a
Levitical city. It revolted from Judah in
the reign of Joram (2 Kings viii. 22). It
seems to have returned to its allegiance,
lince we find it not included in the conquest



of Israel by Shalmaneser, while, on th«
other hand, it undergoes a siege among the
fenced cities of Judah (2 Ki' gs xviii. 13;
xix. 8). The cause (see Blunt ' Unde-
signed Coincidences,' part ii. 27) of this
return is not far to seek. The Levites cast
oft the authority of Joram " because he had
forsaken the Lord God of his fathers " (2
Chron. xxi. 10, 11). It probably remained
independent — for it was not likely to have
joined itself to Israel, either from geo-
graphical position or religious principles —
until the accession of Joash terminated the
connection between the royal house of
Judah and the descendants of the wicked
Ahab. Libnah, or the white city, has been
identified with Tell es Safleh, the Blanche
Garde of the Crusaders. See Stanley, * Sinai
and Palestine,' pp. 207, 258. Lieut.
Conder, however, supposes it to have been
Eleutheropolis, now Beit Jibrin, and Capt.
Warren beheves he has found it at Ibna.
Vandevelde suggests yet another site.
But Lieut. Condor's description of the hill
on which Tell es Safieh stands as " a white
precipice of many hundred feet" (' Pal. Expl.
Fund, Quart. Paper,' July, 1875), would ac-
count for the name Libnah.

Ver. 31. — And Joshua passed. No indica-
tion of time is given in the rest of this ohap^
ter. The campaign was probably an affair
of some weeks, though none of the cities
could have made a prolonged repistance.

Ver. 33. — Then Horam king of Gezer. It
is remarkable that, as Gezer lay somewhat
out of the line of march, Joshua did not
capture it. Accordingly, in spite of the
alleged carelessness of our compiler, who is
credited with having put together shreds of
the various narratives in the most perfunc-
tory manner, he takes care to add (ch. xvi.
10) that the inhabitants of Gezer were not
driven out. In like manner, with the single
exception of Hebron, the people of which
must have at once chosen another king,
he carefully omits the mention of the
king in the cities which had lost their
kings in the battle before Gibeon. See
also note on ver. 32. Thus a careful
examination of the narrative puts the
care and accuracy of the history very
carefully before us. With regard to the
situation of Gezer, it has been accurately
determined by the Palestine Exploration
Society. The Levitical boundaries, with
Greek and Hebrew inscriptions, signifying
the boundary of Gezer, have been discovered
by M. Gannean (see ' Quarterly Paper' for
October, 1874). Tell el Jezer was first
identified by M. Gannean with Gezer. Con-
tinuing his researches, he found on a slab
of rock nearly horizontal and very nearly
two inches in length a bilingual iuscciption^



170



THE BOOK OF JOSHUA.



[oh. X. 1 — 18.



in Greek and Hetrew, signifying the limit of
Gezer (1t3 Dlin). Since the inscription is
Greek and Talmadical in its character (the
word Dinn has not the signification of
" limit " in the Hebrew Scriptures) it must,
in spite of the early form of the letters,
belong to a period long subsequent tc the
Babylonish captivity. M. Ganneau suggests
the Maccabean period. (See below.) But it
is, no doubt, the result of a re-measurement
in accordance with the rules laid down in
Num. XXXV. 5. Some have supposed the
above to have been designed to fix the limit
of the sabbath day's journey. But it is
more probable that it served as a boundary
between the Levifcical and the tribal terri-
tory, the more especially as the words are
BO placed as to be read by one entering the
town. It was a Levitical city (Josh. xxi.
21 ; 1 Chron. vi. 67), or at least assigned to
the Levites ; but Judg. i. 29 shows that the
Canaanitish population lived on vrith the
Levites. It may have been the nondescript
character of the population that caused it
to fall an easy prey to Pharaoh (1 Kings ix.
16, where note that the Canaanites had
never been driven out) ; but when Solomon
espoused his daughter he restored Gezer to
Israel. Under the same name Gazara it plays
a conspicuous part in the wars of the Macca-
bees (1 Mace. ix. 52 ; 2 Mace. x. 32). From
the latter passage we learn that it was " a
very strong hold." It retains its old name,
being now known as Tell el Jezer.

Ter. 36. — Went up. The accuracy of the
geographical details must here be noticed.
Joshua " passes " from one city to another
in the plain. He " goes up " to Hebron,
which is situated among the hills. See note
on ver. 3 ; cf. also eh. xi. 21 ; xiv. 12.
Hebron. Commentators of the school of
Maurer and De Wette regard the taking of
Hebron and Debir as irreconcilable with
oh. xi. 21, xiv. 12, xv. 13—17. But this is
by no means certain. The operations of
Joshua were sudden, and, so far as they went,
decisive. But it is never pretended that his
conquest of southern Palestine was com-
plete. It ia impossible to assert this in the
face of such passages as ch. xvi. 10, xvii. 12,
13, and especially in the face of such a fact
as the continued existence of the Philistine
power. Joshua extirpated the inhabitants
of the cities he took, but there were many
ethers— some of at least equal importance
— which he did not take. We may instance
Gaza, Gath, and Ashdod. See ch. xi. 22.
Their inhabitants came and occupied again
the cities which Joshua had destroyed, first
when he was engaged in operations in the
north and west, and again when thelsraeUtes
had begun to repose upon their laurels, and to
neglect the task God had «et them, namely.



the complete extermination of the Canaanits
race from Palestine. Thus Joshua returned
from the north and found a large part of
the country he had subdued reoecupied by
the giant tribes of the south. He " cut
them off from Hebron and Debir," i.e., he
compelied them to evacuate those cities,
but there was no necessity for a second
of either. Yet at a later period they still
lurked in the neighbourhood (ch. xiv. 12),
perhaps in the mountain fastnessess (a veiy
common thing in the history of nations, as
the history of our own country, of the
Basques in the Pyrenees, and of Swiss free-
dom shows), and were strong enough to
regain Debir (ch. xv. 17). Jerusalem itself
(see note on ver. 1) had a similar fate.
After the capture of Jerusalem the Israelites
were unable to hold it permanently (ch. xv.
63 ; cf. Judg. i. 8, 21). And such expres-
sions as " aU the cities thereof " show that
the south of Palestine was thickly populated.
Each city was, like Gibeon, the head of a
small confederacy. And as the chief cities
smitten by Joshua would have been but a
tithe of the confederations existing in the
south, the task of reoooupying must have
been an easy one. It seems to be impUed
in Judges i. that Caleb took Hebron and
Debir aiter Joshua's death.

Ver. 88.— And Joshua returned. Eatiier,
Joshua turned. Debic was not on the way
back from Hebron to Eglon, but in a differ-
ent direction. His march was now south-
ward instead of eastward. Debir. A city
of importance, since only Hebron and it are
mentioned in the history of the campaign aa
having cities dependent on them. It is also
called Kirjath-Sepher (Josh. xv. 15; Judg,
i. 11), and Kirjath-Sannah (ch. xv. 49). The
first name signifies " the city of the book,"
from whence it has been argued that it was
the seat of what we should now call an uni-
versity. Eecent discoveries have rendered
this supposition by no means improbable.
Ihe Hittite remains have proved that people
to have been a more influential and intellec-
tual people in early times than had ever
been supposed until lately. Others have
suggested that it was the abode of an oracle,
which is rendered probable if Debir be con-
nected with "13T word. The meaning of
Kirjath-Sannah is by no means clear. Some
have derived it from the Arabic " sunna,"
law, or doctrine (whence the Sunnite sect
among the Mohammedans), and some from
nSD or njp, a palm branch, or more pro-
bably a thom-bush. Bitter thinks that both
Kirjath-Sepher and Kirjath-Sannah implj
the place where the public records were kept.
Perhaps what ia meant is that, like Mona
or Anglesea to the Druids, Debir was the



Ofi. X,



1-43.1



tHE BOofe oi" ;rosHtJl.



tn



home of the Canaanitieh religions traditions.
Debir appears as Dapur in the list of forti-
fied cities in Canaan captured by Seti I. and
Eameses II. of Egypt. They are depicted
on the monumental records. See Tomkins,
' Studies of the Time of Abraham,' p. 84.
Debir has lately been identified by the
Palestine Survey. Lieut. Conder (' Quarterly
Paper,' Jan., 1875, p. 48) fixes it at El Dho-
heriyeh or Dhfiheriyeh. The identification
depends upon the passages ch. xt. 19, and
Jadg. i. 15. See note on the former. The
grounds of the identification are as follows :
1. Debir (see last note) was southward of
Hebron. 2. The circumstances require an arid
locality, but within a moderate distance two
Bets of springs, or pools of water. 3. There
must be signs of ancient dwellings, and, as
Debir was a royal city, it must be the con-
verging point of the various roads. AU these
conditions are fulfilled by El Dhfiheriyeh.
The lock excavations, the sign of the most
ancient dwellings, are plentiful there ; an-
cient roads are found converging in all
directions. And six miles and a half north
of the village fourteen springs, or pools, are
found, some at the head of the valley, some
lower down, and some at a lower level still.
The distance of these from Debir is in exact
accordance with the narrative. They are'
too far off to be included as a matter of
course within the boundaries of Debir, and
would naturally enough become the object
of such a petition as Achsah is said to have
preferred in the passage above cited. Wil-
son's ' Lands of the Bible,' i. 351, speaks
of the excavations here, but does not appear
to have been aware of their antiquity. He
describes the inhabitants as living in them.
But he remarks — and it is a singular confir-
mation of Lieut. Couder's subsequent dis-
covery — that the sites of five out of the ten
cities mentioned in conjunction with Debir
in Josh. XV. 48 — 51, are to be found in the
immediate neighbourhood of Dh^heriyeh
(ibid. p. 353). From this passage and
some others, however, Knobel has antici-
pated Lieut. Conder's suggestion. He de-
scribes Thaharijeh, as he calls it, as on the
high road from Gaza, with ruins of great
antiquity, situated in the midst of a country
which, though barren in appearance and
destitute of trees and arable land, is yet rich
in pasture. But he says nothing of the
springs, the only thing wanting to make the
evidence complete. Eitter's description of
the place as the " first place of importance "
on arriving in Palestine from the south, and
as the meeting-place of the roads from Beer-
sheba, from Gaza and Egypt, and from
Petra and Sinai, confirm Lieut. Conder's
view, but Bitter does not seem to have
identified it with Debir, though he regards



it as " one of a series of fortresses designed
to protect the southern frontier of Jndeea '
(iii. 193, 288). It became a Levitlcal city
(ch. xxi. 15 ; 1 Chrou. vi. 58).

Ver. 40. — So Joshua smote. We have now
before us the defined locale of Joshua'i
operations. He smote ' ' the hiUs," or rathei
the " hill-country," a tract of country ex-
tending from Jerusalem southward. This
limestone range formed the watershed be-
tween the Mediterranean and the Dead
Sea. The south, now often spoken of by
travellers by its Hebrew name of Negeb,
was, as the name signifies, an almost waste
district of limestone hiUs (cf. the Mount
Halak, or smooth mountain, of oh. xi. 19).
It was once more fertile than it is at pre-
sent, but could never have been a very
fruitful region. As Knobel says, it is mid-
way between waste and fertile land. It pos-
sesses grass and herbs and flowers, especially
in the rainy season, and is thus suitable for
pasture. But there are many tracts of sand
and heath, and it is not watered by brooks,
characteristics it has in common with the
wilderness. It was also hiUy, though not so
precipitous as the mountain district. Tris-
tram ('Land of Israel,' pp. 365, 366) de-
scribes some of the mountains as rising
gradually to a height of 3,200 feet. Bart-
lett, however, who devoted more time to the
south country, describes it as treeless, but
fertile as a corn-producing country, and as
very distinct in its physical features from
the desert, or what is known as the " WU-
demess of Judsa" {'From Egypt to Pales-
tine,' ch. xvii., xviii.). The best description
of this region is found, however, in ' Scrip-
ture Lands,' by the late Bev. G. S. Drew.
He says (p. 6), " For a few weeks late in
spring-time a smUing aspect is thrown over
the broad downs, when the ground is red-
dened by the anemone in contrast with the
soft white of the daisy and the deep yellow
of the tulip and marigold. But this flush
of beauty soon passes, and the permanent
aspect of the country is not wild indeed, or
hideous, or frightfully desolate, but, as we
may say, austerely plain ; a tame, unpleas-
ing aspect, not causing absolute discomfort
while one is in it, but left without one
lingering reminiscence of anything lovely,
awful, or sublime." The rocks are occa-
sionally rendered fertile by the system of
terrace cultivation, more common, as almost
every traveller since Maundrell has re-
marked, in former times than now. That
keen observer remarks, that if any one were
to object that Palestine could not have
maintained the vast population stated in
Scripture to have inhabited it, he would b«
confuted by the fact that the most cursory
observation showa that " the very rocks



m



THE BOOK OF JOSStTA.



toa. i. 1— 4a.



were made fmitfnl," perhaps even to a
greater extent than plains could be, "by this
method." The "vale," or Bhephelah (see
note on ch. ix. 1), was a low strip of coast
extending from the foot of Carmel to near
Gaza. The fing'K, or "springs," as it is
translated in our version (better, "water-
courses," or ' 'slopes," asKnobel),was a fertile
country, intersected by ravines and brooks,
situated between the mountains and the sea.
The word only occurs in the Pentateuch and
Joshua (a fact to be noted in forming an
opinion on the genuineness of these books).
See Num. xxi. 15 (where it is translated
strram in our version ; Deut. iii. 17 ; iv. 49.
Tlie root, signifying pouring forth, is found
in Chaldee and Syriao. The LXX. renders
this, as well as " the south," strange to say,
as a proper name. See note on ch. xv. 19.
The Vulgate follows its example in the former
case, but not in the latter. The Syriac also
renders as a proper name. Utterly destroyed
all that breathed, as the Lord God of Israel
commanded. See for the word translated
" utterly destroyed," oh. vi. 17. These words
are a quotation from Deut. xx. 16, 17. It
Boems impossible to evade one of the alter-
natives, either that Deuteronomy was writ-
ten before the events recorded in the book of
Joshua, or that we have no historical evi-
dence that Joshua did " utterly destroy all
that breathed." The hypothesis that the
Divine sanction for such a war of extermi-
nation was invented centuries after the
Israelites had come to terms with the in-
habitants and were daily utterly violating its
spirit, and that they then readily allowed
themselves to beUeve it to be of Divine
origin, will scarcely bear examination. The
attitude of the people toward Gentiles after
their captivity is only to be explained by the
hypothesis that it was the result of a belief
that their misfortunes were due to a law
which they had previously received and
neglected to obey. Calvin observes how
thoroughly these passages bear witness to
the fact that the IsraeUtes felt themselves to
be the ministers of a Divine purpose in this
slaughter. Origen (Hom. 15 on Joshua)
says that the Apostles gave order that the
Bcriptures of the Old Testament were to be
read in church, which, he adds, " they would
not have done had not these carnal wars
prefigured the spiritual warfare which we
nave to carry on ' against principaUties,
against powers, against the rulers of the
darkness of this world, against spiritual
wickedness in high places. ' " Gaza. Hebrew
Azzah (or strong), as in 1 Kings iv. 24.
Joshua's conquests extended to, but did not
comprise, Gaza (ch. xL 22 ; xiii. 2, 3). It
was to have been the uttermost limit of the
braelitish territory (see Gen. x. 19). It ac-



tually was BO in the days of Solomon (1
Eiugs iv. 24). But until then the IsracUtct
had not been able to subdue it, though (ch.
XV. 45 — 47) the whole land of the Philistines
was assigned to Judah. What results this
failure produced upon the after history of
Israel we read in the Books of Judges and
Samuel. Not tiU the reign of David was the
Philistine power entirely broken. And Gaza
played a very important part in the Philis-
tine confederation. See Judg. xvi, 1 — 4, 21
— 23; 1 Sam. vi. 16, 17. Gaza has retained
its importance even tc the present day. Its
situation near the sea, and, still more, its
position upon the high road from Palestine
to Egypt, and from the Mediterranean to
Arabia Fetrsea, have secured it this perma-
nence. When Robinson visited it its popu-
lation was between fifteen and sixteen
thousand — larger even than that of Jeru-
salem. And it seems to have largely in-
creased in population since the beginning of
the century. Goshen. Foao/j., LXX. Not,
of course, identical with the land of Goshen
in Egypt, but inasmuch as it lay to the
south-east of Palestine, in the direction of
their former habitation, it may possibly
have been so named in memory of that so-
journ. A city of that name is mentioned in
, the mountains of Judah, together with Debit
(Josh. XV. 51). It clearly (ch. xi. 16) refers
to a large district in the south-east, but its
precise locaUty is not known. Even unto
Gibeon. The conquests of Israel did not
extend f u therin the north-west than Gibeon,
from whence Joshua had set out on hia
triumphant campaign.

Ver. 42. — At one thne, i.e., in one cam-
paign, carried on without a respite. Because
the Lord God fought for Israel It is the
peculiar feature of Old Testament history
that it draws the veil fiom the unseen.
Other historians are content to note the
secondary causes. The Scriptures trace all
to their original source — the will of God.
And it is His will, as the page of history
shows, with exceptions that do but prove the
rule, that a just cause, assisted by bravery,
purity, and devotion combined, wiU not fail,
in the long run, to overcome force and fraud.
Wars of independence, wars undertaken to
chastise wickedness and oppression, seldom
fail in their object. And when they do fail,
it is generally from the presence of similar
crimes among those who undertake the
righteous cause, and sully it by their own
vices and crimes. History furnishes us with
abundant instances of this. The leaders of
the struggle for the Protestant Eeformation
in Europe were often almost as crafty, as am-
bitious, as self-seeking, as immoral, as those
against whom they contended. Struggle«
patriotio in their origin have been marred



oa. X. 1 — 48.]



THE BOOK OF JOSHUA.



m



by the selfish aims of those who carried
them on. Selfishness inspires distrnst, and
distrust produoea disunion. But where
"the Lord God fights for Israel," where
noble objects are pursued by worthy means,
there is a moral strength which triumphs
over the greatest obstacles. Such an instance
we have in modern history in the career of
a man like Willium tlio SJleul. Nearly
rained by the cowardice, obstinacy, and



selfishness of his associates, his faith, con-
rage, and perseverance carried a struggle
hopeless at the outset to a hiumphant con-
elusion. Men may cry that " Providence it
on the side of the big battalions," but "tlia
Lord's hand is not waxen short."

Ver. 43. — Unto tlie camp at GUgal. Sea
note, ch. ix. 6 ; ch. x. 16 confirms the view
tukcii in ch. ix. 6.



HOMILETIOS.

Vers. 1^-43. — The great victory and its resultt. Many of the consideratioiii
which this passage suggests have been ah-eady anticipated. Thus the celerity of
Joshua's inarch (ver. 9) suggests the same set of ideas as oh. iv. 10. The destruc-
tion of the cities teaches the same lessons as the destruction of Jerioho ; while the
miraculous interposition in the battle of Beth-horon is hardly to be distinguished,
as a source of spiritual instruction, from the destruction of Jericho. Again, the
confederacy of the kings (vers. 1 — 5) has been already treated under oh. ix. 1, 2.
Yet some few points remain to be noticed.

I. DiVINB HELP D0E3 NOT EXCLUDE HUMAN EXERTION. Joshua went forth tO

battle relying upon a special promise of God. Yet he went up " suddenly," we are
told. Thus, so far from the certainty of success dimiuishing energy, it should
rather increase it. The apostles went forth relying on a Divine promise that God's
truth should permeate the world. But though this promise relieved them from the
restless anxiety which too often oppresses their successors in the work, it did not
relieve them from the necessity of exertion. And accordingly we find them untir-
ing in their exertions to spread the gospel, and also to lay firinly the foundations of
the Christian Church. The same untiring spirit of exertion should animate us
now. Success is assured in the end, and for that very reason we should not slacken,
but rather the contrary, in our efforts to propagate truth. The two opposite errors
which retard the success of God's cause are (1) a needless anxiety for immediate
results, which cause us to take measures which betray a want of faith, and which
therefore, relying on the arm of flesh, are predestined to fail ; and (2) a blind fatalism
which leaves aU to God, forgetting that tJie forces of His kingdom require to be set
in motion by man before they can take effect. What is wanted is (1) a sublime
caieleBsness about results, when the means God has directed to be employed have
been employed ; and (2) a continual effort to put those means in operation. Untiring
in preaching the gospel, in using the means of grace, and in " good works and alms-
deeds," we are yet to be content with doing what is ordained, and leaving God to
prosper, as He pleases, what we have done.

II. The answeb to fbayeb is more effective than our work. Had Joshua
not done his best, the hailstones would not have fallen. But inasmuch as he was
doing his work, God helped him, and more execution was done by God from heaven
than by Joshua's troops on earth. So he who works and prays not wiU be rewarded
with less success than he who works and prays. If we are not as successful as we
could wish, we may ask whether we have asked God to work with us. It is a
touching story which has been told of Sir D. Brewster's father, that he was so well
known as a man of prayer that when any unexpected and almost marvellous con-
version occurred in his parish,' it was attributed by his people to his prayers. Per-
haps one of the reasons why the Eoman Catholic Church still maintains so strong
a hold upon the world is because of the fervent belief stiU retained among her people
of the power of prayer. Such prayer is often sadly misdirected, and yet, as a
recognition of a power above that hears and answers prayer, it must be more ac-
ceptable in God's sight than the phUoeophical Protestantism which denies the
existence of a Father in heaven, ridicules prayer to God, especially for temporal
blessings, on the ground of the invariability of law, and thus practically ibolishes



174 THE BOOK OF JOSHUA. [ch. x. 1—43.

the God of the Old Testament and of the New, and makes void the gospel of Jesna
Christ: Surely superstition itself is better than this denial of the loving Fatherhood
of God. The lesson here concerns spiritual rather than temporal blessings, but it
none the less contains a protest against the sceptical spirit which would lead us to
think it unnecessary to maintain by prayer an attitude of continual dependence
on God.

III. Heavenly light shall neveb fail him who is fishtino im God's cause.
Joshua asked for Ught, that he might destroy God's enemies. So must the Christian
ask for light, that he may distinguish friends from foes — truth from falsehood. He
has the hght.of God's Word, which, coming direct from God, is symbolised by the
sun ; and the Ught of man's preaching of that Word, which, inasmuch as it only
reflects the Word itself, is not inaptly typified by the moon. We need not fear that
that light will ever fail us ; and yet we do well to pray that it may continue to be
afforded us. We may, in the strength of faith, pray that the sun may for us stand
still upon Gibeon and the moon in the valley of Ajalon, until God be avenged on
His enemies, sin and falsehood and their aUies, through our means.

IV. We shall " SPEAK OP His testimonies even before kings, and shall not
BE ASHAMED." Joshua makes a great point of the subjugation of the Icings to the
people of Israel. He makes his captains set their feet upon their necks to show
that none can resist the armies of the Lord. (1) So our Joshua tells us that we
shall stand " before governors and kings for his sake." And so it has been in the
history of His Church. " The kings of the earth stood up, and the rulers took
counsel together, against the Lord and against his Ai^ointed." First, in the case of
those who first preached the gospel. It was preached for three centuries in direct
defiance of the highest human authority, among Jews and Gentiles ahke. Next,
the defenders of true against false doctrine, of justice and mercy as against violence
and cruelty, had to stand before kings and rebuke them in the name of the Lord.
When the great revival of zeal and reverence for God's Word took place in the
fifteenth century, the influence of the mighty was frecjuently exerted to crush it.
And so it will ever be. " Not many mighty, not many noble," are to be found in
revivals of faith and zeal. Authority frowns on them, prescription is against them,
force is invoked to put them down, yet they thrive. The hand of man is powerless
against the truth. The battle is long and fierce, but it is won at last. And the
principles but lately despised are triumphant. Their holders put " their feet on
the necks of kings," for the rulers who resisted to the utmost are forced to own the
power of the truth against which they contended as long as they were able. Thus
we learn the lesson of confidence taught by Joshua, " Fear not, neither be dismayed,
be strong and of a good courage, for thus shall the Lord do to aU your enemies
against whom ye fight." Again (2) we learn the same confidence against tyrant
lusts, " which war against the soul." Long and obstinate is the conflict ; but if it
be waged in faith and prayer, the Lord fights for us out of heaven ; hght is shed
upon our onward path, the hght of a right judgment and a Christian prudence, until
at last we put our feet upon the necks of those " kings " that would have enslaved
us, and then our Joshua slays them, that they trouble us no more.



HOMILIES BY VAEIOUS AUTHOBS.

Ver. 1. — Adom-zedeh, a lesson for nations and individuals. These Jebnsites
had two or three ideas at least which are worth remarking. They had a true idea
of the essential condition of a nation's prosperity — ^for the people of Jehus had called
their city " Salem " — that is, " peace." And the title of their king was Melchi-
zedek, or Adoni-zedek — King or Lord of Eighteousness. These names are amongst
the earhest contributions to the science of poUtical economy. The one name,
" Salem," contains as much valuable suggestion as is found in many books on
" the wealth of nations." The second condenses all principles of sovereignty into
a single word. No one is a good ruler unless the title Adoni-zedek would suit hiiii.
King or Parliament, the Father in his family, the Prime Minister in his Cabinet,



OH. X. 1—43.] THE BOOK OF JOSHUA, 111

all should remember that the ruler of men is really an usurper unless the title,
Lord of Bighteousness, sait him. Let us look at this name, and observe —

I. We have here a geand title fob a ruler. Perhaps the people had degene-
rated since the days of Abraham. Then this ruler was that Melchi-zedek.whowas a
" Priest of the Most High God." However degenerate, they cling to this title,
and as the kings of Egypt were Pharaohs ; and those of Gath, Abimelechs ; and
those of Damascus, Benhadads ; so those of Jerusalem were Adoni-zedeks. There
is an instinct in all people that desires the throne to be filled with righteousness.
Just as in our days, the Khan of Merv has carried the same titles — King of Eight-
eousness and King of Peace — so in the absence of constitutional checks on regal
power, they gave their kings the title which was meant to be at once impulse
and restraint. The lesson of this title should be learned by all of us. In a ruler of
men there are many qualities requisite. Wisdom to perceive the true necessities of
those under his care ; strength and energy enough to carry out the dictates of
wisdom ; courage to face and provide calmly against every danger. But when
the utmost value has been allowed to these supreme qualities, an accurate
judgment will still allow a higher value to one other — that of equity. In outside
relations, equity wiU enable a king to maintain peace with neighbouring peoples
better than any diplomacy or strength could do. In ancient days, the king was
the judge of all causes, from those of our County Courts to those of the Court of
Chancery. What a boon to a people when the judge was an embodiment of
justice — inaccessible to bribes, ready patiently to unravel the entangled case,
never misled by partiaUty or by antipathy, but to those liked or disliked meting
out even-handed justice. This old people saw all these things, and when a Magna
Charta was an impossibUty, they tried to compass its ends by giving their king this
stimulative and restraining title. Kighteousness is still the most essential quality
of a statesman. Fairness of mind that holds the balance evenly between all con-
flicting claims — this has been the distinguishing quality of all the English states-
men of this century who have earned the nation's gratitude. It is the quaUty needed
in our Legislature to-day. It is the quahty needed by every employer of labour.
The serving classes want no favour, nor mere amiability in a master. Fairness
will ever secure their deepest attachment. A father in a family should be a " Lord
of Bighteousness." In short, this equity is the supreme want everywhere. People
would be more charitable if they were more just. And peace in homes, in churches,
in nations would be much less frequently imperilled, if only fairness of mind
moderated the claims we make, and permitted us to see whatever element of right
lay in the claims made upon us. If we have here a good title, observe secondly —

II. We have a great title borne by one of a poor nature. Name and nature
do not always correspond. And here " The Lord of Bighteousness " is found acting
nnrighteously. Gibeon with its sister cities was probably disliked for its repubUcan
institutions by all those neighbouring states that maintained a monarchy. Now to
the fault of hberty it adds the sin of wisdom. A maxim, unfortunately not obsolete
to-day, was accepted then — that the making of any alliance containing a possi-
biUty of danger to us is a sufficient casus belli against the state that makes it. His
title had not sufficiently instructed this ruler to make him see the wrong of this
position. He is perhaps the more easily led to make war against Gibeon because,
guarding as it did one of the great passes into the heart of the kingdom, to seize
it seemed the best way of securing the safety of the country from Israelitish
attack. And so unrighteously the " King of Bighteousness " attacks his neigh-
bours ; and, like so many, shows that the grandeur of a title is not always matched
by greatness in him who bears it. A long way from us in time, locahty, and cir-
cumstances, how near us in nature does this characteristic bring him. Sometimes
we inherit great names, and forget the lesson of the poet —



" They who on the deeds of ancestors enlarge.
Do but produce the debt, not the discbarge."



Sometimes
"ChiUren



God gives us names, which it is our duty to illustrate and justify,
of Light," "Sons of God," "Heirs of God," "Chosen Generation,'"



m THE BOOK OF JOSHUA. [ch. x. 1—43.

" Eoyal Priesthood." Is there never any discrepancy between the titles we beal
and the lives we lead ? We cannot help having these great names apphed to
us. They belong to all who have been born again by the birth which is from above.
And God gives us them that they may "marshal us the way that we are going."
Let us try and act up to our name, and not have the melancholy fate of being con-
demned by the very title that we bear. Lastly observe —

III. Profession oannot save feom perdition. This man with the grand name
perishes miserably — dishonoured, hanged, involving in his own ruin that of his
people and that of all those confederated with him. The providence and the judg.
ment of God are no respecters of persons. As we sow we reap. The obedience of
faith is salvation. The unrighteousness of self-will is destruction. Let us see that
we have more than the " name to live," lest the greater name only condemn us to
the greater destruction. — G.

Ver. 4. — Connection with the Church a source of worldly trouble. The trouble
which came upon Gibeon through her connection with Israel affords an illustration
of the experience of all who associate themselves witli the career and destinies of
the Church.

I. The existence of this trouble. Though the true Church is an ark of
safety, she is an ark upon stormy waters. He who joins the Church on earth joins
the Church militant, and shares her dangers (John iv. 18). (1) So long as the
world is at enmity with Ood, they who stand on the side of the people of God wiU,
be subject to the assaults of the world in (a) persecution, (5) social ostracism, (o)
calumny, (d) ridicule, &c. (2) While the Church is fulfiUing her mission to conquer
the world for Christ, she wil bring the hatred of the world upon all who are
identified with her (2 Cor. xL 23 — 27). (3) It is vain to expect to receive the
advantages of religion and to escape from the cost of them (Luke xiv. 28). He
who would win heaven must lose something on earth (Matt. vi. 24).

II. The advantages of this trouble. All trouble permitted by Providence is
blessing in disguise. So is this : (1) It serves as a test of genuineness. We may
join the Church (a) from motives of selfish pride and profit, (6) under the influencs
of superficial sentiment. Worldly trouble directly arising out of our Church rela-
tions proves the genuineness of our attachment to Christ by showing whether we
are willing to risk danger and suffer loss for Him (Matt. iij. 12; xiii. 21). (2) It
promotes union a/mong Christians. The Gibeonites were drawn closer to the
Israehtes by the threatened danger. Selfish isolation, mutual jealousy, divisions,
and ecclesiastical quarrels spring up in times of peace. Sympathy and charity are
developed in seasons of adversity. (3) It cultivates u/nworldUness. The friendship
of the world is a dangerous snare. The favour of the world brings with it the spirit
of the world. In worldly prosperity the Church tends to worldly habits. Tha
enmity of the world drives us to the sympathy of God and refuges of unworldly
living.

III. The remedies foe this trouble. Gibeon was threatened with destruction,
but on her appeal to Israel her allies fought for her, and God secured tliem the
victory. (1) The remedy for worldly trouble arising from our religious associa-
tions win be found in mutual help. The Christian Church is a brotlierhood. We
»re called to bear one another's burdens (Gal. vi. 2). The rich should help tlie
poor, the strong the weak, the prosperous at home the persecuted abroad. (2) The
remedy will also be found in the Divine aid. God fought with Israel in the
defence of Gibeon (ver. 18). They who are brought into danger for the cause of
God will find that God is on their side and will secure their deliverance. The real
danger is to those who are fighting against God. It is safer to be in trouble with
the people of God than in prosperity with their enemies, for God must and will

triumph in the end, and then His people will share His victory (John xvi. 33) ■

W. F. A.

Vers. 8—11.— The battle of Beth-horon and its lessons. It may seem as if there
was too much carnage about this account for Scripture purposes. Yet it is well to



CH. X. 1—43.] THE BOOK OF JOSHUA. 177



dwell on it. Dean Stanley treats this battle as the Marathon of the religioiu
history of the world. It was the crisis in which the hosts who were, nncon-
Bciously to some extent, fighting for truth, righteousness, progress, and Hberty,
met with those fighting, to some extent unconsciously, for a depraved religion,
licentious morals, for retrogression and decay. Like the siege of Leyden, or the
defeat of the Armada, such a battle means far more than is obvious on tha
surface. The sacred cause of man is involved in it. And it is worth our while to
linger over some of its lessons. Mark at least these.

I. God uses our effort to fulfil His promises. Israel was apt, perhaps, to
expect the possession of the land to come too easily. Jericho was got by a miracle, .
Ai by stratagem, Gibeon by submission ; and perhaps the ease of these successes
led them to dream dreams of gaining the whole land without an effort. But all the
steps of progress are not to be so easy. Miracles come only where weakness
needs them. In the degree in which they develop vigour and self-rehance, the
miraculous element in their experience wiU grow less. Always sufficient — there will
never be more help of God than is needed. And so with the confidence and vigour
developed by their successes, comes greater strain upon their powers. The nations
of southern Canaan gather together to oppose their progress : to gain possession of
that Gibeon which commands the entrance by the pass of Beth-horon to the land.
And at once "foemen worthy of their steel" confront them. God vrill fulfil His
promise to give them the land of Canaan ; but He will employ their effort and their
prowess to realise the fulfilment of His promise. And to some extent by their efforts
is His promise fulfilled. Such is all life. It-is the heir of promises which, how-
ever, require our effort for their fulfilment, (a) For instance : 'J ruth it a Icmd of
promise. Only when God gives can we get it. " The Spirit of truth " alone can
impart it. It is a land flowing with milk and honey — the home of God's elect.
But though thus a land of God's promises, and in a special sense His gift, it
comes not to the inert or the supine — to the critics that are at ease in Zion. It
comes to the fighters only. When we face bravely all lies, strive fearlessly to see
and grasp and own the truth, get lodgment for it in the heart by obeying it,
strive against doubts that rise within us, and fears disabling us, then do we gain
" the promised possession." (6) Salvation ia Ood's promise, and a Divine gift in
all its elements. Obviously it is beyond our power to compass it. Only the God
that made us eon mend us. And atonement, grace, repentance, faith, perseverance
to the end, are aU God's gift. But there is the battle of Beth-horon at the outset of
every Christian life, and many a conflict afterwards, a strait gate to begin with,
and a narrow way to foUow. And if we do not make the effort and fight for the
attainment of what we desire, we shall not find it. (c) Character is another
Canaan. A thing of promise, but only reached by effort. Daily deeds of self-
denial lead to it; and daily conflicts with doubts and disinclinations, {d) Useful-
ness is, perhaps, the gramdest of all God's promises. It is that in which we most
resemble God. Its joys are the likest of any to those of the everlasting home.
It comes not to the dreamer, but to the fighter. The abolition of slavery was a
fight. Mary Carpenter's triumph in getting a place for Bagged Schools, Industrial
Schools, and Reformatories in English legislation, required thirty years of effort.
When the Church faces the abounding drunkenness of the land, she will find God
will help her to destroy it, but that His help wiU be conditioned on a tremendous
effort. Do not believe in salvation made easy. It is always simple, it is never
easy. The possession of every Canaan is a Divine promise, and needs Divine
power ; but one of the conditions of its fulfilment is the forth-putting of human
effort. Take a second lesson.

II. The heartier the effort is, the more surely and easily success wili
COMB. Joshua saw the need for action, had God's guidance in it, amd then with
an energy which had something Napoleonic in it, threw himselJF into his task.
Was Gibeon threatened ? within a few hours of his knowing it, Israel is on the
march. Doubtless there were counsellors advising caution, consideration, and
delay. Joshua had gathered the wisdom, but not the weakness, of old age, and
knew the value of energy. That night the host is marshalled for its uphjU,

JOSHUA, „



178 THE BOOK OF JOSHUA. [ch. x. 1—48.



moonlit inarch over the fifteen or eighteen miles of valley intervening between
them and Gilgal. And before the five kings have any thought of his approach, he
rushes " hke a torrent " on the foe. And such is the energy, the surprise of that
charge, that, martial as are the habits of the enemy, they are obliged to yield.
Apparently a long fight takes place, the enemy disputing every inch of ground so
long as the gradual rising to the Upper Beth-horon gives them the advantage. But
the sun stands still over Gibeon to let them finish the fight ; and then a headlong
flight down to Lower Beth-horon, and then to the valley of Ajalon and the plains
that skirt the Mediterranean, subjects them to terrible destruction. A great hail-
storm breaks on the fugitive masses, not extending far enough eastward to affect
IsraeL And the moon stands over the valley of Ajalon after the sun has set, to let
them finish their pursuit and complete their victory. It is as fine an instance of
the value of decision, of energy, of heartiness in our work as the whole Bible gives.
" What thy hand finds to do, do it with thy might." The impact of any projectile
is in the ratio of its mass, multiplied by its velocity. And a thing of slight
mass, but of high velocity, will be more effective than one of much greater
mass, whose velocity is sluggish. So is it in the world of morals. Weight
multiplied by momentum measures the power. Most of us are inefficient, because,
while weighty enough, we have little or no momentum. We languidly pursue the
good, and half-heartedly oppose the evil. Unlike St. Paul, it is not one thing, but
twenty-one, that we do. In everything decision and heartiness is needed, but in
religion it is indispensable. Be cold or hot, not lukewarm. If the gospel be true,
it is tremendously true ; if a dream, ignore it altogether. Half-hearted fighting
prolongs the contest, invites defeat, loses the benefits of victory. In march,
attack, pursuit, we have an example of the supreme advantage of doing heartily
whatever has to be done by us. Take a third lesson.

III. The good fight, when well fought, always ends in victoet. It might
have seemed a very dubious affair, this war with the nations of Canaan. Tiie
Canaanites were the English of that period: the nation leading the world in
maritime enterprise and daring, and wealthy and strong in their successful com-
merce. Israel had been for generations in slavery, debased and weakened by
servitude. But against these odds on the side of Canaan there were some things
to be set.

1. Immorality is destructive of cvv/rage. Paganism, with its debasements,
destroyed self-respect and that interest in life, home, and liberty which is the soul
of patriotism. For heroism rehgion is an essential element. Cromwell's Ironsides,
Nelson's Methodists, Havelock's regiment of Teetotallers, the power of resistance
to oppression developed by religion in Holland and in Scotland, show how immediate
and direct is the influence of godliness in vitalising all the manUer virtues.
Corruption of character followed corruption of creed, and was followed by deteriora-
tion of courage.

2. The enemy of the good has never Divine guidance. These nations were badly
advised. Their true policy was a defensive one. Within their ramparts the
labour of conquering them would have been terrific and inevitably slow. All
uniting, in the open they lose the advantage of their cities "walled up to heaven,"
and a single disaster is a fatal one. " A good understanding have they that love
God's law ; " and all others unwatohful in presumption, or feverish in solicitude,
lack wisdom which they need.

8. And God fights on behalf of those who fight for Him, The long dfiy, the
moonlight night, the destructive hail, are all Divine, however we may abate the
miraculous significance of the poetic history. And they who aim at any form of
good find a secret providence furthering their enterprise : many influences co-
operating with them, strange providential openings, a Divine backing which, all
uniting, make it that, however weak they may be, they are more than conquerors
through Christ that loved them. " Wherefore take to yourselves the whole
armour of God," and fight the good fight of faith. — G.

Vers. 8 — 11. — The victory over the five kinc/g. The battle against the fiva kings



OH. X. 1-48.] THE BOOK 01 JOSHUA. 179

is the most remarkable episode in tlie conquest of the Canaanites. Israel might
well have had cause to tremble in presence of such aUied enemies. But Divina
aid gives it a signal victory. That aid comes under two forms : 1. It consists, first,
in a miraculous intervention of the Divine power, which sends down a fierce storm
of hailstones upon the Canaanitish armies, and so lengthens out the day as to
make the conflict decisive. No one believes now that the sun stood still. Holy
Scripture speaks the popular language of the day, and makes no pretension to being
scientific in its records. God reveals only that which man has no power to
discover, and it was not the calling of Joshua to be a Galileo or Copernicus. Do wa
not stUl speak in common parlance of the rising and setting of the sun ? AU that
is essential is, that we hold fast our faith in the miracle itself. Let usnot marvel
that such a prodigy was wrought for so small a nation ; for that nation was the
depository of the promise that in it should aU nations of the earth be blessed. The
God of nature may surely show Himself the King and Master of nature, and it is
most fitting that the heavens which declare His glory should do His command-
ments. The supreme law of the universe is not the physical law, but the depen-
dence of that law upon the sovereign wiU of the Almighty. 2. This Divine 'aid was
manifested, in the second place, by the heroic confidence and courage infused into
the hearts of his people. "Fear them not," was the message to Joshua, who
might weU have been dismayed at so powerful a league of enemies, " for I have
delivered them into thine hands." " Therefore," as we read in the following verse,
" Joshua came unto them suddenly." The Divine word alone gave him courage to
go forward, and courage is in itself an irresistible power, even more formidable
than the storm of hailstones fi-om heaven. With more than redoubled force, Israel
rushes on to certain victory. Thus the noble words of the Psahn xxi. are antici-
pated and fulfilled : " Some trust in chariots and some in horses, but we vrill trust
in the name of the Lord our God " (ver. 8). Did not Elisha describe Elijah as the
chariot and the horsemen of Israel ? Let us place unwavering trust in all our
conflicts in this Divine aid, and that confidence wiU be the first condition of victory.
— E. DE P.

Vers. 12 — 14. — The sun and moon stayed. Whatever opinions we may entertain
relative to the exact nature of the incident celebrated in the poem of the Book of
Jasher, there are certain general principles and religious truths which that poem
brings distinctly before us.

I. God is actively concerned with the events op human history. Divine
powers aided Joshua in resisting the onslaught of the Canaanites. God is present,
when He is not clearly so recognised, in all crises of Ufe. (1) His overruling power
so disposes of the order of creation that even without miracle the outward world
works His will. (2) His providential control of the minds of men and the course
of their lives determines ultimate events. Therefore note : God has not left th«
world to go its own course only to be judged and rectified at a future judgment day.
He judges now, and intervenes now, and works on the side of right, for the pro-
tection of those who submit to His rule, and to the loss of such as fight against His
will (Psa. Ixviii. 1, 7, 24).

II. Nature is subservient to the will op God. Miracles are not rare and
occasional instances of the way in which God makes His vrill felt in nature. They
are rather abnormal manifestations of the Divine power which is equally present
in the regular course of nature. God is as much working in the natural as in the
miraculous event, though the miraculous serves to impress us with the conscious-
ness of His power. If we believe in God at all, it is unreasonable to suppose that
He would create the universe in some age of dim antiquity, and then leave it to
itself like a self-acting machine, which being once wound up only needs adjusting
by miracle now and again to suit special emergencies. It is much more reasonable
to regard the universe as an organism of which God is at once the creating, the
inspiring, the energising, and the controlling spirit. Thus the sun and moon and
stars and the earth always move by His power, iuid at every moment express S;9
will (?s». civ, 2—4, 16, 21, &o. ; Eom. i. ?0),



ISO THE BOOK OF JOSHUA, [oa x. 1—48,

III. Naturai events are linked with human destinies. Like all great
delusions wbicli have exercised wide influence over men, astrology was the per-
version of a deep truth. Our lives are connected with the stars. All nature is one,
and we — in our earthly life — are part of nature. The processes of nature affect
us ; e.g., possihly sun-spots acting through atmospherio phenomena have some
influence over human calamities, and even over moral relations. Therefore note :
(1) God touches us through nature, and we must regard nature as an instrument in
His hands for our discipline. (2) Nature should be studied in its bearings upon
human life for our practical instruction.

IV. Natuee fights against those who resist the will of God. The
Canaanites were resisting God's will concerning the settlement of the land, and
Ihus they made themselves enemies to God's servant, nature. So the stars o«i of
their courses fought against Sisera (Judg. v. 20). It is objected that it is unwcrthy
of the character of God to suppose that He would intervene by means of natural
agencies to assist in a work of destruction. But it should be remembered that God
is always employing destructive agencies in nature, as earthquakes, storms, &c., and
that physical destruction is a less evil than moral corruption. — W. F. A.

Vers. 14. — A day of wonders. The Canaanite kings were slow in gathering their
forces together to repel the advance of Joshua, but they were ready enough to come
down in vengeance upon the Gibeonites for having made peace with him. The
men of Gibeon found the advantage of having a strong and generous protector, one
who would be true to his pledges, even though they had been extorted from him by
fi-aud. Joshua responds at once to the cry that comes to him from the beleaguered
city, and God makes its deliverance the occasion for a signal display of His power
and the furthenance of His purpose in the overthrow of the kings. The blending of
the natural and supernatural in the events of this day is very remarkable. The
two elements are so interlaced and interwoven that it is not for us to say where the
one ends and the other begins. We only feel, in following the course of the
narrative, that we are in the presence of a marvellous Divine power that carries all
resistance before it. Such records as this, however, have their true efiect upon us
when they lead us the more clearly to recognise the supernatural force in the
natural, to discern behind the common, familiar order of things the mystery and
majesty of the Divine. With the vexed question as to the historic truth of the
declaration that " the sun stood still in the midst of heaven," we have not now to
do (see Exposition). We simply note that, if the use the historian makes of the
poetic quotation from the Book of Jasher compels us to regard it as having some
basis of fact, there is no need on that account to believe in any actual arrest of the
order of the universe. May not natural agents and natural laws be used miracu-
lously by Him who is the Author of them? Just as He who created the hailstones
could, without injury to the IsraeUtes, turn them as engines of destruction against
their foes, so surely He who at the beginning " commanded the light to shine out
of darkness " could, in ways to us unknown, prolong the day in answer to Joshua's
prayer. Two broad lessons grow out of this :

I. That God's sovereignty over nature is subservient to the higher pur-
poses OP His spiritual kingdom. We look through these outward incidents to the
Divine end which they were all helping to work out. God was " forming a people
for his praise." Giving them a local habitation, that they might the better con-
serve His truth and show forth His glory. He drove out the heathen before them, and
planted them there that they might bear rich fruits of blessing to the world, that in
them and in their seed all the earth might be blessed. Everything is to he looked
at in the light of that moral purpose. (1) The whole visible universe exists for
spiritual ends — the revelation of the invisible Divine beauty and order ; the mag-
nifying of the law of eternal righteousness. Its activity and its rest, its discords
and its harmonies, its terror and its loveliness, aU have a moral meaning and
intent. (2) The forces and laws of the universe are against those who are against
God. You must be morally one with Him if you would have them befriend you.
*' The stars in their courses fight against Sisera." How terrible |o think of come of



cfi. X. 1-48.] The book OS' ;rosatJA. m.

the forms in which the Creator might, if He pleased, array the powers of nature
against sinful men 1 His long-suffering beneficence is their only safeguard. " It
is of the Lord's mercies that we are not consumed " (Lam. iii. 22). (3) The
created universe attains its consummation only in the final spiritual triiunph of the
Redeemer, The groaning creation waits for the "manifestation of the sons of
God." The glorious presence of the Lord wiU. be " the restitution of aU things."
There will be " nothing to hurt or to destroy " in the " new heavens and the new
earth wherein dweUeth righteousness."
II. That man is an efficient instrument in serving the cause of right-

EOTISNKSS JUST SO FAR AS HE HAS FAITH TO LAY HOLD ON THE SOVEREIGN POWER OP

God. " There was no day like that before it or after it," not because there was
anything singular, unparalleled, in God's " hearkening to the voice of a man." This
was simply a conspicuous and noteworthy example of a universal law. " The
effe;itual fervent prayer of a righteous man " has always "availed much." The
resources of heaven wait upon it. Such prayer is

" A breath that fleets beyond this iron world,
And touches Him that made it."

(1) Let the Church " stir itself up to lay hold on God." Its strength lies in faith
and prayer. The Lord will never fail to " fight for Israel " when she is true to her
high calling. The weapons of her warfare are mighty through Him. " God is in
the midst of her ; she shall not be moved : God shall help her, cmd that right
early " (Psa. xlvi. 5). This pledge of Divine protection and dehveranoe is given, not
to ecclesiastical systems, which may have much that is of man rather than of God
in their constitution, but to that Church which Christ has redeemed and chosen out
of every land and nation to represent His own cause of truth and righteousness.
When the Church goes forth in the energy of faith and prayer, its enemies flee
before it. (2) Let the individual Christian recognise the true source of moral
power. No emergency of life need be overwhelming to one who casts himself un-
reservedly on God. "If God be for us, who can be against us?" Move on
BteadUy in the path of duty and fear not. In all conceivable time's of difficulty and
danger, of temptation and sorrow, Christ's answer to the cry of His faithful ones ia
the same — " My grace is sufficient for thee. My strength is made perfect in weak-
ness."— W.

Vers. 24, 25. — ITie conquered kings. The fate of those kings has its moral
analogies. We may regard them as typical of the principles and powers of spiritual
evil, and their end as suggestive of the certain issue of God's conflict with those evil
powers. Observe —

I. The DECEITFULNES3 OF SIN. It deludes the transgressor, and leads him blind-
fold to ruin. It moves men to seek false refuges, inspires them with a vain hope.
They think to hide themselves, but God's laws and retributions always find them
out. Jonah would fain " flee from the presence of the Lord," but God's " strong
wind " was swifter than his flight, and the sea, by which he thought to escape,
only brought him face to face with his Judge. The subteifuges to which men
resort in any guilty way often become the very means of their detection and punish-
ment. The kings dream of safety in their cave ; it turns out to be the very thing
that shuts them up hopelessly to Joshua's vengeance. As Matthew Henry puts it :
" That which they thought would have been their shelter, was made their prison
first, and then their grave." So do ginfal pm-poses often defeat themselves. " The
wicked is snared in the work of his own hands " (Psa. ix. 16).

II. The HUMILIATION THAT, SOONER OR LATER, BEFALLS A PROUD DEFIANCE OP

Divine authority. See here an illustration of high-handed rebellion against God.
Its overthrow in the end is sure. " The wheel of fortune timis and lowers the
proud." Kings are as helplessly subject to the Divine power by which that wheel
revolves asother men (Psa. Ixxvi. 12 ; Isa. xh. 25). Into what abject misery have
they sometimes fallen, under the mighty hand of God, who once, in the career ol
their unbitiou, set all Divine and human law at defiance, and made the earth to



182 THE BOOK OF JOSHUA. [ch. 1. 1—43.

tremble ! Let not i?"* -wicked exalt themselves ; there is a power that can easily
lay them low.

III. The victory thac rewards faithful and patient moral conflict. The
captains are called, in the presence of all the men of Israel, to " put their feet upon
the necks " of these doomed kings. So shall it be the honour and joy of all
earnest warrior souls to see their enemies at last subdued under them. " The God
of peace shaU bruise Satan under your feet shortly" (Rom. xvi. 20). 'Tis hard
work to be continually fighting against some form of evil in the world without or the
world within ; to have continually to confront some new foe, or " old foes with new
faces; " to be compelled often to drag forth some lurking iniquity from its hiding
place in our own hearts that it may be slain. But let us be resolute and patient and
we shall " come off more than conquerors through him who hath loved us," and at
last plant our feet proudly on the necks of all our adversaries.

IV. The final glorious victory of Christ. It is the eternal purpose of God
that every stronghold of evil should fall before Him and all His enemies be put
beneath His feet, and the events of time are all helping in some way or other to
bring about that issue (Psa. ex. 1 ; 1 Cor. xv. 25 ; Phil. ii. 9 — 11). — W.

Ver. 25. — Courage and strength.

I. The duty to be brave and strono. This is often insisted on in the Book of
Joshua {e.g., i. 6). Christianity gives prominence to gentler graces of humility,
mildness, and the forgiving spirit. But it does not therefore exonerate us from the
more masculine duties (1 Cor. xvi. 13 ; Eph. vi. 10). (1) It is our duty to be brave.
Cowardice is a sin in a Christian even more than in a pagan, because the Christian
has higher motives for courage. The exhortation, " Fear not," is not only an en-
couragement to comfort ; it is an incitement to duty, because cowardice leads us to
shrink from (a) danger, (6) responsibility, (c) pain and loss, ((Q ridicule; and yet
all of these may come in the way of our life's work. (2) It is our duty to be strong.
We should not simply bewail weakness as a calamity ; we should repent of it as a
failing. Moral weakness comes from moral corruption. It makes us fail in our
work of resisting sin and doing good. It is therefore needful that we should over-
come it if we are to fulfil our mission.

II. The call for the exercise of this duty. (1) We are surrounded by
alarming dangers; (a) in our own sinful hearts ; (6) in the evil of the world, and
the troubles and temptations which arise from this ; (c) in the mystery of life. He
who is not brave with God's courage will siak before these terrors when once he
realises their full proportions. (2) We are called to difficult tasks ; (a) like the
IsraeUtes, we are invited to take possession of an inheritance. The kingdom
of heaven is not won without fighting (1 Cor. ix. 26) ; (6) like the Israelites, we have
foes to resist in sin within and temptation without (1 Peter v. 8, 9) ; (c) like the
Israelites, we hare territory to conquer for God. We have not to fight for our own
inheritance and safety only or chiefly, but that we may win the world for Christ
(1 Tim. vi. 12 ; 2 Tim. ii. 3).

III. The secret of courage and strength. (1) Thej are derived from God.
We are not to fear, because God is with us (Isa. xliii. 1,2). We are to be strong in
His strength (Psa. xxix. 11 ; Phil. iv. 13). Tlierefore those naturally most timid
and weak can be strong and brave in God (Isa. xl. 31 ; 2 Cor. xii. 10). (2) They
are encouraged by experience. To us it appears a brutal source of courage — ^those
Hebrew captains planting their feet on the necks of the conquered kings in triumph.
But rejoicing in the victory, it was well that they should see God's hand in it, and
gain strength fi-om it. We may seek strength and courage in the contemplation of
the way in which God has helped us in the past (Psa. xxxiv. 6). (3) They are in-
creased by practice. The text is an exhortation. Though strength and courage
come from God, they come through our own efforts to be brave and energetic. We
must exercise Divine grace in order to realise its efSciency (Phil. ii. 12). (4) They
are mutually helpful. Courage and strength are associated. Corn-age without
strength is rash. Strength without courage is futile. We must be strong to justify
oiir courage and braye to use our strength. Thus the various Christian graces art



e&. X. 1—43.] THE BOOK OP JOSStA. lit

linked together in arming a bouI with the whole armour of God (Eph. vi. 11).—
W. F. A.

Ver. 40. — The extermination of (he Oamaanites, The apparent cruelty of the
Israelites in the conquest of Canaan arouses moral and rehgious questions of great
interest, especially those which are suggested by the conduct of Joshua, the rela-
tion of God to the slaughter of the Canaanites, and the contrast between the earlier
and the later religious dispensations.

I. The conduct of Joshua. This appears cruel and murderous. But note :
(1) It was in accordance with the customs of the times. Christian lenity was un-
known. A man must be judged in the light of his age. It is wrong to " foUow a
multitude to do evil " (Exod. xxiii. 2), when we know it is doing evil, because the
number of guilty persons does not mitigate the guilt of each individual. But our
own judgment of what is right and wrong is largely determined by the prevalent
ideas and unblamed conduct of our contemporaries ; and if, when we have used the
best light at our command, "our hearts condemn us not" (1 Johniii. 21), we cannot
be accounted guilty. (2) It was in obedience to the understood com/mand of God.
A supposed command from heaven is no justification for an act which a man sin-
cerely believes to be wrong, because in no case is he justified in violating conscience,
and because he has more reason for doubting the Divine origin of the voice without
tlian that of the voice within. But when the certainty of the Divine command is
so strong that it carries conviction to the conscience, it becomes right for a man to
obey. (2) It was in execution of what was believed to be a Divine decree of
judgment. Joshua did not consider that he was destroying the Canaanites simply
to make way for the Israelites. He behoved that he was a "scourge of God," sent
to bring doom to the guilty, to rid the land of men who hved only to dishonour it,
and to introduce a better race in their stead.

II. The relation of God to the slaughter op the Canaanites. Did God
really command it ? and if so, how can we reconcile this with His character of
goodness ? (1) If God commanded this slaughter, He was ordering no more than
He does directly in natural events — in tempests, earthquakes, famines, plagues, and
visitations of death generally. (2) If men deserve destruction for their sins, it is
really no more harsh for this to he sent by humcm agency them for it to come from
physical causes, as with the destruction of Sodom and Gomorrah. (3) If the
jpunishment of sin generally is reconcilable with the goodness of God, this particular
instance may be so. (4) The extermination of the Canaanites was a blessing to
the world. (5) It was vo real evil to the Canaa/mtea. If men are living in sin
and will not repent, the judgment which shortens their Uves and prevents further
evU is rather a blessing than a curse ; for any loss or suffering is better for us than
that we should be permitted to live on in sin (Luke xvii. 1, 2). It is better for us
that we should be punished for sin than that we should continue in sin unpunished.

III. The contrast between the earlier and the later dispensations. (1)
Joshua hrovLght punishment and destruction to sinners. Christ brings /or^it)enes»
and life. (2) Joshua could only find room for his people after exterminating their
predecessors. Christ has room for all who wiU come to His kingdom (Luke xiv. 22).
(3) Joshua proved himself fit for the inheritance of his nation by the exercise of
destructive warfare. Christians are made meet for their inheritance by the prac-
tice of Christ-like deeds of charily (Matt. xxv. 84— 36).— W. P. A.

Ver. 40. — The extermination of the Canaanites. " So Joshua smote all the
country of the hills, and of the south, and of the vale, and of the springs, and aU
their kings : he left none remaining, but utterly destroyed all that breathed, as the
Lord God of Israel commanded." The attributes of God are the foundation of
religion. From the relation in which we stand to Him as His creatures some
regards are due to Him ; but this relationship of inferiority could not of itself suffice
to demand that entire devotedness to His services, that complete surrender of our
affection which we denominate religion. God's requirement (as stated in Dent.
X. 12) can only be justified by reference to the perfection* of His character. It



IM THE BOOK OF JOSHUA. [ot. x. 1— 4a

there be the least flaw, implicit trust cannot be expected of us. Herein all heathen
Bystems of religion are defective, presenting to us a deity whom we cannot worship,
a' creature maimed, Uable to the same passions as ourselves. The Christian re-
ligion bears traces of its Divine origin in the grandeur of its conceptions concerning
the character of God. There is a height that dwarfs into littleness the puny goda
invented by man ; there is a many-sidedness of view which could not have been the
product of imagination. Just and holy, merciful and gracious, all-knowing and
Almighty, the Creator and Sustainer, a Friend and Judge, our Father and King,
Buoh He is declared to be. Hence it is that those objections are felt to be most
gerioua which are urged, with any show of reason, against the reality of God's per-
fections. Especially when His benevolence is challenged do we fear lest the dark
shadow becloud the skies and chiU our hearts. Now, in the text there is an account
of a sweeping destruction executed on the south of Canaan by command of God.
No quarter was given. So dreadful the desolation that some have called it cruelty.
And though it is not incumbent on us to justify all the ways of God, yet as some
are led from passages Uke the present to entertain hard thoughts of God, it may be
well for once to look the impUed olijection cahnly in the face.

A command from God may rend<r that notion lawful and right, which done with-
out His authiirity would he deserving of reprobation. He is the Lord and owner
of Ufe. He gave, and it is His to take away. He commits no more injustice than
when a parent redemands from his children the goods of which they are making
an improper use. The text is therefore no excuse for the unauthorized seizure of
the land of one nation by another, or for those violent acts for which no direct behest
of God can be alleged.

These were single detached convmands against pa/rticular foes. There was no
injunction " to cultivate the principles of treachery or cruelty ; " " none of these
precepts are contrary to immutable morality " (Bp. Butler). When an army was
led blindly into Samaria the king said, " Shall I smite them ? " " No," answered
the prophet Eheha in effect (2 Kings vi. 21, 22). On another occasion the prophet
Elijah had rebuked King Ahab because he had allowed a king to escape, whom
" the Lord had appointed to utter destruction." The reason of the case alters the
nature of the action.

The extermination of the Canaanites was a punishment for wicTcedness. See
Lev. xviiL " The land is defiled . . . vomiteth out her inhabitants." The very
earth stank with their practices, and yearned to be rid of its unhallowed burden.
" Ye shall not walk in the manners . . . for they committed aU these things, there-
fore I abhorred him." Again, in Deut. xviii., " Because of their abominations the
Lord doth drive them out from before thee." So also Deut. ix. 5. It is to be re-
membered that the things censured were not merely occasional acts, but abomi-
nable customs. Indeed, the odious practices were a part of their religion, incor-
porated into their most solemn services. So degraded had they become.

A considerable period of respite had been granted, hut without avail. God had
eaid to Abraham, " The iniquity of the Amorites is not yet full." When the cup
of iniquity was filled to overflowing, then did the righteous fiat issue. During that
period warnings of the severest character were given. Sodom and Gomorrah
perished in a terrible manner, and later the kings of Og and Sihon had fallen. Still
no repentance. It is useless to say that the warnings were not sufficiently distinct.
We see the same indifference to-day. Men destroy their health by sinful habits,
grow worse and worse. Do they need a Divine hand on their shoulder or an actual
voice in their ear to warn them ? The warning is plain, if only they will attend to
it. But no I ami the fearful end arrives.

The method of punishment adopted was one of which the nations of Palestine
would not complain, since it was in keeping with their own conduct. They would
find no injustice done them. They would defeat other nations and dispossess them
of life and territory if tbey could. They beUeved in the tenure or lease of the
strong arm. Granted, therefore, that God was executing righteous judgment, the
prevaiUng code removes all charge of cruelty. The judgments as well as the favours
of Qod must be conditioned as to form by men's surroundings. In legislating f<M



ca. XI. 1—23.]



THE BOOK OF JOSHUA.



lU



the Israelites, whilst we expect and find snch purity and such an anticipation of the
opinions of modem times as justly entitles tlie " the law of Moses" to be considered
a revelation from God, yet would it have been Quixotic to take no account of
prevalent opinions and tendencies, to demand of the Israehtes exactly what Chris-
tianity now demands after so many centuries of civiUsation. There is no change,
therefore, in the character of God, no advance in wisdom or love supposed, only
such a difference of reputation as is necessitated by a due regard for the condition
of those to whom Divine commands are given. We must not, therefore, talk of a
contradiction between the spirit of the gospel maxim, " love your enemies," and
the precept followed in the text as seeming to say, "act with barbarity." As a rule,
God's judgments here do not distinguish degrees of guilt. Famines and pestilences
of old times scourged a whole neighbourhood. So in the present instance the sword
visited all with punishment. Let us not forget, however, that these judgments are
■ not final. Nothing is determined respecting the ullimate state of those inTolved in
the general destruction. Minute discrimination is for the other world.
la not God's love exemplified even in the stern precept of the text ?

1. Love to surrounding nations. This terrible example might prove beneficial.
Tlie only proof to them of superior power was prowess in war. This alone could
bring them to acknowledge that the God of Israel, " he was Lord."

2. To His own people. The danger was lest the Israehtes should be contami-
nated, and after events showed the wisdom of God's command. The people were so
easily seduced froih their allegiance to Jehovah. And God was impartial. He
threatened that if the Israelites did evil, their fate should be similar.

8. To the whole world. Since if the chosen people had utterly lost the truth,
the hght would have been universally extinguished. Through Israel the promised
Messiah was to come. Woe to the world if the way were blocked up, and no
Saviour appeared dawning as the Sun of Eighteonsness on this benighted earth.

Many lessons may be drawn. We learn the authority of God, and His hatred of
ein. Ours is no emasculated religion. If God were a being of kindness only, then
kindness with sin would mean total misery. " Except we repent we shaU all like-
wise perish." When we look at His anxiety for the welfare of His people, and the
preparation made for the gift of His Son, we are taught " the goodness and severity
of God " (Eom. xi. 22).— A.



EXPOSITION.



CHAPTER XI. 1—23.



The PEosEcnTios or ihb wab. — Ver. 1.
— And it came to pass. The political con-
stitution of Palestine was, humanly speak-
ing, the cause of its overthrow. The division
of the country into i host of petty states,
and the consequent want of cohesion and
concert, made its conquest a comparatively
easy task. Had the kings of the north rallied
round the standard set up in Central Pales-
tine by Adoni-zedek, a far more formidable
opposition would have been offered to Joshua
at Gibeon. Calvin takes us, however, at once
to the fountain head, and remarks how God
fitted the burden to those who had to bear it.
In spite of the great things God had done to
them, they might have been driven to despair
(and every one knows how weak their faith
was) by the overwhelming numbers of the
enemy. But by reason of the slackness of
their opponents they were able to meet and
overoome them in detail, without any opposi-



tion but what their weak faith enabled them
courageously to confront. Jal)ln king of
Eazor. Jabin (the Hebrew meaning of this
word is intelligent) was, like Pharaoh in
Egypt, the usual name for the king that
reigned in Hazor (see Judg. iv. 2, 23, 24). He
was a powerful monarch, and if not before, at
least after, the Israelitish invasion became
the acknowledged head of the league formed
among the Canaanites against the Israelites.
The first mention we have of Hazor in
history is before the Exodus. The temple
at Karnak, in Egypt, contains an account of
an expedition into Palestine by Thotmes
III., in which Kedeshu, Magedi, Damesku,
Ehatzor or Hazara, and other places are
mentioned. We may no doubt identify
these with Kedesh - Naphtali, Megiddo,
Damascus, and Hazor (see Palest. ExpL
Quart. Paper, April, 1876). Hazor, like
fort in French and German, caer in
Welsh, and the termination cetter in
English (so' also eheittr), signifiea a caitl«



189



TSE BOOK OF JOSSUA.



[c6. XI. 1—28,



or fortified town. Like the names above
mentioned, it was by no means an uncom-
mon name. Beside the present Hazor,
which was in northern Palestine, two cities
of that name are mentioned in the south
(ch. XV. 23, 25). It rose from its ashes
during the period of inaction which followed
the death of Joshua, and though (ch. xix. 36)
it was assigned to the tribe of Naphtali,
became once more the centre of a strong
Canaanitish organisation. It was, perhaps,
the city Solomon is stated to have fortified
(1 Kings ix. 15), though this is not expressly
stated. This becomes more probable when
we find this Hazor among the cities
of northern Israel captured by Tiglath-
Pileser (2 Kings xv. 29). "Yet still, in spite
of the destruction by the Assyrians, the
name lived on till the time of the Maccabees,
and the great contest betweeen King Deme-
trius and Jonathan the Maccabean took
place upon the plain of Hazor " (Bitter, ii.
225). Josephus also mentions the irzSiov
'Aaiip in this coimection. Eobinson identifies
it with Tel Khuraibeh, on the lake of Huleh,
the ancient Merom. Conder regards it as
represented by Jebel and Merj Hadlreh, on
the borders of this lake. Dean Stanley
places it above the lake, while Vandevelde
finds a place called Hazdr, with extensive
ruins, some distance westward. The names,
however, Hazdr and Haziri, are very
common. Of Madon and Shimron nothing
is known. Knobel would identify Achshaph
with Acco or Ptolemais. Eobinson supposes
it to be the modem Kesftf. But this is not
certain, for Achshaph (ch. xix. 25) formed the
border of Asher, while Kes^f is in the
extreme north. According to Conder, it is
the present el Tastf .

Ver. 2. — On the north of the moimtalns.

Bather, to the northward, in the mountain
district. Not necessarily the Lebanon and
Anti-Lebanon range, but th6 mountains of
QaUlee, which lay within the boundaries
of Naphtali. The LXX. reads \\'Ti for
J1BV and therefore renders icaj-d ^iSitiva,
adding T-ijv fieyaXr\v from ver. 8. The plains
Eouth of Ghinueroth. Bather, the Arabah
south of Chinneroth (see note on ch. iii. 16).
The word Arabah is given untranslated in
oh. xviii. 18. This was, no doubt, the great
Gh6r, or depression of the Jordan, or at
least the northern part of it, extending for
some distance south of the town of Chin-
neroth (ch. xix. 35; Deut. iii. 17). This
town gave its name to the lake or inland
sea now better known to the student of
Scriptures as the sea of Tiberias, or lake of
Gennesareth (see Num. xxxiv. 11). " As we
enter upon the geological character of the
Ibuin which contains the sea of GaUlee, we



see at once that it is simply one element of the
Jordan Valley and the Dead Sea, which ex-
tends due north and south for a distance of
sixty hours. This is the Gh6r, or Sunken
Valley of the Arabah " (see note on ch, iii.
16) , " extending from Hasbeya to the .Silanitio
gulf as a continuous cleft — the deepest one
known to us " (Bitter, ii. 241). He goes on
to enumerate the various signs of volcanic
agency in this region ; the frequent earth-
quakes, the form of the basin of Gennesareth
(though he denies it to be a crater), the hot
springs, the frequent caves, the naphtha
deposits and springs, the hot water springs
to be found even in the Dead Sea, the lofty
crystalline masses of the Sinaitie peninsula,
and the porphyritio dykes found at the
southern end of the Gh6r, as well as the
general conformation of the country east of
Jordan. The sea of Chinneroth, or Tiberias,
is stated by Conder (Handbook, pp. 212,
216) to be 682-5 feet below the level of the
Mediterranean. And in the valley. The
Shephelah, or lowland district (see above ch.
ix. 1). The borders of Dor. Bather, the
heights, or highlands (niDJ Vulg. regionibus)
of Dor. This elevated position was a re-
markable feature of the neighbourhood,
though the various translations of the word
(as"coast,"ch.xii.23; "region," 1 Kings iv.
11) rather obscure the prominence given to
this physical characteristic in the Scripture
narrative. Eosenmuller would translate it
the "promontory" of Dor, for Dor (now
Tantura, Tortura, or Dandora) was upon
the sea coast south of Carmel, and nine
Boman miles north of Csesarea. Thus
situated, its position on a hill, though the
hill is not a lofty one, would strike the
observer, and it accounts for the pecuhar
form of speech noticed above, which is so
common that in the LXX. it is usually
given as part of the proper name, tiaipiSBiip
(cf . 'Sa^aSSdip, ch. xii. 28 ; T:ic<l,9a5<if>, 1 Kings
iv. 11). And behind it are still higher
rocky ridges, to which the name also ap-
plies. Dor, with its excellent harbour, was
a noted place of commerce in ancient
times, especially in the murex coccineus,
from which the far-famed Tyriau dye wag
obtained. These are a species of mussel,
and Seetzen mentions two varieties, the
murex trunculus of Linnceus, and the Helix
ianthina. The latter is of a whitish green,
but when taken out of the water it passes
from red to purple, and after death to violet.
Its use has been superseded by that of the
cochineal insect, but the Tyriau purple was
in great demand in early times. Its costliness
may be inferred from the fact that in each
insect a little pouch behind the head, not
the size of a pea, contains the dye. Sea
Bitter, iv. 280, 281 ; Pliny, ' Nat. Hist.' 9,



tk. XI. 1—23.]



THE BOOK Of JOSHUA.



IW



86 (60 in some editions) ; and ' Epist.' 50, 10,
26. The allusions to it by Horace, Virgil,
Juvenal, and other classical authors are too
numerous for quotation. We may take as
'instances Virgil, Georg. iii. 17 • " Dli
victor ego, et Tyrio conspectus in ostro "
(cf. Mn. iv. 262): and Juvenal, Sat. vii. 134 ;
" Spondet enim Tyrio stlataria purpura
filo." The ruins of the ancient city still
crown the steeps of its site (see Vande-
velde's Memoir, and Gender's Handbook.
Also Keil in loc). On the west. The LXX.
renders, " And to the Amorites on the sea
coast " (see last note), leaving out all men-
tion of the Canaanites.

Ver. 3. — To the Canaanlte (see note on
ch. iii. 10). This confederacy was yet more
formidable than the other (ver. 6), but was
as signally defeatedby Joshua's promptitude
(see ver. 7). We are reminded of the swift
march of our own Harold, and its results at
Stamford Bridge ; with this difference, how-
ever, that the enemy, instead of being
engaged in triumphant festivity, was prepar-
ing for an expedition against a much-dreaded
enemy, who was believed to be far off.
Napoleon had nearly achieved a similar
surprise at Quatre Bras and Ligny. The
Jebuslte In the moxmtains. Jerusalem was
not yet taken. From the neighbourhood of
that as yet unconquered city, and probably
from itself, Jabin drew his auxiliaries,
while Joshua was as yet fully occupied in
the south. Hermon In the land of Mizpeh.
Mizpeh, or. Ham-mizpah, as it is usually
called (save in ver. 8 ; Judg. xi. 29 ; 1 Sam.
xxii. 3; Hos. v. 1), i.e., the watch-tower,
was a common name among the Israelites.
There was one in Judah (ch. xv. 38), in
Benjamin (oh. xviii. 26), in Gilead (Judg. xi,
29; cf. Oen. xxxi. 49; Josh. xiii. 26), and in
Moab (1 Sam. xxii. .S). Bitter (ii. 353) men-
tions the large number of watch-towers, of
which the ruins may still be traced, along
the line of the great watershed of Judaea.
This one was probably far to the north, on
the north-western side of Hermon, com-
manding a view of the plain of Coele Syria,
which extended from south-west to north-'
east between Lebanon and Anti-Lebanon.
This vast plain is still known as the
Bukei'a (see note on oh. v. 8), though
Bobinson denies that this Bukei'a is meant,
because the Bukei'a properly so-called was
not under Hermon. This makes it possible
tnat Mizpeh might have been on the south-
eastern side of Hermon, where also an ex-
tensive view might be had. Bitter, however,
says if can be no other than " the great plain
which extends north of Lake Huleh, from
its narrow western margin to Banias, that
is, the plain south and Bouth-west of Her-
mon. Borne have supposed the meanmg of



Mizpeh to be equivalent to Belle Vne in
modem days. But the meaning " watch-
tower " suggests ideas more in keeping with
those rude times, in which our modem
appreciation of scenery was a rare quality.
It was not the beauty of the view which was
valued, but its extent, as giving timely
notice of the approach of an enemy.
Mount Hermon has already been mentioned
in the note on oh. i. 4. Some further
particulars may here he added. We find in
Deut. iii. 9 that the Amorites call the moun-
tain Shenir, and the Sidonians Sirion. It
is very remarkable, and bears on the author-
ship of the Song of Solomon, that the
Amorite name Shenir is given to Hermon
in Cant. iv. 8. Was the song addressed to
a Hittite wife, or had Solomon an Amorite
one t In Dent. iv. 48 Hermon is called Sion.
With the former of these passages we may
compare Psa. xi4x. 6. But we must not con-
found (as even a TOter so well informed as
Bitter does) the Zion, or Tzion (sunny
mount), of Psa. c^xxiii., where Hermon is
mentioned, with the Sion, or " lofty moun-
tain " (spelt with Sin, not Tzade), in Deut.
iv. 48. Vandevelde asks why the mountain
is called by so many names, and replies that
it is because " it is a cluster of mountains
many days' journey in circumference." A
much better reason is suggested by the fact
mentioned in our former note — that, as the
highest ground in Palestine, it was visible
from every part of it. The name Sirion, or the
coat of mail, was no doubt given from its
glittering surface. It is to be feared that the
reason given above for the Sidonian name
diminishes the probability of the remarkable
argument in Blunt's ' Coincidences,' part ii.
2, derived from the Sidonian settlement
(Judg. xviii.) at the foot of Hermon.

Ver. 4. — And they went out. Dean
Stanley (Lectures, i. 259) compares this
" last struggle " of the Canaanites with the
conflict between the Saxons and the British
chiefs " driven to the Land's End." The
comparison is more picturesque than ac-
curate. In the first place, it was by no
means a " last struggle " (see ver. 21 ; ch.
xviii. 3 ; xix. 47 ; Judg. iv. throughout). In
the next, the Britons were never driven to
the Land's End, but Dorsetshire, which
retained its independence for 200 years, was
treated by Ina as Gezer (ch. xvi. 10), was
treated by the Ephraimites, while Devon-
shire and Cornwall came very gradually and
almost peacefully imder the hands of the
conquerors. And thirdly, even had it been
otherwise, there is a vast difference between
a handful of desperate men driven to bay
on a tougne of land surrounded nearly on
every uia by the sea, and a powerful,
though dafeatsd, nation with a vMt oon-



188



THE BOOK 01' JOSSTTA.



(oh. XI. 1-



tinrnt in its rear. Tet there are many
features common to the history of the
Israelites in Canaan, and of the Teutonic
tribes in Britain (see Introduction). As
the sand that is upon the sea shore. This
poetic phrase is common in the Hebrew
writings (see Gen. xxii. 17 ; xxxii. 12 ; Judg.
■vii. 12 ; 1 Sam. xiii. 6 ; 1 Kings iv. 20, &c.).
Solomon's capacious intellect is compared
to the sand on the Sea shore, in 1 Kings iv.
29. The word translated "shore" is "lip"
in the original, a word which adds to the
poetry of the passage. And horses and
chariots very many. Literally, many ex-
ceedingly. The Israelites appear to have
held cavalry and chariots in great awe (see
Exod. xiv. 18, and the song of triumph in
Exod. XV. J cf. also oh. xvii. 16, 18 ; Judg.
i. 19 ; iv. 3). In later times they appear to
have become more used to them. See, tor
instauce, 1 Sam. xiii. 5, where the historian
gives their number, large as it was, instead
of regarding it as past all computation.
This battle must have taken place on level
ground, or the chariots would have been
useless. Accordingly the historian fixes its
scene on the banks of " the waters of
Merom," where such ground is to be found —
another instance of his historical accuracy
(see Vandevelde, Journey ii. 413, who
places the battle on the great plain south-
west of the latter). The use of chariots in
battle dates from an early period. Homfir's
heroes are described as driven to battle in
them. But perhaps the scythe-chariots are
here meant, which are not found on early
Egyptian monuments, but which Xenophon
in his Oyroptedia says were introduced by
Cyrus. We find them, however, in use in
Britain, in the days of Julius Gessar, and
they could hardly have obtained the idea
from the Persians. Potter (Antiquities,
bk. iii. oh. i.) says that they were gradually
abandoned when they were found more
dangfcrous to those who used them than to
the enemy. That this kind of chariot is
here meant seems pretty certain from the
alarm they caused. No such alarm woiild
have been caused by chariots simply used
to convey the chieftains to the fight (see
GeseniuB, s.v. ; Xenophon, Cyr. vi. 4; and 2
Mace. xiii. 2). All their hosts. The LXX.

reads D13''5^D their kings, for dllypD.

Ver. S. — The waters of Merom. Bobin-
■on and the later travellers generally
identify this with the Samoohonitis (Joseph,
Ant, V. 1 ; Bell. Jud. iii. 9. 7 ; iv. i. 1), now
Huleh. Keil and DeUtzsch deny this, but
it may be regarded as established, on the
authority of Bitter, Vandevelde, Tristram,
in short of all who have visited Palestine
Aoxijif the Iwt thirty years. But its name,



"the waters of height," would seem to
answer to this, the highest of the inland
lakes of Palestine. The Jordan runs throngh
it, and it is also the reservoir for nmnerous
other streams. "In the centre of this
plain, half morass, half tarn, lies the
uppermost lake of the Jordan " — the Uttle
lake Phiala excepted — "about seven miles
long, and at its greatest width six miles
broad, the mountains slightly compressing
it at either extremity, surrounded by an al-
most impenetrable jungle of reeds, abound-
ing in wild-fowl, the sloping hills near it
scoured by herds of gazelles" (Stanley,
' Sinai and Palestine,' p. 382).

Ver. 6. — And the Lord said unto Joshua.
The encouragement was not unnecessary.
The task before Joshua was harder than any
that had yet befallen him. The enemy was
far morenumerous and better equipped. And
it is a well-known fact that men of tried
courage are often daunted by unaccustomed
dangers. Therefore all Joshua's strength of
mind was required to inspirit even men who
had experienced God's wonderful support
at the passing of the Jordan, at the siege
of Jericho, at the battle before Gibeon, now
that they were face to face with the un-
wonted spectacle of a vast host, furnished
with all the best munitions of war known
to that age. The Israelites had nothing to
depend upon but their own tried valour, and
the reliance they felt upon God's support.
" Unequal in arms and tactics," says Ewald
('Hist. Israel.,' ii 2. C), "they couldopposa
to the Canaanites only courage and con-
fidence." To-morrow about this time.
The promise was made on the eve of the
encounter, but not, of course, as some
have supposed, while Joshua was still at
Gilgal. We are not told how long Joshua
was on the march. Probably (as in ch. ii.)
he had sent scouts forward, who brought
him intelligence on the day before the
battle of the vastness of the host, and
the formidable nature of its equipment.
The martial spirit Joshua had infused into
the host, and the spirit of faith in God
begotten of His recent acts of favour,
contrast remarkably with the conduct of
She Israelites described in Num. xiv. To
each servant of God His own special gift is
vouchsafed. Moses was the man to inspire
the Israelites with a reverence for law.
Joshua had the special aptitudes for the
leader in a campaign. It is a confirmation
of this view that, in the one successful
engagement recorded during the forty years'
Wandering in the desert, Joshua, not Moses,
was the leader of the troops, while the aged
law-giver remained at a distance, encourag-
ing them by his prayers (see Exod. xvit
8 — 13), But while we thus regard tba



OH. xi. 1—23.1



THE BOOK OF JOSHUA.



IM



gecondary influences of individual character,
we must not forget that the Israelites were
also sastained at this moment b^ the assur-
ances of Divine protection given at Jericho,
at Ai, at Beth-horon, which had not been
vouchsafed to them while under Moses's
leadership in the wilderness. Will I deliver
up. The " I " in the original is emphatic.
And the use of the present participle in the
Hebrew adds vividness to the promise.
Slain. LXX. and Vulg., wounded. Thou
Shalt hough their horsea. To hovgh (or
hoxe, Wiohf) is to hamstring, vevpoKoinlv',
LXX., to cut the sinews behind the- hoofs,
the hocks, as they are called. This rendered
the horse useless, for the sinew could not
reunite. The effects of the horses and
chariots upon the mind of Joshua and
his host, who had neither, is here trace-
able. " Those very horses and chariots,
which seem to you so formidable, will
I, the Lord of hosts, be to - morrow at
this time delivering into your hand.
The horses shall be for ever useless to
your enemies, and the dreaded chariots
shall cease to be." Why should Joshua
have destroyed the horses? Perhaps (as
Keil, following Calvin, suggests) in order
that the Israelites should not put their
trust in chariots or in horses (Psa. ?x, 7 ;
oxlvii. 10), but in God alone (of. fliut.
xvii. 16). But more obvious considerations
of policy may have dictated the measure.
God never (see Matt. iv. 1 — 7) makes use of
supernatural means when natural ones are
sufficient. Now the Israelites were unac-
quainted with the use of horses in warfare,
while their enemies were not. To retain
the horses while the country was as yet
unsubdued would have been a double bur.
den to them, for they would have had not
only to keep them themselves, but to prevent
the enemy from regaining them. On the
same principle in modern warfare do we
spike guns we cannot carry off, and destroy
provisions we cannot convert to our own
use.

Ver. 7. — Suddenly (see remarks in In-
troduction on Joshua's characteristics as a
general. Also ch. x. 9). And they fell upon
them. This phrase denotes the rapidity of
the onset. While they deemed him to be
leagues away, he suddenly appeared at the
head of his army, no doubt debouching from
one of the mountain passes of Upper Galilee ;
and before they could set themselves in
battle array, his troops, without giving the
enemy time to rally, or themselves a
moment's breathing- time, commenced the
attack. The LXX. adds " in the hill coun-
try " here, an obvious blunder. Tlie trans-
lator must have carelessly read ^^3 for Dn3.

Yu 8,— Aa* the I*r4 delivered them



(see ch. x. 42). The issue of every battl*
is in God's hands. The natural man
attributes it to human skill. The spiri-
tual man, whether under the law or
under the gospel, acknowledges the truth
that " there is no restraint to the Lord,
to save by many or by few " (1 Sam. xiv.
6). But if victory should ever side with
numbers, if God appears not to " defend
the right," it is that anxiety and sorrow
may chasten the hearts of its upholders,
lead them to "crucify the flesh with it*
affections and lusts," and so conduct them to
a final victory when they are fitted to resist
the intoxication of prosperity. Many a
lesson in history has taught us that im-
mediate success is by no means a blessing,
even to those who are in the main fighting
for a good cause. Great Zldon. So called,
not to distinguish it from any other city,
but to mark (so also ch. xix. 28) its import-
ance as the capital of Phoanicia. This ex.
pression, ' ' great Zidou," marks the early
date of the Book of Joshua. In Homer's
Iliad, Sidon is represented as the great
home of the arts, though the historian Jus-
tin> tells us that, even when Homer wrote,
her superiority had passed to Tyre (see II.
vi. 290, xxiii. 743 ; Odyssey iv. 618, xiii. 285,
XV. 425. Homer speaks of it as "well
peopled," famous for "much brass" and
the like (see Kenrick's ' Phoenicia '). In
later years, Tyre, known only to the Book of
Joshua as " the strong (Mterally, ' fortified ' )
city." Tyre (ch. xix. 29) outstripped her
rival, and from the time of David tiU that
of Alexander the Great, in spite of her
destruction by Nebuchadnezzar, retained hsr
pre-eminence (see the vivid description of
Tyre in Ezek. xxvi., xxvii.). Sidon, now
called Saida, is still a commercial city of
some importance, whereas Tyre is, or was,
a few years ago, little better than a collec-
tion of huts. This is not difficult to explain.
The pre-eminence of Tyre was due to her
milita-ry strength in a time of warlike enter-
prise, that of Sidon to natural position.
" This ancient city of Phoenicia, ' the eldest
bom of Canaan ' " (see Gen. x. 16), " stood
on the north-west slope of a small pro-
montory which runs into the sea, and its
original harbour was formed by three low
ridges of roo^s, with narrow openings be-
tween them parallel to the shore in front of
the city. On these islands there are re-
mains of massive substructions, the work of
the ancient Phcenicians. There is a spa-
cious but unprotected bay on the south of
the promontory. ... No traces of the
ancient city can be seen on the mainland,
but at a short distance to the north are
sepulchral grottoes, which probably mark
the necro^Ui." The jilaia qi gidoo u



190



THE BOOK OF JOSHUA.



[oh. XI. 1-



prolonged as tar as Sarepta, the Zarephath
of the Old Testament, eight miles to the
icath, which stands on a rising ground near
the sea, and shows the remains of ancient
walls (Eenrick, 'Phoenicia,' pp. 17, 18).
Misrephoth Malm. Literally, burninga of
waters. Kimchi conjectures that these were
hot springs, whereas Jarchi more reason-
ably supposes them to haye been salt-pits,
in which the water was evaporated and the
•alt left. Masius, whom most modern com-
mentators follow, thinks that glass houses,
of which thf>re were several near Sidon
(" constat enim eas apud Sidonem fnisse
plurimas "), are meant. But it is difficult to
translate the Hebrew with him and Gesenins,
"burning near waters," and the idea of
•ome that water stands here for glass is
absurd. Knobel regards it as equivalent to
water-heights, i.e., cliffs rising from the sea,
and derives the word from an Arabic root,
saraph, to be high. The LXX. renders it
by a proper name. Symmachus, " from the
sea," reading U'J? for D*D. The Chaldee
has " fossas aquarum." Misrephoth Maim
(see ch. ziii, 6) was not far from Sidon.
Valley. The word here, Bik'a, signifies a>n
open, wide valley between mountains (see
ver. 17). Sometimes, as in Gen. xi. 2, it is
equivalent to plain.

Ver. 10. — ^Turned back. From his march
toward Sidon. For Hazor beforetlme was
the head of all those kingdoms (see note on
ver. 1).

Ver. 11. — Utterly destroying them (see
note on ch. vi. 17 ; so below, ver. 12).
There was not any left to breathe (sea
note on ch. x. 40). And he burnt Hazor
with Are. Comparing this verse with verses
13 and 21, there can be little doubt that
Joshua had heard that the Anakim had
succeeded in re-occupying the cities he had
captured in the south. He resolved to pre-
vent this in the case of Hazor, which had
been the capital of the neighbourhood,
though he did not think the same step
necessary in the case of the inferior cities.
Hazor was afterwards rebuilt and re-occu-
pied by the Canaanites (Judg. iv. 2), though
not in the time of Joshua. For the pre-
sent, this destruction of the stronghold of
Phoenician power in the north was a de-
cisive measure, and would have been so
permanently had the Israelites followed up
the policy of Joshua.

Ver. 13. — The cities that stood still In
tbeir strength. This is the rendering of
the Chaldee version. The LXX. has kcxi^
liaTia/iivas, heaped np, i.e., defended with
mounds. Bather, on their hill ("in collibus
et in tumnUs sitss," Vulg.). As many of the
towns in Ital^, and the castles ia Qermany



in the middle ages, so these Phoenician
cities were placed upon hills, that they
might be more easily defended. The various
tribes of Palestine were no doubt con-
tinually at war, and, as regards these
northern tribes at least, were not accus-
tomed to subsist by commerce. Therefore
each of these cities stood (the Hebrew IDI*
surely implies situation here) on its own
hill, a detail possibly obtained from an eye-
witness, who was probably struck by this
feature of the district, a feature he had not
observed before. The expressionisused, how-
ever, as Masius observes, by Jeremiah (ch.
XXX. 18). Knobel observes that aU the early
versions have no suffix here. What he calls
the "free translation," however, of the
LXX. (which has avTuiv) requires the suffix,
though the Vulgate requires none. We must
not adopt the very plausible explanation of
Enobel and others that Joshua burnt the
cities in the valleys, but spared the cities
on the hills, because they could be more
easily defended (see ch. xvii. 16 ; Judg. i. 19,
34), since we read that Hazor alone was
burnt. The word here translated hill (Tell,
Arabic) is one with which we are familiar
in the modern name of places in Palestine
(see note on ch. viii. 28).

Ver. 14. — Took for a prey tinto them-
Belv^(see ch. viii. 2, 27, and notes).

Ver. 15. — ^Asthe Lord commanded Mosea
(see note on ch. x. 40). So did Joshua. The
implicit obedience of Joshua to aU the
commands he had received of God, whether
directly or indirectly through Moses, is a
strikiug feature of his character. Like most
great soldiers, he possessed remarkable sim-
plicity of disposition. He reminds us, in
his rapidity of conception and execution, of
Napoleon, but in his single-minded eye to
duty he is much more like our own Wel-
lington. Only one instance in which ha
erred, that of the league with Gibeon, ia
recorded, and this was but an illlustration
of the unsuspicious straightforwardness of
his character (see notes on ch. xix. 49 — 51;
xxiii. 2; xxiv. 15).

Ver. 16.— AU that land. Bather, "aU
this land;" the land, that is, which has been
spoken of in all the previous narrative. It
must not be pressed to mean the utter de-
struction of all the Canaanites, and the un-
disturbed possession of the country. The
hUls. The mountain country of Judah, in
the south. The same word is translated
••mountain" immediately afterwards, to
the confusion of the sense, which contrasts
the mountains of Israel with the mountaina
of Judah (see ver. 21). This would seem at
first sight to lead to the conclusion that the
Book of Joshua was composed after tho
jealooay betweei) Jud^ an4 the teat of



CH. XI. 1—28,]



THE BOOK OP JOSHUA.



m



Israel had sprung np in the time of David
(see 2 Sam. xix. 41—43). But Dr. Eder-
sheim has suggested another explanation.
Judah, he says (see ch." xiv. 6 ; xv. 1),
entered upon their inheritance, while the
other tribes were still in Gilgal. In the
same way Mount Ephraim is so called
because it was given to that tribe, and
occupied by them shortly after. While as
the remaining seven tribes remained without
their inheritance (Reuben and Gad as well
as Manasseh and Ephraim being now pro-
vided for), the rest of the mountains were
known as the mountains of Israel. This
explanation is ingenious, but hardly satis-
factory. Ephraim (see Judg. viii. 1, 2;
xii. 1) early acquired a preponderance over
the other tribes. We should therefore ex-
pect a threefold division of the mountain
district, the mountains of Judah, of Joseph,
and of Israel, especially as Ephraim was the
next after Judah to enter upon its in-
heritance. The internal evidence seems to
prove that the Book of Joshua was written
by one of the tribe of Judah, or by a Levite
residing within the borders of that tribe.
Perhaps this affords the best explanation,
but is quite possible that the whole moun-
tain district of Palestine is here meant. The
■outh. The Negeb, or dry country (see ch.
X. 40). The valley. The Shephelah, or low-
lands (see note on ch. ix. 1). This must have
extended from Gaza northward to Joppa,
while the Shephelah of Israel mentioned
immediately below must be the lowland
tract from Joppa to Mount Carmel. Tlie
plain. The Arabah(seenote on ch. iii. 16).
And the valley of the samo. Bather, his
{i.e., Israel's) lowland.

Ver. 17.— The Mount Ealak. The smooth
mountain. Literally, " moute glabro," Vulg. ;
Xtiov, Symmachus. This may either be
interpreted " the mountain bare of foliage,"
as opposed to Seir, the haiiy or wooded
mountain, as Masius and EosenmuUer sup-
pose, or, as the latter also suggests, it may
mean the mountain which has a smooth
outhhe, as opposed to a precipitous chff.
This falls in with the character of the hills
on the south of Palestine (see note on ch. x.
40). The LXX. renders by a proper name.
But this the article forbids. The Syriao
interpreter renders " the dividing moun-
tain." But p7n rather signifies in this
sense to assign by lot. Keil would identify
it with " the row of white cliffs which cuts
the Arabah obliquely at about eight English
miles to the south of the Dead Sea," and
divides the great valley into two parts, the
Ghor and the Arabah. He gives up the
other " smooth " or " bald " mountains,
Ijecftuse they do not " go up to Seir." Ijater



explorers have failed to settle its situation.
Seir. This mountainous region was well
known as the territory of Esau (see Gen.
xxxii. 2). Baal-gad in the valley of Le-
banon. For valley (nyp3) see note on ver.

8. Baal-gad has been by some identified
with Baalbek, or Heliopolis, a Syrian city,
whose vast ruins strike the beholder with
astonishment even now. But Baalbek lay
considerably to the north of Palestine. It
has therefore with greater probability been
identified by Eobinson, Von Eaumer, and
others, with Paneas or Csesarea Philippi.
Baal-gad signifies " the lord of fortune," an
aspect under which the Babylonian Baal or
Bel was frequently worshipped. The word
Gad, erroneously translated " troop " in our
version (Gen, xxx. 11; Isa. Ixv. 11), is
properly " fortune," and hence the god
Fortune. The worship of Pan in later times
supplanted that of Baal, but traces of both
cults, in inscriptions and niches, may be
found in the neighbourhood to the present
day (see Tristram, 'Land of Israel'). All
travellers speak with enthusiasm of the
situation of Banias. Josephus says that it
affords a profusion of natural gifts. Seetzeu
corroborates him. Dean Stanley compares
it to Tivoli, and Canon Tristram thinks that
in its rocks, caverns, and cascades there is
much to remind the visitor of what is per-
haps the loveliest place in all Italy. He con-
tinues, "The situation of Banias is indeed
magnificent. With tall limestone cliffs to
the north and east, a rugged torrent of
basalt to the south, and a gentle slope for
its western front, Banias is almost hidden
till the traveller is among the ruins."
Banias stands at the end of a gorge of the
Hermon range with the wide range of the
Huleh plain opening out before it, as the
Gampagna and Borne in the distance are
seen from the mouth of the gorge at Tivoli.
Vaudevelde, however, identifies Banias with
Beth-rehob, on the insufficient ground that
Baal-gad is said to be in, not at, the mouth
of the valley or Bik'ath of Lebanon. He
prefers the castles either of Bostra or of
Aisafa, the one an hour and a half, the
other three hours north of Banias. It
should he added that an arm of the Jordan
rises and rushes through the gorge here,
"prsBceps," like the Anio at TivoU. The
valley of Lebanon is supposed by some not
to be the valley between Lebanon and
Anti - Lebanon, but the country on the
southern declivity of Mount Hermon. But
the term nyp3 here unquestionably means

the well-known Bukei'a or Ccele Syria, i.e.,
the tract between Lebanon and Anti-Leba,
non (see Knobel).
Ver. 18 — fi long time, Hebj-ew, mang



IM



THE BOOK OP JOSHUA.



[oh. tt 1—23.



dayt. The campaign in soathem Israel
lasted for weeks, perhaps even months. But
the campaign in northern Palestine mnst
have lasted longer. The vast host which
gathered at the waters of Merom was de-
stroyed, but the task of capturing the in-
numerable cities which dotted that region
nust have been a protracted one. We
may, with Josephus, infer from ch. xiv. 10
that it occupied five years, or perhaps, with
other of the ancient Babbis, seven years,
since the wanderings in the wilderness after
the rebellion of the Israelites lasted thirty-
eight years.

Ver. 20. — ^To harden their hearts (cf.
Exod. iv. 21 ; vii. 23). Miiller, ' Christian
Doctrine of Sin,' ii. 412, says that " Sorip-
tnre never speaks of God's hardening men's
hearts, save in connection with His revela-
tions through Moses or Christ." This
passage evidently had not occurred to him
when writing. His explanation of the diffi-
culty is hardly satisfactory. "We are not to
suppose that the free-will of the Canaanites
was in any way interfered with. God no
doubt left them to themselves as the due
punishment of their iniquities. Sin in
general, by God's own appointment, and
especially the sensual sins in which the
Canaanites were steeped, has a tendency
to produce insensibiUty to moral or even
prudential considerations, and to beget a
recklessness which urges on the sinner to
his ruin. Some have argued that had they
all come, like the Gibeonites, as suppliants,
they must all have been massacred in cold
blood. But this is not likely. Bather we
must imagine that God foresaw that they
would not believe the signs He would give in
favour of the Israelites, and that by meet-
ing them in battle they brought a swift and
speedy destruction on themselves.

Ver. 21. — And at that time (see ver. 18).
What is meant is, during the continuance
of the war in which the country above
described was conquered. The destruction
of the Auakim was the conclusion of the
work, and was rendered necessary by their
having re-occupied the places Joshua had
taken (see notes on oh. x. 36 — 39). The
Anaklms. Literally, the lonp-necked men.
Called the " children of Anak " (Num. xiii.
28, 33 ; also Josh. xv. 13, 14). Geseniua
would derive the German nacken and the
EngUsh neck from this root. The word
is used of the chains on the necks of
camels (Judg. viii. 26. So also Cant. iv. 9,
of a necklace). They were men of gigantic
stature (Num. xiii. 32), and were no doubt
a hiU tribe of the Amorites. It is worthy
of remark that to the two fearless men
whose faith did not fail them at the
sight of the waUed cities, and of the giant



forms of their inhabitants, was entrusted
the task of overcoming these antagonists,
and thus of proving the truth of their own
words. Thus it ever is in the counsels of
God. " To him that hath shall be given,
and from him that hath not, even that
which he hath shall be taken away." To
Joshua, who had confidence In God, the
whole land of Canaan was given into sub-
jection. From the Israelites, who had not
that confidence, the inheritance of their
fathers was taken away (of. also Matt.
zxv. 21, 28). Many writers suppose that
these Anakim (like the Rephaim of ch. xii.
4) were the aboriginal inhabitants, and of
Turanian descent (see note on next verse).
Anab. A town about ten miles south-west
of Hebron (of. ch. xv. 50). It was apparently
one of the daughter cities of Debir, and
there is still a place of that name in the
immediate vicinity of Dhfiharijeh. moun-
tains of Judab. For this and the " moun-
tains of Israel " see note on ver. 16.

Ver. 22.— Only in Gaza. This statement
is confirmed by what we afterwards read.
In Gath especially (1 Sam. xvii. 4 ; 2 Sam.
xxi. 18—22 ; 1 Ohron. xx. 4—8, the last
passage preserving the true text, which has
become hopelessly corrupt in the second
Book of Samuel) we find the race of giants
remaining till David's time. But it had
abuost died out. Goliath and his brethren
seem to have been regarded by the Philis-
tines, as much as by the Hebrews, in the
light of prodigies. It may be that the race
deteriorated in size and strength, when
driven from the mountain district. Gaza
(Hebrew Azzah, as in Dent. ii. 23 ; 1 Kings
iv. 24 ; Jer. xxv. 20) was a stronghold of
the Philistines. We first find it mentioned
as the border of Canaan in Gen. x. 19. It
was the scene of the exploits of Samson,
related in Judg. xvi. It, with Gath, Ekron,
Ashdod, and Ashkelon, formed the five
Philistine lordships mentioned in ch. xiii. 5.
Gaza does not appear in the list of cities
captured by David, although Gath does.
Perhaps the strength of its position (Azzah
signifies strength) may have enabled it to
resist David and Solomon, whose dominions
are said to have extended to, but not to
have included, Azzah. We read little more
of it in the Old Testament. Jeremiah says
that Pharaoh smote it (oh. xlvii. 1) ; Amos
and Zephauiah threatened it with punish-
ment. It is mentioned in Acts viii. 26 as
a place of some importance. And it still
exists, at about an hour's journey from
the sea, and is now called Ghazzeh.
(see also note on ver. 41). Gath. Also
one of the five Philistine lordships. In
David's time it had a king, with whom
David took refuge (1 Sam. xxi. 10; ^vii.S).



OB. XL 1-



'•1



THS BOOK OF JOSHUA.



ItB



It was afterwards conquered by David
(2 Sam. xzi. 20 ; 1 Chron. zviii. 1 ; xx. 6).
We find it is Solomon'e jurisdiction,
though under the government of one of its
own royal family (1 Kings ii. 39). Beho-
boam fortified it (2 Chron. zi. 8). Hazael,
the poweriul king of Syria, wrested it from
Jehoash, and was only bought oS from
assailing Jerusalem. Uzziah re-tooli it once
more (2 Ohron. zxvi. 6). HezekiaL seems
to have retained it (2 Kings xviii. 8). After
this we hear no more of it. Modem travel-
lers and commentators have identified it with
Beit-Jibrin (the house of the mighty — per-
haps a reminiscence of Goliath and his
kindred), now EleutheropoUs (so Knobel).
Others suppose it to be the Blanche Garde of
the Crusaders, or Tell-es-Safieh, an opinion
supported, among others, by Mr. J. L.
Porter and Lieut. Conder. See, however, the
note on Libnah, ch. z. 29. Ashdod. Later
AzotuB, now Esdiid. Here the ark was
earned after the disastrous defeat related in
1 Sam. iv. It was conquered by Uzziah (no
doubt it had formerly been reduced by
David), who built forts to overawe it (2
Chron. zxvi. 6), but it fell intd the hands of
Sargon, king of Assyria, a little later (Isa.
XX. 1). It is frequently mentioned by the
prophets, and we find that Jonathan, the
brother of Judas Maccabceus, burnt the
temple of Dagon there (1 Maco. z. 83, 84).
It is mentioned as Azotui in Acts viii 40.

Ver. 23. — Joshoa took the whole land.
The word must not be pressed to mean that
every Canaanitish stronghold was razed or

appropriated. The word 73, as has been
before remarked, has a very loose significa-
tion in Hebrew. What is meant is simply
this. Joshua had established an unques-
tioned military preponderance in Palestine.
He had broken down all resistance ; but
beforo he completed his conquests to their
full extent, he had to provide for the
peaceable settlement of the tribes in the
territory he had seized. The complete
extermination of the Canaanites formed
no part of his commission or his plan
(Deut. vii. 22; of. Exod. xxiii. 29,' 30).
To have effected it would have been to
throw the land out of cultivation, and to
expose its possessors to the usual incon-



Teniences of depopulated districts. There-
fore it was Joshua's policy to leave the
Canaanites to be extirpated by degrees, and
to encourage the Israelites to cultivate the
arts both of war and of peace ; to nourish a
martial spirit by remembering that nume-
rous and active enemies BtUl dwelt in their
midst, while yet they were not neglectful of
the importance of a settled and civilised, aa
agricultural and pastoral life. See also
Judges iii. 1, 2. This purpose was de-
feated, not only by the usual effects of
civiUBation upon hardy or savage tribes, but
also by the Israelites becoming addicted
to the pleasant but enfeebling vices of the
races they had supplanted, We see in the
Israelitish history the best exemplification
of St. Paul's theory that the " law worketh
wrath," although it is "holy, just, and
good." The excellence of the moral pre-
cepts delivered by Moses did but serve to
manifest more clearly the inherent de-
pravity of our nature (Bom. iii. 20 ; v. 20 ;
vii. 7, 8), and its need of a Saviour, who
should render obedience possible by the
gift of regeneration, and the infusion of His
own Spirit. According to their divisions.
Literally, their divisions by lot, the word
being derived from the same root as the
word Halak in ver. 7, because a smooth stone
was usually employed in casting lots. Hence
it came to mean any authoritative division
or distribution, as the courses of the Levites
(1 Chron. xxiii. 6), the classification for pur-
poses of enlistment (1 Chron xxvii. 1) and
the like. And the land rested flrom war. That
is to say, the Canaanites were so thoroughly
cowed and dispirited that they dared offer
no further resistance to the Israelites in
their task of portioning out the land. They
were quite contented to be allowed to Uve
in peace in such of their cities which re-
mained, and had no disposition to court an
overthrow such as took place at the battles
of Gibeon and Merom, with its inevitable
results of the absolute extermination, not
only of every one who took up arms, but of
every human being in the city to which they
belonged. Thus the IsraeUtes were able to
give their whole attention to the survey and
apportionment of the territory according to
the relative size and importance of the
tribei.



HOMILETIOa

Vers. 1 — 23. — The eonUrmation of the ttruggle. The same olass of thoughts is
suggested by this chapter as by the former. We have, as before (1), the confederacy
of evil against good, (2) the conflict, (8) the victory, (4) the utter destruotion of the
enemy. But the course of the narrative gives a eomewbat different fonn to vox
reflectionB.



194 THS BOOZ 07 30*KVA^ [oh. xl 1—23.



L Joshua needed speoiaIi ENOOTTiu.aEHEiiT once more, in spite of hia prarioTU
rignal victory. This was because be bad a new class of enemies to contend against.
Tbese kings, -vTith the king Hazor at their head, seem to have possessed a higher
civilisation than the southern tribes. We read (vers. 4, 6) of their ehcmots, and
these, as we have seen (see Exposition), seem to have been regarded with peculiar
terror by the Israelites. So it is ever with the Christian Church. It was so at the
beginning. At first she had only to contend with the obstinate jealousy and pre-
judice of the Jews, but as her sphere of operations enlarged she had to contend with
the whole force of the civUised Boman empire. It is so stUl. The Church hag
confronted the barbarism of the middle ages, the superstition and formalism that
followed it. But now she has to contend with modern civiUsation, with its horsea
aud chariots of iron — that is to say, its modem developments of physical force, at
well as knowledge. These have to be attacked and brought under Christ's yoke.

II. The pbogress of Chbistianiiy invites combination auono heb enemies.
This, too, was the case at the outset of Christianity. As soon as our religion was
Been to be a power in the world, capable of surviving the execution of its leader, and
the punishment of His followers, and of spreading nevertheless from city to city,
from country to country, a widespread combination, formed of elements the most
opposite, arose against it. Jew joined with Gentile to put it down. The emperor
waged war against it, because it had formed a secret society, dangerous, he thought,
to tiie stability of his throne. The lawyer and statesman opposed it, because it had
taken upon itself to exist without the permission of the law. The priest opposed
it, because it set up an altar against his. The philosopher opposed it, because it
Bbnick a blow at his proud exclusiveness, and combated some of his &vourite
dogmas. The tradesman opposed it (Acta ziz. 27), because it struck at his gains.
The mob opposed it, because it robbed them of their spectacles and brutahsing
amusements. The man of vicious life opposed it, because it put a curb upon his
habits of sinful indulgence. Yet our heavenly Joshua led his forces against these
enemies, and the unholy combination was utterly defeated. Nor is it altogether
different now. To Christianity as a creed no such opposition is offered. But let us
strive to put the practical precepts of Christianity in operation, and we still meet
on many points with the combined opposition of various sections of society. The
statesman is indifferent to measures which wUl array an interested opposition
against him, or diminish his sources of revenue. The philosopher derides the
movement, because success, from a human point of view, is improbable, or because
it offends against the canons of his school of philosophy. The man of rank,
perhaps, opposes it because it strikes a blow at his privileges ; the man of fashion
because he is incapable of earnest thought, and hates everything that gives bim
trouble. The vicious does his utmost against it for the same reason as of old ; while
it is still not impossible to array against it the clamours of an unthinking mob.
Yet here, as elsewhere, perseverance is success.

IIL Joshua now was at war with civilisation. This is one of the enemies
which must be brought under the yoke of Christ, (a) Civilisation increases luxury,
and liixury is a foe to Christian self-denial. Luxury leads to ease and self-pleasing,
and ease and self-pleasing are the very opposite of the Christian spirit. One great
work of the Christian Church wUl be to teach men thankfoUy to accept the good
gifts of their heavenly Father, and yet to consecrate those gifts to His service, and
not to the formation of selfish habits. (6) Civilisation augments enormously the
power of m,an for evil as well as for good. Who can predict the tremendous
results for evil which may result from modem discovery, unless, under our Joshua,
we maniully confront its advance, destroy its power for evil, and convert what it
might misuse into instruments of good ? Again (c) Modem discovery exalts the
pride of ma/n. And the first requirement of Christianity is that he shall lay that
pridt) aside. Therefore it is our duty to show modem knowledge its limits, to remind
iiim who is puffed up by it that there is a gulf which his highest efforts cannot pass.
He can but teU us what is ; he cannot teU ni how it is. Ha may consider himseU
entitled to overleap the barrier which separates ot from the unknown, but the attempt
involves as great an assumption as it ever did. The barrier is as vride m ever.



CH. XI. 1—28.] THE BOOK OF JOSHUA. IM

though the ground on this side of it is undoubtedly better surveyed. Couceming
God, we shall be always in need of a revelation, however much He may revetd
Himself in His works. So that it is still as true as it ever was, in reference to our
spiritual condition, that truth is hidden from the " wise and prudent " in their own
eight, and is " revealed itato babes."

IV. Joshua had still to combat natural steength. To the men against
Jabiu succeeded the campaign against the uncivilieed but powerful Arakim. So
civilisation does not destroy our natural passions. It may (a) give them another
direction, but it rather augments them than otherwise. The refinements of civilised
life are unfavourable to brutal violence, but brutal indifference is not less common,
and not less cruel. Against vulgar license the civihsed man sets bis face, but is
refined licentiousness less destructive to the soul? History has proved that civilisa-
tion, unchecked by Christianity, does but increase the natural appetite for sinful
pleasure. And it is Christianity alone that keeps the temptations incidental to a
life of luxury within bounds. Bemove that obstacle, and Nature will assert her
power, and the animal in man will once more dominate civihsation to its own
cruel appetites, as in past times. But (b) it is a notewortliy fact that civilised
life has everywhere a fiinge of aggravated naturaUsm. In the element that we
call " rough," which is ever found where society is most highly organised, we find
the most shocking perversion of natural appetites, combined with their utmost
strength. Is there any place upon earth where brutality, ferocity, recklessness,
animal indulgence, rages more uncontrolled by any moral considerations, than in the
~" slums," as we have named them, of our greatest cities ? This is the direct product
of the thoughtlessness, the selfishness, the recklessness of civihsation, which thrusts
out of sight all that is foul and hideous of its own creation, and leaves it to fester
alone. Civilisation may be won to Christianity ; but there remains a long and
terrible conflict with the Anakim, those giant perverted natural forces which hang
on the outsMrts of civilisation.

V. Joshua did not burn all the cities. That is to say, there are uses to
which the discoveries of civilisation and the force of natural temperament may be
put. Hazor, the centre of the combination against Joshua, was bm-nt. So civilisa-
tion and natural disposition, so far as they are employed for self, instead of for God
and mankind, must be rooted out. But where discovery is used, not to exalt men's
pride, but to increase his knowledge of God's ways ; not to manufacture luxuries and
enjoyments to be the exclusive privilege of the few, but to augment the happiness of
all, then need we not destroy but welcome them. So natural disposition need not
be destroyed, but converted to a good purpose. Thus the ardent temperament of
a St. Pavd, diverted from its misuse in fierce persecution, became the parent of a
burning zeal for the diffusion of Christianity. A cold, critical spirit may become
useful in ridding the true cause of false allies. A calm, unimpassioned judgment
may make its possessor an useful guide to the passionate and impulsive. The
quiet, contemplative soul may furnish abundant stores of thought for those who
have no leisure to think for themselves, and a busy, active disposition may find
scope for its energies in the multiphcity of good works which our complicated state
of society has brought into being. And even those passions which, wrongly
directed, will cause widespread misery through sensual indulgence, may burn
with a restrained and steady and harmless flame in the charities of family life.

VI. The war lasted many days. So does the struggle (1) of the Christian
Church against evil, and (2) that of the Christian soul against temptation. It is
not (1) until the final consummation of all things, and (2) till the close of Ufe, that
" the land" can "rest from war."

VII. God is said to harden men's hearts, but only in the sense in which
this is done by the operation of His laws. He has so ordained, that if a man's
heart is not softened by His loving-kindness, it is hardened. The man who resists
the pleadings of His Spirit becomes insensible to their influence. The man who
succumbs to temptation becomes incapable of resistance, indifferent to the beauty
of hohness. The man who apologises for vice sees no excellence in virtue. The
man who is puffed up by a sense of his own suflBoienoy is unable to pereeive th«



19e THE BOOK OP JOSHUA. [oh. u. 1— S*.

•Yidenoe for God's truth. And this is in a sense God's doing, because He hai
willed that it shall be so. It is not an arbitrary law. It exists by a moral neoea-
eity. We can see that it is but an effect following a cause. " Wherefore the law
is holy, and the commandment holy, just, and good." And if that which is g^ood
works evil to any, we may not blame God, but man, who has turned bis meat into
poison, and extracted death from God's most lighteons law.



HOMILIES BY VAEIOUS AUTHORS.

Ver. 1 — 6,—Mamy advertariea. Another league is here. One in the south de-
stroyed ; another in the north is formed. A formidable one scattered ; one more so
gathers. Four kings are mentioned, and probably a dozen others of those mentioned
in the following chapter are associated with them. They marshal all the fighting
power of the northern half of Palestine. As the land was then (as repeatedly
afterwards) very populous ; as war was the most familiar of all employments ; as
numbers of the cities — almost impregnable by nature — were fortified as well ; as the
army gathered was strong in chariots and horses, and had taken up a position on
the great plain of Jezreel, where cavalry could operate with ease — it seemed as if
the outlook for Israel were very dark indeed. A nation of fugitive slaves assailing
a Phoenician people of vast wealth, enterprise, civilisation, and numbers ! What
chance of success was there ? But they unite only for their easier destruction.
Cheered by God, faUing thereon suddenly, the terrific shook of Israel's charge was
irresistible, and this " battle of the league " at once leads to Israel's easy conquest
of the whole of this half of the kingdom. Take this story as an example of the way
in which God's warriors have always " many adversaries." And observe —

I. The NATuaAi. chances are ai.wats aoainst God's feofle. The sacred his-
tory is little more than a Ust of conflicts of one sort and another, fought invariably
against great odds, but followed invariably by victory. The chances were many
against Israel getting away from Egypt, taking Jericho, winning at Beth-horon,
gaining a victory here. It was not otherwise in the case of Jephthah, of Deborah,
of Gideon. Who would have ventured to describe David as having a single chance
in his conflict with GoUath ? How pathetic is Elijah's estimate of the odds against
him in his fight for truth. Baal's prophets and Astarte's prophets are numbered by
hundreds, backed by the whole power of the court and the perversity of the people.
But " I am left alone, and they seek my life." The odds were heavily against
Daniel and his three friends — say 10,000,000 to 1. Neither Ezra nor Nehemiah
felt they had anything approaching a level chance. The Babe of Bethlehem had
all superstitions, vices, prejudices of the world against His cause. The Apostle of
the Gentiles had all the philosophies, rehgions, and weaknesses of men against >i^m
and his simple gospeL The great theologian of the early centuries lamented that he
stood " Athanasius against the world." Luther had Church and State throughout all
Europe against him. Every missionary to a heathen land, every philanthropist
seeking to remove abuses, have had the same experience. The Church to-day
sometimes deems herself " hardly bested " by science, secularism, the pre-occnpa-
tion of men with tlieir necessary cares, the sluggishness of the human heart to
adopt a higher principle of life. Each Christian man finds such weaknesses and
perversities within him and such obstacles without that it seems often as if it would
be impossible to hold his ground, much less to make advance. Be not astonished
if, in the part of the field assigned to you, the odds are altogether and absolutely
against you. They always are against God's people and God's children. But
observe secondly, though the chances are against them —

II. The winning forces are on thkie side. Ituvard force* are on their side.
The heart makes the hero. Nelson's Methodists were his best sailors. God in-
fuses such energy of purpose, confidence, self-sacrifice, that these intensify natural
force a hundredfold. [See Shakespeare's ' Cymbeline,' for illustration of effect of
moral energy in war.] Good is the strongest and sturdiest thing under heaven ;
evil, cowardly and self-ashamed in its presence. Duty, peace, hope, gracious



m. il. i-S8.1 THE BOOK Ot JOSHtJA. W

memories, self-respect, God's smile — ^these are forces which the world can never
match, and which all operate in the direction of victory. Outward forces are also
on their side. Divine guidance is imparted, Providence aids them, concurrently
with their efforts the efforts of Qod are pat forth. When God fights His battles
of mercy there is no lukewarmness in His conflict. He uses us. The weapons
of our warfare are heavenly, while the weapons of His warfare are often earthly.
And so, while the world has the appearance, the Church has the reahty, of a pre-
ponderant weight on her side. Is it a case of a battle of the northern league with
you ? Fight on, for they that are with you are far more than they that are with
them. — G.

Ver. 15. — Oo^B eommcmdment and man't faithfulness. L God's command-
ment IS ENDXTBiNO. The commandment to Moses is transmitted to Joshua.
God's will is changeless. What is right is right eternally. We must uot regard
God's laws as obsolete when they are ancient. The precepts of the Bible are
not the less binding upon us because they are old (Fsa. cxix. 160; Isa. si. 8).
Nevertheless {a) what God commands relative to certain circumstances will be
modified if those circumstances are changed ; (5) a larger commandment coming
later exonerates from the observance of the details of a smaller commandment
when these are by their nature preparatory to the larger. Thus the larger
Christian law of love frees us from the narrower preparatory law of ordinances
(Kom. xiii. 10).

II. Faithfulness to God consists in SEBViNa God in obedienoe to all Hb
COMMANDS US. (1) Faithfuluess is shown in devotion to God. Moses and Joshua
regarded themselves as God's servants. The Christian is not to live for self, but for
Christ (Bom. xiv. 8). (2) This devotion must be exercised in active service. Belief^
reUgious feeling, and acts of worship will not satisfy God. We are called to do His
will (Matt. vii. 24 — 27). (3) Faithful service is obedient service. We must not
simply work for God, but work for God in His way, doing His will, and fulfilling
His commandments. Self-will is fatal to the merit of l£.e most zealous service.
Much of our most devoted service is spent in serving God according to our own will
instead of simply doing His will (Psa. xl. 8; John vi. 88). (4) Perfect fideUty
requires obedience in all things. We are tempted to choose our favourite command-
ments for obedience, and to neglect others. Some are not obvious ; we should
search for them. Some are difficult ; we should seek special strength to do them.
Some are dangerous ; we should be brave and firm before them. Some are dis-
tasteful ; we should sacrifice our feeUugs to God's will. (5) Perfect fidelity will
make us endeavour to secure the fulfilment of Ood't cormnomdments by others
when we cannot accomplish all ourselves. Moses transmitted the commandment
to Joshua. We should think more of the execution of the work than of the honour
of the agent. Jealousy sometimes leads us to refuse sympathy for a good work if
we cannot do it ourselves. (6) The justifying grace of God in Christ does not free
as from the obUgation of perfect fidelity. No man is perfectly faithful. As Chris-
tians, we are accepted by God, not on account of our fidelity, but for the sake of
Christ and through the mercy of God. But the receipt of God's forgiving grace
brings upon us the greater obligation to be faithful to Him in the future (Bom. vi 1).
(7) The liberty of the gospel does not exonerate us from the duty of fidelity. We
are freed from the bondage of the letter of the law that we may obey the spirit of
it. We are delivered from the legal servitude of fear that we may serve the better
in the " sweet lawlessness of love " (Bom. viii. 8, 4).— W. F. A.

Ver. 20. — Hearts hardened by Ood. I. When God hardens a man's heart it

IS BECAUSE his GHABACTEB IS SUCH AS TO TUBK GoD'S BIGHTEOUB ACTION TO THU

BESULT. The same act of Providence which hardens one heart softens another.
Prosperity will harden one in selfish, worldly satisfaction, and soften another to
grateful devotion and active benevolence. Adversity will harden one in discontent
and unbelief, while it softens another to penitence and trust. The experience of
life win deaden the spiritual insights of one, and quicken that of anotiier. The



198 THE BOOK. OF JOSHUA. [ch. xi. 1— 2&

effects of God's work with ns is thus largely determined by the condition of our
own minds. God never hardens a man's heart except through his own abuse ol
providential actions and spiritual influences which are kindly and wholesome in
themselves, and prove themselves so to those who receive them aright (Matt. ziiL
11—15).

II. God habdens a man's eeabt not before, but after, be has sinned. ^ The
Canaanites had hardened their hearts in sin before God hardened them for judg-
ment. God never predisposes a man to sin, nor does He harden a man in sin
against any desire for amendment. The Divine hardening of the heart is not m
cause of sin but a fruit of it.

III. God does mot harden a uan's heart so much bt making the will stub-
born AS BY BLINDING THE EYES TO PRESENT DANGER AND FUTURE CALAMIiy. The

Canaanites were not made more wicked, they were only rendered blind to their
danger and doom, so that they resisted where resistance was hopeless, and attempted
to make no terms with the invader. When a man will not repent in obedience to
conscience, it may be best that he should not find a means of escaping punishment
through the exercise of prudence. So long as conscience is bhnd it is better for all
moral purposes that prudence also should be blind. Note, however, as a warning,
while sin tends to blind us to its approaching punishment, we are not the less in
danger because we feel a sense of security.

IV. When the conscience is dead to God's law it mat be well that the
pTELLECT should BE BLIND TO His TRUTH. It is better not to receive the truth
into the intellect than to hold it with a disobedient heart. Otherwise (1) we shall
misunderstand, abuse, and misapply it ; (2) we shall deceive ourselves by supposing
we are the better for knowing what is good although we do not practise it ; and (8)
we shall be less susceptible to the influence of truth when it comes at the right
moment to reveal our guilt and direct the way to redemption. Christ expressly
said that He spoke in parables that they who were in a wrong condition of heart to
benefit by His teaching might not receive it to their hurt and its dishonour (Matt.
xiii. 13).— W. F. A.

Ver. 20. — Doomedto destruction. Theevilmendoofienappears to be attributed
in Scripture to the Divine will and agency (Bxod. iv. 21 ; Judg. xiv. 4 ; 1 Kings ?ii. 15 ;
Bom. ix. 17. 18). Reason and conscience, indeed, confirm the view St. James
gives of the history of all transgression (James i. 13—15). Every man's sin is
emphatically hia own — bom of his own inward impulse, nourished by influences
to which he freely and wilfully yields himself, and its deadly issue is his just and
natural recompense. God has nothing to do with it but to condemn and punish.
How, then, can it be said of any form of evil that it is " of the Lord," or that a
man does it because the Lord " has hardened his heart " ? Is it so that the wrong-
doer is after aU but the passive instrument of a Divine purpose, and his life the
working out of a Divine decree ? The perfect solution of this difficult problem
may be bejrond us ; but there are considerations that will shed much interpreting
light upon it, and under the guidance of which we may

" assert eternal Frovidenoe,
And justify the ways of God to man."

I. The hardening of men's hearts in evil courses is the result of ceetaih
LAWS OP which God is the author. A suggestive analogy is found in the realm
of material things. Nature has its stem impartial laws, its latent dangers, destruc-
tive powers, deadly poisons, &o. If a man deals wantonly and recklessly with
these, he arms them all against himself; but the blame of the mischief thus done
cannot be laid on Him who made or ordained them. What is man's business in
this world but just to utilise for good ends— to " use and not abuse "—the laws and
resources of the sphere in which the Creator has placed him ? So, morally, the
circumstances of our existence upon earth work out good or evil lesnlts according
as we are voluntarily disposed to use them. The rery influences that in one case
tend to nourish the p rineiplM of a true and noble life, in another case harden the



CH. XL 1— iS.J IMM JLOOK OJ JOSHUA. IM

heart in sin. God's part in this 1b simply to delermine the eonditions nnder which
the process shall go on. The evil men do is their own ; the powers they pros-
titute to their base purposes, the place they occupy among their fellow-men, the
advantages that favour the working ont of their designs, the laws that govern th«
development of their sin to its &taj issues, are " of the Lord."

II. When men show that thet abe besolutelt bent on etil coubses, God
HAY SEE fit TO LEAVE THEM TO THEMSELVES. There is m morals, as in mechanics,
a law of inertia by virtue of which we remain in a chosen state, or continue to
move in a chosen direction, unless some stronger force is brought to bear upon ns,
WUl and habit rivet the chain of iniquity. When a man's heart is thoroughly
" set in him to do evil," God sometimes abandons him to his own choice, leaves
him to become the prey of his own wayward and wicked infatuation (Frov. i. 81).
In such a case the law of sin is simply left to take its course. The Divine act is
negative rather than positive. It lies in the withholding of restraining or deliver-
ing grace. And there is no injustice in this — nothing unrighteous in God thus
allowing the heart to harden itself. Moreover, it is by the operation of a law of
our nature that he who will not turn &om bis evil way shall at length come to a
point at which he carmot (Jer. ziii. 23).

** Sins lead to greater sins, and link so straight,
What first was accident, at last is fate."

And God, who established that law, is often said in Scripture to do tliat which takes
place by virtue of it, or which results from it. He has framed the whole constitu-
tion of things under which it comes to pass that the unpenitent sinner gradually
becomes obdurate and closes against himself the door of hope. In this sense only
can it be true that " it is of the Lord to harden men's hearts."

III. God OFTEN WOBES out, THBOnOH THE WOBST FORMS OF HUMAN EVIL, HiS

OBAKDEST ISSUES OF GOOD. In tracing the course of earthly affairs, we have to
draw a very distinct line of separation in our minds between the wicked will and
purpose of man, and the overmastering will and purpose of God. The sovereignty
of the latter is most triumphantly asserted when the former has been suffered to
reach its utmost hmits, and work its deadliest work. The ntter destruction of
these Canaanites, aggravated by their own mad resistance, was essential to a full
display of the majesty of the God of Israel, and the vindication of eternal righteous-
ness. How important a part it has played in the general progress of humanity,
who shall say ? The triumph of redeeming mercy was brought about through Oie
most heinous of all human crimes. " Him being deUvered by the determinate
counsel and foreknowledge of God," &o. (Acts ii. 28). The " hands " were none the
less " wicked " because through them God accomplished His holy and loving will.
The Son of man was bom into the world to be betrayed and cruci&ed and slain ;
but that does not lighten the curse that falls on the betrayer and the murderer.
Across the dark thunder-cloud of man's evil, God casts the bright and beautiful
rainbow of hope. The darkness is man's — the hope is from Him " who is light,
and in whom is no darkness at alL" — W.

Ver. 20. — The extermination of the Oanaanitet. The terrible eztennination of
the Ganaanitish nations remains a mystery too hard for us to understand. " It
was of the Lord," we read (ver. 20). The history of Israel is designed to bring out
in an impressive manner, by outward and visible facts, the constant intervention of
God in human destinies. The history of our race is a fearful drama of blood and
tears, in which ruin and devastation meet us on every hand. The Old Testament
teaches us that in this history the purposes of Divine justice are carried out. It
■hows us the great Justiciary perpetually working. We might almost say that the
veil which usually conceals ffis operation is lifted, so that we see that " our God is
a consuming fire " (Heb. xii. 29). If we look into the causes of this extermination
of the Canaanites, we see that it was brought about by the excessive corruptness of
the life of these people, under the influence of their impure idolatries. The same
•ouditions are found to-day at the root of all the woes that afSict humanity. T!ie



900 TSB BOOK OF JOSStJA. [<* «»• l-'2«-

■ill is always greater than the suffering. The just God is also the God of love. His
justice paves the way for His mercy. The triumph of Israel is to be turned to the
account of the human race, since the estabhshment of the sons of Abraham in ihe
land of promise is a necessary condition and antecedent of the universal salvation.
We do not for a moment deny that an awful mystery rests upon these dark records
of the Old Testament. It is impossible to think without shuddering of these
myriads of human beings, swept away in a deluge of blood. But surely we may
believe that even in this there was some hidden secret of love Divine, and may
cling with the early Church to the " larger hope," that redemption may have come
to them in that mysterious abode of spirits in prison to which Jesus Christ went to
preach (1 Peter iii. 17). We do not see why the victims of the first deluge should
have been the only ones thus privileged. Ahke in public and private nusfortunes,
let us ever recognise the justice of the Holy God. Let us bow beneath His mighty
hand, remembering that it is at the same time the hand of our Father, and that
" all things work together for good to them that love Him." — E. de P.

Vers. 21, 22. — The destruction of the giants. These giants had been the terror
of Israel. In the evil report of the imfaithful spies they are mentioned last in the
ascending scale of difficulties which seemed to make the conq[uest of the land an
impossibility. The dread of their prowess had provoked the mutiny in the wilder-
ness which led to the forty years of homeless journeying. But here we have the
account of their destruction ; the brevity of the account itself suggesting what
everything subsequently stated confirms, that the most dreaded was not the most
arduous part of their task, but somehow a part wliich was done like all the rest,
without hitch or strain. There is much here that is very suggestive.

I. Theee ake giants that we have to fight. The spies had made a true
report. Their report erred not in the measurement of the difficulty, but in the
estimate of the nation's power with God's help to overcome it. It was true enough
that scattered over the land were these tribes or famUieB of great stature — ^Anakim,
Emim, Zamzummims, Bephaim, as they are variously called. The Israehtesbeuig
probably a people of less llian ordinary stature found themselves thus £a.ce to face
with a most stalwart and lordly race, with a people whose strength is still evinced
in those marvelloua remains of " the giant cities of Bashan," which impress all
who behold them. And the land cannot be theirs until these giant tribes in their
mountain fastnesses are destroyed. It is with them as it is with all men — all have
to fight some giants in their fight of life. Our outlook should be made hopeful by
faith, not by illusion. There are giants before us whom we shall have to fight if we
axe faithful. Difficulties, temptations, huge griefs, loneliness of spirit, impulses ol
wrong, cares and anxieties, stiU make a great tribe of the children of Anak. We
shall find them scattered all over the land — in Bashan and in Hebron, and through-
out all the hill country. Wherever the conquest would be hard enough without
them, there are they found to make it harder stUl. It is well to abjure self-deoeption.
The way of righteousness is hard, and many a battle will try all our neive and all
our endurance. Life itself is stem and full of conflict. Be not surprised if tlie
strain on you be terrific, if the number and force of the enemy alike distress you ;
there has notliing new happened to you. All have had giants to fight with in their
course through life. Israel could not possess the land until the giants were con-
quered, and your apprehensions of the fiiture are so far acciurate that yon will have
to encounter them without doubt. Secondly observe —

II. We OAimoT help being afraid of them, but we must keep the feab
WITHIN PEOPBH LIMITS. It is useless to forbid fear, and perhaps unwise. Useless,
because so long as our nervous system is what it is, and the possibilities of life are
Bo solemn and various, it is inevitable that solicitude should be awakened. It would
be unwise, for the fear, kept within proper limits, is one of the most valuable of all
our instinctive emotions. The eye, by a sort of fear instinctively operative in it,
brings down its Kd over it whenever anything approaches it. And by the physical
apprehensivenesB of the organ itself its delicate arrangements are protected. And
what is dona for tfaftt organ by its nerves of peculiar sensibility ia done flor our livei



m. it. i-2b.j unM BOOK oP josatJA. m

in all their complexity by an instinctive apprehensivenesa which " scents the
danger from aSax." While there are giants it is desirable that there should be
some fear of them. For fear, within bounds, makes men brace up their energies —
take all precautions against surprise, sends them to Qod for guidance and for help,
sets them to repair their weak point, whatever it may be. It is only in excess that
fear is mischievous — that is, when it occupies the entire thought, paralyses all the
energies of the life, and itself directly aids the overthrow it was meant to avert. It
may perhaps be expressed accurately thus : Fear is a good servant but a bad
master. So long as it does not rule us, but only suggests precautions and helps to
make our protection complete, bo long it is a blessing. Whenever it becomes master,
and commands instead of merely advising us, then our manhood is destroyed, and
the ills we fear overtake us aU the faster for our alarm. Israel did not do wrong in
fearing the Anakim, but only in letting their fear exceed its proper limits, and fill
their souls to the exclusion of all faith ia God and hope of His help. Do not need-
lessly blame yourself for the agitation and apprehension produced by the possibilities
of the fature, only limit these things by faith and prayer and watchfolneas, so that,
thus kept in its place, your fear may serve you weU. Thirdly observe —

III. Israel has not to fight thb giants till it is strono enough to
CONQUEE THEM. Somehow — we hardly know how — the fight with the Anakim
comes last. Perhaps because they occupied the fortresses formed by Nature— the
mountain fastnesses; and naturally the first attention was given to the more
regular and more numerous combatants inhabiting the cities. Whatever the reason,
they were five years in the land before Caleb led the first attack on them (see oh.
xiv. 10). And only when they were flushed with victory, every man a conqueror —
when the prestige of their miraculous forces conquered men's hearts before a sword
was drawn— only then are they exposed to the strain of what seemed such an
tmequal conflict. And meeting them when they were thus grown in courage and
prowess, their defeat requires no more effort than many of the lesser struggles which
taxed their less developed powers. There seems something here characteristic of a
universal experience. God's Israel are never unequal for a conflict, when the time
has come for it. There is always such growth of force, or such heavenly aid, that
when the fight comes it is found that fitness for it has come before it. You perhaps
look forward with extreme soUcitude to. the giants that will dispute your passage.
Eemember, there is some distance between you and them, and much may happen
before you reach them. You are gathering strength every step you take on the
right road. And every lesser victory is giving you force and nerve to win a greater
one. And should the giants not die before you get to them, you will find that, like
Israel, you have grown fit to fight them before you are called to fight them. You
wiU be strong enough for victory over them before you are required to enter into
conflict with them. Lastly observe —

IV. They fotjnd out that the worst part of the giants was the terror
THEY COULD INSPIRE. The great power of the giants was over the imaginations of
their foes. And they had no real force at all equal to the terror they excited.
Israel saw in imagination the size of the men, heard with alarm of the length of
their spears and the weight of their armour. They did not remember that in any
match between a great soul and a big body, the big body has but little chance.
And so they were overpowered by the mere imagination of their enemy's force.
But when they actually face them, they find that valour avails more than muscle,
energy than height, faith than armour, soul than body. By beating them they
found that the chief power of the giant was his power of affecting the imagination
of his opponent. So is it still. " The worst ills are tiiose that never happen," as
the French proverb says. They threaten us, alarm na, agitate us, and after aU
turn off in some other direction, and do not come to us. And so is it with our
giants. Their worst part is something which exists only in our imagination. They
kiU us by frightening us, and they frighten us by the powers they borrow from our
imagination. Let us be of good courage and not afraid. And if giants many and.
■trong threaten us let us keep fear in the bounds of faith, let us remember on
Wiufure is ordained for us except where victory is possible, and let us pat a check



aoa Txi BoaK of josblua. [ub. xi. i-ss.



on the too easily affected imagination which needlessly dreads a foe, ■whose outward
bignbfls is no accurate measure of the dimensions of his real force. — Q.

Ver. 23. Sett from war. These words bring vb a gratefdl sense of reliefl We
are weary of reading the long catalogue of bloody Tiotories— -how of one city after
another it is said, " They smote all the souls that were therein with the edge of the
Bword, utterly destroying them ; there was not anything left to breathe." We are
ready to say with ttio Prophet, "O thou sword of the Lord, how long_ will it be
ere thou be quiet ? " (Jer. xlvii. 6). If it were not for our conviction that
an all-wise and righteous Divine purpose determined all this (Carlyle's distinction
between the " surgery" of God's judgments and "atrocious murder"), we should
turn with loathing from the oickening tale of sk/Ughter. Certain thoughts about
war are suggested.

I. The causes of war. The baser passions of human nature are the sources
from which it always more or less directly springs. These are the root of all its
practical wickednesses. " Whence come wars and fightings among you ? Come they
not hence, even of your lusts that war in your members ? " (James iv. 1). Vain
ambition, the desire for territorial aggrandizement, the thirst for power, jealousy,
revenge, to. — these are the demons tiiat kindle its destructive fires. Other and
more plausible motives are but the false veil that hides their hatefulness. There is
no le&L exception. Self-defence is no doubt an imperious instinct of nature, and
there are interests (Uberties, sanctities of social life, principles of eternal righteous-
ness) which it may often be a noble thing for a nation, even by utmost force of arms
to guard. But there would be no need to defend if there were no lawless lust or
cruel wrong to endanger them. These " wars of the Lord " are no exception to the
rule. They were waged by the Divine command, but their ccmse lay in the moral
evil that cursed the land — those foul iniquities which, to the view of Infinite Wisdom,
could be wiped out only by such a baptism of blood.

II. The misekies of wak. It is the very symbol of almost all the woes of which
human nature is capable, and that can darken with their shadow the field of
human life. (1) The frenzy of malignant passions, (2) physical suffering, (3) the
cruel rending of natural ties, (4) the arrest of beneficent industries, (6) the im-
position of oppressive burdens, (6) the increase of the means and instruments of
tyranny. These are some of the calamities that follow in the track of war. Their
sadness and bitterness cannot be exaggerated.

III. The possible benediction8 of wab. It is a marveUons proof of the
Divine beneficence that reigns supreme over all human affairs that oven this deadly
evil has something like a fair side to it, and is not unmixed vsdth good. (1) It
developes certain noble qualities of character— self-reUance, self-control, resolution,
fortitude, mastery of adverse circumstances, &o.; so much so that men have been
led to look upon the experience of great wars as essential to the vigorous life of a
nation, necessary to save it from the lethargy of moral indifference and the ener-
vating influence of self-indulgence. We may give due weight to those heroic
qualities that war oaUs forth, and yet feel that they in no way counterbalance the
crimes and horrors that attend it. (2) It prepares the way for new and better
conditions. As storms clear the air, as a great conflagration m the city dbstroys its
dens of shameful vice and loathsome disease, so wars which dislocate the whole
frame of society, and let loose lawless passions, and inflict unspeakable miseries, do,
nevertheless, often bring about healthier conditions of national life, and clear the
ground for the spread of truth and righteousness. God " makes the wrath of man
to praise him," though in itself it " worketh not his righteousness." And when
the land rests from war there often arises a benign power of restoration thak Boon
changes the faoa of things —

" softening and eoneealing.
And busy with its band in healing,"

the renti md ravages the sweep of the destroyer may have made.

IV. T^ oueb fob war. There is no cure but tiiat which is fta^Kod by UU



oi. XI. 1— as.] TUB jooK Of JontJjJi. «oa

ledeeming inflaenoe of the Prince of Peace. (1) It will uproot and destroy tLosa
hidden evils in the heart of man from which all war arises, suhstituting for them that
" love which worketh no ill to his neighbour." (2) It will turn those energies of
our nature to which war gives a false and fatal impetus into worthier directions,
enlisting them in a purely moral conflict with the abounding evils of the world
(2 Cor. X. 4, 6 ; Eph. vi. 12— 18).— W.

Yer. 23. — Victors/ cmi rest, I, The tbitb Christian wabfabb is destined to
END IN viOTOEY. (1) Victory is promiaed in Ood'i Word. From the first promise
that " the seed of the woman should bruise the head of the serpent " (Gen. ui. 16),
to the latest assurance of a " crown of life " to those who are " faithful unto
death " (Bev. ii. 10), succesB is assured to the faithful soldier of God. So the laud
was taken " according to all that the Lord said unto Moses." (2) Victory is
secured by Ood's help. In the passage of the Jordan, the fall of the walls of
Jericho, and the success of the battle-field, it is everywhere indicated that God was
aiding His people. In our spiritual warfare we are victorious because God is fighting
for us (Psa. cxviii. 6), and gives us strength to fight (Psa. cxviii. 14), and because
Christ has first conquered our enemies (John xvi 33 ; 1 Cor. xv. 57). (8) Victory
is attamed through owr fighting. " Joshua took the land " after hard fighting.
The Christian must fight to win (Eph. vi 10, 11 ; 1 John v. 4).

II. When victory is attained it will be an ample compensation foe the
HABOSHIPS OF THE CHRISTIAN WARFARE. (1) The fuct of victory will in itself be a
great reward. To have conquered sin and mastered self and to be independent of
the world will be attainments full of blessing. (2) Victory will introduce us to a
great inherita/nce. We have our Canaan to possess after the battle of Ufe is over.
Heaven will be a great inheritance to us, as (a) the home of our souls and the abode
of our Father, (&) the " land flowing with milk and honey," wherein our souls will
receive all needful nourishment and inspiration ; (c) the place for peaceful, honour-
able service. After fighting the Israelites had leisure to till the soil and tend their
flocks ; after our fighting will come the happy service of heaven. (8) Victory will
secure to us rest from further wa/rfwre. " The land rested from war." War is
always an evil, though sometimes a necessary eviL Happy the land that has "rest
from war " I The Christian is 'not to live for ever in the toils and dangers of spiritual
warfare. In heaven he will be fi'ee from the assaults of eviL Note : True rest is
not rest from service — ^idleness, but rest from war — peace. — W. F. A.

Ver. 23. — The promise fulfilled. It is well to note the absolute fulfilment of
God's promises. That which He has done for others He will do for us, if we trust
Him. AU who commit the keeping of their souls and the guidance of their Ufe to
Him have a promised land — the enjoyment of which seems often so distant as to
move them to despair. Here we see a great promise grandly redeemed. God
promised safe deliverance from Egypt, safe conduct to the promised land, and the
possession of the whole of Canaan. And now we find Jodiua took (ver. 18) " all
that land, the hills and all the south country, and all the land of Goshen, and the
valley, and the plain, and the mountain of Israel, and the vaUey of the same, even
from Mount Halak that goeth up by Seir, down to Baal Gad in the valley of
Lebanon under Mount Hermon." It took him several years — seven at least— to
make tiie conquest. Even when made, and the enemies subdued, they were stiU
in various localities in sufficient force to dispute the possession and enjoyment of
certain points of the country. But the land of Canaan had become the possessioa
of Israel, and was to continue to be theirs for more than a thousand years to
come. It is a bright and conspicuous instance of God's fidthfolness. Consider this
fulfilment of promise. Observe —

I. It DID NOT ooHE AB THE TOUNa HAN HOPED. When Joshua first came from
Egypt he had doubtless his roseate dreams. To him the projected conquest would
seem the easiest of all things. A journey of a few weeks, a bold entrance, »
vigorous blow, the strenuous efforts of a united nation, helped by the enthusiasm ol
graca and the assistance of Providence — such would seem to him all that wai



SM ¥a£ fiOOS Of JOBHtA. t<m. zn. l-3i

requisite for complete and grand Buocess. Even when he had traversed the land he
BtiU believed in the perfect possibility of its conquest, and had all a hero's difficulty
in beUeving' in anything tending to prevent it. But God's promise came, not as the
young man hoped or expected. Youth sails too fast, underrates the difficulties to be
surmounted, does not reaUse its own weakness, and the weakness of coadjutors,
80 that five-aud-forty years elapse before the promise receives its ripe fulfilment.
God's promises to us wiU all find realisation, but not quite so swiftly, perht^s,
as in our youth we dream. Perfect victory over sin veithin ourselves will not
be achieved in one conflict, and abuses will not be destroyed by one assault
The might of God's help is greater than ever we deem it, but onr own weakness
and faultiness are inadequately known. Our scheme of philanthropy will meet a
stouter opposition and a feebler backing than we anticipate. Be not discouraged.
God's promises will aU be fuMUed, though not so fast as the young expect them.
Observe secondly —

II. God's frouise was fulfilled earlieb than tee uiddle-aqed man dabed
TO hope fob. I expect Joshua felt the years of pilgrimage longer than any one else
felt them. " When would the nation be fit to strike for its earthly home ? " Some
centuries of bondage had been required to give them unity ; would a similar stretch
of wandering be required to produce courage and faith ? To his eye, doubtless,
virtues grew far too slowly. And when he witnessed their murmmings, their
readiness to decline to lower paths and viler practices, there could hardly ful to rise
within him the feeling that the conquest of the land was daily becoming a more
distant thing. And when he saw three of the hardiest tiibes settle on tiie east of
Jordan, and saw a great reluctance on the part of the rest to cross that river,
doubtless he began to think the promise of God tarried, and to wonder whether he
would ever see his people settled. But faith sufficient to cross the Jordan and
courage sufficient to take the land did not require centuries to grow. God's purposes
ripened faster than the faith of even His most believing servants, and accordingly,
in all probability, long before Caleb and Joshua would have dreamed the people'
ready for the task, Canaan is won. God sees more than we see. He hastes not,
but He tarries not. Our despairing thoughts are not our wise ones. More forces
are working on our side than we imagine. God sleeps not. The desire of your
heart will come sooner than, in your despondency, you deem either likely or
possible. And when, perhaps, hope deferred has made the heart sick, then, like a
morning without clouds, it comes in aU its fulness. Lastly observe —

III. When God fulfils His promises, He does so grandly. It is not half-done,
or three-quarters. AU the land is given them. Nay, good measure, pressed down
and shaken together and running over. Oa the south their territory extends to
Seir; on the east it passes over Jordan and embraces almost all within the edge of the
desert. It is given easily. They have war, but no defeat ; difficulties, but none
insuperable ; Inuoh left to be done (as in a new house there always is), but stiU
the conquest is complete. Won far more easily than any could have imagined,
the land is theirs. So in God's own time — ».«., the really fittest time — every
promise will be fulfilled. The promise of answers to our prayers, of the hearths
desire, of a blessing on our work, of growth in grace, of the abundant entrance
into the inheritance of the saints in light — aU will be given to us at last, more
richly, more fuUy, more easily than we have ever dared to hope. — G.



EXPOSITION
CHAPTBE Xn. 1—24.



Thb extent of Joshua's conqtiests.
Ver. 1. — Now these are the kings. The
historian now enters upon a complete de-
scription of the whole territory which had,
np to this date, fallen into the hands of



the Israelites. First he traces ont the
border of the trans-Jordanic possessions of
Israel, which he describes as bounded on
the south by the river Amon, on the west of
course by the Jordan, and as extending from
Eermon, past the Sea of Ghinneroth, to the
borders of the Dead Sea. The eastem boi-



<>& xu. 1— M.]



THE BOOK OP JOSHUA-



WS



der is not dearly defined, bnt the boundary
extended far further eastward in the north
than in the south, since the territory of Og
was much more extensiye than that of Bihon.
On the west of Jordan the territory is
descrihed as extending " from Baal-gad in
the valley of Lebanon ({.«., Baalbeo or
Coearea Philippi ; see note on oh. xl. 17)
unto the Momit Halak which goeth np to
Seir, which we have seen to be a range of
mountains extending southward from wiot
the south point of the Dead Sea. The
border of the Israelitish possessions is more
accurately defined in the succeeding chapters,
but it was, after all, a slip of territory not
more than 180 miles in length by about
. 100 in breadth. Its influence upon the
history of the world, like that of Athens
and Sparta, must not be measured by
its size, but by its moral energy. As
the former city has attained undying fame
by its intellectual power, the second by its
mihtary capacity, so FaJestine has derived
her title to fame from her indestructible
national life — indestructible because built
alone, of aU the religious systemg of the
ancient world, upon the foundations of
ttie unity and Fatherhood of God ; indestruc-
tible, moreover, because it came by revelation
from God. There is no greater argument for
the Divine origin of the Mosaio law than
the unique spectacle of a national life like
that of the Jews, subsisting for nearly
two thousand years after their expulsion
from their land. From the river Amon
(see Num. xxi. 2i). The word Amon sig-
nifies the swift ttream (see Gesenius,
'Thes^ur.' 8.v.). It is now called by the
Arabs, El-Mujeb. Seetzen represents the
region round its mouth to be naturally
most fertile, but as abandoned now to a few
wild plants. Unto Mount Hermon. Now
Jebel-ea- Sheikh. We have a vivid descrip-
tion of the scenery of Hermon in Psa. xlii.,
with the noise of its foaming torrents, the
" deep calUng unto deep " from the recesses
of its dark ravines, where the infant Jordan
rushed along its rocky bed. The Psalmist
pictures to himself his troubles as over-
whelming him like the billows of the
numerous streams that streaked the moun-
tain sides. And yet again Hermon is intro-
duced as the image of peace and plenty and
brotherly love. The refreshing dews which
distilled from the side of the giant moun-
tain were the source of blessing to those who
dwelt afar off, and even the diy and parched
sides of Mount Zion were cooled by their
deUcions influence. In Psa. xlii. 6 the
Psalmist speaks of Hermon in the plural.
Some have regarded this (e.g.. Bitter) as
referring to the double peak of the moun-
The phrase most probably refen.



to the region, though Hermon has really
three peaks (see note on oh. xi. 3). And
all the plain on the east. The Arabah
(see ch. iii. 16). The depression of the
Jordan, which lay eastward, of course, of
Palestine. This is much insisted on in
the following verses.

Ver. 2. — The river Jabbok. Literally, the
pouring or emptying streatu. It is remarb.
able that, while the LXX. renders here by
Xei/iappos, a winter torrent, it steadily
renders the same Hebrew word, when re-
ferring to Amon, by ^apayl. This latter
word indicates the rocky cleft through
which the water flows ; the former, the fact
that, though rapid and impetuous in winter,
it was usually dried np in summer. Of. the
term xeiiwppoQ, applied to the Kedron by
St. John (ch. xviii. 1) ; a remarkable instance
of accuracy, by the way, if, as we are con-
fidently told, the author of that Gospel wag
an Ephesine GentUe who had never seen
Jerusalem and was imperfectly acquainted
with Jewish localities and customs. The
Jabbok has been identified with the Wady
Zerka, or blue stream.

Ver. 3. — ^And £rom the plain. There is
no "from" in the original, which here
ceases to describe the territories of Sihou,
but continues the account of the Israehta
dominions, which included the Arabah (not
the plain as in our version) up to the sea of
Chinneroth. On the east; i.e., the east of
Jordan. So also below. The way to Beth-
jeshlmoth (see Kum. xxxiii. 48, 49). There
was a desert tract near the Dead Sea called
Jeshimon, or the waste district. It is de-
scribed by travellers as the most arid portion
of the whole land. In this, Beth-jeshimoth
(the house of desolations) was situated. It
was south of the acacia meadows (see note on
ch. ii. 1), and it formed part of the territory
of Beuben (ch. xiii. 20). As it lay npon
Jordan, it must have been near the extreme
northernmost point of the Dead Sea. We
are to understand, not that Sihon's territory
exLended to Beth-jeshimoth, but in that
direction. Possibly some of the western
Canaanitish tribes here extended their ter-
ritories across the Jordan. And firom the
south. The word here is not Negeb, but
Teman, t.e., the literal south, which lay on
the right (j^P^) to one looking eastward.
Ashdoth-pisgall. For Ashdoth see ch. x.
40. Pisgah was the northernmost point of
the Abarim range, of which the well-known
Nebo was the chief peaJc. Thither Mosea
went np to view the land which he was
not permitted to enter. There Balaam built
his seven altars and essayed in vain to
curse the children of Israel. There were
the watchmen (Zophim) stationed to proteot



ao6



TSM BOOK OF JOSHUA.



[cH. xn. 1—24



the land, in the d&yn before the'Israelitish
invasion, from the incursions of the tribes on
the other side of Jordan (Num. xxiii. 14).
The position of Fisgah has not been precisely
identified, but the range extended on the
eastern ride of Jordan to a point nearly
opposite Jericho. See Seut. zxxiv. 1.

"Ver. 4. — ^The giants. Hebrew, Bephaim
(cf. Gen. xiv. 6 ; xv. 20 ; also Josh. xvii. 15).
The word, according to EwaJd, is equivalent
to " stretched ont." It was also applied to
the_ dead. The Bephaim were one of the
vorions tribes of giants, like the Anakims,
Zuzims, andEmims, of whom we read in the
land of Canaan. They occupied the land of
Eashan and "half Gilead" — that is, its
northern portion (see Dent, iii, 13). The
term "remnant" would imply that they
had suffered some reverses at the hands of
the other tribes, though they still remained
in possession of their populous territory in
the north. This view is confirmed by Gen.
xiv. 5. Ashtaroth (see note on ch. ix. 10).
Edrel. Or "the strong city," "the city of
the arm," according to Gesen., ' Thes.,' B.V.
This name, together with the immense
number of ruined cities which have been
found of late years in a marvellous state of
preservation in this region, shows that Og
was a powerful monarch. The ease with
which he was overcome bears witness to the
enervating effects of luxury and licentious-
ness upon a people of strong physique, vast
numbers, and high civilisation.

Ver. 6. — The Geshurites. See ch. xiii. 2,
11, 13 ; and Deut. iii. 14 ; also 2 Sam. xiii.
87, where we find the principality of Geshur
still in possession of its independence. It
was in the north-east corner of Bashan,
abutting upon Syria, and is called " Geshur
in Syria " (2 Sam. xv. 8). It is perhaps an
instance of undesigned coincidence that
Haachah, the mother of Absalom and the
daughter of the Mng of Geshur, was so
named, since she probably derived her name
from the adjoining territory of Maachab
(see note on oh. xiii. 2).

Ver. 6. — Sloses, the servant of the Lord,
grave. Theodoret makes the tribes which
received their inheritance through Moses
the types of the believing Jews, and those
who received it through Jesus (Joshua) the
types of the beUeving G^ntUes. Eeuben,
Gad, and Manasseh were the first-bom of
their respective mothers, and were thus
types of the Jews, who were God's first-
bom. As they passed over armed before
their brethren, so we received the good
tidings of salvation from the Ups of Jews.
This is a chara^jteristic specimen of the al-
legorical interpretation of the early fathers.
But it will be observed that the children of
Bilhah, who might have been selected mor*



naturally than those of Zilpah, are entirely
omitted.

Ver. 7. — And these axe the Idngs of the
country. We now proceed to the enumera-
tion of the kings whom Joshua had over-
come on the western side of Jordan. And
the first thing that strikes us is their im-
mense number, as compared to the two
potentates who alone occupied the large
tract of country subdued on the other side
of Jordan. Such a divided territory could
hardly have maintained itself in the face of
the powerful monarcbs Sihon and Og to the
eastward of Jordan. We are thus led to
the conclusion that the smaller kings must
have been tributary to some more powerful
monarch who was the head of the con-
federacy. Such Bretwaldas, to borrow a
term &om onr own history, the kings
of Jerusalem and Eazor appear to have
been, the one the head of the northern, the
other of the southern tribes of Falestiue,
while possibly the five Philistine cities may
have constituted another league, as they
appear to have successfully defied the
power of the Israelites from the first. That
such confederacies existed at a much earlier
time, we find from Gen. xiv. 1 — 5, where the
king of Elam, or Persia, appears as the
head of such an one, though of a more
extensive character. The resistance to his
power organised by the kings in the neigh-
bourhood of the Dead Sea is another case
in point. Possibly in later times Persia
and Babylon found their hands full in their
conflict with one another, and with Egypt
under Thothmes III., as afterwards under
the all - conquering Eameses IL, better
known as Sesostris, and they had to leave
the tribes of Palestine awhile to themselves.
Or the rulers of the central power at
Carchemish (see Introduction) may have
exercised a kind of suzerainty over all.
The next point to be observed is that, in the
list of kings that follows, a good many are
mentioned beside those enumerated in
ch. X. No doubt, as in the earlier history
of this island, there were not only heads of
leagues, and their tributary monarchs, but
under-kings also, who were actually subject
to the reigning monarchs, and involved in
their fall. Compare the other cities men-
tioned in connection with Gibeon, ch. ix. 17.
Baal-Gad, In the valley of Lebanon. See
for this whole passage note on ch. xi. 16, 17.

Ver. 8. — ^The mountains. " Which, as the
mountains of Judah (ch. xv. 48), Ephralm
(ch. xvi. 1), and Naphtali (oh. xix. 82), ran
through the midst of the land " (Enobel).
See ch. xi. 16, 21, and note.

Ver. 9. — The list of the cities subdued.
The King of Jericho, ona. Here foUows a
list of the royal cities of the Canaanitea,



Ch. xn. 1—24.]



THE BOOK OF JOSHUA.



207



the remainder being daughter, or depen-
dent cities, or else, ' perhaps, like Gibeon,
dties whose gOTernment was not regal.
See ch. ix. 3, and Introduction.

Yer. 13. — The king of Geder. Perhaps
the same as Gederah in ch. xt. 36. If so,
it is the Gedor of the Ouomasticon, ten
miles from Beit-Jibrin, or Eleutheropolis,
now Jedireh. Gonder, however, with whom
Vandevelde seems to agree, places Geder
in the monntain region, and identifies it
with Gedor (ch. zv. 68) and the modem
Jeiti, in the Hebron mountain. So Keil
and Delitzsoh, Bobinson, and others. The
Gedor in 1 Ohron. iv. 89 may be the same
place. It is described as on the east side
of the " gai," or ravine, but no clearer in-
dication of the place is given. It is, how-
ever, unlikely tiiat the Simeonites would
have found the children of Ham nndis-
turbed in the mountains of Hebron in the
reign of Hezekiah (see vers. 40, 41). The
liSX. reads Gerar, and this is very probably
the true reading. There was a " Nahal," or
winter torrent, there (Gen. zxvi. 17, 19), and
therefore possibly a " gai." The whole
passage in 1 Chron. should be consulted.

Ver.' 14. — ^Hormah, Arad. Cities in the
Negeb, near the border of Edom (see
Num. xiv. 45 ; xxi. 1, 3 ; zxxiii. 40). Hor-
mah was originally ^own as Zephath
(see Judg. i. 16, 17, where the fullest de-
scription of the locality is given). It was in
the wilderness of Judsaa, in the arid country
(Negeb) of Arad. Mr. Palmer identifies it
with Sebaita, in the centre of the Negeb, in
the Magrah-el-Esbaita, a mountain valley
eloping down into the Wady-el-Abyadh.
Other explorers prefer SulifSt, and Eow-
lauds and G. Williams, Sepata.

Ver. 15. — AduUam. In the Shephelah
{valley in our version. See ch. xv. 33-35).
Canon Tristram in his 'Bible Lands,' as
well as Conder in his 'Handbook,' iden-
tify this with Ald-el-Ha, or Mieh. In the
Quarterly Paper of the Palestine Explora-
tion Fund for July, 1875 (see also Jan.,
1874), Lieut Conder details a visit to this
place, previously identified by M. Clermont-
Ganuean. These explorers reject the idea
approved by Yandevelde and others, that
this Deir Dubban is the ancient Adullam.
The place he prefers fulfils all requirements.
It is in the Shephelah. It is near Jarmuth
and Socoh. It is an ancient site with " rock-
cut tombs, good water supply, and main
road, and communications from different
Bides, and it is moreover a strong militaiy
position. It contains no remarkable oave,
but a number of small ones, now used as
habitations-by the peasantry." Eeilah, which
David saved from the Philistines (1 Sam.
zziii. 1 — 6), was within axeasonable distance.



The present name, Aid-el-Ma or Meh, tht
feast of the hundred, may be a misa}>pre-
hension of the word Adullam similar to that
which converts the Welsh "yr eitel," in
Carnarvonshire, into the EngUsh "the
rivals," or which identifies in many Eng-
lish names the English burn (brook) with
the French horne (boundary). One of the
greatest objections to the theory is that the
Hebrew so frequently speaks of the place
as Cave-AduUam (Ma'arah-Adullam), as
though some special cave existed there.
Adullam plays a somewhat important part
in Scripture history. We hear of it as early
as Gen. xxxviii., where Hirah the Adul-
lamite is spoken of as a friend of the
patriarch Judah. It is well known as the
refuge of David and his mighty men (1 Sam.
xxii. 1 ; 2 Sam. xxiii. 13 — 17). It was the
place where David composed two of his
psalms, the 67th and the 142nd. Behoboam
fortified it (2 Chron. zi. 7j. It seems to be
regarded as a refuge in Micah i. 16. And it
is mentioned among the cities re-occupied
after the return from the captivity in Neh.
zi. 30.

Ver. 16. — ^Bethel This city is here men-
tioned as smitten by Joshua. See notes on
the capture of Ai, and Judg. i. 22 — 25.

Ver. 17. — Tappuah. Literally "apple
city." It is diificult say whether this was
Tappuah in Judah (ch. zy. 34; cf. ver. 63),
or in Manasseh (ch. zvi. 8 ; zvii 7, 8). The
mention of Aphekah in ch. zv. 63, and of
Aphek here, wonld suggest the former, or the
mention of Socoh in oh. zt. 34 (see below
on Hepher). But the mention of Lasharon,
the fact that there is more than one other
Aphek, that Tappuah on the borders of
Ephraim and Manasseh seems to have been
an important city, and that the cities of the
south are mentioned first, those of the north
afterwards, and that Tappuah seems to Ue
about midway, suggest the more northern
city. This is Enobel's opinion. Gesenius
inclines to the southern Tappuah. Conder
identifies it with YassHf, at the head of the
Wady Eanah, south-east of Sheohem. Van-
develde with 'At^, four hours north-east by
east from Shechem. Keil prefers the former
site. Hepher. This appears, from 1 Kings
iv. 10, to have been near to Socoh, but
nothing more is known of it. Aphek. Liter-
ally, fortreis, though some think it comet
from a Syriao root kindred to the Hebrew,
signifying to holdfast, to embrace, and that
it has reference to the sensual worship of
Ashtaroth and Thammuz. There were
several towns of this name (see notes on
ziii. 4; xv. 63; xix. 30). Lasharon it
probably the same as Sharon, or Hasharon
(Isa. xxxiil 9). Thia is the plain between
Joppa and Oarmel (Vandevelde). Conder



THE BOOK OP JOSHUA.



[oa. m. 1— ML



and Enobel identify with Sarona, or
Saroneh, a place near the sea of Tiberias.
See, however, Acta viii. 32 — 38. Kladon is
mentioned in ch. xi. 1, and has been con-
Jeotnrally identified with Madin, near the
sea ot Qalilee. Shimron-iaeron is also
mentioned in ch. zi. 1. It appears among
the cities assigned to Zehulun in oh. xiz.
15. Ewald (■ Hist. Israel,' ii. 2 o.) remarks
on Ithe antiqniij of this list, referring as
it does to cities which are neyer heard of
again. Achshaph lay within the borders of
Asher (ch. six. 25). It has been supposed
to be the modern Yasif, near the shores of
the Mediterranean (see note on ch. zi. 1).
Taanach and Meglddo are frequently
mentioned together (see ch. zvii. 11 ;
Judg. i. 27; v. 19). The former became a
Iievitical city. The latter, being in the
great plain of Jezreel, or Esdraelon, lay in the
way of most Eastern conquerors. Hence we
find it mentioned in the Karnak inscription
by the name of Magedi in the victorious
expedition of Thothmes III., in which
"the whole of the Syrian, Palestinian, and
Arabian nations were overcome and forced
to pay tribute." (Cooper, 'Egyptian Obe-
lisks, p. 33; see also 'Becords of the Past,'
i. 30). The great battle on the slopes of
Mount Tabor was carried on as far as Me-
giddo (Judg. T. 19). Not far from this were
the Midianites pitched, who fell victims to
the valour of Gideon (Judg. vii.). Another
and a disastrous battle of Megiddo, against
the king of Egypt, weakened Jndfea, and
caused it to fall an easy victory to the
power of Kebuchadnezzar (2 Kings zxiii.
29, 30 ; 2 Chron. xxxv. 20—24. The vaUey
of Megiddo, or Megiddon, is mentioned in
Zach. xii. 11. Solomon fortified Megiddo
(1 Kings iz. 16), assigned it to Baana, the
son of Ahilud, with Taanach, as one of the
cities required to provide food for the
royal household (1 Kings iv. 12.) And
the Jewish writer of the Apocalypse makes
this great battle - field of his race the
scene of the battle of the great day of the
Almighty (Eev. zvi. 14, 16). For Arma-
geddon is Har Mageddon, the mounttiin of
Mageddon, or Megiddo. Megiddo and Taa-
nach are also found in later periods of Egyp-
tian history. The Mohar mentioned above
(oh. L 4) notices the former among the
places he visited ('Becords of the Past,'
vol. ii.), while the latter is among thp
places captured by Shishak, as an inscrip-
tion testifies. The latest ezplorers reject
the identification with Legio, or Lejjun, and
suggest Mejedda, at the foot ot Oilboa, near
Beth - shean. See Palestine Exploration
Fund, Quarterly Paper, January, 1877.

Ver. 22. — Eedesh, i.e., Kedesh-Naphtali
(see oh. ziz. 7). Jokneam of CarmeL This



eity is mentioned as one of the cities of pttf
veyance to Solomon's conrt (1 Kings It. 12),
with Beth-shean, Taanaoh, and Megiddo.
It has been identified by ezploiers, from
Bobinson downwards, witii Tell-el-Kaimun,
on the southern slopes of Moont Oarmel.
It is the Oammona, or Cimana, of the Ono-
masticon, the " Cyamon over against Esdra-
elon " of Judith vii. 3. It was a Levitical
city (oh. zzi. 84), but in the list in Chron.
vi we miss it in its proper place, and find
it taking the place of Kibzaim in Ephraim.
But, as the margin of our version remarks in
the latter chapter (ver. 68), the names of the
cities in the two lists very frequently do
not correspond.

Ver. 23.— The satioiia of OUgaL Or
the nations that belong to Qilgal. This ii
identified by Vandevelde and Conder with
JUjuHeh in the plain of Sliaron, north of
Antipatris, and is therefore, if this identifi-
cation be correct, a third GUgsi. The word
" nations " most probably signifies a diversity
of tribes of various races gathered together
under the headship of the king of GUgal,
much in the same way that the kingdom of
Mercia arose in England from a confused
mass of various tribes, gathered together on
the marches, or military frontiers, between
Britons, Saxons and EngUsh, or in tha same
way that the Austrian and Turkish empires
have been formed out of a congeries of va-
rious nationalities. So we read of " Tidal
king of nations" in Gen. ziv. 1. But others
regard the "nations" (Goim) mentioned
there as equivalent to the Gutinm of the
Babylonian tablets — i.e., Semitic tribes im-
perfectly organised, then dwelling in Baby-
Ionia, and prefer the LXX. readinig, OapycA.,
in Gen. xiv. 1, which Sir Henry Eawlinson
considers equivalent to the Accadian Tur
Gal, or " great chief." So Sayoe, ' Babl. Lit.,'
p. 23 ; Tomkins, * Studies on the Time of
Abraham.' See Introduction III.

Ver. 24. — Tirzah meets us as the residence
of the kings of Israel for a time in the narra-
tive in 1 !^ngs. Jeroboam's wife went thither
after her interview with Ahijah (ch. xiv. 17|.
Baasha dwelt there (ch. zv. 21, 33 ; xvi. 6),
Elah was slain there by Zimri (ch. xvi. 9, 10),
and it remained the capital until Omri built
Samaria (ch. zvi. 23, 24). Thenceforward
we hear no more of it till the time of Me-
nahem (2 Kings zv. 14, 16), when it dis-
appears from history. It has been variously
identified — by Bobinson and Vandevelda
(whom Knobel follows) with Tallnza, two
hours'jonmey north of Sheohem; by Conder
with Teiasft, where there are numerous rook
sepulchres. It was a place of great beauty,
if we may judge from Cant. vi. 4, " Thou
art beautiful, my love, as Tirzah, comely
as Jerusalem."



OB. XII, 1— M.] THE BOOK OP JOSHUA. 209



HOMILETICS.

Vers. 1 — 24 — The ewtent of the conque$t. A few detached oonsiderationa occur
to ns here.

I. God wnx not be wosse than His woed. The reduction of the whole land
had not yet been effected, but it had been rendered possible if Israel were disposed
to follow up his advantage. The Ust of cities captured covers nearly the whole
extent of Palestine, and Canaan had been deprived of all capacity of resistance
So it is with the Christian who has entered into covenant with God. The mastery
over sin has been placed in his power. " Sin shall have no more dominion over
him," unless he pleases. Every part of his nature is under the dominion of Jesus.
Satan and his angels can but cower and submit, unless the Christian prefer ac-
commodation to warfare, and allow himself to be led into alliance or fellowship
with evil. It is the making marriages with Canaan, entering into amicable rela-
tions with the enemies he has subdued, that betrays Israel to his ruin. God has
placed everything in his power. If he wiU not destroy his enemies when he can, he
has but himself to blame.

II. Israel's possession is a various one. The land of Israel had various
characteristics. Mountains and fertile plains, strange deep depressions, decUvities,
desert, dry arid ground, all formed part of the land flowing with milk and honey. So
in the Christian hfe there are diversities of gifts, but the same Spirit. The heights of
rank and intellect, the fertile soil of usefulness and energy, the depths of poverty,
ignorance, and absence of mental power, the various inequalities of fortune, the
txials of sorrow and adversity, the dryness of soul in prayer, the privation of
sympathy and consolation — all these are various elements of the spiritual life, regions
on tiie map of the spiritual Canaan ; but all are subject to the power of Jesus, and
may, if wa will, be made useftd in His cause. As the most arid or the most rocky
soil in Palestine became, by man's industry, highly productive, so the oil, olive, and
honey, the figs, and pomegranates, and vines of our spiritual Israel, may be raised,
if we win but be fellow- workers with God, out of the most unpromising natural
disposition.

III. JOSH0A'a TIOTOBIES WERE CAREFULLY KEPT IN REMEMBRANCE; So may the

Ohristian, at the end of a long career under the guidance of God's Spirit, look back
to the former triumphs he has achieved by His aid, provided he does so in no spirit
of Pharisaical boasting, but in gratitude to Him who " has done so great things for
him." Many a victory over enemies without and within, many a recollection of a
hard-fought field, will occur to the veteran in Christ's army when, in the evening
of life, he ixxms his thoughts backward to review the past. And sowiU the student
of history as he reflects on the manifold difficulties encountered by God's Church,
and the number and power of the confederacies arrayed against her, enumerate
with loving pride the cities she has destroyed, and look forward with confidence to
her final tnumph.

HOMILIES BY VARIOUS AUTHORS.

Vers. 7 — 24. — The catalogue of the va/nqmshed. A melancholy document,
meaning little more to us than a column in a directory, but meaning much to
multitudes. Many of these kings would be lamented in elegies as sweet a?
David's song over Saul and Jonathan. Some, doubtless, were noble, perhaps som&
devout, but implicated in a national fate to the deserving of which tiiey had not
contributed. Linger over these a little and observe —

I. All armies will find their place in one of two catalogues — that o»
VICTORS, OR that of vanquished. We lament that to place Israel God must dis-
place others. That heroism conquering ahome assumes also heroism fighting in vain
to keep one. Life in its deepest action must always be a struggle, ending in victory
or defeat. Every foohsh life ends in ftulure, t^id in a consciousness lilce that of ^



210 THl BOOK 0? JOIKUA. [oa. xn. 1—14.

■ I ■ ■ I u II I i i ii jawi i ■ i j i I immmmmmr^ iii ii ' ■

beaten general, of plane nnwisely formed and forces tmhappily employed. Those
who follow God's guidance in all the affairs of life are fighters in a combat in which
their success confers bleBsings on themBelves and on society at large. All who
refuse God's guidance in their general affairs are fighters in a combat in which their
success, if achieved, would damage others still more than their failure would hurt
themselves. Those who choose wrongly thus find life a losing game, a disastrous
battle. It would be well if all realised that not to win a victory with life is t»
suffer a terrible defeat, is to be left with loss of power, and with infinite damage.
In one or other list we all shall be. Crowned as victors, humiliated and discredited
as failures.

II. Most of those in that list never expected to be in it. Why should
they ? They had theories hke ours to-day of the superiority of training in arms, of
fortifications, of what they called their civilisation, to any rude force wmch nomadie
hordes could bring. But they are beaten. Pride goeth before destruction. Many
reliant in their strength of purpose are destroyed by temptations they despised.
Youth dreams of only bright and golden issues to its hfe. Too often the only issues
are deplorable. Do not assume your life is going to be a grand success. Victory
is desert — ^not drift, achievement — not accident. Even to retain requires energy.
These men could not transmit to others what bad been transmitted to them.

III. Thet webe not saved bt pbofession of sanotitt. Some of the cities here
had already had a long reputation for sanctity. " Jerusalem " had been Melchizedek's
seat; "Bethel," the old name of the locality (though the city was Luz), means "the
house of God." " Eedesh " means " a holy place." These all seem to have been
spots consecrated to the service of the true God. Consecrated peoples have God's
protection ; consecrated places go without. "Judgment" does not spare, it "begins
with the house of God." Later inhabitants of Jerusalem may say, " The temple
of the Lord, the temple of the Lord are these." But the sanctity of the site
increases, it does not avert the punishment of those profaning it. There is some-
thing very solemn in this removal of the candlesticks which had served the Pre-
Abrahamic Church. England is to-day a great Bethel, a subhme Eedesh. May we
have grace to act worthily of, and so retain, our eminence.

rV. The iNDiviDnAL shares the fate of the communitt. Some of these
kings and their people, doubtless, were worthy of a better fate. But impUcated
in the fortunes of the general community, leaguing with it for its defence, tliey
oome in for its fate. It is strange how the individual has to share the lot of the
eonununity. The accident of our birth may determine our calling, our fortune,
even our creed, and our character. Advantages for which others have wrought,
disabilities which others have transmitted, are inherited by us. " Other men have
laboured, and we have entered into their labours." Sometimes other men have
sinned, and we have entered into their penalty. There is, indeed, an inner realm
whose fortunes depend only on ourselves. But we are members one of another,
and mast participate the general fortune. We should therefore cherish more
patriotism, more religious interest in our country's politics and action. The
welfare of those yet unborn depends on the wisdom of the generation to-day existent.
Let us not leave to our successors a " heritage of woe," saoh as was left to these
kings of Canaan. Look on them with pity, with modest humility, asking of your
soul, " Who maketh thee to differ ? " It may be some Canaanitish bard lamented
the dead at the waters of Merom, as the Scottish bard did those who fell at
Flodden, and sang tenderly of " the flowers of the forest being a' wede away." Let
us be thankful that in the past we have been spared such a doom, and oarefol in
the future to avoid it. — Q

Vers. 7, 8.— Diversity of lots. The diveriity of situation and character in the
several lots of the tribes of Israel is illustrative of the similar diversity which ii
seen in all human experience.

I. Diversitt or lots is a necesbitt. If we could attain uniformity we could
not retain it (1) Diversity necessarily results fi:om the inevitable differences in
tiie arrangement of the physical vorld and the course of exterpal events. Th«



CH. xa. 1-24,] THE BOOK OF JOSHUA. %U

world is not large enougli for all men to live on the most fertile soil and in the most
genial oHmate. (2) Diversity is also necessitated by the difference in hutnan
ea^acities. Since these sources of diversity are found in nature, they must be
sanctioned by God. Therefore to complain of them is (a) futile, (6) distrustful.

II. DiVEESITY OF LOTS IS LESS SEVERE THAN IT APPEAE3 TO BE. (1) There iS

much compenaaUon for inequality. We are inclined to notice only the hardships
of our own lot and the favourable circumstances of our neighbour's. There are
cares pecuhar to riches and blessings pecuhar to poverty. (2) Custom accommo-
dates us to our lot. It softens the hardest lot and robs the pleasantest of its
interest. The back becomes fitted to the daily burden. The daily luxury becomes
insipid. (3) Happiness depends more on the character of the inner Kfe than on the
circumstances of the external lot. A peaceful mind is better than all riches. The
cheerful poor man is more favoured by Providence than the melancholy rich man
(Prov. XV. 17).

III. DrVEKSITY OF LOTS IS BENEFICIAL TO US INDIVIDUALLY. JuStice IS nOt

equality, but fitness. It is not fit that we should all receive equal lots. For some
the highlands are most fit, for some the plains, for some the valleys. (1) Fitness
depends on our capacity. One can serve best in one lot, and another with different
faculties ia a totally different lot. The talents are given " to every man according
to his several ability " (Matt. xxv. 15). (2) It depends on our ddsposition. We
are not all capable of appreciating the blessings which are given to others. If we
chose for ourselves we could not tell what would be most agreeable to us until we
had experienced all kinds of lots. We often think we should enjoy things for
which we have no capacity, as weak and timid people, delighting in stories of
adventure, imagine they should like to be the heroes of them. (3) It depends on
our need. Our lots are apportioned to us for probation, discipline, and education.
The lot which is most attractive may not be most beneficial. Various methods of
training are needed according to our various characters. Some plants flourish
best in the sunshine, others in the shade. Some souls are healthiest in prosperity,
others in adversity.

IV. Diversity of lots is dbefdl fob the general wblfaee of mankind.
Dull uniformity would leave human life at a low level. CiviKsation must became
complex as it advances. Diversity of lots is necessary for division of labour.
" The whole family" is most prosperous when the several members quietly accept
their various lots. The mountain lot serves for the shepherd and his flock,
the valley for the tiller of the soil. Thus the common life of the whole nation is
advanced. They who suffer most often have a special part to serve in the ministry
of life for the good of their brethren. — W. F. A.

Vers. 12, 18. — The partition of the land of Canaan. " Now therefore divide
this land for an inheritance unto the nine tribes " (ver. 7). In the partition of the
land of Canaan there was nothing arbitrary. God Himself directed it, and
assigned to each tribe its lot, save only to the tribe of Levi, which was to occupy
an exceptional position. There was a very special reason why the inheritance of
the various tribes should be marked out by God Himself, since Israel was TTia
chosen people, destined to give to the world its Messiah and Saviour, so that
nothing could be indifferent in its history. Every tribe was to feel that in tiUing
the soU allotted to it, it was accomplishing the task which God had given. Every
tribe knew that it held its possessions directly from God, and that it was in His
name its appointed work was to be done. Thus everything even in the oatward
life of Israel was elevated, ennobled, and consecrated. Let us apply these same
principles, first to God's greater people — mankind — and then to the Church and to
the &mily. (1) St. Paul in his sermon at Athens said that " God had made of
one blood all nations to dwell on all the face of the earth, and had determined the
times before appointed, and the bounds of their habitation ; that they might seek
the Lord " (Acts xvii 26). Thus the natural fatherland has been determined foi
every nation by God Himselt This is the heritage He has assigned to each, to be
r@ceiT$d in. humble reeognitiou of ipis fatherly wUl, and with the grateful admow-



512



THE BOOK OF JOSHUA.



[oh. xm. 1—88.



led^ment of all the capacities for its development. Bat if God has thus given man
an inheritance in this great world, He has done so not only in order that man ma^
supply himself with food and with all that is essential to his bodily well-being ; it
is not even that he may avail himself of all the appUanoes of a briUiant civiliea-
tion. It is that he may fulfil here upon earth his higher destiny ; that He may
seek God and serve Him. Every nationaUty has its mission in this great work ;
it has its special gifts to employ for the common cause. Each one is to rehearse
in its own tongue the wonderful works of God, and to glorify Him as it baa
opportunity. (2) Every family is in like manner bound to recognise the hand of
ftovidenoe in its earthly loi Whether it be straitened by poverty, or abounding
in wealth, it is equally bound to serve God in the station wherein He has placed
it. All outward prosperity is to be received and held as ft trust from Him. It ia
no more ours of right than the land of Canaan belonged to the IsraeUtes. " The
earth is the Lord's and the fulness thereof," and we are His stewards. It is for
Him we are bound to use it ; and to use it for Him is to nse it for the good of our
fellows, since He reckons any love and service done to them as to Himself. Kor
is it only for our material possessions, but for our whole position and attitude
among our feUow-men, thatwe are responsible to God. Whether masters or servants,
princes or peasants, our lot has been assigned us by God for one sole end, namely
His service. Thus before Him, and iu view of this Divine purpose, there is no
distinction of rank. AU that is done for Him acquires dignity from that fact. The
one essential is that in our earthly life, whether high or low, we do His work. The
poor are often richest towards God, like that tnbe of Levi, which, though it
possessed not a foot of land, was a? we shall see, the great spiritual aristocracy of
IsraeL— E. de P.



EXPOSITION.



CHAPTER xm. 1—33.



Th» BmSION OV THU THBBITOBT. — Ver. 1.

— Now JoBhaa was old. This is usually re-
garded as the second part of the Book of
Joshua ; the first being devoted to the his-
tory of the conquest of Palestine, while the
second is engaged with the history of its
division among the conquerors. Dean
Stanley, in his ' Sinai and Palestine,' as
well as in his ' Lectures on the History o£
the Jewish Church,' describes this por-
tion of the Book of Judges as the 'Domes-
day Book ' of the land of Canaan, and the
remark has been constantly repeated. There
is, however, a considerable difference be-
tween the great survey of the Conqueror and
this one. The former was an accurate ac-
count, for purposes of taxation, national
dafence, and public order, of the exact extent
of soil owned by each landowner, and it
went so far as to ennmerate the cattle on his
estate, to the great disgust of the Saxon
ohronicler, who had an Enghshman'e dislike
of inquisitorial proceedings. There is no
trace either of such completeness, or of
such an inquisitorial character in tiaa sur-
vey, neither has it quite the same object. It
assigns to each tribe the hmits of its future
possessions, and enumerates the cities con-
tained in each portion of territory. But it
inakeii Boatcely any eflort to describe the pos-



sessions of particular families, still less of
individual landowners. Joshua and Caleb
are the only exoeptiona Knobel observes
that the most powerful tribes were first
settled in their territory — those, namely, of
Judah and Joseph. He remarks that the
author must have had written sources for his
information, for no single IsraeUte could
have been personally acquainted with aU the
details here given. And strlclsen In years.
Bather, advanced in age. There is no founda-
tion for the idea of some commentators that
the Jews, at the time this book was written,
made any formal distinction in these words
between different stages of old age. The
Hebrew language rejoiced in repetition, and
this common phrase is only a means of
adding emphasis to the statement already
made. And there remaineth yet very, much
land to be possessed. The Hebrew HKO is
stronger than our version. Perhaps the best
equivalent in modem English is, "And the
amount of land that remainethforut to occupy
is very great indeed." We may observe here
that, as with the Uteral so with the spiritual
Israel, whether the antitype be the Christian
Church or the human heart, the work of
subduing Ood's enemies is gradual. One
successful engagement does not conclude the
war. The enemy renews his assaults, and
when force fails he tries fraud ; when direct
temptations are of no avail he reeor^ to



ott. xtn. 1—88.]



tHE BOOS Of JOSHUA.



iU



entioements. The only gafegnard in th«
war is strength, alertneBS, cotuage, patience.
The faint-hearted and onwatohfol alike fail
in the contest, which can be carried on buc-
cessfuUy only by him who has learned to
keep guard over himself, and to direct hie
ways by the counselB of God.

Ver. 2.— TMs Is the land which yet re-
malnetb. The powerful league of the Philis-
tines, as well as the tribes near them,
remained unsubdued. In the north, like-
wise, the neighbourhood of Sidon, and the
territory of Ccele, Syria, which lay between
Lebanon and Anti-Lebanon, was as yet
in the hands of the enemy. Babble Kimchi
and Solomon Jarchi translate by *' borders."
MasiuB snggests the French marque (which
was the old German mark), and the modem
German grenze. All the borders of tho
FMUstines. Literally, all the circles (Geli-
loth) of the Philistines. The expression is
found in sereral places in this book (sea
eh. xviii. 17 ; xxii. 10, 11). We may com-
pare the expression the circles of Swabia,
Franconia, &B., in the history of Germany.
The expression here may have more affinity
with what is known as the " mark Eystem "
in the history of ancieut Germany, and refer
to the patch of cultivated ground which
extended for some distance round each city.
But this is rendered improbable by the fact
that one circle only retained its name (ah.
XX. 7 ; zzi. 82), and is still known as Galilee
(see notes on these passages). Galilee was
too large a district to have been originally a
dealing round a town. Geshnr (see note on
ch.xii. 5). Ewald (seealso Hitzig,' Geschichte
des VolkeB Israel,' p. 20) conjectures that
these Geshurites were the aboriginal inhabit-
ants of the country (eee 1 Sam. xxvii. 8), and
were the same as the Avites or Awites. See
next verse, where the Awites are distin-
guished from the five lords of the Philistines.
It is worthy of remark that the name
Talmai, the name of one of the " sons of
Anak " (ch. xr. 14), comes in again as the
name of a king of Geshur (2 Sam. ill. 8 ;
xiii. 37). It occurs, however, as a Hebrew
name in Bartholomew, or Bar-Tolmai, i.e.,
the son of Talmai, or Tolmai, one of the
twelve apostles. Ewald supposes that these
aborigines were dispossMsed by the Oanaan-
itish tribes, and that the old name of Geshur
was still applied to those regions on which
this primitive race had retained its hold.

Ver. 3. — FromSlhor. Thisword,whichhas
the article in Hebrew, is literally the black
river. This has been thought to be the Nile,
known to both Greeks and Latins by that title.
The Greeks called it /tiXas. So Virgil says
*fit, "iEgyptum nigra foecundat arena." The
Vulgate has " a fluvio turbido qui irrigat
^gyptom." The LXX. translates by aakti-



Tog. The phrase which is " before " ('i)E5"7JJl

Egypt seems to exclude the idea of the Nile,
since the Nile flowed through the centre ol

Egypt, and it is impossible to make JEr?]}
equivalent to l^jpS. AsDrugins remuks,
moreover, the Nile is always called either
"1"K? or " the river of Egypt." The interpre-
tation which has found most favour of late,
therefore, refers this expression to a small
river that flows into the sea at the extreme
southern border of Palestine. This river
was known as the "river of Egypt" (Gen.
XV. 18), and is now called the Wady-el-Arisch
(of. also oh. XV. 4, 47, as well as Num.xxiiv.
6 ; 1 Kings viii. 65 ; Isa. xxvii. 12, where the
word is nahal, or winter torrent, a word
inapplicable to the Nile). For Sibor, or
Shiehor, see Isa. xxiii. 8 ; Jer. ii. 18, and
especially 1 Ohron. xiii. 6, which seems
decisive against the Nile. Which la counted
to the Oanaanite. These words are con-
nected by the Masorites with what follows:
The five lords of the Philistines are reckoned
to the Canaanite. nie five lords of the
PhUlstineB. The Philistines (Deut.ii. 23. Cf.
Gen. X. 14, and 1 Ghron. i. 12) are supposed
to be of Egyptian origin. Ewald (also
Hitzig, ' Geschichte des Volkes Israel,' p. 20)
believes Caphtor to be Crete, and supposes
the Cherethites and Felethites who formed
David's body-guard (2 Sam. xv. 18) to be
Cretans and Philistines (see Ez^. xxv. 16).
But this opinion is disputed by many
commentators of note, and is far from
probable in itself. They were David's most
trusted and faithful troops, and it seems
hardly probable that so truly national a
monarch would have assigned the post of
honour around his person to the hereditary
enemies of his race. Bitter, however, be-
lieves the Cherethites aud Pelethites to be
Philistines, and appeals to 1 Sam. xxx. 14,
and stiU more forcibly to Zeph. iL 4, 6. It
Bhould be remembered, too, that Ittai was a
Gittite, or native of Gath (see 2 Sam. xv. 21).
The term here used, translated lords {satraps,
LXX.), is peculiar to the Philistines. It is
to be found also in Judg. iii. 3 ; 1 Sam. v. 8,
(fee. In 1 Kings vii. 30 the word means an
axle, or perhaps the outside plating of the
wheel, and in the kindred languages it sig-
nifies a wheel. The expression is remark-
able in connection with the phrase " circles
of the Philistines." The Eshkalonltes. The
inhabitants of Ashkelon, as the Gittites are
of Gath. Also the Avites. literally, " and
the Avites." There is no "also" in th«
original, though the Avites or Avim are sup-
posed (see Deut. il 23, and note on Geshtoi
in the last verse) to have been aborigines
preceding the Canaanitei, and djwpossemed



ti



TflE BOOK OP ;f08atJA.



[oa. tm. 1—31.



by the PhilistineB. Keil, however, dis-
putes this view, and holds that we have
no evidence that any hut a Canaanitish
people dwelt in south-western Palestine.
This Canaanitish tribe, he thinks, was
driven out by the Philistines. Some few of
the Avites, or rather Awites, continued to
dwell among their conquerors. But the
coincidence between Deut. ii. 22, 23, and
1 Sam. xxvii. 8, makes strongly for Ewald's
view above. And KeU and Dehtzsch, in
their later joint work, inoUne to it. See
Introduction III. The word Awim, like
Havoth, or Hawoth (see ver. 30), is sup-
posed to mean villages, or inhabited en-
closures.

Ver. 4. — ^FromtbaBontb. TheLXX. and
thebestmodem commentators ooimect these
words with what precedes. This gives a
better sense than joining it to what follows.
For the south was not " all the land of the
Canaanites," but a large part of it belonged,
as we have just seen, to a tribe jwt of
Canaanitish origin, while the land of the
Canaanites (see note on ch. iii. 10) extended
far to the northward. Therefore we must
understand the words " all the land of the
CanEianites " to begin a fresh section, and
to be descriptive of the territory extending
from Philistia northward towards Sidon.
So the Chaldee, Syriac, and Arabic. Meaiali.
The margin has " the cave." But there is
no article in the original. The LXX. reads
drf Val^rK for Mearah, having clearly, as
Masius observes, substituted Zain for Besh.
But this mistaken reading compels a mis-
translation of the passage. Vandevelde
supposes it to be a remarkable cave still
existing near Sidon, which is mentioned by
William of Tyre as having been fortified by
the Crusaders. He speaks of it as muni-
cipium quoddam, and states that it was
commonly known as the " cave of Tyre. "
" spelunca inexpugnabilis." It was after-
wards " the last retreat of the Emir Fakkr-
ed-Din" (Vandevelde, s.v. Mearah). There
is a village now, north of Sidon, called Mog-
heiriyeh, or the village of the cave. So also
Enobel. Beside the Sldonlans. Bather,
near, at in the direction of, or which be-
Zonjs to, the Sidonians. Aphek. Oi Aphekah.
This (Kuobel) was the northern Aphek (oh.
xix. 30 ; Judg. i. 31), in the tribe of Asher,
known later as Apnaca, and now as Afka,
Not the Aphekah of oh. xv. 53, probably the
Aphek of 1 Sam. iv. 1. It is the same
Aphek which in later times was captured by
the Syrians, and was the scene of several
decisive victories of Israel (1 Kings xx. 26,
80 ; 2 Kings xiii. 17). It is doubtful which
Aphek is meant in eh. xii. 18, though it is
probably the southern Aphek. The situa-
tion is described as one of " rare beauty "



(Delitzsch), "on the north-west slopes of
Lebanon,'* amid exquisite groves (Oonde^.
Here the Syrian Astarte was worshipped,
and the rains of her temple, dedicated ta
her as mourning for Tammuz, or Adonis,
may BtUl be seen. See Kenrick, ' Phoenicia,'
310, 311, and Mover's ' Die Phonizier,' i. 192.
Perhaps it was never actually occupied by
the Asherites, but remained in the hands
of Syria, and as a place of great resort
was the natural point to which the attacks
of Israel would be directed. Vandevelde,
however, believes in four and Conder in
teven cities of this name, and they suppose
the Aphek which was the scene of the battle
with the Syrians to have been on the east
of Jordan, from the occurrence of the word
" Mishor " in the narrative in 1 Kings zz.
The term " Mishor " is, however, applied t«
other places beside the territory east ot
Jordan (see Gesenius, B.v. Mishor). The
Aphek in 1 Sam. zzix. 1 cannot be identified
with any that have been named. To tlie
borders of the Amorites. This can hardly
be anything but the northern border of the
kingdom of Bashan, in the neighbourhood
of Mount Hermon.

Ver. 6. — The Oiblltes. The inhabitanto
of Gebal, called Jebail (i.e., hiU-city, from
Jebel) by the Arabs, and Byblus by the
Greeks. This is Masius's idea, and other
commentators have accepted it (see 1 King!
V. 32 ; Psa. Ixxxiii. 7 ; and Ezek. xxvii. 9,
where the LXX. translates by Byblus). In
the first-named passage the word is trans-
lated " stone squarers," in our version
(where it is the 18th and not the 32nd
verse). All the other versions render
" Giblites " as here, and no doubt the in-
habitants of the Phcenician city of Jebail ai«
meant, since in the ruins of Jebail the same
kind of masonry is found as is seen in
Solomon's temple. Byblus (Kenrick, ' Phoe-
nicia,' I.e. Movers, I.e. Lenormant, < Manual
of the History of the East,' ii. 223) was the
great seat of the worship of Tammnz, or
Adonis. Here his father Cinyras was sup-
posed to have been king, and the licentious
worship, with its corrupting influences, was
spread over the whole region of Lebanon
and even Damascus. This territory was
never actually occupied by the Israelites (see
for this passage also ch. zi. 8, 17 ; and xii. 7).
Eamatb. The spies penetrated nearly ai
far as this (Num. xiii. 21), and David
reduced the land into subjection as far ai
the borders of this territory. But the
Israelites never subdued it. Toi, king of
Hamath, was an ally, not a tributary of
David (2 Sam. viii. 9). The border of
Israel is always described as extending " to
the entering in of Hamath " (1 Kings viii.
65 ; 2 Kings ziv. 25), though Jeroboam V,



ftii 1-Mj



'rM *oolt of JosfitJiL.



Ill



is Baid to have "recovered" (t. 88) Hamath
itself. This " entering in of Hamath " com-
mences at the end of the region called Coele
S;7ria, according to Bobinson, 'Later Biblical
Besearches,' see. 12, at the north-east end of
the Lebanon range. So Vandevelde and
Porter. Vandevelde remarks that the ex-
pression refers to an " entrance formed by
Nature herself," namely, the termination
of the Lebanon and Anti-Lebanon ranges.
The city of Hamath, which gave its name to
the territory, is situated on the Orontes,
and was known later as Kpiphaneia, no
doubt after Antiochus Spiphanei, king of
Syria.

Ver. 6.— All the Sldonlans. The word 7b
here, as elsewhere, must be taken in a
restricted sense. A large portion of the
Sidonian territory was taken, but Sidon
retained its independence (see Judg. i, 31,
32). It is clear, too, that the promise wag
conditional. Had not the Asherites been
willing to tolerate* the existence of the
Ganaanites in their midst, they need not
have done so (see Judg. i. 28).

Ver. 8. — ^With whom. Literally, icith
Mm. The construction is defective, but
the meaning is clear enough. To avoid the
repetition of the words " the half -tribe of
Manasseh," the historian writes IDy mean-
ing thereby the other half of the tribe.

Ver. 9. — ^Aroer. Three, or even four,
cities of this name were known, dnd hav€
been identified by modem travellers under
names somewhat similar. 1. Aroer upon
Amon, on the north bank of that river, at
the extreme south of the territory of Bea-
ben (see Deut. U. 36 ; iii. 12 ; iv. 48 ; Josh,
xii. 2 ; xiii. 9, 16 ; and probably Jer. xlviii.
19). 3. Aroer in Gad (ch. xiii. 25), described
there as "before," i.e., on the way to
"Babbah." It was no doubt some short
distance to the westward of this chief city
of the Ammonites (see also Num. xxxii. 34,
where the Gadites are said to have built it).
These two are probably the " cities of Aroer"
referred to in Isa. xvil 2 (but see next note
but one, where also 2 Sam. xxiv. 6 will be
discussed). 3. A city in Judah (1 Sam.
XXX. 28). To one of these cities probably
belonged Shammah or Shammoth, the
Haraiite or Harorite (2 Sam. xxiii. 11;
he is called Harodite in ver. 25, and 1
Chron. xi. 27). The river Amon (see note
on ch. xii. 2). The city that Is ta the midst
of the river. This city (or perhaps cities)
has received but httle attention from com-
mentators, probably by reason of its bearing
no name. Those who have tried to identify
it have failed In Beut. li. 36, in this
passage, and in 2 Sam. xaiv. C, it is nan-
tioned in connection with Aroer. In ch.



lU. S, Instead of "the oity that is io
the midst of the river/' we find simply
" the middle (Tlin) of the river." But as 2
Sam. xxiv. 6 stands in our version, the city
referred to stood in the middle of the river
of Gad. This would suggest the idea that
the old derivation of Aroer by WeUs and
others from the word fp (city) doubled,
with the signification of the double city,
is nearer the mark than that of wa»te-
ness, or desolatetieat, or nakedness, as of a
region bare of trees, which has found favoiu
of late, and it is not without support in
Hebrew forms. A city, moreover, in the
midst of or "on the brink of" a winter
torrent would be less likely to be waste or
desolate than in other situations. But we
are not yet at the end of our difficulties.
The word Nahal, which comes before Gad
in the passage of which we are now speak-
ing, has the article. Thus the translation,
"river of Gad" cannot be maintained.
And besides, the enumeration of the people
mnst have begun at the Amon, or southern
border of Israel beyond Jordan. It is pos-
sible that the text may be corrupt here,
as it is in other parts of 2 Samuel, and
possibly the meaning may be that the
officers pitched in Aroer, passed through
Eeuben, and having come within the con-
fines of Gad arrived at Jazer. This again
is rendered doubtful by the close connection
of Aroer and Jazer in ch. xiii. 25. It is
of course, therefore, possible that the re-
ference in 2 Sam. xxiv. is to the Jabbok,
not the Amon ravine. A question of such
intricacy can only be settled, if settled
at all, by an investigation on the spot.
The plain. The word here is ";'IB'»p. This,

derived from the rootl^* signifies level
ground, and is appUed to the region north
of Moab, especially that part of it which
belonged to Beuben. Flat, and almost un-
broken, even by trees, it was particularly
adapted for grazing land (see also note
above, and on ver. 4). Uedeba. This is
mentioned in Scripture, together with
Dibon, as here in Num. xxi 30 ; Isa. xv.
2. It was on the level ground before
mentioned (see Gesenius, s.v. ■nt5'''P). Dibon
(see Jer. xlviii. 18, 22, called Bimon in Isa.
XV. 9 ; but Dibon in Isa. xv. 2 ; see also
Num. xxxiii. 45, 46). It was one of the
cities built by the children of Gad (Num.
xxxii. 34). It is now called Dhib&n, and is
a short distance north of the Amon. The
Moabite stone, found at Dibon in 1868,
mentions the occupation of Medeba by
Omri, and implies that Dibon, the principal
•ity in those parts, was also subject to hun,
bnt resovcrsd finally by Mesha.
Ter. 11.— Oesburites and Maachathltesk



218



THE BOOK, OV JOSaUA,



[oa. xm. 1-



See note on chap. sii. 6, of which this pas-
Baga is little else but a repetition.

Yer. 12. — Giants. See note on ch. ziL 4.

Ter. 14. — Only unto the tribe of Levi
Sm Nnm. xviii. 20 — 24, where the original
command is recorded. Like the clergy
under the Christian dispensation, it was
seen that they could not at once perform
the duties of the priesthood, and act as
instmotors of the people, if they were bur-
dened, hke the rest, with the duty of carry-
ing on war. Their place was supplied by the
division of the tribe of Joseph int>> two, so
that the inheritance of Israel was still di-
vided among twelve tribes. Bahr, in his
* Symbolik des Alten Testaments,' ii. 48,49,
gives other reasons for the dispersion of the
Iievites throughout the land. If the Levites
were to keep the Law and Word of God, to
take measures for its being properly kept by
the nation in general, to spread abroad a
knowledge of the precepts of the religion
of Israel, to stir up the tribes tcr a devout
and religions life, it was not merely desir-
able, but absolutely necessary, that they
should be scattered among the tribes. On
the other hand, to secure a proper esprit de
corps, a mutual sustaining influence, and a
common action, too complete a dispersion
would have been a mistake. Hence their
collection into the Levitical cities, which,
however (see note on ch. xzi. 11), were not
given up wholly to them. The Divine
wisdom which dictated the provisions of
the Mosaic law is clearly visible here. The
instinct of the Christian Church in early
times devised a similar provision for the
evangelisation of the people in the organi-
sation of the ancient and medisBval cathe-
drals. As he said unto them. This
quotation of Num. xviii. 20, 24 by a later
writer would, under all ordinary circum-
stances, be regarded as a proof that the Book
of Joshua was quoting one of the books of
Moses. But the " Elohiatio " and " Jeho-
vistic " theory escapes this conclusion in the
ctunbrous fashion to which reference has
been already made. Origen regards this pas-
sage as symbohcal of the more spiritually
earnest among the laity, who "so excel others
in virtue of mind and grace of merits, as that
the Lord should be called their inheritance."
"How very rare," he says, " are those who
devote themselves to wisdom and knowledge
and preserve their mind clear and pure, and
exercise their nunds in all excellent virtues,
who illuminate the way wherein they walk
tor simpler souls by the grace of learning,
and thus attain to salvation. They are the
true priests and Levites, whose inheritance
is the Lord, who is wisdom" (Horn. 17
on Joshua). The Sacrifices. The word is
derived from V^ fire. It does not itself, as



Eeil asserts, signify yire in any place in Holy
Writ, but it is used of the shewbread in
Levit. xziv. 7,9. It thus came to mean any
sacrifice, whether offered by fire or not. And
thus the tenth which (Num. zviU. 21, 23,
24) was given to the Levites, as being
offered for God's service, might be reckoned
as in some sense a sacrifice. With this
passage we may compare various passages
in the New Testament, where, in this re-
spect at least, the Christian ministry stands
on the same footing (1 Cor. iz. 11, 13;
Gal. vi. 6, 7). Thus the maintenance of the
Christian ministry is a kind of sacrifice — as
we find such deeds called, in fact, in Heb.
xiU. 16. And an order of men who are set
apart to the ministry of souls has a right to
claima sufficient maintenance atthehandsof
those to whom they mioister — b point which
in these days of affluence and clerical desti-
tution combined ought to be more largely
recognised than it is (see Num. zviii.
20—24). " For the law is entrusted to the
priests and Levites, and they devote their
energies to this alone, and without any
anxiety are able to give their time to this
Word of God. But that they may be able to
do this, they ought to depend upon the
support of the laity. For if the laity do not
allow the priests and Levites all the neces-
saries x>i Ufe, they would be obliged to engage
themselves in temporal occupations, and
would thus have less time for the law of
God. And when they had no time to spars
for the study of God's law, it is thou who
wouldst be in danger. For the Ught of
knowledge that is in them wonld grow dimt
because thou hast given no oil for the lamp,
and through thy fault it would come to
pass, what the Lord said, ' If the blind lead
the blind, shall they not both fall into the
ditch?'" (Grig., Hom. 17 on Joshua). These
words are well worthy of attention now,
when a multiplicity of worldly business and
a weight of worldly cares are devolved upon
God's ministers by a laity which has to
too great an extent washed its hands of all
co-operation in the work of God's Church.
Yer. 16. — Beuben. This passage is an
expansion of Num. zxzii. 33 — 42. We learn
from it that the Israehtes actually took
possession of this land. But in the reigns of
the wicked kings Omri and Ahab the power
of Israel declined, and after the battle of
Bamoth-Gilead, and the defeat and death of
Ahab, the Moabites succeeded in shaking
o£f the Israehtish yoke, and in wresting from
Israel moreover a considerable portion of
the territory of Sihon. In the next reign
an attempt was made to regain possession
of the lost territory. We learn from the
Moabite stone that the important towns
here mentioned, Medeba, Dibon, Baal*



fla. xin. 1— 88.3



THJB fiOOK OS" JOSritJA.



*if



meon, Emathaim (or Eirjathaim, as it is
here called), Ataroth, Nebo, Aroer, had
fallen into the hands of Mesha at the re-
bellion, and that he had erected a citadel at
Dibon, which had become his capital.
Hence the endeavotir to invade Moab from
the Boatb, recorded in 1 Kings iii., which,
however, though suoceseful as a military
promenade, was attended with no per-
manent results. For Isaiah (oh. xv.) and
Jeremiah (ch. zlviii.) mention most of these
places, as well as Blealeh and Heshhon, the
former capital of SUion, as being strong-
holda of the Moabite power. Jahaz, too,
the place where Sihon gave battle of the
Israelites, is numbered by Mesha, as well as
at a later date by Isaiah and Jeremiah,
among the possessions of Moab; while Horo-
naim, mentioned among the Moabite cities
by the two prophets, is incidentally noticed
by Mesha as having been captured from the
Edomites. In this early extinction of the
tribe of Benben we may see the fulfilment
of Jacob's prophecy (Gen. zliz.). The plain
by Medeba. See ver. 10 ; so again in the
Bext verse.

Ver. 17. — ^Bamoth BaaL The high places
or altars of Baal. The frequent mention
of Baal in this passage shows how common
the worship of Baal was in Palestine. The
Moabites worshipped him under the name of
ehemosh, to whom Mesha, on the Moabite
•tone, attributes aU his victories (ct. Num.
szi. 29 ; Judg. zi. 24 ; 1 Kings zL 7, 33.
Bo Beth-Peor below (of. Num. xxv. 3).

Ver. 19.— Sibmab (see Num. zxzii. 38).
The vine of Sibmah forms a feature in the
lament of Isaiah (zvi. 8) and Jeremiah
(xlviii. 32) over Moab. It was close by
Heshbon, on the borders of Beuben and Gad
(of. ver. 17 with ch. zzi. 39). Zaretb-shahar,
or the tplendow of the aawn, now Zarar,
was on the borders of the Dead Sea. Canon
Tristram, in his * Land of Moab,' mentions
the gorgeous colouring of the landscape
here, more beautiful and varied, no doubt,
at dawi than at any other time of the
day.

Ver. 21.— Cities of the plain. " Mishor "
once more. See above, ver. 9, not as in
Gen. xix., where the word is Ciccar. These,
therefore, were not Sodom and its neigh-
bours, but cities of the Amorites. Such
touches as this, which display the minute
acquaintance of our author witii his subject,
are almost of a necessity lost in a translation.
But where our version has "plain," the
original has Mishor when the uplands of
Gilead and Bashan are meant, Arabah when
ttie writer is speaking of the Wadys in the
neighbourhood of the Dead Sea, Shephelah
when he refen to the lowlands of Western
fklMtiae, itordering on the Mediterranean,



Bik'ah whenhe speaks of the great valley
of Ccele Syria, Ciccar when he speaks of
the territory due north of Jordan. With the
princes of Uldlan. The word here used,
S'EJ'J signifies exalted persons, persons of
rank, as we should say. It would seem to
imply rather civil functions than the more
absolute authority which the word "lb* also
rendered " prince" in Hebrew, carries with it.
With this passage compare Num. xxxi. 8.
The Hebrew baa no "with," so that the
difficulty some have found in the passage
need not have arisen. It is nowhere said
that Moses smote the " princes of Midian "
together with Sihon. All that is stated is
that they, as weU as Sihon, were smitten,
as the history in Numbers tells us they were.
Dukes of Sihon. According to Gesenius,
Eosenmiiller, and others, the word here
translated "dukes" is derived from Tipp
to pmir out, means " anointed." See Psa.
ii. 6, where it is translated "set." But
Keil rejects this interpretation, and sayg
that the word never signifies to anoint.
It is always used, he says, of foreign
princes. But he has overlooked Micah
V. 4. (Heb.). See Knobel, who explains it of
drink offerings, and regards these " dukes "
as men pledged by a solemn treaty to be
Sihon's allies, though not vassals. Eimchi
thinks that Sihon, before his reverses at the
hand of Israel, had held some authority ir
Midian, and these were his prefects, or
nnder-kings. The term is applied to ZebaU
and Zahnuima in Psa. Ixxxiii. 12 (in th«
Hebrew).

Ver. 22. — ^The Bootbaayer. Or divinet,
one who pretended to foretell future events
Balaam, it would seem, insteaa of retuminp
to his own land, went to visit the Midianites
whose elders had joined in the invitation
given by Moab (Num. xxii. 7), and pet
Buaded them to entice the Israehtes into
idolatry and licentiousness (see Num. xxv.)
For this crime he met with the punishment
he had deserved, and was involved in the
destruction which fell on the Midianites by
God's express oomnmnd, in consequence of
their treachery (Num. xxv. 1& — 18. Oee
Blunt, ' Undesigned Coincidences,' Part I.
24).

Ver. 23. — And the border thereol These
words have been omitted in the Vulgate,
which does not understand them. The
LXX. translates, "And the borders of Beu-
ben were the Jordan-border." This seems
to. be the meaning of the original. The
phrase often occurs, as in ch. xv. 12 and Num.
xxxiv. 6. Enobel's explanation is probably
the correct one, that the phrase means to
refer to the natural boundary marked out
by the river or sea and its banks. " TSan



Sfflte Booi oif joB^tjjL



fofi. xin. 1—48.



boundary of the chfldren of Benben was
Jordan and the natural boundary thus
formed." As Sean Stanley reminds ns in
hia ' Lectures on the Jewlui Church,' Ben-
ben, as predicted by Jacob (Gen. zUx. 4),
sank at once into insignificance. No ruler,
no judge arose from this tribe snd its terri-
tory. Villages. Hebrew '.■JVC. LXX. tTrai-
Xeig, Vulgate viculi. The original meaning
is a piece of ground enclosed by a hedge or
wall. HereitwouIdmean,either with GeBeniua
and Keil, farm hamlets, or perhaps clearinga
of cultivated ground, which in Palestine
would naturally be enclosed in some way,
to prevent the ravages of wild beasts. In
the primitive villages of Servia, where wild
beasts are not entirely extirpated, not only
are all the homesteads enclosed, but a fence
is placed across the road, and removed when
a vehicle has to pass through. Or perhaps
the primitive Jewish community was similar
to the primitive Teutonic community as de-
scribed by Marshall in his ' Elementary and
Practical Treatise on Landed Property,'
published in 1804, who described the early
distribution of land in this country as fol-
lows : " Bound the village lay a few small
enclosures for rearing young stock. Further
afield the best land for arable purposes
was chosen, and divided into three parts,
for the necessary rotation of fallow, wheat
or rye, and spring crops. The meadows
near the water-courses were set aside for the
growth of fodder for the oattle or for pas-
turage for milch cows, &o. The irreclaim-
able lands were left for what we now call
' common ' uses — ^for fuel, and the inferior
pasturage." These arrangements are found
to exist in India (see Sir H. Maine, ' Vil-
lage Communities, sec. iv.). But there, as
in Palestine, the necessity for water was the
cause of important modifications. Since
the word is used to denote the court (1) of a
prison, Jer. xxxU. 2 ; (2) of a palace, 1
Kings vii. 8 ; (3) of a private house, 2 Sam.
xvii. 18; (4) of the temple in numberless
places, and as it is used of the enclosure of
a nomadic camp (Gen. xxv. 16, where our
version has towns; perhaps Deut. ii. 23,
where our version has Sazerim, following
the LXX. — which, however, alters the word
to the more usual Hazeroth — and the Vul-
gate ; Isa. xUi. 11, with which compare the
expression tents of Kedar, Psa. cxi. 5), the
translation villages can hardly be the cor-
rect one here or elsewhere (see also ver. 28).
Ver. 24.— Unto the tribe of Gad. The
border of Gad extended further eastward
than that of Beubeu. Westward, of course,
its border was the Jordan. Its northern
border was nearly eeineident with that of
the land »t S-iltad, aad passed by Maha-
«aim and Jabesh OUead, unto th« extreme



Bonthemmost point of the sea of Galilea.
Many of these places also are mentioned in
Isa. sr. and Jer. zlviii. (see note above,
vet. 16).

Ver. 25.— Aroer that Is before Rahbali.
A different Aroer to that mentioned in ver.
9. This was near (Hebrew, opposite to, the
expression being equivalent to the French
en face) Babbah, or the great city of the
children of Ammon. KeU supposes that
this territory had been taken from the Am-
monites by Sihon, since the Israelites were
not permitted to possess themselves of the
land of the Ammonites (Deut. ii. 19). For
Babbah, see 2 Sam. xi. 1 ; zii. 26. It ia
called Babbath in Deut. ui. 11.

Ver. 26. — Bamath-Uizpeh. This is iden-
tified with Bamoth-Gilead by Vandevelde,
and must have been the Mizpeh of Gilead
mentioned in Judg. xi. 29. It is supposed
to be identical with the place called Mizpah,
Galeed, and Jegar-sahadutha by Jacob and
Laban respectively (Gen. xxxi. 47 — 49). If
it be the same as Bamoth-GUead, it is the
scene of the celehrated battle against the
Syrians, in which Ahab lost his Ufe (4.
^ngs xxii.), and where the fall of the
dynasty of Omri was brought about by the
revolt of Jehu (2 Kings ix.). Conder, how-
ever, thinks the two are distinct places,
and fixes Bamoth-Mizpeh on the north
border of Gad, about 25 miles west of
Bozrah.

Ver. 26 Mahanalm. The dual of njno

two hosts or camps. It received its name
from Jacob, who with his own company
met the angels of God, and who com-
memorated the meeting by this name (see
Gen. zxxii. 2). Here Ishbosheth was
crowned (2 Sam. ii. 8). Here David took
refuge when he crossed the Jordan, to avoid
falling into the hands of Absalom (2 Sam.
xvii. 24). Deblr. Not the Debir men-
tioned in ch. X., but another Debir in the
land of Gilead, whose site is unknown.

Ver. 27.— Tne valley. The Emek (see
ch. viii. 13). Beth-Nimrah (see Num. xxxii.
36). Afterwards Nimrim (Isa. xv. 6 ; Jer.
xlviii. 34). Now Nimrln. Succotb. I.e.,
bootlis. Here Jacob rested after his meet-
ing with Esau (Gen. xxxiii. 17). Here
Gideon " taught the men of Succoth," who
had declined to provide food for his army
(Judg. yiii. 5, 7, 16). It is mentioned in
connection with Zarthan, or Zaretan (cf.
ch. iii. 16) as being in the tract or 133
of the Jordan, where the metal-work of the
temple was ca3t,(l Kings vii. 46; 2 Chron
iv. 17). Zaphon. VeihtL^s, and the North ;
tehat remained of the kingdom of Sihon,
i.e. , as is implied above, the part which was
not assigned to Beuben. Jordaa and Ui



J. tin. 1-&8.1



UMS BOOK Qf ^OltttJA,



21ft



border. Literally, Jordan and a border
(see note on ver. 23) . The edge. Bather,
the end (see note on rer. 24),

Ver. 28.— This la tbe Inberltaace of tbe
cblldren of Gad. The cause of tbe dif-
ference between tbe Beubenites and tbe
Gadites may perhaps be thus explained.
While both inhabited a eimilar tract of
oonntry, a country from its open and
pastoral character likely to develop a hardy
and healthy race of men, tbe Benbenites
were exposed to the seductions of the
Moabitish worship of Chemosh, which,
when combined with an ancestral tempera-
ment by no means prone to resist such
influences (see Gen. xlix. 4), soon proved
fatal to a tribe, itself not numerous (Deut.
zzxiii. 6), and hemmed in on every side but
the north by the unbelievers. The tem-
perament inherited by the Gadites added to
their more favourable situation and the
nature of their pursuits, developed a hardy
and warlike race ready to do battle, and
fearless of their foes (1 Chron. v. 18). Of
this tribe came the valiant Jephthah, and
of it also came tbe brave soldiers of David,
whose quaUfications stir to poetry the sober
chronicler of Judah (1 Chron. zii. 8). We
may see here the influence of circum- -
stances on the character of a people.
Originally (1 Chron. v. 18) the Beubenites
and the Gadites were alike. But the Beuben-
ites, as we have seen, from unfavourable snr-
roundings, lost the character which the
Gadites, more favourably situated, were
enabled to preserve. And the distinotiong
of tribes, producing as they did a separate
esprit de corps in each tribe, will serve to
explain why one tribe did not immediately
succumb to influences which proved fatal to
another. In the end, as we know, all tbe
people of Grad fell victims to the temptations
which surrounded them, and, save in the
case of Levi, Judah, and Benjamin, and the
few faithful Israelites who went over to
them, irrevocably. The same phenomenon
may be observed in the history of nations
generally. As long as their manners were
simple and their morals pure, they have
preserved their liberty, and in many oases
have acquired empire. As soon as their
bodies were enervated by luxury, and their
minds corrupted by vice, they fell a prey to
foes whom formerly they would have de-
spised. Thus fell the Greek and Buman
republics, thus the Britons became an easy
prey to the Saxons, and the Saxons to the
Danes. In every instance the history of
a tribe and of a nation serves to illustrate
the maxim that "righteousness exalteth
a nation, but sin is • repraash to aay
people."

Yar- 29.— 'The balf-trlbe of Maaasstb.



The word used for "tribe " in the first and
second haU of this verse is not the same.
Some Gterman critics have derived an argu*
ment for the hypothesis that the historical
and geographical portions of the book are
not by the same hand, from the supposed
fact that the former of these words is used
almost exclusively in the first, or histori-
cal portion, and the latter in the second, or
geographical portion, of the book. The
word " almost " would be alrtwst sufficient
to overthrow the theory, but this verse ia
an insuperable objection to it. Is it seriously
contended that one half of this verse is taken
from one author, and the other from an-
other r Or is it possible that the writer of
the book may actually have understood the
language he was using, and meant to use
the two words in somewhat different senses f
Gesenius, it is true, would explain the words
as being precisely synonymous. But his own
etymological remarks are fatal to his theory.
ntSD the latter of the two words, is a hough,
or shoot (derived from a word signifying to
grow), capable of throwing out blossoms
(Ezek. vii. 10). It refers, therefore, to the
natural descent of the tribe from Manasseh

their father. But D3B' is allied to CSB' to
judge, and the Greek anfi-irTpov, and perhaps
the English shaft, and signifies a rod as tha
emblem of authority. Thus it is used in
Gen. xUz. 10, of a royal sceptre. So Fsa. ii.
9, an iron sceptre, Fsa. xlv. 6. Thus the
latter word has reference to the tribe as an
organised community, the former to it in
reference to its ancestral derivation. This
view would seem to be supported by ver. 24,
where the ilUO of Gad is further explained
to mean his sons and their families, as well
as by this verse, where the HDSlf is need
absolutely, the nOD in connection with the
family

Ver. 30. — The towns of Jalr. Literally,
Bavoth-Jair, as in Num. zxxii. 41 ; Deut.
iii. 14. The word KU ie derived from
nin to live, and the word is compared
by Gesenius to the names Eisleben and
the like in Germany. So we use the phrase
" live," as synonymous with " dwell." Why
the term is confined to these particulu
cities is not known. Gesenius regards it as
equivalent to " nomadic encampment." But
the mini ol the giant cities of Bashan,
recently re-discovered in our own time (by
Mr. O^dl Graham, in 1857), and displaying
all the signs of high civilisation, dispose of
this idea. These cities are mentioned in Deut.
iii. 4 as " threescore cities, all the region of
Argob," and again in ver. 13, "aU the region
of Axgob with all Bashan, whi(^ is called
the land of giants." " To the east he (Abra-
ham) would leaw the barren and craggy



THE BOOK Ot JOSHUA.



foH. xra. 1—33.



fatnesses of the formidable Aigob, Btill {i.e.,
in Abraham's time, not Joshua's) the
asylum of the fiercest outlaws ; and would
jealously avoid the heathen haunts in groves
and on high places where smoke arose to
the foul image, and the frantic dance swept
.round." (Tomkins, ' Studies on the Time of
Abraham,' p. 69. See also note on ' Judah
upon Jordan,' oh. xix. 34). Threescore
cities (of. oh. zvii. 1). It was the martial
onaracter, as well as the half - tribe of
'Manasseh, that qualified him to receive and
subdue this important territory with its wide
extent and teeming population. In the
article on Manasseh in Smith's * Dictionary
of the Bible,' reference is made to the fact
that, while Ephraim only sent 20,800, and
Western Manasseh 18,000, Beuben, Gad, and



Eastern Manasseh sent the immense nmn>
ber of 120,000, and this while Abner, the
supporter of Ishbosheth, had his head-quar-
ters at Mahanaim. But the numbers are
suspicious, especially when Judah, always a
powerful tribe, comes below the insignificant
tribe of Simeon in number. And a compari-
son of 2 Sam. t. 1 with 1 Ghron. xii. 22,
23, would lead to the idea that the corona-
tion of David after the death of Ishbosheth
is the event referred to (see also 1 Clu:on.
xii. 38—40).

Yer. 31. — ^Tbe one half of the children of
Machir. See this question fully discussed
in note on ch. xvii. 6, 6.

Yer. 32. — Moses (see Knm. zxii. 1 ; zxxiv.
16). Plains, Hebrew, Araboth (see ch. iii.
16.



1§:



HOMILBTICS.

Cbap. XIIT. — ^XIV. Ver. 5. — The allotment of the inheritanee. I. There ooubb a
TDIB WHEN WE MUST GIVE PLACE TO OTHERS. Joshua felt that his end was drawing
nigh, and most likely, since we are not told otherwise, as in the case of Moses, bis
natural force was abated. So with ourselves. We cannot expect to see the end of our
work. We ucitist do what God has set before us, and leave results to Him. Yet we,
nnlike Joshua, need not fear the failure of our efforts. The law could not make its
votaries perfect ; but the bringing in of a better hope did. In this later dispeiisation
no work shall altogether fail of its effect if done to God.

II. We must " SET OUB HOUSE nj OEDEB " BEFORE WB GO HENCE. ThoUgh

Joshua had to leave the completion of the task to others, he did not fail to put it in
train. So we, when we have begun a good work, are bound to make proper and
reasonable provision for its being carried on when God warns us that our time draws
nigh. We are not to expect God to work miracles where our own reason would
suffice. We must leave the result to God, but not until we have done all in our
power to procure the fulfilment of His will. We must leave proper directions
behind us to indicate what our vyishes are, and a proper organisation, so far as
possible, to carry out our purposes. We find nothing left to God in the Bible but
what is plainly beyond the reach of man.

III. God assigns to each uan his portion. In parcelling out the land of
Israel, Joshua is a type of Christ, " dividing to each man severally as He v?ilL"
The various powers and faculties we have, bodily, mental, spiritual, are given us by
God. Each one has his own proper share, according to the work God requires of
him. There must be no murmuring or disputing. 'The foot must not ask why he
is not the hand, nor the hand why he is not the head. Each has his own proper
portion of the good gifts of God, and according as he has so wiU it be required of
them. All murmurings were hushed in Israel because Joshua committed the
disposal of the inheritance to the Lord. We are equally bound to refrain from
discontent because it is clear that God has portioned out the gifts of the spiritual
Israel. One man has wealth, another strength, another intellect, another imagina-
tion, another wisdom, another energy, another power oyer others, or these various
gifts are apportioned in various degrees for God's ovm purposes. Let none flunk of
questioning the wisdom of the award.

IV. God's ministers are to be dependent upon their flocks foe support.
Such is the meaning of St. Paul when he speaks of the doable honour (no
doubt in a pecuniary sense, as we use the word " honorarium ") to be given to the
elders who rule well. In consequence of their special aptitude for the work, they
were to be teUeved from the burden of their own maintenance, that they mii^ ni



cnt. xra, 1—88.] THE BOOK OP JOSHUA. 311

able to devote more time to the Bupervision of the flock. Not necesearily that each
minister shoiild be maintained by his own flock, for he might be thereby deterred
from speaking faithfully to them in the name of Christ. We do not And that each
individual priest and Levite was maintained by some special synagogue of the Jews.
But they who ministered in holy things lived of the sacrifice nevertheless. The
oflerings made at the temple at Jerusalem formed a general fund out of which the
tribe of Levi was maintained, as its members went up by rotation to perform the
duties of their ofBce. And beside this, a proper number of cities was provided
them, with a share, most probably (see note on ch. xxi. 12), in the privileges of their
fellow-citizens, of the tribe to winch the land belonged. TMs ample provision for
the ministers vmder the old law is in striking contrast, save in some special
instances, to the provision made by Christians for their ministers now. A due
maintenance for their clergy was one of the special characteristics of the Jewish
religious system. According to the principles laid down by the apostles of Christ,
and always acted upon, save in some special instances, it was an equally marked
characteristic of the Christian Church.

v. Odd is the portion of His ministers. A great comfort for those who are
in straitened circumstances, as many are. They may remember the words, " I have
been young and now am old, yet saw I never the righteous forsaken, nor his seed
begging their bread." If they abstain from murmuring, rigidly adapt their expen-
diture to their means, careless of appearances, careful only_ to do right, they will
find their reward in God's love and favour. He will be in truth their portion.
Having food and raiment, they vidU be therewith content, for they wiU have abun-
dance of spiritual blessings, the reward of an approving conscience, and the respect
of all right-thinking men. Nor is the promise confined only to those who lack the
good tbmgs of this life, but it is given to those who, by God's disposition possessing
them, know bow to use them. All God's ministers who love and serve Him shall
have TTi-m as their portion, and they will treasure this above all earthly goods.
" They that fear Him lack nothing." The Lord is the strength of their liie, and
their portion for ever.



HOMILIES BY VAEIOUB AUTHOES.

Ver. 1, — Life endmg and, (he work not done. The rest of the land from war,
then (ch. xii. 23), was not that of final and completed victory. It was only a tempo-
rary ^ce. The whole land was not yet in the possession of Israel, but enough of
it was subdued to prove God's absolute sovereignty over it. And now rest is needful
to review the field and secure the ends that have been so far gained. Joshua is too
old any longer to carry on the strife, but there is a work that he can do, and which
must be done, before he is gathered to his fathers — the division of the land which
in the Divine purpose, if not as an accomplished &ot, is already Israel's inheritance.
Note here —

I. The honoured ending of a life of noble devotion to the sebvics of
God. There is no Divine approval of Joshua's fidelity actually expressed here, but
the spirit of it seems plainly to breathe through these words. It is as if God said
to him, " Thou art old ; thy work of life is done — done faithfully and weU^now
rest ; review thy path of service ; gather np the fruits of it ; set thy last seal to the
truth of My word of promise, and enter into thy reward." Old age has great dignity
and beauty in it when it crowns a Ufe of earnest practical godliness. " The hoary
head is a crown of glory, &c." (Prov. xvi. 81). Like the rich glow of autumn when
the fields have yielded their precious store to the hand of the reaper, and the song
of harvest-home is sung ; like the golden sunset closing a day of mingled brightness
and gloom, giving assurance of a glorious rising in the world beyond; such is the
halo that surrounds the head of one of God's veterans. Think of the moral gran-
deur of the Apostle Paul's position when, in view of his past life-work, and in
prospect of its eternal issues, he could say, " I am now ready to be offered, and the
time of my departure is at hand. I have fought a good fight," &C. (2 Tim. iv. 6 — 8).



822 TM lOOr OF JOSHUA. [oh. xin. 1—33.

Such honour, in their measure, have all thoBe who oonseerate their days with
■whole-hearted deTotion to the service of the Lord.

II. The failube of the lonqest and the noblest life completelt to
FULFIL ITS OWN HIGH AIMS. "There yet remaineth venr much land to b«
possessed." This is not said in reproach of Joshua. He had accomplished tha
work to which God had called him. But it reminds us that, however rich a human
life may be in the finiits of practical devotion, it is after all but a contribution
towards the full working out of the Divine purpose— small, feeble, fragmentary
indeed in comparison with the grandeur of God's providential plan. Great as may
be the victories it has achieved, it leaves " much land yet to be possessed." More-
over, the noblest spirit £dls to reach its own ideal, the most firnitfol life fails t<
realise its own aspirations. Human Ufe at the best i6 but a tale half told, a song
that dies away into silence when only a few timid notes have sounded. It is but a
beginning, in which the foundation is laid of works that it is left to other hands to
furnish, and purposes are bom that find elsewhere their actual unfolding. How
many a man m dying has had a painful sense of having fallen iax short, not only
of the diviner possibilities of his life, but even of the realisation of the hopes that
inspired Mm in his earlier years. There is always a touch of sadness in the autumn
gleam.

" The clonds that gather round the Betting son

So take a soher colouring from an eye

That bath kept watch o'er man's mortality ; "

because they, remind us of the brevity of our life-day, and reflect the vanishing
glory of so many of its fairest dreams. Full as it may have been of high
endeavour and grand achievement, how much remains undone I " There
remaineth yet very much land to be possessed." This is capable of many apphca-
tions. (1) As regards science. Marvellous as its progress has been, how many
undiscovered secrets has Nature still locked up in her bosom I (2) As regards the
practical uses of Kfe. God has made man " to have dominion over the works
of His hands ; " but what vast resources of the material world still remain un-
utilised in His service I (3) As regards personal spiritual development. The best
of us ML sadly short of the Scripture standard of character. When good men die,
how tax off stiU appears to them the goal of Divine perfection — like the horizon
that seems to recede and widen and become more unapproachably glorious as we
teach forth towards it. (4) As regards the progress and consum/mation of the
Jcingdom of Ood wmong men. Its triumphs thus far have been very wonderful,
but how much remains yet to be done 1 How far as yet are the kingdoms of this
world from having become " the kingdoms of our Lord and of His Christ " I How
small the circle of Ught as compared with the vast outiyiug realms of darkness I
comparatively few of those who profess the faith of Chnst, knowing anything of
the Uving power of it, two-thirds of the human race being still heathen.

IIL The steadfastness of the Divine fubfose, in spite of the decay, one after
another, of the instruments by which it is accomplished. Much land remains to be
possessed, and it shall he possessed though Joshua pass away from the scene of
conflict. " Them will I d/rive out from before the children of Israel (ver. 6). God
raises up men to take their particular part in His great work, some more prominent,
some less, but He is independent aUke of all The fall of His heroes on the field
of battle in no way checks the onward march of the great unseen Captain of the
host to final victory. All true leaders in the holy war point us, aUke in their life
and in their death, to Him whose presence is never withdrawn, whose years fail
not, whose eye never becomes dim, whose force is never abated. In following
their faith, and considering how their " conversation " ended, let us not forget
that "Jesus Christ is the same yesterday, and to-day, and for ever" (Heb. xiii.
7, 8).— W.

Yer. 1. — Old age, The most active servant of God may be overtaken by old age
before he has completed what he believes to be the ta^ of his l^e. Tl^ &ct
sqggests various refleotiops.



OR. xm. 1— 8S.] TBI BOOK OF JOSaUl. tU

I. The obeatnebs of duty and the limits or time tooetheb ubgs upon us
THE NEED FOB DiLiQENT SEBYiOE. (1) We must not postpoue the commencement
of work. Joshua began to serve God in his youth ; yet ms work was not finished
in his old age. (2) We must not be satisfied with any amount of work done.
Joshua had accomplished great things, but much remained undone. (3) We must
not be willing to work at intervals or with wastefulness of time. The work of life
is too great for the longest, most earnest hfe. Time is short ; the day of work wiU
Boon pass. " Work whUe it is day " (John ix. 4).

II. In God's sight that life is finished which has aooomplisbed all
'WITHIN ITS POWEB. Life is long enough for all that God requires of us. We may
not be able to do all we wish, all we set before ourselves, all that appears to b«
needed, all that we think it our duty to do. But God apportions our duty according
to our opportunities. Therefore in His eyes the broken, unfinished Me is really
finished if aU is done for which opportunities have been given.

III. God judges us bt faithfulness, not bt success. It is not they who
effect much, but they who serve truly, whom God accepts. We cannot command
success. The finishing of our work is not in our bands. We can be faithful
(Luke svi. 10).

IV. The unfinished eabthlt life is a pbofheot ov a futube life. Out
aspirations exceed our capacities. It is not simply that we desire the unattainable ;
but we are conscious of duties which reach beyond present opportunities, and of
possibilities within us which the limits of life prevent us firom developing. If God
is too wise to waste His gifts and too good to deceive His children, we may take
the broken life, and still more the incomplete life even of old age, as mute
prophecies of a larger life beyond.

Y. In the futube life thebe will be no old age. The pain of declining
powers, of insufficient time, and of all other limits of earthly fife wiU be gone.
Eternity wiQ give leisure for aU service. The eternal life wiU not grow old, but
flourish in perpetual youth.

VI. It is a i>eovidbntl4l blessing that obbat men should not be able

TO FINISH the WOBK THEY SET BEFOBE THEMSELVES. It Is Well that they should

leave work for smaller men. The necessity thus created becomes a stimulus to
others. When one falls, another is raised to continue his work (John iv. 37, 38).

VII. No MAN FULFILS EVEN SO MUCH OF LIFE'S WOKE AS COMES WITHIN HIS

POWEBS. At best we are unprofitable servants ; but we are all also negligent and
slothful. We have left undone many things which we ought to have done. None
of us can say with Christ, " It is finished." Therefore we should review our lives
with himulity, contrition, and repentance, seeking forgiveness for the failings of the
past and more grace for the duties of the future.

VIII. OhEIST'S work alone is THE GROUND OF ACCEPTANCE BY GOD. OtJT WOrk

16 unfinished. It is faulty for the negligence it proves. It can earn us nothing
on its own merits. Christ's work is finished. On this our faith can rest. Then
we may offer our own imperfect work to God through Christ, and He will trans-
form it for us by lifting it into the light of His merits, tiU it will be worthy as dust
shines like gold when the sunbeam passes through it. — W. F. A.

Vers. 2, 7. — The land allotted, though not yet secured. " There remaLueth yet
very much land to be possessed." " Now therefore divide this land for an inherit-
ance " — form a somewhat strange pair of precepts. It seems as if Joshua was
dividing what he had not got ; and as if Israel were casting lots rather for perils
than property. It is not quite so extreme as this. The point in the conquest was
reached when nowhere was there a resistance needing a nation in arms to quell it.
The several tribes were each strong enough to make good the conquest of their
several heritages. Tlie work of the nation as a nation was over. The work of each
tribe had now to begin. Still there is some of the grandeur of a Divine metiiod in
giving us something that still needs conquering ; enriching us with something for
which some fighting still requires to be done. Look at it.

I. God's oifts abb qenebaxxy HAiiF-BOLDiNa and half-hope. AU Ha impaita



S34 THE BOOK OP JOSHUA. [oh. xm. 1— 8S.

has this douhle character— it is always at once a possession and a responsibiliiy
His gifts resemble, say, a colonial estate needing to be cleared; a good house half
buUt — requiring to be finished before it can be used; a mine requiring to be
wrought. They are always of vast value to those who wiU develop their value ;
but of little to the indolent or timorous. For the same gift, accordingly, some will
be devoutly thankful, some thankless. Hebron, given to Caleb on condition oi
clearing out the Anakim, seems a fee simple, unencumbered, and he rejoices at hia
fortune. " The wood " still harbouring the enemy seems to Ephraim for a while at
least a doubtful possession. Some — the heroic — rejoiced with abounding gratitude
over God's gifts ; some — the indolent — deemed them so hopelessly encxuubered as
to be valueless. So that His gifts were great to the great-hearted, and little to the
mean-spirited. God's gifts are ever of this kind. He gives daily bread, but only
through the toil that wins it ; saving grace, but only on condition of repentance
and obedience which wiU use it. He gives not bags of either earthly or heavenly
gold, but chances, opportunities, potentiaUties. " A little strength and an open
door " gives the power of making our own blessed destinies, is God's usual gift to
all as well as the Church at Philadelphia. His grace is power to win character ; not
a certain pulp which, without effect, shapes itself into goodness; nay, it is some-
thing which we cannot keep except on the condition of getting more of it. The
land divided is, in great part, a land yet to be possessed. Observe secondly —

II. God's method is that op wisdom and of meeoy. His gifts would not be
blessings if action were needless for their improvement and enjoyment. That
would then be stagnation of our powers with consequent enfeeblement But the
gift of that which requires enterprise and action, developes aU qualities of strength,
vigour, courage, selt-denial, self-respect. Those who have no part in winning what
they get generally lack power to keep it. Each tribe held with a stronger hand
what it conquered for itself. The sense of possession was more secure, the enjoy,
ment of it more perfect. If God were to give dignities instead of duties, enjoyments
without responsibilities attached to them, how duU and earthly would His very
gifts make us. In His mercy He gives us " high callings," " new commandments,"
•' fights of faith to fight," and so developes all manUness and godliness. Do not
murmur that your bit of the land of promise can only be got, secured, and eiyo) ''d
by fighting ; it is the mercy of God that so orders it.

III. In counting our wealth we should always include the land kot te
possessed. GocVs Israel are always in this position. They have a little secure and
a grip of a great deal that needs still to be secured, but easily may be. " The good
I have not tasted yet " was rightly included in her list- of mercies by one of the
sweet singers of our own day. With others " a bird in the hand " may be worth
" two in the bush ; " with us, the " two in the bush " — being attainable — are to be
discounted as of far greater worth. Caleb was thankful for the hill of Hebron,
while yet the Anakim disputed its possession with him. Your land to be possessed
is yours by title, by promise, by the power given you to win it. Be thankfal for it
and take it. In your gratitude remember the victories you have still to win ;
attainments which you yet will make ; all the answers to your prayers that are on
their way to you ; the heavenly Canaan yon yet will gain. For, though not yet
" possessed," these are all yours by God's deed of gift, and we act wisely and
devoutly only when we discount God's promises as being absolutely true and certain
to be redeemed. — G.

Vers. 14, 88. — The inheritance of Levi, I, The teibb of Levi beceivbs ho
INHEKITANCB OP LAND. (1) They who devote themselves to the service of God must
be prepared to make earthly sacrifices. We cannot serve God and mammon. If
our service of God costs nothing it is worth nothing (Luke xiv. 88). Therefore
count the cost (Luke xiv. 28). (2) Earthly possessions distract our attention firom
heavenly service. Therefore it is hard for the rich to enter into the kingdom of
heaven (Luke xviii. 24). (3) It is right that they who have the care of souls should
be freed from the care of ea/rthly business.

II. The tbibe of Levi had its temporal wants adequately provided fob



OH. xm. 1—88.] THE BOOK OF JOSHUA. 228

(see verse 14). (1) They who serve at tlie altar have a right to live hy the altar
(1 Cor. ix. 7). This is (a) just (1 Cor. ix. H), (6) necessary for unhindered service,
and (c) not injurious to true devotion so long as the servant of God does not degrade
his vocation into a trade by working for money instead of receiving money that he
may have means for work. (2) In contributing to the support of God's servants we
are offering sacrifices to God. The sacrifices were the priests' and Levites' portion
(Deut. xviii. 1). We cannot benefit God by our gifts, but we can give to God
through His servants (Matt. xxv. 40). It is our duty to provide in temporal things
for those who minister to us in spiritual things. He who starves the ministers of
Christ is as guilty as if he starved their Master (Matt. xxv. 45).
■ III. The tkibe of Levi found its true inheeitancb in God. The sacrificial
gifts of the people were not its chief inheritance, but only the small necessary
earthly portion of what it waste receive. Its true heritage was spiritual. (1) The
Christian minister should not regard the earthly returns which he receives for his
service as his main reward. To do so is to commit the sin of simony. His real
reward is spiritual. (2) He who makes any sacrifice for God will be amply com-
pensated in Divine riches (Mark x. 29, 30). (3") It is belter to have Ood for om-
portion than any earthly inheritance (Psa. Ixxiii 26). To have God for an inherit-
ance ia (a) to enjoy communion with Him; (6) to be protected by Him.; (c) to
hve for His service. This is the best inheritance, because (a.) it is satisfying to the
soul, while the earthly inheritance is full of dissatisfaction, and can never supply
our greatest wants ; (6) it is eternal ; and (c) it is pure and lofty.

Note : In the Christian Church, though there is diversity of orders (Rom. xii,
6 — 8) there is no distinction of caste. All Christians are called to the altar of sacri-
fice (Heb. xiii. 10), all are to serve as priests of the temple (1 Pet. ii. 9), and all
should find their true inheritance in God (1 Pet. i. 4).— W. S. A.

Ver. 22. — The fate of Balaam. I. When spiritual gifts are used fob un-

spiEiTUAL PURPOSES THEY LOSE THEIR SPIRITUAL VALUE. In the Book of Numbers
Balaam appears as a prophet inspired by God. In the Book of Joshua he is only
named as a common soothsayer. All spiritual gifts, of insight, of power, of sym-
pathy, are worthy only so long as they are well used. As they become degraded
by evil uses they lose their Divine character and become mere talents of cleverness
and ability.

II. The ABUSE OF spiritual gifts for personal GAIN 18 A SIN WHICH CANNOT

GO UNPUNISHED. Balaam had sold his prophetic powers for money, consenting to
use them on the side of evil and falsehood. Now his sin has found him out. He
who receives great gifts incurs great responsibUity. No spiritual power is bestowed
for merely selfish uses. The greater the talents we abuse, the greater wUl be the
judgment we shall invoke.

III. The possession of spiritual gifts is no ground for the assurance of
PERSONAL salvation. Balaam had great gifts, yet he suffered the fate of the
heathen. Our privileges are no proof of a Divine favour which wUl overlook our
sins. Salvation comes not fi:om the gifts of the Spirit, but from the grace of God in
Christ. The least gifted has as good ground for salvation as the most highly en-
dowed. Pulpit power, the " gift of prayer," theological insight, and rehgious sus-
ceptibilities may all be found in a Chtistless life, &ud if so they will be of no avail
as grounds of merit in the day of judgment.

IV. The KNOWLEDGE OF THE TRUTH ONLY INOBEASES THE GUILT OF THOSE WHO

WILL NOT FOLLOW IT. Balaam knew the true God and the way of right. But not
hving according to his knowledge, his guilt was aggravated, and his doom certain.
It is worse than useless to know Christian truth unless we obey it (Jas. i. 22 — 24).
The faith in Christ which secures to us salvation is not the bare intellectual beUef
in the doctrines of redemption (Jas. ii. 19), but submissive trust and loyal obedieuoe
to Christ as both Lord and Saviour (Mark ii. 14). — W. f. A.

Ver. 22. — God is patient in the exercise of His justice as well as in His compag-
rions, for He is the Lord, with whom " a thousand years are as one day." He

JOSHUA. .



226 THE BOOK OF JOSHUA. [oh. xra, 1—33.



knows that His tlireatenings, lite His promises, cannot fail. Of this we have a
striking proof, both in the punishment which came upon Balaam, during the war
for the conciuest of Canaan, and in the blessing of Caleb.

I. For many years Balaam had been untrue to his own conscience, in going back
to the idolatries of Canaan, after having been made for one day the orgaji of
the most glorious oracles of the true God. He is thus an illustration of the truth
thai the baser passions of the heart, if not subdued, will always quench the clearest
light of the intellect. Balaam chose wittingly the evil part. He plunged again
into the corrupt practices of the heathen. For a long time it seemed to the eyes of
men, who judge only by the appearance, that he had made the right choice. Was
it not better to sit under his own vine and fig tree, and enjoy the riches heaped
upon him. by Balak, than to join the Israelites in their dreary desert pilgrimage,
beneath a blazing sky, and over the burning sand ? Had not Balaam acted wisely ?
Unquestionably he had if the rule of true philosophy be, " Let us eat and drink,
for to-morrow we die ; " that is to say, if God does not reign in righteousness for ever
and ever. But when the old soothsayer fell beneath the sword of those Israelites
whose warfare he had not been willing to share, he understood too late that it was
these despised people who had alone been wise, and that, in spite of all the light he
had received, he had lived and acted like a fool. How many are there now living
who recognise with their minds the truth of the gospel, but who are unwilling to
give tip their sinful indulgences, untU there rises upon them the terrible day of the
Lord. Happy those for whom this day of awakening comes before death, so that
they do not go down to the grave with their hearts made gross by m.erely material
prosperity, only to be aroused by the stroke of Divine retribution. Let us remember
the punishment of Balaam, which came surely, though it seemed to tarry, when
the prosperity of the wicked seems to us a stumbling-block.

II. The promises of God's love are not less faithful and sure than His threaten-
ings, though they also may seem slow of fulfilment. This is illustrated in the his-
tory of Caleb, who courageously served his people through a long hfetime, bringing
back a good report of the land garrisoned by the enemy, which Moses sent him to
explore. " Therefore Moses sware on that day, saying. Surely the land whereon
thy feet have trodden shall be thine inheritance and thy children's for ever, because
thou hast wholly followed the Lord thy God " (ver. 9). This promise was not for-
gotten. Caleb received, as an inheritance, that hiU of Hebron which was assured
to him in the name of the God whom he served. Thus the promises of God are
yea and amen. — E. de P.

Ver. 22. — Balaam. A study of pathetic interest ; one of the great " might-have-
beens " of the world. One capable of winning an immortal fame, but actually finding
only an immortal infamy. The Judas of the Old Testament : one traveUing on
the right road tiU within sight of heaven, and then turning aside to perdition.
Consider —

I. The greatness of the man. Evidently his position is one of great dignity
and influence. He has raised himself to priest-kingship among the Midianitish
tribes. He is considered to have such power in divination and forecast that he
is brought all the way from a city in Mesopotamia to the borders of Canaan to
" curse Israel." This reputation would lead you to expect to find him at least a
man possessed of great spiritual insight ; able at least to guess well concerning all
moral probabilities. He has, moreover, reached a clear knowledge of God ; has not
become entangled by any service of the lower deities whose degrading worship was
BO prevalent ; showing tliat he was a spiritually minded man, who had gone on and
on following the light which reached him, until that Ught exceeded that of
any one else among his people. His divination is no black art — carried on by
appeals to demons — but by pure sacrifices offered to the supreme God. He had
evidently been accustomed to ntter exactly what God imparted. Pleasant or
painful, what God sent him he said. And his honesty and courage are con-
spicuous in his actual declarations concerning IsraeL When we have put together
these qnaUties : spirituality sufficient to discover and serve the true God ; greai



CH. xm. 1—33.] THE BOOK 0¥ JOSHUA. 22T

strength of integrity; the keen perception which can discern the essential
differences and destinies of things ; the fear of God to which " the secret of the Lord
is always revealed " — you get a character of the first quahty, one that has in it the
making of a Moses or an Abraham, one who could and should have been one of
the grandest of the prophets of the Lord. If only he had reached the full develop-
ment of his spiritual powers, Midian might have been another Israel, for genera-
tions a source of highest good. Doubtless till middle life this course of high
righteousness, consecration to and communion with God had gone on. But
beginning well and running well, he falls at last into ignominy and shame. Mark —

II. The peocess of his fall. It must not be dated strictly from the temptation
before which he fell. There is always, or almost always, some declension before a
feU. No one falls into crime by one stumble. Can we trace the process ? The
writer of the Apocalypse, with his power of going straight to the mark, sums up in
one word: He loved the wages of iniquity ; not iniquity, but what iniquity could
give him. First the selling of his spiritual power was a declension. To seek
God's light in order to get man's money was an activity damaging to his con-
science. Whether it be the sale of masses, absolutions, indulgences, or oracles,
the vitiation is in each case the same. A seemingly slender line divides Samuel's
acceptance of an honorarium from Balaam's eager desire for it. But seeming alike,
they essentially differ. In Balaam's case the greed ^ot headway, and instead of the
prophet's simple acceptance of gifts as a means of hving, there was a valuing of aU
his spiritual powers and privileges only for their market value. [It is an awful
thing when a Christian minister values his creed and his experience only as a
means of making money.] Then hankering after money, he soon loses the fine
edge of honour. "When once God refused to give him leave to go with the
messengers of Balak, there should have been no re-opening of the question. But
so anxious is he for the " rewards of divination," that on their second embassy he
goes to God for a second time, for the chance of finding Him permit what He had
already refused. Declining to accept a reluctamt service, God at once permits and
punishes a less honourable course. Again and again he tries to get permission to
curse Israel, just in order to get gold. That desire to get a different hght from
what God has given him is degrading and demorahsing. Each dishonourable and
dishonouring attempt to get God's anathemas to hurl against a righteous nation
fails to hurt Israel, but t;erribly damages himself; until, hunting after some means
of possessing himself of Balak's gold, in the pursuit he falls down, and down in
degradation until, God refusing to inspire him with evil, his heart is ready to
welcome and iitter an inspiration from below. And his character is so disintegrated
in this hankering after money, that at last he gives the most diabohcal advice
that man could give ; viz., that instead of fighting Israel, they should endeavour to
corrupt them (Num. xxxi. 16). The licentious feasts, the heathen orgies are of
his counselling, and but for Phinehas might have been as disastrous to Israel as their
intent was diabolical. What a fall, from the level of highest character, influence,
and opportunity, down to the level of a Satanic crime. The love of money is daily
making wrecks equally disastrous and irreparable. Beware of it.

III. Lastly observe the retribution. Likely enough he got his reward, and
was for a moment as pleased as Achan. But had he satisfaction in it ? (1) Israel,
in whose future well-being he recognised the source of the world's best help, ia
crippled, degraded, weakened through his advice, and that would pain him. (2)
Midian is all but completely annihilated. All the males and most of the women
are slain (Num. xxxi.). (3) Balaam himself has but a short-lived enjoyment of
his wealth, for he also is slain (Num. xxxi. 8). (4) The loss of life probably
pained less than the everlasting infamy that made what hitherto had been an
honoured name a proverb for the vilest form of treacherous wickedness. These
penalties are obvious. In the world of spirits there must have been others more
serious still. May we fear dishonourable gold, as that which makes the heaviest
of all millstones to drown men in perdition 1 — G.

Yer. 81. — The border Tteep, " Machic was a ' man of war,' therefore he had



f28 THE BOOK OF JOSHUA. [oh. xm. 1—88.



GUead and Bashan." These cities include the group which form Bnch a BtriMng
Btronghold in the northern part of the land beyond Jordan. Mr. Porter, in his
* Giant Cities of Bashan,' has described the surprising strength of the architecture
of these cities — the failure of even three thousand years of change and wear to
render the houses unfit for habitation ; and has also described the strange forma-
tion of the district of Argob, rendering it a natural fortress of the most formidable
kiad. Here, by spRcial adaptation of place with people, this district is assigned to
the family of Machir. It was wisely so assigned, for through all the succeeding
generations the keeping of the frontier in this direction was well done. We may
gather one or two hints not altogether valueless from this assignment. Observe —

I. Machir has for his lot that which by his courage he had conquered.
From Num. xxxii. 89 we learn that, gigantic as were the inhabitants of
GUead, strong as was its cities, impregnable as its natural fortress seemed, the
children of Machir " took it," and dispossessed the Amorite that was in it. Now they
enjoy that which their unusual valour won. Like Caleb, whose daring made him
ask Hebron, even when it was in the hands of the enemy, they chose a diificult
spot, and conquering, inherited it. More than any other they had a right to this,
for their courage had conquered it. Your best inheritance will always be some
Oilead that you conquer for yourself. The truth you discover for youi-self wUl do
you most good. The experience you develop for yourseK will be your best guide.
Even the money you make for yourself will be that which you at once employ and
enjoy the best. Conquer what you want to have. By courage, diligence, enduring
hardness, achieve what you would Uke to keep.

II. "A MAN OP war" is the RIGHT MAN FOR FRONTIER DUTY. The JaCObs in

the middle ; the Bsaus are better on the borders of the land. The bravest should be
those nearest the foe. They who keep the gates of a kingdom should be those to
whom conflict has no terrors. Theologians that keep the frontiers of truth should
be brave. Timid Christians that think all the world is going to turn catholic or
infidel are not men for warfare on the border. Against assaults there should be
placed those who have been through all the fights of faith and unbeUef in their own
hearts, and who can bring a strenuous, cheerful energy to the task of fighting for the
truth. Those strong enough to expect a perpetual victory of truth are tliose alone
fit to deal with the assaiilts of error. Ministers of religion, keeping the frontier
between the Church and the world, should be in a good sense men of war ; on their
guard against encroachment of worldliness ; strong esough to brave opposition and
to be above the seductions of the flattery which a compromising spuit may win
from the world ; strong enough to keep out the intrusions of the secular spirit in all
its forms of caste-feeUng, of cold-hearteduess, of indifference to the perishing ;
strong enough to carry the war into the enemy's country, and secure by extending
the kingdom of Christ. On all frontiers there is need of vigour. Wherever the
enemy is near, set what is bravest and stoutest in you to watch. The pugnacious
element in our nature is very valuable — if it operates in GUead. There is deficiency
of it too often ; and too often where it is, it is just in some position where it quarrels
with its friends instead of with the temptations and the wrongs and the
difficulties which are its proper foes. For frontier- work of aU kinds, courage is the
prime qualification. Lastly —

III. There is no citadel like a fortress won from the enemy. What he won
was his reward, but it was something more. It was the best stronghold he could
have against the enemy. The conquered fortress makes the best defence. The vigour
enough to win it grows stronger and becomes the power to keep it. A victory is
always a point of strength and a stronghold conquered, a vantage ground against
the foe. The Church differs from all other communities in this, that she is never
weaker by extension; each new conquest gives her a better frontier; every GUead
Bubduod becomes a new hne of defence, making her more impregnable against
attack. By God's blessing, conquer a rebellious heart and subdue it to Him, and
it becomes a fortified post from which you can assail or defend more powerfully
than before. Graces that are easily gained are easily lost. But those that are
won with ajrdnous difficulty are invariaibly much more wcurely held. None keep



ea. xw. 1—16.]



THE BOOK OP JOSatTA.



iS3



troth like those who have lousht hard to get it. l^jne are more generous than
those who have fought hard with selfish tendencies within them. None keep
elevation of thought and feeling more persistently than t.ioae who have reached
it by crucifying the flesh. A coniiuered temptation ia a grand fortress in which
you are stronger to resist seduction than ever bofore. A grief conquered by faith
becomes a quiet resting-place, and one secure against all assaults of despair. Keep
making daily some conquest, and so you will perfectly secure all that you have
won. — Q,



EXPOSITION.



OHAPTEB XIV. 1—16.



Ver. 1. — Tribes. The word here for
"tribes," in conneotiou with the word
" fathers," is the one which iiiipliea ge-
nealogical descent (see note ou ch. xiii.
29). ELeazar tlie priest, and Joaliua
the son of Nun, and tlie heads of
the fathers of the trlhes. A picture of
national unity; the head oi the Church,
representing the religious aspect of the
community ; the head of the State, repre-
senting its civil aspect ; the heads of the
tribes, to signify the general assent of the
body politic. A work so begun was likely
to be satisfactorily carried out. And ac-
cordingly the distribution of the land,
recognised as carried out according to the
wiU of God, displayed no partiahty, and
excited no jealousies.

Ver. 2. — By lot was their tnherltanoe.
The commentators, following the Eabbis,
have amused themselves by speculations how
the lot was taken. The question is of no great
practical importance; but no doubt the
contrivance was a very primitive one, as

the word PpW a small pebble, used here,
seems to imply. What is of more import-
ance is the fact that the distribution of
territory was the result of no one's caprice,
or ambition, or intrigue. The whole matter
was referred to God, and the leader of the
Israelitish hosts and the high priest pre-
sided over the ceremony. It was a common
belief among the GentUea, as well as the
Jews, that the use of the lot was to refer
.the matter to a Divine decision. So we read
in the Proverbs, ' ' The lot is cast into the lap,
but the whole disposing thereof is of the
Lord " (Prov. xvi. 33; cf. xviii. 18). It is
a strong evidence for the truth of this nar-
rative that we read of no conflicts between
the various tribes respecting the division of
territory. Jealousies sprung up between the
tribes, as the narratives in Judg. viii., ix.,
zii. ; 2 Sam. xix. 43, are sufficient to show.
But in no one qase was there any complaint
of unfairness, any attempt to disturb the
territorial arrangement made at the time of
the oijgiual settlement in Palestine. There



can be Uttle doubt that KeU is right in sup-
posing this original division to have been in
outHne merely. It is obvious from the on-
ward course of the narrative (especially ch.
xviii.) that no very minute accuracy in detail
could possibly have been arrived at. The
country was roughly mapped out at first,
and the complete adjustment of boundaiiea
was a matter which would naturaUy be put
ofl until the land were actually in possession.

Ver. 4.— For the children of Joseph were
two trlhes (see Gen. xlviii. 5) : therefore they
gave. There is no " therefore " In the
original. The passage is a simple repetition
of what we find in ch. xiii. 14, 33, and ia
added here to explain how the twelve tribes
who actually divided the land were com-
posed. Suburhs. Bather, " pasture lands ; "
literally, places where the cattle were driven
out to pasture (of. Num. xxxv. 2 ; 1 Chron.
xiii. 2, where the Hebrew is " cities of
driving out "). We may illustrate this
phrase by the similar arrangements made
by the Germanic tribes in early times.
" The clearing," says Professor Stubbs, in
his ' Constitutional History of England,' p.
49, " is surrounded by a thick border of wood
or waste, , . . In the centre of the clear-
ing the village is placed. . . . The fully
qualified freeman has a share in the laud
of the community. He has a right to the
enjoyment of the woods, the pastures, the
meadow and the arable land of the mark.
. . . The use of the meadow land is deli-
nitely apportioned. . . . When the grass
begins to grow the cattle are driven out,
and the meadow is fenced round and
divided into as many equal shares as there
are mark-famiUes in the village. For the
arable land similar measures are taken,
although the task is somewhat more com-
plex " (see note on ch. xiii. 23). Some
similar arrangement must have taken place
in the primitive Jewish settlement of Pales-
tine. For the rude huts of the Teutonic
tribes we must substitute the more civilised
" cities, walled up to heaven," of the Phoe-
nician races ; for the scanty supply of gram
and pasture, provided by a northern chmate,
we must substitute the rich plenty of a land



280



THE BOOK OP JOSHUA.



[CH. XIY. 1 — 16.



" Bowing with milk and honey," and with
all the produce of a southern sky. The
area of land assigned to each of the Le-
vitical cities was definitely marked out (see
Num. XXXV. 4, 5), and subdivided, as the
hints in the narrative seem to imply that
»11 the land was, into as many sections as
there were " mark-families " — that is,
families of freemen exclusive of the servile
classes in the town.

Ver. 6.— In Gilgal (see oh. ix. 6). Caleb
the eon of Jephuuueh the Eeuezlte. Or,
descendant of Kenaz, as was his kinsman
Othniel. As far as we can make out from
the genealogy in 1 Chron. ii, Caleb and
Kenaz were family names, for the Caleb
or Calubi (1 Chron. ii. 9) the son of Hezron

il Chron. ii. 18), the Caleb the son of Hur
1 Chron. ii. 50), and Caleb the son of Je>
phunneh (1 Chron. iv. 15), could not have
been the same persons. And Caleb was a
Kenezite, or descendant of Eenaz ; he had a
grandson, apparently, of that name (so the
LXX. and Vulgate translate, 1 Chron. iv. 15),
and a brother, according to the most prob-
able rendering of the Hebrew of both ch. xv.
17 and Judg. i. 9. See also 1 Chron. iv. 13.
For Caleb was the son of Jephuimeh, not
of Kenaz. Hitzig, 'Gesohichte des Volkes
Israel,' i. 105, thinks that Caleb was a de-
scendant of the Kenaz mentioned in Gen.
xxxvl 11 ; or, see 15. Some think he was
a Kenizzite (see Gen. xv. 19). The Bishop
of Bath and Wells, in his article in Smith's
'Dictionary of the Bible,' thinks that the
view that he was not of Jewish origin agrees
best with the Scripture narrative, and re-
moves many difficulties regarding the
number of the children of Israel at the
Exodus. It certainly serves to explain why
the tribe of Judah came with Caleb, when
he preferred his request, and the statement
in ch. XV, 13, which seems to imply that
Caleb was not one of the tribe of Judah by
birth, but one of the "mixed multitude"
that went up with the Israehtes (Exod. xii.
38), and acquired afterwards by circumcision
the rights of Israehtes. If this be the case,
it is an illustration of the truth declared in
Eom. ii. 28, 29 ; iv. 12 ; Gal, iii. 7. By his
faithfulness to God he had well earned the
reward which he now sought. Concerning
me and thee. And yet Enobel asserts that,
according to vers. 8 and 12, Joshua was not
one of the spies 1 He accordingly sees the
hand of the " Jehovist " here. So accurate
is the criticism which pretends to be able to
disintegrate the narratives in the Hebrew
Scriptures, and to assign each part to its
•eparate author (see Num. liv. 24). As
well might we conclude that this verse
in Num. xiv. is by a different hand to vers.
30 and 88 in the same chapter, in spite of



the obvious coherence of the whole narra-
tive.

Ver. 7. — Forty years old. The Hebrew
expression is "the son of forty years."
Compare the expressions " son of man,"
" sons of Belial," " son of the perverse re.
bellious woman." As it was In my heart.
Literally, according as with my heart, i.e.,
in agreement with what I saw and felt. The
LXX. reads "according to his mind," i.e.,
that of Moses. Houbigant and Le Clero
approve of this reading, but it seems quite
out of keeping with the character of Caleb.
He did not endeavour to accommodate his
report to the wishes of any man, but gave
what he himself believed tp be a true and
faithful account of what he had seen and
heard (see Num. xiii. 30; xiv. 7 — 9; Deut.
i. 36).

Ver. 8. — But I wholly followed. Literally,
"I fulfilled after." That is to say, he
rendered a full obedience to the precepts of
the Most High. So also in the next verse.

Ver. 9. — And Moses sware on that day
(cf. Num. xiv. 21—24; Deut. i. 35, 36).
KeU raises the difficulty that in the above
passage not Moses, but God is said to have
sworn, and that no special inheritance is
promised to Caleb, but only that he shall
enter the promised land. But this is not
the fact, as a comparison of this passage
with Deut. i. 36 will show. That either
passage gives the ipsissima verba of Moses is
unlikely. The main sense of the promise
is given in each. And there is no im-
propriety in speaking of the proclamation
by Moses of God's decree as an oath pro-
nounced by Moses himself.

Ver. 10. — Forty and five years. This
marks the date of the present conversation
as occurring seven years after the invasion.
Caleb was forty years of age when he went
to spy the land of Canaan. For thirty-
eight years the Israehtes wandered in the
wildemess. And Caleb was now eighty-five
years old. This remark has been made as
far back as the time of Theodoret. Doubt-
less the apportionment of the land, and its
occupation by the Israelites, was a long and
tedious business (see also ch. xiii, 1). Even
since. Literally, from the time when.

Ver. 11. — ^As yet am I as strong this day.
A vigorous and respected old age is or-
dinarily, by Nature's own law, the decreed
reward for a virtuous youth and a temperate
manhood. Caleb's devotion to God's service
had preserved him from the sins as well as
from the faithlessness and murmuring of
the Israehtes. And thus, with a body not
enfeebled by indulgence, he presents himself
before Joshua with undiminished strength,
at a time when most men are sinking nndei
the weight of their infirmities, and is ready



CH. XIV. 1—16.]



THE BOOK OF JOSHUA.



231



still for battle with the most foimiclable
foes.

Ver. 12. — This mouutain. The neigh-
bourhood of Hebron is described by Bartlett
' Egypt to Palestine,' p. 401, as "a region
of Wlls and valleys." In one of the hollows
in this " hiU country of Judsea " Hebron
Btill nestles, but at a height which (see
Stanley, ' Sinai and Palestine,' p. 102) is
"only 400 feet lower than HelvelljTi,"
the highest point but one in England.
The Dean remarks on the fact that Pales-
tine was a mountainous country, and that
therefore in its history we may expect
the characteristics of a mountain people.
Whereof the Lord spake In that day. There
must therefore have been a promise made
to Caleb, regarding which the Pentateuch,
having to deal with matters of more general
interest, is silent, that he should lead the
forlorn hope, as it were, of the children of
Israel, and that the task of subduing the
mountain fastnesses of the most powerful
tribes in Palestine should be assigned to
him. That the original inhabitants re-
oooupied the districts round Hebron, while
the Israelites were otherwise engaged, we
have already seen (see note on ch. xi. 21).
The final work was to be carried out by
Caleb. Houbigant, it is true, thinks that
here the same incident is referred to as in
oh. xi. 21, 22, and that Joshua is there
credited with what was done by Caleb at his
command. But we read that that expedition
followed close upon the battle of Merom,
whereas seven years elapsed before the final
expulsion of the AnaMm by Caleb. It is
important to notice that the author of the
Book of Joshua has access to sources of
information beside the Pentateuch. This,
though not suf&cient to disprove, does at
least seem inconsistent with the " Elohist "
and " Jehovist " theory. For thou heardest
In that day. The LXX. and Vulgate avoid
the difficulty here by referring these words
to what goes before — i.e., the promise made
to Caleb. In that case we must render the
Becond '? "for," instead of "that," or
" how." Joshua can hardly have heard for
the fii'st time that the Anakim were in
Hebron if, as Num. xiii. 22 appears to
assert, he, in common with the other spies,
had visited the place. But it is possible,
though the narrative as it stands seems to



suggest that they went together, that th«
spies went different ways, either separately
or in pairs, and that Caleb visited Hebron,
and that Joshua heard the account of it
for the first time from Caleb's lips, as tbey
brought their report to Moses, and that
Caleb then asked and received the grant of
Hebron. We may observe the minute agree-
ment here in matters of detail between the
Pentateuch and the Book of Joshua. The
Pentateuch states that the spies visited
Hebron. The Book of Joshua, without
mentioning this, makes Caleb appeal to
Joshua as a witness that a promise had been
made to him, long before the entrance ol
Israel into the promised land, that this par-
ticular place should be allotted to him.
The description of Hebron also in Num.
xiii. agrees in every respect with what is
stated here. Fenced. Literally, inaccessible,
as surrounded by walls. If so be. Bather,
perliaps.

Ver. 14. — He wholly followed (see above,
ver. 8).

Ver. 15. — And the name of Hebron before
was Klrjath-arba. Hengstenberg, according
to KeU, has conclusively shown that Hebron
was the original name of the city. At the
time of Joshua's invasion, however, it wa«
known as Kirjath (or " the city of ") Arba,
from a giant named Arba who had con-
quered the city. Hebron is known as
Eirjath-arba in Gen xxiii. 2, but the way iu
which it is mentioned by Moses seems to
bear out Hengstenberg's theory. TheEabbis
translated " the city of four," and assert
that the four patriarchs, Adam, Abraham,
Isaac, and Jacob, were buried there. The
word translated " man " here is Adam.
The Vulgate follows this tradition, trans-
lating " Adam maximus ibi inter Enacim
situs est." And our own Wiclif literally
translates the Vulgate " Adam moost greet
there in the loond of Enachym was set."
Eosenmiiller renders the words translated
"a great man" by "the greatest man."
And certainly the words have the article;
and this is also the way in which the super-
lative is expressed in Hebrew. It also adds
to the force of Caleb's request. He desired
the most important city of a warlike race.
And the land had rest from war (sea
ch. xi. 23).



H0MILETIC8.

Vers. 6 — 15. — Caleb's faithfulness and its reward. The history of Caleb
seems to have a special fascination for the sacred historian. We read of him here,
and in the next diapter, and in Judg. i. Whether this were due to his bravery,
hi* sincerity, his hale and hearty old age, or (see note on ver. 6} his foreign extraotiop.



tSt THE BOOK OV JOSStTA. [<«. «*• 1—16



coupled with his zeal for his adopted country and tribe, or from the combination of
all these, it is not necessary to decide. Sufficient to remark (1) that he was beloved
by the people ; and (2) that he was a favourite character in the inspired Jewish
history.

I. The BEAVi; man wins respect. This is sure to be the case in the long run.
He may be accused of rashness, want of judgment, intemperance of language or of
purpose ; but in the end he secures the confidence and attachment of aU. The
lesson is especially needed in the present age. One of its most marked charac-
teristics is moral cowardice (as even John Stuart Mill has remarked). Men are
incapable, for the most part, of incurring the disapprobation of the set in which they
live. Politicians vole with their party for measures of which they disapprove.
People in society dare not raise their voices against what passes current in their
own coterie ; they yield to practices, admit persons to their intimacy of which and
whom, in their own better judgment, they disapprove. They dare not brave the
unfavourable verdict of their acquaintance. Yet if they did they would lose
nothing by it. Even the careless and thoughtless respect fearlessness, and dehght
to honour the man who dares to say what he thinks. They may condemn at first,
but in the end they come round to a sounder judgment. History continually
repeats itself. The history of Caleb is the history of every man who is honest in
setting himself above the prevaOing opinions of the day. His report was unpopular
at first. The people sympathised with the cowardly ten. But events demon-
strated the correctness of his view, and he became a popular hero. His tribe came
with him to support his request, and if he were not of Israelite origin this incident
makes the moral still more clear.

II. Wb should always speak the teuth. Caleb brought word according to
what his heart told him. He sought neither to say what Moses would wish, nor
what would be palatable to the people. What he thought, that he said. And this
IB one of the results of a heart devoted to God. Caleb " wholly followed " Him,
and thus he had that sincerity and integrity which is the result of single-minded-
ness. AU Christians, and especially God's ministers, should learn to shun the fear
or favour of man, but everywhere and always to " declare the whole counsel of
God." As we have seen, we do not thereby lose the favour we have not sought.
Because we have not asked for it (1 Kings ui. 11), we have it. But this is not to
be taken into consideration. Those who " whoUy foUow the Lord their God " will
be men who never fail to speak according to the dictates of the regenerate heart.

III. The righteous shall not fail of his kewabd. Moses had sworn to
Caleb that he should have the land for his inheritance of which he had brought so
true a report (no doulit, see notes, the spies went diverse ways). And now, after
years of hardship and toil, he gained it. So has Christ promised a reward to them
who seek Him. Tliey must join their brethren in the toil; they must ever be
foremost in the conflict, and they may be sure that their Joshua will give them
an everlasting inheritance in the mount of God.

IV. The bewaed that the righteous seeks. Observe that Caleb does no!
seek a rich nor easy inheritance, but one full of danger. The Anakim, defeated
over and over again, still lurked in the inaccessible recesses of the hill country, and
tlieir giant strength, protected as it was by the fortifications of these mountain
fastnesses, made it a task of the utmost danger to dislodge them. This task-the
gallant old warrior asks for himself. " Let me," he says, " inherit the stronghold
of the Anakim. Let me have the city of their chief" (see notes). Such a man wafl
St. Paul. His reward was the having preached the gospel without charge (1 Cor.
ix. 18). He desires no other. And so the true Christian, he who " whoUy follows "
Christ, wOl desire as his reward the privilege only of being allowed to do and dare
all for Him.

y. There is a reward foe the godly in this world. Even the laws of the physical
universe have provided a reward for virtue. A temperate life secures a hearty old
age. The spectacle of Caleb, as ready for war at eighty-five as he had been forty-
five years previously, may be a rare one now with our luxurious habits. But the
prmoiple holds good that men who live hard, work hard, and abstain from all over-



tm. xtr. 1-16.] THE BOOK OF JOSHtTA. ««



indulgence in their appetites, will as a rule preserve their physical vigour to an
advanced age. This is a gospel which may not be very palatable to the sons of
luxury, but it is true nevertheless. Common sense and Christianity are ever really
alhed, however much a narrow view of the former may seem to conflict with the
latter. Luxury, sloth, excessive indulgence even in permitted pleasures, are fatal
to the body as to the souL Even the weakly may retain their energies to old age
by care and self-restraint. The sti-ongest man will sink into an early grave_ who
deems such things unnecessary. So true is it that " Godhneas has the promise of
the life that now is " as well as of " that which is to come " (1 Tim. iv. 8). _

VI. The true secret of success. Caleb (see ch. xv. 14 — 17) did not fail in his
dangerous undertaking. But it was because he said, " if the Lord be with me." So is
it always in our undertakings. He that is sure he shall resist temptation, because
he is confident in himself, will find his confidence fail him in the day of trial. He
vho trusts in the Lord only, wOl emerge a conqueror from the struggle. In all
things our support and trust must be in Him. If we purpose a thing in our hearts
it must be " if the Lord will " (James iv. 13—15). If we have done anything by
His help we must say, " Not unto us, O Lord, but unto Thy name be the praise "
(Psa. cxv. 1). Had Caleb reUed upon his unabated strength, or on his undaunted
courage, he would have fared as Israel before Ai. But since he relied on the Lord
his God, the three sons of Anak could not stand before him; the stronghold of Debir
must needs open its gates to his daughter's suitor.



HOMILIES BY VABIOUS AUTHOKS.

Vers. 1 — 6. — The allotment of the tribes. This record of the division of the land
among the tribes is suggestive of principles that are capable of a wider and more
general application, and also of one that is narrower and more individual. Note —

I. The Divine Providence that determines the sphere and surroundings
OP ALL HUMAN LIFE. This is indicated in the division being made by lot. What-
ever the form of the lot may have been, its meaning was that the destination of
each particular tribe should not be a matter of human judgment or caprice, but
should be left with God. It was no mere reference of the issue to blind chance.
The faith of the age was too simple and real for that. Joshua and the elders had
too deep a sense of the presence and guidance of the living God. We pass from this
mere tribal allocation to think how the same law holds good for all the nations of
the world. St. Paul showed his freedom of spirit from the Umitations of Jewish
prejudice when he declared to the Athenians how God, having made of one blood
all nations to dwell on all the face of the earth, " determined for them the times
before appointed and the bounds of their habitation " (Acts xvii. 26). Christianity
reveals a God who is the Father of all mankind, and not of one particular people.
The true patriotism is that wliich acknowleges God's interest alike in aU. the
nations, and teaches us to cherish and use the gifts He has conferred specially on
our own country for the common good. Again : the Providence that determines
the lot of the nations has the same control over the individual hwman life. Every
man's position in* the world is in some sense the fulfilment of a Divine purpose. It
may seem to be the result merely of the fortuitous commingling of circumstance, or
the capricious drift of man's own choice. But we do well to see through all out-
ward appearances the sovereign hand that guides the course of circumstances and
determines the issue. It is God, after all, who chooses our inheritance for us.
" The lot is cast into the lap, but the whole disposing thereof is of the Lord "
(Prov. xvi. 38). The recognition of the Divine Providence that is over us hag
many beneficial moral effects. (1) It gives the sanctity of a higher meaning to life,
(2) provokes to thankfulness, (3) rebukes discontent and distrust, (4) restrains
inordinate ambition, (5) teaches that respect for the rights and interests of others on
which the order and well-being of society depend.

II. The human agency by which the purpose of Divine Providence ib
FULFILLED. The land is divided according to the will of God. but the people muat



234 THE BOOK OF JOSHUA. [oH. HT. 1—18.

go in and possess it for themselves. God will drive out the Canaanitea that are still
there, not without them, but ^' from before them " (oh. xiii. 6). The decision of the
lot seems to have had reference only to the general local situation of the tribes ; the
actual extent of the territory in each case was left to be determined by the discretion
of Joshua and the leaders. There was no caprice in this Divine decision. Nothing
God does is arbitrary or reasonless. It was, no doubt, determined according to the
peculiar characteristics of each particular tribe, and in such a way as that its geogra-
phical conditions should be best fitted to develop its latent powers. Important
practical lessons are suggested. (1) However devoutly we may recognise the Divine
Providence that is over us, we have to determine for ourselves the path of duty.
(2) The circumstances of life place possibOities of good within our reach, which it
remains for ourselves to actuahse. (3) Every man's life in this world supplies the
needful conditions of moral education, if he have but wisdom to discern and skill to
improve them.

III. The sepaeatbness of those who are speciallt devoted to spiritual
WORK IN THE WORLD. This is indicated by the peculiar position of the tribe of Levi.
To them was given no inheritance, " save cities to dwell in with their suburbs.'
" The sacrifices of the Lord God made by fire " (as also tithes and first-fruits)
" were their inheritance " (ch, liii. 14). " The Lord God of Israel Himself was the
lot of their inheritance" (ch. xiii. 83; Num. xviii. 20 — 24). Their position thus
bore witness to the sanctity of the whole nation as " a kingdom of priests " unto the
Lord (Exod. xix. 6). They were the representatives of its faith and the ministers
of its worship. And their representative character was made the more effective by
the fact of their cities being scattered throughout the tribes (ch. xxi.). This principle
of separateness is illustrated — (1) In the various provisions by which the sanctity of
the priesthood was maintained under the economy of the law. (2) In the New Testa-
ment institution of a certain order of men who should be set apart — not, indeed,
as a hierarchy to whom mystic powers belong, but as the ministers of spiritnal in-
struction and edification to tlie Church of God (Eph. iv. H, 12, 13; 1 Cor. ix.
13, 14). (3) In the Apostolic teaching as to the unworldliness of spirit and hfe
that becomes the foUowers of Christ (Phil. iii. 20 ; CoL iiL 1, 2, 3 ; Heb. x. 34 {
1 Peter ii. 9).— W.

Ver. 2. — Inheritamce by lot. While the trans-Jordajiio tribes chose their own
inheritance, the nine-and-a-half tribes submitted to the distribution by lot, and thus
signified their desire to have their possession chosen for them by God. Submission
to the lot was a sign of good qualities which we may well imitate, although altered
circumstances and fuller hght make it our duty to show them in other ways.

I. Belief in Providence. The Jew believed that God superintended the lot
(Prov. xvi. 83). If there be Providence there can be no chance. The word
" chance " describes the appearance of events to us : it is indicative of our ignorance.
A perfect providential care will guide the smallest events (Matt. x. 29).

II. Submission to the will of God. These tribes resigned the choice of their
possession to God, and were willing to take whatever He assigned them. We are
not free to take our destinies into our own hands. We are God's servants, God's
children. Dutiful obedience implies submission to God's will in the shaping of our
Uves (1 Sam. iii. 18).

III. Trust in the wisdom and goodness op God. The submission was fearless
and trustful. We often shrink from God's will even while we bow to it. We
submit sadly as to some painful necessity. We should say, " Thy will be done,"
not with dread and sorrow, but with confidence and hope ; making the utterance
not merely a reluctant concession, but an earnest prayer, because God's vpill is best
for us. It is best that He should " choose our inheritance for us," because (1) He
knows all the character of the inheritance — we only its superficial aspects. (2) He
knows future events — we only present appearances. (3) He knows our true needs
— we our foolish desires. (4) He knows our best life's mission — we our selfish aims.
Lot suffered by choosing his own inheritence (1 Gen. xiii. 11).

IV. Faibness and asNEBOSiTY IN business ABBANaEMEMig. Ihose vIm



CH. XIV. 1—16.] THE BOOK OF JOSHUA. flW

submitted to the lot did not choose the best for themselves. They allowed a
division which was fair for aU. In business we are too selfish and grasping. The
principle of competition should jdeld to the principle of co-operation. It is wicked
for the able and clever to grow rich by taking advantage of the weakness and
incapacity of those with whom they transact business (PhiL ii. 4). In the end the
individual gains by the exercise of such generosity and fairness as promotes the
welfare of the whole community. " We are members one of another." If one
suffer all suffer (1 Cor. xii. 26). This is not only Christian morality, it is the
highest truth of political economy. Before concluding we must look at a question
suggested by this subject, viz.. Are we right and wise in resorting to the lot in the
present day ? We have no Divine authority for the present use of it We have
other means of learning God's will. We live under a dispensation of fuller hght.
Decision by lot corresponds to rule by law — it is authoritative, requiring blind
obedience. Cbriatianity opens our eyes to principles of conduct and io principles of
Providence. If God now guides us in other ways, we have no right to suppose that
He will so direct the lot as to signify His will thereby. To resort to this is to fall
back on lower means of guidance. It often implies both indolence and superstition.
— W. F. A.

Vers. 6 — 15.— Caleb. L The oharacteb of Caleb. {}) .Independence. He
and Joshua had stood alone in the almost universal panic. It is difficult to discern
the right and be faithful to it when aU around us go wrong. The sanction of the
multitude is no justification for an evil course. Truth and right are often with the
minority (Matt. vii. 13, 14). (2) Truth. Caleb says, " I brought him word again
as it was in mine heart." We are tempted to hide our convictions when they are
unpopular. The true man speaks what is in " his heart," not the mere echo of the
voice of the multitude (Acts iv. 19, 20). (3) Courage. Caleb had advocated the
course which seemed to be most dangerous. He is now wiUing to receive for
inheritance a possession from which he wUl have to expel the Anakims (ver. 12).
Courage is a form of unselfishness and a finiit of devotion to duty. (4) Unselfishness.
Though Caleb had shared with Joshua the honour of being faithful and brave in
the day of general failure, he has' lived quietly ever since, seeking no peculiar
honour, and now the brave old man asks for inheritance a mountain region infested
with hordes of the fiercest Canaanites, and offers to conquer it for himself. Like
Lot, we commonly choose the pleasant places, and are greedy of much reward for
little service. Caleb thinks himself no martyr. It is happy to have the humihty
and unselfishness which not only ask for httle but are satisfied with little. (5)
Whole-hearted devotion to God (ver. 8). This is the secret of Caleb's character.
Devotion to God makes us independent of men, true in the light of His searching
eye, brave with trust in His help, and unselfish in obedience to His will Half-
hearted devotion fails of this. We must serve God wholly if we would grow strong
and true and brave.

II. The ebwahd of Caleb. (1) Long life. He and Joshua were the sole
survivors of the Jews who escaped from Egypt. The cowards perish. The brave
are spared. For us the corresponding blessing is not long earthly life but eternal
spiritual life. (2) Continued strength and opportunity for service. His strength
remains (ver. 11). His inheritance makes new claims on his courage and energy
(ver. 12). The lot of greatest comfort is not the lot of highest honour. The best
reward is renewed ability to serve (Matt. xxv. 23). (3) A possession, the adoantagea
of which he had long since discerned. Caleb and Joshua had stood alone in
opposing the unbelief of the people in prospect of the promised land. Now their
position is justified. The reward of sohtkry defenders of the truth will come in the
ultimate triumph of it. Those who now best appreciate the heavenly inheritance
wiU enjoy it best hereafter. (4) Best. The land had rest, and Caleb must have
shared the rest. The rest of heaven will be sweetest to those who have toiled and
borne most on earth. — W. F. A.

Ver. 8. — " I wholly followed the Lord my Ood," I. Teub reliqion is based 0|



388 THE BOOK OP JOSStJA. [en. xtt. 1-18.

PERSONAL RELATIONS WITH GoD. Caleb asciibea his courage and fidelity to his
connection with God, and he speaks of the Lord as "my God." (1) Religion is
individual. We must pass from " our " God to " my " God. Each soul is called
to as private communion with God as if there were no other souls in existence.
(2) Religion establishes close relations with God. In His personal deahngs with
the soul God comes near to it, so that He appropriates the soul and the soul lays
claim to possessing God.

II. Right personal relations with God will be shown by our followino
Him. It is not sufficient that we believe, worship, manifest affection. We must
show our devotion by a consistent course of life. (1) This is to seek to be near to
God, love and duty drawing us Godward. (2) It is to obey His commands, follow-
ing the course of His wUL (3) It is to emulate His example — trying to do as He
does {Matt. v. 48). Christianity consists in following Christ (Mark i. 17, 18).

III. We only follow God aright when we follow Him wholly. We can-
not serve God and mammon. We must choose whom we will serve. Half-hearted
service is no true service. Following God wholly implies (1) not desisting from
service on account of loss or trouble incurred ; (2) taking no account of the opinion
and conduct of other men when these would deflect us from fidehty to God ; (3)
serving God in all the relations of life, business, social, domestic, and private.

IV. Undivided devotion to God is necessary fob success in His work.
We see how thoroughness and singleness of aim are essential to success in secular
pursuits — in business, science, art, literature. They are not less essential in spiritual
things. Much of our work fails for lack of thoroughness. Hesitating belief, divided
aims, mingled motives, often render religious efforts weak and futile. We need to
be more perfectly devoted, giving ourselves wholly to God's service (1 Tim. iv. 15).

-W. F. A.

Ver. 6 — 14. — Galeb amd his inheritance. Caleb is one of those Scripture cha-
racters in whom we feel a personal interest not measured by the amount of historical
information given us respecting him. Scanty as the materials are, they present us
with a moral portrait very real and life-like and full of dignity. AU that we know
of him is greatly to his honour. The more so if, as some say, he was of Idimisean
rather than Israehtish origin, adopted rather than bom into the tribe of Judah,
The courage and fidelity he displayed when, as -o of the spies, he dared, with
Joshua, to counsel the craven-hearted people to 3 in and possess the land (Num.
xiii. 30 ; xiv. 6, 10 ; Deut. i. 36), are illustrated again now that almost another half-
century has passed. The old man has stdl the same spirit in him. While some of
the tribes are so slow to move that Joshua has occasion to rebuke them for their
lethargy (ch. xvui. 3), he is eager to secure at once his promised inheritance, defying
in the strength of God the formidable sons of Anak. In several lights Caleb appears
before us here as a worthy example. We see in him —

I. An honest spirit, forming a truu estimate of its own virtues and
capacities. He recounts with honourable pride the doings and distinctions of the
past — how he had been faithful to his own convictions in his report of the land, not
following the evil example of the other spies, or fearing the anger of the people ;
how Moses had honoured him, and the vigour of which he was conscious even "this
day " was his Divine reward. There is no vain boasting here. His gratefU recog-
nition of God disproves that. It is the fi:ank acknowledgment of an honest mind.
The true heart is conscious of its own integrity and need never shrink from avowing
it. It is well that experience of the happy effects of fidehty to the path of duty
should be recorded for the encouragement of others. There are times when we
may properly " thank God that we are not as other men are." This may be done
in the spirit of profoundest lowliness and self- distrust. Self-depreciation is often
but a mock-humility. We honour ourselves and God when we duly estimate the
worth of the moral qualities with which He has endowed us and the moral victories
He has enabled us to win. Let no man " think more highly of himself than he
ought to think," but at least let him " think soberly, according as God has dealt to
him the measure of &ith " (Bom. xiL 8). Recognise the Divme origin of every



OH. XIV. 1—16.] THE BOOK OF JOSHUA. 237

»

virtue yon possess, and it will never make you vain ; be true to yourself and to yoni
noblest impulses, and you find in yourself an unfailing source of satisfaction and
rejoicing (Prov.' xiv. 14 ; Gal. vi. 3, 4).

II. A BRAVE SPIRIT GATHEEINO FROM THE MEMORY OF THE PAST AN INCENTIVE TO

NEW ENDEAVOUR. There was a moral unity in Caleb's life. He had obeyed the
voice of conscience and discharged manfully the sacred responsibility that was
imposed on him forty-five years ago, and now he feels the recoUeotion to be stimu-
lating and strengthening to him. He has been lost to us through all the interme-
diate time, but we may be sure that his Ufe in the desert, as a leader of the great
tribe of Judah, had sustained the reputation of early days. And the daunt! 03S
spirit of his old age is but the result of habitual fidelity to thfi call of duty and of
Go4 Such is the moral continuity of our life. So true is it that —

" Qui deeds still travel ■with us from afar,
And what we have been makes us what we are."

Every victory of our better nature over the power of meaner motives lays the
foundation for fiirther and completer victories. Even the memory of it becomes an
inspiration and a strength to us. The fruit of it is seen after many days. Accustom
yourself to do the right and to " follow wholly " the path the Lord your God marks
out, and there shall be stored up within you a fund of strength that will enable you
to look calmly in the face of the most formidable difl&oulties — to storm the strong-
holds of the Anakims and "drive them out."

III. A DEVOUT SPIRIT LEANING ON GOD FOR THE FULFILMENT OF HiS OWN PRO-
MISE. We gather from ver. 9 that God had given Caleb a distinct promise of the
possession of that mountain in addition to the general promise recorded in Num.
xiv. 24. To the apprehension of faith every Divine word is a living seed that must
one day bring forth the fruition of its own fulfilment, and the mercies of the past
are pledges of future help and benediction. — W.

Ver. 8. — Personal influence. Assuredly no Israelite could look without emotion
upon the face and form of Caleb, the utterer of the words of the text. His very
existence was a memorial of a memorable day. And when he arose and stood
before Joshua, and the two engaged in the conversation recorded in this chapter,
who could note them without recollecting that out of the laymen of Israel they were
the only survivors of the generation to which they belonged ? Like venerable
towers that rear their heads above the building which is attached to them but
plainly bears the marks of more recent construction, these two men stood an age
above their surroundings, but with strength as unyielding as that of their latest
compeers. Time and sickness had levelled their contemporaries with the dust,
but they remained " with eye undimmed and natural force unabated." God bad
kept His threat and promise. Caleb's utterance may suggest some useful refleo-
tions.

I. The facility with which men are deterred from noble enterprises.
What a lamentable incident was that to which these words refer : " My brethren
that were with me made the heart of the people melt." Eecall the story of the
twelve men and their reconnoitring expedition. They searched the south of
Palestine, and admired the fruit which grew there in such abundance ; but the
hearts of the majority were terrified at the sight of fenced cities and tlie giants who
inhabited them. And so when they i-eturned to their brethren they gave such a
discouraging account that the people cried, ' ' Would to God we had died in Egypt I "
Caleb tried to stiU their mumuring, but in vain. The cowardly spirit prevailed.
Apparently fear is more easily engendered than hope. It is easier to depress than
to cheer. How many religious undertakings have failed through the excessive
eaution of even good men ? It is noteworthy that in the account which Moses
gives in Deut. i. 21 he refers to the fact that on the arrival of the Israelites at
Kadesh he exhorted them to " go up and possess the land : fear not." Well would
it have been if they had acted on the bold counsel of their leader. But they oama



238 THE BOOK OF JOSHUA. [oH. xir \l—U



near and suggested wtat seemed an exceedingly wise plan — to send men first to
spy out the land — and dire was the ultimate effect t We do not inculcate rashness ;
we only say that courage is sometimes better than caution, and quick action than
Blow resolves. We need a holy enthusiasm that will minimise dangers and make
us " strong in faith."

II. The danger of exeeting an evil influenob. Great responsibility rested
on the men who were the means of damping the ardour of their countrymen.
Whilst they themselves died of the plague, the rest of the people were condemned
to forty years' weary traversing of the desert. So fierce was the wrath of God at
the unbelief of the Israelites. This gift of influence God has bestowed on every
person. We all wield this power to a greater or less extent. We may repel or
attract, and in either case we are helping to mould the opinions and form the prac-
tices of our neighbours. We direct their aspirations and colour the spectacles
through which they look at men and things. Is our life-report for good or for evil ?

III. The secubity against wielding and yielding to an evil influence.
It is to be noted that Caleb did not seek to persuade his fellows to renounce the
idea of invading the Holy Land, and also did not allow himself so to be persuaded
by them. He gives us in the text the reason which swayed bim and the power
which sustained him in opposition to the fears of the other IsraeHtes : " I wholly
followed the Lord my God." There might be times in which the mind would be
left in suspense as to the proper course to pursue, in which the chief difficulty
would be in ascertaining the will of Heaven. But on this occasion there seemed
to Caleb but one thing to be done. Precepts and promises clearly showed that it
was the duty and privilege of the Israelites to march to tie possession of their
inheritance. The path wfl5 plainly marked ; to hesitate was to turn aside from
following the Lord. Unswerving obedience to Ood's declared will is the grand
security against iU-conduct. All that we read of Caleb proves him to have been a
man of strong determination. Whatever he did he did with his might. There is
a deal of meaning in that word " wholly." A man whose face is partly to God and
partly to the world may have his attention distracted, but he who maintains an
attitude that has respect to God only will remain uninfluenced by either thehopes
and fears or the blandishments and threats of men. Urge the necessity and help-
fulness of taking a decided step, of becoming openly connected with Qod's people,
of avowing an attachment to Christ. Some may raise a difiSculty in the way of
imitating Caleb's whole-heartedness. This man was gifted with force of character.
Now an objector may say, " I by nature am weak, irresolute, easily moved. Why
am I blamed if I do not manifest that firmness which others display ? " This
inquiry runs into a fundamental problem — ^the reason of the election of men to
different degrees of intellectual and moral ability, and the different degrees of
accountability resulting therefrom. We cannot well separate the direct gifts of
God from the achievements of the individual. We are bound to honour men even
for what they owe entirely to God, since the honour reaches higher than men and
is laid as an offering before the Throne. But what we must remember is that we
are capable of acquiring qualifications which we previously lacked, and we may to
a wonderful degree strengthen and improve the powers with which we axe
endowed. — A

Ver. 12. — The Anakvma. I. We have "Anakims" in oue inheritancb.
Some of the highest blessings are fenced about with the_greatest diflBculties. 1. No
earthly inheritance is without its peculiar disadvantages. Some of the " Anakims "
which resist us in our efforts to fulfil our mission are (a), the evil in our own heart,
e.g., indolence, fear, earthhness ; (6) the temptations of the world, arising from bad
examples, customs, distracting pleasures ; (c) direct hindrance in persecution and
opposition growing out of the world's ignorance, prejudice, envy, &c. 2. Neverthe-
less it is best for us, as it was for Caleb, to have such an inheritance. Difficulties
{a) try our faith and courage ; (6) give scope for energy and devotion ; (c) make the
ultimate peace the more blessed. 8. Apply these truths (a) to private life ; (6) to
Church work and the difficulties in evangeUsing the world ; (c) to pubUo interests,



OH. XIV. 1-16.] THE BOOK OF JOSHUA. IM

and the hiwirances to the work of high-principled statesmen and philanthroplBts
which stay the progress of liberty, civilisation, and national prosperity.

II. We have means fok overcoming the " Anakims." 1. God with us. This
fact is Caleb's ground of confidence. God does not only approve of the right ; He
aids it. He does not merely send assistance for the battle of life ; He is present as
the light to guide and the power to etrengthen. Caleb had faith in the real and
active presence of God. 2. Brave effort. Caleb says, " I shall be able to drive
them out." He names God's help first as indispensable ; but he does not stay with
this. God's grace is no excuse for man's indolence. God fights for us by fighting
in us. Ours is the effort, while His is the strength. True faith in God wiU not
paralyse our energies, but inspire them ; because it wiU show us (a) that, while the
victory will not be given unless we fight, when we fight in the strength of God
omnipotence is on our side ; (6) and that God then assures us of victory, and that as
He is faithful we may be confident of it. Caleb is confident that with God's help
he will drive out the Anakims, because this is " as the Lord said."— W. R A.

Ver. 12. — Caleb's inheritance. But little comparatively is said in the sacred
writings concenaing Caleb. What is recorded is decidedly in his favour. He
stands before us as a model of unbending integrity. Selected fi:om among the
princes of Judah to be one of the twelve appointed to search the land of Canaan, he
remained stedfast in his adlierence to the will of God. Neither the remembrance
of the giant sons of Anak and their fortified towns, nor the passionate waitings of
his brethren, could make Caleb falter and falsify the report he had to give, and the
recommendation he desired to make. For this he received the praise of Jehovah,
and the promise that, not only should he be preserved to enter the land of Palestine,
but also that the very part of the country concerning which some had given an
unfavourable report should be allotted to him as his portion. Forty-five years had
passed. The wilderness was fuU of graves.. Joshua had succeeded Moses as leader
of the Israelites ; had overthrown in pitched battles the chief nations of Canaan ; it
was time to distribute to the tribes their inheritance. The partition was made in
the first instance by lot. Then the arrangements for families were made by com-
missioners, and, as one of these, Caleb might have seized the city he desired. But,
avoiding all suspicion of unfairness, he came with the children of Judah publicly to
offer his petition. The text presents us therefore with —

I. A BEQUEST FOB THE FULFILMENT OF A PBOMiSB. " Give me this mountain
whereof the Lord spake in that day." As God's representative Joshua is desired
to see that the ancient oath is not made void. The declaration of God wotdd not
remain without effect, yet observe the manner in which it was to be accomplished,
viz., by the petition of the man to whom the declaration was granted. Caleb set a
high value on the promise of Ood. Lightly would he have treated it had he
allowed it to rest uncherished in his thoughts. God loves to see His people
appreciate what He has offered to bestow. He has given " exceeding great and
precious promises," and yet " will be inquired of" to do it for them. Our duty is
clear. To lay hold of the announcements of His Word and ground on them our
requests. Sm-ely the reason why multitudes never pray is that they think little of
the blessings promised to those that ask. We need quickened memories. Are the
Scriptures to be empty volumes or fuU of Kfe and power ? The Bible may be
our charter ; ttie will of our Father bequeathing rich portions in this world and the
world to come ; our catalogue of precious furniture that may be had to adorn the
household of saints. How many things we have never asked for or claimed as our
own ! Graces to beautify, gifts to enrich for evermore. " AU Scripture is given
that the man of God may be perfect, thoroughly furnished unto all good works."
Mam, is expected to do his part even in the obtaining of a privilege. Some think,
" If we are to be saved we shall be." Caleb might have thought similarly, and
neglected to make his request, and gone without his portion. God requires men to
use then* reasoning powers, to examine the evidences of rehgion, to repent and
behove in Christ — ^yes, to ask for the adoption that shall make them menobers of
His family.



MO THE BOOK OF JOSHUA. [ch. xrr. 1— IS,

II. A EEWAED SOUGHT LITTLE TO BE DESIRED IN THE EYES OF SOME. Hebron

was a large city, a royal city, but the Burroundiiig bOls were the fastnesses of
giants, who must be attacked and driven away. Before the owner could settle
down on the estate he must dislodge the former proprietors. No easy conquest
was to be anticipated, yet the courageous soldier said, " Give me this mountain.
Others may choose quiet resting-places, let me go to the high places of the field."
Is there not here om example worthy of imitation f Who will be the advanced
guard of the Christian army to attack the fortresses of Sin and Satan ? An
infusion of Caleb's spirit would do much to reconcile us to what we mourn over
as the ha/rdships of ov/r lot. We should take a different view and regard them aa
our reward, increasing the honour put upon us by God. One man has to struggle
in business against fearful odds, another is plagued by a wretched temper, a third
is sorely tempted to murmur under a heavy bereavement. God intends these
various trials as discipline and as honours. The troubles are the Anakim, who
m.ust be cheerfully, bravely encountered. How deep-felt will be the joy of triumph !
No soldier ought to lament when placed by God in the forefront of the battle.
When Jesus drew near His hour of suffering He exclaimed, " Now is the Son of
man glorified." Caleb beUeved that special power had been, given for special worTc.
He appealed to facts as indicative of Jehovah's intention respecting him. Not for
indolence had he been " kept alive these forty and five years," and his strength
preserved, his strength " for war both to go out and to come in " (vers. 10, 11).
This principle admits of wide application. The gifts of God are various. To one
is granted money, that institutions may be supported and enterprises commenced.
To another the power of speech, that he may " speak to the people all the words of
this life." To another a persuasive manner, a winning snule, the grace of hos-
pitality. These are so many talents of which the Master wiLL exact an account.
Nor wQl the question turn so much on actual accomplishment as on the ratio
of abilities to results.

III. An ACKNOWLEDGMENT OP DEPENDENCE UPON THE HELP OF GoD. His

speech would sound like the utterance of self-confidence and presumption did there
not run through it a tone of devout thanksgiving, which removes the charge o<
boastfolness and reveals the source of his assurance. The Lord had kept him
aUve, and if the Lord were with him he would soon drive out the giants from their
strongholds. When David essayed to fight the Philistine he reasoned from past
experience. " The Lord that dehvered me . . . bear, will deliver me from . . .
PhUistine." The same succour is assured to all Christian warriors. We want this
mingled dependence and confidence. " If God be for us, who can be against us ? "
The commission, " Go therefore, preach the gospel to all nations," was preceded
by the announcement, " All power is given unto Me in heaven and in earth." Can
we complain of tribulation and distress? " Nay, in aU these things we are more
than conquerors;" tfiey do but heighten the viotory we gain, " through Him that
loved VB," — ^A.

Ver. 18. — A true man. Consider Caleb — ^the companion of Joshua in early
enterprise, constant faithfulness. Divine reward. From the epithet Kenazite, con-
stantly applied to him; the fact that one of the "dukes of Edom" bears the
name Kenaz ; and the expression, " Unto Caleb he gave a part a/mong the children
of Judah" (ch. iv. 13), which suggests that though settled amongst them he was
not really of them, many have, with considerable probabihty, concluded that
(laleb was a proselyte. One of those who, like Heber the Kenite, threw in his lot
with Israel — ^perhaps a Midianitish youth who attached himself to Moses — and by
force of faith, energy, and wisdom commended himself for any service of special
difiiculty. Whatever his origin, he was one of the twelve prominent men chosen
to survey the land and report on the best method of invasion. The result of that
expedition was, unfortunately, a unanimous testimony to the excellence of the land,
but an aH-but unanimous testimony to the impossibihty of taking it. Ten out of twelve
declared its conquest impossible. Two only — Caleb and Joshua — asserted its prac-
ticability. They were too brave and too believing to yield to despair. They



OH. XIV. 1—16.] THE BOOK OF JOSHUA, 241

reckoned on more than natural probabilitieB, argning, " The Lord ia with us ; and
their defence is departed from them." But overborne by the numbers of those on
the other side, and by the unbehef of the crowd, they can only grieve over what
they cannot avert. And Israel turns back to the wilderness — where the carcases
of aU the grown men except these two faU before they next approach to Canaan.
Now he re-appears after the conquest of the land to ask the fulfilment of the
promise made by Moses to him. This district of Hebron was consecrated by early
recollections of Abraham. The Amorites, though driven out from the city tempo-
rarily, are still in possession of the mountains about Hebron. FuU of the old
heroic fire, Caleb asks for a land still in the hands of enemies. Joshua grants it,
and the Lord gives it him. And the land which saw his courage became his inherit-
ance for generations. Let us consider a few features of this story in Numbem
xiii. and xiv., and Joshua xiv. and xv.

I. First ojjserve— There is need fob good men in suboedinatk as well as
IN EXALTED STATION. Caleb IS not over all Israel, not even prince of Judah. Only
a spy — he is a man of eminence, but not of the highest. He fills a humbler place
which some would have thought not worth while adorning. But, in addition to
integrity and service in those at the head of the State, you want righteousness and
courage throughout all classes of it. Had they had twelve Calebs for spies the land
would have been theirs forty years before it was. As it was, the heroism of Caleb
and Joshua was not wasted. Their testimony remained, inspiring wanderings ;
round it the purpose of the nation crystallised. Their testimony of the possibility,
of conquering Canaan, helped to create the possibility. Their faith was a leaven that
took forty years to do it, but ultimately leavened the whole lump. In whatever
station we be, remember, there is need for faith, energy, and service, and there is
reward for the exercise of these in the lowly as well as in the lofty sphere.

II. Secondly observe — Godliness begets manliness of the noblest kind.
"What a charm there is in manlinesa, in its vigour, its honesty, in its fortitude and
daring. What worth is in the manliness that dares to differ from friends as well
as to defy foes. The happy union of strength and spirit, which knows not fear nor
halting. Besides the charm and worth, there is great joy in it as well. It feels no
dread or dismay. It enjoys the leisure of the lofty nature, and its quickening self-
respect. " Add to your faith manliness," says Peter. Courage to avow and to
obey your faith. Most failures in conduct are preceded by failures in courage. To
face duty as weU as danger requires hardihood of spirit. Now observe the magni-
ficent manliness of Caleb. It gleams through his report as a spy. It is apparent
in this choice of the as yet unconquered territory. It comes out in the energy of his
old age. And this simple quality in one man was of incalculable service to IsraeL
"We aU need this quahty, men and women.

" Our doubts are traitors,
And make us lose the good we oft might win,
By fearing to attempt."

More manliness would mean less falsehood, less failure, less wretchedness of anwe
hension, more enterprise and grand success. And godliness begets it For eodli
ness gives larger thought greater dignity, scope for grand purposes, consciousness
of help laid up m aU providential law and processes. By communion with God man
attains calmness, wisdom, strength, and help. Neither David nor Elijah was less
manly, but more so, for bemg devout. If you would form a list of the kingUest men vou
wUl be sunirised how many of the godliest are m it. John Knox and Luther amongst
teachers, CromweU and Wilham the Silent among statesmen, Sir Philip Sidnevand
Henry Havelock among soldiers. We are short of manliness because sliori; of
godhness. n religion ever enervates a naan, or withers him, it is a superstitious
and not the genume thmg. Nelson said his Methodists were his best saUors Let
the young note this. Godhness does not enfeeble, it enlarges every essential element
of manhood.

III. Thirdly observe-THE great rewards of consecration. That manliness was
Its own magnificent reward, as it produced an expansion of nature, which would b«



t*i THE BOOK OF JOSHUA. [ch. xiv. 1—18.



immortal. But there were besides, special rewards, (a) Accurate light. Good judg-
ment grew from it. Knowledge of the possible, a grand self-measurement, ia which
no vanity exaggerated nor dismay diminished powers marked him. " A good under-
standing have all they that love Thy law." Walk with God and the light in wliich
you walk will illumine common as well as sacred things. (6) Providential mercies
attend him. With Joshua, he is only man who has length of days sufficiently
given him to lead from Egypt to Canaan. Natural influences of devotion tend to
preserve Ufa, and they were in his case intensified by special providence. It may
be said with all reverence and truth devotion saves numberless lives by preserving
men from worry, folly, brooding, and needless quarrelling. God never fails to
get His seal on goodness. " Corruption vrins not more than honesty." (c) Justice
is done him in the judgment of his fellows. When he protested against the evil
report of the other spies the people " sought to stone him with stones." But now
bU the princes of Judah are proud to come with him to support his prayer ! He has
the opportunity of justifying himself and his report, and he does it grandly, (d) The

PLACE WHERE HIS FAITH TRIUMPHED OVEE PEAR BECOMES THE PLACE OF HIS IN-
HERITANCE. He behoved Hebron could be won. He has Uberty to win it and
permission to keep it for himself when it is won. It had fallen to his lot to survey
that district especially, and although three tribes of giants were there, yet he was fear-
less. That fastness against which his valour would have led his brethren becomes hia
own possession. Not only his in title and grant, but his in possession. Is there
not something typical here ? AU things that threaten and oppose become service-
able when we face them bravely. That which threatens to destroy becomes a
quiet resting-place and peaceable habitation. The enemies become the sei-vants,
the hindrances the helps, terrors change to fountains of refreshment. Let us be
braver, refusing to despair, and refusing to shrink from difficulty. The same
Saviour rules now as then, calls us to noble, and therefore difficult, duties. There
are lots of children of Anak still ; fear them, and you doom yourself to wilderness
wanderings and a dishonourable grave. Meet them, and you conquer them easily.
Shame and reproach for Christ are children of Anak ; the fear of falling is another ;
a corrupting taste and an indolent inclination is another. Christ has grand
rewards and blessed helps for such as face these. As to Caleb, so always. He gives
liltimate inheritance and present rewards. Let us not miss these, but seek to secure
them with all our heart. — G.

Ver. 15. — "And the land had rest from war." Beat from war. L Best prom
WAR IS ONE OP THE GREATEST EARTHLY BLESSINGS. Even if War bo a necessity it
is a fearful necessity. Barely are the advantages of a successful war equal to the
cost of it. Best from war affords occasion (1) for the undisturbed enjoyment of the
finiits of the earth and unbroken social and domestic life ; (2) for the practice of
peaceful works — the cultivation of science, art, and literature ; (3) for progress in
political institutions and the development of civiHsation ; (4) for the extension of
Benevolent efforts and of the missionary work of the Church. Therefore peace
should be sought for in prayer and enjoyed with gratitude.

II. Universal rest from war will be one op the chief fruits op the
TRIUMPH OF THE GOSPEL. Christ is the Prince of Peace. The Messianic age is
prophetically described as an age of peace (Isa. xi. 6 — 9 ; Luke iL 14). We must
look to Christianity for the means of abohshing war, because this only can conquer
(1) the injustice, (2) the ambition, and (3) the unruly passions which are the causes
of most wars. War can only cease when right and justice are respected by nations
and the brotherhood of all mankind is universally recognised. These are moral
conditions. Education, trade conventions, political schemes wiU not produce them.
They are the highest fiiiits of Christian principle.

III. Spiritual rest from inward warfare is secured to the Christian by
Christ. (1) The Christian must first fight against indweUing sin, temptation, the
evil of tne world (1 Tim. vL 12). Earth is our battle-field ; heaven our Canaan of
rest. (2) The Christian wiU be aided by Christ fighting for biTn and in him. Jesus
ii the New Testament Joshiia. He hfia conquered the great enemy. He is the



CH. xiT. 1—15.] THE BOOK OF JOSHUA. 341

aonroe of His people's strength for that inward battle which all must fight. (8) By
the grace of Christ the Christian will ultimately enjoy " rest from war." This ia

Eromise (a) for the individual Christian in heaven' (Heb. iv. 9), (b) for the whole
nman family at the time of the complete triumph of Christ (Isa. ii. 4). — ^W. F. A.

Ver. 1. — Peasant proprietorship. The land of Canaan is divided not amongst
nobility and gentry, but amongst the people. Each family has its httle farm-
probably averaging about ten acres. Divided equally amongst the people, tlje
Mosaic law expressly forbade its alienation in perpetuity from any family. The
jubilee year was ordained in order that twice in a centm-y any too great inequalities
of condition which had crept in might be redressed ; that every family which,
through misfortune or even fault, had fallen out of property, might regain their land,
and with it the means of maintenance for their families. In that jubilee year his
freedom reverted to the slave, and his family heritage to bim who had fallen into
poverty. There was no injustice, for the value of the land was assessed in the case
of every sale as that of a leasehold having so many years to run. Every tus and
every religious charge upon the land similarly varied, according as the jubilee year
was near or distant None hurt by this system ; numerous and incalculable advan-
tages arose from it. It prevented the rise of a feudal aristocracy, with the inevitable
degradation of the poor. It put Israel in the best of aU conditions for developing
self-respect in the individual. Its equality was a school for liberty. It averted
many of the most prolific causes of poverty. It diffused a homely comfort through-
out all the land. It made the well-being of the State a matter of vital interest to
every citizen, giving each able-bodied man a " stake in the country." It made
Israel a model commonwealth, where the land was the home of all, and all classes
without envy and without arrogance enjoyed the gifts of God in fairly even distribu-
tion. Observe —

I. The grounds of such a plan or distbibuiion. The first " idea " lying at
the root of this distribution of land is, that land is, unUke all other property,
not proper to he the possession in perpetuity of any holder. The land is like the
air of heaven, hke the rain and the sunshine, like the fisheries of the sea, meant to
be a common blessing for all, rather than the private good of any. Its productive-
ness is due to Nature's chemistry as much as to man's art. What man has no part
in producing, he has no title to possess, and therefore no man can legitimately
possess himself, to the exclusion of others, of that Divine part of the earth's fruit-
fulness. Accordingly, the theory of Moses is, that God is the great and only
landlord ; none having more than life interests in the land. Every fifty years it all
was to fall into His hands again. Under God the land belonged to the nation, and
the jubilee year permitted it to be so divided that aU the famihes of the nation
would enjoy it with a rough equality. A second idea lying at the base of this legis-
lation was, that great wealth and great poverty were both of them great evils, to be
prevented at any cost. The evils of poverty are obvious. Insufficient food,
physical degeneracy, the development of a servile and dependent spirit ; or of a
reckless, turbulent spirit, that in its haste to relieve its himger is apt to overthrow
the State. Strife of classes inevitably springs from it. There is a poveity the result
of indolence, which the law wisely would not attempt to prevent ; and one the
result of accidents, which it was impossible to foresee, and so provide against. But
every State should, direct its first and most patient attention to poverty produced by
law ; for that is generally the worst kind of all, as well as being a very general kind.
And wealth corrupts equally with poverty. Wealth is full of fears, and fear
begets tyranny and injustice. Too much is good for no one. The body is weakened
by being pampered, the mind by want of constant occupation, the character by the
softness that comes flrom the absence of struggle with difficulties. Ignorance of
many of the iUs of life begets hard-heartedness, and destroys the finer sympathies.
The presence of great wealth and great poverty, side by side, intensifies the mis-
chiefs of each, and becomes one of the greatest perils that any community has to
«ontend with. The law of Moses, and the carrying out of it by Joshua, was thus
directed to prevent the develo|)ment of the two great evUs of modern civilisation—



244 THE BOOK OF JOSHUA. [oh, xiv. 1—16.

eieessive wealth and excessive poverty. A third idea, lying at the foundation of
this legislation, was that the equaUty of the citizens is the condition most favourable
to the weU-being of the State. All exaggerated differences of condition tend to
divide and ahenate classes, depriving the land in some degree of oo-operation in
enterprise, in defence of liberties, in practice of rehgion. Joshua aimed not at a
stagnant cammunism, which would rob hfe of its energy, but yet of a brotherly
state in which aU would have a fair chance of comfort, and none an unfair chance
of inordinate wealth. In the present circumstances of our country the land legisla-
tion of Moses is especially worthy of our study. We differ from Israel in one
important condition — England fiuds the chief part of her national wealth, not in
agriculture, but in manufactures and in commerce. This fact has made land laws,
such as every other civilised nation has abolished, tolerable here. But even for
England, and stUl more for Ireland, which is an agricultural land, the time has
come when the needless loss and harm and waste which they produce should ter-
minate. In these circumstances mark —

II. Some suggestions for land legislation at home contained in the
LAWS OF Canaan. 1. These present us with the ideal at which to aim ; viz., to get
the land into as many hands as possible. 2. Such an ideal should, it is almost
needless to say, be pursued only in a righteous aud peaceful way. In a land of
such wealth and resource as ours any other method would be as foohsh as wicked.
3. Every facUity that the law can give for the sale and transfer of lands ought to
be given. Entail ought to be forbidden at once, as unjust to the younger ch3di-en
of a family, and injurious to the State. Settlements destroying the ri;^ht of sale
should be prohibited. These two alterations would at once bring much laud into the
market. 4. A law for division of property among his children on the death of the
holder would in two or three generations effect a marvellous revolution in the present
most deplorable distribution of land, and would work the same blessings here as such
a law has wrought in France, Belgium, Denmark, &c. Instead of 2,000 persons
(2,148 exactly) holding more than one-half of the land in the United Kingdom, it ia
desirable 2,000,000 of persons should share it. If by facilities for sale, the abolition
of feudal laws tending to accumulate property in few hands which survive nowhere
but here, the land could be by justice and peace brought again into the possession
of the people, the gain to the nation would be incalculable. An enormous increase
in productiveness would, judging from the experience of the other nations of Europe,
at once accrue. This would be the least of the benefits. There would be less
poverty, more self-respect, more energy, more patriotism, more union amongst our
people ; perhaps, witli the extinction of so much injustice, more reUgion too. And
we should find in this, as in other things, that modern civilisation is never so wise
as when it sits at the feet of ancient inspiration. Moses and Joshua are the
grandest of all pohtical economists. — G.

Ver. 6 — end. — Caleb the son of Jephunneh. Few characters finer than that ol
Caleb. If Moses was pattern of faithful leader, Caleb was of faithful follower.
There are some things which suggest he was not an Israelite by birth. Kenaz the
name of his father or brother, is an Edomite name, and the expression in ch. xiv.
14, " Hebron became the iuheritauce of Caleb . . . because that he wholly followed
the God of Israel ; " and that of ch. xv. 13, " Unto Caleb he gave a part among the
children of Judah," are expressions which suggest that he was associated with that
ti'ibe rather than sprung from it. Whether or ii ot he was an IsraeUte in flesh, he was
earnestly so in faith. If not by birth an Israehte, he is an instance of the converting
power of truth, and of the way in which identity of heart and aim supersedes all
diversity of nature. He was one of the twelve spies. Had there been other ten
like him, the invasion of Canaan would have begun and finished forty years earlier.
There was no delusion in his mind ; he saw all his colleague saw — ^the stature of
the men, the walls of the cities, the difficulty and aU but impossibility of the con-
quest. But he saw what only Joshua saw besides him — the presence and the
power of God. And seeing that, he believed in the possibility of what seemed to
ethers impossible. Consider some elements of instruction hera.



cm. XT. 1— «8.] THE BOOK OF JOSHUA. tU

I. Good men abb needed fob second places as well as first. We cannot
all be statesmen, rulers, misBionaries. There are many more Iramble pcsitiona than
exalted ones. Twelve spyships for one lordship. Good men are needed for all
stations. Men who fear to do wrong, who fear to grieve God, and who have no
other fear. Complain not of an obscure lot, of a slight opening for your powers ;
but do the duties of the lot, and avail yourself of the openings you have, and all will
be well.

II. Second, observe the peesevbkance of saints. He believed in his prime,
he believes in his old age. Eeady to follow God's leading then, ready now. " As
my strength was then, even so is my strength now for war, both to go out and to
come in." There is, of course, a miraculous element in this persistence of physical
strength and mental vigour at such an age. But it is only a miraculous extension
of what is a blessed fact of daily experience. It is strange the vis inertice of souls.
Forty years ago some were faithless, and are so now ; others believing, they are so
now. There is a tendency for the unjust to be unjust still, and for the righteous
to be righteous stUl. Motion or rest alike tend to he eternal Kise up and follow
Christ, and you tend to follow Him on through coimtless sges. Forsake Him, and
you tend to go on forsaking Him. This persistence of habit is nature ; but the
persistence of better habit is partly grace as well. God keeps the feet from falling,
daily charms the spirit 'afresh, while each step of progress in a good path reveals
new reasons for choosing and pursuing it. Do not despair. Of Christ's flock none
is lost. " They go from strength to strength ; every one of them appeareth before
God in Zion." We may not, like Joshua, see eighty-five, and long before the hfe
ends our powers may wither ; but grace will not wither.

III. Observe the usefulness of such a life of peogbess. Eighty-five years
of steady well-doing t of right aiming and right action ! of the boldness of faith.
Joshua and He were left ahve, as a sort of leaven to leaven the whole limap of Israel,
and they did it. One steady, progressive life of goodness — the same to-day as
yesterday — how invaluable in a village, in a church, in any community. If you
would be useful, keep on. Bemember Abraham Lincoln's policy for the conquest of
the secession — it was to " keep pegging away." Seeming hopeless, it was crowned
with success.

IV. Lastly, observe, Caleb's faith has a grand reward. A manifold reward.
1. In the contagiousness with which it spread. It infects his own family (see ch.
XV. 17). It infects, as we have seen, many besides. 2. His faith has the oppor-
tunity of proving its wisdom. That city, which was impregnable, he took ; and
these Anakim, who seemed terrific, he mastered. Some men, some things, some
forces may be stifled for want of opportunity. But God will always see that there
is a candlestick for the light. An " open door " for the " httle strength " which can
enter it. 8. His faith gets an earthly inheritance of a noble kind. Hebron is hia
family's for an everlasting possession. The shortest road to getting anything is
deserving it. While the clever, the tricky, the greedy, the saving see only what
they aspire to " afar off," the deserving go straight on and reach it. His pijoperty
we can trace in the possession of his descendants down to the time of David (1 Sam.
XXX. 14). It is not sufficiently observed how essential to goodness the courage of
faith really is. Let Caleb's example commend it to us. — G.



EXPOSITION.
CHAPTEB XV. 1—63.



The lot of Judah. Ver. 1. — The lot of
the tribe of tlie children of Judah. The first
twelve verses of this chapter define the
boundaries of Judah. With it compare
Num. xxxiv. 3 — 5, which gives the southern
border of the Israehtish territory, corre-
ipondiim eloaely with this account ol



the southern border of Judah. The word
tribe here is, as might be exjjected from
the context nt3D aud not toac!^. Even to
the border of Edom. The literal trans-
lation, which makes the passage clearer, is,
" the border of Edom, the wilderness of Zin
towards the dry region (n3JJ) from the
extreme limit of the ioath"'(jp*0)- ^«



1?HB BOCXK OP JOSatJA.



[cA. if. 1-



latter of these words, derived from pDJ
" riglit hand," being the position of the south
when regarded from the point of view of
a man looking eastward, denotes the south-
ward direction (see above, ch. xii. 2). The
former word has reference to the physical
conditions of the country, its heat and
dryness. The LXX. does not attempt to
translate the former word and has evidently
tJ'ljjP for n^fpp. The wilderness of Zin.
Not to be confounded with the wilderness
of Sin (Exodus xvi. 1; of. Num. xxxiv.
11, 36). This wilderness was on the
border of Edom (Num. xx. i. ; xxvii. 14).
Thence the border of Judah (which here
includes the small portion afterwards
allotted to Simeon) extended to the utmost
limits of the south (see oh. xix. 1, 9). A
wall of mountains extends south-westward
from the southern extremity of the Dead
Sea, and formed the natural boundary of
Judsea.

Ver. 2. — The shore of the salt sea. Liter-
ally, the extremity, i.e., the south extremity.
From the bay. Literally, tongue (so margin).
The LXX. translates by \ofia, ridge. The
whole southern portion of the sea is out off
from the rest by a peninsula near Eerai;, the
ancient Kir of Moab. It is called the Lisan.
Whoever was the writer of the Book of
Joshua, these details prove him to have had
an accurate acq^uaintauce with the geography
of Palestine. He was no priestly inventor
of fables attached to the temple at Jerusalem.
Canon Tristram gives a vivid description of
the neighbourhood in his ' Land of Israel,'
ch. XV. The ridge of Jebel Usdum — one
large mass of rock salt — on the west of this
"tongue" of water, the salt marsh of the
Sebkha on the south-west, with its treeless
waste — "not a plant or a leaf could be
seen save just under the hills" — and its
mirage hke that of Sahara, the barren out-
line of the Lisan itself, to the eastward
rising to an elevation of from five to six
hundred feet, and the fertile oasis of the
Ghor-es-Safieh at the southern extremity of
the Dead Sea, give an unique charaoter to
this remarkable region.

Ver. 3. And It went out to the south side
to Maaleh-acrabblm.. Or, perhaps, and it
went to the southward of Maaleh-acrabbim,
translated in Num. xxxiv. 4, " the ascent of
Aorabbim." The Uteral meaning of Maaleh-
acrabbim is Scorpion Bise (see Judg. i. 36).
Keil thinks that it was a pass in the Mount
Halak, or the Smooth Mountain, mentioned
in ch. xi. 17, xii. 7. " De Saulcy suggests
the Wady Zouaia, and testifies to the
icorpions found under every pebble" (Stan-
ley, ' Sinai and Palestine,' p. 113). And
Ainsworth, * Travels in Asia Minor,' ii. 354,
•ays that some spots are almost iminhabit-



able in consequence. Knobel supposes it to
be the pass es-Sufah on the road between
Petra and Hebron. But the border of Judah
seems to have gone in a south-westerly
direction. To Zin. Rather, in the direction.
of Zin. On the south side unto Eadesh-
bamea. Or, as above, southward of Kadesh-
barnea. The exact p()sition of Kadesh-
Bamea has not been ascertained. It was
between the wilderness of Zin and that
of Paran (Num. xih. 26 ; xx. 1). Dean
Stanley identifies it with Petra, which was
about 30 miles in a north-easterly direction
from the Gulf of Akaba on the Eed Sea,
and close to Mount Hor. A more recent
traveller (see Bartlett, ' Egypt and Palestine,'
pp. 366—376) identifies it with Ain Gadis,
about 60 miles to the westward of Petra,
and he claims Winer, Kurz, Kalisoh, and
Enobel as supporters of his view. The
latter founds his view on the discovery of
Ain Gadis by Rowlands, and supports it by
the authority of Eitter. Bitter, however, as
his trahslator informs us, embodied the
results of the investigations of Mr. Rowlands'
while his work was preparing for the preps,
and did not give the matter that full con-
sideration which he was accustomed to do.
The chief objection to it is that (see ver. 1)
Ain Gadis can hardly be described as on " the
border of Edom." The general view is that
it lay somewhat to the north-east of Hezron
and to the north-west of Petra, at the foot
of the range of mountains which form the
southern boundary of Judsea. Here ihe
spies brought their report to Moses (ch. xiv.
6, 7 ; Num. xiii. 26). Here Miriam was
buried, and where Moses incurred the wrath
of God from his mode of working the
miracle which supplied the Israelites with
water (Num, xx.). It was " a city in the
uttermost border" of Edom (Num. xx. 16),
and it was some distance from Mount Hor,
for we find it described as a journey (Num.
XX. 22) ; and by passing from Kadesh to
Mount Hor, and thence by the way of the
Eed Sea, the Israelites " compassed the land
of Edom " (Num. xxi. 4), a fact which seems
to prove that Petra and Eadesh-bamea
were not the same place. Kadesh is supposed
by M. Ohabas to be the " Qodesh of the
country of the Amaor," or Amorites, in the
monuments of Seti I. and Rameses II. It is
depicted as " on a hillside with a stream on
one side," and is thus distinguished from
Qodesh of the Kheta or Hittites, which is
in a flat country beside a lake (Tomkins,
'Studies of the Time of Abraham,' p. 84).
Fetched a compass to Earkaa. Rather,
was deflected in the direction of Karkaa.
Nothing is known of the places here men-
tioned. Of. Num. xxxiv. 4, where Earkaa
is not mentioned, but the deflection in the
neighbourhood, of Asmon is.



9fi. SV. 1-



L]



*Hfi SOOK 01* JOSHtJA.



141



Ver. 4. — The river of Egypt (see atove, oh.
xiii. 3). " Westward, as far as Egypt, there
is a sandy, salt, baxren, unfmitful, and an-
inhabitable waste " (Enobel). The land, he
adds, is better near Gaza, but near the sea
it is still pure waste. And the goings out of
that coast were at the sea. The word coast,
derived through the French from the Latin
casta, signihes, like it, a side. It is now
used only of the border formed by the sea,
but at an earlier period it had a wider
signification. The Hebrew word is transla-
ted " border" in ver. 1. The meaning is that
the boundary line of Judah ran as far as
the sea. This shall be your south coast.
Or, this shall be to you the southern bound-
ary. The historian here quotes the direc-
tions given to Moses in Num. xxxiv., with
the evident intention of pointing out that
the south border of the children of Israel
coincided with that of the tribe of Judah.

Ver. 5. — To the end of Jordan. The spot
where it emptied itself into the Dead Sea.
Tlie bay of the sea at the uttermost part of
Jordan. As in ver. 3, the word here trans-
lated bay is tongue in the original. What
is meant is that the northern boundary
started from the point where the Jordan
entered the Dead Sea.

Ver. 6. — Beth-hogla (see ch. xviii. 19).
It is still known as Ain Hadjla or Hajla,
where, says Keil, a beautiful spring of fresh
and clear water is to be found. The place
Hes about two miles from Jordan. Beth-
hogla means " the house of the partridge."
" Leaving the probable site of the ancient
Gilgal £md advancing southward along the
pilgrims' route to the Jordan, an hour and
a quarter brings us to the spring Ain
Hajla, in a small and well-watered grove "
(Bitter). He adds, " Robinson and Wilson
both recognised in the name Hajla the
ancient Canaanitish city Beth-hogla. " Beth-
arabah. Or " the house of the Arabah " or
desert. Its site is not known (see ver. 61
and ch. xviii. 18, 22). The Beth-arabah in
ver. 61, however, must have been another
place, since it was in the wUdemess of
Judsea, not far from the Dead Sea. The
stone of Bohan the son of Keuben. All we
know of this stone is that it was westward
of Beth-arabah. The boundary of Benjamin
in ch. xviii. is mentioned in precisely reverse
order, and since here the stone was on the
ascent from Beth-araba, and there (ver. 17)
it is described as on the descent from
Gehloth, it must have been on the side of
the dechvity. Of Bohan nothing further is
known. We must understand here, as in
many other places of Scripture, descendant
by "son " (cf. ch. vii. 24). _

Ver. 7. — Toirard Deblr. Not the Debir
of oh. z. The valley of Achor (see eh. viii. 26).



This is now the Wady Kelt. GUgal Keil
says that this is not the Gilgal where the
Israehtes first encamped. It is called
Geliloth, or " circles," in ch. xviii. 17, where
the same place is obviously meant as here.
The question is one of some difficulty. If
it be not the Gilgal mentioned in ch. iv. 19,
which is described as being eastward of
Jericho, still less can it be Jiljiliah (see
note on ch. ix. 6) which was near Bethel,
and therefore on the northern border of
Benjamin. In that case-the only supposition
that will meet the facts in this case is that
Gilgal, which signifies a wheel or circle,
was the common name given to all the
Israelitish encampments. But there seems
no reason to doubt that the Gilgal of
ch. iv. 19 is meant. This is Ewald's view in
his ' History of Israel," ii. 245. Adummlm, or
"the red (places)," has been identified with
Maledomim, i.e. Maaleh Adummim, or Talat
el Dumm (Conder), on the road from Jeru-
salem to Jericho. Jerome explains it as
"ascensus ruforum sen rubentium propter
sanguinem qui iUic crebro a latronibus fun-
ditii." Every one will at once call to mind
the narrative in St. Luke x., which has no
doubt suggested this explanation. But at one
particular point in the route from Jerusalem
to Jericho a " large mass of purplish rock"
is found (Stanley, ' Sinai and Palestine,'
p. 424, note). It was called " terra mffa, "
" the red earth," from the colour of the
ground, and recent travellers state that it is
called the "red field " stUl, from this cause.
Conder tells us the name is derived from
"the brick-red marks here found amid a
district of red chalk (see also Mr. Tyrwhitt
Drake in Pal. Expl. Fund Quart. Paper,
April, 1874). So Knobel speaks, on the
authority of numberless travellers of " der
rothen Farbe des dortigengesteins." And
the Quarterly Paper just quoted mentions
the " bright limestone and marl." Which la
on the south side of the river. The Nahal,
or summer torrent, in the origioal ; " the
Wady Kelt, south of Eiha " (Knobel). The
waters of En-shemesh, or the fountain of
the sun, supposed to be Ain Hand, or
the " Apostles' well," near Bethany. There
is an Arak (cave) esh Shews, about two miles
o3. All these places have been identified
on or near the pilgrims' route to the Jordan.
Enrogel (see ch. xvui. 17). It was close by
Jerusalem, and was where Jonathan and
Ahimaaz lingered to gain tidings for David,
and where Adonijah repaired to hold the
great feast when he endeavoured to obtain
the kingdom. " Now Ain Um ed Deraj in
the Kedron Valley" (Conder). Vandevelde
supposes it to be Blr Eyub, Joab's well, at
the point where the Kedron Valley meeti
the Gai Hinnom. This seems most proth



MS



THE BOOK OF JOSHUA-



[cH. rr. 1—63.



able. The valley of the Eon of Hinnom. The
word liere for valley (''}) Biguifies properly
a deep cleft in the rock, through which no
water flows. The valley of Hinnom has
been generally taken to be the deep valley
running from west to east, and lying to the
west and south of Jerusalem, described by
Tobler as forked at its north-western end,
bending to the southward about its middle,
and joining the valley of Jehoshaphat at
its eastern extremity. In the Quarterly
Paper of the Palestine Exploration Fund
for October, 1878, however, it is contended
that the now partially filled up Tyropoeon
Valley, running through the city, is the
valley or ravine of Hinnom. The manner
in which this is demonstrated reminds the
reader somewhat of a proposition in Euclid,
and the question arises whether Euclid's
method be exactly applicable to a point of
this kind. The arguments used are jiot
without force, but no notice is taken of the
peculiar position of the valley of E«phaim
(see next note but one), which, we learn
from the sacred historian, was bo placed
that its extremity coincided with the
mountain which closed the ravine of Hin-
nom at its western side. If the Tyropoeon
Valley answers to this description, it may
be accepted as the true valley of Hinnom,
but not otherwise. Mr. -Birch incorrectly
eites Gesenius in favour of his theory;
and the most recent discoveries appear
to have thrown discredit upon it. The
most weighty argument in favour of his
theory is that a comparison of Josh. xv.
63 with Judg. i. 3 — 8, leads to the suppo-
sition that Jerusalem was partly in Ben-
jamin and partly iu Judah (see, however,
Neh. xi. SO). This valley, called some-
times Tophet, and sometimes, by a corrup-
tion of the Hebrew, Gehenna, whatever its
situation may have been, is conspicuous in
the after history of Israel. This deep and
retired spot was the seat of all the worst
obomin-itions of the idol-worship to which
the Jews afterwards became addicted. Here
Solomon reared high places for Moloch
(1 Kings xi. 7). Here children were sacri-
ficed at the hideous rites of that dcmou-
god (2 Kings xvi. 3 ; 2 Chron. xxviii. 3 ;
Jer. vii. 31,32 ; xix. 2, 4). It was defiled
by Josiah (2 Kings xxiii. 10, 13, 14), and was
looked upon in later times as an abomina-
tion (see Jer. xix. 13). There the carcases
of animals were cast to be burned, and
hence it is used by our Lord (Matt. v. 2i)
as the type of the utmost wrath of God.
It is hardly possible to suppose that there is
no allusion to Tophet and its fiery sacrifices
in Isa. XXX. 33, in spite of the different
form of the word, to which some scholars,
*.(/., Q«8enins, assign an Aryan rathei than



a Semitic origin, and in spite of the fact
that the LXX. suspects no such allusion
thera St. James alone, beside the writers
of the Gospels, mentions it (ch. iii. 6), "seton
fire of hell," or Gehenna.

Ver. 8.— The south side of the Jehusite.
Literally, the shoulder of the Jehusite from
(or on) the south (see 1 Kings vi. 8 ; vii. 39,
margin). Thus Jerusalem lay to the north of
the border, in the tribe of Benjamin. The
same Is Jerusalem. Formerly called Jehus,
from the Jebusites who dwelt there (Judg.
xix. 11; 1 Chron. xi. 4). The city lay
on the borders of Judah and Ben-
jamin (see note on oh. x. 1). The valley
of the giants. Hebrew, Eephaim (see
ch. xii. 4). The word here translated
valley is pijy. In the former part it is 'J
(see note on last verse). The word here
used signifies originally depth, and is ap-
plied to wide valleys embosomed among
lofty hills. Such were the valley of Eluh
(1 Sam. xvii. 2, 19) ; the King's Dale (Gen.
xiv. 17 ; 2 Sam. xviii. 18) ; the valley of
Siddim (Gen. xiv. 3), of Jezreel (Judg. vi.
33). " The word Emek shows that this
was neither a winter torrent nor a narrow,
dry ravine, and it is best identified with
its traditional site, the shallow basin
west of the watershed south of Jerusalem,
now called el Bukei'a" (Conder). We read
of this valley in 2 Samuel v. 18, 22. From
these passages we may gather a eonfiima-
tion of the view above expressed, that the
valley here meant is an open valley, since
only in such a valley could the Philistine
army take up a position. It gradually
narrows towards the south-west. On the
south it extends as far as Bethlehem. The
range of movmtains which lie to the west of
the valley of Hinnom from the northern
boundary of the plain or valley of Eephaim.
Ver. 9. — Was drawn. Or, extended.
The fountain of the waters of Nephtoah. If
these be identified with En Etam, as is done
by the Eabbis (whom Conder follows), and
if we suppose it to have supplied Jerusalem
with water by the aqueduct which ran from
a point south-west of Betlehem to Jerusalem,
we must place it south of Bethlehem, and
imagine that the border ran directly south
here. Far more probable is the notion of
Vandevelde, which places it north-west of
Jerusalem, at A in Lifta. Condor's view is
dominated by the situation he has assigned
to Kirjath-jearim (see note on ch. ix. 17^.
If the view there given in these notes is
sound, the border now ran in a north-
westerly direction from Jerusalem to within
five miles of Gibeon (see also note on ch,
xviii. 14). Etrjath-jearim. See ch. ix. 17.
To the authorities mentioned there in
favour of Enriet al Enab we tui^ ftdd



OH. XV. 1 — 88.]



THE BOOK OP JOSHUA.



341



Enohel, Bitter, and Tristram, in hia last
book, ' Bible Lands.' The view talien above
corresponds to the minuteness of detail with
which the boundary is given. To place
Nephtoah south of Bethlehem and Kirjath-
jearim at 'Arma would make the boundary
far less distinct.

Ver. 10.— Compassed. Or, deflected (see
ver. 4). This is in accordance with the
view taken above. The border line which
had run north-west from Jerusalem now
bent backwards in a south-westerly direc-
tion, and followed the ridge towards Chesa-
lon (see note on Chesalon). Mount Seir.
Not the dwelling-place of Esau, afterwards
the country of the Edomites (Gen. xxxii. 3 ;
xxxvi. 8), but a range running south-west-
ward from Kirjath-jearim, part of which is
still known as Sairah, or Saris, " auf wel-
chem Saris uud Milisir liegen" (Knobel).
Since Kirjath-jearim means the " city of the
forests," and Seir means "hairy," we may
conjecture that the name was given to the
ridge on account of its wooded character.
This also is implied by " Mount Jearim."
The side of Mount Jearim. Literally, the
thoulder (see above, ver. 8). Which Is
Chesalon. This is identified with Kesla, a
point on the summit of the ridge stretcMug
south-west from Kirjath-jearim. The fact
that the border passed northward of Chesa-
lon is a confirmation of the view taken
above. We learn from oh. xix. 41 (of. ver.
83 of this chapter), that the border passed
by Zorah and Eshtaol in the Shephelah,
through a neighbonrliood described in
Condor's Handbook as "an open com
country." Beth-shemesh. The " house of
the sun," identified with the modern Ain
(or fountain of) Shems. It is called Ir-
Bhemesh in ch. xix. 41. It was close to the
border of the Philistines, and was the scene
of the transactions recorded in 1 Sam. vi.
The propinquity to the Philistines appears
to have affected the principles of its inhabi-
tants, and their conduct contrasts most
nnfavourably with that of the inhabitants
of Kirjath-jearim. This was the more dis-
graceful, in that Beth-shemesh (ch. xxi. 16)
was a priestly city, and being inhabited by
those whose " lips should keep knowledge,"
might have been expected to set a better
example. It was required to furnish
Solomon's household with provisions (1
Kings iv. 9), it witnessed the defeat and
capture of Amaziah (2 Kings xiv. 11 — 13 ;
2 Chron. xxv. 21) by Joash, king of Israel.
It fell into the hands of the Philietines at
the time of the decay of the Jewish power
under Ahaz (2 Chron. xxviii. 18). The
name, like Baal-Gad and Ashtaroth-Kar-
naim, is worthy of remark, as pointing to the
•hatiMter of tii* early Piusnician -wwRbijp.



Timuah. Sometimes called Timnath i«
Scripture (see Judg. xiv. 1 — 6), and Tim-
natha in ch. xix. 48.

Ver. 11. — Eloron. This important Fhilis.
tine city (see ch. xiii. 3) lay close to the
northern border of Judah. As a matter of
fact, however, the tribe of Judah never
succeeded in permanently occupying this
territory, which only fell under their yoke
during the reigns of David and Solomon.
The cities of the Philistines were, it is true,
most of them captured (Judg. i. 18), but wa
soon find the Philistines once more in
possession of them (seo 1 Sam. v. 8—10).
Northward. The border turned sharply
northward until past Ekrou, when it once
more turned westward until it reached the
sea.

Ver. 12. — And the coast tbereoC Sea
ch. xiii. 23.

Ver. 13. — And unto Caleb. This passage,
at least from ver. IS, is found with the
slightest possible variation in Judg. i. It
has been argued from the variations that
the one passage was not copied from the
other, but that both weie derived from a
common document. No such conclusion,
however, can be safely drawn from the text.
For first, the present narrative deals exclu-
sively with this portion of the history of
Caleb. That in Judges, down to ver. 12,
deals more generally with the subject, includ-
ing the exploits of Caleb, under the general
history of the progress of Judah. But from
the time that the history becomes that of
Caleb in particular, the agreement between
the two narratives is verbal, including the
very unusual word njV, with one or
two most insignificant exceptions. Thus

we have ip n^ij for i? njn, we have n'?S

for nV?J, and we have -ISIIP interpolated in
Judg. i. 13, and Othuiel (or Kenaz) is
spoken of as the younger brother of Caleb.
But unless we hold that it was a Bscred
duty of the writer in Judges to reproduce
every single word of the narrative in Joshua,
there is nothing whatever that can support
the conclusion that the vrriter in Judges
was not copying the earlier narrative. Tha
variations are such as would naturally
happen where a writer was transferring a
narrative to his pages with a desire to give
the exact sense of the original without tying
himself to Qvery particular word. Since
the use of inverted commas has been intro-
duced we can find multitudes of instances
where a writer, when professing to quote an-
other accurately, has introduced far mora
variations into his quotation than are to
be found here, where the writer, though
quoting the Book of Joshua, and quoting it
ooireotly, does not say that be is doing so



The sooS 01* JosstJA.



tctt. *f. 1— *s.



Ko one doubts that jHfeiaiah in ch. xlviii.
is quoting Ibe. xv., although the passages
are not verbally coincident. We may safely
regard this quotation of the Book of Joshua
in that of Judges, as under all ordinary
laws of criticism an evidence that the former
book was in existence when the latter was
written, just as the quotations of Deuter-
onomy in Joshua may naturally be taken as
evidence that the Book of Deuteronomy
was in existence when that of Joshua
was composed. The son of Jephunneb.
(see ch. xiv. 6). A part. Literally, a lot.
Among. Bather, in the midst of. Our ver-
sion is obscure here. Arba the father
of Anak, which city is Hebron, (see ch. xiv.
6 — 15). Keil thinks that he was the tribe-
father, or chief (sheikh, as the Arabs would
call him), of the children of Anak.

Ver. 14. — The three sons of AnaJc This
also mubt not be pressed literally. Possibly
these men were three chiefs of the Anakim.
The chHdren of Ana.k. '!)y.' descendants,
thus supporting the view taken in the last
note (see for the word Gen. xiv. 14; xvii.
12, where it is used of a slave born in the
house).

Ver. 15. — ^Klrjath-sepher (see note on cb,
X. 38).

Ver. 16.— And Caleb said (of. 1 Sam. xvii.
25 ; 1 Chron. xi. 6).

Ver. 17.— The brother of Caleb. The
Hebrew does not inform us whether Othniel
or Kenaz were Caleb's brother. But the
fact (see note on ch. xiv. 6) that Caleb was
the son of Jephunneh leads to the idea that
the latter is meant. Othniel was a vaUant
and capable commander, as we learn from
Judg. iii. 9.

Ver. 18. — ^As she came to him. Whether
the bridal procession of the later Jews were
already in existence or not, we have no
evidence to show. A field. The narrative
in Judges has " the field," meaning the
pai-ticular field mentioned in the passage.
Lighted oS. Or, sank down; spoken of
gradual motion, as of the nail which, when
smitten by Jael into Sisera's temples, went
dfiwn into the ground. So Knobel. Our
translation renders it " fastened " there,
which is hardly the meaning. This word
has been a difficulty to translators. The
LXX. renders t^nrjaev Ik tov ivov, and the
Vulgate still more strangely, " Suspiravit,
nt sedebat in asino." The LXX. seems to
have read pl?S for nj V. The Chaldee, Syriac,
and Arabic render as our version. What
wouldest thou ? Or, what is the matter I
Literally, What to thee 1 Achsah's conduct
surprised Caleb. It was probably accom-
panied by an imploring gesture, and oo-
enrred b^ore she had reached the boase of



Othniel, who no doubt had come to meet
her; or possibly, according to the later
Oriental custom, had escorted her the whole
way. A blessing (see 2 Kings v. 15 ; also
Gen. xxxiii. 11 ; 1 Sam. xxv. 27). The use
of the word in the sense of "gift" comes
from the fact that to bless is to bestow bene-
fits upon the person blessed (see Deut. xxviii.
1—6, 11, 12).

Ver. 19. — A southland. Hebrew, the
southland. The word Negeb signifies dry
(see note on Negeb, eh. x. 40). It must be
remembered that it became the word for
south, because the south of Palestine was
an arid tract. Therefore Achsah must be
understood as saying, " Thou hast given
me a dry country, give me also a reser-
voir of water." The Vulgate translates
Negeb twice over," australem et arentem"
(arentem only Judg. i. 15). The LXX.
translates both Negeb and GuUoth as proper
names. But in the parallel passage in Judges
Negeb is translated " south," and Gulloth

appears as Xirpuaiv, as if from TVl to re-
move. Nothing can more clearly show
that the LXX. translation is the work of

different hands. Springs of water. n?J
akin to our well and the German quelle, and

derived from 77 J to roll, from the circular
motion observable in springs, as also from
the rolling of waves. The Chaldee renders
the house of irrigation (NJpB' ITD). Knobel
translates reservoirs. The upper springs
and the lower springs (see note on Debir,
ch. X. 38).

Ver. 20.— This is the inheritance. The
territory of Judah is divided into four parts,
in the summary which follows : the ' ' south,"
the " vaUey," the ' ' mountains," and the
" vrildemess." Tribe. Here ntSD (see note
ch. xiii. 29).

Ver. 21. — Coast. Bather, harder (see note
ver. 4). Southward. The term here used
(sea above, ver. 19) for " south " is the one
which has the signification of dryness. It
is, however, occasionally used in a less
strict sense, as in ch. xix. 24. Though the
south country was in the main an arid region,
yet its intersection by numerous wadys,
with their attendant streams, provided fer-
tile spots at intervals, where the traveller
might rest, cattle might be watered, and
com and other produce raised. The only
places of any importance in Scripture
history mentioned here are Beersheba (see
Gen. xxi. 31), and Hormah (see Num. xiv. 46 ;
xxi. 3 ; and cf . ch. xii. 14 ; xix. 4 ; and Judg.
i. 17J. This last passage explains whv the
city IS mentioned among the cities of Simeon
as weU as Judah, and is another instance of
the remarluble accuracy of ccc authoti



m. X*. i— gd.)



*Sii Book Ot* JO^^TJA.



iSl



Ziklag is famous as the residence of David
(1 Sam. xxvii. 6). It is noteworthy that
it was given to him by Aohish, king of Gath,
in whose possession it therefore was at that
time. It was burnt by the roving bands of
AmaleMtes (1 Saiji. xxx. 1).
Ver. 22.— Their villages (see note ch. xiii,

Ver. 22.— Kinali. Knobel suggests that
this was the city of the Kenites, a suppo-
sition which derives some support from
Judg. i. 16 and 1 Sam. xv. 6.

Ver. 24. — Telem. This is identifiea by
Knobel with the Telaim mentioned in 1
Sam. XV. 4. Conder, in his ' Handbook,'
supports this view, but nothing more is
known of the place.

Ver. 29. — lim. The Alexandrian version
of LXX. has 'A«e//i here. If this be correct,
the city was named after the Avim (see note
on ch. xiii. 4). If we take the reading in the
text we must interpret by ruins (see note on
Ai, ch. vii. 2).

Ver. 32.— Aln, Blmmon (see oh. xix. 7;
1 Chron. iv. 32 ; Neh. xi. 29). More likely
the name of one place Ain-Eimmon, the
fountain of the god Eimmou. For Eimmon
see 2 Kings v. 18. The word signifying
eye, or fountain, is written indifferently
Mn or En in our version (see En-shemesh
and En-rogel in this chapter). Eimmon
is mentioned in Zeoh. xiv. 10 as " south
of Jerusalem." Now Umm er-EumSmtn
(Conder).

Ver. 32. Twenty-nine. There is another
of the veiy common errors of numbers here.
The actual number is thirty-six. The eiTor
is as old as the LXX. version.

Ver. 33. The vaUey. n^SB'g (see note
OB ch. ix. 1; X. 40). This was the fertile
part of Judah, and formed a part of the rich
plain which has been described as exteoding
northward as far as Carmel. It was " re-
nowned for the beauty of its flowers"
(Dehtzach). With the exception of Zorah
and Bshtaol, border towns to the tribe of
Dan (ch. xix. 41 ; Judg. xiii. 25), famous in
the histoiyof Samson (see Judg. xiii. — xvi.),
and mentioned in 2 Chron. xi. 10 ; Neh. xi.
29, the cities remarkable in history have
been noticed already. It is worthy of re-
mark that the cities of the Philistines were
included in this Ust. But the Philistines,
save during the reigns of David and Solo-
mon, retained their independence, and in
earlier and later times alike even encroached
upon the Jewish territory (see 1 Sam. xiii.
6; 2 Chron. xxviii. 18 ; and note on ver. 11).

Ver. 44. — Mareshah. One of Eehoboam's
fortified cities (2 Chron. xi. 8). Here Asa
met Zerah the Ethiopian, or Oushite, and
overthrew him (2 Chron. zir. 9). Here



lived the prophet who foretold the destruc-
tion of Jehoshaphat's navy (2 Chron. xx. 37.
See also Micah i. IS). Now Marash, close
to Beit-Jibrin or Eleutheropolis (Tristram,
Conder). If it be the same as Moresheth-
Oath in Micah i. 14, this adds additional
probabiUty to the identification of Gath
with Beit-Jibrin (see note on ch. xiii. 3).

Ver. 45. — Ekron, with her tovnis and her
vlUages. Literally, her daughters and her
farm-hamlets (see note on ch. xiii. 28). These
cities of the Philistines had, like Gibeon,
daughter-cities dependent on them, and
must therefore have been, like Gibeon,
" great cities as the royal cities " (ch. x. 2).
They do not appear to have come under
regal government till later times (of. 1 Sam.
V. 8, 11, with 1 Sam. xxvii. 2). " Around it
(Gezer) and along the sides were distributed
a series of small isolated centres of agglome-
ration. . . . This disposition to scatter itself,
of which Gezer surely does not offer us the
only specimen, explains in a striking man-
ner the Biblical phrase, ' the city and her
daughters ' " (Pal. Bxpl. Fund, Quart. Paper,
Jan., 1874). This explanation, however, is
doubtful (see ch. ix. 17). According to
Knobel, this passage cannot have been
written by the Elohist, because he confines
himself to the description of the cities the
Israehtes actually possessed. Why a later
writer, writing presumably when Israel's
fortunes were at a lower ebb, should have
added a description of the territory Israel
did not possess, he does not explain.

Ver. 48. — The mountains. Compare the
expi-ession, " the hill country of Judaea " (rn
ipewy, the same as here in the LXX.),
Luke i. 65. It extends northwards from near
Debir to Jerusalem, attaining at Hebron a
height of about 2,700 feet. The physical
characteristics of the country are vividly
described in Deut. viii. 7, 8. Dean Stanley
(' Sinai and Palestine,' p. 100) descants on
the home-like character of the scenery and
vegetation to an Englishman, and remarks
on the contrast between the hfe, activity,
and industry displayed there, as contrasted
with the desolation of the greater part of
Palestine. A later traveller, who would not,
of course, be so struck with the resemblance
to English scenery, speaks of the fertility of
the ground as a matter of possibility, rather
than of fact. The rooky soU, when broken
up by the combined influences of heat,
rain, and frost, is, like the soil of other
rocky districts, extremely susceptible of
cultivation when laid out in terraces.
He remarks how the signs of ancient
cultivation in this manner are to be seen oi.
all sides, and laments the misrule which
has converted the •' land flowing with milk
and honey " into a wilderness ^see Bartlett,



98S



THE BOOK OF JOSHtJA,



toH. XT. 1 — 69i



' Egypt and Palestine,' ch. xix., and note
on oh. X. 40). The time has not yet come
for the Jews, now asserting their ancient
greatness in statesmanship, Uteratnre, and
art in erery country in the civilised world,
to return to their own land. Not till then,
it is to be feared, will the prophecy in Isaiah
XXXV. be fulfilled, and " the desert rejoice,
and the wilderness blossom as the rose,
while waters break out in the wilderness
and streams in the desert, the parched
ground becoming a pool, and the thirsty
land springs of water."

Yer. 51. — OUoh. Perhaps the city of
Ahithophel.

Ver. 55. — Maon, Carmel, and apU. These,
as Dean Stanley reminds us (' Sinai and
Palestine,' p. 101), still retain unaltered
their old names. " That long line of hills
was the beginning of the ' hiU country of
Judtea,' and when we began to ascend it
the first answer to our inquiries after the
route told us that it was ' Carmel,' on which
Nabal fed his flocks, and close below its long
ranges was the hill and ruins of Ziph,"
close above the hill of Maou. Wilson
also ('Lands of the Bible,' i. 380) makes
the same remark. Maon is to be remem-
bered as David's hiding - place from the
enmity of Saul (1 Sam. ixiii. 24 — 261,
and as the home of Nabal (1 Sam. xxv. 2).
Carmel (not the famous mountain of that
name) meets us again in the history of Saul
and of David (1 Sam. xv. 12 ; xxv. 2, 5, 7,
40). The neighbourhood of Ziph was also
one of David's hiding-places, and is described
as a " wilderness " in which there was a
" wood " in 1 Sam. xxiii. 15, 19 ; xxvi. 1, 2.
See also the prologue to Psa. Uv. Another
Ziph is mentioned in ver. 24.

Ver. 60.— Klrjath Baal Before these
words the LXX. insert the names of eleven
more cities, among which Tekoah and
Bethlehem are included. For the former
see 2 Sam. xiv. 2 ; 2 Chron. xi. 6 ; xx. 20.
The prophet Amos was one of its herdsmen
(Amos i. 1). We learn from 1 Maccab. ix. 33,
&e., that it was near Jordan, and had a
waste district in its vicinity. It has been
identified with Teku'a, two hours south of
Bethlehem. Of Bethlehem itself, the home
of Buth and David, the birthplace of Jesus
Christ, it is unnecessary to speai. But the
incidents related concerning Bethlehem in
Judg. xvii, xix. (which seem to indicate
that the author of the book had special
information about Bethlehem), as well as the
narrative of the Book of Buth, lead us to
suppose that the verse inserted here by the
\iSiX. is genuine, aiuea Bethlehem was, in



early times, a town of sufficient importance
to be noticed in a list like this, and that its
omission in the Hebrew text is due to tha
mistake of some transcriber,

Ver. 61.— The wlldemess. IS'IO-. This
was the eastern part of the territory of Judah,
bordering on the Dead Sea. Here David
took refuge from the pursuit of Saul (Psa.
Ixiii. 1), and here St. John the Baptist pre-
pared the way of Christ. It is described
by Tristram (' Land of Israel,' p. 197) as " a
wilderness, but no desert." Herbage is to
be found there, but no tarees, no signs of
the cultivation formerly bestowed upon the
hill country (see above, ver. 48). And the
fewness of the cities in early times is a proof
that its character has not been altered by
time. The hiUs, says Canon Tristram, are
of a "peculiar desolate tameness," and are
intersected by the traces of winter water-
courses, seaming the sides of the monotonous
round-topped hills. Other writers describe
this country in less favourable terms, deny-
ing it even the scanty herbage found there
by Canon Tristram.

Ver. 62. — The dty of Salt Probably neat
the valley of Salt (2 Sam. viii. 13 ; 2 Kiug^
xiv. 7; 1 Chron. xviil 12), which mu-t
have been near the border of Edom, ami
in close proximity to the Dead Sea (see note
on ch. iii. 16). Eu-gedl The "fountain
of the kid." Here David took refuge from
Saul ^1 Sam. xxiv. 1). This place, now Ain
Jidy, IS situated in " a plain or slope about
a mile and a half in extent from north to
south" (Tristram, ' Land of Israel,' p. 281).
Here the ruins of the ancient city of Hazezon
Tamar, or " the felling of the palm trees "
(Gen. xiv. 7), are to be found, a city perhaps
" the oldest in the world,"may still be sern.
" The cluster of camphire " (or rather of
henna, the plant with which Oriental women
stained their nails — Cant. i. 14) may stUl be
found there, and its perenniai torrent daslies
still into the Dead Sea. In later times
than those of the Old Testament the Essen es
planted their head-quarters here.

Ver. 63.— As for the Jebusites. This
passage, compared with Judg. i. 8, 21, and
2 Sam. V. 6, implies that the people of Judah
took and set on fire the lower city, but were
compelled to leave the stronghold of Zion
in the hands of the Jebusites (see note on ch.
z. 1). Origen and Theodoret see in tha
Jebusites the type of the nominal members
of Ohrist's Church, who axe not His disciples
indeed. The former refers to Matt. xiii. 25.
Unto this day. A clear proof that thil
book was written before David became Jdn^



CH. XV. 1-63.] THE BOOK OF JOSHUA. SSI



HOMILETICS.

Vers. 1 — 68. — The inheritance of Judah. This chapter does not suggest muoh
matter for homiletic treatment. The chief points to be noticed are (1) the fulfilment
of the prophecy of the pre-eminence of Judah uttered by Jacob (Gen. xlix. 8 — 12),
due no doubt originally to the pre-eminence of Judah for gentleness and justice
above aU his brethren except Joseph ; (2) the picture of fihal and parental affection
in the family of Caleb, as evinced by the manner in which Aohsah made her request,
and the readiness with which, being a reasonable one, it was granted ; (3) the valour
of Othniel, fitting him for his future eminence as a deliverer and judge of Israel ;
and (4) the want of faith, noticed more particularly elsewhere, which, while cities of
such importance as are here enumerated had been given by God into the hand of
Judah, this tribe did not appropriate to itself the promise, and the Philistine cities
became the sorest thorns in their sides of all their surrounding enemies. We may
add (5) that Caleb's behaviour to Achsah supplies us with an iUuatration of the text,
" If ye, being evil, know how to give good gifts to your children, how much more
shall your heavenly Father give good tilings to them that ask Him " (Matt. vii. 11).



HOMILIES BY VARIOUS AUTHORS.

Vers. 16 — 19. — Fulness of blessing. Achsah had something of her father's spirit
in her — ambitious, vigorous, resolute, quick to seize the present opportunity.
Having so lately won his own suit Caleb could scarcely deny her her's. Throiigh
the simple. Oriental form of this narrative we see the working of deep and universal
principles of human life. Let us regard it as suggestive of that restless craving of
our nature which can find satisfaction only in the reaUsation of the higher good.

I. Nature's ceaving. Achsah covets a prize that is as yet beyond her reach.
" Give me a blessing. Thou hast given me a south (dry, barren) land ; give me
also springs of water." How expressive is this of that yearning of the heart by
virtue of which it cannot rest content with present possessions, but is ever reaching
forth towards something more, aricher inheritance, a completer blessing, the perfect
filling up of its capacity, the sense of absolute blessedness. 1. There is an appetite
in the soul of man which is not only insatiable but often becomes more intense the
more it is fed with finite gratificatinns. What is the meaning of life's restless toil
and endeavour, and the perpetual craving for some new form of excitement in the
giddy round and dance of pleasure ? It simply shows what power there is in
earthly good to awaken hopes and longings that it cannot gratify, to quicken an
appetite that it cannot appease. It is not enlargement of possession, the conquering
of fair kingdoms either of knowledge, or wealtli, or social distinction, or means of
enjoyment, that can bring contentment to the soul. This will only feed its discon-
tent unless other conditions are supplied. Man has that within him which spurns
all his attempts to satisfy it thus. It is the mark of his essential greatness that he
is conscious of a hunger which no earth-grown food can satisfy, a thirst which
earthly streams cannot slake, " an aching void the world can never fiU." Study the
facts of your own consciousness. The day-dreams of your iniBgination and your
heart have never been reahsed. Many a pleasant prospect has proved like the
mirage of the desert. Many a fondly-cherished purpose has been Kke a river that
loses itself in the sand. Many a stay in wliioh you trusted has been but as a reed
that breaks and wounds the hand that leans upon it. The world has not satisfied
you. Your fellow-creatures have not satisfied you. You have least of all been
satisfied from yourself. Ami(i\!!Hie happiest arrangement of circumstances you dream
of one that is better. Riph as your earthly inheritance maybe, there are times when
it seems dry and barren to you, and, hke Aohsah, you crave for something more,
(2) When this appetite lifts itself itp consciously to the higher level, fixes itself
upon the spiritual good, it is the evidence of a new Divine life in the soul. We
oome here to an altogether peculiar and distinctive element of feeling. The mere
experience of the unsatisfEwtoriness of all other kinds of good does no* of itself



S64 THE BOOK OF JOSHUA. [oh. xt, 1—63

prepare men to seek after the joys of faith. God said to His sense-bonnd people in
the prophetic age, " Thou art wearied in the greatness of thy way, yet saidst thou
not. There is no hope " f Isa. IviL 10). Their vain carnal life disappointed them,
but they did not repent oi it They were wearied in it, disgusted with it, and still
they clung to it. They hoped on notwithstanding the bUghting and withering of
aU their hopes. How true to human nature and human experience in every age I
The carnal appetite wiU never resolve itself into the spiritual. They are essentially
different things, and point to essentially different causes. The long series of life's
disappointments may be gathered up at last into one sad, deep sigh of conscious
emptiness and weariness — " All is vanity," &o. But does it necessarily assume the
form and tone of an upward yearning for " the things that are above " ? Nay, there
is no saving virtue in the mere groans of a discontented heart. One dare not place
much confidence even in deathbed confessions of the vanity of the world. The
attraction earthwards may have ceased, but perhaps there is no attraction heaven-
wards to take its place. The Ughts of earth may be growing dim, but there is no
soul-captivating view of brightening lights that shine along the eternal shore ;
natural desire fails, but there is no longing for the pure satisfactions of a higher and
a better sphere. So that it is a momentous revolution in the spiritual history of a
man, happen when it will, when he first begins distinctly to reach forth towards the
heavenly and Divine. He becomes a " new creature " when there is thus awakened
within >iim the aspiration of a pure and holy life that he has never known before.
The appetite of his being has taken a new direction, assumed an altogether new
character. He hungers for the " bread of life," and thirsts for the "river of the
water of life " — " hungers after righteousness," and " thirsts for the hving God."

II. Its true satisfaction. Achsah's request is immediately granted. She
receives fi:om her father a completed " blessing " — ^the richer land added to the
poorer to supplement its deficiency. 1. Ood is ever ready to respond to every pure
aspiration of our nature. He who " opens His hand and satisfies the wants of
every living thing " wiU never disregard the cry of His suppliant children. Every
true spiritual desire of which we are conscious contains in itself the pledge of its
own fulfilment. 2. Christ is Ood's answer to the soul's deepest crauoing. In Him
is the fulness of all satisfying good. " Whosoever drinketh of the water that I shall
give him shall never thirst ; but the water that I shall give him shall be in him a
well of water springing up into everlasting hfe " (John iv. 14). In Him we find the
rest of absolute contentment. 3. The joy of the higher life that Christ gives
deepens and prtrifies every natural joy. As the "upper springs" feed the " nether,"
BO when He has conferred on us the Diviner good we discern a richer meaning and
worth in the inferior good.

" Our heart is at the secret sonrca
Of every precious thing."

All that is naturally fair and pleasant upon earth becomes invested vidth a new
charm, and in that which before seemed barren and profitless there are opened to un
unexpected fountains of delight.

" We thirst for springs of heavenly Bfa,
And here all day they rise."

w.

Vers. 16 — 19. — The story of Achsah. I. Love is the strongest motive of
CONDUCT.^ As Othniel was nephew to Caleb, and therefore must have known
Achsah, it is probable that he accepted the challengejto seize Kitjath-sepher from
motives of real affection for the daughter of Caleb. Got has providentially arranged
that human love should serve as a help for the performance of difficult tasks. Chris-
tianity appropriates and consecrates ttie emotion of love by directing it to Christ.
Love is worthless when it wiU not encounter danger and attempt hard tasks. The
highest human affection is shown not in mere pleasing emotions, but in sacrifice
Mid toU

IL !5USBANPS AND -VIIVES SHOUIiP EXEBCJ8E MUTUAf, 00NrR)BN0E. Aobsi^h firS*



•H. XT. 1—68.] THE BOOK OF- JOSHUA. 25B

consults her husband and then proffers her request to her father. Though husbands
and wives have separate spheres of duty, each should be interested in that of the
other. There should be no secrets between them. They should learn to act as one
in important questions. True sympathy will be shown in questions of conduct and
choice, not merely in circumstances of trouble.

III. The dbsihb op eaethly conveniences is not m itself wrong. Achsah
cannot be accused of covetousness. Her request was reasonable. If we do not
put earth in the place of heaven, nor grasp for ourselves what is due to others, nor
forget duty and generosity in greed and self-seeking, the attempt to improve our
condition in the world is natural and right.

rV. Childben should combine confidence with submission in theik conduct
TO thbik parents. Achsah is an example of this combination. She shows con-
fidence in making her request. She shows submission in alighting off her ass and
asking the favour from her father as a " blessing." Reverence and humility are
always becoming, but slavish fear is a proof either of the tyrannous character of the
parent, or of the mean nature of the child. Confidence joined to submission con-
stitutes the right attitude of Christians in approaching their heavenly Father (Eom.
viii. 15).

V. No earthly blessing is perfect in itself. The southland is of little use
without the springs of water. In every condition of life we feel the need of some-
thing more to give us satisfaction. Wealth generates the hunger for greater wealth.
As the field is barren without the waters of heaven, so any earthly inheritance is
profitless to us unless there are added the showers of spiritual blessings (1 Tim. iv.
8).— W. F. A.

Ver. 63. — Invincible Jehusites. The failure of the men of Judah to conquer the
Jebusites is illustrative of the failures men too commonly encounter in the attempt
to accomplish the aims of Hfe.

I. No MAN perfectly SUCCEEDS IN THE TASK OF HIS LIFE. If a man is Satisfied
that he has accomphshed all his aims, this is a proof that those aims were low. We
are bound to aim at the highest thoxigh we never reach it. The most successful
life is stiU a broken hfe. Like the rainbow with half the arch melted away, hke
the waterfall blown into mist before it reaches the ground, like the bird's song cut
short by the storm, Ufe's work ends ragged and unfinished. When failure arises
fi:om the magnitude of the task, we are free from blame if we have laboured our best
at it. But it is usually aggravated by our indolence, cowardice, and culpable weak-
ness. Only Christ has perfectly succeeded (John xvii. 4). We need a higher view
of the requirements of duty, a deeper conviction of our own past failure, more trust
in Crod's power to help us, more consecration of soul and earnest, self-sacrificing
effort.

IL No ChRISTLAN while in this world PERFECTLY SUCCEEDS IN EXPELLING

HIS SINS. The Christian hfe is a warfare with sin. Though God pardons sin
immediately on our repentance and faith in Christ, and gives us grace with which
to conquer it. He requires us to fight against it. The war is not decided by one
battle. It is a Ufe-long conflict. He who claims to have completely conquered is
deceiving himself (1 John i. 8). This is a fact, but one to cause shame, for it is not
a physical necessity. We ought to conquer all sin, and in Christ we have the
means for this perfect victory.

III. The CONQUEST of the world for Christ is slow. The Jebusites were
not completely subdued till the days of David (2 Sam. v. 6, 7). Christian mission
work proceeds slowly. Strongholds of sin, of heathenism, of unbelief, of worldli-
ness still seem invincible. (1) This fact should not shake our faith in the truth of
Christ, for it was predicted while ultimate triumph was promised (Matt. xiii. 31,
32). (2) It should convince us of our own want of faithfiilness. Christ has en-
trusted the extension of His gospel to His Chm-oh. It is to the shame of the Church
that she is so remiss in carrying out her great mission.

IV. No EARTHLY INHERITANCE IS WITHOWT ITS DISADVANTAGES. Canaan WaS

pot paradise. The land flowing with milk and honey also brought forth thorns and



256 THE BOOK OF JOSHUA. [oh. xv. 1—68.

briars. Jemsalem, the future capital of the land, was the last place to be subdued.
Bo we find something amiss in the very core of life. This is owing (1) partly to
our failure to make the best use of this world, and (2) partly to the fact that God
has given us natures too great for any earthly satisfaction. Therefore we must
expect disappointment here. The perfect inheritance is reserved for the next
world.— W. F. A.

Ver. 63. — Failure. We have here the first hint of the incompleteness of Israel's
conquest of the land. The effects of this failure fully to carry out the Divine com-
mand in the extermination of the heathen were very manifest afterwards in the
moral and social Ufe of the people. " Their whole subsequent history, down to the
captivity, was coloured by the wars, by the customs, by the contagion of Phoenician
and Canaanite rites, to which, for good or evil, they were henceforth exposed "
(Stanley). "" They could not take Jerusalem." The reason lay in themselves.
The {skult was their own. They had not enough faith, and of the courage that
springs firom faith. If they had had more of the spirit of their great leader in them
they would not thus have quailed before their foes, or left the work half finished.
The historic fact finds its analogue in the moral and spiritual hfe of men.

It suggests — I. The feebleness that is the result of faithlessness. Want
of power is in various ways coupled iu Scripture with want of faith. There were
times when Christ could not do mighty works among the people " because of their
unbeUef" (Matt. xiii. S8 ; Mark vi. 5). The disciples could not cure the lunatic
chUd " because of their unbelief" (Matt. xvii. 20). Peter could no longer walk on
the water when he began to doubt (Matt. xiv. 31). As the Jews " could not enter
in " to the land of promise " because of their unbeUef," so may we fail to secure our
inheritance in God's everlasting rest (Heb. iti. 19 ; iv. 1 — 14). These examples
suggest that faithlessness is weakness, inasmuch as (1) it severs the soul from the
Divine fountain of strength ; (2) it obscures the soul's vision of those spiritual
reahties which are the inspiration of all high and holy endeavour ; (3) it robs the
soul of all firm standing in the hope of the eternal future. That must be a source
of fatal weakness to a man which thus disconnects him fi-om the higher interests of
his being and leaves him at the mercy of things " seen and temporal." " All things
are possible to him that believeth." To him that beUeveth not, nothing, great or
good, is possible in this world.

II. The ill effects op such moral feebleness. The results of Israel's
failure to exterminate the Canaanites are typical of conditions only too common in
the moral hfe of men. The delay it involved in the settlement of the State —
politically, ecclesiastically ; the perpetual unrest ; the national dii-grace ; the cor-
ruption of the national life by the contagion of idolatry ; the reproach cast on the
name of Jehovah among the nations— all these Have their resemblance in the
penalties of moral failure.

1. Personal dishonour. When a man has not the courag to face and combat
the evils of his own heart and hfe, or that confront him in the world without, he
generally faUs into the shame of some kind of base compromise. He deals sophis-
tically with his own conscience, suppresses the nobler impulses of his nature, behes
the essential principles of his rehgious faith, disowns the bond of his allegiance to
Christ. No greater dishonour possible to a man than this.

2. Spiritual degeneracy. As an enfeebled body is liable to the infection of
disease, so moral laxity leaves men a prey to the destroyer. Corrupting influences
readily take effect upon them. The gates are open, the sentinel is asleep, no wonder
the foe enters and takes possession of the citadel. " From him that hath not shall
be taken away," &o. (Matt. xiii. 12).

3. Exaggeration of opposing difficulties. The sense of moral weakness and
falsenesa conjures up obstacles in the path of duty or endeavour that do not really
exist High moral excellence seems impossible to him who is content to grovel
The faithless heart always " sees a hon in the way."



" The wise and active conquer difficulties
By daring to attempt them. Sloth and



Sloth and folly



OH. XVI. 1—10.]



THE BOOK OF JOSHUA.



26T



Shiver and sbrink at sight of toil and danger.
And make the impossibilities they fear."

4. Defectvoe witness for God. Every suoh case of spiritual failure is a hindrance
10 me progress of the kingdom of heaven among men, tliwarts so far the Divine
purpose in the triumph of truth and righteousness. The hostile forces of the
world laugh at a half-hearted service of Christ. The strongholds of iniquity can
never fall before a church enfeebled by the spirit of unbelief — W.



EXPOSITION.



CHAPTEB XVI. 1—10.



Tbeinhebitance op Efbbaim and Manas-
SBH. Ver. 1. — FeU. lAteisJljcameforthfi.e,,
out of the urn. The water of Jerlcbo.
" This is the present fountain of es Sultan,
half an hour to the west of Biha, the only
large fountain in the neighbourhood of
Jericho, whose waters spread over the plain
and forma small brook" (or small stream,
according to Von Schubert), " which flows in
the rainy season through the Wady Kelt
into the Jordan" (Keil and Delitzsch).
This spring, which rises amid the nebek
trees and the wheat fields, " springs from
the earth at the eastern base of a little
tnoU ; the water is sweet, clear, and agree-
able, neither cold nor warm" (Bitter). It
flows, he adds, into a basin nine feet broad,
in which many fish may be seen playing.
This border coincides with the northern
border of Benjamin (see ch. XTiii. 11 — 20).
Bitter mentions another spring, nearer to
the Kuruntul or Quarantania range,, and
adds that, "under the wise management of
an efficient government, and with the
security of the district from the depreda-
tions of predatory savages, the oasis of
Jericho might unquestionably resume the
paradisaical aspect it onoe bore." To the
wilderness. Or, by or along the wilderness.
The Hebrew requires some preposition to
be supphed. This wilderness is the same
as that spoken of as the wilderness of Beth-
aven in ch. xviii. 12. Througliout Mount
Bethel. The Vulgate has, ^'to Mount
Bethel." The LXX. renders, "unto the
hill country unto Bethel." The Hebrew may
be rendered, "along the hiU country unto
Bethel" (see oh. xviii. 12). The Syriao
renders, " up to the mountain which goeth
unto Bethel ; " but we must understand this
of a range of mountains, and then we can
identify the border with the double rooky
ridge which stretches from the Mons
Quarantania, of which we have already
heard (oh. ii.), and from the pool of Ain es
Sultan, just mentioned, as far as Bethel.

Ver. 2. — From Bethel to Luz. Like
Jerusalem and ^ha Capitolina, or old
and new Carthage, the new city did not

JOSHUA.



coincide precisely In its rite with the old
one (see ch. xviii. 13 ; also Gen. xxviii. 19 ;
XXXV. 6; Judg. i. 23). Bethel was prob-
ably built, as far as could be ascertained,
on the spot near the Ganaanitish city where
the wanderer Jacob spent the night in
which the famous vision appeared to tiim
(see Gen. xxviii. 11). Knobel, however,
renders literally. Bethel- Luzah, as though
the older and later names had been here con-
joined. The borders of Archl Bather, the
borders of the Archite (cf. 2 Sam. xv. 32;
xvi. 16 ; 1 Chron. xxvii. 33). This is the
only clue we have to the residence or tribe
of Hushai.

Ver. 3. — JaphletL Bather, the JopWftfttt*;
but it is unknown what this family was.
Beth-horon the nether (see ch. x. 10). In
ver. 5 we have Upper Beth-horon, but the
places were close together. For Gezer, see
ch. X. 33.

Ver. 5. — The border of the children of
Ephraim. The Hebrew word is translated
indifferently by coast and border in our
translation. The border of Joseph is very
slightly traced out by the historian. It is
difficult to give a reason for this fact, when
we remember that Joseph, consisting as it
did of the preponderating tiibe of Ephraim,
together with half the tribe of Manasseh,
constituted by far the most important
portion of Jewish territory. See, however.
Introduction for the bearing of this fact
on the authorship of the book. It is by no
means easy to define the boundaries of the
tribes ; but, with the utmost deference to the
authority of one so long engaged in the
actual survey of the Holy Land as Mr.
Gonder, I feel unable to accept the maps
he has given us in his ' Handbook ' as an
accurate account of them. Sometimes,
perhaps, an eager attempt at the identi-
fication of certain places may lead astray
those who are most famihar with their
subject. But there are certain plain
statements of the Book of Joshua which
cannot be lightly set aside. Thus the
extremity (nXVh) of the border of Ephraim
is distinctly stated in ver. 8 to be the sea.
To translate " westward " would rob the



168



THE BOOK OP JOSHUA,



[CH. XTI. 1— IOL



Bxpression n'KV'n of all meaning, even if
no* had not the article. Thus Dan can
only have approached towards Joppa, but
cannot have reached it. And it will be ob-
served in ch. xix. 46, in accordance with this
view, that the outgoings of the Danite border
are jwt said to have been the sea. Next, it
would seem that the Ataroth of ver. 2
(not of yer. 7) and Ataroth - addar are
either the same place or close together, and
that the present verse gives a small portion
of the south-eastern boundary as far as
Beth-horon. Why the boundary is not
traced out further (" the author only gives
the western part of the southern border,
and leaves out the eastern," Enobel) we can-
not tell, but the natural translation of ver. 6
is, " and the western border ran to Mich-
methah on the north " (so Knobel). There
was so smalt a portion of Ephraim on the
sea that the Une of the Wady Kanah in a
north-easterly direction to Miohmethah,
near Sheohem, might be called a western,
as it certainly was a north-western, border.
Then the border deflected (lp3) and ran in a
south-westerly direction to Jericho. Manas-
seh seems to have been bounded by Asher
on the north and Issachar on the east, from
the borders of Asher to Miohmethah, and
its western boundary the sea from the Wady
Kanah to the neighbourhood of Dor. It
seems impossible, with the distinct state-
ment that Dor was in Asher (oh. xvii. 11) —
it could hardly have been in Issachar — and
that Oarmel was part of its western border
(ch. xix. 26), to thrust a wedge of Zebnlun
between Manasseh and Asher, as Mr. Gen-
der has done. The invention of an Asher-
ham-Michmethah must not be allowed to
set aside the plain statement (ch. xvii. 10)
that Manasseh impinged (VJD) upon Asher
in a northerly direction — that is, was
botmded on the north by that tribe. Then,
as Asher was the northern, so it would
seem from the passage just cited that
Issachar was, as has been suggested, the
eastern boundary, and that Issachar was
bounded by the Jordan eastward, Manasseh
westward, and by Ephraim tO' the south-
west, and some distance further south than
is usually supposed. Yet oh. xvii. 11 must
not be forgotten in fixing the boundary of
Issachar (see note on oh. xix. 17 — 23). Its
northern border, comprehending Jezreel,
and bounded by Tabor, was thrust in
between Zehulun and Naphtali. Tabor
was evidently the border of these three
tribes. It is with much diffidence that
I venture to offer these suggestions,
but they appear to have the sanction of
the plain statements of the sacred writer.
It would seem as though the comparative
(mallness of the tenitoxy assigned to



Joseph led to the cession of some of the
towns northward of the Wady Eanah
by Manasseh to Ephraim, Manasseh re-
ceiving compensation by receiving Beth-
shean, Ibleam, Dor, Endor, Taanach, and
Megiddo from Issachar and Asher. The
possession of Beth-shean by Manasseh may
be due to the fact that the boundary of
Manasseh ran along the chain of moun-
tains bordering the great plain of Esdraelon,
until it almost reached the Jordan. Ad-
ditional reasons for entertaining these
opinions will be given in the following
notes. On the east side was Ataroth-
addar. It is hardly possible to avoid
the conclusion that a passage has been
omitted here by the transcriber. If so,
it must have been at a very early period,
since the LXX. shows no sign of it, save
that some copies add " and Gezer." But
this is probably added from ver. 3, and is
in no sense an eastern border.

Ver. 6. — And the border went out towards
the sea. Or, "and the western border." On
the north side. Or, " northward." Appa-
rently a line is drawn from the sea, which
(ver. 3) is given as the termination of the
southern boundary to Michmethah, near
Sheohem (ch. xvii. 7). Enobel thinks that
Michmethah (the signification of which is
perhaps hiding-place) was upon the water-
shed, and thus served as a dividing-point.
Went about. Eather, deflected. The border
ran in a north-easterly direction to Mich-
methah. It then bent back and ran in a
south-easterly direction to Jericho.

Ver. 7. — Ataroth. Another Ataroth, on
the northern border of Ephraim. The
name, which signifies crowns, is a common
one (see Num. xxxii. 3, 34, 35 ; 1 Chron. ii.
54). Came to Jericho. Or perhaps skirted
Jericho. The word used (see note on ver. 5)
is akin to the Latin pango and our impinge.

Ver. 8. — ^The border went out from Tap-
puah westward. This would seem to be a
more minute description of the border line
dravm from the sea to Michmethah above.
Tappuah seems to have been near Mich-
methah, and on the border (ch. xvii. 8) of
Manasseh. According to Enobel, Tappuah
signifies plain, which is a little incon-
sistent with his idea that Michmethah, close
by, was the water-shed. Tappuah elsewhere
signifies apple. Unto the river Eanah. The
winter-bound torrent Kanah, so named
from its reeds and canes, formed the border
between Ephraim and Manasseh. And the
goings out (UteraUy, extremities) thereof
were at the sea. This is the only possible
Interpretation of the passage, in spite ol
the obscurity caused by the same word being
used for " sea " and " west."

Ver. 9. — And the separate dtlea Lite>



CH. XVI. 1 — 10.]



THE BOOK OF JOSHUA.



259



rally, and the cities divided off. The word
" were," in our version, is misplaced. It
should be read thus: "And there were
cities divided off and assigned to the tribe of
Ephraim in the midst of the inheritance of
the sons of Manasseh " (see note on ver. 5).
This fact, together with the compensation
given to Manasseh, may serve to explain
the cohesion of the ten tribes in opposition
to Judah. The boimdaries of the latter
tribe were more strictly defined, her attitude
more exclusive. We may almost discern
this in the prominence given to Judah in
the present book. Ephraim, already enraged
at the passing away of the pre-eminence
from itself, which had not merely been pre-
dicted, but, as Judg. viii. 1 — 3 and xii. 1
show, had been actually enjoyed, was closely
allied to Manasseh, and Manasseh to



Issachar and Zebulun, by the arrangement
we are considering. It would naturally be
able, by its position and these circum-
stances, to combine together the rest of the
tribe against the somewhat overbearing
attitude of the tribe of Judah (see 2 Sam.
zix. 43).

10. And they drave not out The
Bphraimites soon grew slack in the fulfil-
ment of the DiTine command. There is a
distinction, apparently, between this passage
and ch. xv. 68. There the tribe of Judah
was unable to drive out the Jebusites from
their stronghold, and no mention is made
of tribute. Here the Ephraimites seem
dehberately to have preferred the easier task
of reducing the Oanaanites to tribute to the
sterner and more difdoult task of destroying
them utterly.



HOMILIES BY VAEIOUS AUTHORS,
Ver. 10. — Cwnaamites still in the land,. I. Canaanites still in the land

WEEK A 'WITNESS TO THE PAILUEE OP THE JeWS TO ACCOMPLISH GOD'S V7ILL. They

may have failed (1) from weakness and indolence, (2) from mercenary motives,
thinking to make profit out of the Canaanites with their tribute. But these
Canaanites were a cause of future trouble and a constant temptation to idolatry and
immorality. We shall always buffer when we neglect God's will for worldly
convenience.

II. Canaanites eemainino in the land weae an instance of the mixed con-
dition OF human society. Wheat and tares grow together. The Church and the
world are in close contact. It is dangerous to associate with evil company when
we can avoid it (Psa. i. 1). But it is also wrong for Christians to neglect their duty
to the world in order to escape the contamination of the world's wickedness.

III. Canaanites remaining in the land weee an example of a common cause
OF national weakness. Much of the trouble of the dark age of the Judges arose
from this fact. A nation to be strong must be united as one body, and it can only
be so united when there are common sympathies binding the people together. The
government which is effected through the forcible subjugation of unwilling peoples
must always rest on an unstable basis, and can never accomplish the highest good
of the subject races. Therefore it should be the aim of a government to avoid, if
possible, the conquest of new, unwilUng subjects, to cultivate the affections of all
classes beneath it, and to weld them together by just equality of administration, and
the development of common interests. Where national assimilation is impossible
it is better that a common government should not be attempted.

IV. Canaanites eemaining in the land webe a type of sins eemadjino in the
HEAET OF THE Cheistian. (1) Most of the land was conquered. The heart of the
Christian is conquered by Christ. Christ sits enthroned there. Sin is dispossessed
of the citadel. (2) Canaanites still lurhed m obscm-e corners of the land. Sin still
lingers about the life of the Christian. It retains its old character unaltered, and
must be regarded as dangerous (Rom. vii. 23). (3) These Canaanites were so far
subdued that they served under tribute. The sin that remains in the Christian's
heart no longer reigns there. It is a defeated enemy. It will be ultimately
exterminated. The temptation to it may be converted into w instrument M
wholesame discij^line. — W. £'. A.



260



THE BOOK OF JOSHUA-



[oh. Tva. 1—18.



EXPOSITION.



OHAPTEB XVn. 1—18.

Ver. 1. — There was also a lot. The prefer-
able translation is, " and the lot for the
tribe of Manasseh—for he was ths firstborn
of Joseph — was (or fell) to Machir the son of
Manasseh. That is to say, the proper poa-
Beasioa of the tribe of Manasseh fell to
Machir and his descendants only, because
of their warlike spirit, and possibly on
aooormt of their numbers also. They were
Buffioient to occupy the land of Gilead and
Bashau, extensive and powerful though it
was, while the rest of the tribe had a share
in the inheritance westward of Jordan (see
also ch. xiii. 29 — 31). For ha was the flrst-
l)orn of Joseph. There has been much dis-
cussion why these words were introduced.
It is probable that they are intended as an
explanation of the existence of Ephraim
and Manasseh as separate tribes; or possibly
this is introduced to suggest the reason for
mentioning the tribes in this order since
Ephraim was not the firstborn (see Gen.
xlviii. 5, 14). The lather of Gilead There
■eeihs no reason to accept Keil's dictum,
that because Gilead here has the article,
whereas in other places where it signifies
Maohir's son it has not, the country and
not the man is meant, and " father " must
be taken as equivalent to "lord." The
nsage is found in Arabic and Ethiopio, but
not in Hebrew. The reason why Gilead as
the name of the individual has the article
here is most likely because ho gave his
name to the territory mentioned imme-
diately afterwards. Therefore he had.
There is no " therefore " in the original,
where we find " and he had. " We must
understand this as spoken of the tribe, not
personally of Machir, who had been long
dead (see note on ch. vi. 25).

Ver. 2. — There was also a lot. Or, and
(the lot) was (or fell). Abiezer (see Judg.
vi.ll ; viii. 2). Gideon, therefore, was of the
tribe of Manasseh. He is called Jeezer in
Num. xxvi. 30. The male children. Bather,
the male descendants. None of the persons
here mentioned were (Num. xxvi. 30, 31 ;
1 Ghron. vii, 18) the sons of Manasseh.

Ver. 3. — Zelophehad (see Num. xxxvi.).
The inheritance here described as being
given to the daughters of Zelophehad was
80 given on condition of their marrying
within the limits of their own tribe, a con-
dition which was fulfilled. Thus the name
of Zelophehad, and the portion of land be-
longing to him, was not blotted out from
the memory of his descendants.

Ver. 4. — And they came near. In order
to demand the fulfilment of the decree of



Moses just referred to, to which they appeal
in support of their claim (sea also Num.
xxvii. 1—7).

Ver. 5. — And there fell ten portiona
Literally, and the measured portions oj
Manasseh fell ten {fm, number). It will be
observed that the descendants of Manasseh,
exclusive of Hepher, are five in number.
These, with the five portions allotted to the
family of Zelophehad, the son of Hepher,
made up ten.

Ver. 6. — The rest of Manasseh's sons.
Namely, the descendants of Machir (see ver.
1). The ambiguity is due to the indefinite
way in which "son" is used in Scripture.
Thus the B'ne Israel, which we translate
" children of Israel," is literally, " sons of
Israel," or Jacob, So the sons of Ma-
nasseh, in like manner, are Manasseh's de-
scendants.

Ver. 7.— Coast Bather, border. Asher.
This has been supposed not to be the
tribe of Asher, for this was on the north,
but a city which has been identified with
the modern Yasir, about five hours' distance
from Nablous, or Neapolis, on the road to
Beisan.or Beth-sbean, where,Bays Delitzsch,
there are " magnificent ruins " now to be
seen. See, however, note ver. 10. Mich-
methah (see oh. xvi. 6). This place has
not been identified. All we know is that
it is opposite {»;:a"^y) Shechem. Some
have thought that this is simply the de-
nominative of Asher, to distinguish it from
the tribe, and that for "Asher to Michme-
thah " we should read " Asher-ham-Mich-
methah." But this could hardly be the
Tasir above, since it is opposite Shechem.
Shechem. Now Nablous. TMsplace is famous
both in the Old and the New Testament. We
first read of it, under the name of Sichem, in
Gen. xii. 6. It was the abode of Shechem
and Hamor his son, when Jacob abode in
Canaan after his return from Padan-aram.
It was situated between Gerizim and Ebal,
and became an important city in the days
of the Judges (Judg. ix.). It was destroyed
by Abimelech (Judg.ix. iS), but it seems to
have recovered. It was thither that Eeho-
boam went to be crowned, and there that
his injudicious answer alienated for ever the
ten tribes from his rule. Jeroboam made it
his capital and is said to have " built " it
(1 Kings xii. 25). He afterwards, however,
abandoned it for Penuel, and Peuuel again
apparently for Tirzah (1 Kings xiv. 17), and
Tirzah for Jezreel, which remained the
capital until Omri built Samaria (1 Kings
xvi. 24). It is no doubt the Sychar men-
tioned in St. John iv. Most travellers



«». ivit. 1— IB.J



I^SE BOOK OP JOSStJA.



261



have aSmired the picturesque situation of
Sheehem. It has even extorted a tribute
from Br, Feterman, in his ' Beifen im
Orient,' a work which, however full of
valuable information regarding the con-
dition and customs of the people, does
not abound in description of scenery. He
becomes almost poetical as he speaks of this
town, resting on the slopes of Gerizim, a
mountain fruitful to its summit, and having
opposite the bare, stony el Ebal, its outKue
unrelieved by verdure, the haunt of jackals,
whose howls, like the cry of wailing chil-
dren in distress, disturb the silence of the
night. Thomson (' Land and the Book,' p.
470) thus describes the scene: "A valley
green with grass, grey with olives, gardeos
sloping down on each side, fresh springs
rushing down in all directions ; at the end a
white town embosomed in all this verdure
lodged between the two high mountains
which extend on each side of the valley ;
this is the aspect of Nablous, the most
beautiful, perhaps it might be said the only
beautiful, spot in Central Palestine. Thirty-
two springs can be traced in different parts.
Here the bilbul delights to sit and sing, and
thousands of other birds delight to swell
the chorus."

Ver. 9. — Southward of the broolz. It
would seem as if some words had fallen
away here also. The LXX. adds Jariel,

translates flbx (these) by terebinth, and
omits the word " cities." The cities south-
ward of the brook belonged of course to
Ephraim. But what is meant here is that
Ephraim had cities north of the brook. That
the border of Manasseh lay to the northward
of the brook is asserted twice over in the
latter part of this and the next verse.
These cities of Ephraim are among (lite-
rally, in the midst of) the cities of Manasseh
(see ch. xvi. 9). If exact and minute
accuracy is found in this record, how
is it that accusations of inaccuracy are
so readily made against its author, when
his narrative is clearly very much abbre-
viated, and where a fuller knowledge of the
facts might possibly clear up what now
appears obaouro? Our present text has not
the names of these cities.

Ver. 10. — And they met together. Bather,
they {i.e., the Manassites) impinged (this is
the very same word as the Hebrew WJS;*),
i.e., " touched upon." There has been great
discussion concerning this passage. The
Uteral meaning is clearly that Manasseh
was bordered by Asher on the north, and
Issachar on the east. The idea of an Asher-
ham-Michmethah must be given up if we
take this rendering of the Hebrew. Its
only justification is the fact that if Mich-



methah be at once the northern border of
Ephraim and Manasseh, the territory of
Manasseh is cut almost in half. And, in
fact, such a supposition makes confusion
worse confounded. Is it probable that La
vers. 7 and 10 Asher-ham-Michmethah is
meant ; that the town Asher is mentioned
in similar terms to the tribe Issachar in the
latter verse ; and that in ver. 11, without
a Single intimation of the change of mean-
ing, the tribes Issachar and Asher are men-
tioned 1 Again : if Dor — considerably to the
south of Mount Carmel — was within the
territory of Asher (ver. 11), how can we
possibly, as Conder's ' Handbook ' does,
place the Umits of Asher at Accho, and
bring Zebulun to the sea (which it never
reaches, for " toward the sea," in oh. six. 11
clearly means "westward"), interposing a
large strip of territory between Manasseh
and Asher, placing Dor, in spite of ver. 11,
far within the limits of Manasseh, and
giving this last tribe, or rather haU-tribe,
an extraordinarily disproportioned share of
the land ? (See the complaint in ver. 16),
Zebulun, too, was on the eastern border of
Asher (ch. six. 27), and it is by no means
certain that Shihor Libnath (see ch. xix. 26)
is not the Wady Zerka, south of Dor. This
is the view of Enobel, a commentator by
no means void of acuteness. This contrac-
tion of Manasseh's territory explains why
cities had to be given to it out of Asher and
Issachar, as well as the complaint in the
latter part of this chapter. Issachar, too,
must have stretched considerably southward.
But the vagueness of the description of
Manasseh "s border, especially on the north,
prevents us from assigning any limits to
Issachar in this direction; while it is im-
possible, with a writer in the Quarterly
Papers of the Palestine Exploration Fund,
to suppose that it extended from Jezreel
and Shunem and Endor on the north as
far as Jericho to the south.

Yer. 11. — And Manasseh had In Issachar
and in Asher (see ch. xvi. 9). Beth-shean.
Afterwards called Scythopolis, now Beisau.
It was a "noble city" in the days of
Eusebius and Jerome. Many travellers
have remarked on its splendid situation,
" in this vast area of plain and mountains,
in the midst of abundant waters and ex-
uberant fertility " (Eobinson, ' Later Bibl.
Ees.' sec. 7). " Just beyond, and separated
by a narrow ridge, is another stream, also
perennial, and on the peninsular formed by
these two, with a bold, steep brow overlook,
ing the Ghor, stood the citadel of ancient
Beth-shean —a sort of Gibraltar on a small
scale — of remarkable natural strength, and
inaccessible to horsemen. No wonder that
it was long ere Israel could wrest it from



THE BOOK OF JOSHUA.



[oh. xvn. 1—18,



the Canaanites. The eastern face rieea like
a steep cone, most incorrectly stated by
Bobinson to be ' black, and apparently
volcanic;' and by Porter, 'probably a
crater.' Certainly there are many blocks
of basalt lying about, but the hill is simply
a Hmestone bluff." (Tristram, 'Land of
Israel,' p. 501). He goes on, " How clearly
the details of the sad end of Saul were re-
called as we stood on this spot " (the sum-
mit of the cone). " There was the slope of
Gilboa, on which his army was encamped
before the battle. Bound that hiU he slunk
by night, conscience-stricken, to visit the
witch of Bndor. Hither, as being a Canaan-
itish fortress, the PhiHstines most naturally
brought the trophies of the royal slain, and
hung them up just by this wall. By the
Tasir, and across that plain below us, the
gallant men of Jabesh-Gilead hurried on
their long night's march to stop the in-
dignity offered to Israel, and to take down
the bodies of their king and his eons."
Jabesh-Gilead was not far off, and though
in full view of the mountain, yet the men of
Jabesh could creep along the Ghor by night
and climb the steep face of the rock unsus-
pected by the warriors above ; while the
roar of the brook would drown all the
sounds they might make (see Thomson,
'Land and the Book,' p. 454). And her
towns. Literally, daughters, Kmiiai LXX. ;
viculi, Vulgate. Canon Tristram remarks
how each hiU in some parts of Palestine is
crowned by a village, a number of which
still cluster, as of old, round the chief city
of the district. So in Italy we may see how
times of unsettlement led to a similar
policy. The fear of the northern pirates
led to the planting the mediaeval towns on
hills, and the disturbed state of the country
kept them there tiU a comparatively late
period. But many of them are deserted in
this more peaceful age. Ibleam. Only known
as near the place where Jehu gave Ahaziah
his death-blow. It was near Megiddo (see
2 Kings ix. 27). Dor (see above ch. xi. 2).
Keil thinks that Dor and aU the cities after
it are in the accusative to " could not drive
out" in the next verse. But it is more
probable that nX was an anacolouthon.
Vandevelde (' Travels,' i. 333) says that he
did not wonder that the faint-hearted Ma-
nassites shrank from attacking Dor when
he saw its formidable position. Endor. This,
the abode of the famous witch, still bears
the old name. It is four miles south of
Mount Tabor, in a country honeycombed
with caves, and it stands on the shoulder
of Little Hermon. The word signifies the
" fount of Dor," or " the dwelling."
Taanadl. For this and Megiddo see ch.
xii 21. Three coimtrles. Rather, three



MIU, or elevated spots (Napheth, see note,
ch. zi. 2). Gesenius compares the name
Tremont. The reference is to Endor,
Taanach, and Megiddo. KeU suggests
province, but he does not explain how a
derivative of Pj-IJ can have this latter signi-
fication (cf. Psa. xlviii. 3. Beautiful for its
height (fjlj) is Mount Zion). The LXX. and
Vulgate regard it as a proper name, and
translate, "the third part of Nopheth,"
They are puzzled by the expression here, as
in ch. xi. 2.

Ver. 12.— Would dwell. The LXX. and
Vulgate translate, " began to dwell," an ob-
vious mistake here, though the word some-
times has this signification. They willed to
dwell there, in spite of their defeats, and
their purpose was not frustrated,

Ver. 14. — ^And the children of Joseph.
The attitude of the children of Joseph
throughout the history of the twelve tribes
is ia precise accordance with the hint given
here. They were proud of their numerical
preponderance over the remaining tribes.
Thus they, and they only, ventured to re-
monstrate with Joshua about the inadequa:Cy
of the portion allotted to them. Such a
sensitiveness was hkely to degenerate into
insolence when the authority of the great
leader was removed. And the history of
Gideon (Judg. viii. 1 — 3) and of Jephthah
(Judg. zii. 6) shows that this was actually
the case. Here, again, we have a sign of
that deep under-current of consistency which
underlies our history, and is a guarantee of
its authenticity. Seeing I am a great
people. The tribe of Joseph, at the census
described in Num. 1., outnumbered every
tribe but that of Judah. At the census in
the plains of Moab (Kum. xxvi.) the tribe
of Joseph outnumbered them all, though
the relative proportions of Ephraim and
Manaseeh were altered, the latter being now
considerably the larger of the two tribes.
The whole number of the fighting men of
Israel underwent a slight diminution during
the passage through the wilderness. But
the demand of the tribe of Joseph seems to
have been a little unbecoming, since Joseph
had obtained two lots and two portions,
since half the tribe of Manasseh had settled
on the east of Jordan. Hence no doubt the
covert sarcasm of Joshua's reply, for, aa
Delitzsch shows, Judah, and even Dan, con-
siderably outnumbered Ephraim and the
half-tribe of Manasseh. Part, however, of
their complaint was no doubt caused by the
idea that Joshua, as one of themselves,
ought to have taken more care of the in-
terests of his own tribe. Joshua, however,
as a true servant of God ought to be, was
above such petty considerations, though
many who live under a higher dispensation



CH. XTIt 1—18.]



THE BOOK OF JOSHUA.



263



find it impossible to emancipate themBelves
{rem such bondage. Forasmucb as the
Lord liatb blessed me bltheito. Or, hath
blessed me to this extent (but see Exod. vii.
16). There is doubtless here an allusion to
Jacob's blessing (Gen. xlviii. 20 ; xlix. 22 —
26), the fulfilment of which would naturally
make a deep impression on the minds of
the children of Joseph. Blessing was the
word reiterated over and over again by the
dying patriarch as he gazed upon the chil-
dren of his best-beloved son. Here, again,
we have one of those delicate touches, im-
possible to a writer of fiction, which show
that we have here an authentic record of
facts. No doubt the consciousness of the
enthusiastic language of Jacob, reiterated
npon an almost equally solemn occasion by
Moses (Deut. xxxiii. 13-17), coupled with
the obvious fulfilment of these predictions,
led the tribe of Joseph to demand as a right
the leadership in Israel, and no doubt pre-
disposed the other tribes to concede it. 'i he
rivalry of Judah, to which reference has
already been made, and which culminated
in the sovereignty of David, was calculated
to produce a breach which it required the
utmost tact to heal. Pity it was that the
Ephraimites and Manassites forgot the fact
that the blessing was conditional, and
neglected to lay to heart the terrible warn-
ings in Deut. xxviii. But it is too often so
with men. They expect the fulfilment of
prophecies which predict their aggrandise-
ment, and too often strive themselves to
hasten the hand of God, while the warnings
of God's Word, since they are less pleasant
to the natural man, are permitted to pass
by unheeded (see vers. 12, 13, which was
the first step on the downward road).

Ver. 15. — If thou be a great people. As
though Joshua would say, ' ' You are ready
enough to boast, but unwilling to act. If
your tribe be as large as you say it is, it is
capable of taking care of itself. There is
the vast forest of Central Palestinebefore you.
Do not complain to me, but go and take
possession of it." Get thee up into the wood
country. The word " couatry " is not in
the original, which is, strictly speaking, in
the direction of the wood. Whether this be
the " wood of Ephraim " mentioned in 2
Sam. xviii. 6 has been much disputed.
For not only David is related to have
crossed the Jordan, but Absalom also, in
hot pursuit of his father (see 2 Sam. xvii.
22, 24). Neither army is mentioned as
having reorossed the river; and it is a ques-
tion whether it is more probable that there
happened to be a " wood of Ephraim " on
the other side of Jordan, or that Joab
and Absalom, with their respective armies,
lecroBsed Jordan without a word being



said of the fact by the historian ; the more
especially as David (see 2 Sam. xix. 15 — 17,
31) remained on the other side Jordan,
while yet it was possible for the Ethiopian
attendant, as well as Jonathan, to run to
him with tidings of the defeat and death of
Absalom. For the wood country in this
neighbourhood cf. Psa. cxxxii. 6. Ewald
would regard the language here as figura-
tive, and the wood as referring to the power-
ful Phoenician tribes in the neighbourhood.
He regards this answer as a sign of Joshua's
"wit." But the interpretation seems far-
fetched and improbable. Cut down. Or,
make a clearing, just as emigrants do now
in the piimeval forest. This wood, or forest,
has now disappeared, though sufficient wood
stOl remains to testify to the correctness ofi
the hintory. FerlzKltes and of the giants.
The Bcphaim (see notes on ch. iii. 10 ; xii.
4). It Mount Sphralm be too narrow for
thee. This fastness in the heart of the
land, the refuge of Ehud, the dwelling.
place of Deborah, the early homo of
Samuel, was well adapted to purposes of
secrecy and defence, but not so well suited
for a place of habitation.

Ver. 16.— And the children of Joseph
Bald. This reply justifies Joshua's sarcasm.
The Ephraimites and Manassites blame
Joshua when they ought to be blaming
themselves. They excuse themselves from
a task which they are too idle to execute,
and wish Joshua to make arrangements for
them which are wholly mmeeessary. The
hill Is not enough for us. Literally, the
hill is not found for us — that is, is not suf-
ficient (see Num. xi. 22 ; Zech. x. 10). Of
the valley of JezreeL Bather, in the valley
of Jezreel. The word for valley in this verse
is p^l^. (see note on oh. viii. 13). Jezreel abut-
ted on the great plain of Esdraelon, a name
which is but a corruption of Jezreel (see note
on ch. xix. 18), where the chariots of iron
could be used with effect, a thing impossible
in the mountain districts. Hence the fact
that the hill country of Palestine was more
rapidly and permanently occupied than the
plains (see Ewald, ' History,' ii. 2 C, and
Bitter's 'Geography of Palestine,' ii. 328.
Cf. Judg.i. 19, and note on ch. xi. 6). Here,
once more, we have a proof that we have
real history before us, and not a collection
of poetic mjths.

"Ver. 18. — But the mountain shall 1m
thine, for It Is a wood. This passage
makes it clear that it was not the whole
territojy of Mount Ephraim, but only the
portion habitable at present, that was too
small for Ephraim and Manasseh. When
cleared it would afford them more space.
But Joshua also recommends them to extend
their operations beyond ita borders, as is deal



3«4



TttE BOOK OP JOSatlA,



[en. xva i— 19.



from the mention of the "plain," and the
" chariots of iron " (see next note). The
outgoings. Not only the mountain itself,
but the country to which the mountain
passes led. Thou Bhalt drive out. Perhaps
tkou may est drive out — i.e., it is in thy
power. Though they have Iron chariots,
and though they he strong. " No weapon
can prosper " against him who trusts in the
Lord. Yet, in spite of the encouragement
given by Joshua, the children of Joseph did
not drive the Canaanites out, as vers. 11 —
13 show. The only reason of this was that
they did not trust in God, but preferred an
unworthy compromise with neighbours who,
however riuL in warlike material, were sunk
in seUBoality and sloth. Keil would tender



"because" for "though," and regard the
very fact of the strength of the Canaanites
as the reason that the sons of Joseph would
subdue them. But Exod. xiii 17 ; Ps. xUx.
17 supply us with other instances of *5
in the sense of although, which certainly
is the best sense here. " Let it be remem-
bered how long it was before the Saxons
were firmly established in Britain, the Is-
lamite Arabs in Egypt. Israel could look
for no reinforcements from kindred left be-
hind. So much the worse might afterwards
be the position of the nation, left alone
without hope of kindred auxiliaries to meet
the repeated outbreaks of the half-subdued
Canaanites " (Ewald, ' Hist. Israel,' ii. 2. o.).



HOMILETICa

Ver. 18. — The lot of Joseph. I. No compeomisb ■with bih. The Israelites, aa
■wo have seen, ■were promised the possession of Palestine on condition that they
should exterminate its inhabitants. They did not do this, either (1) because they
■were indisposed to the exertion, as in the case of the Jebusites (oh. xv. 63), or
(2) because they found bhe process of exacting tribute more convenient. No type
of the ordinary conduct of Christians is more precisely accurate. Constantly in
youth they either (1) will not give themselves the trouble to root out evil habits,
but give way to them, because the task is so dif&cult, or (2) indulge themselves in
sin because it is so pleasant. The consequences are a disastrous captivity to sinful
habits -which last^ half a lifetime, and leaves its mark upon the sinner for Ms
whole hie. Great and mighty deliverers may arise vsithin, as they did in Israel,
but there is a liability to relapse, 'Which long asserts itseK Instances of these truths
are hardly dif&cult to find.

II. They that touch pitch shaix be defiled therewith. The command to
exterminate the Israelites was not an arbitrary one. It was given because of the
terrible depravity of the Phoenician people, and because of the equally terrible
attractiveness of their sins. God well knew (and the narrative in Num. xx-vi. is
Buf&cient to prove it to us) that the Israelites could not resist the contamination of
this evil influence if they allowed themselves to be exposed to it. But they did not,
or would not, believe this. And consequently, till the Babylonish capti-vity, -with its
stem lessons, taught them better, they continued to faU lo^wer and lower into the
abominations of the abominable, revolting, and unfeeling worship of their neigh-
bours ; nor was it surprising, vfhexx ■we find that Solomon, v^ith all his vrisdom,
could not escape the contagion. We may learn thus that neither intellect, nor
prudence, nor even the sanctifying influences of a holy calling, ■wUl enable us to resist
the allurements of bad company, when we voluntarily sun-ender ourselves to them.
The only safe way for the Israelites to meet the Canaanites was in battle array,
with arms in their hands. So the Christian's only safeguard against evil company
is never to enter it, save on the path of duty, and never to part with his weapons of
faith and prayer. " Surely," then, " in vain is the net spread in the sight of any
bird"(Prov. i. 17).

III. We must make the most op the opportunities ■we have. Ephraim com-
plained of the narrowness of his lot, instead of cutting down the woods and thus
finding room in what had been assigned to him. He is the type of many Chris-
tians who complain of the scantiness of their opportunities, while they are leaving
one half of them unemployed. God ■will not vouchsafe us more opportunities if we
neglect those He gives us. He did not give five more talents to Uie man yrho kept
the one be bad trrapped in a napkin.



OB. xm 1—18.] THE BOOK OF JOSHUA. MB

rV. We mitst not make oibcumstanoes a reason fob not doino our dctt.
The Epbraimites wanted an increase of territorj, no doubt at some one else's
expense, while they did not make the most of their own. They not only did not
cut down the wood, hut they assigned as a reason for not driving out the Canaanites
that they had chariots of iron, in spite of the promise God had given them that
these should not be a hindrance to their success. So men assign oircmnstances
now (1) as a reason why they succumb to temptation, (2) as a reason why they do
not combat evil habits, (3) as a reason why they leave work undone" which they
ought to have undertaken and carried out. Let such remember Joshua's words,
" Thou shalt drive out the Canaanites, though they have iron chariots, and though
they be strong."

V. Gon'S BLBSSINOS WILL NOT BE GIVEN TO THOSE WHO NEGLECT THE CONDI-
TIONS UNDER WHICH THET WERE PROMISED. Ephraim bad inherited blessiDgs, and
was fuUy conscious of the fact. Yet he makes this a reason why God should prosper
him without any effort on his own part. So Christians very often expect God to
work out their salvation for them without any labour or effort of their own. They
permit evil tempers to take root in their hearts, and to grow and flourish there.
They make no effort to cast them out, because " God hath blessed them hitherto."
They are called to inherit God's blessings, and so they think they will have them
without any trouble. They are " called to be saints," and expect to be so without
the self-discipline saintliness requires. God will not fulfil such expectations. He
has promised " His Holy Spirit to them that ask it," but He expects them to "work
out their own salvation " vrith His aid. Those who would appropriate the promises
of Christianity without the endeavour necessary to give them effect, either become
eelf-deoeiving professors, who "have a form of godliness but deny the power
thereof," or if more sincere in heart and less capable of hypocrisy, fall back into a
state nf indifference because their Christian calling has failed to reaJiBS all the hopes
that they had formecL



HOMILIES BY VABIOUS AUTH0E3.

Vers. 8, i.—Wotnwn'a rights. I. Women have rights which men commonly
DENY them. The justice of the Mosaic law and the just privileges accorded to
women in the Jewish state stand out in fkvourable conteast with the almost
universal injuatioe which marks the historic relations of men with women. In
barbarous nations women are required to do the hardest manual labour. In semi-
civilised nations they are kept in ignorance, idleness, and jealous seclusion. In
more advanced nations they are hampered with needless social restrictions which
prevent them from enjoying their fair privileges as human beings. This injustice
may be traced to (1) the superior brute force of men, (2) the natural retiring nature
of woman, and (3) false sentiment which dishonours true modesty. Chivalrous
customs and domestic affection may soften the effects of injustice, but they do not
retoove the fact.

II. Women should be allowed to prove their own eights and capacities.
Hitherto one half of the human race has taken upon itself to settle the position and
destiny of the other half. Women have been treated as though men knew
their rights and capacities better than these were known to themselves. It
is at least just that women should be allowed some hberty of choice, gome
opportlmity_ for proving their capacities to the world. If they then fail they take
a lower position feirly. But it is most unreasonable to assert that they have not
certain capacities, while men are jealously closing every channel through which
they might prove the existence of those capacities by putting them into practice.

III. Scriptural principles require justice to women. This is required by
the law (Num. xxvii. 8). It is stUl more fully required by Christianity. The
Bpiritual privileges of the gospel are equally open to men and women. Tht
elevation of women is one of the most beneficial fruits of the gospel (Matt. xrvi. 18 j
Luke X. 88—42 ; Phil. iv. %).



THE BOOK OF JOSHUA. [oh. XTO. 1— la



IV. Justice to women does not imply the equality op women with men.
There must ever remain essential differences between the careers of men and
women in many directions, owing to the essential differences of their physical and
mental natures. Justice does not demand that all should receive the same
privileges, and perform the same duties, but that there should be fairness m tha
distribution.

V. The exercise of eights by women carries with it the obligation oi
corresponding duties. Duty corresponds to right. The extension of rights
increases the obligation of duties. If women obtain larger privileges, in justice they
win be called upon to undertake heavier responsibilities. Happily this was realised
in Scripture history. The women of the Bible enjoying greater advantages than
their neighbours are often distinguished by peculiarly noble conduct. Women are
conspicuous for devotion and sacrifice among the early disciples of Christ
(Luke viii. 2, 3). Much of the best work of Christendom has been done by good
women. There is large work in the Church for women now. — W. F. A.

Ver. 6. — Woman's rights. This is rather a remarkable case. The family of
Machir, one of the most warlike in Israel, had contributed more to the conquest of
GUead than any other, and there had been accordingly allotted to them a large
share of it. It so happened that in one branch of the family there was not a
single male among the children. Five women alone represented a warKke sire.
They appeal to Moses, with an energy derived from their great ancestor, to prevent the
passing of their property out of their hands. It is apparently the last cause which
comes before Moses before his death. The great lawgiver takes occasion from it to
make a general law applicable to all such cases. If there be a son left, then the son in-
herits ; the daughter being supposed to find her provision in that of the husband she
marries, and to be supported by her brother till she does so. But in the case of
there being no brother, they were to inherit their father's land, and marry in their
own tribe, so that the tribe might stOl retain its possessions intact, and all families
have maintenance for their representatives, even though male issue should fail. It
falls to Joshua to apply the principles Moses laid down, and accordingly he gives
the five ladies " an inheritance amongst the sons" of Manasseh. We do not suggest
that Moses legislated in tha spirit of the advanced theorists on woman's rights ; it
would have been impossible for one so wise to legislate some thousands of years
ahead of the general sentiments of mankind. But it is worth noting how ready
Moses was to do justice by the weaker sex ; and to pass a law, doubtless little to
the mind of the rough men who would look enviously on women inheriting con-
siderable estates. It raises the question how far Moses would have sanctioned the
views of those who plead that men and women should stand on exactly equal
platforms before the law. We can only briefly suggest the answer to this question.
Every woman under the Mosaic legislation was more or less sufficiently provided for.
The double portion of the firstborn was, by the usage of the East, assigned him chiefly
that he might support his widowed mother and unmarried sisters. When marriage
was universal, a temporary provision of this kind was all that was required. And
where land was not wealth, but only the material out of which it could be gathered,
we do not wonder at the law dividing the land (after the eldest son's double portion)
equally among the other sons. Wherever, on the other hand, no sons were left,
then the daughters divided equally the property between them, subject to the
restriction that they should maiTy within their own tribe. We may venture to
suggest that the spirit of these laws would, in the altered circumstances of our
country, be altogether in favour of the equal distribution of property between sons
and daughters. The patriarchal system that gave the widow and the unmarried
daughters an established home in the old family house which the elder brother
inherited, and made their maintenance a charge upon iSie double birthright, has
passed away ; and it is no longer the case that sisters share whatever an elder son
inherits. Marriage is neither so early nor so universal now. And in the multi-
plicity of remtmerative pursuits open to men in our land there is no longer any
special reason for restricting the inheritance of the land to those able personally ta



OH. xvn. 1—18.] THE BOOK OF ^fOSHUA, «»

work npon it. Thus woman has less protection if tinprovided for, less certainty of
the resource of marriage ; and man less need for special provisions in his favour:
In these altered circumstances it is prohable that what Moses ruled for the
daughters of Zelophehad he would have expanded into a larger rule, and would
have required invariably the equal division of all property amongst sons and
daughters alike. If we are right in urging this, a few conclusions of practical
moment emerge from it

I. Parents who, in their wUls, make the shares of their sons much larger thatt
those of their daughters, take a course which the spirit of Bible legislation forbids,
and are guilty of grave injustice.

II. The laws of every country ought, with especial care, to protect the property of
women, as being the weaker parties in disputes and the likeUest, therefore, to suffer.

III. A considerable improvement in the position of women would be effected by
the general adoption of such rules by parents and by states. Probably, if women ia
all directions found equal justice yielded them with men, the equahty of legislative
power and influence which somo seek would be found superfluous. — G.

Vers. 14, 16. — Greed and grumhlmg. Joseph— i.e., Ephraim and Manasseh
—wants a larger lot. He pleads his numbers, as giving him a right to more.
There is, perhaps, in his discontent a modicum of justice. They were very
numerous, and part of the land allotted them was that vaUey of Jezreel, which,
tliough the richest part of Palestine, from its being good for cavafry, had been
as yet retained by the enemy. There was, however, more of discontent than
of hardship. One half of Manasseh had already had a large part of GUead
assigned them. The shares allotted to Ephraim and the other half were ample
— in fact, probably double as large in proportion to their numbers as some
of the adjoining tribes. But Ephraim, descended from Joseph, the saviour of
Israel, the tribe of Joshua, its great captain, wanted to take the lead as the
governing tribe. They feel, accordingly, that while their wants are met their
dignity is not sufficiently endowed. " They are a great people," therefore
Joshua should have allowed them a larger portion. It is not unusual for those
conscious — ^legitimately or otherwise — of greatness to make somewhat loud com-
plaints and large demands. But Joshua — the embodiment of justice — cannot bo
unfair, even when his own tribe solicit him. He meets thefr claim in a fine spirit.
He admits their greatness, but argues otherwise from it. They are so many ? Why,
then, not clear the mountain of its forests and find thus an easy and unselfish
enlargement ? It is true the Canaanites hold Jezreel, and they are not yet in pos-
session of the fertile plain. But Joshua argues that that is a reason for fighting
their enemies vpith courage, and not for filching from their brethren, with
meanness. " Thou shalt drive out the Canaanites, though they be strong," he says,
with ft fine, genial, bracing blending of irony and encouragement. We have thus
a fine example of a question with two sides ; a necessity with two ways of meeting
it ; a fact with two conclusions. " I am numerous. There are foes on my land,"
Bays Joseph ; "therefore give me a shce off what has fallen to Judah." " Thou art
numerous, and enemies are still on thy land," says Joshua; "therefore clear the
mountain of its forests and the plains of thine enemies." The example of Manasseh
ftnd Ephraim here, and the reply of Joshua to them, has much in it suggestive.
Observe first —

I. A LITTLE HiSABT SOMETIMES SPOILS GREAT POWERS. The Complaint from which
Ephraim was suffering was this : Ma Tiea/rt was too little for hia body ; poor cir-
culation of the vital elements. These tribes had plenty of power, plenty of stalwart
men to clear the waste or to conquer their enemies ; but they had not moral force
to match. They were short of enterprise, resource, courage. What they could
easily have won by work or war they prefer that others should give thera. The
breath they should have kept for conflict they waste in grumbhug. They want to
be the dominating tribe, without paying the price of lordship in daring and wiUing-
ness to encounter difficulty and hardship. There are many Ephraims in the world
who have it iu their power to make for themselves any lot they like, who, instead



m 'i'HE BOOK 01? JOSHUA, [ca. xvn. 1- 18.

of improving, merely lament their lot. Many keep troubling friends to do for them
what it is quite within their power to do for themselves. Some are merely
indolent — capable of work, but disinclined to do it. Some suffer from a feebleness
which exists only in their imagination, but which prevents their working more than
actual frailty would. Some are merely proud, and think they have a right to some-
thing more in the world than they have got. So some gnmible for want of earthly
comforts they are too dull to get for themselves. So some go about expecting to
get by " interest " and " favour" what they would be wiser to seek by self-reliance
and energy. So some in the realm of religion go to God and complain they have not
larger delights and richer usefulness and more power, when, as a matter of feet, all
these things are within their reach if they would only put forth the powers they
already have. This is a very general ailment. Few have the energy, the earnest-
ness, the faith to do with their powers anything like the whole of what is possible
to them. We are engines, built to work up to 30 lbs. pressure on the square inch,
and we only work up to seven and a half. Seek not so much greater powers as the
heart to use the powers you have. Observe secondly —

II. Tede kindness often declines to do for men what they can do fob them-
selves. When Ephraim has the power to win as much land as he needs, it is
better that he be set to win it for himself. Men can rarely keep well any more
than they can win bravely. To give Ephraim wbat he wants woidd be only to
increase his indolence, his arrogance, and his weakness. To set Ephraim to get
what he wants by his own prowess, increases his enterprise, his brotherliness, his
courage, his diligence, his selfrespeot. We learn best what we learn ourselves.
We profit most by our own experience. It is no kindness to grant the requests of
indolence and greed. The true kindness is Joshua's — to point out how much is
within the reach of the aspiring, and set them to conquer it for themselves. Lastly
observe —

III. Geeatness should dwell upon its duties rather than on its claims.
" I am a great people . . . give me," is the tone which a great multitude, besides
Ephraim,. assume. " I am a great people . . . therefore ought to work and fight," is
the tone they ought to use. True greatness speaks in the latter, bastard greatness in
the former tone. Sometimes it is an aristocracy that declares itself to be the most
important class in a country, and with something of Epbraim's pitiable lament
presents its claims for more consideration and influence. Sometimes a priestly
order will, on the score of its greatness and importance, claim niore authority than
the people are disposed to grant it. Sometimes an ignorant class, puffed up with
ambition, will desire more power than it has got. It is well to remember greatness is
not given us to constitute a claim on others' services, but as a power to serve them
and ourselves together. He is greatest who is servant of aU, and he is chief who
ministers to all. If you and Ephraim are so great and worthy, use your greatness
and power for the good of yourselves and others, and none will grudge you what in
this way you win. — G.

Vers. 14 — 19.— Self-help. I. It is foolish to complain of otjr lot uktil we

have made the best use of it. The Ephraimites had not cleared their forest,
yet they complained of the narrowness of their possession. We do not know the
extent of our advantages tiU we try them. In mm-muring at the privations of life
we spoil the enjoyment of its blessings. Hardships which we ascribe to the
arrangements of Providence may often be traced to our own indolence. The one
talent is buried because it is not five. We have no excuse for complaints before
we have made the full use of what we possess. This may be applied to (1) abilities,
(2) opportunities of service, (3) means of self-improvement, and (4) sources of
enjoyment.

II. Our lot in life will improve as it is used well. Joshua showed to
the complaining Ephraimites that if they cleared their forest and so recovered the
waste land, their lot would thereby be doubled. The neglected inheritance runs to
weeds and becomes worthless. The cultivated possession improves with cultivation.
Exercise strengthens the weak. If we make a good use of what opportunities for
service, we now possess, these wiU develop new and better opporkmities. If w«



CH. xvB. 1—18.] THE BOOK OF JOSHUA. 261

use -well what powers God has given ns, these will grow more effective. The talent
that is not neglected produces other talents.

IIL Gbeai claims should bb sustained bt obeat achievements. Th«
Ephraimites claim to be great, and therefore deserving of a great inheritance.
Joshua rephes, " If thou be a great people, then get thee up to the wood countrv
and out down for thyself there," &o. High rank should justify itself by higl
service, large wealth by large beneficence, titles of honoiu: by deeds of sacrifice.
Duty is proportionate to faculty. The more advantages we claim the more
obligations shall we contract

IV. The best right to a possession is to have obtained it through the
EXERTION OP OUR OWN ENERGIES. Joshua Mds the Ephraimites increase their lot
by the exercise of their valour in exterminating the Canaanites, and of their
industry in felhng the forest. (1) It is imworthy to look to personal fanowr to
secure us a position in the world not earned by merit or work. Joshua belonged
to the tribe of Epliraim, and the Ephraimites seem to have expected favours on
this account, but in vain. (2) It is weak to depend on the paternal interference of
the State when our own industry should obtain onr rights. (3) It is wrong to wait
idly for a providential interposition on our behalf. God will give us our in-
heritance, but we must conquer it and cultivate it. He helps us when we do our
best, but never so as to justify our indolence, — W, P, A.

Vers. 14 — 18. — Let us make some further observations on the division of (he
land of Canaan a/mong the tribes of Israel. The descendants of Joseph receive
but a small lot. They complain bitterly of this, saying, " We are a great people."
Joshua replies that, just because they are a great people, they may be contented
with the share assigned them, for they_ will have the opportunity of perpetually
extending their borders. " The mountain shall be thine ; for thou shall drive out
the Canaanites, though they have iron chariots and though they be strong" (ver. 18).
In this passage of their history there is a beautiful symbol of the position op the
Church in the world. Manasseh and Bphraim have no assured possession. In
order to retain what they have and to acquire sufficient territory, they must be
ever fighting. Ever fresh conquests are the necessary conditions of their retainmg
that which they already possess. If they do not strengthen their position and
enlarge their borders, they will be at once invaded by their enemies. Such is the
position of the Ch#rch in the world. (1) For the Church too, conquest is the con-
dition of security. Pressed on every hand by a hostile world, it must be ever In
an attitude of active self-defence : it must ever have in its hand the sword of the
Spirit. As soon as it falls asleep, in a supposed peaceful security, it finds itself
assailed, and the enemy is in its midst before it is aware. Nothing is more easy,
nothing of more frequent occurrence, than this intrusion of the world into the
Church. Therefore ^e Church is bound to be ever armed with all the panoply of
God, and ready for the fight. " We wrestle not," says the apostle, " against
flesh and blood, but against principalities, against powers, against the rulers of the
darkness of this world, against spiritual wickedness in high places " (Eph. vi. 12).
This defensive warfare is also in a manner aggressiviB ; for every new generation
bom within the outward precincts of the Church needs to be won afresh for Jesus
Christ. No one is born a Christian, though it may be a great advantage to be bom
in a land of historic Christianity. It is necessary, therefore, constantly to reconquer
from the world and from the merely natural life, the posterity of Christians. In
this primary sense the Church cannot hold its own without ever fresh conquests.
(2) Nor is this enough. Antichrist, under the form of paganism, or of simple
infidelity, is still a formidable power on every hand. He who said to His disciples,
" Go and teach aU nations," opened before them a limitless field of conquest. The
mission of the Christian Church is the fulfilment of the command of Joshua to
Epbraim and Mauasseh : " Thou art a great people and hast great power ; get the*
up to the wood country, and out down for thyself there in the land of the giants "
(ver. 15). The might which is in the Church, though invisible, is greater than
that of the giants of antichrist, for it is the strength of Him who said, "Lo, I am
with you alway, even unto the end of the world " (Matt, xxviii, 20). — E. db P.



270



THE BOOK OF JOSHUA.



[fa. XYin. 1 — 26i



EXPOSITION.



OHAPTEE XVm. 1—28.

The oontdtobd division op thb land. —
Ver. 1 — Congregation. The word signifies
a body of persons gathered together at a
spot before indicated. The LXX. renders
by avvayuiyi]. The idea ia evidently that of
an assembly gathered together for some
speeifio acts of worship. This passage teaches
the duty of a national recognition of religion.
Whatever evils there might be in Israel at
that time, the absence of a general and
formal acknowledgment of God was not one
of them. When that public acknowledg-
ment of Him ceased, the downfall of the
nation was at hand. It was the absence of
such acknowledgment that was the ruin of
Israel, while the hypocritical and purely
external recognition of God by Judah was
equally offensive in God's sight. Assembled.
Literally, was summoned; by whom, we are
not told. But this general gathering to set
up the tabernacle was at once an act of due
homage to Him by whose power they had
done so many great deeds, and also the
establishment of a centre of national hfe.
As long as the worship of God was main-
tained in its purity, the unity of Israel
would be preserved, in spite of the twelve-
fold division into tribes, and without the
need to introduce the monarchical power.
When fidelity to the outward symbol of
IsraeUtish unity, the tabernacle at Shiloh,
relaxed, then dissension and weakness crept
in, and Israel became a prey to her enemies.
A remarkable instance of an opposite cha-
racter meets us in the history of our own
country. The prey of various unconnected
Teutonic tribes, the island was one vast
scene of anarchy and confusion, until the
great Archbishop Theodore came over and
founded a National Church. It was this
religious vmity and co-operation which
tended to harmonise the conflicting forces
in the laud and steadily pioneered the way
to an union of the rival tribes under one
head. Without attempting to say whose fault
it is that this religious unity is lost, or how
it may best be re-established, it surely is
the duty of eveiy patriot and every Chris-
tian to co-operate to the best of his abihty
and knowledge, with all the forces that he
sees tending towards unity, and both pray
and labour for the coming of the day when
men may once more " with one mind and
with one mouth glorify God, even the Father
of oar Lord Jesus Christ," and be willing
to meet together " with one accord in one
place." ShUoh. In Deut. xii. 5, 11, 14, we
find Qod prescribing that only in a place



chosen by Himself shall the public woiship
of the congregation be paid to Him. Thither
were aU the males to resort three limes a
year. It is obvious how such a regulation
tended to keep alive national feeling among
the Israelites. The reason for the choice of
Shiloh (which was probably made by Urim
and Thummim, the case being important
enough for such a decision) is to be found in
its central position, five hours south of She-
chem, and eight hours north of Jerusalem.
Its situation is minutely described in Judg.
xxi. 19. It is difficult lo understand why ;
since Shiloh must have been well-known to
all the dwellers in Israel at that time, unless
it was to explain to those who were not
acquainted with the localities in the tribe of
Benjamin the reason for the selection of
Shiloh, namely, that it lay close by the road
between Bethel and Shechem (see, however,
note on oh. xxiv. 1). The place has been
identified. It is the modem Seilfin, but
only a few ruins remain to mark the place
once so famous in the history of Israel,
where Eli abode, where Samuel spent his
early years. Rejected by God Himself, as
the Jewish Psalmist relates with patriotic
pride (Psa. Ixxviii. 60, 67—69), it fell into
utter neglect, and even in the days of
Jeremiah it seems to have become a by- word
(see Jer. vii 12, 14 ; xxvi. 6,9. Also Pal.
Expl. Fund, Quart. Paper, Jan., 1873, where
an account, with a plan, is given of the
place in its present condition. There are a
few rook-hewn tombs there). Whether it
was named Shiloh on account of the word
used in Gen. xMx. 10, it is impossible to say.
The name appears to signify rest, and was
an appropriate name to be given to the
visible symbol of rest from warfare which
Joshua had obtained for Israel (see ch. xi.
23 ; xiv. 15 ; xxi. 44 ; xxii. 4). The difficult
passage in Gen. xUx. 10 is not of course
included in this interpretation of the
meaning of the word ShUoh. Congregation.
The word here differs slightly from the word
translated " congregation " in the first part
of ithe verse, but it comes from the same
root. And the land was subdued before
them. That is, the land in which the
tabernacle was set up. We know from the
next verse that the land as a whole was not
subdued.

Ver. 3. — How long are ye slack 7 This
" slackness " (the translation is a literal
one) in the arduous conflict against the
powers of evil is not confined to Jews. Tha
exhortation needs repeating to every gene-
ration, and not less to our own than any
other, since the prevalence of an external



CH. XVIII. 1 — 28.]



THE BOOK OF JOSHUA.



271



decency and propriety blinds our eyes to the
impiety and evil which Btill lurks amid us
unsubdued.

Yer. 4. — Give out from among you. Calvin
enlarges much upon the boldness of these
twenty-one men in venturing upon the task
of the survey, rightly supposing that the
difficulty of the task was enhanced by the
number who undertook it (see note on
ch. xiv. 12). And here it is impossible to
come to any other conclusion than that the
twenty-one commissioners went together,
for the object of their selection was to
obviate complaints of a kind which, as we
have already seen, the Israehtes were not
slow to make (see ch. xvii. 14 — 18). But
the Israehtes had inspired quite sufficient
awe into the inhabitants of the land to
make such a general survey by no means a
difficult task. Nor is it probable that the
commissioners were unprovided with an
escort. Three men for each tribe. Literally,
for the tribe. This selection, which was
intended to secure an Impartial description
of the country, would render impossible all
future complaints, since the boundaries
would be settled according to reports sent in
by the representatives of each tribe.

Yer. 6. — Ye shall therefore describe the
land into seven parts. Literally, ye shall
write the land, seven parts. Similarly in
ver. 8. That is to say, a written report was
to be brought up in seven parts, a fair
and equal division of the land having
previously been agreed upon among the
commissioners. This report having been
accepted, division was afterwards made
(ver. 10) by lot. Bishop Horsley and
Uoubigant here, as elsewhere, woold re-
arrange the chapter, supposing it to have
been accidentally transposed. But there
seems no ground for the supposition. The
repetition, vrlth its additional particulars at
each repetition, is quite in the style of the
author (see ch. ii. and notes). Tbat I may
cast lota. Or, and I will cast a lot. The
somewhat unusual word PIT to throw, is
used here. The more usual word is ^tgn
caused to fall, though other expressions are
also used.

Yer. 7. — But the Levltet (see oh. xiii. 14,
33). The priesthood of the Lord. An
equivalent expression to that in oh. xiii.
Here the office of the priesthood, there,
more accurately, the sacrifices which it was
the privilege of that tribe to offer up, are
said to be the possession of the tribe of
Levi. By cities. It was evidently not a
land survey, entering into such particulars
as the physiosl conditions of the ground, its
fitness for agriculture, for pasture and the
like. The division was made by cities.
IheM cities had been taken and destroyed



by Joshua, and now it was the intention of
the Israehtes to be guided by the ancient
poUtical system of the country, to occupy
those cities, and to cultivate the adjacent
land, as the Phoenicians had done before
them. Thus, not so much the area of the
land, as the size and importance of its
cities, was to be the leading principle of tha
division. And not unwisely. The Israehtes
were about to relinquish their nomad life,
and if they settled in Palestine, how,
without walled cities, could they hold their
own .against the powerful nations round
about them? And came again to Joshua.
" The result of this examination, which was
unquestionably a more careful one than that
made by the spieB of Moses, was that the
unsubdued territory was found to be too
small for the wants of seven tribes, while
that apportioned to Judah was seen to be
disproportionately large. To remedy thia
difficulty a place was found for Benjamin
between Judah and Ephraim, and tha
portion of Simeon was taken out of the
southern portion of Judah, whUe both
Judah and Ephraim had to give up some
cities to Dan " (Bitter).

Yer. 8. — Shlloh (see note on ver. 1 and ch.
xxiv. 1). The seat of the tabernacle became,
for the present at least, the head-quarteri
of the Israelites.

Yer. 10. — Cast lots. Here, and in ver. 8,
yet another phrase is used to describe tha
casting of the lots.

Yer. 11. — The children of Benjamin.
Lying as their inheritance did between that
of Ephraim and Judah, the chief places of
note on their border have been already
mentioned either in oh. xv. or in ch. xvi.

Yer. 14. — And the border was drawn
thence, and compassed the border of the
sea. This is a serious mistranslation, arising
from the same word being used for sea and
west in Hebrew. The LXX. has irpAc (some
copies have vapa.) 9a\aaaav. The Uteral
translation is, and the border extended, and
deflected to the western tide. What if
meant is that the further portion of the
border now described was the western side
of Benjamin. Southward. The western
border of course ran in a southerly direc-
tion. Quarter. This is the same word that
is translated border above, in the phrase,
" border of the sea." Klrjath-jearlm. Any
one who will take the trouble to examine
a map vriU see how much more probable
the site Euriet el Enab is here, than any
place " four miles from Beth-shemesh," aa
suggested by Lieut. Conder. The distance
from nether Beth-horon to Euriet el Enab'
is not great. It is improbable that tha
boundary should have run double that
distance without any mention of locality.



272



THE BOOK OF JOSHUA.



[cH. xvm. 1—28.



Ver. 17. — Gellloth (see ch. xv. 7).

Ver. 23.— Avlm. Most probably Ai (see
note on oh. vli. 2).

Ver. 21 — Oplirah, Not the Ophrah of
Gideon, who (Judg. vi. 11 ; Tiii. 2, 32) waa
a Mauassite. Gaba. Some (aa Euobel)
think tiiia the aame as Gibeah of Saul.
But see below, ver. 28. Also Isa. x. 29.
Gibeah and Gaba, however, must have been
near together, for Bamah is near both of
them (see Ezra ii. 26).

Ver. 26. — Bamah. Now er-Eam. This
would seem, from Jer. xxxi. 15, and from
a comparison of Jer. i. 1 and xl.' 1, to
have been the Bamah of later history,
famous aa the dwelling-place of Samuel
(1 Sam. 1 1, &o., for Mount Ephraim is
applied to territory jn Benjamin. Of. Judg.
iv. 5 ; 2 Sam. xx. 1, 21). It was near
Gibeah (Judg. xix. 13 ; Isa. x. 29), and
not far from Bethel (Judg. iv. 5). It was
rebuilt by Baasha (1 Kings xv. 17, 21).
Mizpeh. This is the Mizpeh, or Mizpab, of
Benjamin, whither the tribes were wont to
gather together, and where the tabernacle
appears to have been removed (see Judg.
XX. 1, 8 ; xxi. 1 — 8). If, aa Lieut. Oonder
supposes, Nob and Mizpeh were identical,
and were near Jerusalem, thia would
explain the presence of the tribes within
the border of Benjamin on thia occasion.
They were near the border, and the Ben-
jamites had retired to their mountain
fastaesses. This seems almost implied in
Judg. XX. 3. Similar gatherings are recorded
in the Book of Samuel (1 Sam. vii. 5 — 7, 11,
12, 16; X. 17). Mizpeh was the seat of
Oedaliah's administration.and of the tragedy



of his assassination (3 Kings xzr. 23—26 ;
Jer. xl. 10—13 ; xli.).

Ver. 28.— Glbeath. Almost certainly the
same as " Gibeah of Saul" (1 Sam. xi. i).
It was Saul's home (1 Sam. z. 26 ; xiii. 2,
16, 16)_. It was near Saul's home, at the
time his temporary refuge, that the Philis-
tines encamped when Jonathan (1 Sam. xiv.)
made his daring attack on them. It was
the scene of the terrible outrage recorded in
Judg. xix. Lieut, Gonder has identified it
with Jeba, not far from Hiohmash, situated
on one of the branches of the precipitons
Wady Suwaynit. The situation explains the
otherwise unintelligible narrative in 1 Sam.
xiii., xiv. This Is the inheritance of the
Children of Benjamtn. Dean Stanley (' Sinai
and Palestine,' ch. iv.) reminds us how the
very names suggest the "remarkable
heights " which constitute the " tableland"
of which the inheritance of Benjamin
consists. Thus Gibeon, Gibeah, Geba, or
Gaba, a\l signify hill. Bamah signifies
high place, and Mizpeh, watch tower, which
of necessity must be situated on an emi-
nence. Only by narrow passes along deep
torrent beds could access be obtained to
this mountainous region. Thus it was that
the otherwise inexplicable resistance to all
Israel in arms, recorded in Judg. xx., xxi.,
was maintained. In a country Uke this
the skill of the Benjamites with the sling
(Judg. XX. 16) and the bow (2 Sam. i. 22)
could be used with terrible effect upon
foes powerless to come to a hand-to-hand
conflict. To Dean Stanley's vivid description
of the physical geography of the country the
student is referred for a detailed account.



HOMILETICS.

Vers. 1 — 28. — Progress in the great worJc. The trites gathered togetljer at
Shiloh, set up the common tabernacle for worship, and then proceeded, at Joshua's
Instance, to complete the division of the land. Several detached considerations
may be derived from this chapter.

I. The duty of a public eecognition op God. The duty of puhlio worship
has been universally recognised in all religions, and is founded in a natural tendency
of ma nkin d. Philosophical sects, in which religious observances are neglected or
proscribed, show by that very fact their exclusiveness. Behgions, however per-
verted, exist for mankind as a whole ; philosophies, for the cultivated few. Chris-
tianity has provided fewer forms than perhaps any other religion for the gratification
of this instinct, but the principle is clearly acknowledged. At first, the disciples met
together weekly to " break bread." At the Eeformation, the abuses that had crept
into the doctrine and practice of the Lord's Supper led to its more infrequent
reception. Yet still the precept, " not forgetting the assemhling of yourselves
together," has continued to be recognised, and the man who habitually neglectg
public worship is scarcely regarded as a Christian at all. The duty of a pubho
national recognition is a matter of more difBculty in the midst of our present
religious divisions. _ Tot it is practically not neglected. The fact that the nation a«
such recognises ChriBtianity is proved by the spectacle presented by our country every



OH. XVIII. 1—28.] THE BOOK OF JOSHUA. 278

Lord's Day, a spectacle which drew from a distinguished French Eoman Catholic
writer the admission that England was the most religious country in the world.
And in times of national rejoicing, or national distress, the various religious bodies
in the country do not fail, according to their various forms, to unite in common
thanksgiving, or common humiliation and intercession. A more complete external
agreement in the manner of such national recognition of religion may or may not
be desirable. But it would be foUy to conclude that no such recognition exists
because it is not externally organised into a system. Perhaps in God's eyes tJia
agr^ment is greater than it seems to us : that where we discern conflicting institu-
tions and rival denominations. He sees the tribes of Israel gathered together
at ShUoh, and offering up united praises and supplications to Him for His mercy
and His bounty. Be it ours fo recognise more and more a real union under
seeming disagreement, and to abstain from aU uncharitable expressions, which are
out of harmony with the voice of praise and thanksgiving, of prayer and inter-
cession, addressed to our common Father in heaven.

II. Behold how good and joyful a thing it is, bkbthren, to dwell togetheh
IN unity. This consideration has been partially anticipated already. It was the
whole congregation that assembled together. None stayed away, stiU less refused
to come. And though perhaps, in view of the wide freedom allowed in the Chris-
tian Church, the minor differences of ceremonial do not prevent us from coming
as one body before the throne of grace ; yet, in so far as these divisions of opinion
produce jealousy, suspicion, unkindness, bitter accusations and reviliags, they ex-
clude those who are so affected by them from a part in the common worship. Such
persons are unclean, and cannot enter into the congregation of the faithful ; they are
unloving, and can have neither part nor lot in the worship of Him who came to call
us to unity and peace. We may be sure that as there is no more certain method of
checking the progress of the Church on earth than a contentious spirit, so there ia
nothing more sure to deprive us of the favour of God. Let the spectacle, then, of
an united Israel, worshipping peaoefiilly before God in Sbiloh, lead us to beware
how we promote disunion among God's people, remembering the exhortation, " Let
aU bitterness and wrath and anger and clamour and evil speaking be put away
from you, wiih all maUce," and "walk in love, as Christ also hathlovedus, and hath
given himself for us, an offering and a sacrifice to God for a sweet-smelling
savour."

III. Eest in God. Shiloh means rest, or peace. And rest and peace is only to
be found in the presence of God. " Peace on earth," cried the angels at His
bu-th. " I will give you rest." " My peace I give unto you," said He Himself.
" He is our peace," said the apostle. Through Him we possess the " peace that
passeth all understanding." And, thanks be to Him, we are never far from His
tabernacle. The tabernacle of God is among men, and He wiU dwell with them,
and wherever a soul pours itself out in prayer to Him, there is His tabernacle and
Shiloh, or restful dependence on Him.

IV. What has to be done should be done thoeoughly. Many a Christian
has fallen into serious trouble by neglecting this precept. Some think that a certain
profession of reHgion ought to excuse all shortcomings. Some even go so far as to
think that the careful and punctual performance of duty is a legal work, below the
attention of a redeemed and sanctified man. Such a view receives no confirmation
from Scripture. Oui' Lord did not neglect the lighter matters of the law Himself,
nor advise others to do so. St. Paul did not consider the minutest details beneath
his attention. And here the survey was made with the most scrupulous exactness,
and recorded in a book. Let Christians learn hence the duty of performing, accu-
rately and punctually, whatever falls to their lot to do. Christ did not give Hia
Spirit to men to make them slovenly, careless, indifferent to what they undertake,
but the reverse. Both the Old Testament and the New combine to enforce on us the
lesson, " Whatsoever ye do, do it heartUy, as to the Lord, and not unto men."



#9«SUA.



S74 THE BOOK OP JOSHUA. [ch. xtul 1—28.



HOMILIES BY VAEIOUS AUTHORS.

Ver. 1. — Shiloh, the sanctua/ry. The choice of Shiloh as a resting-place for the
tabernacle was not left at Joshua's discretion : it was a matter of Divine appoint-
ment (Deut. xiL 10 — 12). At the same time it was not without its natural reason.
The situation was both central and secluded ; in the midst of the land, as the
tabernacle had always been " in the midst of the camp " in the wUderness (Num.
ii. 17), and yet removed from the main routes of the country's traffic. Its name,
dating probably from this time, while expressive of the fact that God had now given
His people rest from their enemies, was also suggestive of the deeper thought of
His settled dwelling among them, and was in harmony with the retired and tranquil
aspect of the scene. Shiloh, the sanctuary, the place of rest. In this establishment
of the tabernacle at Shiloh the Israehfces were performing the highest function of
their life as a people. It was a devout recognition of God ; the majesty of His
being, His sovereignty over them, their dependence on Him as the Uving root of
all their social order and prosperity, that testimony for Him which it was their
high calling to present before the nations. The tabernacle at Shiloh stands as
a type of all places where people assemble to pay their homage to the Supreme.

i. The sanctity of the scene of worship. The tabernacle was the centre
and home of all devout thought and feeling. The highest acts of worship could
alone be performed there. It represented the unity of the religious life of the
people, as opposed to a scattered and divided worship. It was called " the taber-
nacle of witness" (Num. xvii. 7; Acts vii. 44). In several ways is every scene
of worship, every " house of prayer," a witness.

1. As a symbol of the presence of Ood with His people. It bears witness to the
fact of HJH spiritual nearness and accessibUity. It could have no meaning if
personal and " congregational " communion with God were not a blessed reality.
The fundamental idea of the tabernacle was that it is the place where man " meets
with God," and finds a gracious response to his seeking. " In all places where
I record my name I will come unto thee, and I wiU bless thee " (Exod. xx. 24).
•' There will I meet vidth thee, and I will commune with thee from above the
mercy-seat " (Exod. xxv. 22). And Christ perpetuates and confirms the promise
with a freer, richer grace ; " Wheresoever two or three," &c. (Matt, xviii. 15). This
gives sanctity to any place ; makes it a true sanctuary. What other consecration
can be needed than the realised presence of the living God?

2. As a memorial of the hallowed traditions of the past. The historic associa-
tions of the tabernacle were distinctive, wonderful, supernatural. Its origin:
made " after the pattern shown to Moses in the mount" (Exod. xxvi.) ; the " glory-
cloud " that rested upon it ; its varying fortunes ; the changing scenes through
which it had passed — scenes of human shame, and fear, and sorrow, and scenes of
joyous triumph and marvellous Divine interposition— all this invested it with
extraordinary interest Every true house of prayer has its hallowed memories.
Some small chapter at least of the sacred story of the past is enshrined in it. It
speaks to us of struggles for truth and hberty, purity of faith and worship, freedom
of conscience, in former days. It represents the earnest thought and self-denying
labour of devout men and women who have long, perhaps, been numbered with
the dead. It has been the scene of many a solemn spiritual transaction : revela-
tions of truth, searchings of heart, stirrings of sympathetic emotion, heavenly
aspirations, visions of God. However lowly a place it may be, the memory of
these hngeriug about it gives it an interest and a distinction that no outwaxd charm
oan rival.

8. As a prophecy of the better future. The tabernacle, though it had
•ome now to a resting-place after all its wanderings, was still only a temporary
provision, a preparation for something more substantial and enduring. The time
came when " Ichabod " must be pronounced on Shiloh. The ark of God was taken,
the sanctuary was desecrated, and the faded glory of the sacred tent was lost at
last in the greater splendour of the temple ; until that also should pass away, to be
followed bj a nobler ehrine. So is it with all earthly sceaes of worship. They



ca xvm. 1—28.] THE BOOK OP JOSHUA. «7l

are but temporary and provisional. They are expressive, after, all, of our human
weakness — dimness of spiritual vision, imperfection of spiritual life. They remind
tJB ever of the " vaU that hangs between the saints and joys Divine." They " have
no glory by reason of the glory that exceUeth." They speak to us of the " more
perfect tabernacle not made with hands." We see in them a prophecy of the
nobler worship of the future, and learn through them to lift our longing eyes to
that eternal city of God of which it is written, " I saw no temple therein, for the
Lord God Almighty and the Lamb are the temple of it" (Rev. xii. 22).

II. The peaceful associations of the scene op worship. " Shiloh " is a name
that becomes every place of prayer, every scene of Divine manifestation and com-
munion. It ought to be a place of rest in the midst of earthly agitations, a quiet
resort for the spirit from the traffic and turmoil of hfe, a refuge for the wea;k and
weary, a sanctuary for those who are harassed by the contradictions and pursued
by the animosities of a hostile world. Unhappily the house of God is too often
connected in men's minds with far other ideas than those of tranquillity and peace.
It is suggestive to them of division, and enmity, and bitter contention. The mis-
chief done by those historic strifes about faith and worship that have raged around
it, .or those mean discords that have reigned within, can never be exaggerated.
And yet wherever there is a place of Christian assembly there stands a testimony
to the " one Lord, one faith," &c. Beneath these superficial distractions lies the
bond of a true spiritual unity. Let that essential unity become manifest, then
shall the " glory of the Lord " be again upon His tabernacle, and it shall attract
the world to itself as a true sanctuary and place of rest. — W.

Ver. 1. — Shiloh. Shiloh was at once the seat of public worship and the centre of
tribal union ; the symbol of estabUshed peace and the witness to that Divine law
on which the maintenance of peace and prosperity depended. Christendom needs
its Shilohs. It is true that our privileges of worship are not confined to consecrated
buildings, holy days, priestly ministrations, and church ordinances. Anywhere, on
the lonely lull-side or in the busy street, at any hour — in the silent night or at the
noisy noon — every Christian can claim the privilege of one of God's priests and
offer up secret worship, which God will accept and bless. There is often a depth
and spirituality in such worship which is not attained in the observance of public
religious services. Nevertheless there are special advantages connected with
pubUo worship.

I. Public worship affords an opportunity for spiritual rest. The taber-
nacle was set up when " the land was subdued." The seat of worship was named
" Shiloh," the " place of peace." Our churches should be homes of spiritual peace ;
our Sundays, Sabbaths of spiritual rest. The ejaculatory prayer of sudden emer-
gencies, and the "praying without ceasing" of those who " walk with God" and
enjoy constant communion with Him, are not sufficient means for withdrawing us
from the spirit of the world and reveaUng to us the heights and depths of heavenly
things. For this we want a more complete separation from common scenes, and
a longer season of quiet meditation.

II. Public worship affords the means for the outward expression op
spiritual worship. All true worship must be internal and spiritual (John iv. 24).
External ordinances without this are a mockery; but spiritual worship will
naturally seek some external expression. The body is so connected with the soul
that all emotion tends to bodily manifestations — joy to smiles, sorrow to tears,
anger to frowns. So emotions of worship find their outlet in articulate prayers
and songs of praise. Such expression is (1) natural, (2) helpful.

III. Public worship is an occasion for a public iestimont to religion.
The tabernacle was set up in the sight of the people as a visible witness for God.
We have our " altars of witness." It is our duty (1) to confess our faith (Matt. x.
32) ; (2) to glorify Ood by declaring His character to the world and thanking Him
before men for the blessings we have received ; (3) to preach Christ by making the
light of His gospel shine through the worship of His Church (Matt. v. 13—16).

IV. Public worship is a stimulus :^:o private dbvosiijn. li «ounteracts tlie



276 THE BOOK. OF JOSHUA. {ch. xviu. 1—28.

depressing influence of worldly occupations and the variations of private experience
resulting from our own changing moods. It stimulates us (1) by the direct influence
of the religious exercises of prayer, praise, and the reading of Scripture and preaching ;
(2) by mutual sympathy.

V. Public worship helps us to realise Christian brotherhood. The erection
at Shiloh was " the tabernacle of the congregation." There the tribes assembled
together. It was to them the centre of national unity. In our worship we should
forget our differences. Bich and poor meet together first as one in sin and want
and helplessness, and then as one in redemption, spiritual joy, and Christian ser-
vice. No duty is more important than that of maintaining a spirit of Christian
brotherhood (John iv. 20, 21). By no means is this more fully realised than by
union in the deepest emotions of the spiritual hfe. — W. P. A.

Vers. 2, 8. — Slackness. I. Much of the Christian inheeitanoe is not yet
POSSESSED. (1) Multitudes of men have not yet received the advantages of the
gospel which a/re freely offered to all. Christ died for the wliole world ; God
desires the redemption of all men ; all are freely invited (Eev. xxii. 17). Yet some
live on in sin, some in distress, some in unbehef. Let these know that the distri-
bution of God's grace has not ceased. There is yet abundance to be given for those
who seek. The festal chamber is not fall. There is yet room. The door is still
open (Luke xiv. 22, 23). (2) The Church has not yet conquered the world for
Christ. He claims the whole world. So long as there are heathen nations abroad
and godless men at home the work of the Church mflitant will be incomplete. It
is foolish to be satisfied with the triumphs of the past. We should rather lament
the slow progress of the gospel. (3) Christians have much of their inheritance in
Christ not yet possessed. The half has not been told us. No one can conceive
the fulness of the riches of Christ (laa. Ixiv. 4). {a) Christians do not enjoy on
earth all the blessings which they might have ; (6) greater blessiags are reserved
for heaven (1 John iii. 2).

II. It is owing to the slackness of men, and not to the will of God, that

so MUCH OF the CHRISTIAN INHERITANCE IS NOT YET POSSESSED. Not God's wUl,

but man's impenitence, delays his acceptance of the blessings of the gospel. Not
God's win, but the Church's tardiness, hinders the spread of Christianity through
the world. Not God's wUl, but the Christian's weakness, prevents him from enjoying
the full privileges of redemption. This slackness to take full possession of the
Christian inheritance is culpable, and arises from various causes. (1) Satisfaction
with the present. The Israehtes became too well satisfied with their achievements
before aU the land was conquered. We are too readily tempted to " rest and be
thankful " before half our work is done. Our watchword should be " Forward"
(Phil. iii. 13, 14). (2) Indolence. Even when we know that more should be done
we are slothful and unwilling to rouse our energies for continued service. This
may arise {a) from weariness when it shows the need of the Divine help for con-
tinued exertion ; or (6) from culpable remissness when it is a distinct proof of cooling
zeal. (8) Habits of delay. Some seem to follow the rule of never doing to-day
what can be postponed till the morrow. Every day has its task. To postpone
this to the morrow will hinder the task of the morrow. All is ready on God's side ;
there is no excuse for delay. WliUe we delay the opportunity may pass (Psa. xov.
7). (4) Unbelief — {a) in the need of Christ, (6) in the greatness of the Christian
blessings, (c) in the Divine power, through which they may be obtained. — ^W. F. A.

Ver. 8. — An exhortation to adma/nce. In ch. xiii. 1 we find an address delivered
to Joshua by Jehovah, in which he was reminded how much remained to be done
ere his work was finished, and his age forbade the beUef that many years would
intervene before his death. To the assembled tribes of Israel the exhortation of the
text was consequently given. The tribes of Manasseh, Beuben, and Gad had received
their inheritance on the east of the Jordan, Judah occupied the south of Palestine,
and Ephraim a domain in the centre, Levi was to have no special territory assignedt
ftn4 seven tribes waited for the de|;ermination of their settlements.



m. xvm. 1—28.] fSE BOOK OF JOSStTA. 4W

I. The position of these Iseaelites. After years of wandering they were
permitted at last to tread the soil of the land of promise. They might well mdulg*
feelings of gratification at the thought of their surroimdings, that the wilderness waa
passed, and their eyes beheld the country which their fathers had in vain desired to
see. A spot had been selected where the tabernacle should remain, being, according
to the promise and prophecy of God, " in the midst of all their tribes." StiU the
Israelites had only attained to a half-way position. The rest of arrival must be
succeeded by the warfare of acquisition before they could reach the rest of enjoy-
ment. Jehovah had granted to them the land of the enemy, had conducted them
safely thither ; now let them grasp the privilege placed so near. Pew of God's gifts
but necessitate effort on the part of the recipients, efforts to appropriate and improve.
AccordiQg to the old fable, treasures are buried in the fields, and only diligent search
and cultivation will bring them to light and make us master of them. What men
pay for or have a hand in securing, they value ; what they strive after, they esteem ;
hence the necessity laid upon us to labour in order to receive is a beneficial law.

II. What the eepeoof of the text aegttes upon the part of the eepeoved.
(1) Indolence of disposition. It was doubtless pleasing to the Israelites to indulge
for a season their love of ease. They could live for a time on the bounty of their
brethren and on the fertile produce of the land which had cost them no trouble to
tUl. They were " slack to go in to possess the land." Indolence is one of the most
difficult foes to overcome. The great majority evince a decided disinclination to
energetic exercise of their powers. Indolence is not only a state of privative loss in
respect both of character and happiness, it is also a dangerous state, leaving man
open to any incursion of the arch enemy. History abounds in instances of failure
on the part of men to become great because they relaxed their efforts and progress
ceased. A little longer struggling and the summit of ambition and fame had been
scaled. "Idleness," says Seneca, "is the burying of a living man." (2) Insensi-
bility to the privileges possible to be acquvred. Desire of gaining an end in view
is the chief incentive to exertion, and the strength of the desire depends upon the
amount of appreciation of the advantages which wiU be thereby secured. He who
is not attracted by the pictures drawn of heaven will not manifest any resolute
endeavours to get there. That kind of exhortation is most successful which causes
hearers to glow within them at the thought of the precious jewels which may be
obtained by seeking. Emotions are regulated by the keenness or dulness of our
perceptions. (3) ForgetfuVness of direct command. Sloth was, in fact, disobedience.
The very purpose for which God had preserved the tribes was, that they might, in
obedience to His behests, occupy their respective territories, and drive out the
inhabitants who had defiled the land. Many persons excuse their dUatoriness in
complying with the precepts of Scripture by various pleas which discover an insuffi-
cient acknowledgment of the obUgation resting upon them not merely to leave undone
what ought not to be done, but to do at once what they ought to do. In this they
are verily guilty. We must not be obUvious of the sins of omission as well as of
commission. Woe to us if we know our Lord's wiU and do it not I Constantly let
the inquiry be made, " Lord, what wilt thou have me to do ? "

III. The application op the FOEEGOiNa. To Christian attainments. The
Christian life is described in many terms, nearly all of which represent it as a
progress, a "reaching forth unto tilings that are before." It is called a warfare,
a race, a pilgrimage, a building, &o., denoting continuous effort, in the shape of
assault or resistance to assault. There are strongholds to be taken, plains to be
seized, fountains and woods and rivers to be gamed, trophies to be won. The
followers of Christ are expected to advance in faith, hope, and love, in knowledge,
purity and holiness, in gifts and graces, in self-discipline and improvement, and in
usefulness to others and to the Church. To secret ddscipleship. There was a
time when you were under the servile yoke of sin, and being released entered the
wildemesa of doubt to be affrighted by the thunders of the law. But you have
found a High Priest, a Mediator, who has also been a Deliverer to lead you into the
land of rest. Tou have believed in Christ, and are rejoicing in your condition. But
you have not taken your rightful position among your bret^eu. Some are engaged



m



THE BOOK OP iOBnVA.



[cfi. tit. 1-gi.



in tending the ground, planting and sowing, erecting houses and expelling tha
enemy, whilst you are content to remain by the tabernacle of the Lord. You do
not enjoy the privileges of communion at the table of the Lord, and of occupying
your station in the Church of Christ. To stay where you are is an injury to your-
selves, it is a loss to the Church, and dishonours the Bedeemer. — A.



EXPOSITION.



CHAPTEB XIX.— 1—51.



ThB lot of the BEMAININO TRIBES. Vcr.

1. — And their Inheritance was within the
tnlierltaiice of tbe children of Judah.
Literally, in the midst of. avd jitaov,
LXX. ; in medio, Vulgate (cf. ver. 9).
Simeon, at the last census (Num. xxvi.
14), was the smallest of the tribes of Israel,
a fulfilment of the prophecy of Jacob, and
possibly the result of the command given
in Num. xxv. 5, since the Simeonites were
the chief offenders on that occasion (Num.
xxv. 14 ; see also 1 Chron. iv. 27). The
distribution of territory was in accordance
with this, and it is possible that the lot only
determined the priority of choice among the
tribes. The territory of Judah seems to
have been recognised as too large, in spite
of the importance of the tribe. They there-
fore willingly gave up a portion of their
teiritory to the Simeonites.

Ver. 2. — Beersheha. A locality well
known in Scripture, from Gen. xxi. 81 on-
wards. And Sheha. Some would translate
here, or Sheba (see below). No doubt the
city, of which nothing further is known,
derived its name from Beer-sheba, " the
well of the oath," close by. It is true that
some httle difficulty is caused by the omis-
sion of this city in Chron. iv. 28, by the
identification of Shebah with Beer-sheba in
Gen. xxvi. 33, and by the fact that in ver. 6
we are told that there were thirteen cities
in this catalogue, whereas there are four-
teen. On the other hand, Eeil has re-
marked that in oh. xv. 32 the number of
names does not correspond to the whole
number of cities given; and we have a
Shema, probably a mistake foi; Sheba, in
oh. XV. 26, mentioned before Moladah
among the cities of Judah. And, lastly,
we have very few instances in Scripture of
the disjunctive use of 1, though it seems
impossible to deny that it is used in this
sense in 1 Kings xviii. 27.

Ver. B. — Hazar-shual. The " hamlet of
jackals." The word Hazar is translated
' ' village " in our version (see note on oh.
XV. 32). So also with Hazar - susah or
Hazar - susim, " the hamlet of horses "
(1 Chron. iv. 31) below.

Ver. 9. — Therefore the children of Simeon
had their Inheritance. Of the later history



of the children of Simeon we find a little
recorded in 1 Chron. iv. 39 — 42, and some
suppose that the event recorded there is a
fulfilment of the prophecy in Obadiah 19.
Dr. Pusey mentions a tribe stiU existing in
the south, professing to be of the sons of
Israel, and holding no connection with the
Arabs of the neighbourhood, and supposes
them to be the descendants of the five
hundred Simeonites who took possession of
Mount Seir in the days of Hezekiah. No
border seems to have been given of Simeon.

Ver. 10. — Sarld. This seems to have
been a middle point, from which the border
is traced eastward and westward, as in oh.
xvi. 6, and perhaps in ver. 32. But the
LXX. and other versions have a variety of
readings here.

Ver. 11. — Toward the sea. Bather, west-
ward. The original is touched or skirted
(WS). River that Is before Jokneam. This,
with the assistance of oh. xii. 22, which men-
tions Jokneam as near to Mount Carmel,
enables us to identify this river (or rather,
winter torrent), as " that ancient river, the
river Kishon." Knobel, however, says that
if the Kishon had been meant it would have
been called by its name, and that we must
therefore understand the Wady-el-Mil'h.
But this is by no means a safe conclusion.

Ver. 12. — Chlsloth-Tabor. The loins or
flanks of Tabor. Tabor (the name signifies
either quarry — see note on Shebarim, prob-
ably a kindred word, oh. vii. 5 — or navel),
is one of the most conspicuous mountains
of Palestine. Like Soraote, above the Cam-
pa gna of Borne, "the cone-shaped figure of
Tabor can be seen on all sides," though it
rises only 1,750 feet (French) above the level
of the sea, 800 above the plain at its north-
eastern base, and 600 above Nazareth on the
north-west (Bitter, ii. 311). Ohisloth-Tabor
was on the north-west side of the base of
Tabor. Tabor has been supposed to have
been the scene of the Transfiguration. But
Bitter points out that from the time of
Antioohus the Great, 200 years before
Christ, to the destruction of Jerusalem, the
summit of Tabor was a fortress. And he
notices that while Jerome and Cyril mention
this tradition, Eusebius, who UvedlOO yeari
earlier, knows nothing of it.

Ver. 13. — Glttah-hepher. Or, Gath
hepher (1 Kings xiv. 25) was the birth'



te.Xtot. l-6l.!l



Tfifil BOOK OF JOSStJA.



m



Elaoe of the prophet Jonah. Now el-Mesh-
ed, where tne tomb of Jonah is still shown.
The Babbinioal writers and the Onomasticon
mention this tradition,

Ver. 14. — Compaaaeth It The verb 3DJ
is here used transitively. The meaning is
that the border makes a eurre round the
city of Neah. Neah seems to have been the
extreme eastern border. Methoar is sup-
posed to be the Pual participle, and has
been freely translated, " which is marked
out," or, "which belongs to," Neah. But
the passage is obscure. Knobel would alter
the readmg, in view of the granamatical
difdculty. Yet this, perhaps, is not in-
superable in view of ch. iii. 14 (see Gesen,
•Grammar,' sec. 108, 2. c). VaUey. 'j
(see note on oh. viii. 13 ; zv. 8). So in
ver. 27.

Ver. 15. — Beth-lehem. This name, sig-
nifying the " house of bread," would natu-
rally euough be given to a place in a fertile
situation. We are not to suppose that it
was " Bethlehem - Ephratah, among the
thousands of Judah" (Micah v. 2). It is
now Beit-lahm, about eight miles in a
westerly direction from Nazareth,

Ver. 16. — The inheritance of the children
of Zehulun. It is strange that the beautiful
and fertile land occupied by the tribe of
Zebulun does not appear to have brought
prosperity with it. Possibly the fact that
the "lines" of this tribe had "fallen in
pleasant places," had tended to induce
sloth. Certain it is that we hear but little
of this tribe in the after history of Israel.
They were not, like Eeuben, absent from
the great battle of Tabor, for there we read
that, like Issaohar, they " jeoparded their
lives unto the death " for their homes and
liberties. Tet though they seem thence-
forth to have slackened in their zeal, theirs
was a fair portion. It bordered on the slopes
of Tabor, and seems (though the fact is not
mentioned here) to have extended to the
Sea of Galilee, as we may gather from
Isa. ix. 1.

Ver. 18.— JezreeL The valley (pDJJ) of
Jezreel, known in later Greek as the plain
of Esdraela or Esdraelon (Judith i. 8; vii.
2, 2 Maoc. xii. 49) was "the perennial
battle-field of Palestine from that time to
the present" (Cooper, ' Egyptiaii Obelisks,'
p. 83). Lieut. Conder (' Quart. Paper, Pal.
Expl. Fund,' Jan., 1&73), however, takes
exception to this statement. " The great
battles of Joshua," he says, " were fought
far to the south." We presume he would
make an exception on behalf of the action
by the waters of Merom, and that he docs
not wish ns to forget that the majority
of Joshua's other "battles" were sieges.



" David's wars were fought with the Philis-
tines," he continues, "while, the invasions
of the Syrians were directed to the neigh-
bourhood of Samaria." But here, again, he
would seem to have forgotten 1 Sam. xxix.
1, 1 Kings IX. 26, 2 Kings xiii. 17, 25, whUe
he expressly admits that the great battles
of Gilboa and Megiddo, in which Saul and
Josiah were defeated and met their deaths,
were fought here. And we have already
seen that twice did the Egyptians invade
Syria by this plain. One of these invasions
took place while Moses was in Egypt, under
Thothmes III. The other was the famous
expedition of Barneses II. against Syria,
about the time of Deborah and Barak. If
we add to these the victory of Gideon over
the Midianites and the overthrow of Sisera,
we shall have reason to think that the
epithet " the battle-field of Palestine "
applied to this plain is not altogether mis-
placed, especially if, with a large number of
critics, we regard the Book of Judith as
founded on fact, but relating to events of
some other time than that of Nebuchad-
nezzar. " Well may it be fertile," exclaims
Mr. Bartlett (' From Egypt to Palestine,'
p. 478), " for it -has drunk the blood of the
Midianite, the Philistine, the Jew, the
Soman, the Babylonian, the Egyptian, the
Frenchman, the EngHshman, the Saracen,
and the Turk. It is a singular group to
summon up to the imagination, Gideou,
Saul, and Jonathan, Deborah, Barak, and
Sisera, Ahab, Jezebel, Jehu, Josiah, Omri,
and Azariah, Holofernes and Judith, Vespa-
sian and Josephus, Saladin and the Knights
Templar, Bonaparte and Kleber." The list
is a striking one. But certain it is that the
plains of Jezreel have been noted as the
highway of every conqueror who wished to
make the fertile fields of Palestine his own.
The Israelitish invasion alone seems to have
been decided elsewhere than on that plain,
stretching as it does from the foot of Carmel
in a south-easterly direction, and divided in
the direction of Jordan by Mount Gilboa and
Little Hermon into three distinct branches,
in the midst of the southerumost and
most extensive of which stands the famous
city of Jezreel — God's acre, or sowing-
ground, as the name indicates. Here Barak
and Dehorah fell upon the hosts of Jabia
(Judg. iv. 14), descending suddenly from the
heights of Tabor with 10,000 men upon the
vast and evidently undisciplined host that
lay in the plain. Here Gideon encountered
the vast host of the Midianites (Judg. vii.
12), who, after laying waste the south
country, finally encamped in this fertile
plain (accurately called plJJ? in Judg. vi. 33),
and with their leaders Oreb and Zeeb, and
their princes Zebah and Zalmunna, wei«



m



THE BOOK OV JOSHUA.



[ca. xtx. 1—61



Bwept away in one of those sndden and ir-
rational panics so often fatal to Eastern
armies. Here Saul, hard by Jezreel, dispi-
rited by hia visit to the witch of Bndor,
on the north of Gilboa, gathered his men
together as a forlorn hope, to await the
attack of the Philistines, their numbers at
first swelled by a number of IsraeUtes
whom Saul's tyranny and oppression had
driven into exile (1 Sam. xxix.). Advanc-
ing to Jezreel, the Philistine host carried
all before them, and drove the Israelites
in headlong flight up the steeps of Gilboa,
where Saul and his sons fell fighting
bravely to the last (1 Sam. xxx.). In the
later and sadder days of the Israelitish
monarchy, when the ten tribes had been
carried into captivity by the Assyrian con-
queror, Josiah courted disaster by a rash
onslaught upon the Egyptian troops as they
marched against Assyria. No details of this
fight at Megiddo are preserved, save the fatal
fire of the Egyptian archers, who marked
Josiah as their victim, and drove, no doubt,
his leaderless troops from the field (2
Kings xxiii. 29; 2 Chron. xxxv. 22). At
Jezreel, too, Ahab made his capital. Hither
Elijah, when " the hand of the Lord was
upon him " (1 Kings xviii. 46), ran after the
wondrous scene on Mount Oarmel, when he
alone, in a strength not his own, withstood
the " prophets of Baal, even four hundred
and fifty men." Here Jehoram stood on the
hill, with its commanding view, watching
with an uneasy distrust the furious rush of
Jehu with his troop from the other side
Jordan, and here, in the plat of Naboth the
Jezreelite, so fatal to Ahab and his house,
did the vengeance decreed overtake the un-
happy monarch (2 Kings ix. 25). The spot
may be still identified. It is the modern
Zerin. Bitter describes it (and so does
Robinson) as standing on the edge of a
precipice 100 feet high, and commanding a
fine view of the plain of Beth-shean on the
east, and of Bsdraelon on the west. There
is a tower here which commands the same
view as the watchmen of Jehoram com-
manded, bearing witness to the accuracy of
the historian. So in 1 Kings iv. 12, the
mention of Taanach, Megiddo, and the region

of Beth-shean, as beneath Q nnriD). Jezreel
is another instance of topographical detail
which marks the correctness of the record.
Another point is that we read in the narra-
tive above mentioned of " chariots." WUsou
(' Lands of the Bible,' ii. 303) was sur-
prised, on leaving the rugged heights of the
hill-country, to find how easily, if the
civihsation of Palestine permitted, excellent
roads might be made throughout this region;
and Canon Tristram ('Landof Israel,' p. 421)
has remarked on the desolate appearance



now presented by that fertile region, the
result of the insecurity for life and property
which is so commonly remarked by aU who
have traveUed in the East. Here, where
under a better rule would be the abode of
peace and plenty, no cultivator of the land
dare venture to pass the night, exposed to
the depredations of the vpild tribes that
infest the country. Only a mountain fast-
ness, hard to climb and comparatively easy
to defend, affords a secure retreat for those
who would Uve peaceably in that once
favoured land. Shunem. Now Sulem : the
place of the encampment of the Philistines
before they "pitched in Aphek" (1 Sam.
xxviii. 4 ; xxix. 1). It was " five Eoman
miles south of Mount Tabor " (Vandeveldel
and an hour and a half {i.e. about six miles)
north of Jezreel (Keil and Delitzsch). Here
Abishag the Shunammite lived (1 Kings i. 3 ;
ii. 17, 21), and here Elisha lodged, and after-
wards restored the son of his entertainers
to life (2 Kings iv., viii.).

Ver. 21. — En-gannim. Supposed to be
the same as the " garden house " (the Beth-
gan of the LXX. ) mentioned in 2 Kings ix.
27) where Ahaziah, king of Judah, met with
the wound of which he afterwards died at
Megiddo. It was one of the Levitioal cities
of Issaehar (ch. xxi. 29). Eobinson, Van-
develde, and others identify it with the
modem Jenln, the Ginsa of Josephus. The
meaning of the name is " fountain of the
gardens " and the present Jentn is situated,
so Bobinson teUs us, in the midst of
gardens.

Ver. 22. — ^The coast reacheth. Literally,
the border skirteth, as in ver. 11. Tabor.
Perhaps the same as Chisloth-Tabor in ver.
12 (cf. 1 Chron. vi. 77). It would therefore
be, as Mount Tabor certainly was, on the
boundary between the tribes of Issaehar and
Zebulun. Beth-shemesh. Not the weU-
known town in the tribe of Judah (ch. xv. 10).
The repetition of this name is a proof of the
extent to which sun-worship prevailed in
Palestine before the Israelite invasion.

Ver. 23. — Tills is the Inheritance of the
tribe of Issacbar. Jacob, whose dying eye
pierced far into the future, discerned before-
hand the situation of the tribe of Issaehar,
and its results upon its conduct. Situated
in the midst of this fertile plain, accessible
alike to Egypt by the way of the Shephelah,
and to the east by way of the fords of
the Jordan, the tribe of Issaehar became in
the end the prey of the various nationalities,
who made the plain of Esdraelou their
battle-field, and it was the first to " bow hia
shoulder to bear" and to " become a servant
unto tribute" (Gen. xUx. 15). It seems to
have been to the east of Manasseh (sea
ch. xvii. 10), and may have extended umok



Ctt. tsx. 1— l»l.J



tSE fiOOS OP' ^TosiJUl,



m



further south than is usually supposed.
jSince but email mention of the Jordan is
made in the boundary of Joseph, it may
have extended as far or farther south than
the Jabbok (see also note, oh. xvii. 10).
The general belief of explorers at present is
that the inheritance of Issachar extended
from Jezreel to the Jordan, and from the
Sea of Tiberias southward as far as the
border of Manasseh, above mentioned.

Ver. 25. — HellcatlL A Levitioal city
(oh. xxi. 31 ; 1 Chron. vi. 75, where it is
called Hukok).

Ver. 26. — ^Reachetll. Literally, touclieth,
i.e. skirteth, as in vers. 11 and 22. So in the
next verse, with regard to Zebulun. The term
appears to be the invariable one when a dis-
trict, not a particular place, is spoken of. To
Caxmel westward. The Carmel range apjioars
to have been included in the tribe of Asher.
For we read (ch. xviL 10, 11) that Asher met
Manasseh on the north, whence we conclude
that it must have cut off Issachar from the
sea, and that as Dor was among the towns
which Manasseh held within the territory
of Issachar and Asher, it must therefore
have been within the boundaries of the
latter. ShlhoT-Ubnatli. For Shihor see
oh. xiii. 3. Libnath, which signifies white
or shining, has been supposed by some to
mean the glassy river, from its calm, un-
broken flow, though this appears improbable,
since Shihor means turbid. It is far
more probable that the current was ren-
dered turbid by a quantity of chalk or
limestone which it carried along in its
course, and hence the name " muddy
white." Keil thinks it to be the Nahr-el-
Zerka, or crocodile river, of Pliny, in which
Beland, Von Eaumer, Enobel, and Eosen-
miiUer agree with him. But when he pro-
ceeds to argue that this river, being blue,
" might answer both to shihor, black, and
libnath, white," he takes a flight in which
it is impossible to follow him. Gesenius,
from the glazed appearance oi burnt brick
or tiles {I'banah), conjectures'that it may be
the Belus, or " glass river," so called, how-
ever, in ancient times because the fine sand
on its banks enabled the manufacture of
glass to be carried on here. But this, empty-
ing itself into the sea near Acre, has been
thought to be too far north. Vandevelde,
however, one of the latest authorities, as
well as Mi. Conder, is inoUned to agree with
Gesenius. The difficulty of this identifica-
tion consists in the fact that Carmel and
Dor (oh. xvii. 11) are said to have been in
Asher (see note on ch. xvii. 10). The Nahr-
el-Zerka has not been found by recent ex-
plorers to contain crocodiles, but it has
been thought possible that they have hitherto
elad«d obaeiration, Eenriek, however



(' Phoenicia, 'p. 24), thinks that as crocodiliu
originally meant a hzard, the laeertus Nito-
ticus is meant, the river being, inhisopinion,
too shallow in summer to be the haunt of
the crocodile proper (see also Tristram,
'Land of IsraeL' p. 103, who believes it
possible that the crocodile may be found
there, though no specimen has as yet been
produced). The Zerka is described in Pales-
tine Exploration Fund Quarterly Paper,
January, 1874, as " a torpid stream flowing
through fetid marshes, in which reeds, canes,
and the stunted papyrus grow." When it
is added, " and where alone in Palestine
the crocodile is found,'' no evidence is given
in favour of the statement'. It empties itself
into the sea between Dor and Ctesarea, a
few miles north of the latter.

Ver. 27. — Beth-dagon. We learn that
Dagon, the fish-god, was worshipped here
as well as in the south of Palestine (see
ch. XV. 41). The Valley of Jlphthah-el.
This valley, or gai, is mentioned above,
ver. 14, as the extreme northern border of
Zebulun. Cahul. We read of a Cabul in
1 Kings ix. 11—13, but it can hardly be this
place, though clearly not far off. For we
read that the name given to that territory
was given then by Hiram. There is a Kw/irj
Xa/3w\(i) IlToXe/jai&£ uiBopLov oiaa men-
tioned by Josephus. There is a village four
hours north-east of Acre, which still bears
this name.

Ver. 28.— Hebron. Bather, Ebron. It
is not the same word as the Hebron in
Judah, but is spelt with Ain instead of
Hheth. In ch. xxi. 30, 1 Chron. vi. 69,
Abdon is the name of the city assigned to
the Levites in Asher. Twenty MSS., says
Keil, have the same reading here. But the
LXX. has 'E/Sowv here and AjiSuv in ch.
xxi. 30. The Hebrew T and 1 are so much
alike that there is no doubt that the mis-
take has arisen earlier than the time when
that translation was made. It is true that
the lists of Levitical cities in Joshua xxi.
and 1 Chron. vi. do not entirely correspond.
But the resemblance here between th«
names is too striking to allow of the sup-
position that two different cities are meant.
Great Zldon. This city, as well as Tyre,
remained unsubdued, although assigned by
Joshua to Asher. The boundary of Asher
appears to have been traced first towards
the west, then eastward, from a middle
point on the southern border (see note on
ver. 11), then to have been carried north-
ward from the same point (the left hand
usually means the north ; see note on Te-
man, oh. xv. 1), on the east side till it
reached Cabul. Then the northern border
is traced westward to Sidon. Then tha
border turned southward along the tM,



m^



*afi BOOK Oi* JOSHtA.



[ca. 111. i— Si.



which ia not mentioned, because it would
seem to be sufficiently defined by the men-
tion of Eamah and Tyre. Between Hosah
and Achzib there would seem to have been
a greater paucity of cities, and therefore
the sea is mentioned.

Ver. 29. — ^Th9 strong city lyre. Bather,
the fortified city. The general impression
among commentators appears to be that
the island city of Tyre, afterwards so
famous, had not as yet come into exist-
ence. And the word here used, IVaD
seems to be more in accordance with the
idea of a land fortress than of one so
exceptionally protected as an island fortress
would be. This expression, like "great
Zidon" above, implies the comparative
antiquity of the Book of Joshua. The
island city of Tyre, so famous in later
history, was not yet founded. The
city on the mainland (called Ancient Tyre
by the historians) was ' ' the chief seat
of the population till the wars of the
Assyrian monarchs against Phoenicia '
(Kenriok, 'Phoenicia,' p. 344). He adds,
" The situation of Palse-Tyrus was one of
the most fertile spots on the coast of
Phoenicia. The plain is here about five
miles wide ; the soil is dark, and the variety
of its productions excited the wonder of the
Crusaders." William of Tyre, the historian
of the Crusades, tells us that, although the
territory was scanty in extent, " exiguitatem
suam multa redimit ubertate. " The position
of Tyre, as a city of vast commercial im-
portance and artistic skill in the time of
David and Solomon, is clear enough from
the sacred records. It appears stUl (2 Sam.
xxiv. 6, 7) to have been on the mainland,
for the successors of Eameses II. , up to the
time of Sheshonk, or Shishak, were unwar-
like monarchs, and the Assyrian power had
not yet attained its subsequent formidable
dimensions. We meet vrith Eth-baal, or
Itho-baal, in later Scripture history, re-
markable as the murderer of the last of
Hiram's descendants, and the father of the
infamous Jezebel, from which we may
conclude that a great moral and therefore
political declension had taken place since the
days of Hiram. The later history of Tyre
may be inferred from the prophetic denuncia-
tions, intermingled with descriptive passages,
found in Isa. xxiii. and Ezek. xxvi., xxvii. ;
Joel (iii. 3 — 8) and Amos (i. 9) had previously
complained of the way in which the children
of Israel had become the merchandise of
Tyre, and had threatened the vengeance of
Qod. But the minute and powerful de-
scription in Ezek. zzvii. shows that Tyre
was still great and prosperous. She was
strong enough to resist the attacks of suc-
cessive Assyrian monaichs. Shalmaneser'g



victorious expedition (so Alexander tells ns)
was driven back from the island fortress of
Tyre. Sennacherib, in his vainglorious
boast of the cities he has conquered (Isa.
xxxvi., xxxvii.), makes no mention of Tyre.
Even Nebuchadnezzar, though he took and
destroyed Palse-Tyrus, appears to have
been baffled in his attempt to reduce the
island city. Shorn of much of its ancient
glory. Tyre stiU remained powerful, and
only succumbed, after a resistance of seven
months, to the splendid military genius of
Alexander the Great. But Alexander re-
founded Tyre, and its position and its com-
mercial reputation secured for it a large
part of its former importance. The city
continued to flourish, even though Phoenicia
was for a long period the battle - ground
between the Syrian and the Egyptian
monarchies. To .Christian readers, the de-
scription by Eusebius of the splendid church
erected at Tyre by its Bishop PauMnus will
have an interest. He describes it as by
far the finest in all Phoenicia, and appends
the sermon he preached on the occasion.
Even in the fourth century after Christ, St.
Jerome ('Comm. ad Ezek.,' 26. 7.) wonders
why the prophecy concerning Tyre has
never been fulfilled. • " Quod sequitur, ' nee
sedificaberis ultra,' videtur facere quses-
tionem quomodo non. sit eedificata, quam
hodie cernimus nobilissimam et pulcheni-
mam civitatem." But the present state of
Tyre warns us not to be too hasty in pro-
nouncing any Scripture prophecy to have
failed. Even Sidon is not the wretched
collection of huts and ruined columns which
is all that remains of the once proud city
Tyre. And the outgoings thereof are at
the sea from the coast to Achzib. Bather,
and the western extremity is from Hehel to
Achzib. Hebel signifies a region or posses-
sion, as in ver. 9. Here, however, it seems
to be a proper name. Achzib. " A city of
Asher, not conquered by that tribe (Judg.
i. 31), now the village of Zib, two-and-a-half
hours north of Akka," or Acre (Vandevelde).
Keil and DeUtzsoh make the journey a three
hours' one. But Maundrell, who also cor-
roborates St. Jerome in the distance (nine
Boman miles), states that he performed the
journey hence to Acre in two hours.

Ver. 80. — Aphek (see ch. xiiL 4). Twenty
and two cities with their villages. The
difficulty of tracing the boundary of Asheir
seems to be that it was traced, not by a
line plainly marking out the territory, but
less accurately, by a reference to the relative
position of its principal cities.

Ver. 31.— This la the Inheritance of the
tribe of Asher. Asher appears to have
been allotted a long but narrow strip of
territory between Naphtali and the tea.



eri. m.. 1— SI,]



THE BOO^ Of JOStttJA.



m



The natural advantages of the territojy
must have been great. Not only was it
described prophetically by Jacob (Gen.
xlix. 20) and by Moses (Deut. xxxiii. 24, 25),
but the prosperity of the two great maritime
cities of Tyre and Sidon was due to the
immense commercial advantages the neigh-
bourhood afforded. St. Jean d'Acre, within
the territory once assigned to Asher, has
inherited the prosperity, so far as anything
under the Turkish rule can be prosperous,
once enjoyed by her two predecessors.
Maundrell, the acute English chaplain at
Aleppo, who visited Palestine in 1696, de-
scribes the plain of Acre in his day as about
six hours' journey from north to south, and
two from west to east ; as being well watered,
and possessing " everything else that might
render it both pleasant and fruitful.
But," he adds, " this delicious plain is
now almost desolate, being suffered, for
want of culture, to run up to rank weeds,
as high as our horses' backs." Asher, how-
ever, never employed the advantages its
situation offered. They never subdued the
Canaanites around them, but, unquestion-
ably at a very early date (see Judg. v. 17)
preferred a life of compromise and ignoble
ease to the national welfare. But it would
be incorrect to suppose that because the
tribe is omitted in the Ust of rulers given
in 1 Chrou. xxvii., it had ceased to be a
power in Israel. For Gad is also omitted
in that Ust, while among the warriors who
came to greet David when he became un-
disputed king of Israel, Asher sent 40,000
trained warriors, a number exceeding the
men of Ephraim, and those of Simeon, of
Dan, and of the half-tribe of Manasseh (see
1 Chrou. xii.), and far exceeding the num-
bers of Benjamin, which had never recovered
the war of almost extermination waged
against it, in consequence of the atrocity at
Gibeah (Judg. xx.). Possibly the reason
why so few are mentioned of the tribe of
Judah on that occasion is because so many
were already with David. There seems no
ground for the idea of Dean Stanley, that
the allusion to Asher in Judg. v. 17 is any
more contemptuoni than the allusion to
any other tribe.

Ver. 33.— FromAUon toZaanannlm. Or,
the oak which is at Zaanannim (cf. AUon-
bachuth, the oak of weeping. Gen. xxxv. 8).
Zaanannim is the same as the Zaanaim
mentioned in Judg. iv. 11. For (1) the Keri
is Zaanannim there, and the word here
rightly translated " oak " is rendered there
"plain," as in Gen. xii. 6 and elsewhere.
It has been supposed to lie north-west of
Lake Euleh, the ancient Merom, whence
we find that the scene of that famous battle
was aangned to the tribe of Naphtali. Th«



border of Naphtali is more lightly traced
than any previous one, and is regarded ai
being sufficiently defined, save toward tha
north, by the boundaries of the othei
tribes.

Ver. 34.— And then the coast tumeth
westward. Here the words are hterally
translated without any confusion between
the west and the sea, nor any misappre-
hension of the meaning of the word 3DJ.
Beacheth. This is the same word translated
sUrteth above, ver. 11, note. We have it here
clearly stated that Naphtali was bordered
on the south by Zebulun, on the west by
Asher, and on the east by "Judah upon
Jordan." To Judali. These words hav«
caused great trouble to translators and ex-
positors for 2,000 years. The LXX. omits
them altogether, rendering, "and the
Jordan to the eastward." The Masorites,
by inserting a disjunctive accent between
them and the words that follow, would
have us render, "and to Judah: Jordan
towards the sunrising," or, " is towards the
Bunrising," a rendering which gives no
reasonable sense. They unquestionably
form part of the text, since no version but
the LXX. omits them. A suggestion of
Ton Eaumer's has found favour that the
cities called Havoth Jair, which were on
the eastern side of Jordan, opposite the
inheritance of Naphtah, are meant. Jair
was a descendant of Judah by the father's
side, through Hezron. So Bitter, iv. 338
(see 1 Chron. ii. 21—23). It would seem
that the principle of female inheritance,
having once been admitted in the tribe of
Manasseh, was found capable of further
extension. But to the majority of tha
Israelites this settlement would no doubt
be regarded as an offshoot of the tribe
of Judah.

Ver. 35.— And the fenced cities. The
remark is made in the 'Speaker's Com-
mentary ' that the number of fenced cities
in the north were no doubt owing to a
determination to protect the northern
boundary of Israel by a chain of fortresses.
The word fenced is the same that is rendered
strong in ver. 29, " the strong city Tyre."
Chinnereth (see ch. xi. 2).
Ver. 36. — ^Hazor (see above, ch. xi. 1 — 10).
Ver. 37. — Eedesh (see ch. xii. 22). It was
the residence of Barak (Judg. iv. 6). Ejiown
to Josephus (Bell. Jud.,4. 2. 3.) as Cydoessa,
to EusebiuB and Jerome as Cydissus; it is
now Eedea (see Bobinson, 'Later BibUcal
Eesearches '). Edrel. Not theEdrei of Og,
which was beyond Jordan.

Ver. 38.— Migdal-el. The Magdala of
the New Testament. It lay on the lake of
Gennesareth. Beth-shemesh. A common
name derived from the worship of the siub



284



THE BOOK Oli' J08SUA.



[cH. xis. 4—61.



This is neither Beth-shemesh of Judah nor
of iBsaohar (see ver. 22).

Ver. 39.— The Inheritance of the trlTje of
the children of NapbtaU. Of NaphtaU,
beyond the not too heroic leader Barak, we
hear nothing in the after history of Israel,
until the fulfilment of the prophecy in
Isa. ix. 1, 2. Galilee, the scene of the
greater part of our Lord's teaching and
miracles, was divided between Issachar,
Asher, Zebulon, and Naphtali. The majority
of the places mentioned in the Gospels were
within the borders of Zebulon. But as we
learn that our Lord penetrated as far as
"the coasts of Cffisarea PhiUppi," in the
extreme north of Palestine, He must bave
preached also in the cities of Naphtali.
NaphtaU sent a goodly number of warriors
to welcome David as ' ' king over all Israel "
(1 Chron. xii. 34). The inherhanoe of
Naphtali was in the main fertile, but there
was a large mountain district, known as the
mountain region of Naphtali (oh. xx. 7).
Some of the mountains rose to the height
of more than 3,000 feet.

Ver. 41.— Zorah and Eshtaol On the
border between Judah and Dan, but aban-
doned by the tribe of Judah to the Danites
(see Judg. xiii. 2, 25). " The wild and im-
passable wadies, the steep, hard, rocky hills,
their wildernesses of mastic, clear springs,
and frequent caves and precipices, are the
fastnesses in which Samson was bom, and
from which he descended into the plain to
harry the Philistines (Lieut. Conder in Pal.
Expl. Fund, Quart. Paper, Jan., 1874).
Eobinsou identifies Zorah with Surat. Ir-
ehemesh. Another sign of sim-worship.
Ir-shemesh is " the city of the sun."

Ver. 42. — Aljalon, or Ajalon (see ch.x. 12).
One of the Levitical cities.

Ver. 43, — Ekron (see ch. xiii. 3).

Ver. 44. — Gibbethon. A Levitical city, as
was also Eltekeh (see ch. xxi. 23). It was
the same city as that mentioned as " be-
longing to the Philistines " in 1 Kings xv.
27 ; xvi. 15, 17.

Ver. 45. — Gathrlmmon. Also a Levitical
city (see ch. xxi. 24; 1 Chron. vi. 69). Me-
Jarkon. The waters of the Jarkon.

Ver. 46. — Before. Or opposite. Japho. The
Joppa of the New Testament, and the
modern Jaffa. It is called Joppa in
2 Chron. ii. 16, in Ezra iii. 7, and in the
book of Jonah (ch. i. 3), in all which places
ii is mentioned as a famous seaport, a
position it still maintains, being still, as it
was of old, the port of Jerusalem. The
LXX. and Vulgate have Joppa here, and it
is unfortunate that our translators, in this
instance only, should have adhered to the
Hebrew form. Joppa appears to have been
AH important city in the time of the Mac-



cabees (see 1 Maoo. x. 75, 76; and 3 Mace,
iv. 21). Its mention in the New letta-
ment as the place where St. Peter's vision
occuiTed will be known to all. The name
signifies " beauty," though Joppa does not
seem to be distinguished above aU other
places in Palestine by the beauty of its
situation. But according to Movers, Japho
signifies in Phoenician, " high place." It is
certainly built on a range of terraces above
the sea, but the term " high place " would
seem unsuitable. The soil is very produc-
tive, and it is " the only harbour in Central
Palestine " (Ritter).

Ver. 47. — ^Went out too little for them.
The Hebrew is, went out from them ; i.e. ,
either went out beyond their own borders,
or went out too small a distance to be suiS-
cient for them. The first is the explanation
of Masius ("extra se migrasse"), the second
of Jarchi, Houbigant suggests for ^4.V,*1
" and it went out" yVi^) " audit was narrow."
But the LXX. has the same reading as our-
selves, and the explanation given above is
quite consistent with the fact. The border
of Dan did " go out " far beyond the borders
originally assigned to the tribe, in fact to
the extreme northern limit of Palestine.
The account of the taking of Laish, or
Leshem, is given more fuUy in Judg. xviii.
The inheritance assigned to Dan was ex-
tremely small, but it was also extremely
fertile.

Ver. 48. — This Is the Inheritance of the
children of Dan. We read little of Dan in
the after history of Israel. Samson is the
only hero this tribe produced, and his
exploits were limited to a very narrow area,
and his iofluence apparently to his own
tribe.

Ver. 49.— When they had made an end.
The LXX., both here and in ver. 51, reads

•ID??, they went. The last thing Joshus
thought of was himself. It was only when
his work was done, and Israel had received
her allotted territory, that Joshua thought
it right to take his own inheritance. Calvin
remarks that it was " a striking proof of the
moderation of this servant of God " that he
" thought not of bis own interest until that
of the community was secured."

Ver. 60.— The city which he asked. He
asked for a city, certainly. But the law of
the inheritance was not to be set aside for
him any more than for the meanest in Israel.
Timnathserah was in his own tribe. Tim-
nath-serah. Called Thamna by Josephus
and the LXX., and Timnath-heres, or Tin-
math of the sun by a transposition of the
letters, in Judges ii. 9. Eabbi Solomon
Jarchi gives a singular reason for the latter
name. It came to be so called because thai«



CH. XIX. 1 — 51.]



THE BOOK OF JOSHUA.



2M



was a representation of the sun upon tlie
tomb of him who caused the sun to stand
still. Timnath-serah must not be con-
founded with Timnah, or Timnathah, in the
tribe of Dan (ver. 43). For a long time its
site was unknown, but within the last 40
years it has been identified with Tibneh,
seven houx'S north of Jerusalem, among the
mountains of Ephraim. Dr. Eli Smith was
the first to suggest this, and though it was
doubted by Kobiuson, it has since been ac-
cepted by Vandevelde and other high autho-
rities. Tibneh seems to have anciently been
a considerable town. It is described in
Eitter's ' Geography of Palestine ' as a gentle
hiU, crowned with estensive ruins. Opposite
these, on the slope of a much higher emi-
nence, are excavations like what are called
the Tombs of the Kings at Jerusalem. Jewish
tradition, however, points to Kefr Haris,
some distance south of Shechem, as the site
of Joshua's tomb, and several able writers
have advocated its claims in the papers of
the Palestine Exploration Fund, on the
ground that on such a point Jewish tra-
dition was not likely to be mistaken.

Ver. 51. — At the door of the tabernacle
of the congregation. The lots were drawn
under Divine sanction. The ruler of the
State and the ruler of the Church combined
in this sacred act, hallowed by all the rites
of religion, and confirmed by the presence
and approbation of the heads or representa-
tives of all the tribes. Accordingly, as has
been said above, we hear of no murmurings
Of disputiuga afterwards. However much



the Israelites may have quarrelled among
themselves, there is not a hint of dissatis-
faction with the final distribution of terri-
tory. Three points may be noticed here —
1. The authenticity of the narrative is con-
firmed by these evidences of the internal
agreement of its parts. 2. We learn the
value of mutual consultation, of open and
fair dealing, from this narrative. The par-
celling out of the inheritance of Israel under
God's command was carried out in such a
manner as to preclude the slightest sus-
picion of partiality. 3. The duty of hallow-
ing all important actions with the sanction!
of religion, of uniting prayer and a pubUo
recognition of God's authority with every
event of moment, whether in the life of the
individual or of the body politic, finds an
illustration here. An age which, like the
present, is disposed to relegate to the closet
all recognition of God's authority, which
rashes into wars without God's blessing,
celebrates national or local ceremonials
without acknowledging Him, contracts
matrimony without publicly seeking Hia
blessing, receives children from Him without
caring to dedicate them formally to Hia
service, can hardly plead that it is acting in
the spirit of the Divine Scriptures. A well-
known writer in our age declares that we
have "forgotten God." Though the external
and form^ recognition of Him may be con-
sistent vrith much f orgetfulness in the heart,
yet the absence of such recognition is not
likely to make us remember Him, nor can it
be pleaded as proof that we do so.



HOMILETICS.
Vers. I — SI. — The completion of the worTc. The reflections suggested by thia
chapter are identical -with those which have already occurred to us. They are,
perhaps, emphasised by ver. 51, in vrhioh the solemn pubUc division of the land ia
once more, and yet more plainly, declared to have taken place with the assent of
the heads of Church and State, and to have been attended with a religious ceremony.
Without pretending to say whose fault it is, or how such a desirable state of things
may be once more attained, we may be allowed to lament that what was the rule
with our forefathers before the Norman conquest is impossible now. No doubt the
separation of ecclesiastical from civil jurisdiction which the Conqueror effected has
been to a great extent the cause of this, as that measure was also the cause of an
assumption of authority by ecclesiastics which was afterwards found to be intoler-
able. There should be no separation between the religious and civil interests of the
commimity. Every man in the kingdom is, or ought to be, interested in its eccle-
Biastical arrangements. No single act of the State ought to be considered as outside
the sphere of rehgious influence. At the same time we must remember that the
present state of things is the natural result of religious freedom, a freedom which
Christ Himself proclaimed (John xviii. 86), but which was unknown to His Church
for many centuries, as also to the Jews before He came (Gen. xvii. 14 ; Bxod. lii.
16; XXX. 83, 38; xxxi. 14; Levit. vii 20, 27, &c.). As has been already intimated,
an example which cannot he fulfilled in the letter may be fulfilled in the spirit. W«
pia^ etrive to hallow great national events with one heart and soul, though with



286 THE BOOK OF JOSHUA. [oh. xa. l—Sh

different forms, waiting for the day when " our mihappy divisions " have ceased.
We may, however, add one consideration derived from this chapter alone.

Selfish aims ought not to inteude into a great cause. This principle is
illustrated (1) by the oondaot of Judah, (2) by the conduct of Joshua. The rule of
the world is (1) to covet power and possessions, and (2) that the successful conqueror
has a right to be first considered in the division of the spoil. Observe how com-
pletely Qie narrative of this chapter implicitly rebukes a view of things which is
assumed as a matter of course in the ordinary concerns of the world. In past
history we read of the greed of individuals and nations for the annexation of terri-
tory, and of the wars and bloodshed thus caused. It has been a maxim that any
ruler or any nation may, and ought to, add to its territories if it can, vrithout much
regard to the principles of justice or the general good. A man, it is stiU behoved,
may heap to himself possessions in land or money as much as he chooses, and
would be a fool if he did not. The first of these doctrines has only lately begun to
be questioned among us. The second is still an established principle of action. Yet
Judah voluntarily surrendered its territory to Simeon for the national welfare. And
Joshua takes care that every one is served before himself. It is this marvellous
self-abnegation on the part of the leader of a mih'tary expedition, imparaUeled until
Christianity came into the world, that is the best proof of the claim of the Mosaic
dispensation to have been Divine. Cases like those of Cincinnatus cannot be adduced
in refutation of this argument. His position is in no way parallel to that of the
leader of an expedition like Joshua's. Such utter self-abandonment as was displayed
by Moses and Joshua marks them out as men fifteen or twenty — we might perhaps
say thirty — centuries before their age. The invasion of Canaan has been declaimed
against as cruel ; but its cruelty was at least the fruit of a moral idea, a righteous
indignation against an obscene and ferocious religion, which was itself the cause of
infinite misery to mankind; while Joshua's cruelty was kindness itself compared to
the revolting atrocities recorded at their own instance by the Eastern conquerors
of old, Egyptian, Assyrian, Babylonian, Moabite. We hear ad nausecmi of the
impossibility of God's ordering the slaughter of the unoffending Canaanites (see this
subject further discussed in the Introduction). We hear nothing of the high morality,
the sublime disinterestedness, the devotion to a grand and subhme ideal which
characterised the giver of the Law and the conqueror of Canaan. Such characters
have been rare since Christ came into the world. Save the two great men whom
wc have just known, they were unknown before it.



HOMILIES BY VABIOUS AUTHOES.
Ver. 9. — Brotherhood. 1. The idea of beotheehood must be recognised a

OEDEE that TEUE PEINCIPLES OP JUSTICE MAY BE ESTABLISHED. Justice doOS nOt

imply equality. To deal equally with aU is often unjust, since different men have
different needs. It would have been unjust to have given equal portions to Judah
and Simeon. In the family, justice does not require the treatment of aU the
children alike, but the treatment of each according to his disposition and require-
ments. But in order to do this there must be mutual understanding and sympathy
Therefore these are necessary for the administration of justice. Bude social
equahty wHl not regenerate society. The idea of brotherhood must come first and
bring with it the thoughtfulness and sympathy, without which we cannot be just to
one another. Note : Providence is often more just than it appears, because it does
not aim at estabhshing a mechanical equality, but studies the individual condition
of each man, and acts according to special requirements of special cases which may
be entirely unknown to us.

II. The idea of beotheehood must be realised if men would see thh
PEAOTioAii application OF PEINCIPLES OF JUSTICE. Judah had too much. Few
men are willing to admit that they have too much, and hence they often wrong
others and greedily hold what they do not need. Until men feel their brotherhood
with others they will not see the measure by which to jud^e whether or no thejr



OH. XIX. 1—51.] THE BOOK OF JOSHUA 2W



Lave more than their due share of the advantages of hfe. Selfishness magnifies a
man's needs and deserts, and minimises the requirements and merits of others. Td
be just we must conquer selfishness with brotherliness.

III. The idea of beotherhood must take possession of men befoke they can

fRAOTISB THAT MUTUAL ACCOMMODATION WHICH IS REQUIRED BY JUSTICE. The

children of Simeon had their inheritance within the inheritance of the children of
Judah. Thig 'Could only be enjoyed peaceably so long as the two tribes lived on
terms of brotherly kindness. Justice wiU not be obtained under a system of jealous
competition in a selfish race for wealth. This leads to the weak and unfortunate
losing, and the strong and fortunate gaining, more than is fair. The idea of
brotherhood wiU prevent men fi-om taldng unfair advantage of one another, will
estabUsh the principle of eo-operation in place of that of competition, and wUl sub-
stitute the mutual benefits of the family for the selfish profits of a state of inter-
necine warfare.

IV. The IDEA OF brotherhood can only be fully realised undeb the
INFLUENCE OF CHRISTIANITY. Eevolutious whioh have dispensed with Christianity
have boasted of then: power to realise this idea, but the attempt to do so has too
often led through bloodshed to despotism. Christianity realises it (1) by pointing
to a common fatherhood, (2) by joining to one brother, Christ, (3)' by exalting
brotherly charity to the first rank among the Christian graces (1 Cor. xui. 13). —
W. F. A.

Ver. 49. — JosJiMa's portion. " When they had made an end of dividing the land,*
Joshua gets his share. Not first, as kings usually do, but last. When aU are
helped, then comes his turn. Though be waits longest, yet it does come to him.
And when it does come it is aU the more welcome from being well earned.
Observe two or three things that are thus brought before us.

I. A TRAIT OF HONOUR. Houour is the bloom of uprightness ; the finer instinc-
tive working of it in matters too deUcate to be touched by law. It is not so common
as it ought to be ; for our natm-es are often coarse, and honour is always costly. We
prefer going in for cheaper virtues, especially for such, of them as are loud and
obvious, as well as cheap. Even those who attend to the " honest and just and
true " of Paul's presept, sometimes overlook " the pure and the lovely and that
whioh is of good report." Here Joshua comes out, as we would expect him, as a
man of honour. Such faith as he had never existed in a selfish heart; such
courage as marked him, naturally had emotions of similar nobility to keep it com-
pany. Doubtless, some foolish and flattering firiends urged him to accept his lot
first ; and pleaded, perhaps, his first right to it, both as faithful spy and succeasful
leVer. Something before Shakespeare had whispered —

" Love thyself last : let all the ends thou aim'st at
Be thy country's, God's, and Truth's."

And the still small voice of sacred honour within him did not speak in vain. Like
as in a sinking ship, a brave captain is the last to leave her and seek for safety, so
Joshua elects to be the last served. AU the best bits of the country others eagerly
go in for. Joshua sees it disposed of by lot, but is not moved by the sight of its
going to envy others, nor does he catch any greed from the contagion of their
example. Quite cahn, feeling rich in enriching others, at rest in giving others
rest, he has rewards above any freehold, and joys above any wealth. There is
here an example all ought to follow. The insistance on om* rights is sometimes a
duty. In the interest of others we may be obliged to resist and dispute injustice.
But such insistance ought always to be practised with regret, and avoided wherever
possible. The precept requiring us to give the cloak to bim who covets the coat
certainly inculcates the surrender of rights wherever any moral advantage can
accrue from it. For our own sake, to keep the soul in proper and worthy mood, we
ought to cultivate this honourableness that thinks of something subhmer than its
private rights. And for the sake of others also, for honour is one of the subtlest,
but the strongest, forces of good anywhere existeftt. It allures men to a better way,



2ga THE BOOK OF JOSHUA. [ch. xn- 1—61^



charms tliem to integrity, is a root of brotherliness and peace. Especially should
all leaders of their fellows cultivate this honour. It is not too common amongst
either sovereigns or statesmen. Men are apt to forget that selfishness ia vulgar,
•whether it seeks to get a throne, in ambition, or to keep its halfpence in sordid
avarice. AU selfishness is mean ; and in the great it is greatly mischievous. It
brseds oivU wars ; it corrupts the patriotism of a people; it prevents the rise of that
confidence in the justice and the patriotism and the wisdom of the rulers which
gives the nations rest. In leaders in smaller circles— boroughs, churches — there is
the same scope for this high principle. Israel was blessed in this, that its most
unselfish man was its leader. And he who was highest in place was highest in
honour. Secondly observe —

II. Honour has its reward at last. He had had abundant reward all
through. Bivalries and competitions which, under a selfish ruler, would have
broken out, and perhaps flamed up into strife and tumult, are repressed by the
silent, dignified example of one whose thoughts were above the vulgar deHghts of
wealth. And this reward of being able to compose the conflicting claims of a great
multitude was the grandest reward he could have. To win victory over his
nation's foes, and keep contentment and peace in her own borders, was reward
indeed. But he does not go without even the material reward. All Israel come and
give him Timnath-serah. We cannot identify it now with any definiteness. But
it was doubtless worthy of the nation that gave it — of the man that received it.
Honour often seems, to the coarse-hearted, to go without reward. But that is only
because the reward is of a sor^ too subtle for coarse vision to detect. It has always
a grand reward in the influence with which it crowns the head of him who practises
it. It has, besides, even common outward rewards. The race is not always to the
swift, nor the gold to the greedy. We make our own world, and teach men how
to deal with us. The world is froward to the froward ; it is honourable to the
honourable. The fairest treatment men ever give is given to those who treat
them fairly. The best masters get the best service. The truest friends form richest
fi-iendships. Honourable men rarely meet with dishonomrable treatment. And
without any clamour or fighting they get a better Timnath-serah than in any other
way they could have gained. " Trust in the Lord and do good : so shalt thou dwell
in the land, and verily thou shalt be fed." Lastly observe —

III. The inheritance got by desert, and held without being envied, is
THE PBEFEOTioN OF A LOT. Not aU riches comfort us. Ill-gotten riches curse us.
niches gotten by others and passed on to us are insipid. Wealth gathered by
penury is a burden. But the lot that comes as the reward of dfligence, consecra-
tion, honour, has a special sweetness, and the man who gets it has a special power
of enjoying it. Especially when it is ungrudged ; no neighbour coveting it ; no
peasant thinking that by right it should be his ; aU men glad to see it in such
worthy hands. We shall do well to resolve that we will have no fortune and no
inheritance which does not in its way resemble Timnath-serah. — G.

Vers. 49, 50. — Joshua's inheritance. I. Joshua reoeivbd ak inherxtanoe
AMONG his brethren. After labour and battle come rest and recompense. Though
Joshua was a man of war he was not to spend aU his days in fighting. It is some-
times weU that the active should have a quiet time of retirement in old age. For
all God's servants there is an inheritance of rest when this world's work is done
(Heb. iv. 9).

II. Joshua's inheritance was given according to a Divine promise. True
devotion is founded on unselfish motives. Yet the prospect of reward is added by
God's grace as an encouragement. Christ looked forward to His reward (Heb.
xii. 2). We are only guilty of acting from low motives when the idea of personal
profit is allowed to conflict with duty, or when it is the chief motive leading na to
perform any duty.

III. Joshua's inheritance was similar to that of his brethren. He was the
ruler of the people, yet he took no regal honours. He had led them to victory,
yet b^ received no exceptional reward, liik* Ci»oi©natus, ke quietly retired to



ea. XX. 1—9.]



THE BOOK OF JOSHUA,



2m



private life -when lie had completed his great task. This is a grand example of nn-
selfishness, simplicity, and humility. It is noble to covet high service rather than
rich rewards. Ambition is a sin of low selfishness 'sloaked witli a false semblance
of magnificence. The Christian is called to fulfil the highest service with the
lowHest humiUty (Luke xxii. 26). Christians are aU brethren under one Master
(Matt. ixui. 8). Joshua is a type of Christ in his great work and unselfish hmuiUty
(John xiii. 13—16).

IV. Joshua received his inheritance from the hands of the people. He was
not forward to take it for himself. He submitted to the choice and wUl of the people.
It is a mark of true magnanimity to refuse to use influence and power to gain
personal advantages. Joshua is a noble example of a man who exercised authority
over others without developing a spirit of despotism which would fetter the popular
choice. It is a great thing to have a strong, united government ruling over a firee
people.

V. JosHnA did not beoeivb his djheeitancb TiLii after all the other people
HAD RECEIVED THEiB POSSESSIONS. He was first in service, last in reward. The
true Christian spirit will put self last. He who is rightly devoted to duty will not
seek for his reward before his task is completed. The world is too often tardy in
recognising those who have rendered it most valuable service. — W. F. A



EXPOSITION.



CHAPTER XX. 1—9.



Thb cities of EErnoE. — Ver. 1. — Cities
of refuge.. The original is more definite,
the cities of refuge. So LXX. Whereof I
spa^e to you. In Bxod. xxi. 13; Num.
XXXV. 9 ; Deut. xix. 2. Here, again, Joshua is
represented as aware of the existence of
the Pentateuch. It must, therefore, have
existed in something like its present shape
when the Book of Joshua was written. The
words are partly quoted from Numbers and
partly from Deuteronomy; another proof
that these books were regarded as consti-
tuting one law, from the " hand of Moses,"
when Joshua was written.

Ver. 3. — Unawares and miwlttlngly.
Literally, in error, in not knowing. Num.
XXXV. 16 — 18 and Deut. xix. 5, give a clear
explanation of what is here meant. Knobel
notices that the first of these expressions is
found in Levit. iv. 2, and the second in
Deut. iv. 42. The latter is " superfluous,"
and therefore a " filUng up of the Deuterono-
mist. " The " Deuteronomist " must have
been very active in his " filling up." If he
were really so lynx-eyed in a matter of style,
it is a wonder that he was so careless, as we
are told he is, in matters of fact. To more
ordinary minds it would seem as if the
author, familiar with the books of Moses, was
quoting Deuteronomy for the precept, and
Leviticus for the nature of the offence. Tlie
avenger of blood. The Hebrew word is
worthy of notice. It is Gdel ; that is, Uterally,
redeemer, one who buys back at the appointed
price what has fallen into other hands, as
a farm, a field, a slave, or anything oon-

J08HUA.



secrated to God. Hence, since the duty <A.
such redemption, on the death of the owner,
devolved upon the nearest relative, it came
to mean " blood relation." Thus Boaz
(Buth iv. 1, 6, 8) is called the Goel of
Elimelech and his widow. In the present
passage, the phrase " the redeemer (LXX.
ay;(icrT£«ii)j<, next of kin) of the blood"
signifies the exactor of the only penalty
which can satisfy justice, namely, the death
of the murderer. So we are taught in Gen.
ix. 6 ; Exod. xxi. 12, 14 ; Levit. xxiv. 17, 21.
This duty, which in civilised society belongs
to the government, in uncivilised tribes is
usually left to the relatives of the murdered
man. Hence the terrible blood-feuds which
have raged between families for generations,
and which aie not only to be found among
savage nations, bat even in countries which
lay claim to civUisation. In Ireland, for
instance, it is not so long ago since one of
these blood-feuds in the county Tipperary
had acquired such formidable proportions
that the authorities of the Boman Catholic
Church there were compelled to resort to a
mission in order to put an end to it. A
man had been killed nearly a century before
in an affray which commenced about the
age of a colt. His relatives felt bound to
avenge the murder, and their vengeanta
was again deemed to require fresh vengeance,
until faction fights between the " Three-
Tear- Olds" and the "Four -Tear. Olds"
had grown almost into petty wars. A
thrilling story written by the late Prosper
M6rim6e turns upon the Corsican vendetta,
and so true is this story to Ufe that in the
very year (1879) in which these words were

V



290



THE BOOK, OF JOSHUA.



CH. XX. 1-^9.



written an oocnrrenoe precisely Bunilar,
lave in its termination, was reported in the
daily jonrualB to have taken place in that
island. The only way in which the feud
could be terminated was by summoning the
representatives of the two families before
the authorities and exacting an oath from
them that they would cease their strife.
It ia no small oorroboration of the Divine
origin of the Mosaic law that we find here a
provision for mitigating the evils of this
rude code, and for at least delivering the
accidental homicide from the penalty of this
law of retaliation. Yet for the offence of
wilful murder the penalties enjoined by the
Jewish law were terribly severe. A deliberate
violation of the sanctity of human life was
an offence for which no palliation could be
pleaded. No right of sanctuary was to be
granted to him who had wantonly slain a
fellow-creature. "No satisfaction " was to
be taken for his life (Num. xxxv. 31). "The
land cannot be cleansed of the blood that is
shed therein, save by the blood of him that
shed it " (ver. 33). Such provisions might
be expected of a lawgiver who had laid
down as the fundamental principle of
humanity that man was created "in the
image of God," after His likeness ; that God
had " breathed the breath of life" into him,
and man had thus " become a living soul "
(Gen. i. 27 ; ii. 7). Such inward harmony
is there between Moses' inspired revelations
concerning God's purpose in creation, and
the precepts he was commanded to deliver
to the children of Israel.

Ver. 4.— And when he that doth flee unto
one of those cities. This passage is in
accordance with the instructions given in
Num. XXXV., but is not a quotation from it.
The passage may be translated ," and he shall
flee • • . and shall stand." Shall declare
his cause. Literally, shall speak. This
was to be done at the ' ' gate of the city," the
place where all legal business was transacted
(see Euth iv. 1 ; 2 Sam. xv. 2).

Ver. 6. — And if. Or, "and when."
Deliver. LiteraUy, eaitse to shut up {ivy-
KKaaovai, LXX.), implying the completeness
of the deliverance, from which no escape was
possible. And bated him not beforethne.
Paun, cited in Keil's Commentary here,
remarks on the difference between the
Jewish law of sanctuary and that of the
Greeks and Eomans. The former was not
designed to save the criminal from the
penalty he had deserved, but only the
victim of an accident from consequences
far exceeding the oHence. The Greeks and
Eomans, on the contrary, provided the real
criminal with a mode of escape from a pun-
ishment which he had justly merited.

Ver. 6.— Until he stand before the coa-



gjegatloa That is, until he had had a fair
trial. It was no object of the Jewish law to
make a man a victim to passion. Until the
death of the high priest, The further to
protect the unwitting homicide from the
consequences of an unjust revenge, he was,
if iimocent, to return to the city of refuge^
and to dwell there until there was reasonable
ground to suppose that the anger of the
relatives of the slain man should have
abated. This is clear from Num. xxxv.
24, 25. Why the period of the death of the
high priest should have been fixed upon ia
not easy to explain. Keil thinks it is be>
cause the death of the high priest was
typical of the death of Christ, and referg
to Heb. ix. 14, 16. But the reference is not
to the point. The high priest's death was
in no sense typical of the death of Christ.
His yearly entrance into the holy place
once a year, on the Day of Atonement, was
so typical. It might have been supposed
that this yearly atonement would have been
regarded as a propitiation for all the sins
committed during the year. Certainly the
fact that the high priest died the com inon
death of aU men, and the inauguration of
his successor to fill his place could in no
way be regarded as an atonement for sin.
There is more force in Bahr's suggestion in
his ' SymboUk ' (ii. 52). The high priest,
on this view, is the head of the theocracy,
the representative of the covenant. He
concentrates in his person (so Bahr puts it
in another place — see vol. u. 13) the whole
people of Israel in their religious aspect.
His death, therefore, stands in a connection
with the Ufe of Israel which that of no other
man could do. " It is," says Maimonides
(' Moreh Nevochim,' 3. 40), " the death of the
most honoured and beloved man in all
Israel. His death plunges the whole com-
munity into such distress that private
sorrow is lost in the general affliction."
Thus the covenant in a way recommences
with the inauguration of the new high
priest. Bahr complains that Philo has car-
ried this view to an extravagant and fanci-
ful extent. Hengstenberg (' Geschichte des
Eeiohes Gottes,' vol. ii. sec. 3, p. 258) takes
the same view as Maimonides, that the
high priest's death was " a great calamity,"
affecting the whole nation.

Ver. 7. — And they appointed. The
original, which, strange to say, the LXX.
and Vulgate, as well as our version, have
neglected to render, is sanctified (heiligten,
Luther). The selection is itself a proof that
our author knew weU what he was writing
about. It is not likely that in the later
times of Jewish history, when tiie law had
been forgotten (2 Kings xxii. 8) and ita
precepts had long been in abeyance, that



CH. Xi. 1 8.]



THE BOOK OB" JOSHUA.



m



the institution of the city of refuge remained
in full force. But we find three cities
selected on each side of Jordan. Those on
the west were in the tribe of Naphtali on
the north, of Bphraim in the centre, and of
.Tudah in the south. The same is the case
with those on the other side Jordan. Thus
every little , detail of the narrative, when
closely scrutinised, does but show more
entirely how free this narrative is from the
reproach so hastily cast upon it of being a
loose and inaccurate compilation, attempted
by a man who had not the slightest literary
fitness for the task he had undertaken. A
corroboration of this view may be found in
the fact that all these cities were Levitioal
cities. Thus, as the crime of homicide was
looked upon under the Mosaic law as a
crime apart from all other crimes, inasmuch
as it was an offence against the life which
was God's gift, and man, who was God's
image, so the offender who pleaded extenu-
ating circumstances for his offence was
placed, until his trial could be held, under
the special protection of the Divine law.
For *' the priest's lips should keep know-
ledge, and men should seek the law at his
month." It was the special privilege of the
tribe of Levi to possess the " key of know-
ledge." It was to them that the duty of
ascertaining the will of God by Urim and
Thummim was assigned (Num. xxvii. 21).
Thus a special acquaintance with the law
(Deut. xxxiii. 8), and a special fitness for
deciding the difficult questions sometimes
arising out of it, would naturally be found
in the elders of those cities which had been
set apart as cities of refuge. In Galilee.
Hebrew, Hag-GalU, the circle. Here we
have the masculine, as in xiii. 2 ; xvii. 17 ;
xxii. 10, 11, the feminine form. This is
the first place in Scripture in which the
word Galll, or Galilee, is applied to this
region. Gesenins regards it as having been
originally a district of twenty towns round
Kedesh in Naphtali. Such a region of
twenty towns is mentioned in 1 Kings ix.
11 (see also Isa. viii. 23; or, ix. 1 in our
version). Kedesh has already been noticed
(see also ch. xxi. 32).

Ver. 8. — By Jericho eastward. Or, east-
ward of Jericho. This, of course, only
refers to Bezer. The plain. The Mishor,
or table-land (see ch. iii. 16, ix. 1, and notes).
Our version, by its renderings, obscures the
beautiful precision with which our historian
never fails to hit off the physical geography
of the country. Thus, the plain of Bashan,
Gilead, and Eeuben is always the Mishor ;
the strip of laud between the mountains
and the Mediterranean is always the She-
rfiSlah; the depression of the Jordan
Valley and the coautxy aoutb of. the Dead



Sea is iBvaiiably the Arabah ; wide plalui
shut in between ranges of hills or situated
on their slopes are distinguished by the title
of Emek ; while narrow waterless ravines
are known by the name of Ge. We may
quote here the emphatic words with
which Canon Tristram concludes his ' Land
of Israel.' " While on matters of science
the inspired writers speak in the ordinary
language of their times (the only language
which could have been understood), I can
bear testimony to the minute truth of
innumerable incidental allusions in Holy
Writ to the facts of nature, of climate, of
geographical position — corroborations of
Scripture which, though trifling in them-
selves, reach to minute details that prove
the writers to have hved when and where
they are asserted to have lived; which attest
their scrupulous accuracy in recording what
they saw and observed around them ; and
which, therefore, must increase our confi-
dence in their veracity, where we cannot
have the like means of testing it. I can
find no discrepancies between their geo-
graphical or physical statements and the
evidence of present facts. I can find no
standpoint here for the keenest advocate
against the full inspiration of the scriptural
record. The Holy Land not only elucidates
but bears witness to the truth of the Holy
Book." Kamoth In Gilead. See ch. xiii.
26, where it is called Kamoth Mizpeh ; also
ch. xxi. 38. All these cities of refuge were
Levitical cities. It is famous as the head-
quarters of Jehu's rebellion, in which he
clearly had the support of the priestly party
(2 Kings ix.). The key to his subsequent
conduct is found in this fact. His " zeal for
the Lord," di^played so ostentatiously to
Jonadab, who we may suppose, as being of
the " family of the scribes," to have become
identified with the Levites (cf. 1 Chron. ii. 55
with Judg. i. 16, and 1 Chron. xxvil 32 with
Ezra vii. 12, Jer. viii. 8), was simply a stroke
of policy, to bind to his interest the sacer-
dotal party, to whom, with the army, he owed
hig throne. Just such a policy commended
itself to the worldly wisdom of our own
Lancastrian princes, and led to the enact-
ment of the infamous statute de heretico
comburendo in the fifteenth century. Jehu,
we find, was contented vrith the one vast
saoiifioe of idolaters, for whom he cared
nothing, and gave himself no further trouble
to secure purity of worship for his people.
The one great value of the geographical
and political details in the book of Joshua
is that when carefully studied they supply
ns with the key to many a mystery in the
after history of Israel, which, but for theil
aid, we should scarcely have unravelled.
Ver. 9.— Appointei Or, of refuge or



292



THE BOOK OF JOSHUA.



[oh. U. 1— a



retort. Oar version has followed the
LXX. and Vulgate here. Greek, unawares;
Hebrew, in error or inadvertently, as above.
Matthew Henry's note on the cities of
refuge is worthy of remark. He says, " I
deUglit not in quibbling on names, yet am
willing to take notice of these." Thus
Kedesh, he reminds us, is holy. Sheohem,
a shoulder, reminding us of Him upon
whose shoulder the government was to be.
Hebron is fellowship, recalling the fellow-
«hip we have in Christ. Bezel is a fortifi-



cation, reminding ns of God otir stronghold
(later criticism, however, gives another
derivation to this unusual word, which in
Job xxii. 24, 25, means the ore of a precious
metal). Eamoth is height or exaltation,
and to such exaltation we are called in
Jesus Christ. Lastly, Golan is exultation,

80 says Matthew Henry, deriving it from 7' J

or 7-13. But Gesenius derives it with equal

prohahihty from Twi "to make bare," hence
to lead into captivity.



EOMILETICa.

Vera. 1 — ^9. — The cities of refuge. The institution of these cities was intended
to put hounds to revenge, wliile providing for the punishment of crime. As Lange
remarks, the Mosaic law found the principle of venjjeance at thfe hand of the nearest
relative of the deceased ah-eady recognised, and desired to direct and restrain it.
Three considerations suggest tliemBelves on this point.

I. The value of human lite. The most serious crime one man could commit
against another (offences against God or one's own parents are not included in
this estimate), according to the Mosaic, and even the pre-Mosaio coJe, was to take
his life. The sanctity of human life was ever rated high in the Old Testament.
Nothing could compensate for it but the death of him who violated it. The duty
had always been incumbent on the nearest blood relative, and Moses did not
think it necessary to institute any otlier law in its place. He only placed the
restriction upon the avenger of blood, that in case the murderer should reach a city
of refuge, he should have a fair trial before he was given into the hands of his
adversary, in case it should prove that, instead of murder, the deed was simply
homicide by misadventure. It has been strongly urged that capital punishment,
even for murder, is opposed to the gentler spirit of Christianity. Without presuming
to decide the question, this much is clear, that God in His law has always regarded
human life as a most sacred thing, and any attempt to take it away as a most awful
crime. It may he observed, moreover, that in Switzerland, where the punishment
was abolished, it has had in several cantons to be reimposed. It is also a curious
fact, and one somewhat difficult to explain, that a higher value is set, as a rule, upon
human life in Protestant than in Eoman CathoUo commuuities. There can be no
doubt that the severer view is in accordance with the Old Testament Scriptures, and
we may see why. The evil effect of other crimes may, in a measure, be repaired,
but life once taken away can never be restored, Man, moreover, is the image of
God, and life His greatest gift. To deface the Divine image, to take away finally
and irrevocably, so far as the natural man can see, what God has given, is surely
the highest of crimes.

II. Vengbancb must be under the direction of the law. The rale for
Christians as individuals is, never to take vengeance at all, but to subuiit to the
most grievous wrongs in silence. But there are times when a Christian is bound
to regard himself as a member of a community, and in the interests of that
community to punish wrong-doers. We learn a useful lesson from the chapter
before us. We may not take the law into our own hands. We are not the best judges
in our own cause. The punishment we inflict is likely to be disproportionate to the
offence. We are bidden, if our neighbour wUl not listen to us (Matt, xviii. 15 — 17)
to take others with us to support ns in our complaint, and if that be in vain, to
bring the matter before the assembly of the faithful, who take the place in the
Christian dispensation of the elders of Israel. But in all cases the decision must not
rest with ourselves. It would be well if every one, before bringing an action or prose-
cution at law against another, would submit the matter to some perfectly disinterested
persons before doing so. It would be well if the Christian congregations exercised



ca. xt. 1-9.] l^afi BOOK 03" JOSHUA. 2«8

more frequently tlie power of arbitration, which was clearly committed to them by
Christ. It should be the city of refuge to which the offender should betake himself,
and he should be free from aU penalties until the " elders of that city " declare that
he has deserved them.

III. "Where we cannot abolish an evil custom, we may at least mitioatb
ITS EVIL EFFECTS. It must often happen to the Christian to find laws and customs
in existence which we feel to be opposed to the spirit of Christianity. Two courses
are open to us, to denounce and resist them, or to accept them and try to reduce
the amount of evil they produce. There are, of course, some customs and laws
against which a Christian 'must set his face. But there are many more in which it
would be fanaticism, not Christianity, to do so. Such a spirit was displayed by
the Montanists of old (as in the case of TertuUian, in his celebrated treatise ' De
Corona'), who frequently reviled and struck down the images of the gods. -Such a
spirit is often displayed by Christians of more zeal than discretion now. A remark-
able instance of the opposite spirit is shown by the attitude of Christ's apostles
towards slavery. Slavery is alien to the first principles of Christianity. And yet the
Cliristians were not forced to manumit their slaves, but were only enjoined to treat
them gently and kindly. Such was obviously the best eoiurse, so long as Chris-
tianity was a persecuted and forbidden religion. It is often our duty so to deal
with customs which are undesirable in themselves, but which, as individuals, we
have no power to put down. So long as we have it in our power to remove from
them, in our own case, what is objectionable or sinful, it is our duty to conform to
them, at the same time hoping and praying for better times.



HOMILIES BY VABIOUS AUTHOES.

, Ver. 1 — Cities of refuge. The institution of cities of refuge interests us as at once
an admirable instance of the spirit of the Mosaic legislation, and as an arrangement
of gracious wisdom. In the absence of courts of law and any sufficient arrange-
ment for the administration of justice, a system has luaiformly arisen in all
primitive tribes, and is found in many places to-day, of charging the nearest male
relative with the duty of putting to death the murderer of his kinsman. The Ven-
detta, as it is termed, is still practised among the Arab tribes, and even survives
vigorously in the island of Corsica. By it there was always a judge and an executi ve
wherever there was a crime. And doubtless such a custom exercised a highly
deterrent influence. At the same time a rough and ready system of punishment like
this was incapable of being appUed with that discrimination essentially necessary to
justice. In the heat of revenge, or in the excitement and daugerincidentto what was
regarded as the discharge of a kinsman's duty, men would often not inquire whether
the death was the result of accident or of intention. It might chance that none
bewailed the death more than him who committed it. But the rude law left the
responsible kinsman no alternative. Tlie one who slew might be his own relative,
it might be that a blow of anger, not meant to kill, or some sheer accident, took
away the life of one dear to him who struck the blow, or was the unhappy cause of
the accident. But where blood had been shed, blood was to be shed. And so one
fault and one bereavement not infrequently involved the commission of a greater
mult, and the experience of a greater bereavement. In this position of things
Moses stepped in. And m the legislation he gave on the subject there is much
that is worthy of notice.

I. Observe, What he did not pkesceibb. The payment of " damages " for a
death inflicted has been a form in which the severity of these rules for the punish-
ment of a murder has been mitigated. In Saxon times in England, blood-money was
contmuaUy offered and taken. In many other lands a fine has been laid on the
mm-derer for the benefit of his family. The Koran permits such a compensation ;
and to-day, m some Arab tribes, a man may escape the penalty of murder if he can
pay the flue which custom prescribes. But though such an alternative must have
been lamihar to Moses, it is not adopted by hun. On the contrary, he expretil^



294 THE BOOK OF JOSHUA. [ca. xx. 1— ».

forbids the relatives to condone a crime by receiving amy money payment for it:
(see last chapter of Numbers). This is a very slriking fact, for raany would very
muob have preferred a law allowing the giving and receiving of such a fine, to tlie
law actually given. His not adopting such a rule shows that Moses was appre-
hensive of the danger of conscience being dulled, and crime encouraged by any com-
promise effected between guUt on the one side, and greed on the other. Such a rule
would always mitigate the abhorrence of crime ; would make it safer for the rich to
indulge their animosities, than for the poor to injure, by accident, a fellow-man.
Law, duty, self-respect would be lowered. Life would be held less sacred.
Instead of its being invested with a Divine sanction, and the destruction of it made
an awful crime, it would appear as something worth so many pounds sterling, and
men would indulge their taste for the murder of those they dieUked, according to
their judgment of what they could afford to pay. The poor substitute of a fine
instead of the punishment of death is not only not accepted, but explicitly forbidden.
And so far the legislation of Moses suggests that whatever course our criminal
legislation may take in dealing with crime, it will do well to maintain the sanctity
of lifo and to guard against such a method of dealing as would increase the crime thnt
it should prevent. But observe, secondly, that while the sanctity of life is maintained,

II. Justice is substituted foe eevenge. The six cities of refuge were simply
six cities of assize, where an authoritative verdict could be found as to whether
the death was wilfiiUy or unintentionally inflicted. The man who had taken a life
claimed of the elders of the city (ver. 4) protection, and received it until his case was
adjudicated on. He was tried before the congregation, the assembly of the adult
citizens. As these were all Levites (the six cities of refuge being all of them
Levitioal cities) they were familiar with law, and had, probably, a little more moral
culture than their non-Levitical brethren. A cahn unbiassed "judgment by their
peers" was thus provided for every accused person — a tribunal too large to be
moved by animus or corrupted by bribes. If on explicit evidence of two or three
witnesses it proved to be a case of wUful murder, further asylum was denied him, and
he was delivered to death. If it proved a case of either accident or manslaughter, the
asylum was lengthened, and beneath the protection of God he was safe, as long as
he kept within the precincts of the city and its suburbs. How admirable such an
arrangement I A better court of judgment in such cases, than such a jury of two
or three hundred honest men, could not be devised. It was costless ; it was simple ;
it involved no delay. It restrained a universally recognised right, but did it so
wisely and fairly none could complain. A provision of unconditional asylum, as it
developed later in connection with religious buildings, has proved an unmitigated-
evil even in Christian lands, an encouragement to all crimes, promoting not
morality, but only the cunning which committed them within easy reach of such a
sanctuary. This gave Israel, for the most important of all cases, a court of justice
that protected innocence, that soothed revenge, that prevented blood feuds settling
»nd growing to large dimensions. It is a lesson for us, as individuals, always to
guard against our being carried away by passion, and to import into every quarrel
it may be our unhappiness to fall into, the calm and unbiassed judgment of others.
It may be our duty to others to prosecute or punish a criminal. But revenge is an
unholy passion which has no sanction from on high. Lastly observe :

III. A CURIOUS provision in the law. If innocent cf wilful murder, the man
had a right of asylum in the city. But leaving the city, he lost it, and might
lawfully be slain. The nearness of hving Levites was his protection. But the
perpetual residence in the city of refuge was not enjoined. For when the high priest
died, he could go back to his proper home and dwell there. The high priest luas to
be thought of— as an intercessor who had entered within the veil — beneath the
protection of whose prayers (ill these refugees were sacred; and for them the
whole land became one great place of refuge. The death of another high

PRIEST WAS AN ENTERING WITHIN THE VEIL, WHICH BENEFITS WITH DIVINE
PROTECTION ALL WHO TAKE REFUGE IN THE DIVINELY APPOINTED PLACE. They by

innocence got the benefit of his pleading — we by repentance. Are we all under the
shadow of the heavenly Intercessor ? — G.



<JH. XX. 1—9.1 THE BOOK OF JOSHUA. 295



Vers. 1—6. — The memslayer amd Mb refuge. The institution of the cities of
refuge stands as a conspicuous memorial of the heneflcent spirit of the Mosaic
economy. It bore a resemblance to that right of asylum, or sanctuary, which in
some form or other has found a place in the usage of all nations from the earliest
times, but it was not liable to the same abuse. Every provision of the Mosaic
economy enshrined some enduring principle. Some great moral lesson was
intended to be impressed by it on the minds of the people. The institution changes
or passes utterly away ; the principle, the lesson, remains. Note here —

L The sanctity op human life. The institution bore striking witness to this.
This was its root-principle. It was intended as a check on that form of ferocity
for which Oriental tribes have ever been remarkable — the thirst for vengeance
in the shedding of blood. It threw a shield over an endangered hfe. This at once
commends it to a radical instinct of our nature. God has implanted in our breasts
an intuitive sense of the value of life. Not only the instinct of self-preservation
(" skin for skin," &c., Job ii. 4), but something also that prompts' to respect for the
Hfe of another. The most barbarous conditions of humanity are not altogether
destitute of the traces of this. The natural effect of religion and civilisation is
to develop it. Mainly on this instinct rests the admiration we feel for any
marvellous triumph of surgical skill, for the rescue of imprisoned miners, or of a
shipwrecked crew, or of a wounded comrade from the battle-field. It is not merely
satisfaction in beholding consummate skiU, resolute endm-ance, deeds of daring and
self-sacrifice — but in the fact that life is souved. The " vital spark,"' so mysterious
in itself, and so mysteriously kindled, is kept from being extinguished. The
humane spirit, the spirit in sympathy 'with humanity as such, feels just the same
however feeble or apparently worthless and despicable the Hfe may be. We don't
stay to consider either its actual conditions or its latent possibUities ; we only know
that it is good to save it. There is no higher mark of Christian civilisation than
the diffusion of a nobler sentiment as to the inherent value of human life. " The
Son of Man came not to destroy men's lives, but to save them " (Luke ix. 56).
This fact has its manifest, though indirect, bearings on the question of man's
immortahty. If physical life is surrounded by such sanctions and safeguards, does
it not at least suggest the indestructiblHty of &e essential being of the man ?

" That not one life shall be destroyed,
Or oast as rubbish on the void,
When God shaU make the pile complete."

n. FoEFEiTUEB OP UFE. This principle of sanctity bears on the slain as well as
on the slayer. If it shields the one, not less does it avenge the other. The right
of asylum was based on the foregoing right of the Qoel, the blood-avenger (see
Kumb. XXXV. 19, et seq., Deut. xix. 11—13). This was the outgrowth of the ancient
law given to Noah, " Whoso sheddeth man's blood, by man shall his blood be shed"
(Gen. ix. 6). And, again, to Moses at Sinai, " Life for Hfe, eye for eye, tooth for
tooth," &c. (Exod. xxi. 23, 24). So severely was this rule to be appHed, that no kind
or measure of " satisfaction " could be taken for the forfeited hfe of the murderer
(Numb. XXXV. 31). Such was the Mosaic law. The gentler spirit of Christianity
inculcates a different rule. As that softened and restrained the natural savagery
of the olden times, so this brings in the reign of stiU nobler principles of moral
and social life (Matt. v. 88, 39 ; Eom. xii. 19). It is questionable whether the
teaching of Christ and his Apostles does not throw such an air of sanctity over the
being of every man, and make restorative love rather than retributive justice the
universal law, as completely to annul the old order of " Hfe for life." At the same
time the principle of retribution is in no way ohUterated— less Hteral, less circum-
Btantial, entrusted less to the hands of man, but not less reaL The avenger still
tracks the steps of the transgressor. He cannot escape " the righteous judgment
of God, who will render to every man according to his deeds " (Eom. ii. 5 6).
Vengeance may suffer even "the murderer to live," but he bears the penalty 'and
the curse within. " Be not deceived ; God is not mocked : for whatsoever a man
Boweth," &o. (Gal. vi. 7, 8^



2!>6 THE BOOK OF JOSHUA. [oa. XX. 1—9



in. The impoetancb op the spirit above the form op evert deed. The
eity of refuge was a provision for the protection of the man slayer from lawless
and indiscriminate violence, that he might be subject to judicial inquiry as to th«
real meaning and intent of what he had done. He must be brought before •
tribunal of the people. The " congregation " must judge between the slayerand the
avenger, and if it is shown that he was not the enemy of the man slain, nor " sought
his harm," he shall be delivered (Numb. xxxv. 22 — 25). Here was a striking witness
to the principle that it is the spirit, the purpose, that determines the real quahty of
every deed. God is the '" Searcher of hearts," and He would have man, according
to the measure of his insight, estimate everything by what gives birth to it there.
The " Sermon on the Mount" is a Divine lesson on the importance of the spirit
above the form (Matt. v. 21, et seq.). The law of Christ is a " discerner of the
thoughts and intents of the heart." It is the motive that determines the merit
or demerit of every deed. God has given us no power infallibly to trace or weigh
the motives of men, but as far as they are disclosed so let us judge.

IV. The blending op justice with mercy in the treatment op trans-
gression. The city of refuge bore witness to the principle of equity between man
and man, and equity is the quaUfication of law by reason and humanity. The
manslayer, however innocent, must suffer for the iU that he has done, but safe-
guards are provided against his being subject to any flagrant wrong. Whatever it
may cost him he must flee to the city, but it is not more than six miles distant and
the way is clear. He loses his liberty, home, perhaps property, but he is safe.
In all this there is a remarkable blending of regard for the majesty of law and the
sanctity of social order, with kindly protection of human weakness. It is full of
instruction. A true social economy is the due balance of reciprocal rights, interests,
&o. We deal righteously with each other only when mercy tempers justice,
when law is interpreted hberally and applied with charity.

V. An analogy is often instituted between the city op refuge and the
GOSPEL way of salvation. There is an essential mark of difference between the
two ; the one was for the protection of the innocent, the other is God's provision
for the redemption of the guilty. But they are alike in this, that they tell of
shelter from the fetal stroke of the avenger. We are reminded how —

" All the lives that are were forfeit once.
And He who might the vantage best have took
Found out the remedy."

"When He " maketh inquisition for blood," then shall it be found that " there la
no condemnation for them that are in Christ Jesus," who have " fled for refuge to
lay hold on the hope set before them." — W.

Ver. 2. — Cities of refuge. I. The appointment of cities op refuge exempli-
fies universal principles of justice. We do not need such cities because we
can attain the end they were set apart to accomphsh by simpler means, but we are
called to observe the principles they were instituted to maintain. (1) The justice
which brings retribution on offenders is natural and right. But this must be
distinguished from vengeance. Justice seeks the honour of law and the maintenance
of the public good. Vengeance aims only at the infliction of harm on the offender.
The latter is unchristian and wicked. (2) We should not be hasty in passing
judgment. The city of refuge afforded time for evidence to be collected and a
mature judgment to be formed. First impressions are often deceptive. Anger
blinds judgment. (3) It is well to refer our quarrels to the decision of others.
The avenger of blood was required to refer his case to the congregation. Interested
persons can rarely form impartial opinions. It is well to resort to Christian
arbitration when differences cannot be settled amicably in private (Matt, xviii. 15 —
17). (4) It is difficult to judge of the conduct of oihers. because of our uncertainty
as to their motives. The man-slayer may be a murderer or he may be innocently
concerned in a piu-e accident. Thus he may be guiltless, while the person who
inflicts no harm on another may be a murderer at heart. " Whosoever hateth hia



tm. XX. 1-91 ^SE BOOK OE* JUSHUA. 291

brotlier is a murderer" (1 John iii. 15). Guilt attaches to motives, not to outward
acts. Therefore [a) do not jurlge others needlessly (Matt. vii. 1) ; (6) when it is
necessary to judge do not be deoeiyed by outward appearance, but consider differ-
ences of motive (John vii. 24).

II. The appointment of cities of REruGE is an illusteation of God's
OEACE OF REDEMPTION. (1) God provides a city of refuge in Christ. He is a
refuge from the dangers that beset us, from the consequences of our own acts, from
the indwelling power of sin. (2) This refuge is jor the most guilty. The Levitical
cities were for the innocent ; Christ is a refuge for the guilty. Men fled to them
for justice ; they flee to Christ for mercy (Matt. ix. 12, 13). (3) This refuge is in
our midst. Tlie six cities of refuge were situated in convenient central positions at
different points of the land, so that every Israelite might be within reach of one.
Yet even this arrangement could not secure safety in all cases. Christ is in our
midst. We have not to bring Him from heaven ; He dwells among us. He is near
and ready to receive us at any moment. None need perish on the road to Christ.
(4) This refuge must he entered to secure safety. It was vain for the fugitive
Israelite merely to run in the direction of the city, or even to be within sight of it,
if he did not enter its precincts. It is useless for a man only to have inclinations
towards Christianity, to know the truth of it, to begin to turn Christward. He
must seek Christ and come to Him in trust and submission. As the fugitive must
enter tlie city to be safe, so the sinner must be " in Christ " (Bom. vui. 1). (6) It
is dangerous to delay entering this refuge. While the fugitive stayed, the avenger
of blood was upon him. " Now " is the appointed time. The opportunity may
soon pass. — W. F. A.

Vers. 2, 3. — Danger and safety. The Book of Joshua supplements the Pentateuch.
It tells us of the execution of the behests contained in the law. Hence it preaches
a continual lesson of obedience. How far do our hves exhibit a conformity of
practice to gospel precepts ? Surely God says to us, as to Joshua, " Be mindful
of the commandment given by the hand of My servant."

I. A PREVALENT CUSTOM MODIFIED. The rights of kinsmeu were various and
strongly insisted on. The exaction of vengeance for the death of a relative was
deemed among the most important of these rights. The nearest kinsman became
the " avenger." To abrogate such an institution might have been impossible ; at
any rate, it was wisely ordained that particular rules should regulate its operation
and soften its character. Legislation must ever have regard to the prevalent
opinion, must not be too far in advance of the age. This principle of directing
popular thoughts to more wholesome channels was recognised by the Church of the
early centuries, when it sought to lead men away from orgies and revelries to joyous
Christian festivals, and missionaries of modem days have adopted this plan with
success. We may alter the ship's course even if we cannot absoln sly check her
progress. The modification of GoeHsm introduced (1) AcTaiowledg<d the sanctity
of human life. (2) Distinguished between the quality amd the ma.tter of actions —
a vital distinction in ethics, which regards the intention as well as the consequence
of behaviour, before it can be censured or approved of. To slay a man unwittingly
was not murder. On the other hand, Jesus Christ afterwards showed that the
indulgence of an angry thought towards a brother is an infraction of the sixth
commandment. So also 1 John iii. 15. (3) Placed this departTnent of equity
under the special supervision of the religious authorities. 'The places of refuge
were chosen from the Levitical cities, whose rulers miglit be trusted to carry out
the law in respect both of justice and of mercy. The unintentional man-slayer was
considered as the prisoner of the high priest, and on the death of the latter was
released. EeUgion never looks more beautiful than when she wears her benign
garb of mercy, protecting the helpless and friendless. It is part of her office to
prevent injustice and oppreHsion. The laws of God are deposited with the Church
as a sacred trust for the benefit of mankind. How she perverts her functions when
abe employs her strength in bitter enmity and persecution!

ZI. Points op resemblance between the cities of refuoe and the balva-



298 THE BOOK OF JOSHUA. [oh. XX. 1—9.



TioN OFFERED IN THE GOSPEL. That the Ordinances of the Israelites were a figure
for the time to come, is in many places of the New Testament expressly affirmed
(see 1 Cor. x. 6, 11 ; Heb. ix. 9 ; x. 1). And with great likelihood the words of
Heb. xi. 18 have been supposed to refer to the very institution now under discussion.
(1) Easiness of access. The cities were so selected as to be scattered throughout
the land at equal distances, no part of the country being remote from one of these
centres. And Jesus Christ is nigh unto every one of us, a very present help in
trouble. It need not take even half a day to reach Him, the heart may be sur-
rendered to Him at once and find rest. (2) The way readily known. The road to
the nearest city of refuge was plainly indicated by the words " Eefuge 1 Befage I "
written at each tittning, and the way was always kept clear of obstacks (see Deut,
xix. 3). " He that runneth can read " and understand the plan of salvation.
Bedemption freely oifered in Christ, who died for sinners. Prophets and apostles
point to Him, saying, "Behold the Lamb of God." (3) Avadlahle for every
inhabitant. Equally for the stranger or sojourner and one born in the land (ver.
9). God is no respecter of persons. He gave His Son, that " whosoever believeth
in Him should not perish." " Whosoever, will let him take the water of life freely."
(4) The gates always open. We learn this from Maimonides, as also that the rulers
of the city furnished the refugee with shelter and food so long as he remained with
them. Jesus " ever Kveth to make intercession for those who come unto God by
Him." No shmer need fear lest the door of mercy should be shut against him.
There are no specially appointed days for obtaining reKef. It is always, " now is
the accepted time." God will not allow one of His little ones to perish. " Seek
first the kingdom of God and His righteousness, and all other things shall be added
unto you." Several other particulars might be mentioned, such as that even the
suburbs of the city were a refuge (Num. xxxv. 26, 27), like as to touch the hem of
Clirist's garment heals the sick ; and the cities saved by virtue of God's appointment,
not so much by reason of their natural strength, even as God hath set forth Christ
to be a propitiation through faith in His blood. But let us note —

III. The SUPEEIOKITT OF THE aosPEL SALVATION. (1) Accessible even to the
guilty. In fact, there are no innocent ones, " all have sinned.-" The Apostle called
attention to the mercy and longsufCering of Jesus Christ, who " came into the world
to save sinners ; of whom I am chief" (1 Tim. i. 15). " The blood of Jesus Christ
cleanseth from aU sin." Ho I ye despairing ones, there is hope for you. And ye
who are polluted with stains of deepest dye, you may be " clothed in white robes,"
and to you there shall be " therefore now no condemnation." (2) TJie refuge no
confinement, but rather enla/rgement of liberty. The man-slayer was unable to
foUow his ordinary avocation or to resume his wonted place until the death of the
high priest. Our Saviour has been already slain as the victim, and is entered as
High Priest into the holiest of all ; hence there is no period of waiting for ns, but
instant pardon and deliverance from thraldom. The busy man goes to business
with lighter heart, and the mother, troubled with domestic cares, has obtained ease
and rest by casting her burden upon the Lord.

Conclusion. Flee to this refuge I Delay, and the footstep of the avenger shall
be heard close behind you, and fear shall paralyse your flight. " Satan hath desired
to have you ; " but haste to the Saviour, let His strong arms protect you, and
sheltered 'neath His smile 3-our panting heart shall cease tumultuously to beat.
And if you have won Christ and are " found in Him," not having your own right-
eousness, how secure and peaceful you may be. What rejoicing should be yours I
To be tormented with doubt while you are in such a stronghold is foolish, and
impairs the glory of the salvation Christ hath wrought. " Neither shall any man
pluck them out of My hand." — A.

Ver. 2. — The cities of refuge. We know how strictly the law of Moses applied
the avenging law. He who had Irilled was himself to be killed. The nearest
relation of the victim had the right, and it was his duty, to pursue the offender.
He was the avenger of blood. The law, tmder its original form, made no distinction
between a murder committed purposely and of premeditation, and an unintention»l



OB. XXI. l-^S.]



THE BOOK OF JOSHUA.



299



murder. It may ■well be said that in this respect it was the inexorable law of the
letter which killeth.

I. The estabUshment of cities of refuge, intended to serve as a sanctuary to the
murderer who had killed some one by accident, is like the fibst step towaeds the

NEW LEGISLATION WHICH DEALS EATHEE WITH THE INTENTION THAN WITH THE ACT,

and is aimed primarily at the heart. The last commandment of the Decalogue,
which prohibits covetousness, carries the Divine law into the inner region of the
moral life, showing that its scope is far wider than the sphere of outward action or
speech. The man who has unintentionally committed murder, finds in the city of
refuge a means of esbaping the vengeance of the pursuer. This provision is in itself
8 protest against the Pharisaic spirit which based its judgment upon the outward
act alone. The new covenant gives yet fuller appUcation to the same moral prin-
ciple, when it declares that hatred in the heart involves the moral guilt of murder,
as lust does of adultery.

II. The estabhshment of cities of refuge is an admirable emblem of thk
Church. The Church is the city set upon a hiU, whose gates stand open day and
night to those whom the law condemns. Only those to whom it offers shelter are
not exclusively persons who have transgressed unwittingly, as was the case with
the Israelitish cities ; all who have broken the law of God, even with open eyes,
may there find shelter, on the one condition that they enter by the door. "I am
the door," says Jesus Christ, " no man cometh unto the Father but by me " (John
X. 7). This is a strait gate — so strait that none can pass through it except on
bended knees and laying aside every weight. By repentance and faith everything
that is of self and sin must be abjured. But so soon as these conditions are
fulfilled, the door is opened. No one is too great a sinner to enter there. Publicans
and harlots, aU the sorrowful and sinful, let them hasten, arise and enter in. The
city of refuge is open for all. The Church of the middle ages restored in a hteral
sense the Jewish custom of having cities of refuge. It opened its sanctuaries to
murderers and spread over them, the shield of its protection. This was called the
privilege of sanctuary; but it became a grave abuse. Let us cleave to the one great
privilege of finding reftige in the true Church built upon the great Comer-Stone.
The old cities of refuge promised safety fi^om the avenging arm of the inflexible
law. We have a further pledge of our safety in the blood that was shed for our
sins, in the redeeming sacrifice by which our debt was paid. Sheltered beneath
this outspread wing of everlasting love, we are safe fi'om the condemnation of the
righteous law which we have broken. — B. de P.



EXPOSITION.



CHAPTEB XXI. 1—45.



THE INHEEITANCE OF THE LETITBB.

Ver. 1. — Then came near the heads of
the fathers of the Levltes. We are not to
suppose, with Calvin, that the Levites had
been overlooked. Such a supposition is
little in keeping with the devout spirit of
him who now directed the affairs of the
Israelites, who had been minister to Moses
the Levite, and had but lately been con-
cerned with Eleazar, the high priest, in
making a public recognition of that God to
whose service the Levites had been specially
set apart. The delay in appointing to the
Levites their cities arose from the nature of
the «rraugeraent which had to be made for
the Levitical cities. The prophecy which



threatened (Gen. xlix. 7) to " scatter them
in Israel " was to be fulfilled for the benefit
of the whole people. Instead of a portion
for himself, Levi, as we have been repeatedly
informed (ch. xiii. 33 ; xiv. 3 ; xviii. 7) , was
to have " the Lord God of Israel for hia
inheritance." Since, therefore, their cities
were to be assigned them within the limits
of the other tribes, it was impossible to
apportion them until the other tribes bad
been provided for. Unto Eleazar the priest.
The close connection between the military
and the sacerdotal power is kept up through-
out the book. Warned by his one- act of
neglect in the case of the Gibeonilea,
Joshua never again appears to have neg-
lected to have recourse to the high priest,
that he might ask counsel of God for him
as had been presoiibed in Num. zzvii. 2J .



8do



TfiE BOOK OF JOSStTA.



toft. Tta. 1 -46.



Eleazar is placed first here, because, as the
acknowledged bead of the tiibe, he was the
proper person to prefer its request to the
leader. But the whole history shows how
entii'ely Joshua and Eleazar acted in con-
cert. And unto Joshua the son of Nun.
In a matter of eoolesiastioal organisation
the ecclesiastical took precedence of the
civil leader. And unto the heads. The
position of Joshua was that of a chief
magistrate ruling by constitutional methods.
The representatives of the tribes were
invariably consulted in all matters of
moment. Such appear to have been the
original constitution of all early communi-
ties, whether Aryan or Semitic. We find it
in existence among Homer's heroes. It
meets as in the early history of Germanic
peoples. It took a form precisely analogous
to the Jewish in the old English Witan,
where the chief men in Church and State
took counsel with the monarch on aU
matters affecting the commonweal of the
realm ; and the remains of this aristocratic
system still meet us in our own House of
Lords.

Ver. 2. — ^At Sbllob. Another instance of
exact accuracy. Shiloh was now the place
of assembly in Israel (see ch. xviii. 1). The
Lord commanded. The command is given
in Num. xxxv. We have here, therefore,
another quotation from the books of Moses.
If we refer to it we find how exactly the
precepts were carried out. First, the six
cities of refuge were to be appointed, and
then forty-two more were to be added to
them. Calvin, not noticing this, has com-
plained that this narrative is not in its
proper place, and that it should have been
inserted before the details in oh. ii. The
very reverse is the fact. These cities of
refuge are included, in what follows, among
the number of forty-eight cities in all,
assigned to the Levites. Suburbs. See ch.
xiv. 4. And so throughout the chapter.

Ver. 3.— Out of their inheritance. Out
of that of Israel (ste note on ver. 1). These
cities. The number was forty-eight, i.e.,
four times twelve. Biihr (' S.ymbolik des
Alien Testaments,' i 221) remarks on the
symbolical meaning of this number. He
compares it, first, to the twelve tribes march-
ing in four detachments, the ark of God
and its guard in the centre (see Num. ii.).
Four, he says, is the number of the world,
and three the sign of God, and twelve of
the combination of the two. Thus we are
reminded of the heavenly city which " heth
four-square," which has "twelve founda-
tions of precious stones," " twelve gates of
pearls, and at the gates twelve angels,"
and the names of " the twelve tribes of
Israel " written theieupon, and wherein waa



" the tree of life," with its " twelve mannei
of fruits," wliich were "yielded every
month" (Eev, xxi 12, 14, 16, 19, 21;
xxii. 2).

Ver. 4. — And the lot came out. As in
the distribution of the land among the
tribes, so in the division ol the cities among
the tribes of Levi, the whole matter was
referred to the judgment of God. Thus
solemnly placed in His hands, the division
would not afterwards become the occasion
of jealousy or dispute. The division was
first made between the descendants of the
three sons of Levi, Gershon, Eohath, and
Merari (see Bxod. vi. 16 — 25), and then, as
regards the Eohathites, between the priests,
the descendants of Aaron, and the rest of
the Levites. We have remarked above (ch.
xix. 50) on the disinterestedness of Joshua.
We have now to remark on the same
characteristic as displayed by Moses. There
was no attempt on the part of Moses to
" found a family," the object of ambition
with most men, whether kings or private
persons possessed of wealth. No special
privileges belonged to his descendants.
They merged in the undistinguished herd
of the Levites generally. In this Moses
contrasts favourably with most public men
in our own day ; he stands out prominently
before nearly all the great leaders and con-
querors before or even after the Christian
era. The same may be said of Joshua, his
successor. Cincinnatus may be in some mea-
sure compared with them, but as a dictator
simply in time of danger, his power was by
no means so absolute, nor were his tempta-
tions so great as those of the two successive
leaders of the Israelites. Thirteen cities.
It has been contended by Maurer and
others that this number of cities was
largely in excess of what could possibly be
required for the descendants of Aaron in so
short a time. But we Lave to consider (1)
that the cities were probably not, at least at
first, inhabited exclusively by the priests;
(2) that the Israelites multiplied rapidly,
and that the number of descendants in the
fom-th generation would probably be nearly
a thousand, and in the fifth, above five
thousand ; (3) that all the cities were not, as
yet, actually taken from theCanaanites at all,
and BO therefore were in all probabiUty only
intended as an eventual possession of the
priests, and (4) that the cities themselves
were probably not of any very great size.
It may be worthy of remark, as a proof of
the accuracy of the writers of the Old
Testament, and as a means of approximately
ascertaining the date of the Book of Joshua,
that Nob, mentioned as a priestly city in
1 Sam. xxii. 11, 19, is not found in the list
given here. For the number of priesta



CH. xii. 1 — 46.]



THE BOOK OF JOSHTJA,



801



being sure to increase, it is not snrprising
that in the course of time additional cities
should be assigned to them. And since Nob
is not mentioned here, we have good
grounds for concluding that the Book of
Joshua was not a compilation put together
after the reign of Saul. Calvin does not
fail to remark on the prescience of God here
demonstrated. He had fixed upon Jeru-
salem as the place where he would " put
Eis Name." He therefore directed that the
lot of the priests should fall within the
limits of the tribes of Judah and Benjamin,
on whose borders Jerusalem stood. Simeon
is also mentioned, but the territory of that
tribe (ch. xiz. 1, 9), was contained within
the borders of Judah. For theirs was the
first lot. Not because Kohath was the first-
born, for this Gerahon appears to have
been, but because to Aaron and bis sons
had the priesthood been reserved.

Ver. 11.— In the hiU country of Judah.
The word in the original is "in, mountain,
the title which is consistently applied to the
highlands of Palestine in the Bible, while
our version translates indiscriminately by
" mountain " and " hill. "

Ver. 12. — The fields. The original is
in the singular. We are not necessarily,
therefore, to suppose that the land was
mapped out into divisions analogous to our
fields. Our word " land " would more accu-
rately represent the meaning of the original,
whiuh refers to the arable and pasture land
in the neighbourhood of the city, with the
agricultural villages or homesteads dotted
•bont it Keil contends that the Levites
only received as many houses within the
city as they needed, and that the rest be-
longed to Caleb. Bahr, moreover (' Sym-
boUk,' ii. 49), supposed that the Levites
dwelt with the other inhabitants of the city,
and that .the pasture land within the dis-
tance of 2,000 paces from the city was
reserved for them, the rest of the land
belonging to the inhabitants of the tribe
(see note on Gezer, ch. x. 33). This seems
the most probable explanation. The land
in general was owned by the descendants of
Caleb. But the Levites had certain pas-
tures reserved for them, whither they drove
their cattle (see note on suburbs, ch. xiv. 4).
The special mformation about Hebron here
again is worthy of notice. It is copied by
the author of 1 Chron. in ch. vi.

Ver. 13. — Hebron with her suburbs to be
a city of refuge for the slayer. Bather,
the city of refuge for the slayer, Hebron and
her cattle-drives (see note above on ver. 2).
The translation in our version obscures the
meaning, which is clearly that the cities of
refuge were first fixed on, and then assigned



to the Levites. Most of the cities in Urn
following list have been noticed already,

Ver. 16. — Ain with her suburbs. We
have " Ashan" in 1 Chron. vi. 59. If the
view taken above of Ain (see note on ch.
XV. 32, and ch. xix. 7} be correct, Ashan is
the true reading here.

Ver. 18.— Anathoth. The birthplace of
Jeremiah, where we find that Anathoth was
BtiU a priestly city (ch. i. 1). No doubt it
was for this reason that it was chosen
(1 Kings ii. 26) as the place of Abiathar's
banishment. Here again we see to how
close an examination the writers of the Old
Testament may be submitted without in
the least degree shaking their testimony.
Observe, too, the geographical accuracy of
Isaiah's mention of Geba and Anathoth in
his description of an Assyrian invasion
through the passes at Ai or Aiath and
Michmash (Isa. x. 29, 30).

Ver. 21. — To be a refuge for the slayer
(see above ver. 13). This order is observed
in every case but one, which is explained in
the note on ver. 36.

Ver. 25. — Tanach. The same as the Taa-
nach before mentioned, ch. xii. 21. In
1 Chron. vi. 70 (56 Heb. text) we have
Eth-aner, an obvious blunder, as the Hebn w
shows, Eesh having been read for Bheth,
and Aleph having been inBorted to form the
Eth of the accusative case. This reading
existed, however, as far back as the LXX.
version. Gath-rimmou. There is a blunder
also here, where Gath-rimmon has crept in
by the mistake of a copyist from the last
verse. The true reading is preserved in
1 Chron. vi. 70, where we find Ibleam (see ch.
xvii. 11), or as it is there written Bileam;
no doubt by mistake; the Hebrew letters
(omitting the Jod, which has dropped out),
being those that compose, the familiar name
of Balaam the prophet. The LXX. reads
Jebath here.

Ver. 27.— To be a city of refuge (see
above, ver. 13). Be-eshterah, Thus printed
by the Masorites, and thus translated by the
LXX., but no doubt the same as Og's city
Ashtaroth (see ch. xii. 4, and 1 Chron. vi. 71).

Ver. 30.— Abdon (see note on ch. xix. 28).

Ver. 32. — Galilee (see above, ch. xx. ?).

Ver. 36.— And out of the tribe of Reuben.
This verse and the succeeding have the
Masoretie note appended that they are not
found in the Masora or true tradition.
BJimchi therefore rejects them. But they
are found in the LXX. and the rest of the
ancient versions, and they are necessary to
make up the number of forty -eight cities.
Dr. Eennicott, as well as Michaelis, Eoscu-
muUer, and Maurer defended their genuine-
ness. So does Enobel. who complains that
Babbi Jacob Ben Chajim, in his Eabbinicai



802



THE BOOK OF JOSHUA.



[CH. MU, 1 — is.



Bible of 1525, has rery improperly omitted
these towns on the authority of the Masora,
and that many editors have fooUshly
imitated him. They have no doubt been
omitted by the mistake of a copyist, who
passed on from the U3';i8 (four) of ver. 35
to that of ver. 37, omitting aU that lay be-
tween. The LXX. adds here " the city of re-
fuge for the slayer," words which may have
possibly formed part of the original text, as
they do in every other instance. Jahazah.
It is worthy of remark that this city, with
Heshbon and Jazer and Mephaath, fell into
the hands of the Moabites in later times,
a sad indication of rehgious declension (see
Isa. XV., xvi. ; Jer. xlviii. 21, 34).

Ver. 38. — To be a city of refuge (see
above, ver. 13). Mahanalm (see oh. xiii. 26).
Perhaps the unquestionable entente cordiale
between David and the sacerdotal party
may have determined him to fix on this as
his refuge when fleeing from Absalom, in
addition to its situation beyond Jordan, and
near the fords (2 Sam. xvii. 22, 24).

Ver. 42. — These cities. Bather, perhaps,
these cities were, (i.e., " have been enu-
merated," or " were given "), city by city,
and tlieir cattle-drives surrounding them,
thus was it with all these cities.

Ver. 43.— And the Lord gave. The LXX.
adds before this passage : " And Joshua
completed the division of the land in its
boundaries, and the children gave a portion
to Joshua, by the commandment of the
Lord. They gave to him the city for which
he asked, Thamnath Saraoh gave they him
in Mount Ephraim, and Joshua built the
city, and dwelt in it. And Joshua took the
stone knives, with which he had circum-
cised the children of Israel, which were in
the way in the wilderness, and he placed
them in Tamnath Sarach." The repetition
is very much in the manner of the sacred
historian, and it is possible that we have
here an authentic passage, which some
copyist has omitted in the Hebrew text.
All the land. As has been before re-
marked, the Hebrew 73 must not be pressed
to mean hterally " all." Tet, in a sense,
the word is true here. The land had been
put in their power. They had only to exert
themselves to complete its conquest. This
they failed to do, and not only so, but
violated the conditions under which the land
was granted them. Thus they soon fell
under the dominion of those who had been
their own vassals. Bitter thinks (vol. iii.
187 — 189) that the Asherites and Danitea
submitted to the inhabitants of the land in
consequence of being allowed equal citizen
rights with them. He draws this inference
from Judges v. 17, supposing that these



tribes addicted themselves to the commercial
and maritime life for which the Phoenicians
were so famous.

Ver. 44. — And the Lord gave them rest
LXX. Kariiravaev. The student of Scripture
will not fail to recall the passage in the
Epistle to the Hebrews (ch. iv. 8) in which
reference is made to this passage, and
especially to the LXX. version of it. The
word signifies rather rest from wandering
than rest from toil, though in some passages
{e.g. Exod. xxiii. 12 ; Deut. v. 14) it has the
latter signification (cf. Deut. xii. 10). Round
about. Or, from round about, i.e., from
the assaults of the surrounding nations.
According to all that he sware (Exod.
xxxiii. 14). There stood not a man of all
their enemies before them. This was true,
as far as the present history is concerned.
We read that the Ephraimites did not, or
" could not," drive out their enemies, and
that the other tribes also failed to obtain
complete possession of the land. But (1)
we are not told that this was in the time of
Joshua, and (2) it is intimated that this was
their own fault. How could it be other-
wise? Had the same faith been theirs
which caused the Jordan to dry up, and the
towers of Jericho to fall down at their
march, which discomfited one vast con-
federacy at Beth-horon, and annihilated
another vast confederacy, even better sup-
plied with munitions of war at Lake Merom,
they could not have failed to root out the
scanty remnant of their humiliated and
disheartened foes. As has already been re-
marked (see oh. xi. 23, note), it was from no
neglect on Joshua's part that this was not
done at once, for it had been God's own
command that it should not be done, lest
the country should become a desert (Deut.
vii. 22). Calvin conolndes a similar argu-
ment with the words, " nothing but their
own cowardice prevented them. from en-
joying the blessings of God in all theii
fulness."

Ver. 45. — Ought of any good thing.
Literally, a word from all the good word.
This Eeil regards as the "sum of all the
gracious promises that God had made."
But he should have added that "131, beside

T T '

signifying, as it does, "word," is also the
word for " thing " in Hebrew (see, for
instance. Gen. xv. 1 ; xx. 10), and in-
numerable other passages, as well as the

use of "13"; N? for "nothing." The trans-
lation " thing" makes the best sense, and
is more agreeable to the Hebrew idiom.
All came to pass. The Hebrew is singular,
the whole came, the word translated " came
to pass " in our version being a different
one from that usually so translated.



CH. XXI 1—45.] THE BOOK OF JOSHUA 80»



HOMILBTIOa

Vers. 1 — 46. — The ecclesiastical settlement ofCa/naam,. Though the ecclesiastical
institutions of the Christian Church differ, in some respects materially, from those
of the Jewish, yet inasmuch as the law and the gospel came from the. same All-
wise Hand, we may naturally expect that the main principles of each wiU be the
same. Perhaps we have insisted too much of late on the feet that the law was
" done away in Christ," and too little on the qualifying truth that Christ came " not
to destroy, but to fulfil it." It may be well, therefore, to consider briefly what the
duties of the priests were under the old covenant. Prom this we may be able to
infer what their duties should be under the new. The N ew Testament Scriptures
contain some information on the point, but not so much as to render it unnecessary
to seek some enlightenment from the Old. The reaction from an obedience to
powers unduly claimed and unjustly used, has rend ered it all the more necessary
that we should recur to first principles in the matter. The hatred of what is called
" sacerdotalism " has resulted on the part of the laity in general to something like
an imdue impatience of the just influence of ministers of religion, and this can only
lead to disorder in the Christian hodLj. We may observe, then, (1) that the per-
formance of the pubho duties of religion belonged exclusively to them, and the
oases of Korah, Saul, Uzzah, and King Uzziah sh6w how rigidly this law was to be
observed. For the sacrifies of the old law we must substitute the sphitual sacrifices
of prayer and praise in the congregation, the administration of the sacraments, the
ordering of the services of the sanctuary. They had (2) to " bear the iniquity of
the sanctuary" (Num. xviii. 1) which would seem to mean, in the case of the
Christian clergy, that they aie bound to take upon themselves the office of pubho
and private intercession for God's people, just as Daniel did during the Babylonish
captivity (Dan. ix. 8 — 20). Nor is this to be confined to their own particular flocks.
"Who can tell the blessing to Christian society if all the ministers of religion kept
up a ceaseless intercession for the sins of Christian people in general, and especially
for those of theh' own country and Church ? Again, (3) the decision of difficult
causes is referred to them as weU as the judges. To claim such a right would be
regarded in these days as an imbounded instance of priestly arrogance. Yet it has
been claimed, not only by ecclesiastics of the Roman Church, but by Calvin and
his followers, by John Knox, and by the Puritans in the reign of Elizabeth. No
doubt the claims of aU these parties were pushed to inordinate lengths. But, on
the other hand, it does not seem extravagant to believe that in a healthy state of
society, the influence of those whose studies are chiefly concerned with the word of
God, should be considerable in matterg relating to the application of the principles
of morality. Of course nothing like an absolute authority is claimed for them.
All that Scripture gives them is a consultative voice, a co-ordinate with that of the
magistrate or legislator. Such was actually the position given to the clergy in
Anglo-Saxon times, and though, no doubt, the increased and increasing complexity
of modern society renders special study more and more necessary for the inter-
pretation of laws, the same rule does not hold good regarding theii' enactment.
Lastly, the priests of the old covenant, though not formally charged with it by the
law, yet (see Levit. x. 11 ; Deut. xvii. 9 — 12) became practically (4) the interpreters
of God's revealed wiU. We learn this from the text, " The priests' Ups should keep
knowledge, and they should seek the law at his mouth " (Mai. ii. 7). This office,
though not formally committed to the clergy under the gospel, any more than
under the law, is yet at present vested in them exclusively by common consent.
They are the authorised expounders of the truths of religion. Not that the people
are bound to accept implicity whatever they say. For it is implied in the passage
above cited and by many others, that the priests' Ups did not keep knowledge, and
that men sought the law at his mouth in vain. It is the duty of the laity to test
the truth of what is delivered to them by the word of God. But, except in very
rare instances, that of Origen for example, the task of the pubhc exposition of the
oracles of God has been reserved for those who have been called to the office of
the ministry. In these foiir respects the ecclesiastical arrangements of a Christian



804 THE BOOK OF JOSHUA. [oh. xxu 1—46.

oomitry should correspond, it may fairly be urged, witli the ecclesiastical arrange-
ments of the promised land. On the other hand, it must not be forgotten that the
whole history of Israel, from Moses downwards, shows that the civil magistrate
had a large influence in ecclesiastical affairs. Not to go beyond the limits of the
present book, we have instances of the exertion of such an influence in ch. iii. 5, 6 ;
iv. 10, 17; V. 2, 3; vi 6; xxi. 1. Some additional considerations are added.

I. The Levites received theih inheritance last of au.. This self-abnegation
was fitting among those who were specially appointed to the service of God. So,
in like manner, should the ministers of Jesus Christ, instead of grasping eagerly at
power or pelf, be desirous of being " last of all and servant of all," in imitation of
Him who was among His own disciples as one that serveth. It may be added in
a spirit, not of boasting, but of thankfulness, that never was there a time, since the
hour of the first fervour of the gospel in the days of the Apostles, when this spirit
was more abundantly displayed than in our own age and countiy — when there
were so many ministers of God content to sen'e God in the sanctuary, without the
prospect of earthly countenance or reward. Let them not murmur if men take
these things as a matter of course, but look forward to the " recompense of the
reward."

II. Propeb provision was made for the service of God, The Levites were
carefully dispersed throughout all the tribes of Israel, not, of course, for the service
of the sanctuary, which was kept up at one place only, but obviously in order to
diffuse among the tribes a knowledge of and attachment to the law of God. A
similar provision has been made in aU Christian countries. At first, bodies of men
were gathered together in the chief cities of a country, from whence the rural
districts were gradually evangelised. Thence, by an extension of the principle of
Levitioal dispersion, came our present institution of a resident minister or ministers
in every vfllage. To this institution, more than to any other, do we owe the
diffusion of Christian principles throughout the whole land. It would be the sorest
of all calamities were any untoward event to overthrow it.

III. Proper provision was made for the maintenance op the clergy and
ministers of relioion. Here we may do well to quote Matthew Henry, who
says, referring to the words, "The Lord commanded by the hands of Moses," and
observing that the Levites based theii' claim, not on then- own merits or services,
but on the command of God : " Note, the maintenance of ministers is not an
arbitrary thing, left purely to the good-will of the people, who may let them starve
if they please, but a pei-petual ordinance that ' those who preach ihe gospel should
Uve of the gospel' (1 Cor. ix. 14), and should live comfortably." Many other
passages in the New Testament enforce this truth (e.g., 1 Cor. ix. 7, 11 ; Gal. vi. 6).
The clergy may feel a natural repugnance to enlai-ge upon that in which they
themselves have a personal interest, and which their flocks might find in the word
of God. But they should not be deterred by an over-scrupulous feeling from doing
their duty. They are bound to declare the whole counsel of God. And if, by an
iasufBcient provision for God's ministers, the cause of God is likely to suffer (and it
is to be feared that such is now very often the case), if the energies which should
be devoted entirely to God's cause are dissipated in worldly anxieties, in endeavours
to keep the wolf from the door, in efforts to eke out a too scanty income by other
labours than those of the sanctuary, it is plainly their duty to speak out. Instead
of "living of the gospel," it is to be feared that there are many clergymen and
their famihes starving of the gospel, though they have too much self-respect to let
the fact be known. And while the spectacle of ecclesiastics roUing in riches and
living idly and luxuriously is a hateful one, on the other hand, our present hap-
hazard regulations, which deprive a good many estimable clergymen of the where-
witlial to purchase their daily bread, and keep a good many more in anxiou*
suspense, whether it may not one day be so with themselves, are no lesg an offenc«
in the eyes of God.



CH. XXL 1—45.] THE BuOK OF JOSHUA. 306



HOMILIES BY VAKIOUS AUTHOBS.

Ver. 8. — The cities of the Levites. The Levites were scattered amon^ the
other tribes of Israel, and yet not individually but in clusters, in cities of their own.
This arrangement must have had some, object : —

I. The Levites were set apart fob the service of God. They were freed
from the claims and cares which fell on the other IsraeUtes. They were main-
tained by the offerings of the people. Those who minister in spiritual things have
temporal wants which the people who are benefited by their services should care
for. They are not the less men because they are servants of God, and their home
comforts should be secured that they may be free for spiritual work.

II. The Levites were able to minister to the people by livino amongst
THEM. When it was not their turn to be serving at the temple, the Levites appear
to'have been engaged in educational work and religious ministrations among the
people of their neighbourhood. Church services are useless unless the private hves
of men are improved. We must carry the gospel to those who wiU not come to
hear it in the regular place of worship. It is the duty of Christians not to live apart
from the world for their own sanctification, but to hve in the world for the world's
redemption — to be the leaven leavening the whole mass, the light of the world
Bhining into the dark places. Thus the world will be Christianised (1) by the
gospel reaching those who are out of the way of ordinary rehgious influences;
(2) by example ; (3) by direct personal persuasion.

III. The Levites were able to cultivate their httman sympathies by
UviNO AM0N& THE PEOPLE. The religion of complete separation from the world
is unnatural. It destroys some of the finest qualities of human life. Godhness
cannot exist without humanity. The man of God is most truly human. Sympathy
for human affairs, active pity for the distress of the world, and brotherly kindness
are essential to the Christian life. Therefore the best school for the saint is not
the hermit's cell, but the market-place. Complete separation from the world for
religious ends developes (1) morbid subjectivity, (2) spiritual selfishness, (3) pride,
(4) idleness.

IV. The Levites were asle to cultivate their spirituality by mutual
INTERCOURSE. They hved in cities together ; though in the midst of the tribes of
Israel. Christians should unite in Church fellowship. Sohtary mission work is
difiioult and painful. Christian suoiety secures (1) mutual sympathy, (2) whole-
some emulation. The Church should be a home for the Christian. It is bad to be
always in worldly society. — ^W. F. A.

Vers. 43 — 45. — Oo^s faithfulness.

I. We may assure ourselves of God's faithfulness by a consideeation of
the grounds on which it rests. (1) The wnchamgeahleneas of God. This is
seen (a) in nature — in changeless laws, as of light and gravitation, and in geological
miiformity; (6) in revelation, the development of which is like that of a tree
retaining unity of life and growing according to fixed principles. (2) The ommi-
science of God. Men cannot foresee (a) the novel circumstances under which they
will be required to redeem their word, and (6) the breadth of the issues to which
their promises may lead them. When God promises He knows (a) all future
circumstances to which His word may apply, and (6) ah that is involved in the
pledge He gives. (S) The omnipotence of Goi. We may promise help, and fail in
the hour of need from inability to render it. This is seen in business engagements,
national treaties, pledges of fnendship, &c. God has all the sources of the universe
at His command.

JI. We may illustrate God's faithfulness by a review of the instances
IN WHICH IT has been PROVED TO US. (1) In history ; e.g., the return of the
seasons and the production of the fruits of the earth, according to the promise to
Noah (Gen. viii. 22) ; the possession of Canaan promised from the time of Abraham
(Gen. xii. 7) ; the return from the captivity promised in the law fDeut. xxx. 3) ; th«
advent of Christ (Isa. xi. 1), and the enjoyment of Christian blessings (Matt. si.

JOSUEA X



806 THE BOOK OF JOSHUA. [ch. xxl 1—45.

28 — 30). (2) In personal experience; e.g., deliverance from sin, comfort in sorrow,
guidance in perplexity, strength for duty. Andrew Fuller says, " He that watches
Providence will not lack a Providence to watch."

III. We may strengthen our belief in God's faithfulness by an examina-
tion OF apparent exceptions. These may often be explained by noting important
circumstances. (1) Time of fulfilment. God does not always fulfil his promise
immediately, or when we expect. He will do so in His own time, at the right time,
in the fulness of time. (2) Mode of fulfilment. The promise is not always fulfilled
in the Way we expect, because (a) we misinterpret God's word, and (&) God is
educating lis by illusions which cover greater truths than we can at first receive.
(3) Condktiona of fulfilment. God's promises are conditional on our faith and
conduct. His covenant is sure so long as we keep our side of it. He is faithful to
ns if we are true to Him. "We often fail to receive a promised blessing because we
neglect to carry out the conditions God has attached to it.

IV. We may apply the principle of God's faithfulness to our own
experience by noting the regions over which it extends. (1) It extends to
all Ood's promises — the threats of chastisement as well as the assurances of
mercy. (2) It extends to all time. God's promises are as fresh now as when he
first uttered them. (3) The fruits of it are enduring. The people " possessed the
land and dwelt in it." (4) The realisation of it is perfect. " All came to pass."
— W. F. A.

Ver. 3. — The portion of the tribe of Levi. There might seem at first something
strange in the withholding from the tribe of Levi its share among the cities of
Canaan, divided by lot among the other tribes. There were, however, as we shall
see, substantial reasons why the tribe of Levi should not be treated like the other
tribes in the apportionment of the land of Canaan. It had its own peculiar
WORK TO WHICH IT WAS TO BE ENTIRELY CONSECRATED. Set apart for the Service
of the altar, it was not to be distracted by other interests. The sacrifices of the
Lord were its inheritance. On the other hand, as it must have means of subsistence,
every tribe was to set apart from its own lot that which was needftil for the
saor&ces and service of God, These temporal conditions of the tiibe of Levi in the
land of Canaan give us a very fair idea of the priesthood of the old covenant, and
we shall be able to derive from their consideration several principles apphcable to
the priesthood of the new covenant. (1) The fact that the tribe of Levi was to
have no portion of its own, shows that it is not the loill of Ood that nit service
should be mixed up with temporal a/nd material interests. (2) It is made incum-
bent on the whole tuition to provide for the ma/intena/nce of the Levites. This is a
sacred duty which cannot be neglected without prejudice to the service of God.
In fulfilling this duty, the people associate themselves with the priesthood. The
Levites, whom they maintain, are their representatives. The eleven tribes have
their delegate in the twelfth. This truth was impressed on the minds of the
children of Israel by the offering by which they had to redeem the first-bom of
their male children. Thus even under the old covenant, the great idea of the
universal priesthood was implicitly recognised. Now all Israel is a nation of
priests, for, as says St. Peter, in Christ " we are made kings and priests unto God "
(1 Pet. uL 9). Stm the Church has its ministers ; but these are not a clerical class
apart ; they are but the representatives of the people ; or rather, they do but devote
themselves specially to that which is at the same time the duty of every Chiistian.
In fulfilling this ministry, they are called, as was the tribe of Levi, to renounce all
earthly ambition, and not to attempt in any way to make holy things the handle
for securing their own material advantage. Freely they have received, freely they
are to give ; or they will come under the condemnation of Simon Magus. It is for
the Church to maintain these her servants by voluntary gifts. This duty was
m-ged by the apostles. " Let him who is taught communicate unto him that
teaicheth in aU good things " (Gal. vi. 6) , (8) The Church has become altogether
a race of priests. As a Church she has no right to secula/r dominion. When the
p»paoy pretended that temporal power was a condition of safety for the Catholic



OH. XXI. 1—46.1 THE BOOK OP JOSHUA. 807

Church, it ignored the laws concerning the priesthood, both under the old
covenant and the new. "Whenever a Church seeks to reign after the manner of
temporal sovereigns, .she becomes guilty of the same rebellion, and forgets the
great words of her Divine Founder : " My kingdom is not of this world " (John
xviii. 36).— E. de P.

Ver. 41. — The estabUshed Ghwrch of Israel.. These words project before ns

essentially the Church establishment of ancient Israel. It is quite true that the
Old Testament priesthood in its functions differed in very many most essential
poiats from the clergy of any modern Church. Their function was ritual rather
than instruction. Their office came, not by fitness, choice, or ordination, but by
birth and training. Throughout its history, from its earliest institution, when it was
named " The Host," down to the days of tbe Maccabees, the priestly was one of the
most warKke of aU the tribes. According to Dr. Stanley (' Jewish Church,' vol. ii..
Lecture on Jewish Priesthood), the employment of the Levites in the temple
service was that of the butcher rather than of the theologian. And though dis-
tributed in every tribe, there was no attempt to secure that distribution of the
Levites in every city, which would have been essential if their work had partaken
in any great degree of the educational character marking that of the Christian
ministry. Still Qiey were a religious order. Chiefly serving in the temple at
Jerusalem, they had yet some instruction work to do in their provincial homes.
To them belonged the duty of " preserving, transcribing, and interpreting the law."
They were the magistrates also who applied it (Deut. xvii. 9 — 12; xxxi. 9, 12, 26).
Though only a portion of their time occupied in attendance on the temple, and thua
left free to pursue other labours, yettheir service was recognised by a national provision.
Roughly one-twelfth of the population, Levi had as its share the tithes of the pro-
duce realised by the other eleven tribes. It had no land, excepting a little suburban
pasture land, given it; but forty-eight cities situate in all the tribes were given them
for their dwelSng. AJid while the priesthood never had the glory belonging to the
line of prophets, it yet rendered splendid service to the land. It was a bond of
unity between the various tribes. It linked them to God, it gave persistence to the
national history, was the most enduring part of the most enduring people that the
earth has seen; gave some of the finest psalmists, e.g^.,Heman and Asaph; produced
grand prophets, e.g., Samuel, Jeremiah, Ezekiel, and probably Isaiah, Joel, Micah,
Habakkuk, and others; statesmen, like Ezra; patriots, like the Maccabees. While
the Ten Tribes to-day are lost, in the firequency of the names Cohen and Levy you
see the grand persistence of the tribe and the stamp of God's approval of at least
much of its service. In all this ordering of the Levitical institutions, and the pro-
vision made for the support of the tribe, we have a conspicuous example of a
Ghwrch Establishment. As such consider it —

L As an illustration of religiousness of man. How strange is the universality
of religious provision in the world I Egypt had its caste of priests ; large provision
was made in Greek and Boman societies for reUgious service ; India has its caste
of Brahmins ; China has its Buddhist priests and monks ; Israel has here its
sacred tribe. Whatever else such a provision may import, it certainly involves a
wonderful testimony to the force of the religious principle in man. Mem cannot be
utterly secular. The mystery around him, conscience within him, all aspirations
of the heart, make him grope after God. However vague the creed and limited the
law, every nation firom the beginning has been religious. Israel's Church establish-
ment illustrates this fact.

IL This example suggests that in all things a nation ought to act reli-
giously. The writer questions the expediency, on grounds hereafter to be noticed,
of a Church establishment in England to-day. He, at the same time, would
equally protest against the opposite extreme, which would deny to a State any
right to reco^se the truth of God, God's claims, or the spiritual nature of
man in its legislature. It is desirable that at once our national poHcy aild law
should in aU points harmonise with those highest teachings of morals which we
god in the word of God. if all do not agree in their views on <J»e8e points,



808 THE BOOK OF JOSHUA. [oh. xxl 1—46.

t'len, as in all other cases, the majority should have the power of carrying out
tiicir opinions, while the minority should have perfect freedom individuaUy to
hold and to propagate theirs. Becognising God and His claims, the pohcy and
Laws of a land would be more elevated in their tone. Is the question one of war,
our English parliament should ask, What would God have us do ? and should do it.
On such questions as Sunday trading, the demoraUsing traffic in strong drink,
religious education, or laws of marriage, the State could not without grave harm
omit religious considerations from its grounds of action ; on the contrary, it ought
to place them in the forefront, and in all such questions adopt as its course that
which, in its judgment, most accords with the will of God, and most furthers
tlie spiritual as well as temporal benefit of man. If it beheve^ God's will to be
revealed in the Bible, it should appeal to and boldly foUow the teaching laid down
there. No desire to keep sacred things from irreverent handling should be per-
niitted to divorce legislation from religion. No undue regard for sensibilities of a
minority should keep the majority from acting according to its highest views, so
long as the freedom of the minority is unimpaired. Without religion government
degenerates into a thing of poUce and sanitation ; and is apt to become mean in its
tone, reckless in its principles, and adverse to the nation's real good.

III. Every pateiot SHonLD seek foe his oountey the diffusion of true
RELIGION. In what way this is to be done is a grave question. But if we aim at
the right end, probably not much harm results from endeavouring to reach it in
various ways. In Moses' time God ruled that the best way was a Church estabhsh-
ment. Expedient then, it seems to the writer inexpedient (not unlawful) now.
He mentions a few out of many grounds. (1) Christianity, as being a more
spiritual system, is much less dependent on external support than Judaism was.

(2) Tliere the order of precedence was Church before State ; the whole nation
being a theocracy, the law of Moses the statute book. While this was the order,
the Church was free to carry out its mission in allegiance to God. In almost every
modern union of Church and State the Cliurch has had to purchase State support
by a serious sacrifice of its spiritual self-government and freedom of action.

(3) There is an absence of the harmonious, united feeling which alone makes a
national Church a possibihty. (4) The wealth of the nation, and its rehgioua
interest, are so great that it can easily provide for the effective maintenance of aU
Christian activities, without needing anything beyond the freewill offerings of the
people. On such grounds it is suggested that a Church establishment is to-day
inexpedient. But, if a national provision of rehgious ordinance is inexpedient,
a provision of religious ordinance tliroughout the land should be made in soma
other way ; and it behoves every lover of his God and of his country to consecrate
wealth and give labour to secure in every community a house of God, and
to put within reach of all the preaching of the gospel of Christ. A church of
Christ in every vUlage, training children, consecrating youth, supporting manhood,
gloiifying age, the home of gentle charities, a qmet resting-place, where aU learn
to love each other beneath the smile of God, is a provision on which God would
smile, and by which man would be higlily blessed ; and feeling this, every true
patriot will take every means and make every sacrifice to secm'e that something,
thus answering to a tribe of Levi, shall in our land diffuse the immeasurable
advantages of religious truth and united worship. Let all strive to establish, by
the consecration of their gifts and labours, the Church of Christ more firmly in our
native land.— G.

Ver. 45. — The record of Ood's faithfulness. A beautiful little word, recording
a nation's experience, and one adopted as the correct statement of the experience
of multitudes that none can number 1 Look at it, and observe first —

I. God speaks good things to the house of Iseael. " Good things," i.e.,
" of its future : "exceeding great and precious promises — words on which He causes
us to hope." Man lives not in the present only. The past cUngs to him ; the
ftiture presses on him. Especially this future — near and further I Our bliss comes
chiefly from its hopes, our sorrows from its fears. With the present it is easy t«



cs. xxt. 1—45.] THE BOOK OF JOSHUA. 809

deal ; its form is fixed, and we can determine at once how to meet it. But the
future is filled with "may-bes" so indefinite and changeful in their form that we
cannot settle how to meet or what to do with them. In the case of Israel, God
covered all this darkness with His good words of hope. He would go before them ;
they should be brought to a land flowing with milk and honey; no enemy should
stand before them ; vineyards they had not planted, cities they had not built, should
be theirs. They should find an earthly dwelling-place singularly suited for their
habitation: fertile for their sustenance, secure for their safety, central for the diffu-
sion of their truth. So God speaks to all His Israel To every one some promise
is given. Even Hia prodigal children have some promise to cheer them. His sun
of promise rises on the evil and on the good ; but on the good it sheds its richest
warmth. There are great words given to us. Providential mercies are promised ;
support of the Spirit of aU erace is assured us : the Voice behind saying, " This is
the way, walk ye in it : " andthattemptationsshall not overpower, nor inward weak-
ness destroy us ; that we shall be more than conquerors through Him that loved
us ; that death itself shall be a ministering angel, wrestling with us, but blessing
us at " break of day ; " that there will be an abundant entranceinto the everlasting
kingdom, a perfected hkeness fco our Lord, an occupation before the throne, in
which all our power will find delight and all our capacities be filled with satisfaction.
These are the pledges given us. It is well to realise how vast they are, how worthy
of the generosity of the infinite God. Be not dismayed, there is no serrow whose
consolation is not pledged in some word of promise, and no perplexity the solution
of which is not tendered in some other. Marvel not that the words seem too vast
to belong to us. The dimensions of mercy are Divine. Put against every thought
of fear these words of comfort and of hope. We are sad and fearful chiefiy because
we forget them. God speaks good things unto Israel. Observe secondly —

II. It seemed impossible that these words should not fail. When Moses
brought them, the people " believed not for anguish of spirit and cruel bondage."
How could such promises be redeemed ? They, a nation of slaves, whose spirit was
ground out of them ; their oppressor having a standing army, strong in cavalry ?
Impossibilities multiplied as they advanced. By the route they took they found
themselves hemmed in by ranges of hills on either hand, sea in fi'ont, foe behind
them. How could they reach the other side ? There were desert difficulties, or
rather impossibilities, as to water and food. How could they possibly dispossess
the Canaanitish nations, all of them stronger than themselves — these peoples of
Gilead in their fortresses, impregnable by nature, and rendered still more so by
consummate art and by the marvellous vigour of the inhabitants ? Without artUleiy
of any kind, how could it be deemed a possibility to reduce the fenced cities of the
Canaanites ? How was Jordan to be crospod, with its deep ravine and swift stream
that made it one of the strongest lines of defence that any nation ever had ? Ten
out of the twelve spies— all of them of course chosen for their courage — declared
the task an utter impossibility. And it is worth our while to mark this, for there is
a sort of family likeness running through all God's promises ; and almost all have
this look of impossibility about them. I suppose all spies are apt to feel that the
promises God has made to us cannot possibly be fulfilled. One battling with doubts
deems continuance in saintly living impossible, though God promises grace suf-
ficient. One battling with strong proneness tp sin feels it impossible that a feeble
seed of grace should survive and conquer forces so much stronger than itself. The
promise of usefiilness resulting frcm our labour seems impossible of fulfilment, so
does the promise of answers to our prayers. The promise of some survival of death
and of our fi-agile spirit weathering all storms, and reaching a jerfect home, seems
impossible to be fulfilled. It is well to mark exactly the force of the favourite
promises. They are not poor probabihties. They are the grand impossibilities of
life. The supernatural enters into all our hopes. They cannot be realised unless
God troubles Himself about them. We must not try and eke out faith with the
consideration of natural probabihties. The natural probabilities are all against any
one of the grander promises being fulfilled. But thirdly observe —

JIL Axx THE FBOMisES WEBE FULmXED. " AU Came to pass." There failed



ISE BOOK OF JOSHUA. [OB. xxi. l-^S.



not ouglit of any good thing the Lord had spoken. The sea was crossed ; the
desert had its food and water ; Bashan was subdued ; Jordan crossed ; the whole
land possessed. And all this took place easily, without any hitch whatever, so long
as Israel was willing simply to go on. And from then till now the experience of the
Church of Christ has, on a large scale and with invariable uniformity, been, that
however impossible the fulfilment of God's promises might seem, they have all
been realised exceeding abundantly above aU asked or thought. God is the same
to-day as yesterday: not further from us in heart, not feebler in powers. His
anointing is not exhausted ; He is still fresh to do what He has promised. And if
we faithfully follow on in the way in which He leads us, there will not fail ought
of the good that God hath spoken to us. — G.

Vers. 43—45. — Last among the tribes to know the particular inheritance assigned
to them came the Levites, since they were not to occupy a distinct territory, but
certain selected cities in each district. By this arrangement each tribe recognised
the duty of providing for the support of the service of God, and had rehgious
instructors abiding within its borders. The sacred historian having finished his
narrative of th« partition of the land, deems it a fitting opportumty to bear witness
to the fact that God had proved equal to His word. He had brought His peo2^l6
into their possession, and they were busily engaged in arranging their habitations,
tilling the soil and other occupations of landed proprietors. The IsraeHtish dis-
pensation was typical, foreshadowing the dispensation of the fulness of times, of
which theirs was but a dim anticipation, an emblem and a shadow. As mind is
superior to matter, and spiritual are preferable to bodily satisfactions, as righteous-
ness is more important than wealth, and elevation of soul more desirable than
prowess in war, so do the advantages of which beUevers in Christ are partakers
immeasurably outweigh all that was the portion of the Israehtes in their brightest
period.

L An enumeration of privileges. (1) Mention is made of the inheritance,
the land which they now possessed, and wherein they dwelt. Hope was at last
fruition. Buoyed up in their journeys by the thought of the " land flowing with
milk and honey," they had crossed the Jordan and planted their feet on the soU
that was to be theh-s. When a man realises his sonship to God, the whole earth
becomes his. For him the trees unfold then- leaves and the birds sing. He takes fresh
interest in the world of nature, it is his Father's garden. But our thoughts centre
chiefly in those mercies bought for the Church by Christ at such enormous cost. For-
giveness, justification, adoption, sanetification, whole acres of fruitful soil that yield
sustenance to the soul, yea, spiritual luxuries, if only we be diligent. Our inheritance
is not to be enjoyed without appropriating effort. The word of God is the register
of our estate. The territory expands by viewing, " 'tis a broad land of wealth
unknown." The higher we ascend on the hUl of meditation, the better shall we
behold our property, stretching far and wide, up to heaven and away to eternity.
The ground furnishes aU manner of fruit ; the graces of the Spirit are many. The
believer enters into the kingdom of God, an empire larger than that of Charlemagne
and he is made richer than Croesus. Angels are his attendants. (2) Best is spoken
of, rest from wamderings. There may be some of vagabondish tendencies to whom
Incessant travelling, with the variety it affords, is pleasing, but a nomadic life is
neither desired by the majority nor healthful for them. Forty years in the
wilderness did not reconcile the Israelites to the continual shifting of the camp.
Perhaps no more piteous nor clamorous cry is heard to-day than the demand for
rest. The rush o^Hfe is everywhere bewailed. Turmoil and bustle may dehght
for a season, but soon pall upon the taste and tire the faculties. A gospel intended
for men must be capable of meeting the legitimate demands of every age. And the
gospel of Jesus Christ claims to give rest to the weary. Not that the Christian is
summoned to a position requiring no vigilance nor exercise of his talents. To
superficial observers, the disciples who embraced the offer of Jesus may have
appeared to lead an extremely unquiet life, now tossing on the waves at their
Master's command, then journeying on foot through hamlets and towns, and finally



iik. m. l~is] m-& fioofe ot ios^VL *il

proclaiming the truth in the midst of foes and persecutors. But rest is not idleness,
carnal ease. The Israelites had stiU their proper work to do. But they were not
tormented by the constant need to transport themselves, their wives, and children,
and their baggage, to a different residence. The Christian has obtained peace of
conscience, rest of soul, by reposing in Christ for security. (3) The text speaks of
victory, or rest from conflict. The inhabitants of Canaan had been defeated in
several pitched battles. Many were slain, and others remained scattered in small
groups through the land. The period of warfare necessary to acquire possession
was at an end. " There stood not a man of all their enemies before thena," &o.
And victory is another blessing which Grod grants the believer. Satan has been
driven from the citadel, and the rightful king installed. Sin staggers under a
mortal wound. The contest may be long and sharp. The agonised soul cries,
" "What must I do ? " Hopes and fe^rs struggle for the mastery, passions fierce
rend the breast, the thunders of Sinai roll, temptations darken the sky. But the
radiance of the cross, the glory of the risen Saviour, the brightness of the ascension
cloud, these dissipate the gloom, and the believer shouts, Victory 1 Victory t
" Thanks be to God which giveth us the victory through our Lord Jesus Christ."
Henceforth the character of the fight is changed. The enemy may not be com-
pletely extirpated ; he may be left to prove the Christian, who has only to be true
to his Lord, and the country shall be reduced to entire subjection. All the equip-
ment, guidance, and succour requisite are provided ; he may go from strength to
strength, and if not triumphant, the blame is attributable to himself alone.

IL Some GENEBAL OBSEEVATioNS upon the text. (1) The Author of ov/r hlessvngt
must be held in constant remembrance. Four times in three verses is the name of
the Lord repeated. Herein lies the distinction between morality and religion.
We are but heathen, if we speak of warring against evU, expelling selfishness, and
slaying vice without acknowledging the impulse derived from on high. We are
not Christians unless we ascribe the merit of the victory to the Lord, '' Thou hast
redeemed us by Thy blood." (2) Blessings a/re all the sweeter from contrast with
previous trials. Poverty teaches thankfulness for riches, labour enhances sub-
sequent rest. It is the lame man healed that leaps and runs in the joy of his new-
found powers. Angels can never know the delight of exclaiming, " Wbereas I was
bUnd, now I see." In this way will God recompense the afBicted. The pained in
body will be oveq'oyed to experieace ease. The desolate will understand the
comfort of sympathy and association with like-minded saints. These vagrant
Israelites, harassed by perpetual marching and warfare, estimated highly the
privilege of a restful settlement. And to any struggUng with difficulty, we say,
" Hereafter it shall deUght thee to remember these thy labours." The veteran
soldier wiU talk with honest pride of his wounds, and the traveller of his fatigues.
(3) Eeminded of two truths that are like sunbeams in the word of God. The Lord
is mindful of His oath, and able to redeem it to the very letter. " There hath not
failed ought of any good thing. ... all came to pass." How often the Israelites
mmmured because of the length of the way, were tempted to think the promised
land a delusive mirage, that it was better to return to Egypt with its certain
bondage, but also certain leeks and bread. The report of giants afield overwhelmed
them with dismay. They would not look at the stars in the sky, the power of God
and His covenant faithfulness. Now, in a class at school, what the teacher says to
one is intended for the information of all. And what the Almighty has done to
one individual or nation is for the instruction, refreshment, consolation of all.
Uubehef is ever ready to lodge suspicion in our breasts. "Hath God forgotten to
be gracious ? " The holiest men have known seasons of despondency. Shut up
in the ark they believe they are safe, but the floods are all around, and the time of
release is long in coming. If tempted to doubt the execution of God's plans, we
must rise above the crowd, and from the tower behold the growth and grand pro-
portions of the city. Withdraw a little, and try to obtain a comprehensive glance
at history past and present, and your faith will be confirmed in the accomphsh-
ment of the Almighty purposes concerning mankind. Order will be educed out of
fancied confusion. The building of your faitlv cannot faU. Seize its pUlars and



»12 THE BOOK OF JOSHUA. [oh xxi. 1—48,

test their strength, the pledged word and omnipotence of God, and all your fright
■will vanish, (i) It is ever seasonable to record with gratitude the fulfilment of
God's promises. If we only acted upon this statement in proportion to our con-
BoiousnesB of its truth, there would oftener issue from our complaining hps a burst
of thanksgiving. The declaration of the text was reiterated by Joshua in his
solemn charge to the people (xxiii. 14), and a similfir testimony was borne by
Solomon at the dedication of the temple (1 Kings viii. 56). 'Wliat monuments
were constructed and institutions established in order to commemorate the faith-
fulness of Jehovah I And we to whom " the fulness of the time " is come, coiild
surely tune our harps to louder, nobler anthems, by reason of the more excellent
gifts poured upon us from the treasury of Infinite Love, in accordance with His
prophecies, " Praise our God all ye people! '' His glory and our welfare concur
xn demanding this tribute of gratitude.

This subject raises cub thouoht to heaven, as the place to which perfect
rest and enjoyment of our inheritance are reserved. We have here " the spirit of
promise as the earnest of our inheritance until the redemption of our pmrohased
possession." This is the morning twilight, that the noon ; this the portico, that,
the inner palace ; this the foretaste, that the banquet ; this the type, that the
reality. Here " we groan being burdened," there we have the house eternal, the
body that is the out-flashing glory of the spirit. Here we slake our thirst and
appease our hunger, and soon we crave again; there "they hunger no more,
neither thirst any more," for the Lamb doth feed them, and lead them to living
fountains of water. Here we revive under the physician's touch, and fall ill
Again ; there the inhabitants never have to sayt "I am sick." — ^A.

Ver. 46. — God's fcdthfuVnest. This cannot mean that the Divine plan in refer-
ence to Israel's possession of the land was now in all respects completely fulfilled.
The Canaanite still dwelt in certain parts of it, and was never really cast out. But
in the main the work was done. The country, as a whole, was subdued, and the
invaders no longer had any formidable opposition to contend with. Moreover,
God's part in the work was fully accomplished. Whatever partial fiulure there
Kiay have been was due to Israel's faithlessness and weakness. There was no
failure in God. He had been inflexibly true to His purpose. His word had not
been broken. " There failed not ought,'.' &c. The absolute fidelity of God to His
purposes and promises is our theme. Let us take a broad view of it.

I. The general constitution and order of the universe illustrates the
PiviNE faithfulness. The universe of being is but an embodiment ot the thought
of God. A Divine purpose governs every part of it. His laws are not only expres-
sions of His will, but are of the nature of pledges and promises, and no law is ever
frustrated, no promise ever broken. They partake of the eternal steadfastness of His
essential Being. " They stand fast for ever and ever, and are done in truth and
uprightness." (1) It is so in the material reaVm. Physical laws are simply the
impress of the eternal mind on matter and the method by which tliat Mind sees fit
to mould and govern it. The " course of nature " is but a continual unfolding of
the steadfast thought and purpose of God. The world passed through many struc-
tural changes before it was trodden by the foot of man, and has passed through
many since, but the laws that govern it have been the same from the beginning.
Ages pass before those laws are discovered, but they existed of old. Great liberty
of action is given to man within the natural order, but he cannot change it in one
iota- It is a rock against which the waves of his self-wiU and vain ambition only
dash themselves in pieces — so beneficent and yet so terrible in its inflexibUity ;
rewarding his trust, yet rebuking his presumption ; inflicting on his ignorance and
feebleness so severe a penalty, and yet guarding and befriending it. Our place in
this great system of things is that of learners. Our highest science and skill are
but a feeble answer to its truth and certainty. Life proceeds on the principle of
trust in the constancy of nature, which is but another name for the faithfulness olt
God, (2) It is so in the moral sphere. The material order is but the shadow and
reflection of the moral. Moral laws belong to a world not of shadows and appear-



CH. XXI. 1—46.] THE BOOK OP JOSHUA. 818

ances, but of substantial and enduring reality. " The things that are seen ara
temporal," &o. If there is fixity in the principles that govern the outer, how much
more in those that govern the inner, life of mau. Our earthly existence is a restless
ebb and flow of ciroumatance and feeUiig. No two human histories, no two social
situations, events, experiences, are aUke. And yet there is " nothing new under
the sun." " That which hath been is now " &c. (Eccl. iii. 15). As the kaleidoscope,
out of a few simple shapes and colours, presents ever-changing forms of beauty to
the eye, so does the revolution of our days and years embody in an endless variety
of forms the primary principles and laws that govern our moral life. Those laws
partake of the nature of the Lawgiver. They change not, " fail not," because He
is " without variableness," &c. Whether as regards the threatening of evil or the
promise of good, all infallibly " come to pass." Conceive it in a single case to be
otherwise, and the whole moral system of things is involved in utter confusion and
hopeless ruin.

II. The spheeb of fulfilled prophecy illustrates it. Prophecy, as at once
an inspiration and a revelation, is essentially supernatural. Divine. As regards its
predictive element, it is as a passing gleam of light from the Infinite Intelligence, to
which all things, past, present, and future, are alike " naked and opened." The
prophet, as a seer, is one for whom God's own hand has for a moment lifted the
veil of the future. Every really prophetic word is thus a Divine pledge, and its
fulfilment is the redemption of that pledge. Biblical revelations from the beginning
breathe the spirit of prophecy, and bibhcal history is rich in the verification of it.
What is the whole career of Israel — its national existence, its captivities and
deliverances, the advent of Messiah and His glorious kingdom, the after destiny of
the Hebrew people — but the translation of prophecy into history ? Thus does age
after age present some new testimony to the truth and faithfulness of God. Dis-
pensations change, the generations come and go, but His purposes move on steadily
to their accomplishment. " Not one faileth." Heaven and earth may pass away,
but His word shall not pass away.

III. The covenant of orace illustrates it. In this the covenant made with
Abraham found its consummation (Gen. xxii. 18). David died in the cahn, glad
faith of it. " Yet hath He made with me an everlasting covenant, ordered in all
things and sure " &o. (2 Sam. xxiii. 5). Having its birth in the depths of a past
eternity, being no mere " after thought," it was manifested " in the fulness of time "
in Him " in whom all the promvses of God are yea and amen." His blood is the
seal of the everlasting covenant. In Him God " performed the mercy promised to
the fathers," and "the word that He spake by the mouth of His holy prophets since
the world began." And as all foregoing ages foreshadowed it, so do the after ages
give ever accumulating witness to its truth and certainty. Every earnest Christian
life— every reward of obedient faith, every answered prayer, every new victoxy over
death — confirms it. Our fathers trusted in it and were not put to shame. They
passed peacefully away with its language on their Hps, and the hope of hnmortality
it enkindled in their hearts. We ourselves are learning more and more daily how
worthy it is of our trust. And we know that when the tale of our changeful life is
told, and we also shall have passed away, our children wiU enter into the inheritance
of blessing with the "long interest " of added years: " heirs together with us of the
grace " it reveals.

♦• The words of God's extensive love
From age to age endure ;
The angel of the covenant proves
And seals the blessing sure."

"All flesh is grass, and all the glory of man as the flower of grass. The grass
withereth, and the flower thereof faileth away; but the word of the Lord endureth
for ever. And this is the word which by the gospel is preached unto vou " (1 Peter
i. 24, 26).— W. . J ^

Vers. 43—45.—" The Lord is not a man that He should lie, or the Son of Man
VUA Ha should repeat." His promises are " yea and amen." This is the great



mi



i-aE BOOK oP JosatjA.



l&A. xkit. i— 44.



truth brought home to us by the beautiful conclusion of the partition of the land of
Canaan. " The Lord gave to Israel all the land which He sware to give unto their
fathers. There faUed not ought of any good thing which the Lord had spoken unto
the house of Israel ; all came to pass " (vers. 43, 45). Heaven and earth may pass
away, but the word of the Lord must stand. (1) His word cannot retwrn to Him
void ; for it is always instinct with vital power. " In the beginning was the
Word ; and the Word was with God ; and the Word was God." God spoke, and a
world sprang into being. Every word of prophecy has been fulfilled in the history
of our race. His promises in like manner can never be empty words — they must
have an answering reality. (2) He is the God of truth, ever faithful to Himself.
(3) He is the Ood of love, and His love cannot belie itself. (4) He is the God of
eternal ages. To Htm there is no interval between the promise and its fulfilment ;
it is to our apprehension only that the promise tarries. The new Israel may say,
like Israel of old, " Not one good word has failed of all that He has spoken." The
covenant of grace is a new land of promise. In it the Chiirch has found a settled
abiding place : it has overcome its adversaries and shall go on conquering and to
conquer. So also shall it be with the third great land of promise, the heavenly
Canaan. Upon this inheritance shall the redeemed at last enter singing, with a new
meaning, this old song of triumph : " The Lord hath given us rest round about,
according to all that He sware unto our fathers " (ver. 44). — B. db P.



EXPOSITION.



CHAPTER XXII. 1—34.



Ver. 1. — ^The Eeubenites and the Gadltes.

Acoording to the Hebrew idiom, these are
in the original in the singular, as in Gen.
xii. 6. Thus a tribe, as has been before re-
marked, or even a family (oh. vi. 25), is
spoken of frequently as a single individual
(of. cb. xvii. 14, 15, 17, 18). It seems prob-
able that this chapter oocutb in strict chro-
no logical order, and that the soldiers of
the two tribes and a half remained under
the national banner at Shiloh until the
work of survey and appointment was com-
pleted. But this cannot be affirmed with
certainty. The word TK with which the
chapter commences, is not the usual word
for chronological sequence, though it does
not preclude it (see note on ch. viii. 30).
And the time during which these soldiers
must in this case have remained separated
from their wives and families was a very
long one. Some have even supposed that
it lasted fourteen years (see ver. 3). On the
other hand, the words " gathered together
to SbUoh," in ver. 12, implies that the tribes
west of Jordan had left Shiloh. Nor did
there seem to be the least need for their ser-
vices after the battle of Merom. We must
be content to leave the matter in uncer-
tainty, with the remark that if the armed
men of the two tribes and a half did remain
during this long period away from their
homes, oiu sense of their 'ready obedience
must be greatly enhanced, as also of the

Sersonal influence of the leader at whose
iBtance they did so. The half tribe of



Mauasseh. Some cities read t33B' here tot
niSD, and as the tribe is spoken of in a
political and not in a genealogical point of
view, the reading, as far as internal con-
siderations go, would seem preferable. The
two words, however, are not always used
with complete strictness, but are sometimes
regarded as synonymous (see note on ch. xiii.
29).

Ver. 3. — Many days (see note on ver. 1).
The expression in the original impUes more,
a greaUmany days, the usual expression for
a period of considerable length. Thus the
military service of these tribes must under
any cu'cum stances have been a prolonged
and arduous one, and they well deserved
the encomiums which Joshua here lavishes
upon them. It is a remarkable and almost
inexplicable tact, that while the sojourn in
the wilderness is represented as one long
catalogue of murmurings, not one single
complaint (unless we may call the gentle
expostulation of the tribe of Joseph, in oh.
xvii., a complaint) disturbs the peace of the
tribes while Joshua led them. This re-
markable consistency of the narrative
throughout, so great a contrast to what
precedes and what follows, and felt to be
so by the writer (ch. xxiv. 31), is of itself
no small pledge of the trustworthiness of
the whole. A collector at random from
various narratives, themselves to a con-
siderable extent fictitious, could hardly hava
managed to cull portions which would form
an harmonious whole. A writer who wai
inventing his details would hardly hava
thought of making his history so great a



Ch. xJHt. 1—34.]



ITHEi BOOK OF JOSHUA.



m



contrast to the rest of the history of Israel,
gave with the idea of exalting the character
of his hero. But there is no attempt to set
Joshua ahove Moses, or any other Jewish
leader. In fact, it is an argument for the
early composition of the book that there is
no reference, not even an allusion, to any
later events in the history of Israel. Why
there was this marked diEferenoe between
Israel under Joshua, and Israel at any other
time, is a question somewhat difficult to
determine. Tet we may believe that it was
the evidence of visible success. While the
Israelites were wandering in the wilderness,
they felt keenly, as men accustomed to a
civilised and settled life, the inconveniences
of a nomad existence. By their mingled
impatience and cowardice they had forfeited
their claim to God's protection. Even the
observance of their feasts, and still further
the rite of initiation into the covenant itself,
were in abeyance (see notes on ch. v. 2 — 8).
So uncertain, humanly speaking, was their
future, that it was as difficult a task, and
one the successful accomplishment of which
was above unassisted human powers, for
Moses to keep them together in the wilder-
ness, as it was for Joshua to lead them to
victory in the promised land. And it is one
of the commonest of Christian experiences,
both in the history of individuals and of
the Christian Church, that times of pros-
perity are times of content and outward
satisfaction. It is the times of adversity
that try men's faith and patience. As long
as the leraeUtish Church was subduing
kingdoms, winning splendid victories, ex-
periencing the encom'agement derivable
from God's sensible presence and interven-
tion, there was no discontent, discourage-
ment, or wavering. But the trials of the
long wandering, as well as those incident to
the quiet, unostentatious discharge of duty,
were fatal to their faith and patience. Can
theirs be said to be a singular history?
Kept the charge. The words in the original
have reference to the punctual discharge of
a duty entrusted to a person to fulfil. It
may be rendered, " kept the observance
of the commandment." This couunand-
ment, as we have before seen, was given
in Num. xxxii. (see also ch. i. 12 — 18).

Ver. 4. — Given rest. LXX. muTravae, the
word used in Heb. iv. 8.

Ver. 5. — But take diligent heed. This
passage is a quotation from the Book of
Deuteronomy (chs. vi. 5 ; x. 12 ; xi. 13, 22 ;
XXX. 6, 16, 20, &c.) The expressions, as
KeU well remarks, are " crowded together,
so that obedience to God's commands may
be the more deeply impressed on their
hearts." It is worthy of remark, that while
beginning with the love of God, Joshua does



not end there. The best proof of love is ooi
conduct towards the person loved. If love
be genuine, it is the practical principle
which produces diligent service, punctual
obedience, faithful attachment, the devotion
of the heart and soul. Commandment and
law. The first of these words, derived from s
root signifying to eet wp, has rather the force
of what we call a positive precept, referring
to single acts. The word translated law,
derived from the root to cast, hepce to
stretch out the hand, to point out, refers
rather to moral precepts. The Greek v6iioq
and our law are used in the same sense.
Cleave unto Him. The Hebrew is stronger,
cleave into Him, as though regarding not
so much isolated actions as principles of
life. Our life was to be " rooted and
grounded," to use an apostolic phrase, in
His. But the full significance of these
words could not be understood till One had
come who enabled ns by faith to "eat His
flesh and drink His blood," and so be united
to Him as the branch to its root.

Ver. 6. — To their tents. It would seem
that, during the whole of these "many
days," the conquered cities had remained
tenantless, waiting for the return of the
warriors from their long expedition. " Those
that were first in the assignment of the
land were last in the enjoyment of it; so
'the last shall be first and the first last,'
that there may be something of equality "
(Matthew Henry). Thefirst partof the quota-
tion is due to Bishop Hall, who also says,
" If heaven be never so sweet to us, yet
may wee not runne from this earthen war-
fare till our great Captaine shall please to
discharge us."

Ver. 7. — Now to the one half of the tribe
of Mauasseh. We have here, as Keil re-
marks, a specimen of our author's habit of
repetition. Four times do we read (chs. xiii.
14, 33; xiv. 3; xviii. 7) that the Levites
were to have no share in the division of the
land. Four times (in chs. xiii. 8 ; xiv. 3 ;
xviii. 7, and here) does he repeat that the
tribe of Manasseh was divided into two, and
had its inheritance on either side Jordan.
The same kind of repetition occurs in the
narrative of the passing of the Jordan. It
has been before remarked to be a charac-
teristic of the style of the Old Testament
generally, but nowhere is it found to a
greater degree than in the Book of Joshua.
Yet this, to which critics of the analytical
school have objected as a sign of spnrious-
ness, is in fact one of those peculiarities of
style which mark the individuaUty of the
writer. It is to inspired history what tha
Gos^ and Epistles of St. John are to
inspired theology. The form belongs to tha
author ; the matter, at least as regards it*



81«



THE BOOK OF JOSHUA.



[oh. xxn. 1—84



general purport, belongs to God. A Hebrew
wriier, we are reminded in the 'Speaker's
Commentary, ' does not quote or refer to what
has been already stated. If it is necessary
to make his narrative clear, he repeats it.

Ver. 8. — Riches. The word here used is
an uncommon one, and occurs only here
and in the later Hebrew. Divide the spoil
of your enemies with your brethren. This
was the just reward for their toUs. And
here, as elsev/here, we may observe the
strict and scrupulous integrity of Joshua.
The division of the spoil by other leaders
has olten been the cause of heart-burnings
and even of mutiny. Here each man has
his due, and no room is left for reproach or
dissatisfaction.

Ver. 9,— Out of ShUoh. See note on
ver. 1. In the land of Canaan. To dis-
tinguish it from Gilead, the land of their
possession, on the other side of Jordan.
Whereof they were possessed. Another
instance of that repetition which was
according to the genius of the Hebrew lan-
guage.

Ver. 10. — The borders of Jordan. Liter-
ally, the ciTcles (cf . notes on ch. xiii. 2 ; xviii.
17 ; XX. 7 ; xxi. 32). Conder suggests downs,
and it is most probable that the word refers
to curved outlines, such as we frequently see
in the hollows of our own chalk downs, or
in any place where the strata do not yield
easily to the action of water, and yet have
been moulded by such action. That are In
the laud of Canaan. Again the intention is
to lay stress Upon the fact that the historian
is still speaking of the country west of
Canaan. A great altar to see to. Literally,
an altar great to sight, i.e., large and visible
from a great distance. Bishop Horsley,
however, would render a great altar in
appearaTice, supposing that what is meant
is that it orly looked Uke an altar, and
was not intended to be used as one. One
of the most valuable results of the Pales-
tine exploration movement has been the
discovery of the site of this altar, which
seems probable, in spite of Lieutenant
Condor's abandonment of the theory in
his ' Tent Work in Palestine,' ii. 53. The
reasons for the identification are as fol-
lows. The altar must be near one of the
fords of Jordan. It must be on this side
of Jordan (see note on vers. 24, 25). It
must be in a conspicuons position, as we
have just seen. Now Kurn Sartabeh or
Surtubeh (see note on oh. iii. 16), visible
from a great distance on aU sides, from
Ebal, from near Gennesaret, thirty miles
off, from the Dead Sea, from the eastern
high lands, and from the Judsean watershed
(see Quarterly Paper of the Palestine Ex-
ploration Fund, Oct. 1874), fulfils all these



conditions. Dr. Hutchinson replies (Quar-
terly Paper, Jan. 1876) that the altar is
stated by Josephus to have been on the eas*
side of Jordan, and that it was improbable
that the two and a half tribes would have
erected the altar on the cis-Jordanic terri-
tory, or so near to Shiloh, because Ephraim
would have resented this. Moreover, the
words, " a great altar to be teen," would
imply that it was to be visible from a long
distance, so that the two tribes and a half
might see it from their side of Jordan. It
must be confessed that the evidence for the
identification is but slight, but so also are
the arguments against it. For (1) Josephus
is not infaUible, and the Hebrew text seems
to assert the very opposite of what he says.
And (2) the other tribes did resent the erec-
tion of the altar. Lieutenant Conder now
admits that it is possible that the words
stating that the tribes crossed "by the
passage of the children of Israel " (ver. 11,
but see note there) leads to the idea that
the ford by Jericho is meant, and not the
Damieh ford by Kurn Sartabeh. See, how-
ever, the translation given below. The fact
that the Arabs call the place the ascent of
the father of Ayd, which has a close resem-
blance to the Hebrew word Ed, " witness,"
does not appear conclusive, though it lends
some degree of probability to the theory.
On the other hand, it might be contended
that if the Beubenites and Gadites had not
erected the altar on their own territory, it
would not have excited the wrath of the
remaining tribes. But as the best authori-
ties are contentto leave the matter uncertain,
it must be left uncertain here.

Ver. 11. — Half tribe of Manasseh.
Throughout this part of the narrative, when
the body politic, rather than the descent of
the tribe, is to be indicated, we have, not
ntSD, but Das'. See above, ch. xiii. 29. An
altar. The original has the altar. Over
against. ^-ID-^^. It is difficult to fix the

meaning of this expression. jID seems to
have meant the /rent of anything, and there-
fore >1Dv^ would naturally mean towards
the front of, or in front of. Thus we have
had the expression in ch. viii. 33 (where see
note), where it seems to mean, in the direc-
tion of, and in oh. ix. 1, where it seems to
have the same meaning. With verbs of
motion it signifies towards, as in Exod. xxxiv.
8, and 1 Sam. xvii. 30. Here it clearly cannot
be pressed to mean across Jordan. See note
below. The borders of Jordan. As above,
ver. 10, the circles of Jordan. At the pas-
sage of the children of IsraeL The word
translated " the passage of," literally, "unto
over," has originally the sense of " across,"



OH. xxn. 1—84.]



THE BOOK OF JOSHUA.



817



Here, however, it means "towards the region
opposite to the sons of Israel," i.e., in the
direction of the country on the other side
Jordan. The country across Jordan was
usually designated as ^3J)3 or 13{?Q Jordan.

13y."7i{ , the phrase used here, we find in
Exod. xxviii. 26, apparently in the sense of
across (so Exod. xxxix. 19). Jn Deut.
XXX. 13 it is used of moving in the direction
of a place, "across" or "over the sea." In
Ezekiel i. 9, 12, with the addition of V^3,
the phrase means "straight forward." In
1 Sam. xiv. 40 in^ 1^1?? means " on one
side." In 1 Kings vii. 20 13}?? means
" over." Thus the altar was not necessarily
on the other side Joi-dan.

Ver. 12.— Gathered themselves together
at Shiloh. 1 he commentators refer here to
Levit. xvii. 8, 9, and Deut. xii. 4—14. See
also Levit. xvii. 4. The punishment for the
sin is to be found in Deut. xiii. 12 — 16. We
have before remarked (note on ver. 3) upon
the singular obedience of the Israelites
during the life of Joshua. The present
incident is another exemplification of the
fact. It is not Joshua who summons the
children of Israel, it is they who voluntarily
gather themselves together. The solemn
provisions of the law have been infringed,
they hasten at once, if necessary, to put
the law in execution. The vivid sense of
the triumphs they had enjoyed under
Joshua, and the safety in which they now
were enabled to dwell, filled their hearts
with a strong, if short-lived, feeling of
gratitude to Him who had done so great
things for them, and of indignation against
his foes. We may here observe two points
which demonstrate the consistency of the
narrative, and are evidences for its genuiae-
ness. (1) The children of Israel were not
remarkable for their obedience to the law,
or to heaven-sent leaders. Both their pre-
vious and subsequent history forbid us to
predicate for them the quality of obedience.
Whence, then, comes this new-born and
ephemeral " zeal for the Lord," which dis-
plays itself in such a remarkable manner on
the present occasion? Whence, but from
the long catalogue of splendid victories and
wonderful Divine interpositions recorded in
this book, and from the sense of security
arising out of them ? Whence, but from the
great fear of the children of Israel that had
fallen upon the inhabitants of Canaan, bo
that, to use the striking expression ot our
historian in ch. x. 21, "none moved his
tongue against any of the children of
Israel." (2) The offence and its penalty
are recorded in the book of the law, and
tfi..X!i.Jl>r in HkQ Book of Deuteronomy.



Unless, therefore, we are to conclude that
all this history, in spite of its natural and
life-hke character, was entirely the invention
of later ages, we can scarcely avoid the con-
clusion that Deuteronomy, as well as the
other books of the Pentateuch, was in
existence when these events occurred. Foi
if not, where was the offence of the two
tribes and a half? How was its gravity to
be determined? What induced the rest of
Israel, including apparently the other half
of the tribe of Manasseh, to prepare for wai
with their brethren? The only rationa!
explanation of the history is that the tribes
beyond Jordan had contravened the provi.
sions of the law of Moses, contained in the
Book of Deuteronomy, and that the rest of
Israel were preparing to inflict the punish
ment decreed in that law against such
contravention. And these provisions and
that punishment we find in the five books
of that law as it is at present handed down
to us. Our only alternatives, then, would
seem to be, to reject the history, or to
accept the law in toto. And if we take the
former, we have to explain how it is that
the law and the subsequent history, though
entirely fabulous, came to be arranged into
so harmonious and consistent a whole. To
go up to war against them. Calvin blames
the Israelites a little unjustly here. They
did not act rashly, as he asserts. Though
they prepared to visit the offence with
instant chastisement, they gave their
brethren an opportunity of explanation.
And when that explanation was given, it
proved so entirely satisfactory that all
hostile intentions were laid aside. "Not
onely wisdom, but charitie moved them to
this message. For grant they had been guilty,
must they perish unwarned? Peaceab'e
meanes must first be used to recall them,
ere violence be sent to persecute them "
(Bp. HaU). It ia to be feared that Christians
have not always so restrained their impe-
tuosity when the cry that the faith was in
danger has been raised, and that the zeal,
so well tempered by discretion, of the
Israelitish congregation at this time, is an
example of both qualities which puts many
Christians to shame. Even Masius cautions
us here that we should not " temere move-
amur suspioionibus." But he derives hence
an argument, and cites St. Augustine in
favour of it, for the doctrine that heretics
may be proceeded against by the civil sword.
Knobel's remark upon this verse is a perfect
gem of the "destructive criticism." The
account of all Israel gathering together to
war against the two tribes and a half " is
unsuitable to the circumspect and mild
Elohist." Are aii.writersof history, except
those who have no battle* ot lieges to de-



818



THE BOOK OF JOSHUA.



[oh. xxn. 1—84.



scribe, lash and savage by nature f And
even the "eiroumspeot and mild Elohist,"
or a member of the Peace Society itself,
might venttire to describe a gathering which,
though at first it assumed a warlike form,
ended in mutual explanations and a perfect
understanding. Of a very different stamp
is Bp. Hall's apostrophe, "O noble and
religious zeale of Israel 1 Who would think
these men the sonnes of them that danced
around the molten oali ? "

Ter. 13. — ^Fhlnehas the boh of Eleazar
the priest. Their messenger was well
chosen. He was the representative of the
high priest, whose duty it was to call
attention to all Infringements of the law.
He had proved his own fiery zeal for the
purity of Israelitish faith and life by his
eonduct at a critical moment of his country-
men's history, when Balaam's miserable
intrigues had brought the Isradites to the
brink of destruction (Num. xxv. 7). Such
an envoy, if the trans-Jordanic tnbes had
indeed disobeyed God's command, was well
qualified to bring them to a sense of their
gin. Once again we find him in his proper
position, at the head of the children of
Israel (Judg. xz. 28), and that was when
they were once more assembled to avenge
the atrocious crime of the men of Gibeah.

Ver. 14. — And with him ten princes.
Fhinehas represented the tribe of Levi, the
high priest being too great to permit of his
forming part of such a deputation. The
actual head of each tribe accompanied him ;
that is, the head of the family, as we should
call it, in each tribe. TMs seems pre-
ferable to EeU's idea, that some tribes were
represented by a prince, and some by heads of
families, which seems inadmissible from the
fact that the Hebrew states that each tribe
was represented in the same manner, K'B'J
nn{<N*B'J. in^. what is doubtless in-
tended here is to emphasize the weight and
importance of the deputation sent with
Phinehas, a weight and importance be-
fitting an embassy which might have to
announce the determination to exterminate
the two and a half tribes as completely as
Jericho had been exterminated. The men-
tion of ten princes shows that the cis-
Jordanic haU tribe of Manasseh was repre-
sented. Tribes. The word here, after
" father's house," is the genealogical n^D
not the political t3^^. The thousands.
Or families (as in Judg, vi. 16; 1 Sam.
X. 19). See however Introduction, p. xxix.
Ver. 16. — Trespass. The Hebrew word
rignifies to act deceitfully or faithlessly. It
was an act of ingratitude towards the God
who had established them in the good land
in which they now found tjiemselves. Such



ingratitude and desertion of God waa
equivalent to rebellion, the term used im-
mediately afterwards. The embassy clearly
assumed that the fault had been committed,
and that it would be necessary to proceed
to extremities. Tet, deeply moved as they
were, they did not refuse to listen to reason,
and rejoiced that it was not necessary to
inflict the fearful vengeance which other-
wise would have been their duty. How
great a contrast is this to the readiness,
nay, even the eagerness, which many own-
ing the Chiistian name have displayed to
destroy the body, and the soul also, if that
were possible, of their brethren in Christ,
who have been overtaken, or have been sup-
posed to be overtaken, in a similar fault 1

Ver. 17. — Is the Iniquity of Peor too
little for us 7 How natural the illustration
in the mouth of the speaker! It waa
Phinehas who had avenged the iniquity of
Peor, and arrested the judgment for that
offence as it was about to fall. How natural
that the occurrence should be, as it were,
branded upon hia memory with a hot iron,
and that the mention of it should spring at
once to his lips when he saw his brethren,
as he thought, upon the verge of a similar
offence 1 Peor is, of course, a contraction
for Baal-Peor (Num. xxv. 3). This god
derives his name probably from Mount
Peor, or "the cloven mountain" (Num.
xxiii. 28). From which we are not cleansed
until this day. Here we have the expression
of the feeling which was never removed
until Christ came. It was not possible that
the blood of bulls and of goats could take
away sin. No ceremonial lustrations could
" cleanse us from its guilt and power." No
destruction of the prime mover of the
offence, though it may avert the wrath of
of God, can remove the moral reproach
which lies upon the sumer. Not even the
destruction of twenty-four thousand persons
(Num. XXV. 9) can purify Israel from the
taint of pollution. Iri the eyes of a sincere
servant like Phinehas, the stigma rests upon
Israel still, nor could anything avail to take
it away. Truly, the law was, indeed, " our
schoolmaster, to bring us to Christ." What
Keil says of Calvin's explanation, that " the
remembrance was not yet quite buried,
nor the anger of God extinct," is unsatis-
factory, ffis. own explanation, that " the
heart of Israel still delighted in their sin,"
is even more so, since we have no evidence
whatever that this was the case at the time
of which we are speaking. We have here
again to remark that the history in Numbers
is here presupposed, and an allusion to an
incident in Numbers is here placed in the
mouth of one of the chief actors in it. How
natural, if the history be a veracious on$ I



OH. xxu. 1 — 34.]



THE BOOK OF JOSHUA.



819



How marvellouBly ingenious, if it be not 1
The circumstance is mentioned again ia
Hosea, in the time of Jotham or Hezekiah,
and again in Psa. ovi., which would appear
to have been written during the captivity.
Thus we have a chain of testimony con-
cerning it which makes it difficult to assign
a time for the invention of the story, if it
be invented, since all references to it in
Scripture are perfectly consistent with each
other, and display none of the signs of
gradual grow -h which we invariably find in
the case of legends. A plague. The original
is noticeable, the plague ; a natural mode of
speech for one who well remembered it.

Ver. 18. — But tliat ye must turn. The
original has the imperfect, of an action not
completed, " and ye are turning." There is
no need to give the adversative sense to 1.
The ye also is emphatic. " Ye are turn-
ing against the Lord to-day, to-morrow ye
will involve the whole congregation in
calamity." That to-morrow he wUl he
wroth with the whole congregation of
IsraeL This passage also is quite con-
sistent with the circumstances and with
the position of the speaker. Not merely
anger but fear is visible throughout— fear of
His wrath who had manifested His power
BO signally of late. There was no longer
any temptation to rebel against Him. The
Israelites were no longer suffering the daily
pressure of comparative privation and dis-
tress, such as it was impossible to avoid in
the wilderness. While, on the contrary,
there was every reason to remember His
power Who had driven the heathen out
before them and planted them in. Who had
not failed to punish them when they deserved
it, and Who, by the fate of their enemies,
had made it clear that His hands were not
waxen short. Thus the heads of the tribes,
and Phinehas especially, were alarmed lest
■ Israel should forfeit the prosperity they at
present enjoyed, and exchange it for those
terrible woes that God had shown He could
inflict when His people rebelled against
Him.

Ver. 19. — If the land of your possession
be unclean. Bather, he defiled, either by
the idolatrous nations around, or by being
cut off from the worship of the true God at
Shiloh. The only satisfactory explanation
of this somewhat difficult passage which
has yet been given is that of Masius, who
explains it of a possible belief on the part
of the two and a half tribes, that they were
cut off by Jordan into another land, a land
which had no title to the promises and
privileges of Israel, no share in the worship
of the one true God at Shiloh. If they
entertained such an idea, then, however
nafouBded their conviction, it were better



far to abandon the land, how suited to
their circumstances soever it might be, and
come across the Jordan, and dwell in the
midst of their brethren, and under the protec.
tion of the tabernacle of the Lord. Beside.
That ia, separate from, suggesting the ilea
of an exclasion of those who committed
such an act from the worship of the Lord.

Ver. 20.— Did not Achan the son ol
Zerah. Here again the reference to the
past history of Israel is suited to the
speaker and the circumstances, ^ and this
appeal, therefore, strengthens our conviction
that in the history of Achan we have fact
and not fiction. The case of Achan is even
more in point than that of Peor. In hia
case the IsraeUtes had a clear proof that
"one man's sin," unless completely and
absolutely put away, brought God's dis-
pleasure on " all the congregation " (Num.
xvi. 22). The repulse at Ai, fresh as it
must have been in the memory of all, was
sufficient evidence of this. How much
more then would His displeasure fall upon
Israel, if they condoned this act (as it
seemed) of gross and open rebellion against
the Lord who had brought them out of
Egypt, and had put them in possession of
the land He had promised them ? Commit
a trespass (see note on ver. 16). In tha
accursed thing (see note on ch. vii. 1). And
that man perished not alone In his inlciuity.
Literally, and he, one man, did not expire in
his iniquity. The Vulgate has, " and he
was one man, and would that he had
perished alone in his iniquity." The sense
is the same as in our version. Achan did
■ not perish alone, for not only did he
involve his family in his ruin, but the loss
of life at the first assault of Ai lay also
at his door (see ch. vii. 5).

Ver. 21. — ^The thousands. See above,
ver. 14.

Ver. 22.-The Lord God of gods. The
double repetition of this adjuration is suited
to the greatness of the occasion. No words
can suffice to express the horror and
detestation of the two and a half tribes at
the sin of which they have been supposed
guilty. Nor does our version at all approach
the majesty of the original form of oath.
The Vulgate and Luther approach nearer to
it when they render the one, "fortissimus
Deus DominuB,"and the other, " der starka
Gott, der Herr." But no translation can do
justice to the vigour of the original. The
three names of God, El, Elohim, and
Jehovah, are each twice repeated in their
order. El representing the earliest Hebrew
idea of God, strength (as that of the Aryans
was splendour) comes first. Then Elohim,
with its pluralis excellentice, suited to a
nation whose theological horizon was e^.



820



THE BOOK OF JOSHUA.



[CH. XXU. 1—34.



pandiog, and suggesting the manifold ways
in which El the mighty one displayed His
greatness, as the source of all power, mental,
moral, and physical, in heaven and in earth.
Then came the name by which He had
revealed Himself to Moses, Jehovah, the
Self-existent One, the author of aU being,
He whose supreme prerogative it was to
have existed from all eternity, and from
whose will all things were derived. It was
impossible for any Israelite to have devised
a more awful formulary which to clear
themselves from the charge of rebellion
against God. The same striking phrase is
adopted by Asaph in the fiftieth Psalm,
when he desires to give especial emphasis
to the words of God which follow. Some of
the Babbis interpret Elohim here of augels,
and explain, "the God of angels." Dr.
Perowne,on Psa. 1. i., prefers theLXX. Gcos
0euiv. Lange, on this passage, translates
feebly, "God, God Jehovah," but he
abandons this in his commentary on Psa. 1.
for the interpretation given above. Ewald
prefers the LXX. rendering. Vaihinger
suggests, " the mighty God Jehovah." But
the majority of recent commentators pre-
fer the rendering given above, and it is
supported by Jewish authorities of credit
(of. Jer. xxxii. 14 ; Neh. ix. 32). He
knoweth. These words are in the strictest
Hebrew form of the present tense. It is
not merely implied that " God knows " as a
general fact, but He is called to witness in
the most emphatic manner. " He is at
this moment aware that we are speaking
the truth." Save us not tMa day. These
words are not parenthetical, as in our version,
but in their eagerness to clear themselves
(another fact of vivid narration not to be
lost sight of, as indicating that the informa-
tion came originally from ■ an eye-witness)
they change the construction. " El Elohim
Jehovah, El Elohim Jehovah, He is wit-
ness, and Israel shall know — it in rebellion,
and if in transgression against the Lord,
mayest Thou not save us this day— to build
an altar to us, to turn from after the Lord."
Tha whole sentence betokens the strong
agitation of those who uttered it — " ex vehe-
mentissima anirai perturbatione effundunt
iUi potiusquam pronunciant" (Masiua) — and
to whatever period we may attribute the
composition of the Book of Joshua, there
can be little doubt that he had access to
authentic documents, written by eye-wit-
nessos of the scenes that are described.
Eosenmiiller discusses another interpreta-
tion, which regards these words as an ad-
dress to Phinehas ; but while admitting that
it is a possible one, rejects it as less suitable
to the context. Besides, it may be remarked
chat "save iis"cau only be addressed to



God. To man, "spare ns" would havs
been said,

Ver. 23. — Let the Lord himself require It
Or, tlie Lord, He shall exact, i.e., the

penalty.

Ver. 24.— From fear of this thing. Thig
translation cannot be correct. Had the He-
brew original intended to convey this mean-
ing, we should have had n-{ij 13^n DJifip.
The Uteral rendering is, "from anxiety,
from a word." The word here translated
"anxiety" (LXX. iiXdBeia) is applied to the
sea, and is translated " sorrow " in Jer. xlix.
23. It is translated " heaviness " in Prov,
xii. 25. In Ezek. iv. 16 ; xii. 18, 19, it is
translated "care," "carefulness," and is
applied to eating food. It obviously re-
fers to agitation or anxiety of mind, and
the proper translation here is, "we did
it out of anxiety, for a cause." So Masiua
and BosenmuUer, who render the word
n^KT here by sollicitudo.

Ver. 24, 25. — What have you to do with
the Lord God of Israel? For the Lord
hath made Jordan a border. Literally,
Wliat to you and to Jelwvah the God of
Israel, since He hath given a border between
us and between you, sons of Reuben and sons
of Gad, even the Jordan. Thus the reason
for the erection of the altar was the very
converse of what it had been supposed to be.
So far from considering themselves as shut
out from the communion of Israel by the
natural boundary formed by Jordan, the
two and a half tribes were resolved that no
one else should ever think so. If the descend-
ants of the remainder of the Israelites
"should ever venture to assert anything of
the kind, there was the altai-, erected in a
conspicuous position on the west side of
Jordan, left as a perpetual memorial of the
great struggle in which Eeuben, Gad, and
the half tribe of Manasseh had taken part,
and wliich had resulted in the final occupa-
tion of the land of Canaan. Keil and
Delitzsch remark that there was some reason
for this anxiety. The promises made to
Abraham and his posterity related only to
the land of Canaan. For their own advan-
tage these tribes had chosen to remain in the
trans-Jordauicterritoryconquered by Muses.
It was quite possible that in future ages
they might be regarded as outside the
blessings and privileges of the Mosaic cove-
nant. For the present, at least, they
valued those blessings and privileges, and
desired to have some permanent memorial
of the fact that they had a right to share
tliem. From fearing. It may be worth
while to notice, as a sign of later, or at least
of different authorship, that the Pentatetioh
employs a different (the feminine) form oi
the infinitive for the form found here.



OH. xxii. 1 — 84.]



THE BOOK OP JOSHUA.



821



Ver. 26. — Let us now prepare to build us
an altar. Literally, let us make now to
build to us an altar. Burnt offering, nor
for sacriflce. In the " biirnt offering " the
■whole victim was consumed. In the
" sacrifice " part only was offered on the
altar. The rest was eaten by the priest or
the person who offered it.

Ver. 27.— But that It may he a witness.
Bather,/or this altar is a witness before Him,
Literally, ie/ore His face; in the tabernacle,
that is, where His special presence was eu-
shrined.

Ver. 28.— Behold the pattern. Bather,
Look at this facsimile. The Hebrew ia
even stronger than our version. The exist-
ence of an exact reproduction of the altar
in Shiloh, erected on Canaanitish ground
by the two and a half tribes before their
departure across Jordan, was an incontes-
tible proof of their original connection with
Israel. And the fact that they had erected
it, not on their own territory, but on that
of their brethren, was, though they do not
use the argument, proof positive that it was
not intended to be used in contravention of
the precepts of the law. The nature of the
facsimile is explained by Exod. xx. 24,
where the precise form of altar seems to
have been presented as a contrast to the
stone altara employed by the heathen.

Ver. 29. — God forbid. Literally, profane
or accursed to us be it from Him. So
Keilv Gesenius, and Knobel. That we
should rebel against the Lord. The embassy
had the effect not ouly of eliciting an ex-
planation, but of showing how earnest, at
that time at least, the tribes of Israel were
in the service of God. And we may learn
here, as Bobertson remarks of St. Paul's
frank and explicit vindications of himself,
the value of explanations. Many a mis-
understanding would be averted, many a
feeling of rankling displeasure, culminating
in an inexcusable explosion of anger, might
be avoided, nay, many an unjust suspicion
against a fellow Christian's honesty and
sincerity of purpose might be dispelled, if
men would but follow the example of the
ten tribes on this occasion, or lay to heart
the words of our Lord in St. Matt, xviii. 15,
" li thy brother shall trespass against thee,
go and tell him his fault between thee and
him alone ; if he shall hear thee, thou hast
gained thy brother."

Ver. 30.— It pleased them. The genuine-
ness of their zeal for God's service is shown
by their readiness to be appeased by a plain
explanation. Had they been actuated by
jealousy or party spirit, they would have
admitted no defence, or have endeavoured
out of the clearest exculpation to find some
new topic for complaint. So religious party

JOSHUA.



spirit has been wont to inflame men'i
minds in later times, so that they desired
rather victory over a supposed antagonist
than the discovery that no offence at all
had been committed. True religioxis zeal
is slow to anger, and easy to be appeased,
when it appears that no harm has been
intended. It might have been contended
in this case, if controversy rather than truth
had been the object, that the action bad a
dangerous tendency ; that though the altar
was not intended for sacrifice, it might bo
used for that purpose; that it was unwise to
put a temptation in the way of future ages
to substitute worship there for worship in
the tabernacle. Such arguments are not
unknown even to Christian zealots. Israel
was satisfied that no harm was intended.
It was not thought necessary to point out
possibilities which were not likely to be
realised.

Ver. 31. — Now ye have delivered the
children of Israel out of the hand of the
Lord. The word here rendered " now " is
rather then. But the Hebrew word, like
our own, is used as implying not only con-
secution of time, but consequence of action
(see Psa. xl. 8 ; Ixix. 5 ; Jer. xxii. 15). Thus
the meaning here is, " We see, then, that
instead of bringing upon us heavy chastise-
ment, as we had feared, ye have acted in a
way which secures us from the punishment
of which we were afraid.

Ver. 38. — Did not intend. Literally, did
not speak. That is, no one, after the ex-
planation, was found to support the pro-
posal which had previously been found to
be necessary.

Ver. 84.— Ed. This word is not in the
original. It is found in some late MSS.
and in the Syriac and Arabic versions, but
not in the LXX. or Chaldee. Even in the
MSS. which have it, the word is found
sometimes before and sometimes after the
Hebrew word signifying " altar." This
may either be because, once omitted, it was
conjecturally supplied, but it is more prob-
able that it was never there at all. The
passage may be rendered, "And the sons
of Beuben and the sons of Gad gave a name
to the altar, ' for it is a witness between
us.'" But it seems more likely that the
word "Ed," though not expressed, is in-
tended to be understood. The LXX. and
Valgate give incorrect renderings of the
passage. The Lord is God. Bather, as in
1 Kings xviii. 39, Jehovah is the God ;
that is, the one true God. Some MSS.
have interpolated Nlil here from the above
cited passage. Such altars, or mounds, of
witness seem not to have been unusual
among the Eastern nations (see Gen. xxxi.
47—52).



THE BOOK OF JOSHUA. [oh. xxn. 1—84.



HOMILETIOS.

Vers. 1 — 84. — JBeuhen and Gad and the Tudf -tribe o/Maaiaaseh at home. Tbres
points are eBpeciaUy noticeable in this chapter. First, the reward of those who
have laboured on behalf of their brethren ; next, the duty of claiming our privileges
as Christians when serered firom our brethren ; and lastly, the necessity of zeal for
the purity of reUgion.

I. Self-denial shall have its reward. Our Lord teUs us that he who gives
a cup of cold water to his brother shall not lose his reward. We find a similar
statement in Matt. x. 41. The reward includes this life as well as the next (Mark
X. 80). Joshua blessed the two tribes and a half, and sent thenoi to their inherit-
ance. So does Jesus say to those who have laboured in His cause, " Well done,
thou good and faithful servant, enter thou into the joy of the Lord." And as the
Eeubenites and their brethren were blessed with silver and gold and a multitude of
earthly possessions, so the Christian enjoys riches which are far above what earth
can give, even the riches of the glory of God's inheritance among the saints. If he
leaves home and friends for the work of the Gospel ; if he devotes himself to a long
and weary warfare against sin, the time will come when the true Joshua will
dismiss him to his inheritance, across the Jordan-stream of death.

II. We must not let isolation depeivb ns of the privileges of the
COVENANT. Many an Englishman is in the position of the two tribes and a half.
He emigrates to distant lands, and he often forgets to assert his oneness with those
whom he has left behind . So did the members of the Church of England neglect
in America to reproduce the organization of their native land. So continually do
men (a) cast off all religious profession whatever, or (6) neglect to keep up sufficient
connection with their brethren at home, and thus to keep up the solidarity and
mutual brotherhood of Christian churches. Of late this evil has been much
diminished. The " great altar to see to " is visible on all sides. Those who leave
us for the colonies, or for foreign lands, are not left without the ministrations of
their own nation and feith. Christians deprived of the superintendence of the
ministers of rehgion assemble for prayer and reading of the Scriptures. Thus a
witness is set up before God and man that they have both part and lot in the
Christian brotherhood. It is the one worship of the one God. There is no desire
to set up altar against altar, to break the bonds of Christian love and fellowship.
The new communion has its own laws and regulations, suited to its own peculiar
needs, for the gospel practically forbids us to set up one hard and fast rule for all
races and regions alike. But the one faith and the one Church exists throughout,
united, not in the unity of external rules and rites, and organization and tribunals,
but in the holy bond of truth and peace, of faith and charity.

III. We must be ZEALOUS FOB THE CAUSE OF TRUE BELisioN. Had the Jews
continued to display the same zeal for God which they showed in this instance,
they would have escaped the fall which afterwards befel them. So, had Christians
maintained their first zeal and purity and mutual love, the Christian Church
■would have been spared much of its sad history, and so large a portion of the world
would not have remained heathen. But as the Jews allowed mixed marriages and
intercourse with heathen tribes to undermine their attachment to God and His
law, so has familiarity with the world deadened the zeal for true religion among
Christians. The zeal which was displayed in early Christian times concerned faith
more than morals. The zeal shown now concerns morals rather than faith. But
a true Christian spirit will care for both. Faith is the salt that keeps practice
from corruption, and a carelessness or tendency to compromise in matters affecting
the fundamental principles of Christian truth or worship is as sinful as would
have been the conduct of the Israelites had they suffered the erection of the altar
of witness to pass without explanation. Such a spirit of compromise is the dangez
of our own day. It is our duty (a) to decide for ourselves what a/re the essentials
of Christianity, and {b) when we have decided it, to declare perpetual war against
Uios« who would deny them. While we are careful not to insist upon anything ai



OH. xxn, 1—84.] THE BOOK OF JOSHUA. 828

essential which is not " contained in Scripture, or may be proved thereby," w«
must make the maintenance of the recognised truths of Christianity a sine qua non.
The spirit abroad which maintains that no teacher should be removed from his
post for any consideration whatsoever, is as opposed to truth as that which would
remove him without fi9.ir trial or sufficient cause. The task of deciding on the
limits of religious freedom is a difficult one, and demands exceptional gifts. But
the denial that there aire such limits is contrary to the main principles of law and
gospel aUke.

IV. We aeb bound to eesteain zeal within pbopbb bounds. The Israelites
did not proceed to action without due inquiry. They sent a deputation to their
brethren to invite them to clear themselves if they could. And the result was an
honourable acquittal, though there was a strong prima facie case against them.
Would that all religious investigations had been as fair 1 For though the duty of
maintaining the purity of the Christian faith is most undeniable, yet the converse
is equally true, that we must be sure that it is the Christian faith that is at stake.
The practice on the part of the mediseval Church authorities, of treating suspicion
of heresy as a crime, was a violation of the commonest laws of justice. The
practice of holding a teacher responsible for every inference which could be drawn
by a mereUess logic from his theses, although these conclusions are energetically
repudiated by himself, was not the offspring of zeal for the truth, but of prejudice
and passion. The custom of declaring views heretical which, though opposed to
the voice of authority and the force of numbers, did not touch the essentials of the
faith, was an outrage against Christian liberty, and a violation of the great principle
laid down in this chapter, of subordinating the letter to the spirit. For the
Beubenites and their brethren had unquestionably broken the letter of the law.
The erecting of such an altar as they had erected was strictly forbidden. And yet
by that very violation they had been proving their sincere adhesion to the spirit of
the violated law. And their defence was not only accepted, but joyously and
thankfully accepted (ver. 31). If in those days the spirit was set above the letter,
how much more in our own. Let us take heed then that we do not, misled by
blind party zeal, fall upon those who are our aUies in the great and holy work.
Let us not exact too steict a conformity with the letter of Holy Scripture, but let
us seek hearts purified by love to God to discern its real spirit. It is no easy task,
no doubt, but it may be performed through prayer and love to God and man.
With hearts so fiUed with the sacred fire, it may well be that we shaU. often gather
together to ShUoh ready and bm-ning for the conflict, yet be appeased when we
learn what seemed a foul wrong to God was inspired by the deepest devotion to
His cause, and may say with Phinehas, whose zeal for the truth cannot be disputed,
" This day we perceive that the Lord is among us, because ye have not committed
this trespass against the Lord."

V. Airways believe the best. " Charity hopeth all things," says the apostle.
The Lord Himself bade us always, when we had a cause of complaint against our
brother, to begin by talking the matter over with Him. So also says the wise
man in the Apocrypha, in words which well deserve to be remembered. " Admonish
a friend, it may be he hath not done it, and if he have done it, that he do it no
more. Admonish thy friend, it may be he hath not said it, and if he have, that he
speak it not again. Admonish a friend, for many times it is a slander, and beHeve
not every tale." It is never safe to neglect this counsel. The case may look very
bad against your_ friend, but so it did against the two tribes and a haJf. In fact, in
their case, nothing could be worse. They were caught im flagrante delicto.
There was the altar, erected in a most conspicuous situation — a great altar to be
teen. The Israehtes might have argued that it was useless to ask explanations
when they had the fact before their eyes. But they were not so rash. And the
result showed that they would have been blameable indeed if they had been so
precipitate. How many a friendship has been severed, how many a life-long
estrangement has been caused, how much misery has been brought about, by the
want of courage to go frankly to a fiiend and ask for an explanation of what seems
indefensible. You may have yotu- testimony from unimpeachable witnesses, oi



824 THE BOOK OF JOSHUA. [oh. xmr. 1—34



witnesses yon believe to be nnimpeacliable, and if in truth they are not slanderers,
or mischief makers, they may yet not be in possession of certain material facts
■which give the case an altogether different aspect. At least the mle is clear — never
condemn any one unheard. Wounded feeling or offended pride may make ns
averse to seek the explanation ; the effort may be painful, almost intolerable, yet
justice demands that it should be made. And you may afterwards have reason to
" bless God " that you did not " go up against your brother to battle." Either he
may repent, and then "thou hast gained thy brother," or he may never have
offended, and then the bonds of Christian Mendship wiU never be relaxed at aJLL



HOMILIES BY VAEIOUS AUTHORS.

Ver. 80. — A misv/nder standing. Earely do we find such an instance of miscon-
ception as is here recounted. The two and a half tribes, whose territory lay to the
west of Jordan, had acted with the highest honoiu:. During the five or six years
occupied in the conquest of their land, they had voluntarily accepted the task of
fighting — and fighting in the van in aU the battles of IsraeL When they leave a
completed task behind them, they return laden with spoil : rich in the gratitude of
their brethren ; solemnly blessed by Joshua. And yet within a few weeks, all their
brethren — ^including those of their own tribes who had settled to the west of Jordan
— are up in arms, ready to exterminate them. All this change is brought about by
one of the most deplorable things in life — ^A misundeestanddjq. Such things
happen still, and it may illustrate and remove some of them if we observe the
comrse of this. In the misunderstanding before us, we observe, first —

I. The innocent cause. The two and a half tribes were, as they explain,
Bolicitous to keep in unity with IsraeL The possibihty of their being treated as
outsiders weighed on them. The erection of an altar precisely the same in pattern
with that in the tabernacle struck them as a means of embodying a testimony
that they had enjoyed the same access to the sanctuary with their brethren on the
west of Jordan. By weighty precepts, Moses had forbidden any multipUcation of
altars. One God, one worship, one people, was to be the mle : Levites in every tribe,
sacrifice only in the central consecrated spot. They were ahve to the sin of schism,
and the wickedness of seceding fi:om their people, and the thought of it does not
enter their minds. They would have acted more wisely if they had consulted the
priests first, explaining their desire and purpose. But their very innocence makes
them neglect to take precautions against being misunderstood. So far flrom
desiring to break, they are solicitous to keep the unity of Israel. And the altar
which their brethren think will destroy was erected by them to keep it. Tet they
are misunderstood. So shall we be, and so will others be by us. There is hardly a
word we can speak but can carry two meanings, or an act we can do but can carry
two aspects. And if we attempt by the avoidance of speech or action to escape
misunderstanding the endeavour will be in vain. At the same time, the fact that
a large proportion — say 76 per cent. — of misunderstandings have an innocent
cause should set us on our guard against the next thing we observe here, viz. —

II. A HASTY CONSTEUCTION PUT UPON IT. How discreditable was this haste to
assume that the worst explanation was the truest ! If any part of the community
had proved their patriotism, brotherliness, their honour, and their faith, it was these
miselfish warriors who had laboured so generously for the general well-being. But
haste always leaves its fair judgment at home. It argues fi-om its fears, its temper,
its prejudice, its suspicions. Judgment being a slow-moving thing, that does not
come to conclusions quick enough for its purpose. And so here, instantly there is
put upon this act the construction that it evinces a purpose of secession, first, from
the religion, and, next, fi-om the people of Israel. Israel is not the only community
disposed to hasty and harsh constructions. There is in all of us a vUb readiness to
believe the worst of men ; a certain disposition to chuckle over the discovery of
what seems a fault; an evil suspicion, arrogating to itself peculiar vrisdom, suggests
ftlways that the worst view miost be true. Observe here, the hasty construction \a



ofl. txa. 1— 84.J THE BOOK OF JOSHUA. 8M

not only mistaken but ntterly mistaken. It has concluded the very opposite of
the truth. And our hasty constructions are not more accurate. Let us be on our
guard. The truth may be the very opposite of what on the first blush it appears to
be. What seems presumptuous and unholy may spring from the deepest devont-
ness. Observe thirdly —

III. A SENSIBLE iNQUiET. Phinehas, the high priest, and the ten princes of the
nine and a half tribes are sent first of all to ask, " What trespass is this that ye have
committed ? " Some cooler heads and calmer hearts have suggested that before
civil war be entered on there should be, at least, an explanation sought. None
can cavil at a suggestion so prudent and pertiaent. The best men for such a task
are sent, not with weapons of war, but with words of peace — words still hasty and
suspicious, but yet spoken in love and with a desire for the right. Then, for the
first time, the two and a half tribes learn the evil construction which might be put
on their deed. And the surprise with which they receive the accusation, convince
all of their innocence of the things of which they were accused. The simple inquiry
■was all that was necessary to get the most perfect satisfaction. How many mis-
understandings would at once be lolled if men had just the courage to ask a
question I But the suspicion which hastily concludes the worst is generally wedded
to the cowardice which dare not ask if its conclusions are right, and so misunder-
standings endure. If in a fi-iend there is that which pains you, ask himself why he
does it. Let the inquiry be a respectful one. Let the priestly and princely pa/rt of
yovr nature maTte it. Let it be direct and fuU. Let no fear of being suspected to
be yourself uncharitable permit you to be uncharitable. " If thy brother sin
against thee, go and teU hmi his fatdt, between thee and him alone." If there was
more of the manliness that would expostulate, there would be more of the saintliness
that could forgive. Lastly, observe that the inquiry leads to —

IV. A HAPPY TERMINATION. There was every probabihty of the misunderstanding
having a most disastrous termination. What would have been the issue of such a
■war ? To crush a third part of Israel, and that the most warKke portion, would
probably have cost the lives of another third ; and the remnant surviving would
at once have been at the mercy of the remnants of the Canaanite still sur-
■viving, and able to form strong alliances with Phoenician and Philistine neigh-
bours. The extinction of Israel neither more nor less trembled on the verge of
probaiiliiy through this misunderstanding. Blessed are the peacemakers. The
inquiry elicits the most satisfactory facts. The momentary doubt of their
brethren's good faith passes away. Their confidence in their faith and patriotism
is resumed ; for many, many centuries mutual suspicion is destroyed, and Israel on
both sides of Jordan is an undivided people. A little lAisdom, a little delay in
speech or action until knowledge becomes certainty, a brotherly approach to those
who have offended us, might bring our most hopeless misimderstandmgs to the same
satisfactory end. — Q.

Vers. 1 — L— Service and rewa/rd. I. The Sek^tioe. This is characterised by
the following points of merit : 1. Obedience to discipline. The two tribes and the
half tribe are commended for obedience to their supreme commanders. Soldiers,
servants, employes, aU persons under authority, should recognise the duty of loyal
obedience from the heart, and perform it (a) conscientiously — " not ■with eye-service
as men-pleasers ; " (5) diligently — working as laboriously as if for their o-wn pleasure ;
and (c) cheerfully. 2. Brotherly-kindness. These tribes had not left their brethren.
They had been foremost in conquering Canaan for them. Humanity, patriotism,
and Christianity should lead us to labour unselfishly for the welfare of the world,
our country, and fellow Christians. 8. Faithfulness to Ood. These tribes had
" kept the charge of the commandment of the Lord their God." We have a charge
from God to keep. Our duty is not confined to our relations ■with men ; we have
duties to God (MaL i. 6). Even our duties to men should be discharged with a
supreme regard to the ■mil of God (Col. iii. 22), and our religious devotion should
guide and inspire us in human duties.

n, The Eewaed. This is marked by the following features : 1. It it delayed tiH



826 THE BOOK OF JOSHUA. [oh. xxil 1—84.

the service is complete. The Eeubenites and their associates were the earliest
tribes to have an inheritance apportioned to them; but they were the latest to
enter into possession of it. Thus the first are last. We must not expect the
rewards of faithfulness before our work is complete. It is wrong to desire to hasten
to our heavenly reward at the neglect of earthly duty. The "rest which
remaineth " is secure, though the enjoyment of it is delayed. The force of God's
promises is not weakened by time. 2. It is so appointed as to satisfy the desires
of those who receive it. The two tribes and the half tribe preferred to settle on the
east of Jordan, and they were permitted to do so. As they chose for themselves
they must take the consequences, whether for good or for ill. God allows us much
Uberty in shaping our own destinies. When He does not give us what we desire,
the refusal is not arbitrary but merciful. In the end He will give us our heart's
desire — either the thing we desire now, or something else to which He will incline
our hearts, so that we shall desire that. As there are varieties of dispositions
among Christians, so there will be differences in the heavenly reward. 3. It takes
the form of rest and peaceful occupation. The army is disbanded. Warfare was a
temporary necessity ; it was not to be regarded as a constant occupation. Home-
life is most natural and most blessed by God. The spiritual warfare of Christians
is only temporary. It will be followed by (a) rest, (6) reunion, (c) the home-life of
heaven.— W. F. A.

Ver. 6. — Loyalty to God in separation from the GhtMrch. L The ciECUMSTAifOES
OF TRIAL. 1. Isolation. The Eeubenites and their associates had chosen an
inheritance which would separate them from their brethren. There was danger
lest the separation should injure their fldeUty to God. The influence of Christian
example and the sympathy of the Church are great aids to devotion. When these
are lost special care is needed to prevent devotion from growing cold. This applies
{a) to those who go from their homes to business occupations which separate them
from old religious associations, (6) to those who leave their country for the colonies.
&c. 2. Evil burroundings. These tribes were about to settle amongst a heathen
population. In addition to the loss of the good example of their brethren's
devotion, they would become liable to the injurious influence of bad associates. If
duty calls us to Kve amongst those whose Hves are unchristian we need to be watch-
ful against the fatal influence of their example. Lot was injured by living in Sodom.
3. The cost of religious ordinances. Though these tribes estabUshed worship
for themselves, they must have missed the good of the tabernacle services. They
who Uve beyond the reach of such rehgious ordinances as they have found profitable
in the past — as in lonely country places, or the backwoods of colonies — should be
on their guard against the spiritual deadness which may result unless they are
assiduous in private devotion, The proximity of a suitable place of worship should
be a first consideration in the choice of an abode. Convenience, society, health,
beauty of situation are too often considered to the neglect of this important requisite.
Heads of famiUes should know how much this affects the character and destinies of
their children.

I. The doty of loyalty. The duty is illustrated in various phrases that it may
he made clear and be well insisted on. This is no small matter. It should engage
our chief attention. Several points are here included, viz., 1. Devotion of heart.
This is the root of true loyalty. It springs {a) from personal love to God, and cleav-
ing to Him ; (6) from the service of inward desire— serving with the heart ; (c) from
thoroughness— eerviag with the whole heart. 2. Obedience in Kfe. This is " to
walk in all His ways."" True loyalty does not confine itself to the secret desires of
the heart. It c6mes out in the life. There it is not only seen in definite acts but
in the general course of conduct. We are not to be faithful only in supreme moments,
but to walk obediently — to continue a constant course of obedience. 3. Diligence
in fulfilling Ood's commcmds. (a) These tribes were to take heed. We need
thought to consider what is God's wiU, and care to see that we are doing it. (6)
They were to keejp Ood's commandments. The details of duty must be observed
after we have onltivated the general spirit of devotion. — W. F. A.



CH. xxn. 1—84.] THE BOOK OF JOSHUA. 327

Vers. 1 — 9. — We have seen the Eeuhenites and Gadites generonsly taking their
part in the war for the conquest of Canaan, though they had abeady come into
possession themselves of their assigned share on the other side of Jordan. In this
way the soUdarity of the nation was vindicated. Joshua now sends back these
soldiers of their country to their own inheritance, and we see in the verses before us
the reward of their fidelity to duty.

I. Theie first recompense is a. MATERIA!. ONE. They cany away a goodly share
of the booty which accrued to Israel from its successful warfare. The man of
God cannot always count upon this temporal reward. It may never be his. And
yet it is certain that, as a general rule even in this life, the folfilment of duty is a
condition of prosperity. Evil gives only deceptive and evanescent joys ; it is
opposed to the Divine law, which must in the end prevail. It entails also terrible
consequences. Is not all sensual indulgence a deadly and ruinous thing ? Does
not hatred kindle with its accursed torch fire and war, only to be quenched with
blood ? Does not the wicked dig the pit into which he himself falls (Psa. vii. 15).
Punishment may tarry. Penalty is slow-footed, as Homer says, but it is guided by
the unerring hand of Divine justice. - The people who fear God and work righteous-
ness are in the end always the blessed people, and the Psalmist rightly pronounces
them happy.

II. The highest recompense is not however this material prosperity, bdt the ap-
proval OF GOD. " Ye have kept," says Joshua to the Eeubenites and Gadites, " all
that Moses the servant of the Lord commanded you " (ver. 2). There can be no
purer joy than to hear words like these from the Master's lips : " "Well done, good
and faithful servant, &c." (Matt. xxv. 21). They waken in the depths of our hearts
the glad echo of an approving conscience. This is not the proud satisfaction of
self-righteousness ; it is the joy of having rejoiced the heart of God ; of having done
something for the Saviour ; of having in some measure responded to the love fireely
received.

III. Obedience leads to obedience; good begets good. "The path of
the just is as the shining light, shining more and more." So Joshua, in sending
back these valiant soldiers of their country, gives them in parting some holy
admonitions. We see that he judges them worthy to apprehend the law of God in
its " true breadth and length," in the spirit and not in the letter. It is to be noted
that he sums up the whole in that commandment which is ever new, and never
to be abrogated, that which St. John calls the old and the new coromandment
(1 John ii. 7) : " Love the Lord your God, and walk in all his ways ; keep his com-
mandments, and cleave unto him and serve him with all your heart, and with all
your soul " (ver. 5). Thus does each step or word in the Divine life prepare the
way for a yet farther advance, and so we go fi:om strength to strength, from grace
to grace.^E. de P.

Vers. 9 — ^21. The feeling excited in the people of Israel by the news that the
Beubenites and Gadites had set up an altar beyond Jordan is a proof that the
religious condition of the nation after the great benefits received by it was very
healthy, while the act of the Beubenites and Gadites is no less an evidence of their
gratitude to God. The indignation of the ten tribes is aroused by their impression
that the Beubenites and Gadites have conmiitted an act of rebellion against the
holy law of God, in seeking to offer sacrifices on any other than the national altar.
They are filled with holy zeal forthe name of God and jealousy for His glory. " Ye
have turned away this day from following the Lord," say their messengers to the
two tribes supposed to be thus rebellious. If we inquire mto the causes of so keen
a spiritual hfe in this people usually so stiffuecked and prone to estrangement from
God, we find that it can be accounted for in two ways.

I. Israel has vtvidlt in remembkanck the consequences of any violatiom
OF THE LAW OF GoD. Did not Achan the son of Zerah commit a trespass in the
accursed thing, and was not the anger of the Lord kindled against all Israel ? It
was not Achan alone who perished because of his sin ; the whole congregation
suffered ou his acooont (ver. 20). In this holy fear we see the vindioation of the



128 THE BOOK OP JOSHUA. [oh. xxn, 1— 8i

atem judgment of God. " 'Whom he loveth he chasteneth, that they may be made
partakers of his holiness."

II. The second explanation of this heaithy moral condition is gratitudb
FOB BLESSINGS RECEIVED in the Signal victory over the Canaauites, which the
people felt they could never have achieved in their own unaided strength. Thus
we need the discipline both of adversity and of prosperity in our spiritual education.
Prosperity alone does but harden ; adversity unreheved would sink the soul iir
despair. God knows our proneness to wander, hence He chastises us to put us
in mind of our sins and of His holiness. But He remembers that we are but dust.
Hence He blends joy with sorrow in our changefiil lives, and the two together work
out in us the gracious purposes of eternal love. — E. de P.

Ver. 21 — 84. The Beubenites and Gadites easily vindicate their oondnot. They
have had no intention of setting up a rival altar, for they do not mean to offer
any sacrifices except in the place appointed by God. Their altar is to be simply
a . memorial. They have built it under a sort of apprehension that possibly,
in times to come, their children might be led, in ungrateful forgetfulness of the
past, to forsake the Lord and His service. The Beubenites and Gadites teach us a
wholesome lesson. It is incumbent on ns to strive, as they did, to keep aHve the
memory of the great things which God has done for us, that we may not fall under
the reproach addressed by Christ to His disciples: "How is it that ye do not
remember? " (Mark viii. 18). Christ knows how prone we are to forgetftilness. He
has therefore given us two great aids to memory — Holy Scripture and the sacra-
ments. Nothing can ever take the place of the Scriptures. These alone give us
the full story of redemption. But it was needful that that story should be brought
before us also in a sjmboUc form, which should appeal vividly to the heart. Bap-
tism and the Lord's Supper supply this necessity for theChurch. " As often as ye
eat this bread and drink this wine, ye do show the Lord's death tiU he come," says
the Master (1 Cor, xL 26). The bread which we break is the communion of the
body of Christ, broken for our sins. The cup which we bless is the communion of
His blood, shed for our offences. Thus does the Lord's Supper recall to us the
sacrifice of Calvary, as the altar of the Beubenites and Gadites brought to their
remembrance the tabernacle sacrifices. But they had not, and we have not, to
offer for ourselves upon this altar of remembrance, for there can be no other sacri-
fice than that offered once for all upon the cross. The Mass, by its pretension to be
a real sacrifice, behes the true meaning of the Eucharist. The church which cele-
brates it commits exactly the error into which the tribes beyond Jordan would have
fallen, if they had presumed to offer upon their altar sacrifices which could be
legitimately presented only upon the one altar of the nation. Let us be on our
guard against materialising the sacraments, and so offering to God a worship which
must be abhorrent to Him, since it seeks acceptance in virtue of another than the
one ef&cient and perfect sacrifice. — B. de P.

Vers. 10 — 34. Mismiderstamdings among good people. Bitter contention often
arises from simple misunderstanding. The Israelites were on the verge of a civil
war as a result of a simple mistake of judgment. Much unhappiness might be
avoided if the lessons of this incident were well considered by Christian people.

I. Consider the incident in relation to the trans-Jordanic tribes. They
erected an altar of witness which was supposed by their brethren to be an altar of
sacrifice, a rival to the altar at Shiloh, a mark of national secession and religious
schism. (1) We should be careful to avoid the appeanrance of evil. These tribes
had voluntarily chosen a position of isolation. They were now acting in a way
which exposed their conduct to suspicion. It is our duty to prevent the misinter-
pretation of our conduct when possible (a) lest quarrels be engendered ; (6) lest the
name of God be dishonoured ; (c) lest the weak be hindered. (2) We must expect
sometimes to be misunderstood. There are persons who are always ready to give
an evil interpretation to ambiguous actions. We must not refrain fi:om doing right
for fear of being misjudged. False judgment is a trial to be endured with patience



oa. xxn. 1—84] THE BOOK OP JOSSUA. 329

and accepted as a means of discipKne to humble us and drive us to the sympathy
of God (1 Cor. iv. 3). (8) A refuge from the misunderstanding of men may be
found in the knowledge and sympathy of Qod. The guspected tribes appeal to the
" Lord God of gods," who knows everything. When men misjurlge, God sees the truth.
It is better to be blamed by all the world and approved by God, than to win the
world's approval at the expense of God's disapproval. (4) We should explain our
conduct when it is questioned by those in whose good opinion we are interested.
The trans- Jordanio tribes made a full explanation of their motives in building tlie
altar. The pride which disdains an explanation is (a) foolish, for it injures our-
selves ; (6) unjust, for it allows the world to suffer for a false impression ; and (c) un-
generous, since our brethren have a right to expect us to justijfy our conduct when
this is possible.

II. CONSIDBE THE INCIDENT IN RELATION TO THE TEN TRIBES. These tribeS

were hasty in judgment, but wise in conduct. (1) Zeal for God's honour is always
commendable. Phinehas and his friends feared dishonour to the name of God. It
is weU to be jealous for God's truth rather than for our private interest. (2) We
should he cautious of passing an adverse judgment on others. Phiuehas was too
hasty. Many are too ready to form an unfavourable opinion of the conduct of others.
Charity should incline us to view this in the beat light (1 Cor. xiii. 7). (3) Con-
tentions often spring from mistahes. It is so in the wars of nations, in ecclesiastical
differences, in personal quarrels. (4) It is our duty to inquire well into the
grovmds of a quarrel before taking an active part on either side. The Israehtes
sent a deputation to their brethren. It is unjust to decide and act on the uncertain
information of mere rumours. Before saying anything iU of a person we should
endeavour to see the accused himself, and hear his explanation. (5) We should
frtmkly recognise our errors of judgment. The Israelites admitted their mistake.
It is mean and unchristian to hold to a mistaken judgment from feelings of pride.
The Christian should always work for peace (Matt. v. 9). — "W. F. A.

Vers. 26 — 28. — The altar of witness. I. The objects aimed AT. The Israelites
were proved to have been in error when they assumed that the erection of the
altar was a sign of religious schism and tribal secession. On the contrary,
it was intended to prevent those very evils. (1) It was erected to preserve the
unity of the nation. National unity is always a desirable end of patriotic efforts.
It secures strength, mutual help, brotherly sympathy, and the means of progress.
Christians should aim at restoring the unity of the Church ; or, where this is
not possible, at preventing further divisions. While the external unity of the
Church is broken, oneness of spirit and oneness of aim should be bonds of
common sympathy between Christians. It would be well if Christians could
make it evident that their points of difference are far less important than that
common groimd of essential faith on which all are united. Less emphasis would
then be given to the internal controversies of the Church, and more weight to
the great conflict with sin and unbelief and the great mission to evangehse the
world. (2) The altar was erected to maintain the religious faith ot the trans-
Jordanio liribes. BeUgion is more important to a people than fertile lands and
well-b\iilt cities. We make a poor exchange when we sacrifice privileges ■ of
worship for worldly convenience. Separation from the ordinances of religion
endangers the faith of religion. It should be our first duty to see that reUgious
wants are supplied (a) for ourselves, (6) for our families, (c) for destitute places,
such as newly built suburbs of great towns, outlying hamlets, the colonies, &c.

II. The danoeb feared. The men who built the altar of wdtness thought that
the national unity and religious faith were endangered. (1) Separation from the
other tribes was a source of danger. It is difficult to be faithful when we stand
alone. (2) Time would increase the danger. These men built the altar vrith a
view to the future. The severest test of faithfulness is the trial of endurance.
Christians rarely forsake Christ suddenly. Early impressions Unger for a time and
fade gradually ; but they will fade unless they are renewed. We cannot maintain
the faith of a life on the lessons of youth. For constant faith we need constant
" means ef grace." (3) New generations would be less fortified against tha



030 THE BOOK OP JOSHUA. [ch. xxii. 1—04.



danger. The altar wag built chiefly for the sake of the children of the future. The
Church can only- be maintained by bringing the children into the places of the
elders as these pass away. Children do not become Christians instinctively, or by
the influence of the mere atmosphere of religion about them ; they must be taught
and trained ; therefore the education of the young should be a primary object ol
Christian work.

III. The means employed. An altar of witness was erected. This was not for
sacrifice and yorship, to rival that of the tabernacle, like the altars attached to the
calves at Bethel and Dan (1 Kings xii. 28, 29). (1) It was aimpVy a visible symbol,
(a) It was a aymhoh-ixMih is often suggested most clearly by parables and illustra-
tions. (5) It was visible. Truth should be made clear and striking, (c) It was
substantial. Truth should be estabhshed by soUd evidence, not melted down into
vapid sentiments, (d) It was endmrmg. We should not be satisfied with super-
ficial impressions, but aim at establishing an enduring faith. (2) The Christicm
has altofs of witness, e.g., (a) the Bible preserved to us through the dark ages,
(6) the institutions of the Church, baptism, the Lord's supper, and public worship ;
(c) inwardly to the Christian, the indweUing Christ who is first our altar of sacrifice
and then our altar of vritness, bearing testimony to the fact that we are His, and
one with his true Church by the Spirit He gives to us, and the fruits of this Spirit
in our lives (Eom. viii. 9).— W. F. A.

Vers. 26, 27. — A misunderstamding removed. Having completed their engage-
ment, the auxiliaries of Reuben, Gad, and half Manasseh were dismissed by Joshua
in peace and honour to their homes, now at length to settle down to the enjoyment
of their possessions on the east of the Jordan. Joshua had strictly charged them
" to love the Lord," and "to walk in all his ways," and to share with their brethren
the spoils acquired in war. One of their first acts on arriving in Gilead was to
erect an altar, conspicuous by size and position, and framed after the pattern of
the altar before the tabernacle.

I. The intention of the eastern tribes. (1) To home a memorial of their vnity
in religious faith with their brethren across the river. Eehgious ceremonies were
inseparably interwoven with the national Ufe, so that to be refused a right to par-
ticipate in the former would imply a denial of their claim to kinship. The Jordan
might hereafter be regarded as a natural barrier of exclusion from the privileges of
dwellers in the land of promise. When the Btiubenites, &e., had proffered their
request to be permitted to dwell on the east of the river, they had not perceived
tills possible difficulty so clearly, but now, after having trodden the promised land,
and viewed the habitations of their brethren, they were seized with anxiety lest in
after years they might be regarded as " ahens from the commonwealth of Israel."
Their conduct exhibits a respect for God. Their chief care was not for horses or
trophies of war, but for the preservation of a common interest in the worship of the
true God, and all the advantages thereby secured. They feared the selfislmess of
the human heart. Men so often like to reserve to themselves pecuhar honours and
privileges, to be esteemed the only true people of the covenant. Brotherly love
and sympathy are forgotten in the attempt to surround ourselves with walls of
exclusiveness. And against this narrowing of the national bounds the altar was to
be a continual guard, a silent yet eloquent and forcible " witness " to the_ brother-
hood of all the tribes. And amongst Christians of to-day some such voice is not
unneeded to remind us of our common interest in the " altar" (Heb. xui. 10), the
cross of Christ, whereby we are made " one body." (2) To prevent a la^se into
idolatry on the part of their descendants. The altar would be a standing reminder
of the commandment of God, which forbade the rearing of strange altars for sacri-
fice. These easterns showed a right sense of the importance of preserving the
religion of their fathers, and of handing it down uncorrupted to remotest ages.
If the knowledge of the true God vanished, then farewell to all prosperity ! What
a hint to parents I Men toil to gather wealth for their heirs, to found an estate, to
perpetuate the family name ; it is more important to perpetuate piety, to train up
the children in the nurture and admonition of the Lord. " The fear of the Lord*



CH. xxiL 1—84.] THE BOOK OF JOSHUA. 331



(ver. 25) is tlie choicest treasure wMch children can inherit, and apart from it
riches do not prove a blessing. BeUgion and prosperity eventually go hand in
hand. Statesmen, if wise, wUl seek to establish the throne in righteousness.
Their aim will be that rehgion shall flourish in the land, not necessarily by direct
enactments, but by removal of all restrictions to its progress. It is not our com-
merce, our arts, our resources for war that constitute our strength or hope for the
future, but love to God, the prevalence of honesty and integrity, peace and truth.
We need not so much ascendancy over other nations as over ourselves, our own
passions and prejudices, vices and errors. (8) To secure the offervngs of the proper
sacrifices at the tabernacle. Not only rights were remembered, but consequent
duties. The altar would ever call these tribes to attend to the performance of their
obUgations, not to neglect "the service of the Lord." Some of the people would
have a long distance to travel, and might grow weary of providing for ceremonies
celebrated at such a distance from their dwellings. What shall be the "witness"'
in each household, testifying to the duty incumbent upon its members to contribute
of their substance to the support of God's cause ? The Bible ? The missionary
box ? And in our churches the first day of the week is a mute appeal, seconded
by the gathering now and again aroimd the table of the Lord.

II. The indignation of the western tribes. (1) Exhibited in a striking manner
their jealousy for the Lord God. Though these brethren had been lately endan-
gering their lives and strength on their behalf, marching at their head and
capturing their places of abode, nevertheless this kindness does not excuse an after
fault. Our gratitude must not blind us to derelictions on the part of our friends.
It were mistaken love that hesitated to reprove error. Nor did the westerns delay,
they were prompt in action to prepare to root out evil. They knew the value of
early attention to it. A little water quenches a fire which, if allowed time to
spread, will surpass the power of a flood to extinguish. Let us not say of any sin,
" Is it not a Uttle one ? " Attack the disease at its commencement or it wiU defy
all treatment 1 Better lose a limb than the whole body. (2) Manifested the
abiding impression produced by past events. Peor and its dreadful plague, Achan
with the loss in battle and dire retribution exacted fi'om the offender and his family,
had written in letters of fire and blood the wrath of God against iniquity. The
lessons were remembered. Punishment graves the commandment deep within
the conscience. Well for us if the past is not forgotten, its events recorded not on
the sands but on the rocks. The reasoning of the IsraeUtes was clear. If two
and a half tribes transgressed, surely it was to be feared that God would chastise
the entire nation ; perhaps blot it out from tmder heaven, since he had in previous
days manifested such severe displeasure at the defection of a few of the people.
We cannot allow our brother to persevere in sin and ourselves remain unharmed.
The contagion spreads. "Am I my brother's keeper?" is a foolish inquiry and a
groundless plea. (3) Bested on a misv/nderstamding. And so does much of the
strife which prevails. It is frequently impossible for men to know all the reasons
by which others are actuated, and a partial view is often unjust. We do not advo-
cate false leniency, or a total suspension of judgment. In the sermon wherein our
Lord gave the warning, " Judge not that ye be not judged," He also declared, " 6y
their fruits_ ye shall Imow them." We are apt to be hasty in drawing our conclu-
sions, and it is probable that concerning a brother's behaviom* we are especially
quick in rushing to an adverse judgment. If acquainted with all the circumstances
we might praise where now we blame. Let us try to avoid putting imcharitable
constructions upon each other's acts. Appearances deceive. In heaven the
harmony of love will be perfect, for we shall know even as also we are known.
No veil of flesh shall intercept the vision of the spirit. Every signal flashed is
clearly deciphered in the pure Hght of the presence of God ; there is no cloud, no
haze, to mar the reflection of His glory.

III. The misdndeestanding removed. (1) The right method was pursued
hy the complainamts. Before proceeding to the arbitrament of the sword they
resolved to send an influential deputation to remonstrate, and to seek to dissuade
ti-MiJr brethren from the indulgence of idolatrous practices. They manifested theii



fiaa THK boos: of Joshua. tea. xxn, i— S4.

Binoerity and aflfection by offering to provide settlements within the land of Pales-
tine, if the eastern tribes were now repenting of having chosen an unclean
possession (ver. 19). Such is the method of dealing with brethren whom we beheve
to be sinning against God. Inquire and expostulate! "If thy brother shall
trespass against thee, go and tell him his fault ; if he shall hear thee, thou hast
gained thy brother." Keformation is better than eiconamunioation. Wisdom and
affectionconour in urging the adoption of such a course. (2) The a^p a/rent offenders
displayed similcur reasonableness of spirit. They willingly explained what thej
had done ; did not stand sullenly upon their rights, refusing to render reasons for
their action. They did not ask what business their brethren had to interfere with,
them, "Who made you rulers and judges over us?" Their procedure conveys
lessons for modem days. Peaceable overtures must be peaceably met, and even
imjustifiable suspicion must be pardoned. (3) The suspected altar heca/me a
pleasing object to all. The explanation was accepted, and the deputation, gratified
with the answer they received, bore home a favourable account, and the dispute
was amicably terminated. The end was even better than the beginning, for the
affair reflected credit upon all concerned. God grant that all misapprehensions
among believers may vanish with equal celerity and happiness 1 that no root of
bitterness be allowed to spring up and trouble them. Nothing should delight us
more than to be enabled to exonerate our brethren from blame. Discovery of their
freedom from guilt is a sweet proof of the presence of God in our midst (v. 81).

Conclusion. This narration begets the inquiry whether we have any part in
the Lord. Can any secret place of prayer, or any word or deed testify that the
Lord is our God? The strongest union is formed by rehgious ties. Where
families are thus united the bands of love are indissolubly cemented. Have we a
family altar, not material but spiritual, a witness to the Lord ? May the lessons
thus derived from an old book be indehbly stamped upon onx hearts. — A.

Ver. 81. — Go(f» presence manifested in the faithful conduct of His people.
I. God is present in the midst op His faithful people. By the nature of
things, God Is present everywhere (Psa. cxxxix. 7 — 10). Yet there is a more
intimate and revealed presence of God which is not universal, but which is the
peculiar privilege of some, while to others it is depied. This consists in the out-
flow of sympathy, the exercise of special grace, the nearness of spiritual com-
munion. Two persons can be locally near, and yet in thought and sympathy very
distant from one another. Spiritual pi'esence is conditioned not by space but by
sympathy. When we are out of sympathy with God He is far from us. When
we are one with Him in sympathy He is near. This is a real presence. God does
not simply send blessings and breathe benedictions from a distance. He makes
the bodies of His people a temple (1 Cor. vi. 9), and their hearts the home of His
Spirit (John xiv. 28).

II. God's peesence is a pact of great inteeest to His people. Phinehaa
expresses satisfaction in the recognition of God's presence. (1) God's presence
sliould be a source of blessing, since {a) He is our father, and we are homeless
without Him; (6) He is the Almighty One, and we are full of need ; (c) He is the
light and hfe of all things, and without Him we are in darkness and death, hke a
planet without its sun. (2) God's presence is proved by experience to be a source
of blessing, bestowing {a) safety, (6) purity, (c) joy, (d) glory. The possession of
aD the treasures of the world without God would leave the soul poor indeed. His
presence is a pearl of great price.

III. God's peesence can be keooonised bt the conduct of His people.
(1) Ood's presence is discernible. It is not for ever secret and hidden. Phinehas
perceives the presence of the Lord. We do not always perceive it, but there are
events which make it strikingly apparent. If we know how to recognise it, we
need not be always asking, " Is the Lord among us or no ? " but, hke Hagar (Gen.
xvL 18) and Jacob (Gen. xxviii. 16), we shall be surprised and satisfied with the
manifestation of God in our midst. (2) Ood's presence is manifested in the
conduct of Hit people, (a) It is not proved by our opinions : we may hare TWy



OH. xxn. 1—84] THE BOOK OF JOSHUA. 888



eorreot ideas about the nature and character of God while we are far fi-om Him.
(6) It iB not made manifest by our feelings: emotions are deceptive, and verj
strong religions feelings may be found in a very godless life, (c) It is seen in
cond/wct.

IV. Thr oonditot which peoves the peesenok of God ib faithfulness in
His sbevice. Phinehas perceives "that the Lord is among us, because ye have
not eommitted this trespass against the Lord." Faithfulness in ttie service of God,
Rnd a consequent spirit of brotherly kindness and sympathy, such as that now
manifested among the tribes of Israel, are good signs of the presence of God in a
Church. (1) His presence is the cause of fideUty. Our fidelity reveals His
presence, but it does not secure it. ■ He is present first, and inspires devotion, and
binds TTia people together in united affection through their common devotion to
Him. (2) He must need depart firom His people when they become unfaithful. No
past enjoyment of God wiU secure His abiding presence. If God depart, though
wealth and ease and numbers testify to apparent prosperity, we may exclaim,
" Ichabod— the glory has departed." — W. F. A.

Vers. 30, 81. — A miataTce and its rectification. When Joshua dismissed the
trans- Jordanio tribes to their homes he pronounced his benediction upon them, in
grateful acknowledgment of the services they had rendered to their brethren of the
other tribes, and with full confidence in their loyalty to the God of Israel. It soon
seemed, however, as if this confidence had been misplaced. Their building of a
"great altar over against the Land of Canaan " had a suspicious appearance.
■What could it be intended for but as a rival to the altar at Shiloh, and therefore a
wicked violation of the Divine command in reference to the one chosen place of
Bacrifloe ? (Levit. ivii. 8, 9 ; Deut. xii.). The issue proved this suspicion to be
groundless ; and what seemed likely at first to lead to a serious breach in the
religious unity of the nation ended in a signal manifestation of the presence of the .
" one Lord" in the midst of it (ver. 31). We see here-

I. A NOBLE EXAMPLE OF ZEAL FOR GOD AND FOR THE PUEITT OF HiS WOESHIP.

It was a true instinct that warned the leaders of the ten tribes of the danger of a
rival altar on the other side of the Jordan. They saw how easily the river might
become a cause of moral and spiritual separation, the geographical boundary a
dividing line of conflicting sympathies and interests. A flame of holy indignation
was kindled within tbem at the thought of the glory of Israel being thus turned to
shame. Their zeal is shown (1) in their instant resolution forcibly to arrest the
evU. at its very beginning (ver. 12). Though they had so lately ceased from war,
they will at once take up arms again, even against their brethren and compatriots,
rather than suffer this wickedness to be done. (2) In the wise measures they adopt.
They wiU hear and judge before tliey strike, and the dignity of the appointed court
of inquiry (Phinehas and a representative prince from each of the tribes) indicates
their sense of the solemnity of the crisis. (3) In the earnestness of tlteir remon-
strance. Their words are somewhat overstrained (ver. 16). The slightest departure
from the appointed order is to them an act of guilty rebellion. (4) In the sense
they have of the latent propensities of the people to idolatry, in spite of all the sad
lessons of the past (ver. 17). (5) In their readiness to suffer loss themselves by the
narrowing of their own inheritance rather than this supposed evil should be done.
All of which is greatly to their honour, inasmuch as it shows how true they were
to their allegiance to the God of Israel, and how earnest their purpose to maintain
the religious unity of the commonwealth.

II. A SUCCESSFUL ACT OF SELF- VINDICATION. If the suspccted tribes were rash
in raising the altar without having first consulted the heads of the nation, and
especially the high priest from whom the will of God was to be known, and
without duly considering the aspect it might bear to their brethren on the other
side of the river, yet they themselves were also wronged by this too hasty judgment
on the meaning and motive of their deed. The honesty of their purpose is
abundantly made mardfest. Note (1) the spirit in which they receive the remon-
Btrauce. This at ono« bespeaks the purity of their intent. It ia a serious charge



834



THE BOOK OF JOSHUA.



[oh. xxm. 1 — 16,



that IS brought against them, hut they meet it with no angry recrimination. There
is surprise, but nothing Uke resentment. This, perhaps, not only quenched the
arrow of rebuke, but turned it back upon the soiu'oe from whence it came.
" Innocence doth make false accusation blush," and the guilelessness of their
bearing must have brought a feeUng of shame to their accusers, for having so
hastily condemned them. In nothing is the moral quality of a man indicated more
than in the way in which he receives an unmerited rebuke. (2) Their desire to
approve themselves to their brethren, as well as to Him who knew what was in
their hearts. " The Lord God of gods, he knoweth, and Israel he shall know "
(ver. 22). No right-feeling man wiU be indifferent to the good opinion of his fellow
men. (3) Their thorough religious sympathy with the leaders of the people. The
building of the altar, instead of being meant as an act of revolt, was done "forfea/r
of this very thing." We are reminded not only how possible it is to mistake
m^en's motives, but how the same motive may prompt to actions that seem to be at
variance, formal differences and separations in the Church are not necessarily
schism. They may be the outgrowth of that very loyalty to truth and conscience
which is one of the main elements of its living unity. The principle that binds
men in allegiance to Christ may be at the root of much that seems to separate them
from one another. A truly upright spirit rejoices in spiritual uprightness that may
assume forms widely different from its own ; and that is the most Ohristian con-
science that most respects the consciences of others. (4) Their prudent regard to
the possibilities of the future. Not as a substitute for the altar at Slailoh, but as the
shadow and memorial of it, did they rear this altar ; that their children, looking
upon it, might never &il to claim their part and lot in the fellowship of Israel. The
loyalty of a godly soul will always manifest itself in the desire and practical
endeavour to hand down its own inheritance of blessing unimpau-ed to coming
generations.

III. A GREAT CALAMITY AVERTED BT A POLICY OP MUTUAL FOEBEABANOE. What

might have been a disastrous feud was arrested at the beginning by a few frank
outspoken words. Honesty of purpose on the one side detected and appreciated
honesty of purpose on the other. The " soft answer turned away wrath." " Charity
covered the multitude of sins." And thus the very altar that seemed hkely to
break the bond of the nation's unity, rather became a witness to it and a means of
strengthening it. So may it ever be. The true cure for the discords of social life
and of Church life lies in fidelity to conscience, tempered by the forbearance of
love. " If thy brother trespass against thee, go and tell him his fault between
him and thee alone ; if he shall hear thee, thou hast gained thy brother " (Matt.
xviii. 15). "Let us not therefore judge one another any more; but judge this
rather, that no man put a stumbling block or an occasion to fidl in his brother's
way" (Eom. xiv. 13).— W.



EXPOSITION.



CHAPTBB XXTTI. 1—16.

Joshua's solemn chabgb. — Ver. 1. —
Waxed old and stricken In age. Literally,
was old, advanced in days (see ch. xiii. 1).
But this refers to a more advanced age still,
when the patriarch felt his powers failing
him, and desired, as far as his influence
went, to preserve the IsraeHtes in the path
in which they had walked since their en-
trance into Canaan. Calvin has some good
remarks on the "pious solicitude" shown
by the aged warrior for those whom he had
led in time of war and guided in time of
peace. He seems to have sent for the chief



men m Israel to his home at Tinmath-Serah,
where apparently he had led u retired and
peaceful life, only coming forward to direct
the affairs of the nation when necessity re-
quired. His address is simple and practical.
He reminds them that they will soon lose
the benefit of his experience and authority,
and of the work that he had done, under
God's direction, in settling them in the
land. Then he proceeds to urge strict obe-
dience to the law of God, reminding them
that victory is assured to them, if they will
but be true to themselves and their calling
as the servants of God, but that as certainly
as they neglect to do so, wrath and misery



ca. xxni 1 — 16.]



THE BOOK OF JOSHUA.



886



will be their portion. He emphasizes his
words by reminding them how amply God
had fulfilled his promise, and conclndes with
a picture of the evil which will befall them
if they rebel against God.

Ver. 2. — ^AU Israel. By their representa-
tives, as subsequently mentioned. For their
officers (see ch. i. 10). In the original the
pronoun is in the singular throughout (see
note on oh. vi. 25). And said unto them.
This speech is not, as Calvin, Mauier, and
others have suggested, the same as that in
ch. xxiv. (see notes there). Maurer believed
that he was the first to entertain this idea,
but he has been anticipated by Calvin. It
consists largely of quotations from Deuter-
onomy.

Ver. 3.— Because of you. Literally, 6e/or«
you.

Ver. 4. — Divided unto you by lot. Liter-
ally, caused to fall, the lot being of necessity
understood. Tliese nations that remain.
Israel had therefore not driven them out.
This, however, need not of necessity be im-
puted to them as a sin. For, as we have seen,
the conquest was to be gradual. No doubt
there was enough to be done in consolidat-
ing the conquests already made, in settling
the tribes in their possessions, to occupy all
the days of Joshua, and even possibly a
longer period. At least we may be sure that,
as long as Joshua lived, the heathen settle-
ments were kept distinct from the Israelitish
community, that intermarriages were not
allowed, nor rights of citizenship granted to
any but the Gibeonites. Cut off. Joshua's
speech here exactly agrees with the state-
ments in ch. vi 21 ; viii. 26 ; x. 28 — il ; xi.
11, 14, 21. Here at least, if Joshua's speech
and the history were taken from two dif-
ferent sources, neither of them precisely
accurate, the first postulate of the destruc-
tive criticism, we might have expected some
slight discrepancy. But Joshua uses a word
which implies total extermination, a feature,
be it observed, of the campaigns of Moses
and Joshua only, and not of the later Is-
raelitish history. Westward. Literally, tht
going down of the sun.

Ver. 5. — And the Lord your God, he shall
expel them. Or, Jehovah your God, He
shall thrust them out. Joshua here uses the
unusual word found in Deut. vi 19 ; ix. 4,
another instance of quotation from Deuter-
onomy. The word occurs in the sense of
thrust in Num. xxxv. 20, 22. From out of
your sight. Bather, from hefore you.

Ver. 6.— Be ye therefore very courageous.
The original is stronger. Be ye exceedingly
courageous (see note on ch. i. 6). That Is
written In the book of the law of Moses.
A yet more distinct intimation that the
words of Moses had been collected into a



book at this early period, and that it was
known as the Book of the Law of Hoses.
It seems incredible that such a book should
have been invented at a time when the pre-
cepts it contained were Ughtly regarded, and
should hafve been represented as the proper
standard of conduct when every one knew
that it could never have been anything >f
the kind.

Ver. 7. — That ye come not among these
nations (see note on ver. 4). We can here
perceive that the Israelites, though Uving
among these nations, held no intercourse
with them. Neither make mention of the
name of thetr gods. Cf. Fsa. xvi. 4, which
however is not a verbal quotation of this
passage. The LXX. here has, kuI t& ivoftara
Tbtv Oeutv avTtov ovK dvoftaaOrjffsTot Iv it^lv ;
the Vulgate simply, " ne juretis in nomine
deorum earum." l?he Hebrew has the signi-
fication (1) to bring to remembrance, (2) to
praise or celebrate. The former is the better
idea here, " let them not be named among
you, as becometh saints," let them be quite
forgotten, as though they had never been
heard of ; and this not with a purely theo-
logical, but with an ethical purpose, since
" fornication and all uncleanness and greedi-
ness" (TrXEovtIia; see Bphes. v. 3) were
the first principles of their rites (see Intro-
duction). Nor cause to swear by them.
These words are found in connection with
what follows in Deut. x. 20. So with
"serve" and "bow down" (see Exod. xx.
5; Dent. iv. 19; v. 9; viii. 19, &o.). Here
again we have Joshua quoting Deuteronomy
as the book of the Law of Moses. According
to the " Deuteronomist " theory, the quota-
tion is an audacious fiction, manufactured
by the person who was at that moment
forging the book from which he pretended
to quote.

Ver. 8. — But cleave unto the Lord your
God. Or, ye shall cleave unto Jehovah your
God. The phrase denotes the intimate
imion between God and the soul (see above,
and Gen. ii. 24).

Ver. 9. — For the Lord your God hath
driven out. So the Masora and the LXX.
The Vulgate and the margin of our version
translate by the future. So Luther also.
The next verse is undeniably future. An
appeal to their experience, which did not
fail (see ch. xxiv. 31) to be effective as long
as the memory of these things was fresh in
their minds. So in the Prayer Book of the
Church of England we find the appeal, " O
God, we have heard with our ears, and out
fathers have declared unto us, the noble
works that thou didst in their days, and in
the old time before them." And the pas-
sage (Psa. xliv. 1 — 3), from which the idea
of this petition is taken, is an allusion to



880



THE BOOK OF JOSHUA.



[oB. xxui. 1—16.



Gob speech of Joshna. And we often, in
times of faintheartedness or sloth, need to
be thus reminded of the motal and spiritual
victories of the true Israel, under the true
Joshua the Saviour, over the enemies with
whom we are forbidden to make a com-
promise.

Ycr. 10. — One man of yon shall chase a
thousand. A quotation from the song of
Moses (Dent, xxxii. 30).

Ver. 11. — Take good heed to yourselves.
This is quoted from 0eut. iv. 15, word for
word. The Hehrew is, take heed exceedingly
to your souls; but the meaning is either
"as you vaJue your lives" (Gesenins), or
"with all your soul" (Keil). The former
appears preferahle. A third interpretation,
however, "guard youi souls dihgently," is
suggested by a comparison of Deut. iv. 9, 15.

Ver. 12. — Go back. Literally, return.
Cleave. A word (see ver. 8) signifying
close and intimate relationship. And the
intimacy of the relationship is indicated, as
in ver. 8, by the use of the preposition 3.
Hake marriages with them. No closer or
more intimate relationship is possible than
this. Nothing, therefore, would be more
certain to draw the Israelites away from
their allegiance to God, and to seduce them
and their children into the false and corrupt
worship of the nations around them. " Unde
deprecor vos qui fidelis estis, ut ita vitam
vestram et couversationem servetis, ne in
aUquo vel ipsi scandalum patiamini vel aliis
Bcandalum faciatis; sit in vobis summi
Btudii, summteque cantelffi, ne quis in hano
sanotam congregationem vestram poUutus
introeat" (Orig., Horn. 21 on Joshua). Go
In unto them. Bather, go among them.
Spoken of the fanuhar intercourse of friend-
ship. It is equivalent to our words "as-
sociate with them."

Ver. 13. — Snares and traps. Perhaps,
rather, nets and snares. The LXX., where
our translation has snare, has vayiq, and
for traps has incorrectly aKovSoKa. The
snare or pach was e'Hdently (Amos ui. 5)
laid upon the earth ; but there is no evi-
dence for Gesenius' idea that the mokesh
which follows, there as here, means the
stick of the trap, which when displaced in-
volved the bird in the net. As the primary
signification of this latter word, which is
akin to riEI'p a bow, seems to mean some-
thing curved, it is probably a noose or
springe. And the word and its cognates
are used of involving, or catching, people by
its use. Fiirst's Lexicon oonflrms this
view, which has been imlepeudeutly ar-
rived at. Scourges. The Hebrew word is
in the singular. It is translated ijKovs,
nails. In the LXX., and offendiculum in the



Vulgate. In yonr sides. Bather, on your
sides. The words here are very similar to
those in Num. xxxiii. 65. Moses, however,
does but use two of the similes of which
here we have four. He has, moreover, a
difterent word (C'SE') for thorns, and the
word here translated thorns is there sub-
stituted for scourges ; " thorns in your
sides." Joshua crowds together his similes
"to describe the shame, and trouble, and
oppression which they would bring upon
themselves by joining in the idolatry of the
Canaanites" (Keil). The Lord your God.
Here, as elsewhere in this and many other
passages, we have in the original, Jehovah
yonr God. It is important to remember
that the sacred writer is caUing the God of
Israel by His own proper name, that by
which He was distinguished from the gods
of the nations round about.

Ver. 14. — ^And not one thing hath failed
thereot This is a good instance of the
habit of repetition so common to Hebrew
writers. It is to be remembered that they
had no italics, no stops, and, owing to the
want of copiousness in their language, a
great want generally of the means possessed
in more modem languages of emphasizing
their words. They, therefore, had recourse
to what is still a favourite rhetorical artifice,
the practice of repetition.

Ver. 16.— All good things. Literally, all
the good word. That is to say, the pro-
phecies of good had been fulfilled. Joshna
uses this as an argument that the evil also
will not fail to follow, if Israel provoke God
to inflict it. But the memory of these
words, and of the great deeds of Jehovah,
faded quickly from their minds. And then,
like the people of the earth before the flood,
like the men of Sodom before it was
destroyed, and like many other people since,
they turned a deaf ear to the prophecies ol
evil which faithful souls foresaw and fore-
told. The warnings of the prophets are but
a variation upon the predictions of Moses in
Levit. xxvi. 14—33, Deut. xxviii. 15—68,
xxix. 14 — 28, and oif Joshua, here addressed
to a generation who had broiight some of
the predicted evil upon themselves, and
would not see that by refusing to listen,
they would bring upon themselves yet more.
How terribly have these predictions been
fulfilled I First, the Babylonish captivity ;
then the disorders and anarchy in a territory
which the Jewish people inhabited, but
which they were not strong enough to rule;
then the siege of and destruction of Jeru-
salem under Titus with its accompanying
horrors. Then the dispersion of the Jews
among all the nations, the barbarous and
inhuman persecutions they met with in the



OH. zzm. 1 — 10.



THE BOOK OP JOSHUA-



887



Middle Ages from priest and monarch alike:
the Inquisition in Spain, the contempt and
hatred which contiaued to be felt tor them
among more enlightened nations, aa evi-
denced in Marlowe's ' Jew of Malta,' and
Shakespeare's ' Merchant of Venice,' in the
days of our own Queen Elizabeth. Only in
our own age has a brighter day begun to
dawn on them, and three thousand years of
oppression, relieved only by the brief glories
of David and his dynasty, are beginning to
be compensated by a share in the world's
lewaida and honours. All evil things.



Literally, all the evil word; or thing; every
evil thing, that is, which had been foretold.
Ver. 16. — Transgressed. The English is
the precise equivalent of the Hebrew, which
signifies to " pass over," with the idea of
going beyond bounds which had previously
been prescribed in the covenant between
God and His people. Other gods. See
ver. 7. Here again we have the usual
repetition for the sake of emphasis. 7e
shall perish quickly. A verbally accurate
quotation of Deut. xi. 17. The original ia
even more emphatic — with haste.



HOMILETIOS.

Ver. 1 — 16. — The last words of the aged servant of God. The influence gained
by a long and Buccessfiil life is immense. It was so in Joshua's case, for it outlasted
his life, and continued as long as any of his former colleagues and companions in
arms were alive. It was only when a fresh generation arose who knew him not,
Bave by the report of the younger men, such as Othniel, that Israel declined from
the true path. Joshua's last charge, therefore, is full of interest and profit.

I. How A LONG LIFE OF USEFULNESS MAY BEST BE CLOSED. When Joshua felt

his life drawing to an end, he assembled those who had been partakers of his toils,
reminded them of the great things God had done during his leadership, and warned
them of the danger of departing from the course which had been marked by such
signal and uninterrupted success. So may those who, by God's grace, have been
the means of improvement or usefulness to others, parents to their children, pastors
to their flocks, men who have won for themselves a moral influence in the religious
or even the social, philosophical, or political world, when they feel their powers
failing, assemble those who have worked with thena, review the past, and draw a
moral from it for the future. The last words of any one we deeply respect have a
weight with us which no others have, and live within us when those who uttered
them have long since passed away. This is even the case with the last words our
Lord and Master spoke before His crucifixion, though in His case they were not
His last, for not only did He rise from the dead, but He hath since spoken to us by
His Spirit. Yet His dying command concerning the bread and wine has touched
the heart more than any other ; and His last speech in John xvii. has always had
a peculiar interest for Christians. Perhaps His followers have too much shrunk,
from Christian modesty, from the most powerful means of influence they have.
Forms of belief vary. The religious earnestness of our age is replaced by a different
form of religious earnestness in another. The new wine has to be put into new
bottles. Thus exhortations to maintain a particular form of doctrine or organisation
may fail of their effect, or when (as is very often the case) they do not fail, they
may be undesirable. But exhortations to love, joy, peace, zeal, energy, self-restraint,
indifference to the world, may derive a vast additional force when they are the
farewell words of one whose life has been a nfe-long straggle to practise them.

II. Wb must obey the whole law. We are not to pick and choose either in
doctrines or precepts. There is an eclecticism now, as there was in the apostle's
day, which rejects particular doctrines or precepts of Christianity as " unsuitable to
the times." We are of course to distinguish between doctrines and development of
doctrines, the last being, perhaps, the product of a particular age, and unsuitable or
impossible for philosophic or scientific reasons in another. So again, the form of
a precept {e.g., those touching almsgiving) must be altered from time to time, as
Christian principles are transforming society by permeating it. But the spirit of a
precept is for ever binding. And, we may observe, excess is as bad as defect.
It was said of the law, that men should " mi nought to it," as well as " diminish

WSPUA. g



ns THE BOOK OF JOSHUA. [oh. xxiil 1— Ifll

ought from it;" and we know what Christ thought of those who "tauyht foi
doctrines the conuuandments of men." Yet there has been in all ages a spiritual
Pharisaism which has turned aside to the right, as there has been a Sadduceeism
which has turned to the left. Every age has had its teachers who added to the
essentials of religion as well as those who would explain them away. And the
tendency has been to magnify these positive precepts of particular religious parties,
until it has been held more criminal to disobey them than to ofTend against the first
principles of the Christian religion. For their sake the fundamental law of love has
been laid aside, and transgression against a law Christ never imposed has been
visited with a bitterness and a fury which He has expressly forbidden. Whether
excess or defect have been more fatal to the cause of Christianity is a point which
must be left undecided. But that grievous evils to the cause of religion in general
and the souls of individuals have arisen from' the practice among Christians of
insisting upon what Christ has never enjoined cannot be denied. Let it be our
case, then, to observe the whole law of Christ, neither to turn to the right nor to
the left, but to keep all, and no more than all, that He has commanded. For "His
commandments are not grievous." His " yoke is easy and His burden is light."
There is the more reason, therefore, why we should keep it to the very letter.

III. We are expressly exhorted to avoid compliance with the world.
This is a more difficult precept now than ever. Once there was a broad line of de-
marcation between the religious and the worldly man. Now Christianity has so far
externally leavened society that the conflict has been forced inward. Decency and
propriety of behaviour is everywhere enforced where education has penetrated.
Cursing and swearing are banished at least from general society, and open profane-
ness is seldom met with. Yet the conflict must be continued, and continued within.
St. Paul's advice in 1 Cor. v. 10 must be kept. A Christian must go into society
and mix with the people he finds there, though he must not choose them for his
intimates. But he must be more on the watch than ever to detect the tone of
his associates when it jars with the gospel precepts. Still, as ever, there are false
standards of right and wrong set up, false doctrines of honour and morality incul-
cated, principles laid down which Christ would have abhorred, conduct tolerated
which He would have emphatically condemned. The worship of rank and fashion
and wealth ; the polite depreciation of all enthusiasm ; the utter failure to recognise
the glory of self-sacrifice, except it be for tangible rewards, such as glory among
men ; the absence of all reverence ; the veiled (or it may be wiveUed) selfishness of
a hfe of indolence and ease, the cynical indifference to the welfare of even the
existence of others, except so far as it contributes to the pleasures of our own — these
are habits of mind utterly repugnant to the spirit of Christ. They must not be
tolerated, they must be steadily and openly resisted by the Christian. And yet, so
insidious are they, that they frequentiy creep into the souls of those who imagine
themselves to be unoormpted soldiers of the Cross. They have made mention of
the names " of these gods of the nations around them," have "served" them and
" bowed down" to them without knowing it, though they could have known it, had
they been on the watoh. And then they become " snares and traps," " scourges in
their sides and thorns in their eyes" — the causes, that is, of manifold cares and
troubles and annoyances which to the Christian are unknown. And if unrepented
of, they poison the Christian life at its source, tUl the once believer "perishes from
off the good land which the Lord his God has given him."

rV. The importance op Christian marriage. "Neither shall ye make mar-
riages with them," says the sacred writer; and the precept has been continually
repeated. It is surprising how httle the New Testament says on this important
point of the selection of a partner for life. It would seem as though Christ and
TTin apostles thought it so obvious that it were superfluous to speak of it. " Only in
the Lord " (1 Cor. vii. 89) is the only precept given on this important point, unless
2 Cor. vi. 14 be held indirectly to include it. But the Old Testament, which is,
equally with the New, a guide of hfe, is fuU of such cautions, from Isaac, Esau, and
Jacob downwards. Moses perpetually warns the children of Israel against contract-
ing Buoh aUiances with the idolatrous Canaanitea. Ahab is a stan&ig warning of



m. SMIL 1—16.] THE BOOK OF JOSHUA. 880

their danger, and the taint invaded the kingdom of Judah through the weaknes*
of the otherwise pious Jehoshaphat, and ended in the ferocious treachery ot
Athaliah. What Nehemiah thought of it in the reviving fortunes of Israel after
the captivity may be read in his own words (ch. xiii.). There is no difficulty,
therefore, in gathering from Scriptm-e a condemnation of marriage between those
who are not of one mind on the most essential point of all, that of religion. The
Boman Catholic Chiu'ch has forbidden mixed marriages, and wisely. It were well
if Churches of the Reformed faith were as outspoken in their condemnation of them.
Yet unwise as are unions between those who differ in religious views, they are far
worse when contracted between Christians and imbelievers, between those who are
"conformed to this world " and those who hope to be " transformed by the renew-
ing of their mind" into the image of JesiTS Christ. There can be but one result to
such unions. They must ever be " snares and traps,'' " scourges in the side and
thorns in the eyes" of those who contract them, even though the end be not the
destruction from out of the " good land which God has given." Those whom " God
hath joined together " ought not to be " put asunder " by a discordance of opinions
on aH the main duties and objects of Ufe. No temptations of beauty, of wealth or
prospects, or even of personal preference, can outweigh the misery and danger of a
conation Kke this, especially when it is considered that the results are not confined
to those who are parties to such marriages, but that those whom God has sent into
the world to be heirs of eternity will be considered by one, perhaps eventually by
both their parents, as the creatures of a world that is passing away. The words
" only in the Lord," though spoken but once, and then incidentally, ought never-
theless to be well pondered. They constitute the only ground upon which a Chris-
tian can enter into the most sacred and enduring of human ties ; the only one that
can ensure a blessing ; the only one possible to those who are pledged to order aU
their actions by the inspiration of God's Holy Spirit.



HOMILIES BY VAEIOUS AUTHORS.

Vers. 6 — 8. — Clea/oing unto the Lord. I. The duty. (1) Peraoual devotion.
God seeks the devotion of our hearts. It is inward and spiritnal, and not merely
a fact of visible conduct. It implies drawing near to God in prayer, walking with
God, delighting in Him, seeking to be like Him, aiming at pleasing Him. (2)
Active ohedience. Joshua exhorts the people to " be very courageous," " to kee^)
and to do all that is wiitten in the book of the law of Moses." Devotion of heart
is a mockery unless it leads to obedience in conduct. We must cleave to God in
action as well as in feeling. (3) Purity. The people are exliorted to avoid the con-
tamination of heathen society and the sin of idolatry. Anything that takes the
place of God in our heart is an idol. All sinful pleasiu-es and worldly interests that
are not consistent with pure devotion to God separate us from Him and vitiate our
service. God cannot accept our sacrifices while we approach Hinn with sinful
affections (Isa. i. 13).

II. The danger. Joshua saw that there was a danger that the people should
cease to " cleave unto the Lord." This arose from various causes: (1) Prosperity.
It was now "a long limo after that the Lord had given rest unto Israel." In times
of prosperity we are often off our guard, and become indolent, and hence are in
danger. (2) Bad exa/mple. The Canaanites who remained in the land would be a
source of temptation to idolatry and immorality. We need to be especially careful
if we are surrounded by those who live worldly and unholy lives. The influence of
an ever-present example is insidious and powerful. (3) The inherent difficulty of
duty. The people were exhorted not to turn aside to the right hand or to the left.
The path of duty is narrow (Matt. vii. 18, 14). There are many wrong ways, but
only one right way. (4) The loss of an old leader. Joshua was about to die. He
feared for the people after his guiding hand was removed. When trusted leaders
we called away the Church is thrown back on the individual responsibility of iti
ipemt)«rs to preserve its fidelity.



MO THE BOOK OF JOSHUA. ch. xxiu. 1— 1&

III. The motives fob OVEECOMINa THE DANOEB AND FULPILLINO THE DUTY.

The great source of devotion is love to God. Joshua says, " Take good heed, there-
fore, unto yourselves, that ye love the Lord your God." We cannot cleave to the
Lord out of a mere sense of duty. We must feel attracted by the influence of His
love to us, rousing our love to Him (Hosea xi. 4). This influence wiU be realised
as we reflect upon the goodness of God in the past. Joshua appeals to the experi-
ence of the people and their memory of God's great goodness and powerful help.
We have not only the providential grace of God to reflect upon, but also the wonder-
ful love He has revealed in the sacrifice of Christ (2 Cor. v. 14). If we have been
at all faithful in the past, the thought of this fact should stimulate us to maintain
our fidelity. Joshua says, " Cleave unto the Lord your God as ye have done unto
this day." Past devotion is no security ageinst future unfaithfulness. But it is a
motive to fidelity, because, failing this, the finiits of the labour and sacrifice of the
past win be lost ; because the habits of the past will make it easier to be true in tha
future — ^the greater difficulties being overcome, it would be foolish to yield before
the lesser ; and because the experience of the blessings which accompany fidelity
should make us see that our joy and peace are iu " cleaviag unto the Lord." —
W. F. A.

Ver. 10. — Victory etasv/red through the help of Qod. I. Victoet is assubed.
(1) The people of God are few and weak in comparison with the host of their
enemies. This was the case with the Jews. It is so in the comparison of the
Church with the great godless and heathen world. It is true of our own spiritual
resources and the dangers which beset our inner life. The comparison is as one to
a thousand. (2) It is a Divine law that success shall not turn on questions of
nmnbers and visible strength. God is not always " on the side of the big battalions."
Even in material warfare there are possible "accidents" and "mistakes" which
vitiate arguments drawn from statistics. In spiritual warfare visible superiority
counts for very little. Paul the tent-maker was stronger than the Sanhedrim.
The monk Luther was victorious over the Pope and the whole Roman hierarchy.
Kothing could have looked feebler than Christianity when it appeared in the upper
room at Jerusalem ; yet in three centuries it conquered the Eoman Empire, and it
is now the most powerfiil factor in the life of the foremost races of mankind. (3)
God assures victory to His people. The victory is not only possible in spite of
apparent weakness; it is certain. It is promised by God. Anticipations are con-
stantly seen, as in the successes of Israel, the triumphs of Christianity, the victory
of the Christian over his old sins, &c. Therefore let us see that we are on the side
of right and truth and God, and then let us be trustful and hopeful.

II. The secret of victory is the help of God. Israel must be brave and
faithful, and must labour and fight. Yet victory is not secm-ed by these means
alone. Joshua points to the true ground of assurance : " The Lord your God, He it
is that fighteth for you." How does God fight for us ? (1) He fights for us in His
providence, (a) God so overrules events that they shall minister to the victory of
His people ; His complete government of all things renders it certain that no
calamities or temptations can fall upon His people against His vrill, and He can
regulate and temper those that He permits. (6) God guides the thoughts and inner
lives of men. Pharaoh the oppressor and Nebuchadnezzar were led by God to do
His will, though unconsciously. Even the bitterest opponents of God's wiU cannot
shake off this unseen control.^ (2) God fights for us by inspiring us with strength
to flglit. (a) He leads the mind to those thoughts which help us to resist evU and
advocate truth and right with enthusiasm. (6) He is the source of direct spiritual
influences which strengthen the wiU in the determination to brave all for the right.
— W. F. A.

Ver. 11. — Love t-o God. We are called to love God. It is not enough that we
discharge our duty to our neighbour ; we have a distinct duty to God (Mai. i. 6),
This duty is not fulfilled by the most scrupulous devotion to external service alone<
God claams the affection of our hearty



ca. nxm. 1—16.] tfliJ fiOOK OP JOSStJA- 841

L The nature of love to God. (1) It has all the qualities of gervwine love.
(a) It is personal. We love God in loving goodness and all things Godlike ; but
the perfect love of God implies a personal relation between our soul and His. We
love Hioa as our Father. (6) It is seen in the delight we have in God, the attraction
He is to us, our desire to be in His presence, and the greater brightoess of oui
lives as we grow nearer to Him. True love finds its greatest joy in loving. The
love which is merely benevolent, which wishes well without feeKng delight, is cold
and faint, (c) Itis proved by sacrifice. Love sacrifices itself to death, and prefers
the person loved to its own joy. So our love to God must lead to self-devotion and
willingness to suffer loss for His sake. (2) It has special featv/res of its own.
There are different kinds of love, determined by the different relations of men, as
firiends, brothers, parents and children, husbands and wives. Our relation to God
is unlike any other relation, and the love which flows from this must have a
peculiar character. God stands to us in the ideal of all relations, as the friend, the
father, the husband of His people, and our love to God shoidd be the perfection
and ideal of all love. StUl God needs no help firom us ; therefore the element of
pity which characterises tke love of the strong to the weak does not belong to this
love. God is unseen and spiritual ; therefore our love to Him does not naturally
take the form of sensuous rapture, but rather that of cahn and rational devotion.
God is infinitely above us; therefore oiur love to Him must be inspired with
reverence and humility. In its perfection it must become an all-absorbing devotion.
Yet even then it will be characterised by strength and depth rather than by
passion and visible emotion.

II. The sources of love to God. We are to " take goodheed " — an admonition
which implies that it rests with us to cultivate our own love to God. (1) Consider
the grownds we have for loving God : (a) In His love to us, seeing that He has
loved us before seeking for our love, and has proved His love by His goodness in
creation, providence, and redemption ; (6) in His nature. He attracts by the
" beauty of holiness ; " He is love ; the more we know of God the more do we see
of His goodness. (2) BeaKse the presence of God. Love is strengthened by com-
munion. Contemplation of God with faith in His personal presence will draw the
soul IK ;ir to Him, and deepen the feeling of affection to Him as a real being — " our
Father '' — and not as the mere abstraction of perfect attributes which is aU that the
name of God suggests to some men. (3) Live in His spirit. As we love what God
loves, as we grow like Him, as we approach Him in sympathy, we shall learn to
love God.

III. The effects of love to God. (1) Obedience. We shall desire to serve
and please Him, and shall do this more heartily than from fear, self-interest, or a
cold conviction of duty (Eom. xiii. 10). (2) Likeness to God. Love naturally
assimilates by the influence of (a) admiration and (&) sympathy. (3) Love to mam.
This is a direct fruit of love to God, because {a) it pleases Him, (b) it is Godlike,
(c) love to ■ God must flow out in aU forms of unselfishness and benevolence
(1 John iv. 20). (4) The highest blessedness. Heaven consists in the enjoyment
of God through love. He secures, on earth, peace and satisfaction to the deepest
yearnitigs of the soul. — W. F. A.

Ver. 11. — A needed caution. Whilst the words of the youthful sometimes olaJm
our attention, none can forbear to give earnest heed to the advice of him whose
head is whitened with the snows of many winters. Bespect is due to the aged,
and never more so than when lessons taught them by a long and varied experience
drop from their venerable Ups. Let us bend our ears to hsten to the counsel of
Joshua, " old and stricken in age." The period at which it was delivered was one
of peculiar interest. The honoured leader of the Israehtes felt the time to be
drawing near when he must pass away &om the people whom he regarded as a
father does his children. Knowing how soon they would be deprived of his
presence and control, he assembled the people, as Moses had previously done, and
like Samuel and David afterwards, and addressed them in words of solemn ex-
portation, which may be summarised in the language of the text, " lake goo^



m tHJE feook OP J-OSttJA, [oh. xxm. 1-ig.

heed," &c. The purpose of most addresses is to strike a note of warning, to put
men on the alert to guard against some danger. Our sleepy senses get so steeped
in forgetfulnesB that there is constant need of the pealing alarm, "Take heed I "

I. The importance op the caution. (1) It directs attention to the centre a/nA
substance of religion. Our Saviour endorsed " Thou shalt love the Lord thy God "
as "the first and great commandment." His condemnation of the Jews was ex-
pressed, " I know you that ye have not the love of God in you." The first sin
consisted in a turning away fl:om God in consequence of the tempter's insinuation
that want of love was the motive of the seemingly harsh prohibition. Hence the
incarnation and crucifixion were the stupendous exhibition of Divine love intended
to regain the love of man. Affection alone can secure ready and earnest and con-
stant obedience. " Keep thy heart with all diligence, for out of it are the issues of
life." Love becomes " the fulfilling of the law." It is the mainspring of a godly
life, the fountain whence flow streams of holy activity. Striking is it to observe
how love is demanded and insisted on even under the old dispensation. The law-
giver knew that the sternest threats and severest penalties could not ensure com-
pliance with the commands of the Almighty, unless love were enthroned in the
heart as the ruling passion of the life. All the attributes of God require corre-
sponding recognition on the part of His creatures ; and love as His chief, all-
embracing excellence challenges our love in response, and we are guilty if we
withhold it. (2) It is highly necessary on accotimt of man's nature and sttrround-
ings. He is engrossed by the senses and their gratifications, and is averse to what
is spiritual. To worship God requires an effort of the mind, an abstraction from
things carnal. The spirituality of the Divine nature was a source of difiiculty to
the Israelites. Even though they had seen the cloud, the fire, the Sheohinah, they
wanted to set up idols, visible images ever present. And as many of the miraculous
elements had disappeared, there was the greater tendency to forgetfolness of
Jehovah. To-day men urge, " How can we love a Being whom we have never
Been ? " His laws appear in many instances stringent, and to obey is painful.
Evidences of thoughtful, loving design seem rebutted by contrary appearances of
disharmony and wrath. It is acknowledged to be diificult to hush the voice of
passion, and to hear the " stiU small voice" that betokens the presence of God.
The dif&culty is increased by our surroundings. If Israel had been alone upon the
earth, it might have maintained intact the worship of the true God. But, encircled
by idolatrous tribes and abominable practices, there was constant Uabihty to mix
with the evil and catch its infection (see vers. 7, 8). Our position is strictly
analogous. We are " in the world," and daily brought into contact with those who
make self their aim and treat pure religion with contempt. Easily may the con-
tagion spread. The smoke of the city obscures the heavens, and amidst its din the
tones of the angels fall but faintly on the ear. If this applies to believers who
know and serve God, how mighty the barriers that interpose between Him and His
" prodigal " sons I What dire need of sounding aloud the caution that they may
BpeedUy " come to themselves," and return to their Father I (3) History confirms
the necessity of attending to the caution. Joshua well knew how frequently the
Israehtes had already become estranged from God. Many were the mementos of
rebellion left in the wilderness, many the stones which bore the traces of their
Btumbling. Thus reasoning had its conclusions verified by experience. And which
of us has not memorials of foUy ? If a pillar marked each scene where was dis-
played absence of regard for our Maker, how thronged with such tokens woidd be
the route by which we have travelled. Call up the remembrance of the acts of
childhood and youth and manhood. Each sin was a step-upon the path of enmity
against God, for it evinced a liking for that which is displeasing to Him. His
mercy checked us from utter aberration. The warning of Joshua was proved
necessary by the actual event. Standing on the mountain-top, he thence sur-
veyed both the past and the future." In spite of the special covenant recorded in
the following chapter, the Israehtes ceased to love the Lord, and lapsed into
idolatry and licentiousness. Would that no similar case could be pointed to
sonongst those who have been professing Christians I Of how many may it be said,



dH. ixm. i— 16.] tsE BOOK Of JosauA. m

"Ye did run well"? Let history shed its beacon-light athwart the waves, remind-
ing us of the rooks, and bidding us remain in the calm open sea of the love of God.
(4) Consider the risTc vncv/rred in neglecting the advice of the text. Polly is in
proportion to the hazard which neglect involves. Scripture wisely employs every
legitimate motive to urge men to adopt its plans. Threats are mentioned as weU.
as promises, and punishments as well as rewards. Joshua declared that the
spurning of his counsel would result in the withdrawal of God's aid in battle
(ver. 13), and in their visitation with aU manner of evil untU destruction ensued
(vers. 15, 16). Who shall estimate the peril of encountering the wrath of God ?
Even with His smile resting upon us the trials of life are hard to bear, but what if
we have departed from Him and trials partake of the nature of judgments ? True,
believers are " kept by the power of God." Nevertheless, declension may cause
the serious inquiry whether we have been really classed with believers. Hence the
hypothetical statements and warnings of Holy Writ. It is not wise to swim on the
verge of a whirlpool. Nor need we try how close to the edge of the chff we can
walk, lest we faU and there be no overhanging bough of Providence to arrest our
awful descent.

II. Practical methods of cultivating the holy affection enjoined. A
preliminary objection may be raised respecting tlie inoperativeness of a command
relating to the affections. Give an order with regard to the physical powers and it
can be obeyed ; the intellect will answer a call ; but love is a spontaneous product,
of internal not external origin, and cannot rise at will. Such an objection over-
looks the fact that affection can be influenced, if not absolutely forced, by fixing its
attention upon an object, by noting the qualities in it deserving of esteem and
regard. Point one man to another whom he sees casually, and no emotion is
excited. But describe the man, picture him as a loving friend, generous, noble, and
true, and there will be created a desire to know more of him, and acquaintance will
ripen curiosity into love. Accordingly we recommend (1) Frequent meditation
upon the cha/racter of God. He is the embodiment of every perfection. He is
life, hght, and love. If, when we observe traits of goodness in our fellow-creatures,
our hearts go out to them in loving sympathy, what must be the fervency of
affection produced by contemplating the fount of goodness as it resides in the
Almighty. In men it is but a shallow stream, often dry when most we need it,
subject to widest fluctuations and to all changes of temperature, but in God it is an
exliaustlesB perennial flood of all-powerful holiness and benevolence. We cannot
let our minus dwell too much on the measureless perfections of the Deity. Let ua
stand upon the mount with Moses while God passes by, reveaKng His glory in His
excellent name. To shut out the world for a season, and ascend in contemplation
to the glorious temple, " where dwells eternal love," vrill be like exchanging the
murky atmosphere of the city for the pure, bracibg, inspiring Alpine mountains.
We shall return strengthened for work and warfare, less enchanted by the world's
allurements. And yet does the Almighty seem far removed from our ken, and do
we need an assurance that He is one whom doubting finite minds can think of with
delight ? He has provided us with a clear portrait of Himself, His only-begotten
son, " the brightness of His glory," the lustre of Deity shaded, that our weak eyes
may gaze uninjured, living amongst men, and displaying all the quaUties that can
command our highest, deepest reverence and love. (2) A constant passing in
review offavowrs bestowed. Joshua reminded the people that every promise had
been fulfilled (vers. 14, 15). The Lord had vanquished the enemy (ver. 3), the land
was partitioned, each tribe was enjoying its inheritance. If they adhered to God,
memory would be prophetic. Surely gratitude would constrain them to yield
loving service unto Him who had done and would do great things for them. And
each has but to survey his present position, to let the eye hght on many a proof of
love Divine. Temporal prosperity, true-hearted friends, the delights of honest
labour and rest, health and strength, knowledge and taste, for some of these or a
hundred other blessings has every one to thank the author of " every good and
perfect gift." Be it noted that mercies augment love, since they teach us plainly
the goodness of the Giver. They are to ua the revelation of His character, and it



844 THE BOOK Of JOSStlA. [ofl. xxm. 1— 1«.

must needs be that when we are brought into personal contact with Him, mada
personally the recipients of His bounty, then we understand Him better, appreciate
more the warmth of heavenly rays than when we hear the testimony of others, or
behold the sunlight flashing upon them from the throne of God. But what shall
we say of God, revealed to us in Jesus Christ as the Father of our spirits, the for-
giving God, who by His spirit hath quickened us from the death of sin, and is
fitting ns for the enjoyment of His immediate presence ? And when we call to
mind His providential care exercised over us, and the seasons in which He pre-
vented the billows from overwhelming ns in despair, and the fires of temptation
from scorching ns, what joy must it be to comply with the precepts of the text, to
" arise and seek Him whom the soul loveth." (3) Watehfulness against sin. The
" expulsive power of a new affection " is a two-edged sword that fights both for
good and for eviL The tendency of sin is to bhrid the judgment, pervert the
imagination, and to deaden spiritual emotion. If it were one and unif orm we
should know how to attack it, but it is insidious and wraps itself in disguises, and
encroaches on every side, hence we must be ready to act on the defensive. Joshua
cautioned the Israelites against mingling with the degraded inhabitants of the land
(vers. 12, 13). This is an entanglement to many a youthful Christian. First, on
speaking terms, then follows familiarity, and lastly, participation in the very prac-
tices condemned. Not all at once did he rush into flagrant transgression, but
gradually walked into the snare, untU the love of God was stifled in his breast.
Bodily sight depends on the state of the health, and the eye of the soul is dimmed
through the indulgence of fleshly lusts. A traitor is admitted into the camp, and
the true friend is ousted from his seat of honour. Guard, then, against sin ; say
not, " it is a Uttle one ; " cherish not a viper in your bosom, it will mar your peace,
pollute your dwelling, and leave a sting which no palliative shall be able to soothe.
But if you are now repenting of sin, be assured of God's willingness to pardon,
" believe in Him that raised up Jesus from the dead ; who was delivered for our
offences and was raisedagain for our justification." Then say, " I love Him because
He first loved me." — ^A.

Joshua before his death twice calls together the people of Israel to urge on them
one exhortation of supreme importance. On the first occasion he reminds Israel of
its great mission, which is to be a holy nation, the priesthood of the Lord for all
mankind, separated by this its high calling from all association with the pagan
nations around, and bound to abstain from all contact with idolatry. Let us notice
the command and its sanction. (1) " The Lord hath driven out from before you
great nations and strong ; no man hath been able to stand before you unto this
day." " Take good heed, therefore, unto yourselves that ye love the Lord your
God ; lest ye in any wise go back and cleave unto the remnant of these nations
that remain among you and make marriages with them (vers. 9 — 12). Israel is
thoroughly to understand that it has not been put in possession of the land of
Canaan, to lead the same unholy Ufe as those whom it had expelled. There is a
priesthood to be exercised. This priesthood impHes separation from the ungodly
and from idolators. This separation, however, is to be for a time only, for all the
nations of the earth are finally to be blessed in the seed of Abraham (Gen. xii. 3).
Israel is separated from the rest of mankind for the good of the whole. This
separation is not merely external, it is moral, for it is only reaUsed by a life of
holiness. Such is stiU the high caUing of ttie people of God. They are to be
priests of the most High, separated from the world by the elevation of their life and
experience, even more than by privilege of position. The elect are a priesthood.
Their election does not terminate in their own advantage, but seeks through them
the good of the whole race, for which they are to prepare the way of salvation.
Under the new dispensation, the people of God are no longer divided by material
boundaries from the world. There is, therefore, all the greater necessity that the
line of spiritual separation be bright, strong, and distinct. (2) The command-
ment is enforced by a solemn sanction. " If ye go in unto these nations and they to
yoa, know for a certainty that the Lord yovix God wUl no more drive out any of thesa



fit. txm. 1—16.] 'MS. BOOS: of j'osiirn. W«

nations from before yon; but they shall be snares and traps unto you, and seourgea
in your sides, and thorns in your eyes, until ye perish from off this good land which
the Lord your God hath given you" (vers. 12, 13). The punishment threatened has
this notable charaoteristio — that it is to come by means of those very nations with
■whom Israel shall have entered into unholy alliance. These shall be made, in the
hand of God, the scourge and the goad to His rebellioiis people, just as Israel had
been, in the first instance, the sword of Divine justice to visit the iniquity of the
Oanaanites. So is fulfilled the great moral law that sin brings its own punishment.
"Sin, when it is finished, bringeth forth death." Every time that Israel entered
into compact with the heathen nations it fell under the hand of the heathen. So
whenever the Church allies itself with the world, the world entangles, corrupts, and
destroys its life, though, it may be, stealthily and without violence. " Strangers
have devoured his strength, and he knoweth it not " (Hosea vii. 9). The worldU-
ness of the Church silently saps its spiritual power. — E. db P.

Ver. 15. — Threats as true as promises. There are those who 3eny God's threats
of punishment the same validity which they ascribe to His promises of blessing.
Joshua here ascribes equal certainty to both.

I. God must bb tbue to His thbbats. God desires to bless, and He can only
punish reluctantly, since His nature is love. Hence it might appear that He would
not be so true to His threats as to His promises. But, on the other hand, note : —
(1) To threaten without intending to execute woidd be deceitful; God is true and
must be faithful to His word. (2) It would be cruel ; a merciful God would not
terrify us with groundless alarms. (3) It would be ineffectual ; the emptiness of
the threat would be ultimately discovered, and then the delusion would cease to be
a terror and become a mockery. (4) Punighment is ordained not to satisfy
vehgeamce, but to establish justice and to vindicate and restore righteousness. It is
a good sent for good ends, and to refrain from it would be a mark of weakness,
not of mercy.

II. The appaeent uncertainty of God's threats admits or explanation.
(1) They are conditional. The punishment does not always come because the
conditions of the threat are altered. Repentance and faith in Christ are conditions
on which God exercises mercy and refrains from executing His threat. The turning
from evil is declared to be an alteration of circumstances which makes the threat no
longer to apply (Ezek. xxxiii. 19). The force of gravitation is not suspended when
we arrest the motion of a falling body. The law is not frustrated by the counter-
action of the gospel. (2) Threats are often misunderstood. The Church has
added monstrous physical horrors to the threats of the Bible, against which men
revolt. It is not our interpretation of the threat, but God's meaning, that will be
fulfilled. (3) Threats apply to the future; because God is long-suffering, men
refuse to believe that He is just. The delay of punishment is no ground for dis-
believing in the reality of it. (4) Threats are unpleasant ; many persons wiU not
entertain unpleasant ideas. Tet a fact is not the less true because it does iiot
please us.

III. The application of God's threats should be seriously consideeed.
(1) It is dangerous to neglect them. We do not improve our health by ignoring the
opinion of a physician simply because this is imfavourable. If the Divine warnings
are true, they are terribly true, and no soul should be at rest till it has found safety
in Christ. (2) His foolish to despair. Why are these threats recorded in the Bible ?
Surely not simply to torture us ! If they were inevitable it would be most merciful
to conceal our doom from us tUl the last moment. But they are warnings. The
very fact that they are recorded implies that the evil they describe may be avoided.
The threat is true, but it is conditional. Therefore let us flee the danger by escaping
to the refuge which God has provided (Bom. viii. 1). — W. P. A.

Ver. 24. — The old man eloquent. With much in the detail of these chapters
which is of interest, the final farewell of Joshua is worthy of our study in its entirety.
Xhe dignjjjf and serenity of saintly ripeness, the vigour of his exhortations, and tht



U^ *fiE feOOk OF JOSfittA. [c± ixni. 1-16.

assurance of his faith, are facts worthy of the study of every one of ns. Consider
a few features of this farewell, and observe —

I. Hi3 GRACES ENDUEI3 TO THE END. Bodily vigouT leavos even his stalwart
frame. Nervous energy begins to flag even with him. The mind loses elasticity
and keenness. But his graces tlirive. He chose God in his youth ; he clings to
Him in his age. His faith expected much in his manhood ; it still enthrones God
as the fountain of all that blesses a man or a people. His hope was bright, and
still continues bright. His love of his God and of his countiy warm his whole being
at an age when the chill of wintry age seems as if it must lower all warmth of
interest. The outward man perishes ; the inward man has been renewed day by
day. What a sight to animate us I No regrets lament the early choice. No de-
clension stains the early purpose. The bitter words of the elder D'Israeli, " Youth
is a mistake, manhood a struggle, old age a regret," are all of them contradicted
here. They are too often true. They are so when the early choice is made by
passion rather than by principle. But when we choose God, we go " from strength
to strength mitU we appear before the Lord in Zion." The perseverance of the
saints is beautifully illustrated in such a case as this. Let the faint-hearted be of
good cheer. Grace, however feeble, is a " Hving and incorruptible seed ; a living
and deathless seed ; " and whatever its varying fortunes, it will persist until it
reaches its great reward. Connected with this, yet worthy of separate mention,
observe —

II. The longee the good man's exfeeibncb, the larger is his satisfaction
WITH his choice. A short experience sometimes leaves good people in doubt
whether their goodness will be worth its cost. Moses, when he had to flee to
Midian, was very much tempted to repent of the zeal with which he had taken up
the cause of his oppressed people in Egypt. In the Slough of Despond Christian
was tempted to regret his setting out on pilgrimage. Joshua was tempted, when
they refused the advice of Caleb and himself and talked of stoning them, to wish
he Lad not unsettled the minds of the people by avowing his dissent from the con-
clusions of the majority of those sent out to spy the land. And often we drift into
a mood the reverse of that of Agrippa, and are " almost persuaded " to cease to be
Christians. But a longer experience always means a stronger sense of the wisdom
of our choice. The earlier doubts of a Moses or a Joshua all fade away, and the
aged saint is only thankful for his early choice. This should hearten us, and keep
us from attaching too much weight to temporary depression, or even failures.
When we choose God we choose "the good part" which shall not be taken away
from us. Observe —

III. The good man's last service is his best service. He had done illustriouB
service throughout : as the faithful spy ; as the faithful helper of Moses ; as the
heroic warrior ; as the wise and upright divider of the land. But here he conquers
not the arms of enemies, but the hearts of friends : infuses the energy to win not
an eaithly, but a heavenly kingdom : leads them into covenant with God: secures
that deepening of conscience and strengthening of faith which will give them, in
the degree in which it endures, the power to keep aU that they had conquered.
Theie is something characteristic of grace here. The last service may always be —
•nd perhaps almost always is — the best. As it was said of Samson so, in a different
Bsnse, it may be said of the Saviour Himself and of all God's saints, " The dead he
slew in his death were more than all they that he slew in his life." The progressive
usefulness of the saintly life is a very marvellous feature of it. Rejoice and hope
in it. Lastly observe —

IV. How FIT FOE IMM0ETALIT7 THE OLD MAN STANDS. There may be a physical
theory of another Ufe which convinces some of the truth of the Christian doctnne of
immortaUty ; but the great argument for immortality lies in men's meetness for it.
The Enochs and the Joshuas were in early ages — and such spirits are to-day — the
great arguments of immortality. Such ripeness of spirit cannot be wasted by Him
who gathers up the fragments even that nothing may be lost. For such power
to serve and faculty for enjoyment men could not help feeling there must be soma
yiOTision and some scope beyond the grave. The other world is hidden, bur ooca-



itit. i-18.1



¥fifi fedot Off iom^k.



m



sionally the entrance of a great soul brightens it They, lifted up, draw Q-or hearts
and thoughts up after them. And when, Uke the men of Gahlee, we stand gazing
upwards after those who leave us, like them we see the angels, and receive the
promise of a blessed heritage with those who have gone. The belief in im-
mortahty has existed ever since good men died; and while there are good men
to love, the belief in a bright glory will siurive. Joshua stood ready for heaven,
proving the existence of a heaven by that readiness. Let us, hke him, be fit for the
other world as well as this, that, to the last, hope, purpose, and usefulness may be
rich and bright. — Q.



EXPOSITION.



CHAPTEE XXIV. 1—28.

The last benbwaii of thb covenant.
— Ver. 1.— To Shechem. The LXX. and
the Arabic version read Shiloh here, and
as the words "they presented ihezuselves
(literally, took up their station) before God "
follow, this would seem the natural reading.
But there is not the slightest MSS. authority
for the reading, and it is contrary to all
sound principles of criticism to resort to
arbitrary emendations of the text. Besides,
the LXX. itself reads Svxeju, in ver. 26, and
adds, " before the tabernacle of the God of
Israel," words implied, but not expressed in
the Hebrew. We are therefore driven to
the supposition that this gathering was one
yet more solemn than the one described in
the previous chapter. The tabernacle was
no doubt removed on this great occasion to
Shechem. The looaUty, as Poole reminds us,
was well calculated to inspire the Israehtes
with the deepest feelings. It was the scene
of God's first covenant with Abraham (Gen.
xii 6, 7), and of the formal renewal of the
covenant related in Gen. xxxv. 2—4 (see
note on vers. 23, 26), and in Joshua viii.
30 — 35, when the blessings and the curses
were inscribed on Mount Gerizim and Ebal,
and the place where Joseph's bones (ver. 32)
■Tere laid, possibly at this time, or if not,
at the time when the blessings and curses
were inscribed. And now, once again, a
formal renewal of the covenant was de-
Eaanded from Israel by their aged chieftain,
before his voice should cease to be heard
among them any more. Eosenmilller re-
minds us that Josephus, the Ghaldee and
Syriac translators, and the Aldine and
Gomplutensian editions of the LXX. itself,
have Sichem. Bishop Horsley makes the
very reasonable suggestion that Shiloh was
not as yet the name of a town, but possibly
of the tabernacle itself, or the district in
which it had been pitched. And he adds
that Mizpeh and Shechem, not Shiloh,
appear to have been the places fixed upon
for the gathering of the tribes (see Jud^. x.



17 ; xi. 11 ; xx. 1 (of. ver. 27) ; 1 Sam. vii
6). See, however, Judg. xxi. 12, as well aa
Josh. xxi. 2; xxii. 12. Some additional
probability is given to this view by the fact
noticed above, that it is thought necessary
to describe the situation of Shiloh in Judg.
xxi. 19, and we may also faU to notice that
the words translated " house of God " in
Judg. XX. 18, 26 in our version, is in reahty
Bethel, there being no " house of God "
properly so called, but only the " tabernacle
of the congregation." The tabernacle in
that case would be moved from place to
place within the central district assigned to
it, as necessity or convenience dictated.
Hengstenberg objects to the idea that the
tabernacle was moved to Shechem that it
would have led to an idea that God was only
present in His Holy Place, to which it is
sufficient to reply, (1) that this does not
necessarily follow, and (2) that such a con-
ception was entertained, though errone-
ously, by some minds. The Samaritan
woman, for instance, supposed the Jews to
believe that in Jerusalem only ought men
to worship (John iv. 20). When Heng-
stenberg says, however, that the meeting in
the last chapter had reference to Israel from
a theocratic and rehgious, and this one fiom
an historical point of view, he is o» firmer
ground. The former exhortation is ethical,
this historical. He goes on to refer to the
deeply interesting historical traditions
centering round tMs place, which have been
noticed above. The oak in ver. 26, Heng-
stenberg maintains to be the same tree that
is mentioned in Gen. xii. 6 (where our ver-
sion has, erroneously, "plain"), and which
is referred to both in Gen. xxxv. 4 and here
as the (i.e., the well-known) terebinth in
Shechem (see note on ver. 26). He has
overlooked the fact that the tree in Gen.
xii. 6 is not an HpX but an JPN. He goes
on to contend that the terebinth was not
merely " by " but " in " the sanctuary of
the Lord, which he supposes to be another
■anctoary beside the tabernacle, perhapf



m



tfiE BOO^ oP josattA.



foa xxrr. 1—2



the sacred enolostiie round Abraham's altar.
But he is wrong, as has been shown below,
(ver. 26), when he says that 3 never signi-
fies near (see oh. v. 25). The question is
one of much difficulty, and cannot be satis-
factorily settled. But we may dismiss
without fear, in the hght of the narative in
ch. xzii., Knobel's suggestion that an altar
was erected her« on this oooasion. If there
were any altar, it must have been the altar
in the tabernacle. Other goda. That the
family of Nahor were not exactly wor-
shippers of the one true God in the same
pure ritual as Abraham, may be gathered
from the fact that Laban had teraphim
(Gen. xxxi. 19, 30). But recent researches
have thrown some light on the condition
of Abraham's family and ancestors. If
TJr Casdim be identified, as recent dis-
coverers have supposed, with Mugeyer,
which, though west of Euphrates as a
whole, is yet to the eastward of one of
its subordinate chaimels (see ' Transactions
of the Society of Biblical Arohasology,'
iii. 229 ; Tomkins, ' Studies on the Time
of Abraham,' p. 4), its ruins give us plenti-
ful information concerning the creed of its
inhabitants. We may also find some in-
formation about this primeval city in
Eawlinson'a ' Ancient Monarchies,' i. 15,
and in Smith's 'Assyrian Discoveries,'
p. 233. The principal building of this city
is the temple of the moon-god Ur. One of
the hturgioal hymns to this moon-god is in
existence, and has been translated into
French by M. Lenormant. In it the moon
is addressed as Father, earth-enlightening
god, primeval seer, giver of life, king of
kings, and the like. The sun and stars seem
also to have been objects of worship, and
a highly developed polytheistic system
seems to have culminated in the horrible
custom of human sacrifices. This was a
recognised practice among the early Acca-
dians, a Turanian race which preceded the
Semitic in these regions. A fragment of an
early Accadian hymn has been preserved, in
which the words " his offspring for his life
he gave " occur, and it seems that the
Semitic people of Ur adopted it from them.
A similar view is attributed to Balak in
Micah vi. 6, 6, and was probably derived
from documents which have since perished
(see Tomkins, ' Studies on the Time of Abra-
ham,' p. 24). Hence, no doubt the Moloch,
or Molech, worship which was common in
the neighbourhood of Palestine, and which
the descendants of Abraham on their first
entrance thither rejected with such disgust
(see also Gen. xxii., where Abraham seems
to have solne difficulties connected with hia
ancestral creed). Other deities were wor-
(ihipped in the Ur of the Chaidees. Sunat,



the sun-god, Nana, the equivalent of Astarte,
the daughter of the moon-god, Bel and Belat,
"hia lady." "In truth," says Mr. Tom-
kins, in the work above cited, "polytheism
was stamped on the earth in temples and
towers, and the warlike and beneficent
works of kings. Bimmon was the patron
of the aU-important irrigation. Sin of
brickmating and building, Nergal of war."
A fuU account of these deities will be found
in EawUnaon's ' Ancient Monarchies,' vol. i.
Ver. 2. — All the people (see note on ch.
xxui. 2). The Lord God of Israel Bather,
Jehovah, the God of Israel (see Exod. iii.
13). Until the vision to Moses, the God of
Israel had no distinctive name. After that
time Jehovah was the recognised name of
the God of Israel, as Chemosh of the
Moabites, Milcom of the Ammonites, Baal
of the Phoenicians. Our translation, " the
Lord," somewhat obscuresthis. Your fathers
dwelt on the other side of the flood.
Bather, of the river. Euphrates is meant,
on the other side of which (see, however,
note on last verse) lay Ur of the Chaidees.
It is worthy of notice that there is no evi-
dence of the growth of a myth in the
narrative here. We have a simple abstract
of the history given us in the Pentateuch,
without the slightest addition, and cer-
tainly without the invention of any further
miraculous details. All this goes to es-
tabhsh the position that we have here
a simple unvarnished history of what oo-
cuiTed. The manufacture of prodigies, ci.8
every mythical history, down to the biogra-
phies of Dominic and Francis, teUs us, la
a process that cannot stand still. Each
successive narrator deems it to be his duly
to embeUish his narrative with fresh mar-
vels. Compare this with the historical
abridgment before us, and we must at least
acknowledge that we are in the presence of
phenomena of a very different order.
Professor Goldziher has argued, in hia
' Mythology among the Hebrews,' that
Abraham, Sarah, Isaac, and Jacob are
solar myths, such as we find in immense
abundance in Cox'a 'Aryan Mythology.'
Abraham (father of height) is the nightly
sky. Sarah (princess) is the moon. Isaac
(he shall laugh) is the smiling eunset or
dawn. It would be difficult to find any
history which, by an exercise of similar
ingenuity, might not be resolved into myths.
Napoleon Bonaparte, for instance, might be
resolved into the rushing onset of the con-
queror who was never defeated. The retreat
from Moscow is a solar myth of the most
obvious description. The battle of Bull's
Eun is clearly so named from the cowardice
displayed there by the sons of John Bull.
It ia lemarked by Mr, Tomkiua that Ur,



en. xxtT. 1—28.]



THE BOOK OF JOSHUA.



848



tbe city of the moon-god, lends itself most
naturally to the fabricator of myths. There
is only one objection to the theory, and that
is the bricks, still in existence, stamped
with the words Urn, which compel ns to
descend from this delightful cloud-land
of fancy to the more sober regions of
solid and literal fact (see* Studies on the
Times of Abraham,' pp. 205—207). In
old time. Literally, from everlasting, i.e.,
from time immemorial, iir ap^rie. The
Eabbinio tradition has great probability in
it, that Abraham was driven out of his
native country for refusing to worship idols.
It is difficult to understand his call other-
wise. No doubt his great and pure soul
had learned to abbor the idolatrous and
cruel worship of his countrymen. By in-
ward struggles, perhaps by the vague
survival of the simpler and truer faith
which has been held to underlie every
polytheistic system, he had " reached a
purer air," and learned to adore the One
True God. His family were led to embrace
his doctrines, and they left their native
land with him. But Earan, with his star-
worship, was no resting-place for him. So
he journeyed on westward, leaving the
■ooiety of men, and preserving himself fiom
temptation by his nomad life. No wander-
ing Bedouin, as some would have us believe
(see Drew, ' Scripture Lands,' p. 18), but a
prince, on equal terms with Abimelech and
Pharaoh, and capable of overthrowing the
mighty conqueror of Elam. Such an ex-
ample might well he brought to the memory
of his descendants, who were now to be
Eojoumers in the land promised to their
father. Guided by conscience alone, with
every external influence against him, he
had worshipped the true God in that land.
Ko better argument oonld be offered to his
descendants, when settled in that same
land, and about to be bereft of that valuable
support which they had derived from the
life and influence of Joshua.

Ver. 5. — And I plagued Egypt, according
to that which I did among them. This
Terse implies that the Israelites possessed
some authentic record which rendered it
nnnecessary to enter into detail. Add to
this the fact that this speech is ascribed to
Joshua, and that the historian, as we have
seen, had access to authentio sources of
information, and we cannot avoid the con-
clusion that the hypothesis of the existence
of the written law of Moses at the time of
the death of Joshua has a very high degree
of probability. The word rendered "plagued"
is literally smote, but usually with the idea
of a visitation from God. And afterward I
brought you out The absence of any men-
tipii of (he plagues her« is noteworthy. It



cannot be accounted for on the supposition
that our author was ignorant of them, for
we have ample proof that the Book ot
Joshua was compiled subsequently to the
Pentateuch. This is demonstrated by the
quotations, too numerous to specify here,
which have been noticed in their place. We
can only, therefore, regard the omission
made simply for the sake of brevity, and
because they were so well known to all, as a
sign of that tendency, noticed under ver. 1,
to abstain from that amplification of marvels
common to all mythical histories. Had
Joshua desired to indulge a poetic imagina-
tion, an admirable opportunity was here
afforded him.

Ver. 6. — Unto the Red Sea. There is no
unto in the original. Perhaps the meaning
here is into the midst of, the abruptness
with which it is introduced meaning more
than that the Israelites arrived at it. But
though without the He locale, it may be no
more than the accusative of motion towards
a place.

Ver. 7. — And when they cried unto th«
IiOrd. This fact is taken, without addition
or amplification, from Exod. xiv. 10 — 12.
The original has unto Jehovah, for "unto
the Lord." He put darkness (see Exod.
xiv. 19, 20). The occurrence, which there is
most striking and miraculous, is here briefly
related. But the miracle is presupposed,
although its precise nature is not stated.
You. This identification of the Israel of
Joshua's day with their forefathers is
common in this book (see notes on ch. vi.
21, &C.). A long: season. Literally, many
days. Here, again, there is no discrepancy
between the books of Moses and this
epitome of their contents. If both this
speech and the Pentateuch were a clumsy
patchwork, made up of scraps of this narra-
tive and that, flung together at random,
this masterly abstract of the contents of the
Pentateuch is little short of a miracle.
Whatever may be said of the rest of the
narrative, this speech of Joshua's must
have been written subsequently to the
appearance of the books of Moses in their
present form. But is there any trace of the
later Hebrew in this chapter more than
any other t

Ver. 8. — And I brought you into the land
• of the Amorites (see oh. xii. 1—6 ; Num.
xxi. 21—35 ; Deut. ii. 32—36 ; iii. 1—17).

Ver. 9. — ^Then Balak, son of Zipper. We
have here the chronological order, as well as
the exact historical detail, of the eventi
carefully preserved. Warred against Israel,
The nature of the war is indicated by the
rest of the narrative, and this taUies com-
pletely vrith that given in the Book of
Nnmbers. Balak would have fought if he



160



THE BOOK OP JOSHUA.



[oh. xxit. 1—28.



dared, but as he feared to employ temporal
weapons he essayed to try spiritual ones in
their stead. But even these ■were tamed
against him. The curse of God's prophet
was miraculously turned into a blessing.

Ver. 10.— But I would not. The Hebrew
Bhows that this is not simply the conditional
form of the verb, but that it means I willed
not. It was God's "determinate purpose"
that Israel should not be accursed. Blessed
you still. Eather, perhaps, blessed you
emphatically. And I delivered you out of
Ms hand. Both here and in the narrative
in Numbers xxii. — xxx. it is implied that
Balaam's curse had power if he were per-
mitted by God to pronounce it. Wicked
as he was, he was regarded as a prophet of
the Lord. There is not the slightest shadow
of difference between the view of Balaam
presented to us in this short paragraph and
that in which he appears to us in the more
expanded narrative of Moses.

Ver. 11. — ^And ye went over Jordan. This
epitome of Joshua's deals with his own nar-
rative just as it does with that of Moses.
The miraoulons portions of the history are
passed over, or Ughtly touched, but there is
not the slightest discrepancy between the
speech and the history, and the miraculous
element is presupposed throughout the
former. The men of Jericho. Literally, the
U>rds or possessors of Jericho. The seven
Canaanitish tribes that follow are not iden-
tical with, but supplementary to, the lords
of Jericho. Fought against yon. The word
is the same as that translated " warred " in
ver. 9. The people of Jericho did not fight
actively. They confined themselves to de-
fensive operations. But these, of oourse,
constitute war.

Ver. 12. — The hornet. Commentatora
are divided as to whether this statement is
to be taken literally or figuratively. The men-
tion of hornets in the prophecies in Exod.
xdii. 28, Deut. vii. 20 is not conclusive.
In the former passage the hornet seems to
be connected with the fear that was to be
felt at their advance. The latter passage
is not oonclusive on either side. The prob-
ability is — since we have no mention of
hornets in the history — that what is meant
is that kind of unreasonable and panic fear
which seems, to persons too far oS to discern
the assailants, to be displayed by persons
attacked by these apparently insignificant
insects. The image is a lively and natural
one, and it well expresses the dismay which,
Bs we read, seized the inhabitants of the
land when their foes, formidable rather
from Divine protection than from their
number or warlike equipments, had crossed
the Jordan (see Josh.ii. 9 — 11 ; v. 1 ; vi. 1).
Where tl^e figure came from i* ao% tax to



seek. Joshua was quoting the prophecies
of Moses mentioned above. The two Idnga
of the Amorltes. Sihon and Og, who were
driven out, beside the tribes on the other
side Jordan who have just been mentioned.
Ver. 13. — Labour. The word here used
is expressive of the fatigue of labour, and ig
more equivalent to our word toil. The
whole passage is suggested by Deut. vi. 10.
Ver. 14. — Sincerity and trath. These
words, rendered by the LXX. h eiSirtin koI
tv liKoioaivy, are not the precise equivalent
of those so translated in other passages in
the Bible, nor is St. Paul, in 1 Cor. v. 8,
quoting this passage. The word translated
sincerity is rather to be rendered 'perfection,
or perfectness. The Hebrew word signifying
truth is derived from the idea of stability,
as that which can stand the rude shocks of
inquiry.

Ver. 15. — Or the gods of the Amorltes, In
whose land ye dwell. There is a reductio
ad absurdum here. " Had ye served those
gods ye would never have been here, nor
would the Amorites have been driven out
before you." The reference to the gods of
their fathers seems to be intended to suggest
the idea of an era long since lost in the past,
and thrown into the background by the
splendid deliverances and wonders which
Jehovah had wrought among them. But
as for me and my house, we will serve the
Lord. Or, Jehovah. Here speaks the sturdy
old warrior, who bad led them to victory in
many a battle. He invites them, as Elijah
did on another ev n more memorable occa-
sion, to make their choice between the false
worship and the true, between the present
and the future, between the indulgence of
their lusts and the approval of their con-
science. But as for himself, his choice is
already made. No desire to stand well with
the children of Israel obscures the cleamesB
of his vision. No temptations of this lower
world pervert his sense of truth. The ex-
perience of a Hfe spent in His service has
convinced him that Jehovah is the true
God. And from that conviction he does
not intend to swerve. In days when faith
is weak and compromise has become general,
when the sense of duty is slight or the
definitions of duty vague, it is well that
the spirit of Joshua should be displayed
* among the leaders in Israel, and that there
should be those who will take their stand
boldly upon the declaration, " But as for me
and my house, we will serve the Lord."

Ver. 16. — And the people answered and
said, God forbid that we should forsake the
Lord. There could be no doubt of the sin-
cerity of the people at that moment. The
only doubt is that afterward* expressed b;
Joshut^, whether the feeling were Ukely t9



OH. XXIV. 1—28.]



THE BOOK OF JOSHUA.



861



be permanent. The best test of sincerity is
not always the open hostility of foes, for
this very often braces up the energies to
combat, -while at the same time it makes
the path of duty clear. Still leas is it the
hour of triumph over our foes, for then
there is no temptation to rebel. The real
test of our faithfulness to God is in most
cases our power to continue steadfastly in
one course of conduct when the excitement
of conflict is removed, and the enemies with
which we have to contend are the insidious
allurements of ease or custom amid the
oomraon-plaoe duties of life. Thus the
Israelites who, amid many murmurings and
backslidings, kept faithful to the guidance
of Moses in the wilderness, and who followed
with unwavering fidelity the banner of
Joshua in Palestine, succumbod fatally to
the temptations of a Ufe of peace and quiet-
ness after his death. So too often does the
young Christian, who sets out on his
heavenward path with earnest desires and
high aspirations, who resists successfully
the temptations of youth to unbelief or
open immorality, fall a victim to the more
insidious snares of compromise vrith a cor-
rupt society, and instead of maintaining a
perpetual warfare with the world, rejecting
its principles and despising its precepts,
sinks down into a life of ignoble ease and
self-indulgence, in the place of a life of
devotion to the service of God. He does
not oast off God's service, he does not
reject Him openly, but mixes up insensibly
with His worship the worship of idols which
He hates. Such persons halt between two
opinions, they strive to serve two masters,
and the end, like that of Israel, is open
apostasy and ruin. For " God forbid " see
ch. xxii. 29.

Ver. 17. — For the Lord our Ctod. Bather,
/or Jehovah our God (see note on ver. 2).
The Israelites, we may observe, were no
sceptics, nor ever became such. Their sin
was not open rebellion, but the attempt to
engraft upon God's service conduct incom-
patible with it, which led in practice to the
same result — a final antagonism to God.
But they believed in Jehovah ; they had
no doubt of the miiaoles He had worked,
nor of the fact that His protecting hand
had delivered them from all their perils,
and had achieved for them all their vic-
tories. Nor do we find, amid all their sins,
that they ever committed themselves to a
formal denial of His existence and authority.
To this, in the worst times, the prophets
appeal, and though Israelitish obstinacy
contested their conclusions, it never disputed
their premises. Did those great signs.
Here the people, in their answer, imply the
ciroumstanoes which Joshua had gmitted.



This remark presupposes the miraculous
passage of the Eed Sea and the Jordan, and
the other great miracles recorded in the
books of Moses and Joshua. And among
all the people through whom we passed.
The Hebrew is stronger, " through the midst
of whom." As the destruction of the
Amorites is mentioned afterwards, this
must refer to the safe passage of the
Israelites, not only among the wandering
bands of Isbmaelites in the wilderness, but
along the borders of king Arad the Canaanite,
of Edom, and of Moab (Num. xx. — xxv.).
This close, yet incidental, agreement on the
part of the writers of two separate books
serves to establish the trustworthiness of
the writers.

Ver. 18. — Therefore wtU we also servo
the Lord. There is an ambiguity in our
version which does not exist in the Hebrew.
There is no " therefore," which only serves
to obscure the sense, and which is borrowed
from the Vulgate. The LXX., which has
aXKA. Kai, gives the true sense. After the
enumeration of the great things God
Jehovah has done for them, the IsraeUtes
break off, and, referring to the declaration
of Joshua in ver. 15, " but as for me and
my house, we will serve Jehovah," reply,
" we too will serve Jehovah, for He is our
God."

Ver. 19. — And Joshua said unto th«
people, Ye cannot serve the Lord. Calvin
thinks that Joshua said this to rouse the
sluggish heart of the people to some sense
of their duty. But this is quite contrary to
the fact, for the heart of the people, as we
have seen (ch. xxii.), was not sluggish. As
little can we accept the explanation of
Michaelis, who paraphrases, " Ye will not be
able, from merely human resolutions, to
serve God." Joshua was stating nothing
but a plain fact, which liis own higher con-
ception of the law had taught him, that the
law was too "holy, just, and good " for it
to be possible that Israel should keep it.
He had forebodings of coming failure, when
he looked on one side at the law with its
stem morality and rigorous provisions, and
the undisciplined, untamed people that he
saw around him. True and faithful to
the last, he set before them the law in all
its majesty and fulness, the nature of its
requirements, and the unsuspected dangers
tliat lay in their weak and wayward hearts.
No doubt he had a dim presentiment of the
truth, to teach which, to St. Paul, required a
miracle and three years' wrestling in Arabia,
that by the deeds of the law " shall no
flesh be justified in God's sight, for by the
law is the knowledge of sin " (Eom. iii. 20).
As yet the Spirit of God had barely begun
to upveil the figure of the Deliverer whf



9S9



THE BOOK OF JOSHUA



[cH. xxiT. 1— 2a



was to declare at once God's righteonsness
and His forgiveness. Yet none the less did
Joshua do his duty, and strove to brace up
the Israelites to theirs, not by disguising
the nature of the undertaking to which they
were pledging themselves, but by causing
them to be penetrated with a sense of its
awfulness and of the solemn responsibilities
which it entailed. St. Augustine thinks
that Joshua detected in the Israelites already
the signs of that self-righteousness which
St. Paul (Eom. x. 3) blames, and that he
wished to make them conscious of it. But
this is hardly borne out by the narrative.
He Is a holy God. The pluralis excellentice
is used here in the case of the adjective as
well as the substantive. This is to enhance
the idea uf the holiness which is an essen-
tial attribute of God. He la a Jealous God.
The meaning is that God will not permit
others to share the affections or rights
which are His due alone. The word, which,
as its root, " to be red," shows, was first
applied to human affections, is yet trans-
ferred to God, since we can but approximate
to His attributes by ideas derived from
human relations. Not that God stoops to
the meanness and unreasonableness of
human jealousy. His vindication of His
rights is no other than reasonable in Him.
"His glory" He not only "vrill not," but
cannot " give to another." And therefore,
as a jealous man does, yet without his
infirmity, God refuses to allow another to
share in what is due to Himself alone. The
word, as well as the existence of the Mosaic
covenant, has no doubt led the prophets to
use, as they do on innumerable occasions,
the figure of a husband and wife (Jer. ii. 2 ;
Ezek. xxiii. 25 : Hos. ii. 2, 13, 16 (margin),
19, 20) in describing the relations of God to
His Church, and approximate to His
attitude towards His people by the illus-
tration of an injured husband towards a
faithless wife (see also Bxod. xxxiv. 14;
Deut. vi. 16). He wUl not forgive your
transgressions nor your sins (see Exod.
xxiii. 21). There were many words used
for "forgive'* in Scripture : ^^^, KtJ'J and
Two (see Pearson's learned note in his
•Treatise on the Creed,' Art. X.). The one
here used signifies to remove or to bear the
burden of guUt, corresponding to the word
oipw in the New Testament. The word
here translated " transgressions " is not the
same as in chap. vii. 15, and the cognate
word to the one rendered " transgressed " in
ehap. vii. 11, is here rendered " sins." It
signifies a " breach of covenant," while the
word translated " sins " is the equivalent of
the Greek dfiapria.

Ver. 20.— Then he wlU turn. There is
no contradiction between this passage and



James i. 17, any more than our expression,
the sun is in the east or in the west, con-
flicts with science. St, James is speaking
of God as He is in Himself, sublime in His
unchangeableness and bountiful purposes
towards mankind. Joshua and the prophets,
speaking by way o£ accommodation to our
imperfect modes of expression, speak of Him
as He is in relation to us. In reality it is
not He but we who change. He has no
more altered His position than the sun,
which, as we say, rises in the east and sets
in the west. But as He is in eternal oppo-
sition to all that is false or evil, we, when
we turn aside from what is good and true,
must of necessity exchange His favour for
His displeasure. Do you hurt Literally,
do evil to you. After that be bath done
you good. This implies what has been be-
fore stated, that it is not God who is incon-
sistent but man, not God who has changed
His mind, but man who has changed his.

Ver. 22 — Ye are witnesses against your-
selves. Joshua has not disguised from them
the difficulty of the task they have under-
taken. Like a true guide and father, he
has placed the case fully and fairly before
them, and th^ have made their choice.
He reminds them that their own words bo
deliberately uttered will be for ever wit-
nesses against them, should they afterwards
refuse to keep an engagement into which
they entered with their eyes open. They do
not in any way shrink from the responsi-
bility, and by accepting the situation as it
is placed before them, render it unpossible
henceforth to plead ignorance or surprise as
an excuse for their disobedience. And it Is
well to observe, as has been remarked above,
that such an excuse never was pleaded after-
wards, that the obligation, though evaded
was never disavowed.

Ver. 23. — Now therefore put away, said
be, the strange gods which are among yoo.
KeU and Delitzsoh notice that the words
translated "among yon" have also the
meaning, "within you," and argue that
Joshua is speaking of inward tendencies to
idolatry. But this is very improbable. For

(1) the word is the same as we find trans-
lated in ver. 17, " through whom." And

(2) the internal scrutiny which the law
demanded was hardly so well understood at
this early period as by diligent study it
afterwards became. The plain provisions
of the law demanded obedience. Compara-
tively little heed was given at first to in-
ward feelings and tendencies. There can
be little doubt that the meaning is precisely
the same as in Gen. xxxv. 2, and that though
the Israelites dare not openly worship
strange gods, yet that teraphim and other
images were, if not worshipped, yet pre-



. XXIV. 1—28.]



THE BOOK OF JOSHUA.



858



served among them in such a way as to
be likely to lead them into temptation. The
history of Mioah in Judg. xvii. 5 is a proof
of this, and it must be remembered that
this history is out of its proper place. The
zealous Phinehas (Judg. xs. 28) -was then
still ahye, and the worBUp at Mioah's house
had evidently been carried on for some
time previous to the disgraceful outrage at
Gibeah, The putting away the strange
gods was to he the outward and visible sign,"
the inoliniug of the heart the inward and
spiritual grace wrought within them by the
meroy of God. For it is not denied that
God desired their affections, and that those
affections could scarcely be given while their
heart went secretly after idols. It may be
further remarked in support of this view
that the Israelites are not exhorted to turn
their heart from the false gods, but to put
them away. It is a plain, positive precept,
not a guide for the inner consciousness. On
the other hand, the command to incline the
heart to the Lord rests upon the simple ground
of common gratitude. St. Augustine thinks
that if any false gods were secretly in Is-
rael at this time, they would have been met
by a severer punishment than that accorded
to Achan. Masius — " pace divini viri " —
proceeds to argue that inurders, thefts, and
adulteries were worse sins than those of
Achan, that it were not reasonable to sup-
pose that Israel was free from such sins, and
they were not punished like Achan 's. He
forgets to urge (1) that the condition of the
children of Israel was very different in
Achan'stime to that of the death of Joshua,
and (2) that Aohan's was a special act of
disobedience to a very special enactment,
considerations which would have materi-
ally strengthened his argument.

Ver. 24. — And the people said unto
Joshua. The triple repetition of theprpmise
adds to the solemnity of the occasion and
the binding force of the engagement.

Ver. 25. — So Joshua made a covenant.
Literally, cut a covenant, a phrase common
to the Hebrew, Greet, and Latin tongues,
and derived from the custom of sacrifice,
in which the victims were out in pieces and
offered to the deity invoked in ratification
of the engagement. The word used for
■ eovenant, berith, is derived from another
word having the same meaning. This
appears more probable than the suggestion
of some, that the berith is derived from the
practice of ratifying an agreement by a
social meal. And set them a statute and
ordinance. Or, appointed them a statute
and a judgment. The word translated
" statute " is derived from the same root
as our word hack, signifying to cut, and
bence to engrave in indiehble characters.

JOSHUA.



The praetioe of engraving inscriptions, pro-
clamations, and the like, on tablets was
extremely common in the East, We have
instances of it in the two tables of the
law, and in the copy of the law engraven in
stones on Mount Ebal. The Moabite stone
is another iostance. And the Egyptian,
Assyrian, and Babylonian monarchs seem
to have written much of their history in
this way (see note on ch. viii. 32). The
word rendered " ordinance " is far more
frequently rendered " judgment " in our ver-
sion, and seems to have the original sig-
nification of a thing set upright, as a pillar
on a secure foundation. In Shechem (see
note on ver. 1).

Ver. 26. — And Joshua wrote these words.
Or, these things, since the word (see note
on ch. xxii. 24; xxiii. 15) has often this
signification. Joshua no doubt recorded,
not the whole history of his campaigns
and the rest of the contents of what is
now called the Book of Joshua, but
the public ratification of the Mosaic cove-
nant which had now been made. This
.he added to his copy of the book of the
law, as a memorial to later times. Tbe
coveoant had been ratified with solemn
ceremonies at its first promulgation (Exod.
xxiv. 3 — 8). At the end of Moses' ministry
he once more reafSrmed its provisions, re-
minding them of the curses pronounced on
all mho should disobey its provisions, and
adding, as an additional memorial of the
occasion, the sublime song contained in
Deut. xxxii. (see Deut. xxi. 19, 22). Joshua
was present on this occasion, and the dying
lawgiver charged him to undertake the con-
quest of the promised land, and to main-
tain the observance of the law among the
people of God. Hitherto, however, God's
promise had not been fulfilled. It seems
only natural that when Israel had obtained
peaceful possession of the land sworn unto
their fathers, and before they were left to
His unseen guidance, they should once
more be publicly reminded of the con-
ditions on which they enjoyed the in-
heritance. It may be remarked that,
although Joshua's addendum to the book
of the law has not come down to us, yet
that it covers the principle of such ad-
ditions, and explains how, at the death of
Moses, a brief account of his death and
burial should be appended by authority to
the volume containing the law itself. The
last chapter of Deuteronomy is, in fact, the
official seal set upon the authenticity of the
narrative, as the words added here were the
official record of the law of Moses, having
been adopted as the code of jurisprudence in
the land. And took a great stone (see notes
on oh. iv. 2, 9). An oaJc Perhaps the tere-

AA



864



THE BOOK OF JOSHUA.



[cH. XXIV, 1 — 28.



kinth. So the LXX. (see note on ver. 1).
The tree, no doubt, under which Jacob had
hid the teraphim of his household. This
was clearly one of the reasons for which
the place was chosen. By the sanctuary.
Eeil denies that ^ ever means near. It is
difficult to understand how he can do this
with so many passages against him (see ch.
y. 13 ; 1 Sam. zxix. 1 ; Ezek. x. 15). He
wishes to avoid the idea ot the sanctuary
being at Shechem.

Ver. 27. — A witness (see note on ch.
xxii. 27). For It bath heard. Joshua speaks
by a poetical figure of the stone, as though
it had intelligence. The stone was taken
from the very place where they stood, and
within earshot of the words which had been
spoken, Thua it became a more forcible
memorial of what had occurred than if it
had been brought from far. Te deny your
God. To deny is to say that He is not.
The Hebrew implies " to deny conceitiing
Him," to contest the truth of what has
been revealed of His essence, and to dis-
parage or deny the great things He had
done for His people. The whole scene
must have been a striking one. The aged
warrior, full of years and honours, venerable
from his piety and courage and implicit
obedience, addresses in the measured,
perhaps tremulous, accents of age the repre-
■eutatives of the whole people he has led I



BO long and so well, Aronnd him are the
ancient memories of his race. Here Abra-
ham pitched bis tent in his wanderings
through Canaan, Here was the first altar
built to the worship of the one true God
of the land. Here Jacob had buried the
teraphim, and solemnly engaged his house-
hold in the worship of the true Qod. Here
was the second foothold the children of
Abraham obtained in the promised land
(see ver. 32), a foretaste of their future
mheritance. The bare heights of Ebal
soared above them on one side, the softer
outlines of Gerizim rose above them
on the other; and on their sides, the
plaster fresh and the letters distinct and
clear, were to be seen the blessings and
the curses foretold of those who kept
and those who broke the law. In the
midst, Shechem, in a situation, as we
have seen, of rare beauty, bore witness to
the fulfilment of God's promise that the
land of their inheritance should be " a good
land," a "land flowing with milk and
honey," No other place oould combine so
many solemn memories ; none could more
adequately renund them of the fulness of
blessing God had in store for those who
would obey His word ; none could be fitter
to impress upon thera the duty of worship-
ping God, and Him alone.



HOMILETICS.

Vers, 1 — 28. — The posieaaion of the inheritwnce ami itt responsibiUtie$. The
difference between this address to the children of Israel and the former is that, m
the former, Joshtia's object was to warn them of the danger of evil-doing, whereas
in this be designed to lead them, now they were in fall possession of the land, to
make a forma] renewal of the covenant. For this purpose he briefly Bur\'eys the
history of Israel from the call of Abraham dovra to the occasion on which he
addressed them. Up to that time the covenant had been given them as one
which it would be their duty to fulfil when the time arrived. Now, he reminds
them, the time had arrived. And just as the Church calls upon those who were
dedicated to God in infancy to solemnly affirm, when they are old enough, theii
obligation to fulfil the engagement that was then contracted for them, so Joshua,
now Israel was in a position to carry out fuUy the terms of the covenant, chooses
a place as well as a time most fitting for the ceremony, and obtains from them a
full recognition of the duties to which they were bound. In this address there is
no appeal to their feeUngs, It is no question of personal influence to guide them
into the right path. They are now simply asked to affirm or deny the position in
which, whether they affirm or deny it, ttiey reaUy stand before God.

I. The contrast between the past and peesent condition of God's people,
" Tour fathers dwelt on the other side of the flood in old time . , . and served
other gods." So St. Peter tells us, " Ye were as sheep going astray, but are now
returned to the Shepherd and Bishop of your souls " (1 Peter ii, 25, C£ i. 14, 18 ;
ii, 10 ; iv. 3). So St. Paul tells us (Ephes, ii, 1—8, 11, 12 ; Titus iii, 3, &c,). When
we entered into covenant with God we crossed the flood, and were placed in the
promised land, though not yet to jpowess the folness of our iuberitauoe. But it



OH. XMV. 1—28.] THE BOOK OP JOSHUA. a&f



each one of ns for himself has to cross the flood and put himself in oovenant with
Christ, it is because our Head has Himself trodden the same path. Bom in " the
likeness of sinful flesh," as the representative of sinners not yet folly reconciled to
His Father, " made sin," not for Himself, but for us. He dwelt " on the other side " of
the river of death ; but that sti'eam once crossed. He ascended into heaven, there
to win blessings which we should inherit after Him. We must ever, while rejoicing
in the privileges we now enjoy, remember how they were won, and what we once
were, "children of wrath even as others," but now, being "made free from sin and
become servants to God, ye have your fruit onto hoUness, and in the end ever*
lasting Ufe."

H, The covenant must be eenewed bt each foe himselp. The promises of
Ood are general, to all mankind. But they are also special, to each individuaL
They must be appUed personally by each man to his own soul, by faith. For this
reason the Church of God has always required a profession of faith from each person
when they entered into covenant with God at baptism. But this formal profession
is practically inoperative, unless each man makes & personal profession of faith, in
his own heart, on which he means to act, as soon as he is conscious of his own
iudividual responsibihty to God. Thus Israel, when the time had come for the
fulfilment of the covenant by reason of his possession of his inheritance, was called
upon to avow his readiness so to do. And thus he was the type of all Christians,
who cannot appropriate to themselves the blessings of the covenant until they have
acknowledged the obhgation on their part to fulfil its conditions.

III. We did not gain the blessings foe ourselves (see ver. 15). The Israelites
were continually reminded that the good things they enjoyed were not of their own
procuring (see Deut. vi. 10 ; ix. 5). And so the Christian is reminded that he owes
all to God. The Christian covenant is one of mercy, not of works. Any merits
the Christian possesses are not his own, but the gift of God. " What hast thou,
that thou hast not received ? " If the gift of salvation through Christ, it was not
thine by merit, but by God's free gift. If thou hast any bodily or intellectual gifts,
they came down " from the- Father of lights." If thou possessest any moral or
spiritual qualities worthy of praise, they have been the work of God's Spirit within
thee. Boast not, then, of anything thou art. Be not highminded, but fear. Take
heed to use the gifts that have been given you to God's glory, and to be ever thank-
ful to Him for Btis meroy» to whona you owe all you have and all you are.

IV. The covenant is a hard one to obey. The law of Moses was singularly
strict and searching. It bound men to a close and minute scrutiny of their lives,
and forced them to remember every hour the obligations they lay under. Nor is
the Christian covenant one whit less searching. Nay, it is far more so, for it em-
braces not merely every act and word, but even the " thoughts and intents of the
heart." God still punishes those who, even in the least point, oflend against His
law, and thus forsake Him and serve strange gods. It is still true that we " can-
not" in our own strength " serve the Lord." But it is also true that He will forgive
us our shortcomings through Jesus Christ, and that He will furnish us with the
strength we lack to foM the precepts of the wide-reaching lav which He haa
eet MO,



HOMILIES BY VAEIOUS AUTHOBS.

Ver. 1. — Puhlia worship, " And they presented themselves before God."
Eminent servants of God were remarkable for their solicitude respecting the
course of events likely to follow their decease. " When I am gone let heaven and
earth come together" is a sentiment with which a good man can have no sympathy.
Note the instructions given by Moses (Deut. xxxi.), David (1 Kingsii.), Paul (2 Tim.
iv. 1 — 8), and Peter (2 Pet. i. 12 — 15). As Jesus Christ looked to the futm-e (John
xiv. — ^xvii. ; Acts i. 8), so did His type Joshua. He was determined that the people
ehould be bound to the service of the true God, if solemn meetings and declarations
eould bring it about. Nothing should be wanting on his part, at any rate. The



806 THE BOOK OF JOSHUA. [oh. xxiv. 1—28.

gathering of the Israelites may remind us of the purposes for which we assemble
every Lord's day. We come —

I. To MAKE SPECIAL PEESENTATiON OF OUBSELVES BEFOBE GoD. Always in the
presence of the Almighty, yet do we on such occasions "draw nigh" to Him. The
world, with its cares and temptations, is for a season excluded. We leave it to hold
more immediate intercourse with our heavenly Father. We approach to pay the
homage that is His due from ub. Surely those who plead that they can worship in
the woods and fields as weU as in God's house, in sohtude as in society, forget that
the honour of Jehovah demands regular, public, united recognition. We have to
consider His glory, not only our individual satisfaction. " I will give Thee thanks
in the great congregation." It is our privilege also to proffer our requests, to
implore the blessings essential to our welfare.

II. To LISTEN TO THE WoED OF GoD. We havc the "lively oracles," the revela-
tion of God to man. It behoves us to give reverent attention thereto. In business
or at home other m itters may distract our attention ; here we can give ourselves
whoUy to the "still small voice." It may instruct, inspire, rebuke, and comfort.
The utterance of God's messenger claims -a hearing as the message firom God to
our souls. " Thus saith the Lord" (ver. 2). The speaker may (1) recall the past
to our remembrance. Joshua reviewed God's dealings with His people, speaking
of their caU (ver. 2), deliverance from bondage (ver. 5), guidance (ver. 7), succour
in battle (vers. 9 — 11), and possession of a goodly land (ver. 13). Such a narrative
is fruitful in suggestions ; provocative of gratitude, self-abasement, and trust. (2)
State clearly the present position. Acquainted with God and the rival heathen
deities, it was for the Israehtes to make deliberate choice of the banner under
which they would henceforth enrol themselves. In God's house Christians are
taught to regard themselves as "strangers and pilgrims," as "seeking a better
country," as those who are " on the Lord's side." If they wiU they may turn back
and desert the Master whom hitherto they have followed. There must be "great
searchings of heart." (3) Briefly slcetch the future. Eeligion does not confine
itself to the narrow region of present circumstances ; it looks fia,r ahead, desires no
man to take a leap in the dark, but rather to weigh cahnly the respective issues
dependent upon the actions of to-day. None who have experienced the tendency
of earthly occupations to absorb, to engross the interest, will deny the advantage
accruing from the quiet contemplations of the sanctuanry, where it is possible to
caloiilate correctly afar from the bustle of the city, where on wings of the spirit we
rise to an altitude that dwarfs the loftiest objects of worldly ambition, and brings
heaven and its glories nearer to our view.

III. To RE-coNSEORATE OUBSELVES TO God's serviob. We remain the same
persons and yet are continually changing. Like the particles of the body, so our
opinions, affections, &c., are in unceasing flux. To dedicate ourselves afresh is no
vain employment. It brightens the inscription, "hohness unto the Lord," which
time_ tends to efface. Are not some idols still in our dweUings ? some evil pro-
pensities indulged, which an exhortation may lead us to check ? To keep the feast
we oast out the old leaven. Man is the better for coining into contact with a holy
Being. The contrast reveals his imperfections and quickens his good desires.

Conclusion. If inclined to say with the men of Beth-shemesh, " Who is able to
•tand before this holy Lord God ?" (1 Sam. vii. 20) let us think of Christ, who has
entered as our Forerunner into the Holiest of all. In His name we may venture
boldly to the throne of grace. Some dislike the services of the sanctuary because
they speak of the need of cleansing in order to appear before the Almighty. Men
would prefer to put aside gloomy thoughts and to stifle the consciousness that aU
is not right within. But does not prudence ooimsel us to make our peace with God
now, to "seek Him while He may be found," clothed in the attribute of mercy,
instead of waiting for the dread day when we must all appear before the judgment-
seat, when it wiU be useless to implore rooks and mountains to hide us from the
presence of Him that sits upon the throne ? Behold TTim now not as a Judge
desirous to condemn, but as a Father who hath devised means whereby His
banished ones may be recalled, who waits for the return of the prodigal — ^yea, will
diso«m Him afar off, and hasten to meet him in love. — JL



ea. twt. 1-28.] fSE fiOOK OP JOSHUA. fig?

Vers. 14, 15. — A rightful cTioiee v/rged. The most solemn engagement we can
piake is to bind oiirselves to be the servants of Jehovah. Suoh a bond not even
death dissolves, it is entered into for eternity. There are periods, however, when
it becomes us to ponder the meaning of the covenant, and to renew our protesta-
tions of fidelity. To consider the exhortation of Joshua here recorded will benefit
alike the young convert and the aged believer, and may lead to a decision those
" halting between two opinions."

I. An appeal fob hearty eb-dedioation to the service of God. (1) It*
necessity arises from the proneness of man to settle down upon his lees, neglecting
the watchfuhiess observed on his first profession of religion. Enthusiasm cools ;
men sleep and tares are sown among the wheat ; the Christian athlete rests content
with the laurels already gained ; the warrior, having defeated the enemy, allows him
time to gather his forces for another battle. The temple was beautifully cleansed,
but inattention has allowed it to grow filthy, and it needs a thorough renovatibn.
(2) Its leading moti/oe is gratitude for Divine goodness in the past. How skilfally
Joshua, in the name of Jehovah, enumerates the chief national events wherein His
mercy had been conspicuous. Brethren, review the past I Your mercies have
been numberless, hke the drops of the river flowing by yom- side. If you can tell
the stars, then may you catalogue the blessings you have received. The retrospect
teaches the character of your God, and may inspire you with hope for the future.
Eeverence the Almighty, and your highest expectations wiU not be disappointed but
far surpassed. (3) Its method prescribes severance from idolatry and a sincere
determination to follow the Lord fully. Self-examination will reveal many sins
still cherished in the heart, like the gods which Israel had allowed to remain in
the camp. It were well for us, like David, to go in and sit before the Lord (2 Sam.
vii. 18). In the presence of Him who has loaded us with benefits temporal and
spiritual, our vision will be clarified, and we shall be filled with an earnest desire
to "cleanse ourselves from all filthiness of the flesh and spirit." All avowals of a
change of heart are to be distrusted which are unaccompanied by evident renuncia-
tion of evil habits. The outward act not only affords an index of the inward
feeling, but also materially contributes to its strength.

II. An alteenativb presented. Notwithstanding all that had been done for
the Israelites, some of them might deem it " evil," unpleasant, irksome, laborious
to serve the Lord. Hence the option of forsaking Him, and bowing before the gods
whom their fancy should select. The alternative suggests that, in the opinion of
the speaker, (1) some kind of service is inevitable. "Without acknowledging some
superior powers, the IsraeUtes could not remain. Absolutely free and independent
man cannot be, though his idol may assume any form or character. In every breast
there is some predominating principle or passion, be it piety, morahty, inteUec-
tuaKsm, sestheticism, or love of selfish pleasure. (2) The freedom of the will it
teen in the power of choice. Choose man must ; but he can choose what seems
best to him. God has a right to demand our homage ; but He is content to let ua
decide for ourselves the equity of His claims. He appeals to the judgment and the
conscience. He makes His people " willing in the day of His power," not by
enchaining their wills and constraining obedience, but by appropriate motives and
inducements, leading them to consider it their glory to lay themselves at His feet.
"Who then is willing to consecrate this service thisdayunto the Lord?" (1 Chron.
xxix. 6). Freedom of choice is too frequently a beautifal and dangerous gift, which,
like a sword in the hands of a child, injures its possessor. Yet we are unable to
divest ourselves of the responsibility that attaches to firee agency. Some plan of
hfe is mhng us, even if it be a resolve to live aimlessly. We may deliberately
weigh our decision, bringing to bear upon our comparison of conflicting claims all
the strength of our moral nature and power of discernment, or we may refuse to
face the points at issue, and let our judgment go by default, imagining that we shall
thus escape the onus of a formal determination ; but in the latter case, no less than
m the former, we have made our choice, and are serving some master, though we
recognise it not. The alternative indicates (3) that neutraMty amd compromise art
taeh impossible. If God be not the object of adoration, then any occupant of ths



858 THE BOOK OF JOSHUA. [oh. mit. 1—28.

throne must be considered as God's enemy. Mtiltitudes think that if they are not
found openly opposing religion there is naught to be complained of in their attitude
and conduct. Herein they are terribly at fault. "He that is not with Me is against
Me." Those who advance not to the help of the Lord are treated as His foes (cf.
Judg. xxL 8 and 1 Sam. xi. 7). Nor wiU God accept a divided allegiance. Dagon
must faU from his pedestal when the ark of God's presence enters the chamber of
the heart. How could the Israelites be true at once to Jehovah and to idols ? " Ye
cannot serve God and mammon." Beligion modifies the character of every action,
transforming it into an offering laid upon the altar to the glory of God. All that we
have and are we send to the Royal Mint, and receive it back, stamped with the
Sovereign's image, and fashioned according to His desire.

III. A FIXED RESOLVE. " As for me and my house, we will serve the Lord."
Joshua seta noftZe ea;a57»pfe, which powerfully affected his followers. The expressed
determination of a pastor, a teacher, a parent may produce widespread beneficial
results upon those imder their charge. Joshua showed himself fit to lead men.
He did not wait to see what the majority of the people would approve before he
committed himself to a particular course of action ; but boldly stated his inten-
tion to cleave with full purpose of heart unto the Lord. The Ephraimites, slow to
come to the rescue in the hour of danger, but swift to claim a place of honour
when a victory has been won (Judg. xii.l, 2), have found many imitators in every
age. Men who wait to see in which direction the current of popular feeling is
Betting ere they risk their reputation or their safety by taking a decided step. We
may dislike isolation, but are not alone if the Father is with us. Joshua's resolve
was never regretted. What man has ever been sorry that he became a follower of
Christ ? Even backsliders confess that they were never happier than when they
attended to the commandments of the Lord. True religion furnishes its votaries
with self-evidential proofs of its Divine authority in the peace of mind and satis-
faction of conscience which they experience. To enjoy the favour of God is felt to
be worth more than any earthly friendship or worldly gain.

Conclusion. This theme is suitable for the beginning of a year, when untrodden
paths invite you to choose a method of travel Or perhaps some crisis is occurring
in your life, when you are entering upon a firesh sphere of employment. Use it as
a time to commence a period of devotion to God's service. Young people, decide
which is the more honourable, to serve God or the world. Do not spend the finest
of your days in a manner which will hereafter pierce you with remorse. — ^A.

Vers. 1 — 22. — Joshua gathers all the tribes together to Shechem, and calls for
the elders of Israel, and for their heads, and for their judges, and for their officers,
and they presented themselves before God. " And Joshua said imto the people, Ye
are witnesses against yourselves that you have chosen you the Lord to serve Him.
And they said, We are witnesses. So Joshua made a covenant with the people that
day." There are few more beautiful incidents in the Old Testament than this
renewal of the covenant between God and His people, at the moment of their
entering into possession of the promised land, and on the eve of the death of Joshua.
It seems to us an admirable model of the covenant which ought to be constantly
renewed between successive generations of the people of God in all ages, and the
Father in heaven. (1) Let us observe, first, that the piety of the fathers does not
suffice for the sons, and that while it is a great blessing to have pious parents, and
gives the children a strong vantage-ground for the spiritual warfare, it does not do
away with the necessity that they should for themselves ratify the holy resolves of
their progenitors. God made a covenant with Abraham, but, nevertheless, both
Isaac and Jacob renewed that holy covenant for themselves. And it needed, as we
see, to be ratified again by their descendants when at length they entered into
possession of the promised land. So is it with ourselves. Though we had in our
veins the blood of the most glorious saints, their holiness would not make us the
less culpable if we did not yield our own selves a living sacrifice unto God. Wliat
avails it to be chililren of Abraham according to the flesh, since God is able of the
stones to raise up children unto Abraham ? (Matt. ui. 7.) These principles find »



OH. xxiT. 1—28.] THE BOOK OF JOSHUA, 900

Bpecial application in the gospel economy, in which everjrthing is made to depend
upon the birth. Not only should the covenant with God be concluded by each new
generation of Christians, but it needs to be ratified by every individual for himseli
apart (2) " They presented themselves before God," it is said, on this solemn day.
It is before Him and in His sight that the great pledge is to be taken which marks
our entrance into His covenant of grace. We have not to do with His representa-
tives, the ministers of His Church, nor even with the Church itself, but with Him.
Let us rise above all that is human, and let us come into the very presence of God
when we yield ourselves to Him and to His service. (3) In this solemn meeting
between Israel and Israel's God, to renew their covenant, it is God who leads the
way by recalling to His people the glorious manifestations of His love in choosing
them, delivering them from the bondage of Egypt, bringing them through the
desert, and making them victorious over the nations of Canaan. All is of His
mercy ; His free grace is the basis of reconciliation. It is the offended one who
makes the first advance. " He fint loved us," says St. John (1 John iv. 18). (4)
Preventing grace does not nuUify human freedom. God proposes, invites, beseeches,
and in His very entreaty there is a virtue which enables us to respond to Him. But
we must respond, we must decide for ourselves, it must be our free act. The question
is put in the most categorical form to the people of Israel : " If it seem evil to you
to serve the Lord, choose ye this day whom ye will serve " (ver. 15). " The people
answered and said, God forbid that we should forsake the Lord to serve other gods."
"And Joshua said unto the people. Ye are witnesses against yourselves, that ye have
chosen you the Lord to serve Him. And they said. We are witnesses " (ver. 22).
This decisive dialogue ought to pass between every individual soul and God. Its
form may differ, but in substance it is always the same. " Lovest thou Me ? " says
Christ to Peter, on the shores of the Lake of Tiberias. " Tea, Lord, Thou knowest
that I love Thee " (John xxi. 15). It is the interchange of this question and answer
which seals the covenant between the soul and Christ. Woe to those who forsake
the good way after having once chosen it I " If we sin vpilfully after that we have
received the knowledge of the truth, there remaineth no more sacrifice for sins,
but a certain fearful looking-for of judgment" (Heb. x. 26, 27). — E. db P.

Vers. 1 — 13. — Bevieio of Providence. I. It is well to review the past.
(1) The Ufe which is wholly occupied with the present is necessarily superficiaL
BecoUection find anticipation broaden and deepen life. They are essential to the
consciousness of personal identity. Memory retains possession of the past and thus
enriches life. The past is not whoUy gone ; it lives in memory ; it lives in its
effects ; it will be called up for judgment. (2) A review of the past should make us
(a) grateful for the goodness of God, (6) hiumhle in the consciousness of our own
failings, (c) wise from the lessons of experience, and {d) diligent to redeem the time
which yet remains.

II. No EEVIEW OF THE PAST IS COMPLETE WHICH DOES NOT EECOGNISE THE DiVINK .

Pbovtoence. The chief value of bibhcal history is in the fact that it clearly indi-
cates the action of God in human affairs. (1) The highest historical study is that
which searches for " God in history." To do this is to trace events to their first
cause, to see the connecting ideas of unity which bind all things together, and to
follow out the course of aJl changing movements towards their destmed end. (2)
We may see indications of the active presence of God in history and in private life
by noting (a) material and spiritual good things enjoyed ; (&) providential deUver-
ances in trouble _; (c) solemn acts of judgment ; (d) good thoughts and deeds which
all have their origin in God, the source of all good, and (e) the general onward and
upward movement of mankind. (3) Let us practically apply the duty of noting
God's action in human affairs to national history, church history, and private
experience.

III. A BIGHT REVIEW OP God'S ACTION W THE PAST WILL SHOW THAT THIS IS

OHAEAOTEEISED BY GOODNESS AND MEBCT. We single out striking Calamities for
difficulties to the doctrine of Providence. We should remember that these are
striking just because they are exceptional. We ore often tempted to fix upon the



MO THE BOOK OF JOSHUA. [0=- ""• 1—28.



trouble* and neglect the meroies of the past. A fair review of the whole will show
that the blessings infinitely outnumber the distresses. (1) Such a review should
gtimulate gratitude. It is most ungrateful to be receiving innumerable blessings
every day of our lives and rarely to recognise the Hand from which they come,
while we complain that others are not added, or murmur if any cease. (2) Such a
review should increase our confidence and hope. God is changeless. As He has
been He wiU be. " Hitherto the Lord hath helped us." Threatening clouds have
burst in Ibeneflcent showers. Dehverance has come when all seemed hopeless.
Let us believe that the same wUl be in the future, and press forward to dark and
uncertain days with more assurance of faith.

IV. The goodness of God in history will be chiefly seen dt the promotion
OF the highest human progress. History in the main is the story of the progress
of mankind. This was the case with Joshua's review of Jewish history. It showed
progress from idolatry to the worship of the true God, from slavery to liberty,
from poverty to a great possession, from homeless wandering to a happy, peacefiilc
settled hfe. Thus God is always leading us upwards from darkness to light, from
bondage to liberty, from ignorance, superstition, sin, and misery to the golden ag«
of the future (Bom. viii. 19— 23).— W. F. A.

Ver. 14. — The call to GocPa service. I. The call. (1) It is a direct appeal.
Eeligion is practical, and preaching must be practical. We must not be satis-
fied with the exposition of truth. We must aim at persuasion such as shall
affect the conduct of men. For this purpose there is room for direct exhortation.
Men are ready to admit the truth of propositions which lie outside the sphere
of their own experience. The difScult matter is to translate these into priuciples
of conduct and to apply them to individual lives. The Bible is sent for this
ultimate purpose. As a message from God the Word of God is not merely a
revelation of truth ; it is supremely a call from the Father to His children.
God is how calling directly to us by the undying voice of Scripture, by providence,
by His Spirit in our consciences (Eev. xxii. 17). (2) The call is based on a
review of past experience. After this review Joshna says, " Now, therefore, fear
the Lord," &o. God's goodness to us in the past is a great motive to incline
us to serve Him (a) because it lays us under a great obligation to Him (1 Cor.
vi. 20), and (6) because it reveals His character as that of a Master worthy of
devotion and deUghtful to serve. (3) The call is urged with the last words of a
dying ma/n. Joshua is old and about to die. At such a time an address would
naturally be characterised by supreme earnestness. What is then urged would be
felt by the speaker tb be of first importance. Mere conventionalism, objects of
passing political expediency, trifles and crotchets sink out of view. The dying
message of the old leader must concern the highest welfare of the people. With all
the force of these oiroumstanoes Joshua selects the need to fear and serve God for
His one urgent exhortation. Siaely this fact should lead us all to put it before our-
selves as a question of first importance, taking precedence of all cousideratious of
worldly pleasure and interest.

II. The object op the call. (1) The end to be aimed at is to " fear and serve
the Lord." The fear characterises the spirit of internal devotion, the service covers
the obedience of active work. The fear precedes the service ; because we cannot
rightly serve God with our hands tiU we are devoted to Him in our hearts. The
fear of God here required is not the abject terror wliich the slave feels for the
tyrant, but reverence, awe, worship, the dread of displeasing, and the humble sub-
mission of our souls. This must be found in all true devotion. Yet it is most
prominent in the stem Hebrew faith (Psa. ii. 11). For the Christian, love is the
leading motive, though this love must be an awed and reverent affection. After the
fear, then, must follow the service ; for God will not be satisfied with passive vene-
ration. He requires active obedience. (2) The essential oharaoteristio of the fear
and service here noted is sincerity. There is always danger of worship becoming
unconsciously formal even when it is not knowingly hypocritical ; because pm-a
worahip inTdvM the highest effort of spirituality, great abstraction from sense, and



fltt. xxW. 1-M.] TfiE BOOK OP JOSQtJA, 861

m purity of thought which is very foreign to the habits of Binfu] beings (2 Tim. iii. 5),
Yet God abhors unreal devotion (Isa. xxix. 13), and can only be worshipped at all
when He is served spiritually (John iv. 24). (3) The necessary condition of this
fear and service is a depa/rtv/re from all things inconsistent with it. The people
must give up all Ungeriug habits of idolatry. We must repent and forsake our old
sins. We cannot retain devotion to the world and to sin whilst we devote ourselves
to God. No man can serve two masters. Therefore choose. — W. F. A.

Vers. 2, 3. — Abrahmn the heathen. "Tour fathers . . . served other gods," is
■n incidental statement of the utmost value. It throws a hght on Abraham's
antecedents in which we do not always see tliem, and enhances the significance of
his abandonment of home and country, and his clear faith in a living God, in a
degree which nothing else does. Observe first of aU —

I. The fact that Abraham was originallt a heathen. He was not merely
born and bred an idolater, as we might have gathered &om the story of Bachel's
teraphim, but was a pagan in exactly the same condition of belief as many in India
or in China are to-day. Some, in later times especially, and indeed in all times,
worshipped the true God, but employed an idol to assist their imagination of Him ;
that is, they simply sought ritualistic and sensuous aids to religious thought and
feeling. But Abraham began hfe far lower down in the religious scale. His fathers
terved other gods ; the deified powers of nature representing Uttle more than the
forces and tendencies of life. Primitive tradition had lost any brightness it ever
had. The religious sentiment had lost that reverence and habit of attention which
soon begins to perceive God and to feel that the God constantly appealing to it is
one and the same. The worship of several deities is always a mark of a super-
stitious ingredient blending with faith. Terah's family were in this condition.
They were not only idolaters but polytheists — without Bible or sacrament, promise,
or law. Abraham was precisely m the same sort of spiritual circumstances, and
had been taught the same sort of religious ideas, and trained in the same super-
stitions, as are found in aU pagan lands to-day. Yet with advantages so shght, he
became the spmtual father of the religious nation of antiquity — type of all saintU-
ness, of everything bright in faith and unquestioning in obedience. There is some
reason to suppose that a god of vengeance v/as one of those deities most reverently
regarded by his people ; and yet he finds and worships a God of love I He, like all
of us, had Christ, the light that Hghteth every man that cometh into the world.
He, unlike most of us, followed the Christ-light within him. Following the Divine
light, it grew ever clearer, and his vision became stronger to perceive and his heart
to follow it. Amongst a multitude of silent deities, One spoke to him through hia
conscience, with more and more of frequency, and, in the degree in which He waa
obeyed, with more and more of clearness, both in the comforts He whispered and
the commands He enjoined, till gradually he felt there was but one great God,
who governed all, and should receive the homage of all ; who was the friendly
refuge as well as the omnipotent Creator of men. Gradually his life began to revolve
around this unseen Ceutre, and the outward aspect and mward purpose of his life
stood out in palpable difference from that of his fellows. Doubtless he preached his
deep conviction, gathered about him some kindred spirits ; perhaps had to endure
persecution ; tiU at last he got a strong impression borne in upon his conscience
that his path of duty and of spiritual wisdom was to leave his native land and seek a
new home for what was a new faith amongst men. His coming to Ur of the
Chaldees, and then to Canaan, maybe compared with the expedition of the Pilgrim
Fathers. Like them he sought " fireedom to worship God," and like them founded
a great nation in doing so. In any view of his character, his decision, his devotion,
the clearness of his faith, the promptness of his obedience, are marvellous. But
they become much more so when we mark the"" fact that Joshua here brings
out, that Abraham began his career in heathen darkness— that the father of the
faithful began life as a mere pagan. Observe —

II. Some lessons of this fact. For evidently it has many. We can only
luggest them. (1) A little grace and a little light go a long wwy when v>eU used.



862 THE BOOK OF JOSHUA. [oh. xxiv. 1—28.

How little had Abraham to begin with I But, using what he had, it grew more, and
was enough to do more for Inrn than light a thousand times as clear does for some
of us to-day. A man who has light upon his next step of duty has really an
" abundance of revelation." Do not go in for being omniscient, postponing aU
obedience until you get light on all truth. Use your little light well whatever it
is, and 80 yon wUl get more. (2) Obedience is tJte mode of self-enUghtenment. "If
any man will do God's wiU, he shall know God's doctrine." So says Christ.
Doing duty is the way of discovering truth. Since the creation of the world there
has been no other. Take this. (3) All the sacra/menta a/re means of grace, not
conditions of salvation. The Church has always been tempted to exaggerate (he
helpful into the essential, until it says, " Extra ecclesiam, nulla salus." Paul, in the
Epistle to the Bomans, arguing with those who held the sacrament of circumcision
essential to salvation, quotes Abraham as reaching all his spirituahty and accept-
ance with God, "not in circumcision, but in uneircumcision," i.e., not by sacra-
ments, but without them altogether. Sacraments are aids. The mercy that gave
them to be such wiU, in the absence of them through error or inadvertence, use
some other way of enriching and enlightening the obedient heart. (4) However
sunk in superstition the heathen may be, they are capable of religion. The difference
between the Christian and the heathen in the matter of spiritual advantages is not
a difference between having all and having nothing, but between having more and
having less. They have the Christian inward light — movings of God's spirit, lessons
of God's providence. God speaks to them, and " wakes their ear in the morning."
They lack the testimony of God's saints, their examples, the revelation of God's
highest law, a clear Hght on immortality ; above all, the light which comes from
the hfe and death of the Son of God — " the light of the knowledge of the glory of
God in the face of Jesus Christ." This fuller hght would multiply vastly the
number of the devout amongst them, and give a higher character to their devotion.
But they may be saved, as we are taught explicitly both by Peter and by Paul, by
a Saviour they feel and follow, though they do not know the story of His love. (5)
The heathen being thus capable of reUgon, and ov/r higher advantages being
influential to produce it, we ought to extend to them the full light of the Sa/viour's
glory. Our neglect of Christian missions grows from our despair of heathen men.
We ought to think of the millions in heathen darkness as Abraham's brethren, and
capable of appreciating and responding to all that ia true and gracious. If we
rightly reverence them, we shoiild not eat our morsel of the bread of life alone,
but should share it with them. Let us seek to extend the knowledge of the
gospel of Christ, and we shall yet behold many an Abraham rising up in heathen
lands. — G.

Vers. 14, 15. — The great appeal. From the trembling lips of one within a step
of death comes the appeal which through all the centuries since has pierced and
moved and won the hearts of men. Often urged, it is not always represented
accurately. Ehjah may address a more degenerate generation with a challenge to
serve God or to serve Baal, insisting on this as if the chances of either alternative
being adopted were even. Joshua does not say, " Choose ye this day whom ye
vnH serve — God or another," but bids them serve God, urging His claims. In
the event of their being unwilling to yield to these claims, he urges with some
irony, that shows the keenness of moral energy still in Him, that in that case they
should choose amongst the deities whose feebleness they had witnessed the one
least helpless. There are several things here worthy of notice. Observe, first, an
assumption underlying this appeal, viz. :

I. Some plan op lifb should be soberly thotjght out and followed with
DECISION. Our "miscellaneous impulses" always prove a poor guide. There can be
neither progress, peace, strength, nor usefulness if life is desultory. We cannot
employ anything to good advantage, much less life, unless we know its nature, what
it is made for, what can be done with it, its resources and its proper ends. The
first question of the ' Shorter Catechism,' " What is the chief end of man ? " stands
as the first question of the catechism of life. Until we form some aim and keep



m. XXIV. 1—28.] THE BOOK OF JOSHUA. 86S

to it, to-morrow will be always moving in a different direction from to-day, wiU loss
what to-day lias won. An aim permits life to be cumulative, always gathering
rioherforoe, fuller joys — always completing and rounding off its conquests. Joshua
here assumes that a plan of life is essential to the proper pursuit of it, and on this
assumption his appeal is based. Take note of this, for a planless is a powerless life.
Observe —

II. He claims their life foe God. •' Now, therefore, serve Him." He does
not timorously present any alternative. There is no reasonable alternative to this.
One plan, and only one, of life should be entertained by a serious nature. The
only wise and only rational plan of life is the service of God. A multitude of
reasons concur to commend it. (1) Gonsdence reqv/iires it, as the only right course.
Serving God, every law will be kept, every duty done, every claim met, every wrong
avoided. Conscience points like a compass-needle to the throne of God, and its
every suggestion is in one form or other a suggestion to do His bidding. It is a
solemn fact that the hohest and the deepest instinct of our nature bids us serve God.
(2) Gratitude requires it. God had delivered them, led them, helped them, enriched
them ; given them Uberty, victory, home. In addition to these national blessings.
He had to each individual given life, faculty, joys, home-loves, duties that dignified,
comforts that gladdened life. The instinct of gratitude is to ask. What shall I
rSBder to the Lord for all His benefits ? We have still larger benefits — a Saviour,
a home above. Gratitude should constrain us to serve God. (3) Wiadom should
constrain us to serve Him. Serve self — and server and served are both ruined.
Serve God — and God is pleased, and we are safe. Service of God developes aU our
higher faculties ; is the only state in which we are safe ; is the course in which we
are useful. Growth, safety, usefulness, what can compare with them ? Pitiable is
the state of those who do not serve. They do not live in any proper sense of the
word. Therefore Joshua urges on them to serve their redeeming God. And the
grounds which suited them 4,000 years ago are all intensely vahd to-day. Consider
this claim, and if disposed to dispute it, consider next —

II. The challenge he gives to those unwilling to serve God. " If it
Beem evil unto you to serve the Lord, choose ye whom ye wUl serve ; the gods
whom your fathers served, or the gods of the Amorites in whose land ye dweU."
Thus he presents them with the discredited deities around them, and bids them
choose. Win they choose the gods that Abraham forsook — ^forsook because power-
less to help, degrading in their influence ? by forsaking whom he found all his
grandeur, all his blessedness, aU his reward ? or will they take the gods of the
Amorites whose powerlessness to protect their servants had been just witnessed,
who betrayed those who trusted in them ? With what force does the mere form in
which he urges his challenge deter men from it I Would that all who reject the
Saviour would reaUse what they are about t If it seems not good to you to serve
Christ, whom will ye serve ? The gods your fathers left ? The gods whose power-
lessness to bless men is manifest around you? Such a goddess as Pleasure,
which fools think the best to worship, which fritters away all strength of soul, de-
stroys conscience, and heart, and intellect, and body alike — would you choose that ?
or Money, coyest of aU deities ? whom he that seeketh rarely findeth, and he that
findeth never finds so rich as he had hoped ? who seems to be a god that can give
everything, but it is found to be unable to give any one of the things most desired
by us ? Or Power, the deity sought by the ambitious, who never permits any one
to say, " He is mine " in anything like the degree he had hoped, and even when
possessed is found to be insipid as the insignificance from which men fled ? Is it
Indulgence f the deity that degrades men ? or Self-will, the deity that destroys
them ? Choose which. There ought to be no trifling. We must serve some God.
Who is to be the source of all you hope for if you put away the Saviour of Calvary ?
To use the experience of others is the part of a wise man ; to buy experience dearly
for yourself is the part of a fooUsh man. There is none amongst aU the deities
that clamour for your sor\'ice which the wise and the good have not forsaken, or
the fooUsh and the worldly have not repented of cleaving to. Betake not yoorseli
to such, but serve the Lord. — G.



8M ttaE BOOK OP JOSfittA. [aa. xxt?. 1-28.

Vers. 14 — 16. — The grand choice. Joshua's words derive added force from the
historic associations of the place in which he uttered them. Shechem was not only
a scene of great natural heauty, but one around which lingered memories peculiarly
in harmony with the circumstances of the time. Here Abraham first pitched his
tent and raised an altar, consecrating that spot to the living God — a witness against
the heathen abominations of the Canaanites who dwelt in the land. Here,
probably under the same oak, Jacob bmied the " strange gods " — the teraphim
and the amulets that some of his family had brought from Padanaram— in token
of his resolute renunciation of these sinful idolatries. What more fitting place
could be found for a solemn appeal Mke this to the tribes to remain true to the God
of their fathers ? Besides which, Joshua's venerable age, the blameless integrity
of his character, and the renown of his exploits as their leader, gave such weight to
his appeal that they would well deserve the threatened penalties if they failed to
profit by it. Certain important principles of religious life are illustrated in this
appeal —

I. The sebyice op God is a matter of free peesonal choice. " Choose you
this day," &c. The simple alternative they were called on to decide was, either the
service of the Lord Jehovah, or the service of the false gods of Egypt and of the
Amorites. No middle course was open to them. There could be no compromise.
It must be one thing or the other — let them choose. And substantially the same
alternative is before every man in every age. There is something to which he pays
supreme homage, and it is either to the great invisible King, the only living and
true God, or else to the idols, more or less base, of his own self-wiU or of the vain
world around him. (1) It is the glory of our nature that we can make such a
choice. God has so constituted us that this self-determining power is one of oui
most essential prerogatives. And in His dealings with us he always respects the
nature He has given. He never violates the law of its freedom. That were to
destroy it. Np man is compelled to serve Him, nor yet forbidden by any imperious
necessity of his being or hfe to do so. Human nature knows nothing either oi
necessary evil or irresistible grace. (2) This freedom of choice gives worth to
every religious act. There would be no moral worth in anything we do without
it. The basis of all personal responsibility, it is also the condition of aU moral
goodness and acceptable service. God would have nothing at our hands that is
not voluntarily rendered. If we would serve Him at all, His Bervice must be our
free unfettered choice.

II. It is a choice detebmined by eational considebations. " If it seem evil,"
fto._ Joshua sets the alternative with perfect fairness before them that they may
weigh the conflicting claims and judge accordingly. • If these gods of the heathSn
are really nobler, better, more worthy of their gratitude and trust than the Lord
Jehovah, then by all means let them foUow them ! But if the Lord be indeed God,
if they owe to Him all that gives sanctity to their national character, and glory to
their national history, then let them put these " strange gods" utterly and for ever
from them, and cleave to Him with an undivided heart. It is a deUberate. judgment
between contrary and wholly irreconcilable paths to which they are called. Eeljgion
is our " reasonable service " (Rom. vii. 1). It is no blind act of self-surrender." It
involves the consent of all our powers — the mind embracing divinely discovered
truth, the heart yielding to gracious heavenly influence, the conscience recognising
a supreme obligation, the wiQ bowing to that higher will which is " holy and just
and good." No man is called to declare for God withaut sufacient reason.

III. It is a choice which cebtain okitical occasions make to be spbciaixt
mpBEATiVE. "Choose you this day," &o. "This day" above all other days—
because the motives to it are stronger to-day than ever ; because the matter is one
that it is neither right nor safe to defer to another day. While self-consecration to
the service of God is a perpetual obUgation, there are seasons of hfe in which it is
peculiarly urgent, when many voices combine with unwonted emphasis to say
"now is the accepted time," &c. (1) Youth, (2) times of adversity, (3) times of
special rehgious privilege or awakening, (4) times when new social relations are
pemg formed, and new paths of hfe are opening.



»H. ixnr. 1—28.] THE BOOK OF JOSHUA. 86S

IV. It is a choice encoceagbd by noble personal examples. " As for me and
my house," &o. Here is an exa^uple (1) of manly resolution, (2) of the strength
that can dare to stand alone, (3) of family piety directed by paternal authority and
influence. Such an example has an inspiring effect above that of mere persuasive
words. It quickens and strengthens every germ of better thought and feeling in
the breasts of men. There is no stronger incentive to rehgious Ufe than the obser-
yation of the exemplary forms it assumes in others (1 Cor. iv. 15, 16 ; Phil. iii. 17).

V. It is a choice that must lead to appeopbiate pbactical conclusions.
" Now therefore put away," &o. (ver. 23). The honesty of their purpose, the reaUty
of their decision, could be shown in no other way. They only have living faith in
God who are " careful to maintain good works " (Titus ui. 8 ; James ii. 18). — ^W.

Ver. 15. — Choice and deeUion. After exhorting the people to fear and serve tlie
Lord, Joshua calls to them to consider the alternative of rejecting Him, and to
make a decisive choice. It is well to be brought to a practical decision in fuU view
of all the issues which face us. These may be clearly seen. Truth does not shua
the light. Christianity can weE bear comparison with all other systems of worship
and modes of life.

I. The call to choose. (1) We are free to choose. Joshua is the leader of the
people, yet he does npt command submission to God, and forcibly compel it. He
exhorts, but he leaves the choice open. God has left our wills free to choose or to
reject Him. This liberty is essential to voluntary service — the only service which
is true and spiritual. God would not value forced devotion. The worth of devotion
depends on its free willingness. Yet the freedom God accords is not release from
obligation, but only exemption from compulsion. It is still our duty to serve Gotl.
(2) We camnot lerve Ood without vohinta/rily choosing Him for our Master.
This is a consequence of our Uberty. "We shall never come to be truly Christian
by accident, or by the unconscious influence of a Christian atmosphere. Beligion
depends on a decisive action of the will. This need not be so sudden and pro-
nounced as to take the dramatic form it assumes in the narrative before us, and ia
some oases of sudden conversion. But the fact must be proved by a consequent
decisive course of hfe. (3) Indecision is a fatal error. We may not choose the
evil, yet we practically abandon ourselves to it while we refrain from choosing
the good. In ordinary Hfe indecision is a sure cause of failui e ; so it is in religion.
Though we may doubt many points of doctrine, if only we know enough for choice
we must not hesitate in the region of practice. (4) There is no reason for delay.
Joshua called for immediate decision. This is most safe, most easy, and secures
the longest life of service (Heb. iii. 7).

II. The alternatives op choice. (1) Joshua anticipated the position of those
to whom it might " seem evil to serve the Lord." This might arise (a) from mis-
understanding the character of God's service, (6) from fear of the inevitable sacrifices
and toils which it involves, or (c) from lingering affection for the evU things which
must be abandoned on entering upon it, (2) Joshua challenged the people to
ohoose whom they would serve if they rejected the Lord. It is well not only to
defend the truth, but to show the difficulties which must be faced if this is rejected.
We should look at our prospect aU round. It is not fair to object to the difficulties
of Christianity until we have weighed well the consequence of any other course of
life. We must have some God. Israel must ohoose — if not for Jehovah, then fur
the gods of thefr fathers or the gods of their neighbours. There is irony in Joshua's
way of setting out the alternatives. Either the people must go back to the past,
deliverance from which they are now rejoicing at, or they must accept the worship
of those gods whom they have defied and defeated in the overthrow of their enemies.
If we have not God we must follow the world, Satan — our evil past, or the worst
foes of our present welfare.

III. The example of decision fob Ood. Joshua ohooses independently of the
popular choice. He is not swayed by the opinion of the multitude. Rather he
would guide it by example. It is weak to refuse to choose tO we see how the
world will ohoose. Truth and right are not affected by numbers. Every man



066 THE BOOK. OE JOSHUA. [oh. xxiv. 1— 2a

must make the great choice for himself. (1) Joshua first chose for himself. We
must be decicled before we can influence others aright. Yet let us beware lest in
saving others we ourselves become castaways (1 Cor. ix. 27). (2) Joshua also chose
for Ids house. We should seek to bring strangers to the right way, but our first
duty is with our own household. It is a good sign when a man is able to speak for
the decision of his house. — W. P. A.

Ver. 19. — The diffieuUiea of God^B lerviee. I. There aee difficultieb in the
SERVICE OF God. All are fi:eely invited to serve God ; all may find ready access to
God ; there is no need for delay, all may come at once and without waiting to be
worthy of Him ; after coming through Christ, the yoke is easy and the burden
light. Yet there are diflScultiea. Sin and self and the world must be sacrificed ;
God cannot he served with a divided, heart, hence complete devotion must be at-
tained ; the service itself involves spiritual endeavours and tasks and battles, before
which the strongest fail. It is impossible to serve God in our own strength. We
ean only serve Him aright because what is impossible with men is possible with
God ; i.e., we ean only serve Him in His strength and through the inspiration of
His Spirit.

II. The difpiouIjTies in the service of God arise from the disagreement
BETWEEN OUR CHARACTER AND His. God docs not wUlingly make TTia service
hard ; it would not be hard if we were not sinfiil. It is diiScult while we have evil
habits and affections lingering about us, and it is impossible so long as we cUng to
these voluntarily. (1) God is holy, therefore He cannot accept service which is
tainted with cherished sin (we must distinguish between cherished sin which makes
acceptable service impossible, and resisted sin which hinders, but does not utterly
prevent, such service). (2) God is jealous, therefore He will not accept divided
service. Israel must choose either the service of the Lord or the worship of the
heathen gods. Both cannot be embraced. We must choose. So long as we give
one-half of our heart to the world or to sin God wiU not accept the other half. (3)
God is, in some respects, unforgiving. He forgives the worst sins of the worst
men on repentanos ; but whilst the least sin is cherished God cannot forgive it.
No time wUl soften His resentment. Hence if we come to His service with evil
knowingly in our hearts, He cannot overlook it and accept us.

III. It is well to consider the difficulties in the service op God. Israel
was too ready hastily to accept God's service without considering aU that it involved.
If difficulties exist they must be faced. It is best to count the cost before making^
choice (Luke xiv. 28). Those representations of the gospel which are confined to
invitations and promises, and ignore the call to repentance and to sacrifice for
Christ, are false and unjust. Christ would have the new disciple face the cross
(Luke ziv. 27). Such considerations should not deter us firom the choice of God's
service. They should make us (1) careful to compare both sides of the question
till we see how immensely the obligations and advantages of religion outweigh the
difficulties, (2) humble and fi'ee from boasting and presumption, and (3) whoUy
dependent on the help of Christ to make us worthy of His service, to give us streugtifi
to serve, and to make our serrioe acceptable (Fhil. iv. 13). — ^W. F. A.

Vers. 21 — 26. — The covenant. I. The terms of the covenant. It was to
bind the people to their promise to renounce the old life of sin and idolatry, and to
enter upon and remain in the true service of God. Nations are proud of protecting
teeaties, constitutional pledges, charters of liberty, &e. No nation ever took a
more important covenant than this. The chief question for all of us is whether we
will live for the world or for God. The gospel brings to us a new covenant. The
promises are greater, the terms are more light. Yet we must choose and resolve
and yield ourselves in submission to it if we would enjoy the advantages its offers.
This covenant has two sides. God pledges His blessings, but we must pledge our
devotion. His is the infinitely greater part. Yet if we fail in oui-s God's promises
of blessing no longer apply.

11. The objects of the covenant. (1) It was to preserve the memory of th«



OH. ixnr. 1—28.] THE BOOK OF JOSHUA- 867

pledge. Men make resolutions in moments of exaltation whicli they are apt ta
forget when the feeUngs which gave rise to them have subsided. Yet it is just then
that they are most necessary. They are not needed when they are freely made,
because the impulse to resolve would carry out the action without the resolution.
Their real value is for those seasons of trial and service when the lack of a strong
spontaneous impulse makes it necessary to fall back on some fixed principle. (2)
It was to secv/re the execution of the pledge. It is easy to promisa. The difficulty
lies in the performance. God is only mocked with the devotion of the sanctuary
which is not followed by the service of the daily life. Hence we need to preserve
and carry the high impulses of worship into the work of the world. Many men
live two hves, and the life of the Sanday has no bearing on that of the week-day.
We should use all means to bring religion into hfe.

III. The foem of the covenant. (1) There was an appeal to memory. The
people were to be vidtnesses against themselves. We should treasure in the memory
and often call to mind the thoughts of our seasons of spiritual elevation. (2) There
was a written record. Writing remains unchanged with the varying moods of men.
It may be well to write our higher thoughts and deeper resolves for our own subse-
quent private meditation. The New Testament is a written covenant. (3) There
was a memorial atone. This would be always visible. So the covenant would be
often called to mind. We often need to have our memories refreshed and our
thoughts called back to the great practical truths of Christianity. Hence the utility
of preaching not only new ideas, but truths that all of us know, and yet that all need
to be reminded of, and to have often brought before us for practical apphoation.
The stone would not lose its value as it became old and familiar. Trath does not
grow feeble with age, nor is it the less important because it is the more familiar.
— W. F. A,

Vers. 19 — 21. — A itrict master. Great as was Josbtu's amtiety that the Israelites
should renew their covenant with the Almighty, he would not secure this end by
concealing the rigorous nature of the service it involved. Instead of accepting
immediately the people's ready response (ver. 18) to his appeal, he proceeded to
speak of Jehovah in stem, almost chilling, language. True religion is honest, does
not gloss over the requirements which will be insisted on, nor seek to entrap men
by fair, smooth promises of an easy rule. Jesus Christ spoke of the necessity of
taking up the cross, of leaving home and friends, of enduring hatred, persecution,
and trouble, so that none could afterwards complain of being deceived about the
requirements and difficulties of discipleship. Men who undertake an enterprise
with eyes open are the more likely to persevere ; they have already afforded a proof
that they are not to be daunted by the prospect of labour and hardship.

I. The character of God, and the kind of sebvicb hence expected. 1.
He is hoh/, and consequently dema/nda ahatinence from ain. There is in Him
entire rectitude of attribute, both in essence and in exercise. The seraphim cry,
" Holy is the Lord of Hosts." His vesture is spotless, and He expects His servants
to attend Him in uniform unstained (see Levit. xix. 2). Also note the incidents of
Moses at ihe burning bush, Nadab and Abihu consumed for offering unhallowed
fire, and the men of Beth-shemesh constrained to exclaim, " Who is able to stand
before this holy Lord God ? " The sinlessness of Jesus proclaims Him Divine, and
sometimes evokes the petition, " Depart from me, for I am a sinful man, Lord."
God is of purer eyes than to behold iniquity, and condemns every act that is incon-
sistent with the relations in which we stand to Himself, to our fellow- creatures,
and the material world. 2. He is jealous, and therefore exacts whole-hearted
allegiance. Annexed to the second commandment was a statement of Jehovah's
jealousy, which could not permit His glory to be paid to graven images. When
the tables jof the law were renewed it was expressly affirmed, " The Lord whose
name is Jealous, is a jealous God." The word means, glowing with heat, henca
the Almighty is compared to a " oonsnming fire " that subdues every work of man.
Idolatry was the sin to which Israel was prone, and every prostration at the shrin*
of an idol was a derogation from the honour due to God, and excited His indigua'



eeS TKB BOOK OF JOSHUA. [ch. xmt. 1-28,

tion. He is not content with an inferior share of affection, He must be loved and
served with aU our strength. " He that loveth father or mother more than Me ia
not worthy of Me." The true disciple is ready to forsake all and follow Christ,
The will of the Lord is for hum law, his only inquiry being, " Lord, what wilt Thou
have me to do ? " 8. He is immutable, and requires vmmwrying fidelity. " If ye
forsake the Lord, then He wiU do you hurt after tliat He hath done you good." He
rewards every man according to his doings, and visits transgression with punish-
ment. The Israehtes were fickle, moved hke water by every passing breeze. God
is not the son of man that He should repent. He cannot be false to His nature,
and look with pleasure on offenders. Past obedience is no answer to the charge of
present guilt. Each day brings its own need of sanctification. It is not possible, in
God's service, to work so hard one week as to enable us to spend the next in idle-
ness, nor can we accumulate a store of good works to cover deficiencies in a time
of sin. " It had been better for them not to have known the way of righteousness
than to turn from the holy commandment dehvered unto them."

II. The people's determination to serve this exacting God. 1. Indicates
a feeling that only such a Master ia worthy of men's service. Conscience testified
that worship should not be offered to other than a perfect Being, and that such a
Being could rightly claim these high prerogatives. The rock on which the vessel
of mythology has been wrecked is the evil character assigned to its deities, proving
them the offspring of human imagination in a debased state. The remembrance of
the past, and hopes and fears respecting the future incited the Israehtes to con-
tinue in their position as the Lord's peomar people. And have not we experienced
that to be the happiest day when we have thought most of God, and most fre-
quently lifted our hearts in prayer to Him for guidance and succour? If called to
renounce ease or sinful practices, have we not been amply repaid in the conscious-
ness that we have acted rightly, and are waUdng in the light of God's countenance ?
To set upon the throne of om- hearts one who would be content vrith meagre devo-
tion and occasional conformity to righteousness might please for a while, but could
not durably satisfy our moral aspirations. 2. Intimates a belief that Qod chiefly re-
ganrds the sincere endeavours of His servants to please Him. The Israehtes could
point to Joshua's own demand in ver. 14 — " serve Him in sincerity and in truth."
"What is really displeasing to the Most High is wOful violation of His command-
ments, or hypocritical pretences of loyalty when the heart is estranged. These He
visits with severest condemnation. Jehovah declared Himself in the same com-
mandment both a "jealous " God, and one " showing mercy." And though the
disciples of Christ had often exhibited a spirit of worldhnesss,of impatience and
unbelief, yet their Master looking on His little company at the Last Supper could
even after their unseemly dispute concerning precedence, recognise what was good
in them and say, " Ye are they who have continued with Me in My temptations."
He who knows all our works (Rev. iii. 8), appreciates the humblest effort to keep
His commandments. 3. Suggests an assurance that imperfections of service ca/n
be atoned for h J confession, sacrifice, and intercession. Joshua's assertion was
quite true. Neither the Israelites nor any other nation could serve the Lord perfectly.
Lunitations of knowle^lge and frailties of temper produce at least temporary devia-
tions from the path of obedience. But the people no doubt remembered the pro-
vision made in the law for sins of ignorance, the trespass offerings, the day of
atonement " to cleanse them that they might be clean from all their sins before the
ifu.e ^°' Z^^^ *''®y "n™ii'lftJ of the prayers which had been heard on their
behalf when Moses pleaded for them, and the gracious forgiveness that had often
loUowed their national repentance. And what was dimly foreshadowed in the
Levitioal economy now blazes brightly for our mstruction and comfort under the
Christian dispensation. Jesus Christ hath by one offering perfected them that are
sa lotihed. His perpetual priesthood is a guarantee for the final salvation of those
wuo come unto God by Him. " Christ is the end of the law for righteousness to
evei-y one that beheveth." " Ye are complete in Him." 4. Leads us to anticipate
apertod of perfect service. However the goodness of God mav pardon our faults
and, beholdmg us m Christ, take note of the durection rather than of the Buocese of



CH. rxiv. 29— 33.]



THE BOOK OP JOSHUA-



(69



OTir attempts, it ia impossible for us to rest content with our present experience.
The spirit cries out for entire emancipation from the thraldom of sin, and longs for
the redemption of the body. When shall we be conformed to the image of Christ,
and enjoy to the full what now we know only by brief moments of rapture and
sudden hasty glimpses ? This question is answered by the promise of a " manifes-
tation of the sons of God," when, in unswerving obedience to His Father's will, they
shall realise truest liberty. You who so dehght in Christian work as to wish you
could spend aU your time and energy therein, look to the years to come I " They
serve TTim day and nigbt in His temple." " His selvaats shall serve Him, and
they shall see His face." — A.



EXPOSITION.



CHAPTEB XXIV. 29—33.

Joshua's death and btjbial.— Ver. 29.
— TUe servant of the Lord. The theory
ot some commentators, that this expres-
sion is evidence of a later interpolation
because "the title only dates from the
period when Moses, Joshua, and others were
raised to the rank of national saints," need
only be noticed to be rejected. It is a, fair
specimen of the inventive criticism which
has found favour among modern critics, in
which a large amount of imagination is
made to supply the want of the smallest
modicum of fact. What ia wanting here is
the slightest evidence of such a ' ' period "
having ever existed, except at the time when
these saints of the old covenant closed their
labours by death. All the facts before us
go to prove that Moses, as well as Joshua,
was held in as high, if not higher, venera-
tion at the moment of his death as at any
other period of Jewish history. Died. His
was an end which any man might envy.
Honoured and beloved, and full of days, he
closed his life amid the regrets of a whole
people, and with the full consciousness that
he bad discharged the duties God had
imposed upon liim. The best proof of the
estimation in which he was held is con-
tained in ver. 32.

Ver. 30. — In the border of his Inheritance
In Tlumath-Serah. Bather, perhaps, within
the border. For Timnath-Serah, see note on
ch. xix. 50. The burial-place of Joshua has
been supposed to be identified by the Pales-
tine Exploration Committee. Lieutenant
Oonder describes what be saw at Tibneh.
Amid a number of tombs he. found one
evidently, from more than 200 lamp-niches
on the walls of the porch, the sepulchre of
a man of distinction. The simple character
of the ornamentation, he thinks, and the
entire absence of it in the interior of the
tomb itself, not only suggest an early date,
but are in harmony with the character of
the simple yet noble-minded warrior, whofw

JOSHUA,



tomb it is supposed to be (see Quart. Paper,
Oct. 1873). In later papers, however (see
Oct. 1877, and Jen. 1878), Lieutenant
Conder abandons Tibneh for Kefr Hans,
on the ground that Jewish tradition, usually
found to be correct, is in its favour. And
more mature refiection has induced him to
modify bis former opinion as to the early
date of the tombs. Until these researches
commenced, the situation of the hill Gaash
was unknown, though it is mentioned in
2 Sam. xxiii. 30 (" the brooks" or " valleys
of Gaash "), and 1 Ghron. xi. 32. Nothing in
these places serves to identify it. This
passage is copied, with a few minute verbal
disorepanoies, into the Book of Judges (cb.
ii. 6 — 9), a strong ground, according to all
ordinaiy laws of literary criticism, for con-
cluding that the latter book was written
after the former. This is the chain of
, evidence by which the authenticity of the
historical books of the Scriptures is estab-
Usbed, not, of course, beyond the reach of
cavil or dispute, but to the satisfaction of
practical men. The LXX. as well as the
Arabic translators have added here the
following words : " There they placed with
him in the sepulchre, in which they buried
him there, the stone knives with which he
circumcised the children of Israel in Gilgal,
when he led them out from Egypt, as the
Lord commanded, and they are there unto
this day." This passage is not found in
the Hebrew. And as the Arabic and the
LXX. do not altogether agree, the proba-
bility seems to be that some apocryphal
legend was inserted here at a very early date.
Ver. 31. — And Israel served the Lord
(ef. Judg. ii. 10). We see here the value
of personal influence. Nor is such influence
altogether unnecessary among us now. The
periods of great reUgious movements in the
Christian Church are in many ways very
Uke to the time of the Israelitish conquest
of Palestine by Joshua. They are times
when God visibly fights for His Church,
when miracles of grace are achieved, when
W



370



THE BOOK OF JOSHUA.



[oh, XXIV. 29—88



the enemies of God are amazed and con-
founded at the great things God has done.
The snocesses, so clearly dne to the inter-
position of a Either Power, have a sobering
rather than an intoxicating effect, and the
inflnenoe of the grave, vase, earnest men at
the head of the movement is great with
their enthusiastic followers. But with the
removal of these leaders in Israel a reaction
sets in. The fervour of the movement de-
clines, the era of slackness and compromise
succeeds, and a generation arises whioh
"knows not the Lord, nor yet the worki
which He had done for Israel." In our
times such reactions, living as we do in the
full blaze of gospel light, are far more
transient and less fatal than in the days of
Israel. But in our measure we continue to
experience the working of that law by which
intense energy is apt to be followed by
<oldness, and every earnest movement for
ood needs a continual rekindling at the
altar of God of the fire which first set it
at work. That overlived Joshua. Lite-
rally, that lengthened out their days after
Joshua.

Yer. 33. — ^And the hones of Joseph (see
Gen. L 34, 25; Ezod. zui. 19). Nothing
oonld more fully show the reverence in
whioh the name of Joseph was held in
Israel than this scrupulous fulfilment of his
commands, and the careful record of it in
the authentic records of the country. This
passage is another link in the chain of
evidence which serves to establish the
authenticity and early date of the present
book. For tiiough Joseph's name was
always a striking one in Israelitish history,
it is unquestionable that as time went on
his fame was overshadowed by that of his
ancestors. It is Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob
on whom the national mind was fixed. It
is their names that the prophets recall, the
covenant with them whioh is constantly
brought to mind. But during the IsraeUtes'
sojourn in Egypt, and while the departure
from Egypt was yet recent, the conspicuous
position whioh Joseph occupied in Egyptian
history could not faU to be remembered, and
the command he gave concerning his bones,
as well as his conviction that the prophecy
concerning their departure would be ful-
filled, was not likely to be forgotten. The
emphatic way in which the fulfilment of
Joseph's charge is here recorded affords a
presumption for the early date of the book,
as well as against the theory that it was a
late compilation from early records. We
are not necessarily to suppose that the
interment of Joseph's remains took place at
this period. The Hebrew, as we have seen,
has no pluperfect tense (see for this Judg.
ii. 10), and therefore it may have t^ken place,



and most probably did take place, as soon ai
Shechem was in the hands of Israel. In a
parcel of ground. Bather, in the portion of
the field (see Gen. xxziii. 19). Our word
parcel is derived from partieula, and was
originally identical with the word particle,
a httle part. So Chaucer speaks of parcel-
mele, i.e., by parts. Shakespere has a
" parcel-gflt goblet," that is, a goblet partly
gilt. It has now come to have a widely
different meaning. Pieces of silver. There
can be little doubt that this is the true
translation. The cognate word in Arabic,
signifying " justice," is apparently derived
from the idea of even scales. A kindred
Hebrew word signifies " truth," probably
from the same original idea. Another
kindred Arabic word signifies a balance.
It therefore, no doubt, means a coin of a
certain weight, just as the word shekel has
the original signification of weight. The
Babbinical notion, that the word signified
"lambs," rests upon no soUd foundation, '
though supported by all the ancient versions.
Some commentators, however, think that
a coin is meant upon which the figure of
a lamb was impressed. So Vatablus and
Drusius. The LXX. has aiivddwv, the
Vulgate " centum novellis ovibus."

Yer. 33. — A bill that pertained to
Fhlnehas, his son. The LXX., Syriac, and
Yulgate translate this as a proper name,
Gibeath or Gabaath Fhineas. But it may
also mean Fhinehas' hill. A city may oi
may not have been built there. Eeil and
BeUtzsch believe it to be theLevitical town,
Geba of Benjamin ; but of this we cannot
be sure. The tomb of Eleazar is still shown
near Shechem, " overshadowed by venerable
terebinths," as Dean Stanley tells us. And
so the history ends with the death and
burial of the conqueror of Palestine,
the lieutenant of Moses, the faithful and
humble servant of God, and of the suc-
cessor of Aaron, who had been solemnly
invested with the garments of his father
before that father's death. A fitting ter-
mination to 80 strange and marvellous a
history. With the death of two such men
a new era had begun for the chosen people ;
a darker page had now to be opened. . The
LXX. adds to this passage, " In that day
the children of Israel took the ark and
carried it about among them, and Phinehas
acted as priest, instead of Eleazar his
father, until he died, and was buried in his
own property at Gabaath. And the children
of Israel went each one to his place and to
his own city. And the children of Israel
worshipped Astarte and Ashtaroth, the goda
of the nations around them. And the Lord
deUvered them into the hand of Eglon
king of the MoaMtes, q.nd he had do^hitttoa



GB. xxiT. 29—83.]



THE BOOK OP JOSHUA.



871



over them eighteen years." The pftssage is
an obvious compilation from the Book of
Judges. It has no counterpart in the



Hebrew, and the mention of Astarte and
Ashtaroth as different deities is suf&oient
to discredit it.



HOMILBTICS.

Vera. 29—83. — Tht end of the ioorJe. We now reach the conclusion of the
narrative. Like every other biography, it ends ■with death. Well were it for us all
if death came at the conclusion of a well-spent hfe like Joshua's.

I. A GOOD man's end. We read in the Book of the Eevelation, " Blessed are
the dead who die in the Lord . • . their works do follow them." Few have been
privileged to be " followed " by their works like Joshua. He led the IsraeUtes into
the promised land, and left uiem there. For many hundred years — the seventy
years' captivity excepted — they dwelt there. For their rejection of Him of whom
Joshua was the type they were cast out. But even now they remain a distinct
people, and entertain hopes of a return to the land which, humanly speaking,
Joshua gave them. If we ask the cause of this great success, whose results have
lasted even to our own day, it is to be found in the unique character of the con-
queror. Simple, straightforward adhesion to duty, intense moral earnestness,
earnest piety, prompt and unquestioning obedience to God, the highest pubho
gpirit, the utter absence of all self-seeking and ambition, mark a character altogether
without parallel in the history of conquest. Conquest generally is associated with
fraud and wrong. It has its origin in the greed and ambition of the conqueror ; it
is carried out amid injustice and oppression ; it leaves its evil results behind it, and
ia avenged by the hatred of the oppressed, and by the sure and often swift collapse
of a power founded in wrong. Cruel, according to our modem ideas, Joshua was,
no doubt. But he was centuries in advance of his age ; his cruelty was the result
of a moral purpose. And we must remember that for our modem notions of
cruelty we are indebted to Jesus Christ. It is a fact that God did permit (whether
He ought to have done so is a question we cannot discuss here) men to Uve for
thousands of years in ignorance of the true law of mercy. It is not strange, then,
if Joshua was not in this respect conformed to an ideal which was not peimitted
to exist until ChriBt revealed it. In all other respects, he was the model of what
a commander should be, and hence the durabihly of his work. We cannot hope
to become so famous. Yet if we imitate Joshua's obedience, earnestness, piety,
unselfishness, we, too, may achieve results as durable, though it may never be
known to whom they are owing. For a good deed never dies. It associates itself
with the other good influences at work in the world, each of these producing good
results on others, and thus steadily working on to the great consummation of all
things. What Joshua was it is shame to us if we are not, according to our
opportunities. For the Spirit of God is now freely shed forth in all the world, and
given to them that ask it.

IL Thk hemobt of the jvst is blessed. Joseph's bones were interred in
Shecliem. Thus we learn (a) that patriarch's affectionate love for his brethren, in
that he desired in death to be among them, and would have his memory cherished
AS an encouragement to serve God MthfuHy. And (6) we learn the duty of com-
memorating God's saints. The extravagant veneration paid to saints and martyrs
by those of another communion has caused ns to be somewhat too neglectful of
their memory. The martyrs of the Beformation are not commemorated among us.
We publiah biographies of our good men, and straightway forget all about them.
Yet surely we might be greatly cheered and encouraged on our way by the recol-
lection of the triumphs of God's Spirit in our feUow-sinners, _ Surely the pulses ol
the spiritual hfe may lawfully be quickened by a sympathy with the great and good
who have gone before. Surely all noble examples, all holy lives, are a part of the
heritage of the saints designed to advance God's cause. The victories of God's
Spirit over the devil, the world, and the flesh, in various ages, among variouf



374 THE BOOK OF JOSHUA. [oh. xxit. 29— 8a

nationB, under various oiroumstanoes, will surely best encourage that catholic spirit
of sympathy with all that is great and good, without which no Christian perfection
can exist. " Let lis then praise famous men, and our fathers that begat us." Let
the Josephs and Joshuas of the new eoveaant be held in the deepest honour among
us. And thus we shall rise from the contemplation of their struggles to the vision
of the Great Captain of their salvation, by whom alone they had victory in the
fight.

III. Thk infujenoe of a good man lives after him. As long as the memory
of Joshua's personal influence was felt, so long did the children of Israel keep to
the right way. Or rather, perhaps, we may better put it thus : the example and
influence of Joshua gradually gathered roimd him a number of men like-minded,
who were placed in positions of authority, and who were capable, like him, of
guiding and directing others. When they died, their places were filled by men
whose recoUeotion of Joshua's conduct was less distinct, and who possessed in a
less degree his power of ruling. Thus Israel fell into disobedience, and it is worthy
of remark that when oppression brought them to their senses, it was Othniel, one
of those on whom the example of Joshua may be supposed to have had most dfTect,
that they looked for deliverance. We see these facts {a) repeated constantly in the
history of God's Church. (1) The great leader of a religious movement trains a
number of men like-minded, who guide and direct the movement in his spirit after
he has passed away in the spirit, and for the ends that he intended. But (2) a time
comes when the first fervour of the movement dies away, when its principles be-
come popular, and thereby vulgarised. They are corrupted by the admixture of
the worldly element, the pecuUar features of the system are unduly pressed, and
deprived of that balance which they possessed in its founder's mind by being kept
in check by a wider sympathy and a larger grasp. Prom a revival of forgotten
truths the movement degenerates into a sect or party ; the salt has lost its savour,
and there needs some o&er regenerator to arise, who shall give a new direction to
the flagging spiritual energies of men. There is no need to give instances of this.
They will occur in numbers to every student of history. Also (6) the same truth
meets us in the life of individuals. Whether in a public and private position, either
as a minister of Christ, or as a member of a congregation, God is pleased to raise
tip some one whose life of piety is at once an encouragement and an incentive to
others to lead the same kind of life. He dies, and for a long time his name is a
household word to those who knew him. From his grave he is a preacher of right-
eousness to those who live near and where he is known. His example is brought
forward, his words are quoted, to those who have never seen him. And so the
tradition of his excellence Hves on among those who come after him. Yet it grows
fainter as the years roll on, untU it becomes a tradition of the past. Others come in
his place who knew him not. Other influences are at work in the pulpit where he
preached, the parish where he laboured, the place where he dwelt. His influence
has not really died out — good influence, as we have said, never dies — for the good
seed he sowed sprung up in the most unexpected quarters, and in the most unex-
pected ways. But his own place knows him no more. His name is now but a
shadow in the distant past. It is no longer an influence full of power. Very of t6u
there is a declension in the neighbourhood when the good man is taken away.
Very often the aged who remembered him have too good cause to lament a change
which is not for the better. But the good work goes on. The torch of love flames
more brightly, now here, and now there. But God does not fail to raise up de-
liverers for His people. His Spirit does not cease to work powerfully in human
hearts. His faithful servants s^ continue to battle against sin, and shall do lo
Uitil He come again.



CB. TJtxv. 29—83.] THE BOOK OP JOSHUA. 878



HOMILIES BY VARIOUS AUTHORS.

Yer. W.'—TJia death of Joshua. It has been well remarked thai; "this Book of
Joshua, which begins with triumphs, ends with funerals." All human glory ends
in the grave. The longest life is soon passed. The most useful men are taken
from their work on earth, leaving the unfinished task to other hands. Joshua
being dead yet speaketh,

I. Joshua is an example fob us. (1) His character is an example of (a) courage,
(6) energy, (o) independence, (d) trust, (e) unselfishness. He is ttie type of the
soldier of Ood, the pattern of active and masculine excellence. (2) His mmion ia
an example. Christians are called to possess an inheritance, to conquer the earth
for Ohrist, to fight against and overcome the evils and temptations of the world.
(3) His career is an example. We see how Joshua was true to his character and
fulfilled his mission. He served through a long life. There are some whose devo-
tion is like morning dew. There are others who are roused for great deeds at
eritical moments, but are negligent in the longer intervals which are left for quiet
service. It is a great thing to be long and continuously faithful. It is selfish to
desire an early death. Bather, if it is God's will, should we welcome the oppor-
tunity of long service. (4) His end is an example. Joshua was faithful to death,
and faithful in death. His last act was to bind the people to the service of God
with a solemn covenant, and pledge his own devotioA and that of his house. The
Christian's death-bed should be a blessing to others.

II. Joshua is a type of Christ. Jesus is our Joshua, with marks of resemblance
and of contrast to the Hebrew leader. (1) Jesus Christ exemplifies in perfection
all those good characteristics for which Joshua is famous. Though mild and
gentle, our Lord was not weak and efieminate. Fidelity, firmness, courage, energy,
are seen in Him to perfection. As the perfect man, he combined and harmonised
(he excellences of all good types of character. (2) Jesus Christ, like Joshua, lived
a life of mar/are. Joshua was a warrior. Christ is a captain of salvation. He
met constant opposition from men ; He was opposed by the powers of Satan, and
he conquered. Yet (a) Joshua fought enemies of flesh and blood, Christ fought
spiritutd foes ; and (&) Joshua used the sword, Christ conquered by submission and
BufTering and sacrifice. (3) Jesus Christ, like Joshua, is a Samiowr. (a) He deUvers
from real present, enemies. He saves not only from the future consequences of
evil, but from our present sins and troubles. (6) He saves those who trust Him,
foUow Him, and fight with Him, as Joshua not only fought himself, but led the

Eeople to battle. (4) Jesus Christ, Uke Joshua, leads His people to an inheritance,
ut in this there are no Canaanites remaining ; it is " an inheritance incorruptible
and undefiled, and that fadeth not away, reserved in heaven for us " (1 Peter i. 4).
(6) Jesus Christ, unlike Joshua, " ever liveth." Joshua Uved to old age and died
in honour, and was buried, and ceased to serve his nation. Jesus Christ was cut
off in early life and crucified in shame, but rose from the dead, and is now with
His people, and wiU remain till aU have entered into their inheritance (MattL
nviii. 20).— W. P. A.

Ver. 29.— "After these things Joshua, the son of Nun, the servant of the Lord,
died, being a hundred and ten years old." Having thus reached the close of the
life of Joshua, it is fitting that we should form a general estimate of his character
and work. He occupies an honourable place among the great leaders of the people
of God. He well deserves to be called a servant of the Lord, for this was the one
aim and object of his life. His brow is not crowned with the halo of glory which
lighted up that of Moses when he came down from the mount, where he had
talked with God as a man talketh with his friend. He is a less sublime type of
man, but not, therefore, the less admirable ; for in the kingdom of God there is no
room for rivalry among those who have fulfilled each his appointed task. First,
Joshua was a man of impUeit obedience to the Divine behests. He did nothing
but that which was commanded him, neither mote nor less. Second, he waa «



8T4 THE BOOK OP JOSHUA. [oh. xtn. »— 88.

very hnmble man. He never took to himself, in any degree, the glory which
belongs to God alone. After the most glorious battles in which he acted as
conunauder, he forgot self in the fervent recognition of the invisible power of
which he was but the organ, and hie song of gratitude and praise went up to God
alone. Third, he was a man of unfaltering faith and courage. His heturt never
failed him for an instant. He never doubted God ; and it was from this confidence
that he derived the boldness which he communicated to the children of Israel, to
march undaunted against an enemy superior in numbers. Fourth, he united true
love for his nation, manifested on repeated occasions, with holy severity when
there was just ground for rebuke. Fifth, be was absolutely disinterested in all his
service. He never dreamed of handing down his power to his children ; his one
thought was to do the wiU of God and to finish His work. When his task was
done, he spoke words of solemn warning to his people, and then was gathered to
bis fathers, or rather to his God. A saintly and noble life truly, and one which
teaches us the secret of success in the righteous war with eviL To obey, to be whoUy
consecrated to God, to beUeve in the fulfilment of the Divine promises, to fight
fearlessly with eye fixed upon the Captain of our salvation, whose strength is per-
fected in weakness — ^this is the unfailing secret of success for the Church. Joshua
well deserves, not only by his name, but by his faithfulness and devotion to the
cause of God, to be the type of our great Leader, " the Author and Finisher of our
faith ; " the true Joshua^ who has conquered for us " a better country, that is an
heavenly." — iS. de P.

Vers. 16—81. — A great decision. One of the beautiful things about Scripture is
the fine endings of all courses in which God has been leader. This book is no
exception. The last view we have of Israel shows them entering into a solemn
covenant with God, and one which, speaking roundly, all who made it kept. They
respond grandly to Joshua's challenge. " God forbid that we should serve other
gods.'' And even when reminded of the difficulty of serving Him, their purpose
remains unshaken. In this great decision there are many things worth noting.

I. He who leads men bightlt wnx neveb lack followebs. Some say, Go,
and men go not. But when they say, " Coma with us," they find men respon-
sive. Advice that costs nothing is fatile, but example that costs much constrains.
Joshua leads grandly, because he moves before the people. " As for me and my
house, we will serve the Lord." It is strange the contagiousness of faith and good-
ness ; the force of unconscious influence. The courage of another wakes courage ;
the honour of another wakes honour. The faith of others is itself " evidence of
the things unseen." A man like Joshua is a pillar of cloud by day, and a pillar of
fire by night, that " marshals men the way that they were going." However
arduous the calling to which you summon men, if yon can say, " As for me, I will
terve," you wiU always be answered by some, " We will serve the Lord." Despair
not of holy and saving infiueuces. Every one marching on the Divine way of duty,
mercy, faith wiU have more followers than he dared to hope for. It is the grandest
illustration of the influence of man on man that we can guide men even to heaven
itself by the constraint of a good example. Note this, the good leader has always
good followers. [See a beautifol treatment of this subject in Horace Boshnell's
sermon on ' Unconscious Influence.'] Secondly observe —

II. A GBEAT DECISION SHOULD BE SOLEMNLT AND FOBMALLT MADE. Heleadsthem

to make a formal covenant with God. He constrains them at once to give up their
idols, and m the spot where Jacob had buried the idols which his family had brought
with them fi:om Padanaram he buries them ; and he sets up a pillar as a memorial.
Ihese several things aU tend to fortify and consolidate the resolution to which
they had come. Sometimes we make a great decision, but fail to keep it tiirongh
some neglect to fortify it with special solemnities. One great object of the sacra-
ments ordained by the Saviour, unquestionably, was to give to religious decisions
this solemn and formal character. They were meant to bring vague feelings to a
point ; to detach utterly from the world ; to attach strongly to the Saviour. If w«
mean to serve Chrisi, the idols should be brought out and buried, and tie cove"



OH. XXIV. 29—88.] THE BOOK OP JOSHUA. 871

nant rites of God entered into. There shonld be openness, for without confession
we remain constantly amid entanglements. There should be thoroughness, for a
great change is often more easUy made than a gradual one. There should be the
sacramental covenant and vows that we may have at once the strength and the
constraint which come with the feeling that we belong to God. As here the deter-
mination was avowed — carried out thoroughly — solemnised in a covenant — so ours
should be. Men do not know what they lose by a secret and uncovenanted sanctity.
When we are secret disciples there is a perpetual danger of the secresy destroying
the discipleship. We lose the protection of a definite position, the power that
lies in fellowship, and much of the usefulness which our goodness might carry if it
were not counteracted by our reserve. If you are deciding to serve God, let your
decision be thorough, open, sacramental. Observe lastly —

III. The grand kesults of this gbeat decision. Sometimes good resolves are
badly kept. They are like " grass on the house-tops, which withereth afore it groweth
up." Whether they are well kept or not depends largely on whether they are well
made. Generally it will be foimd where they are broken that there was some
defective part : sin not wholly left ; the surrender to God not absolutely made.
Here the great decision is worthily and thoroughly made, and the grandest results
flow from it. (1) They Jeeep the covenant they enter into with God. Prom the
31st verse we might conclude what from Judges ii. 7, 10 we learnt explicitly,
that aU that generation which made the covenant kept it. We are called to resolve
on what seem impossibilities : to deny self ; to walk with God ; to follow the
Saviour's leading. But when the great resolve is well made, the very making of it
ensures the keeping of it. " Well begun is half done." Each step well taken
developes strength to take the next. Each good deed done imparts the power to
do one still better. God supplies the grace on which men depend. His smile
heartens ; His providence helps them. Be not afraid to enter into covenant with
God. Perhaps none ever finally fall away from a great decision, thoroughly and
religiously made. (2) They home a period of freedom from assault in which to
complete their occupation of the land. This period has been computed to be thirty-
two years (Smith's ' Diet. Bible,' art. Chronology). Godliness is not detrimental,
but profitable for all things. A nation devout is a nation sober, united, strong ;
one left unattacked, or easUy resisting an attack. It was of great moment that
fbey should settle down, become accustomed to possession, multiply in strength,
secure whatever of the inheritance was stiU in the enemy's hands. And, following
God, they enjoy the favour of God, and find just the period of rest which they
require. Is there not something here to which the experiences of individual men
furnish many a parallel ? Tour earthly welfare will not be wrecked by your
Christian action. Your honesty will promote, it will not prevent success. No lie
and no dishonotur is necessary for getting on in life, only the weak and fooUsh
think so. It is not the grasping that inherit the earth, but the meek. It is wisdom,
not greed, that has " in her right hand length of days and in her left hand riches
and honour." It is one of God's " open secrets " that the shortest way to the
enjoyment of anything we desire is simply deserving it. Enter into covenant
with God, and keep His covenant, and " thon shalt dwell in the land, and verily thoa
Shalt be fed."— G.

Vers. 80, 82, 83. — Three graves. Such is the story of life. The end of it is
always in some sepulchre. " They buried Joshua." " They buried the bones of
Joseph." " They buried Eleazer." So the land is taken in possession. Every
grave becoming a stronger Unk, binding the people to each other and to the land
God gave them. Look at these graves. And observe —

I. Every life at last finds a grave. However strong the frame and long
the conflict, at last the priest must lay down the censer, the statesman resign
command, the warrior retire from fields of strife. Immortality is not for earthly
surroundings, nor for the imperfect spirit and body we have here. If we are to
live for ever it must be somewhere where character is perfect, and a frame suited
for a perfect spirit is enjoyed. It is well that an existence bo faulty is so brie£



T tt-R BOOK OP JOSHUA. toH. xxir. 29— SS.



Out of Eden it is better that we should be out of reach of any tree of life that can
give earthly immortality. The average life is long enough for the average power
of enjoying it. And it is well that it should be " rounded off by sleep." Tbia
destiny ia too much overlooked. It may be so contemplated as only to injure us.
When we anticipate it with dread, without the light of God's ernUe upon it or of
His home beyond it, when it only shrivels up the warmth and energy of life, then
its influence is harmfuL But it need not have any such influence. If we remember
that God is love and death a Divine institution, we shall feel that there must ba
some service rendered by even death ; and this feeling destroying the dread of it,
we shall then be in a condition to profit by its helpful influence. Amongst many
wholesome influences these may be noted : (1) It should correct the folly that
wastes Ufe. Some make two mistakes. They treat time as if it were eternity, and
eternity as if it were time. And this mistake produces a purposeless existence that
turns life to no account. The thought of death should wake those wasteful of life.
It reminds us that the day of Ufe "has its task, that there is a serious account to
be rendered of how we spent it. It says, " Awake thou that sleepest, and arise
from the dead." It bids us live while we live, and work while it is called day,
(2) It comforts the hea/vy -laden. Life has many burdens. Duty is often a heavy
load. Begrets, cares, sorrows make between them a burden of huge dimensions.
God's saints, though they take more peacefully what is sent them, are not insensible
to its troubles. On the contrary, " many are the afflictions of the righteous." Death
comes when the burden is too heavy, and whispers, " It is not for long." " The
light affliction is but for a moment." The glory is eternal.'

" Brief \Me is here our portion,
Brief sorrow, shortlived care ,
The Ufe that knows no ending.
The tearless life is there."

How many would have fainted utterly but for the thought' that trials were only
mortal, u. to some death had seemed a great foe, to many others it has seemed the

" Kind umpire of men's miseries.
Which, with sweet enlargement, does dismiss ns, hence.''

If it is a great consoler of the suffering, observe farther (3) it give* eeei to
every activity of Ufe. How vapid would hfe become if death were not the lot of
men I How diJl the activity which had eternity for its work I How poor the low
delight would become if anything fixed for ever the conditions which for the
moment are sufficient to produce it. But a brief life, ever changing, with no time
to waste, gives keenness and zest and joy to all our existence. And lastly, it makes
ut hohfor immortality. It raises the eye above. The other world is lighted by
those who, dying, enter it. The thought of our own impending death makes us
desire some " everlasting habitation " when the stewardship here ia ended. So
mortality protects immortaUty, keeps it from being forgotten, undervalued, or
endangered. And, hke some schoolmaster whose harshness yet helps the learning of
some lesson, so death is the great instructor and preparer for the life beyond.
Lament not Joshua, or Joseph, or Eleazer. Death is mercy to all such. It is not
a calamity, it is the sleep God gives His beloved. If it is well to remember that all
life comes to a grave, it is still more important to remember —

II. That neithee life nor usepolness end there. (1) Life does not end
there. Who could imagine that that grave at Timnath-serah was the end of
Joshua ? When ripest and fittest for high employment, to what purpose would
have been " the waste of siioh ointment " ? " God gathers up fragments that
nothing may be lost ; " would He waste such a splendid aggregate of saintly forces ?
Men could not beheve it. Jacob spoke of Ms approaching death as a being
" gathered tn his people," as if his great ancestors were all above waiting to wel-
come him. What nature has whispered to the hearts of all men the Saviour has
revealed more clearly. He has " abolished death." And now we rejoice to believe
Ufe does not end, but only takes a new departure from the grave. Death in th<



6b. XXIV. ^9-33.] THE BOOK 01- JOSfltA. m

case of all God's Eaints is only the fiilfilment of the Saviour's promise, " I will coma
agaip and receive you uuto Myself." If life does not end with the grave, ohserv e
(2) uaefwlneaa doei not end with it. There is something touching in these earliest
graves of Israel— Hachpelah, Sheohem, Timnath, Mount Ephraim. Such graves
were thrones, on each of which a great spirit sat and ruled, teaching spirituality,
truth, courage, communion with God. The very graves oonseorated the land. A»
of the great oathediiil of Florence the poet sang :

" In Sfinta Croce's holy precincta lie
Ashes which make it holier. Dust which la
Even iu itself an immortality ; "

80 we feel these graves were a leavening consecration which made Palestine indeed
a holy land. England is rich in graves. Its soil is rich with the dust of the great
and good.

" Half the soil has trod the rest
In poets, heroes, martyrs, sages."

What impulses of courage, of philanthropy, and consecration have come from the
graves of Bruce, of Howard, of the Wesleys, of a multitude that none can number ?
If we have the Divine life within us, death cannot end our usefulness. On the
contrary, its touch canonises. Death makes the neglected counsel the revered
oracle ; and the neglected example the pattern on the mount ; and the despised
creed the life-giving truth. " Except a corn of wheat fall into the ground and die
it abides alone ; but if it die, it bringeih forth much fruit." Death robs us of ruler-
ship over a few things only to give us mlership over many things. Let us live so
that, like these, our graves may brighten and bless the land of our burial. — Or.

Ver. 82. — Joseph^ a honea. I. The bubui. op Joseph's bones was a justifica-
tion ov HIS FAITH. Joseph had been so sure that God would give the promised
land to Israel that he had made his brethren swear to bring up his bones with them
(Gen. L 25). (1) True faith will lead to decisive action. It is vain to profess
to believe in our heavenly inheritance unless we behave consistently with our
belief. (2) Faith is concerned with the unaeen and thefutwe. If we could see
all there would be no room for faith. (8) Faith is juatified on earth by providence.
It waits its full justification in heaven. As Joseph's faith was justified in the
entrance into Canaan, so the old Messianic faith was justified in the advent of
Christ, and the Christian faith will be justified at the "consummation of all
ttiingB."

II. The bubial of Joseph's bones was an examplb of dbfebence to thi
WISHES OF THE DEAD. It is Well that children should respect the wishes of
departed parents. Much good may be learnt by considering the thoughts and
purposes of our ancestors. The people which has no respect for its past is wanting
in reverence and in depth of national Ufe. Yet there must be a limit to the influence
of antiquity. The ancients lived in the childhood of our race ; wisdom should grow
with enlarged historical experience. At best they were fallible men, and cannot
claim to extinguish the reason and responsibility of their descendants. New
circumstances often render the rules and precedents of antiquity entirely obsolete.

HI. The bubial of Joseph's bones was an iLLnsTRATioN of the oneness of
KANEiND. Ages had passed since the death of Joseph. Yet his bones were pre-
served and buried in tiie very "parcel of ground which Jacob had bought." There
is a family unity, a national unity, a church unity, a human solidarity. The past
lives on in the present. Men are insensibly linked and welded together. We are
members one of another. Therefore we should consider the good of each other,
and of the whole community, and should take note of past experience and future
requirements.

rv. The bubial of Joseph's bones eeminds us of the delay which precfdes
THB enjoyment of the highest blessings. There were centuries of delay between
Mm promise and the possession of Canaan. Many ages passed a^r the first



S'TS TflE BOOK OP JOSHUA. [oh. xsiv. 29—33.

prophecy of redemption and before the coming of Christ. The second advent of
Chriat has often been anticipated by the Church and longed for by His people,
but it is not yet accomplished. The Christian must wait on earth during years of
service before receiving his heavenly inheritance. This is occasioned (1) by our
unbelief — as the unbelief of Israel deferred possession of Canaan ; (^ by the need
of fitness — ^the people needed to be trained in the -wilderness ; the world needed
preparing for Christ, who came in the "fulness of time;" Christians must be
made "meet for the inheritance of the saints in light;" the world must be prepared
for the full and perfect reign of Christ." Yet, note, the promise is not violated
because the fulfilment is delayed. Finally, the Christian inheritance will not be
the unconscious possession of a grave in the promised laud, but the •njovment of
hMven with the &enltieB of im eternal life. — W. V. A>



HOMILETIOAL INDEX



TO THE BOOK OF JOSHUA.



riTAPTEB L




OHAPTEB IV.




ffnEUB


MOB




*AM


Joahna'sGomimsBioii .. .^


5


The Memorial.. .. ..


66


Consolation for BereaTed Woilers


7


The ChUdren'i Qaeation


68


God'B Gift to the Church


7


Memorials .. .. ..


70


Joshxia, the Successor of Moses . .


9


Memorial Stones .. ,.


70


The Source of Joshua's Confidence


11


Grace for Beginners . . .,


72


The Leader's Promise ..


12


Prophets and Priests— The Order of




A Benewed Corenant .. ..


12


Precedence ..


74


The Study of the Bible . .


14


Memorials ..


75


Joshua's Command to the People


18


The Passage of Jordan the Symbol




Joshua and the Beubenites


18


of Death


77


Duties of Brotherhood ..


19






An Agreement Bemembered . .


21


OHAPTEB V.




The People's Answer .. ..


23


The Great Benewal of the CoTenant


81


[ioyaUgr


24


The Two Sacraments of the Old








Covenant


84


CHAPTUiBIL




Sacramental Consecration of Life .
The Passover and the Cessation of


84


Bahsb and the Spiet .. .. 29, 39


the Manna .. .. ..


87


Forethought ..

A Brand Plucked from the Fire . .


82
33


The Special and the Onstomary . .
The Vision and the Command 92


88
,100


The Harlot Bahab
Bahab's Faith . .


35
87


The Captain of the Host

A Soldier'! Interview with bis


93


The Oath of the Spies, and their
Betum to Joshua .. ..


41


Captain
The Captain of the Chorch ..


9S
S7


OHAPTEB HL




OHAPTEB VL




The Command to Cross Jordan ..


44


The Siege of Jericho .. .,


102


The Crisis uf Life


46


Strongholds .. ,.


104


Preparation for beholding Display!




Delusive Trust


106


of Divine Power


49


Salvation : its Cause and Effects ..


108


The Entry into the Promised Land


60


A City of Destruction . .


112


God's Wonders


CI






The Passage of the Jordan


C6


OHAPTEB VIL




,» ?» • •


C8


The Sin


118


Hm Diyiiion of the Waten , ,


eo


Sin Committed «, ,.


117



HoMlLETlOAii INDEX,



THXMB ff>Att>

The Way of the Transgreiior .. 118

The Accursed Thing ,. ,, 120

The Humiliation .. .. 123

Bin Discovered,. .. ,. 124

The Detection .. .. .. 126

Sin Confessed .. .. ., 128

A Sin of Greed .. .. 129

SinPnnished .. ,. .. 181

CHAPTBB Vm.

Bene'ved Effort after Disaster .. 1S5
God's People ViotoriouB,. ,. 136
Trying again .. ., .. 137
The Fruits of Victory .. ., 139
The Setting up of the Law . . 142
The Altar on Kbal, and the Bead-
ing and Becording of the Law . . Hi
Baonfioe and Law .. .. 145

CHAPTEE IX,

Ood'i People oS their Qnard «. 152

The Israelites Outwitted .. 154
An Oath Observed .. .,.155

The Gibeonites .. .. 157

A Stolen Treaty . , . . 158

The Submission of the Gibeonites 159

The Oracle Neglected .. .. 160

OHAPTEB X.

The Great Victory, and its Eesults 173
Adonizedek : a LesBon for Niitions

and Individuals .. .. 174
Connection with the Chnroh a

Bouroe of Worldly Trouble . . 176
The Battle of Beth-horon, and its

Besults .. .. .. 176

The Victory over the Five Kings. . 178

The Sun and the Moon Stayed .. 179

A Day of Wonders ., ., 180

The Conquered Kings .. .. 181

Oonrage and Strength . . . . 182

The Extermination of the Ganaan-

itei.. .. .. .. 183

CHAPTEE XL

The Contianation of the Struggle 193

Many Adversaries . . . . igg
God's Commandment and Man's

faithfulness .. ., 197



Hearts Hardened by God ••

Doomed to Destmotion , . ..
The Extermination of the Canaan-

ites ,. .. ..

The Destmotion of the Giants ..

Best from War ,, ..

Victory and Best .. ..

The Promise Fnlfilled .. ..

CHAPTEB xn.

The Extent of the Conquest ..
'Xhe Catalogue of the Vanquished
Diversity of Lots
The Partition of the Land of

Canaan
The Allotment of the Inheritance



wtmu

197
198

199
200
202
203
208



909
209
210

211

sso



CHAPTEE Xm.

Life Ending and the Work not done S21
Old Age .. ,. .. 821

The Land Allotted, though not yet
Secured .. .. ..228

The Inheritance of Levi . . 224

The Fate of Balaam .. 225—227

The Border Keep .. .. 827



CHAPTEB XIV.






Caleb's Faithfulness and its Beward


231


The Allotment of the Tribes


,-..


233


Inheritance by Lot


J ,


234


Caleb . .


>•


285


Caleb and his Inheritance


>•


236


Personal Influenoa


■ •


287


The Anakims . .


»•


238


Caleb's Inheritance


j^


289


A True Man ..


>•


240


Best from War


»•


242


Peasant Proprietorship . .


>,


243


Caleb, the son of Jephnnneh


•


244


CHAPTEE XV.






The Inheritance of Judah ,


•


268


Fulness of Blessing .,


m


253


The Stoiy of Aohflah ,.


•


254


Invincible Jebnsites ,, ,


•


255


FaUure


•


354



CHAPTEE XVI.
Canaanites still la the Land



tea



HOMILETIOAL INDEX,



881



OHAPTEB XYQ.

VAoa

The Lot of Joseph . . . . 264

Women's Eights . . , . 265

Greed and Ginmbliiig . . . , 267

SeU-help .. .. ..268

Ihe Divisioii of the Laud .. 269



OHAPTEB XVm.

Frognas in the Oieat Work .. 272

Shiloh the Sanctuary .. .. 274

Sbilob .. .. .. 275

Slackness .. .. .. 276

An Exhortation to AdTtnoe .. 276

OBAPTEB XIX.

The Completion of the Work . . 285

Brotherhood .. .. .. 286

Joshua's Portion .. .. 287

Jothna's Inheritance .. •• 288



OHAPTEB XX.

The Cities of Befuge .. .. 292

Cities of Befuge . . 293, 296, 298

The Manslayer and his Befuge . . 295

Danger and Safety .. .. 297

CHAPTER XXL

The Ecelesiastical Settlement of

Canaan .. .. .. 803

The Cities of the Levites . . 805

God's Faithfulness .. .. 805

The Portion of the Tribe of Levi. . 806

The Established Churob of Israel 307

The Becord of God's Faithfulness 308

The Privileges of the Jewish Church 310

Fulfilment of God's Promises . . 313

Ood'B FaithfnhiesB .. .. 812



CHAPTEE XXn.

Beuben, Gad, and the Half-tribe of
MtTiMieh at Home « ••



XHBUB ri.(ta

A Misunderstanding .. ., 32i

Service and Eeward .. .. 325
Loyalty to God in Separation from

the Church .. .. ..828

The Cause of this Outbreak of Wrath 327

Its Yindication . . . . 328

Misunderstandings among Good

People .. .. ..328

The Altai of Witness .. .. 329

A Misunderstanding Bemoved . . 330
God's Presence Manifested in the

Faithful Conduct of His People 832

A Mistake and its Bectification .. 88>

OHAPTEB XXin.
The Last Words of the Aged Ser-



vantofGod..


837


Cleaving unto the Lord . .


339


Victory Assured through the Help




of God


340


Love to God .. ..


840


A Needed Caution . .


341


The Command and its Sanction . .


344


Threats as True as Promises . .


345


The Old Man Eloo[uent . . ..


845


CHAPTEE XXTV.




The Possession of the Inheritance




and its Eeeponsibilities


854


Public Worship ■ .. ' ..


855


A Bightf ul Choice Urged


357


The Eenewal of the Covenant . .


358


Eeview of Providence . . . .


359


Abraham the Heathen ..


361


The Great Appeal


363


The Grand Choice ..


364


Choice and Decision


365


The Difficulties of God's Service . .


366


The Covenant . . . . . .


366


A Strict Master .. ..


367


The End of the Work .. ..


871


The Death of Joshuiv .. .. .


373


A Great Decision •• ••


874


Three Graves .. ..


876


Jowph'g Bones •• »,


871



GEOQEAPHIOAIi INDEX.







FAOB








VAOB


Aohor, Valley of ..


.. 247


Debit ..






.. 170


Achshaph




.. 208


Dibon .,






.. 215


Achzib




.. 282


Dor ..






186, 263


Adam ..




.. 55










Adullam




.. 207


Ebal ..






.. 140


Adumnuni




.. 247


Ed ..






.. 321


Ai




.. 114


Edrei ..






.. 206


Ajalon (or Aiialon) , . 166


160, 284


Eglon ..






.. 164


AUon :.




.. 283


Ekron ..






.. 249


Amorites




.. 54


Endor ..






.. 262


Anakim




.. 192


Eligannim






,. 280


Anatboth




.. 301


Eu-gedi






.. 252


Aphek ..




207, 214


En-sbemesh






.. 247


Arabah




.. 55


Eshtaol






.. 284


Arad ..




.. 207


Eupbrateo






4


Arcbi ..




.. 257










Amon ..




.. 205


0aaah ..






.. 369


Aioer ..




215, 218


Galilee






.. 291


Asbdod




.. 193


Gath ..






.. 193


Ashdoth




172, 205


Gath-rimmon






284, 301


Afihtaroth




.. 149


Gaza . .






172, 192


Atarotb and Ataroth-addar


.. 258


Gesbnr






206, 213


Atuu ..


■ ■ • •


.. 272


Gezer ..






.. 169


Avites ..


a • • •


.. 213


Gibbetbon






.. 284


Azekah


• •


.. 165


Gibeab, Gibeath




.. 272








Gibeon






.. 147


Baal-gad


• •


.. 191


Giblitea






.. 214


Bamotb-baal


• ■ • •


.. 216


Gilead ..






217, 218


Beerotb


• • • •


.. 150


Gilgal ..




64, 81, 148


, 208, 247


Beer-sheba


• • • •


.. 278


Giloh ..






.. 252


Beth-arabah




.. 247


Girgasbitea






.. 53


Betb-aven


■ • • •


.. 114


Gittatb-bepbei






.. 278


Betb-dagon


• • • «


.. 281


'








Betb-el


• • • ■


114, 257


Halak, Mount






.. 191


Betb-hogla




.. 247


Hamath






.. 214


Beth-horon


• •


.. 164


Hazar-shnal






.. 278


Betb-jesimoth


• • • •


.. 205


Hazor ..






.. 185


Betb-lehem


• • ••


252, 279


Hebron






.. 163


Beth-nimrah


• • ••


.. 218


Helkath






.. 281


Beth-sbeau


• • • •


261, 280


Hepher






.. 207


Betb-shemesh


• • • •


249, 280


Hennon






.. 205








Hinnom, Valley of the son of


.. 248


Cabnl ..


• "


.. 281


Hittites


• •


..


4,52


Canaanltei


• •


.. 52


Hivites


• •


• •


.. 53


Carinel


• •


.. 252


Hormah


• •


• •


.. 207


Cbesalon


• •


.. 249










Chinneroth


• •


.. 186


Ibleam


• •


••


.. 262


Chislotb-Taboi


• •


.. 278










pity in tbe audst of the river


.. 215


Jabbok


»•


e«


.. 20$



mi



GEOGEAPHICAIi INDEX.





FAOa








pAaa


Jair


.. 219


FerizziteB


• ■


• •


.. 63


JapUeti .. .


.. 257


Fisgah


• •


• •


.. 205


Japho (Joppa) . . .
Jarmutu .. .


.. 284
.. 168


Quarantania


• •


• •


.. 40


Jearim, Mount ..


.. 249










Jebusitei


.. 64


Eamah


• •


• •


.. 279


Jericho


36, 63


Bamath-Mizpeh






.. 213


Jerusalem


.. 162


EatQOth-Gilead


__


• •


.. 291


Jezreel . , , . .


.. 279


Eed Sea






.. 29


Jiph'thah-el

Jokneam . . .


.. 281
.. 203


Eephaim, Valley of


• •


.. 24a


Jordan . . .
Judah-upon-Jordan .


8

.. 283


Salt, City of
Sarid ..




• •

• •


.. 252
.. 278


Eadesh-bamea . . •


. . 246


Sea of the plain




• •


.. 55


Eanah . . . . .
Karkaa • • «


.. 258
. . 246


Seir, Mount
Sheba ..




• •

• •


.. 249
.. 278


Kedesh . . .


208, 283


Shebarim




• •


.. 115


Kirjath-Arba (Hebron) .
Kirjath-baal

Kirjath-jearim . . .
Kirjath-sepher (Debir) ,
Eurn Sartabeh , .


. . 163
. . 252


Shechem
Shephelah




■ •
• •


260 354
.. 147


. 150, 249, 271

170, 250

65, 316


Shihor-libnath

Shiloh

Shimron-meron




• •

• •

• •


.. 281
870, 300
.. 208






Shittim




• •


.. 25


Lachish . .


.. 163


Sibmah




• •


.. 217


Lasharon . .


.. 207


Sihor .,




• •


.. 213


Lebanon . .


3


Sidon ..




• •


.. 189


Lisan . . . .


.. 246


Suoooth




• •


.. 213


Maaleh-acrabbim


.. 246


Taanaob






.. 208


Madon . .


. . 208


Tappuah




• •


207, 258


Magdala


,. . . 283


Timnath-serah






285, 369


Mahanaim . ,
Makkedah
Maon . . . .


218, 302
.. 165
.. 252


Tirzah..
Tyre ..




«•


.. 203
.. 283


Medeba
Megiddo ..


.. 215
.. 208


UrCasdim




• •


.. S4a


Me-jarkon ..


.. 284










Merom


. . 188


Zaanannim




• •


.. 283


Mishor


214, 215


Zaphon




• •


.. 213


Misrephoth Maim
MiTipeh


.. 190
.. 272


Zaretan
Zareth-shahar




• •


.. 65
.. 217






Midon (or Sidon)


,,


.. 189


Nephtoah, Waters ol


.. 248


Zin .,


• •


• •


.. 246






Ziph ..


• •


• •


.. 253


Ophnb


.. 373


ZorBh ..


••


••


.. 334




■ ■.-,-.-T>^*t7-.-f f )- " T*Titn»nr? ■



M tt'i't'h'tnt

i,n<Mt"fitTtm;ti

•miii'lii'ijitiit'ii

■-■•' UlllMjItl






:11111



ir iiHllni"i'umii'iii" tj'"!'

■ ri^MMl t" "I nil 'l''il''!l '"

-.'!!!'! 11! 'I'nhmniihi! hi




■•^tmtmfnmnn• ■




;; r, ii!!!! fell i'jiiii'.:! ii!);ii!S;!i

iiiiiiiniiiii R!ii!;i!ii!ij
!;k!;;i! iiiiiiiiniimi! 11
